SPEECH EMOTION RECOGNITION USING CAPSULE NETWORKS
Xixin Wu1, Songxiang Liu1, Yuewen Cao1, Xu Li1, Jianwei Yu1, Dongyang Dai2, Xi Ma2,
Shoukang Hu1, Zhiyong Wu1;2, Xunying Liu1, Helen Meng1;2
1Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China
2Tsinghua-CUHK Joint Research Center for Media Sciences, Technologies and Systems,
Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
fwuxx, sxliu, ywcao, xuli, jwyu, skhu, zywu, xyliu, hmmeng g@se.cuhk.edu.hk,
fddy17,max15 g@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
Speech emotion recognition (SER) is a fundamental step towards
ﬂuent human-machine interaction. One challenging problem in SER
is obtaining utterance-level feature representation for classiﬁcation.
Recent works on SER have made signiﬁcant progress by using spec-
trogram features and introducing neural network methods, e.g., con-
volutional neural networks (CNNs). However the fundamental prob-
lem of CNNs is that the spatial information in spectrograms is not
captured, which are basically position and relationship information
of low-level features like pitch and formant frequencies. This paper
presents a novel architecture based on the capsule networks (Cap-
sNets) for SER. The proposed system can take into account the spa-
tial relationship of speech features in spectrograms, and provide an
effective pooling method for obtaining utterance global features. We
also introduce a recurrent connection to CapsNets to improve the
model’s time sensitivity. We compare the proposed model to pre-
vious published results based on combined CNN-long short-term
memory (CNN-LSTM) models on the benchmark corpus IEMOCAP
over four emotions, i.e., neutral, angry, happy and sad. Experimental
results show that our model achieves better results than the baseline
system on weighted accuracy (WA) (72.73% vs. 68.8%) and un-
weighted accuracy (UA) (59.71% vs. 59.4%), which demonstrates
the effectiveness of CapsNets for SER.
Index Terms —Speech Emotion Recognition, Capsule Net-
works, Spatial Relationship Information, Recurrent Connection,
Utterance-level Features
1. INTRODUCTION
One important step towards intelligent human-machine interaction
is speech emotion recognition (SER), since human emotion contains
important information for machine response generation. Two of
the most challenging problems in SER is the extraction of frame-
based high-level feature representations and the construction of
utterance-level features [1, 2]. Speech signals are considered to be
approximately stationary in small frames. Some acoustic features
extracted from short frames, e.g., pitch, are believed to be inﬂuenced
by emotions and can provide detailed emotionally relevant local
information. These frame-based features are often referred to as
low-level features [3]. Based on the frame-based low-level features,
neural networks are utilized to extract neural representations frame
*Corresponding authorby frame, which are referred to as frame-based high-level feature
representations [4]. However, the emotion recognition at utter-
ance level requires a global feature representation, which contains
both detailed local information and global characteristics related to
emotion.
There have been many studies in this area. [4, 5] propose to
apply neural network on low-level features, e.g., pitch, energy, to
learn high-level features, i.e., the neural network outputs. Recently,
SER has made great progress by introducing neural networks to ex-
tract high-level neural hidden representations directly from spec-
trogram features [6]. Directly applying neural networks to spec-
trograms overcomes the open question of how to choose effective
low-level features as input [7], since the spectrograms contain rich
information for emotion recognition and neural networks can learn
the high-level feature representations oriented for the recognition
task [6]. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are conventionally
utilized to extract the high-level neural features [8, 10]. However,
with the kernel-based convolution process, CNN is not sensitive to
spatial relationship or orientation information of input features.
Based on the frame-based high-level features learned, various
methods are used to construct the utterance-level features. [5] pro-
poses to use extreme learning machine (ELM) upon utterance-level
statistical features. The utterance-level features are statistics of
segment-level deep neural networks (DNNs) output probabilities,
where each segment is a stack of neighboring frames [4]. [6, 11]
propose to introduce recurrent networks to increase model’s ability
to capture temporal information. However, only the ﬁnal states
of the recurrent layers are used for classiﬁcation, which may lead
to loss of detailed information for emotion classiﬁcation, since all
information is stored in the ﬁxed-size ﬁnal states. [10] explores
pooling utterance-level features from high-level features output by
CNNs with attention weights, because not all regions in the spec-
trogram contain information useful for emotion recognition. By
pooling, it also avoids to squeeze all the information in one ﬁxed-
size vector [12]. However, pooling loses the spatial information,
e.g., the position information of pitch in time and frequency axes,
which is informative for emotion recognition.
Recently, capsule networks (CapsNets) are proposed to over-
come the disadvantage of CNNs in capturing spatial informa-
tion [13]. A capsule contains a group of neurons maintaining
activity vectors. The length of the vector represents the existence
probability of the activity represented by the capsule, and the orien-
tation captures the detailed instantiation parameters of the activity,6695 978-1-5386-4658-8/18/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE ICASSP 2019