e.g., translation and rotation information. Based on the activity
vectors output by the lower layer of capsules, a routing algorithm is
used to couple the similar activity vectors to activate corresponding
capsules in the upper layer. The CapsNet has been applied to several
tasks and demonstrated its effectiveness [14, 15, 16]. However, the
CapsNets used in previous work does not consider the temporal
information, which is important in emotion recognition.
In this paper, we propose a sequential capsule structure, ﬁrst
slicing the input into windows and applying a CapsNet to the win-
dows iteratively, then aggregating the CapsNet outputs and applying
another CapsNet to the outputs to obtain utterance-level features.
In this way, we adapt the CapsNet to incorporate temporal infor-
mation. To further enhance this capability, we introduce recurrent
connections between capsules at neighboring timesteps to the cap-
sule structure. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
capsule-based structure can signiﬁcantly improve the overall accu-
racy of SER system.
This paper is organized as follows: the capsule-based structures
are introduced in Section 2; the system architecture is illustrated in
Section 3; Section 4 describes the setup and results of experiments;
Section 5 draws the conclusion.
2. CAPSULE NETWORKS
2.1. Basic Capsule Structure
The idea of the capsule is to maintain a group of neurons, instead
of a unique neuron, to capture both the existence probability and the
spatial information. For the connection between capsule layers, the
routing-by-agreement algorithm is applied to learn the hierarchical
relationship between the learned spatial information in neighboring
layers [13]. Compared to previous neural networks, e.g., CNNs, the
CapsNets replace the scalar neuron with vector neuron, and the max-
pooling method with dynamic routing method.
Referring to Fig. 1, assume that the capsules in layer landl+ 1,
e.g., window capsules layer and window emo-capsules layer, are u
andvrespectively. The j-th capsule vjin layerl+ 1 is obtained
by compressing the total input sjas Eq. (1). This non-linear com-
pressing function normalizes the input vector to have norm between
0 and 1, while keeping the orientation of the vector. The vector norm
represents the existence probability of the activity represented by the
orientation.
vj=jjsjjj2
1 +jjsjjj2sj
jjsjjj(1)
The input sjis calculated by summing up all prediction vectors ^ujji
with weights cij, where the prediction vector ^ujjiis produced by
multiplying ui, output of the i-th capsule in layer l, with a weight
matrix Wijas Eq. (3).
sj=X
icij^ujji (2)
^ujji=Wijui+bij (3)
The weightcijis determined by a softmax upon the logits dij, which
represents the log probability of whether uishould be routed to vj.
cij=exp(dij)P
kexp(dik)(4)
When the outputs of lower capsule layer are different, the coupling
coefﬁcients are determined dynamically by the dynamic routing al-
gorithm. Initially, dij= 0, which means the output in layer lis
routed to all possible capsules in upper layer l+ 1equally. In each
8x8
Window
Input MatrixWindow
Emo-CapsulesRouting
5x5Orientations
Lengths  
Routing
8648Window
CapsulesWindow
Emo-V ectorsUtterance
Capsules16
4
8x8
8Fig. 1 . Structure of SeqCaps: the input is ﬁrst sliced into windows,
and then CapsNets are applied to the windows. Finally the win-
dow outputs are aggregated and sent to another CapsNets to obtain
utterance-level features.
iteration,cij;sjandvjare updated according to Eq. (1)-(3), and the
logit values are updated according to dij dij+^ujjivj, where
represents dot production. Finally, when the predeﬁned iteration
number is reached, the vjat the ﬁnal iteration is returned as output
of thej-th capsule in layer l+ 1.
2.2. Sequential Capsules (SeqCaps)
In the task of SER, the input data is a sequence of feature frames
with variable length. It is impractical to feed the whole sequence to
capsule layers. In order to optimize the model upon the whole se-
quence, we propose the structure of SeqCaps. As shown in Fig. 1,
we ﬁrst slice the input sequence into overlapped windows and ap-
ply capsule layers to each window, with the capsule layer weights
shared across time steps. In each window, several separated convo-
lutional layers are used on the input to obtain the capsules, denoted
as window capsules. The output of the window capsules are routed
to activate the window emo-capsules. The window emo-capsule out-
puts are converted to window emo-vectors. The window emo-vector
ocontains the orientations and lengths of all the Nemo-capsules in
one window:
o= [vT
1;:::;vT
N;jjv1jj;:::;jjvNjj]: (5)6696