INSTRUCTION TUNING WITH GPT-4
Baolin Peng, Chunyuan Li, Pengcheng He, Michel Galley, Jianfeng Gao
Microsoft Research
fbapeng,chunyl,penhe,mgalley,jfgao g@microsoft.com
ABSTRACT
Prior work has shown that ﬁnetuning large language models (LLMs) using machine-
generated instruction-following data enables such models to achieve remarkable
zero-shot capabilities on new tasks, and no human-written instructions are needed.
In this paper, we present the ﬁrst attempt to use GPT-4 to generate instruction-
following data for LLM ﬁnetuning. Our early experiments on instruction-tuned
LLaMA models show that the 52K English and Chinese instruction-following
data generated by GPT-4 leads to superior zero-shot performance on new tasks to
the instruction-following data generated by previous state-of-the-art models. We
also collect feedback and comparison data from GPT-4 to enable a comprehensive
evaluation and reward model training. We make our data generated using GPT-4 as
well as our codebase publicly available.1
1 I NTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown impressive generalization capabilities such as in-
context-learning (Brown et al., 2020) and chain-of-thoughts reasoning (Wei et al., 2022). To enable
LLMs to follow natural language instructions and complete real-world tasks, researchers have been
exploring methods of instruction-tuning of LLMs. This is implemented by either ﬁnetuning the
model on a wide range of tasks using human-annotated prompts and feedback (Ouyang et al.,
2022), or supervised ﬁnetuning using public benchmarks and datasets augmented with manually
or automatically generated instructions (Wang et al., 2022b). Among these methods, Self-Instruct
tuning (Wang et al., 2022a) is a simple and effective method of aligning LLMs to human intent, by
learning from instruction-following data generated by state-of-the-art instruction-tuned teacher LLMs.
It turns out that the line of instruction-tuning research has produced effective means to improve
the zero and few-shot generalization abilities of LLMs. The recent success of ChatGPT (OpenAI,
2023a) and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023b) offers tremendous opportunities to improve open-source LLMs
using instruction-tuning. LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023) is a series of open-sourced LLMs, which
match the performance of proprietary LLMs such as GPT-3. To teach LLaMA to follow instructions,
Self-Instruct tuning has been quickly adopted given its superior performance and low cost. For
example, Stanford Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023) uses 52K instruction-following samples generated
by GPT-3.5, while Vicuna (Vicuna, 2023) uses around 700K instruction-following samples (70K
conversions) shared user-ChatGPT (ShareGPT, 2023).
To advance the state of the art of instruction-tuning for LLMs, we propose for the ﬁrst time to use
GPT-4 as a teacher for self-instruct tuning. Our paper makes the following contributions:
•GPT-4 data . We release data generated by GPT-4, including the 52K instruction-following
dataset in both English and Chinese, and the GPT-4-generated feedback data that rate the outputs
of three instruction-tuned models.
•Models & Evaluation . Based on the GPT-4-generated data, we have developed instruction-tuned
LLaMA models and reward models. To evaluate the quality of instruction-tuned LLMs, we use
three metrics evaluated on test samples ( i.e.,unseen instructions): human evaluation on three
alignment criteria, automatic evaluation using GPT-4 feedback, and ROUGE-L on un-natural
Equal Contribution
1https://instruction-tuning-with-gpt-4.github.io/
Note: This is a preliminary release, and we will continue to expand the dataset and will ﬁnetune larger models.
1arXiv:2304.03277v1  [cs.CL]  6 Apr 2023