Algorithm 1: Pseudo code for prompt engineering, GPT-4 call and hyper-parameters in data
generation. Each instruction instance is used as variables in the prompt template, the data ﬂow is
highlighted in blue.
1PROMPT DICTf
2prompt input : (
3“Below is an instruction that describes a task, paired with an input that provides further context.”
4“Write a response that appropriately completes the request. nnnn”
5“### Instruction:nnfinstructiongnnnn ### Input:finputgnnnn ### Response:”
6),
7prompt noinput : (
8“Below is an instruction that describes a task. ”
9“Write a response that appropriately completes the request. nnnn”
10“### Instruction:nnfinstructiongnnnn ### Response:” )
11g
12output =openai.ChatCompletion.create(
13 model="gpt-4",
14 messages=["role": "user", "content": prompt],
15 temperature = 1.0,
16 topp=1.0, # nucleus sampling over entire vocabulary
17 maxtokens=512 # the max number of generated tokens
18)
instructions (Honovich et al., 2022). Our empirical study validates the effectiveness of using
GPT-4-generated data for LLM instruction-tuning, and suggests practical tips of building a
general-purpose instruction-following agent powered by LLMs.
2 D ATASET
Data Collection. We reuse 52K unique instructions in the instruction-following data collected in
the Alpaca dataset (Taori et al., 2023). Each instruction describes the task the model should
perform. We follow the same prompting strategy to consider cases with and without input , which
is the optional context or input for the task. The output answers to the instruction instance using
LLMs. In the Alpaca dataset, the output is generated using GPT-3.5 ( text-davinci-003 ) but
we instead consider GPT-4 ( gpt-4 ) for data generation. Speciﬁcally, we generate the following four
datasets with GPT-4:
(1)English Instruction-Following Data : For the 52K instructions collected in Alpaca (Taori et al.,
2023), one English GPT-4 answer is provided for each. The details are described in Algorithm 1.
We leave it as future work to follow an iterative process to construct our own instruction set
using GPT-4 and self-instruct (Wang et al., 2022a).
(2)Chinese Instruction-Following Data : We use ChatGPT to translate the 52K instructions into
Chinese and ask GPT-4 to answer them in Chinese. This allows us to build a Chinese
instruction-following model based on LLaMA, and study cross-language generalization ability
of instruction-tuning.
(3)Comparison Data : We ask GPT-4 to rate its own response from 1 to 10. Furthermore, we ask
GPT-4 to compare and rate the responses from the three models, including GPT-4, GPT-3.5 and
OPT-IML (Iyer et al., 2022). This is used to train reward models.
(4)Answers on Unnatural Instructions : The GPT-4 answers are decoded on the core dataset of 68K
instruction-input-output triplets (Honovich et al., 2022). The subset is used to quantify the gap
between GPT-4 and our instruction-tuned models at scale.
Data Statistics. We compare the English output response sets of GPT-4 and GPT-3.5 in Figure 1.
For each output, the root verb and the direct-object noun are extracted; The frequency over the unique
verb-noun pairs are computed over each output set. The verb-noun pairs whose frequency are higher
than 10 are displayed in Figure 1(a) and (b), and the most frequent 25 pairs of two sets are compared
2