[9]. Training ML models using encrypted data was discussed
in [10]–[14]. In [15], efﬁcient conversion of models for use
of encrypted input data was discussed. The use of secure
multi-party computation reduces the computational efﬁcie ncy
of ML algorithms by adding a non-trivial computational and
communication performance overhead.
ML with Differential Privacy. A natural way for alle-
viating privacy concerns is to deploy privacy-enabled ML
using differential privacy (DP) [16]–[19]. In [18], a priva cy-
preserving regularized logistic regression algorithm is p ro-
vided for learning from private databases by bounding the
sensitivity of regularized logistic regression, and pertu rbing
the learned classiﬁer with noise proportional to the sensit ivity.
This technique is proved to be DP and simulations are used to
investigate the trade-off between privacy and learning uti lity.
In [17], a large class of optimization-based DP machine
learning algorithms are developed by appropriately pertur bing
the objective function of the ML training algorithm. The
mechanism is applied to linear and logistic regression mode ls
and shown to provide high accuracy. In the mentioned studies ,
privacy-preserving ML, however, often relies on an entire
dataset, constructed by merging smaller datasets, being st ored
in one location. The ML model is then either trained on
the aggregated dataset, and is systematically obfuscated u sing
additive noise to guarantee differential privacy, or train ed
on an obfuscated centrally-located data. Such methods do
not address the underlying problem that the smaller dataset s
are owned by multiple entities with restrictions on sharing
sensitive data.
Distributed/Collaborative Privacy-Preserving ML. ML
based on distributed private datasets has been recently inv esti-
gated in, e.g., [20]–[24]. Note that this problem is intimat ely
related to distributed optimization using differentially -private
oracles, as such ML problems can be cast as distributed
optimization problems in which distributed training datas ets
are represented within cost functions or constraints of the
entities. Using stochastic gradient descent with additive Gaus-
sian/Laplace noise to ensure DP is also common in the
literature; (e.g., [25]–[28]). In [25], noisy gradients ar e used
to train a deep neural network. The scale of the required
additive noise for DP is reduced in [26] by employing the
idea of moment accountant, instead of standard composition
rules. Stochastic gradient descent is also utilized in [27] for
recurrent neural network language models. Generalization s for
obfuscating individual and group-level trends by DP additi ve
noise are presented in [28]. Because iterative methods rely on
multiple rounds of inquiries of private datasets, for insta nce,
by submitting multiple gradient queries, the privacy budge t
must be inversely scaled by the total number of iterations to
ensure that a reasonable privacy guarantee can be achieved
(alternatively, privacy guarantees get weaker as the numbe r of
iterations grows because of the composition rule of differe ntial
privacy). Hence, if the parameters of the optimization algo -
rithm are not carefully chosen, bounds on the performance of
the ML training algorithm deteriorates with an increasing t otal
number of iterations; e.g., see [29]. In [20], [21], the priv acybudget was kept constant and therefore by communicating
more, as the number of the iterations grows, the privacy
guarantee weakens. However, in those studies, if the privac y
budget had been scaled inversely proportional to the total
number of iterations, privacy guarantees would be maintain ed
over the entire horizon but performance would deteriorate w ith
increasing total number of iterations, as in [29].
All these studies, however, do not address the issues of
convergence of the learning algorithm, selection of approp riate
step size in the stochastic gradient descent, and forecasti ng of
the quality of the trained ML model based on the privacy
budget prior to running extensive potentially computation ally-
expensive experiments. These missing steps are some of the
important contributions of this paper.
C. Paper Organization
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We introduce
our system model and propose privacy-aware ML algorithms
with distributed private datasets in Section II. We analyze and
provide theoretical results for predicting the performanc e of
the privacy-preserving training algorithms in Section III . We
present the experimental results in Section IV. Finally, we
conclude the paper in Section V.
II. ML T RAINING ALGORITHM BASED ON DISTRIBUTED
PRIVATE DATA WITH DP G RADIENT QUERIES
A. Setup
Consider a group of N∈Nprivate agents or data owners
N:={1,...,N}that are connected to a node responsible
for training a ML model, identiﬁed as a learning agent, over
an undirected communication graph as in Figure 1. Each
agent has access to a set of private training data Di:=
{(xi,yi)}ni
i=1⊆X×Y⊆Rpx×Rpy, wherexiandyi,
respectively, denote inputs and outputs. Each data owner,
for instance, could be a private bank/ﬁnancial institution . In
this case, the private datasets can represent information a bout
loan applicants (such as salary, employment status, and cre dit
rating1) as inputs and historically approved interest rates per
annum by the bank (in percentage points) as outputs.
Assumption 1. Private datasets are mutually exclusive, i.e.,
Di∩Dj=∅for alli,j∈ N .
Assumption 1 states that two identical records, equal in
every possible aspect, cannot be in two or more datasets. Thi s
is a realistic assumption in many real-life applications, s uch as
ﬁnancial and energy data. For instance, across multiple ban ks
and ﬁnancial-service providers, transaction records (e.g . for
purchasing goods) are unique by the virtue of timestamps,
amounts, and the uniqueness of purchases for an individual. In
energy systems, one household cannot transact (for purchas ing
power) with two or more energy retailers and thus its consump -
tion pattern can only be stored by one retailer. The reasons
behind this assumption are two-fold. First, to guarantee ǫ-
differential privacy, we need to ensure that the records are not
1Categorical attributes, such as gender, can always be trans lated into
numerical ones according to a rule.