proportional to the size of the training datasets squared an d the
privacy budgets of the data owners squared; see Theorem 2 in
Section III. Several ML models and ﬁtness costs, such as line ar
and logistic regression, satisfy the above-mentioned assu mp-
tions. This enables us to predict the outcome of collaborati on
among privacy-aware data owners and the learner in terms of
the ﬁtness cost of the ML training model. However, if the
ﬁtness function does not meet these assumptions, we must
select the step size to be inversely proportional to the squa re
root of the iteration number. This way, the step size fades aw ay
much slower and the effect of the DP noise is more pronounced
on the iterates of the learning algorithm. Therefore, we mus t
add an averaging layer on top of the algorithm to reduce the
negative impact of the DP noise; see Algorithm 2 in Section II .
This is based on the developments of [2] with appropriate
changes in the averaging step to suit the ML problem with DP
gradient queries. In this case, we can prove that the differe nce
between the ﬁtness of the trained ML model using DP gradient
queries and the ﬁtness of the trained ML model in the absence
of any privacy concerns is inversely proportional to the siz e
of the training datasets (no longer squared) and the privacy
budget (no longer squared); see Theorem 3 in Section III.
In this paper, we focus on the case where the datasets in
possession of the private data owners in Figure 1 are mutuall y
exclusive or non-overlapping, i.e., two identical records are not
shared across the datasets. In many real-life applications within
the ﬁnancial and energy sectors, this is a realistic assumpt ion,
e.g, transactional records (e.g. for purchasing goods) are
unique by the virtue of timestamps, amounts, and the unique-
ness of purchases by an individual. This assumption is set in
place to ensure differential privacy using independent add itive
noises. In the absence of such an assumption, there also
needs to be a privacy-preserving mechanism for identifying
those common entries without potential information leakag e
regarding non-common entries, which itself is a daunting ta sk
and open problem for research.
For experimental veriﬁcation of the theoretical results, t wo
ﬁnancial datasets are used in this paper. First, we use a
regression model on a dataset containing information on loa ns
made on Lending Club, a peer-to-peer lending platform [3], t o
automate the process of setting interest rates of loans. Sec ond,
we train a support vector machine for detecting fraudulent
transactions based on a dataset containing transactions ma de
by European credit card-holders in September 2013 [4]. We
use the experiments to validate theoretical predictions an d to
gain important insights into the outcome of collaborations
among privacy-aware data owners. For instance, even if the
learner has access to one large dataset with relaxed privacy
constraints, the performance of the trained ML model can
be very bad if small conservative datasets (i.e., datasets w ith
very small privacy budgets) also contribute to the learning .
Therefore, it is best to exclude smaller conservative datas ets
from collaboration. This is a counter-intuitive observation
as it clearly indicates that more data is not always good ,
if it is obfuscated by conservative data owners. Larger, but
conservative, datasets are sometimes worth including in th etraining as they do not degrade performance heavily with the ir
conservative privacy budgets, yet improve the performance of
the trained ML model because of their size. These observatio ns
can be alternatively interpreted as: collaboration in trai ning a
model with a dataset can only be useful if and only if it has
enough information (i.e., enough data entries) to suppress the
impact of random noise added for privacy guarantees.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
•We develop DP gradient descent algorithms for training
ML models on distributed private datasets owned by
different entities; see Algorithms 1 and 2 in Section II.
•We prove that the quality of the trained ML model
using DP gradient descent algorithm scales inversely with
privacy budgets squared, and the size of the distributed
datasets squared, which can establish a trade-off between
privacy and utility in privacy-preserving ML;
•We develop a theory that enables to predict the outcome
of a potential collaboration among privacy-aware data
owners (or data custodians) in terms of the ﬁtness cost
of the ML training model prior to executing potentially
computationally-expensive ML algorithms on distributed
privately-owned datasets; see Theorems 2 and 3 in Sec-
tion III. The bounds in these theorems are not necessarily
optimal, i.e., there might exist better performance bounds
for other privacy-preserving learning algorithms, but, if
the data owners follow Algorithms 1 and 2, they can
predict their success or failure.
•We validate our theoretical analysis by evaluating our
differentially private ML algorithms using distributed
non-overlapping ﬁnancial datasets belonging to multiple
institutes/banks for determining interest rates of loans
using regression, and for detecting credit card fraud using
support vector machine classiﬁer; We further validate the
predictions of the analysis with the actual performance of
the proposed privacy-aware learning algorithms applied to
the distributed ﬁnancial datasets; see Section IV.
•Our experimental results indicate that, in the case of three
banks collaborating to train a support vector machine
classiﬁer to detect credit card fraud, within only 100
iterations, the ﬁtness of the trained model using DP
gradient queries is in average within 90% of the ﬁtness of
the trained model in the absence of privacy concern if the
privacy budget is equal to 1 and each bank has access to
a dataset of 30,000 records of credit card transactions and
their validity. We observe similar performance results for
training a regression model over interest rates of loans
with the privacy budget of 10 and datasets of 350,000
records each.
B. Related Work
ML using Secure Multi-Party Computation and Encryp-
tion. Secure multi-party computation provide avenues for se-
curing the iterations of distributed ML algorithms across m ul-
tiple data owners. In the past, secure multi-party computat ion
has been used in various ML models, such as decision trees
[5], regression [6], association rules [7], and clustering [8],