holds ifN= 1 andǫ1=ǫ, which is the case of centralized
privacy-preserving learning.
Finally, we note that these results provide bounds on the
distance between the non-private ML model and the privacy-
preserving ML models learned in a distributed manner as a
function of the privacy budgets and the size of the datasets.
Issues, such as non-independent and non-identical dataset s, in-
ﬂuence the performance of the non-private model and thus als o
indirectly inﬂuence the performance of the privacy-preser ving
models. In the next section, although the datasets are not
restricted be i.i.d. (e.g., the number of fraudulent transa ctions
in the credit card fraud detection is low and arguably contai ns
activities that have originated from same/similar fraudst ers),
the theoretical bounds tightly match the experimental resu lts.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL VALIDATION OF THE PERFORMANCE
OFML ONDISTRIBUTED PRIVATE DATA
In this section, we examine the results of the paper, speciﬁ-
cally the performance of Algorithm 2, on two ﬁnancial datase ts
on lending and credit card fraud. Particularly, we use the
relative ﬁtness of the iterates in Algorithm 2 to illustrate its
performance. The relative ﬁtness of θis given by
ψ(θ) :=f(θ)
f(θ∗)−1. (13)
This measure shows how good θis in comparison to the
optimal ML model θ∗in terms of the training cost in (1).
We opt for studying the relative ﬁtness, scaled by f(θ∗)as
opposed as the absolute ﬁtness f(θ)−f(θ∗), because we
consider datasets with different sizes for two distinct ML
learning models and thus we want to factor out the effects
of the variations of f(θ∗). Finally, note that, by construction,
ψ(θ)≥0. Further, the lower the value of ψ(θ), the better
θperforms in comparison to θ∗. In what follows, we use
Algorithm 1 with ǫ= +∞for non-private learning of θ∗; this
is equivalent to setting the magnitude of the additive priva cy-
preserving noise in the gradients to zero.
A. Lending Dataset
First, we use a lending dataset with a linear regression mode l
to demonstrate the value of the methodology and to validate
the theoretical results.
1) Dataset Description: The dataset contains information
regarding nearly 890,000 loans made on a peer-to-peer lendi ng
platform, called the Lending Club, which is available on
Kaggle [3]. The inputs contain loan attributes, such as tota l
loan size, and borrower information, such as number of credi t
lines, state of residence, and age. The outputs are the inter est
rates of the loans per annum. We encode categorical attribut es,
such as state of residence and loan grade assigned by the Loan
Club, with integer numbers. We also remove unique identiﬁer
attributes, such as id and member id, as well as irrelevant
attributes, such as the uniform resource locator (URL) for t he
Loan Club page with listing data. Finally, we perform featur e
selection using the Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to
select the top ten important features. This step massivelyimproves the numerical stability of the algorithm. For the P CA,
we only use the last ten-thousand entries of the dataset to
ensure that the feature selection does not violate the distr ibuted
nature of the algorithm. Note that, if we were to use the
entire dataset for the PCA, the data should have been availab le
at one location for processing which is contradictory to the
assumptions of the paper regarding the distributed nature o f the
dataset and the privacy requirements of the data owners. Aft er
performing the PCA, the eigenvectors corresponding to the
most important features are communicated to the distribute d
datasets. The ﬁrst n1entries of the Lending Club are assumed
to be the private data of the ﬁrst data owner. The entries
betweenn1+1 ton1+n2belong to the second data owner
and the entries between n1+n2+ 1 ton1+n2+n3are
with the third data owner. Note that, by construct, these
distributed datasets are non-overlapping, i.e., they do no t share
identical records. We may use any other approach for splitti ng
the Lending Club dataset among the private data owners as
long as the distributed datasets are not overlapping. The da ta
owners then balance their datasets using the-said eigenvec tors.
The balancing refers to a transformation of the dataset usin g
the eigenvectors to extract the most important independent
features. The eigenvectors, here, serve as a common diction ary
between the data owners for communication and training.
2) Experiment Setup: The experiments demonstrate the
outcome of collaborations among N= 3 ﬁnancial institutes,
e.g., banks, for training a ML model to automate the process
of assigning interest rates to loan applications based on th e
attributes of the borrower and the loan. Each institute has
access to a private dataset of nihistorical loan applications
and approved interest rates. The value of ǫifor each insti-
tute essentially determines eagerness for collaboration a nd
openness to sharing private proprietary datasets. For a lin ear
regression model, we consider a linear ML model relating
the inputs and the outputs as in y=M(x;θ) :=θ⊤xwith
θ∈Rpθdenoting the parameters of the ML model. We
train the model by solving the optimization problem (1) with
g2(M(x;θ),y) =∝ba∇dbly−M(x;θ)∝ba∇dbl2
2, andg1(θ) = 0 .
3) Results: First, we demonstrate the behaviour (e.g., con-
vergence) of the iterates of the stochastic gradient descen t
procedure in Algorithm 2. Consider the case where n1=n2=
n3= 250,000. Figure 2 shows the statistics of the relative
ﬁtness of the stochastic gradient method in Algorithm 2 for a
ML model determining lending interest rates, ψ(¯θ[k]), versus
the iteration number kforT= 100 for three choices of privacy
budgetsǫ1=ǫ2=ǫ3to illustrate the convergence of the
learning algorithm as established in Theorem 3. The algorit hm
is stochastic because the data owners provide differential ly-
private responses to the gradient queries, obfuscated with
Laplace noise in Theorem 1. Thus each run of the algorithm
follows a different relative ﬁtness trend. The boxes, i.e., the
vertical lines at each iterations, illustrate the range of 2 5%
to 75% percentiles of the relative ﬁtness extracted from one -
hundred runs of the algorithm. The black lines show the
median relative ﬁtness versus the iteration number. The eff ect
of the privacy budgets on the quality of the iterates at the