PSfrag replacements
102103104 10−1101103105107109
ǫ= 0.1
ǫ= 1
ǫ= 10
n1=n2=n3E{ψ(¯θ[T])}
Fig. 10. Relative ﬁtness of the stochastic gradient method i n Algorithm 2 for
fraud detection after T= 100 iterations versus the size of the datasets. The
solid line illustrate the bound in Theorem 2.
Finally, we consider a few scenarios of collaboration for
the data owners. Speciﬁcally, we evaluate the performance o f
the learning algorithm for four distinct scenarios in which the
second and the third data owners have: ( i) small datasets and
small privacy budgets (i.e., reluctant to share due to priva cy
concerns); ( ii) small datasets and large privacy budgets (i.e.,
eager to share); ( iii) large datasets and small privacy budgets;
(iv) large datasets and large privacy budgets. For each case, we
vary the privacy budget and the size of the dataset of the ﬁrst
data owner. This allows us to investigate the potential bene ﬁt to
data owners from collaboration in various scenarios. Figur e 6
illustrates the expectation of the relative ﬁtness of the st ochas-
tic gradient method in Algorithm 2, after T= 100 iterations,
versus the size of the dataset n1and the privacy budget ǫ1for
four distinct scenarios of collaboration. The ﬁrst scenari o in
Figure 6 (the left most plot) shows that there is no point in
collaboration with small data owners, even if the size of the
dataset of the ﬁrst data owner is large and it is eager to share
its data; the relative ﬁtness (capturing the distance betwe en
private ML model and the non-private model) is very large, it
does not change signiﬁcantly with ǫ1, and it still remains large
for relative large datasets n1= 105. We could foresee this
from the bound in Theorem 3 without running Algorithm 2.
This bound shows that ψ(¯θ[k])∝1/(2000+n1)/radicalbig
200+1/ǫ2
1;
hence, no matter how large ǫ1gets (even if ǫ1=∞), the
error’s coefﬁcient remains large due to small privacy budge ts
of the other two data owners and n1must become considerably
large to compensate for it. In the second scenario (the secon d
left most plot in Figure 6), the effect of ǫ1andn1are more
pronounced. This is because, although the other two data
owners are small, they do not hinder the learning process by
adding large amounts of privacy-preserving noise because o f
their conservatively small privacy budgets. The third scen ario
is similar to the ﬁrst one, albeit with better relative ﬁtnes s as
conservative data owners are relatively larger. The best sc e-
nario for collaboration, unsurprisingly, is the fourth sce nario in
which phenomenal performances can be achieved even without
much consideration towards the size of the ﬁrst dataset or it s
privacy budget as the other two datasets are large and eagerto collaborate for learning.
B. Credit Card Fraud Detection
In this subsection, we use a credit card dataset with a
L-SVM classiﬁer to further demonstrate the value of the
methodology and to validate the theoretical results.
1) Dataset Description: The datasets contains transactions
made by European credit card holders in September 2013
available on Kaggle [4]. The inputs are vectors extracted by
PCA (to avoid conﬁdentiality issues) as well as the amount
of the transaction. The output is a class, determining if the
transactions was deemed fraudulent or not. The dataset is
highly unbalanced, as the positive class (frauds) account f or
0.172% of all transactions.
2) Experiment Setup: The experiments demonstrate the
outcome of collaborations among N= 3 ﬁnancial institutes
for training a SVM classiﬁer to detect fraudulent activitie s
automatically and rapidly. Each institute has access to a
private dataset of nihistorical credit card transactions and
their authenticity. The value of ǫifor each institute deter-
mines eagerness for collaboration. In L-SVM, the model
isM(x;θ) :=θ⊤[x⊤1]⊤, andg1(θ) := (1/2)θ⊤θand
g2(M(x;θ),y) := max(0,1−M(x;θ)y).
3) Results: First, we investigate the transient behaviour of
the iterates of Algorithm 2. Assume that n1=n2=n3=
30,000. Figure 7 shows the statistics of the relative ﬁtness of
the iterates of Algorithm 2 for training a fraud detection SV M
classiﬁer,ψ(¯θ[k]), versus the iteration number kforT= 100
for three choices of privacy budgets ǫ1=ǫ2=ǫ3. The boxes,
i.e., the vertical lines at each iterations, illustrate the range
of 25% to 75% percentiles of relative ﬁtness extracted from
one-hundred runs of the algorithm and the black lines show
the median relative ﬁtness. As expected from Theorem 3, the
performance of the trained SVM classiﬁer gets closer to the
SVM classiﬁer trained with no privacy constraints θ∗as the
privacy budgets increases.
Now, we can demonstrate the effect of the size of the
datasets and the privacy budgets on the performance of the
trained SVM classiﬁer at the end of Ttraining iterations.
Figure 8 shows the expectation of the relative ﬁtness of the
stochastic gradient method in Algorithm 2 after T= 100
iterations versus the size of the datasets n1=n2=n3and the
privacy budgets ǫ1=ǫ2=ǫ3. Similar to the theoretical results
in Theorem 3, the ﬁtness improves by increasing the size of th e
datasetsn1=n2=n3and the privacy budgets ǫ1=ǫ2=ǫ3.
We can also isolate the effects of the size of the datasets
and the privacy budgets. Figure 9 illustrates the expectati on
of the relative ﬁtness of the iterates of Algorithm 2 after
T= 100 iterations versus the privacy budgets ǫ1=ǫ2=ǫ3.
As all linear slopes in the log-log scale in Figure 9 are −2,
the bound in Theorem 2 seems to be a perfect ﬁt. Figure 5
shows the expectation of the relative ﬁtness of the iterates of
Algorithm 2 after T= 100 iterations versus the size of the
datasetsn1=n2=n3revealing the exact behaviour predicted
in the bound in Theorem 2.