arXiv:1906.09679v1  [cs.CR]  24 Jun 2019The Value of Collaboration in Convex Machine
Learning with Differential Privacy
Nan Wu‡, Farhad Farokhi∗,†, David Smith∗,§, and Mohamed Ali Kaafar∗,‡
‡Macquarie University∗CSIRO’s Data61†The University of Melbourne§Australian National University
Abstract —In this paper, we apply machine learning to dis-
tributed private data owned by multiple data owners, entiti es
with access to non-overlapping training datasets. We use no isy,
differentially-private gradients to minimize the ﬁtness c ost of the
machine learning model using stochastic gradient descent. We
quantify the quality of the trained model, using the ﬁtness c ost,
as a function of privacy budget and size of the distributed da tasets
to capture the trade-off between privacy and utility in mach ine
learning. This way, we can predict the outcome of collaborat ion
among privacy-aware data owners prior to executing poten-
tially computationally-expensive machine learning algor ithms.
Particularly, we show that the difference between the ﬁtnes s of
the trained machine learning model using differentially-p rivate
gradient queries and the ﬁtness of the trained machine model in
the absence of any privacy concerns is inversely proportion al to
the size of the training datasets squared and the privacy bud get
squared. We successfully validate the performance predict ion
with the actual performance of the proposed privacy-aware
learning algorithms, applied to: ﬁnancial datasets for det ermining
interest rates of loans using regression; and detecting cre dit card
frauds using support vector machines.
Index Terms —Machine learning; Differential privacy; Stochas-
tic gradient algorithm.
I. I NTRODUCTION
A. Motivation and Contributions
Data analysis methods using machine learning (ML) can
unlock valuable insights for improving revenue or quality- of-
service from, potentially proprietary, private datasets. Having
large high-quality datasets improves the quality of the tra ined
ML models in terms of the accuracy of predictions on new,
potentially untested data. The subsequent improvements in
quality can motivate multiple data owners to share and merge
their datasets in order to create larger training datasets. For in-
stance, ﬁnancial institutes may wish to merge their transac tion
or lending datasets to improve the quality of trained ML mod-
els for fraud detection or computing interest rates. Howeve r,
government regulations (e.g., the roll-out of the General D ata
Protection Regulation in EU, the California Consumer Priva cy
Act or the development of the Data Sharing and Release
Bill in Australia) increasingly prohibit sharing customer ’s data
without consent [1]. Our work here is motivated by the need to
conciliate the tension between quality improvement of trai ned
ML models and the privacy concerns for data sharing.
We investigate a machine learning setup in which a learner
wants to train a model based on multiple datasets from
different data owners. For the purpose of preserving privac y for
data contributors, the learner can only submit queries to da ta
owners and they respond by providing differentially-priva teLearner
···query DP response
queryDP response
query
DP response
Data
owner
1Data
owner
2Data
owner
N
Fig. 1. The communication structure between the learner and the distributed
data owners for submitting queries and providing different ially-private (DP)
responses.
(DP) responses as illustrated in Figure 1. We speciﬁcally
consider honest-but-curious threat models in which differ ent
private data owners do not trust each other (or the central
learner) for sharing private training datasets, but trust t he
learner to train the model correctly. As an example, in ﬁ-
nancial services, a central learner, such as a central bank
or government, can be trusted for facilitating computation s
among banks although they may not trust each other or the
learner for accessing private data. Another example is for s mart
grid in which electricity retailers are private data owners and
the electricity market operator can facilitate learning. I n this
paper, the learner submits a gradient query to each data owne r.
Upon receiving DP responses from data owners to the gradient
queries, the learner adjusts the parameters of the ML model i n
the direction of the average of the DP gradients. Therefore, the
quality of the DP responses (in terms of the magnitude of the
additive DP noise) from the data owners to the gradient queri es
determines the performance of the ML training algorithm.
An important parameter in the ML training algorithm is
the step size, the amount by which the model parameters
are adjusted in each iteration. If the ﬁtness cost of the ML
meets the assumptions of smoothness, strong convexity, and
Lipschitz-continuity of the gradient, we can prove that, by
selecting the step sizes to be inversely proportional with t he
iteration number and inversely proportional with the maxim um
number of iterations squared (see Algorithm 1 in Section II) ,
the difference between the ﬁtness of the trained ML model
using DP gradient queries and the ﬁtness of the trained ML
model in the absence of any privacy concerns becomes small.
In fact, the magnitude of the difference becomes inversely