Evaluator
Multi-ObjGABOA𝑝(𝑥$%|𝑥$')[0-00-111-0111-00000-0]Trade-off	FrontcomplexityerrorEncoding[1-01-001]
Figure 1: Overview of the stages of NSGA-Net. Networks are represented as bit strings, trained through gradient descent, ranking
and selection by NSGA-II, search history exploitation through BOA. Output is a set of networks that span a range of complexity and
error objectives.
error and computational complexity. Here, computational complex-
ity is defined by the number of floating-point operations (FLOPs)
that a network carries out during a forward pass. Experimentally,
we observe that NSGA-Net can find a set of network architectures
containing solutions that are significantly better than hand-crafted
methods in both objectives, while being competitive with single
objective state-of-the-art NAS approaches. Furthermore, by fully
utilizing a population of networks through recombination and uti-
lization of the search history, NSGA-Net explores the search space
efficiently and requires less computational time for search than other
competing methods. The implementation of NSGA-Net is available
here *.
2 RELATED WORK
Recent research efforts in NAS have produced a plethora of methods
to automate the design of networks. Broadly speaking, these methods
can be divided into evolutionary algorithm (EA) and reinforcement
learning (RL) based approaches – with a few methods falling outside
these two categories. The main motivation of EA methods is to treat
structuring a network as a combinatorial optimization problem. EAs
operate with a population that makes small changes (mutation) and
mixes parts (crossover) of solutions selected by consideration of
multiple objectives to guide its search toward the optimal solutions.
RL, on the other hand, views the construction of a network as a
decision process. Usually, an agent is trained to optimally choose
the pieces of a network in a particular order. We briefly review a few
existing methods here.
Reinforcement Learning: Q-learning [ 45] is a widely popular value
iteration method used for RL. The MetaQNN method [ 1] employs
anϵ-greedy Q-learning strategy with experience replay to search
connections between convolution, pooling, and fully connected lay-
ers, and the operations carried out inside the layers. Zhong et al. [ 49]
extended this idea with the BlockQNN method. BlockQNN searches
the design of a computational block with the same Q-learning ap-
proach. The block is then repeated to construct a network. This
method allows for a much more general network and achieves better
results than its predecessor on CIFAR-10 [24].
A policy gradient method seeks to approximate some not differ-
entiable reward function to train a model that requires parameter
gradients, like a neural network architecture. Zoph and Le [50] first
applied this method in architecture search to train a recurrent neural
*https://github.com/ianwhale/nsga-netnetwork controller that constructs networks. The original method in
[50] uses the controller to generate the entire network at once. This
contrasts from its successor, NASNet [ 51], which designs a convo-
lutional and pooling block that is repeated to construct a network.
NASNet outperforms its predecessor and produces a network achiev-
ing state-of-the-art error rate on CIFAR-10. NSGA-Net differs from
RL methods by using more than one selection criteria. More specifi-
cally, networks are selected for their accuracy on a task, rather than
an approximation of accuracy, along with computational complexity.
Furthermore, the most successful RL methods search only a compu-
tational block that is repeated to create a network, NSGA-Net allows
for search across computational blocks and combinations of blocks.
Hsu et al . [17] extends the NASNet approach to multi-objective
domain to optimize multiple linear combinations of accuracy and
energy consumption criteria for different scalarization parameters.
However, multiple generative applications of a scalarized objectives
was shown to be not as efficient as simultaneous approaches [7].
Evolutionary Algorithms: Designing neural networks through evo-
lution, or neuroevolution , has been a topic of interest for some time,
first showing popular success in 2002 with the advent of the neu-
roevolution of augmenting topologies (NEAT) algorithm [ 42]. In its
original form, NEAT only performs well on comparatively small net-
works. Miikkulainen et al . [32] attempted to extend NEAT to deep
networks with CoDeepNEAT using a co-evolutionary approach that
achieved limited results on the CIFAR-10 dataset. CoDeepNEAT
does, however, produce state-of-the-art results in the Omniglot multi-
task learning domain [26].
Real et al . [40] introduced perhaps the first truly large scale ap-
plication of a simple evolutionary algorithm. The extension of this
method presented in [ 39], called AmoebaNet, provided the first large
scale comparison of EC and RL methods. Their simple EA searches
over the same space as NASNet [ 51] and has shown to have a faster
convergence to an accurate network when compared to RL and ran-
dom search. Furthermore, AmoebaNet produced one of the best
state-of-the-art results on CIFAR-10 data-set.
Conceptually, NSGA-Net is closest to the Genetic CNN [ 47]
algorithm. It uses a binary encoding that corresponds to connections
in convolutional blocks. In NSGA-Net, we augment the original
encoding and genetic operations by (1) adding an extra bit for a
residual connection, and (2) introducing phase-wise crossover. We
also introduce a multi-objective based selection scheme. Moreover,
we also diverge from Genetic CNN by incorporating a Bayesian
2