Input2 3 6
5
Pooling2
451
36
Pooling12
34 5
Avg Pooling
Linear
x(1)
o=0-01-000-0010-00101-0 x(2)
o=0-00-000-0101-10101-0 x(3)
o=0-00-111-0111-00000-1Figure 2: Encoding: Illustration of a classification network encoded by x=xo, where xois the operations at a phase (gray boxes, each
with a possible maximum of 6 nodes). In this example the spatial resolution changes (orange boxes that connect the phases) are fixed
based on prior knowledge of successful approaches. The phases are described by the bit string xowhich is formatted for readability
above. The bits are grouped by dashes to describe what node they control. See Section 3.1 for detailed description of the encoding
schemes.
network in our search to fully utilize past population history as
learned knowledge.
Evolutionary multi-objective optimization (EMO) approaches
have been scarcely used for NAS. Kim et al . [23] presents an algo-
rithm utilizing NSGA-II [ 7], however their method only searches
over hyper-parameters and a small fixed set of architectures. The
evolutionary method shown in [ 10] uses weight sharing through net-
work morphisms [ 46] and approximate morphisms as mutations and
uses a biased sampling to select for novelty from the objective space
rather than a principled selection scheme, like NSGA-II [ 7]. Net-
work morphisms allow for a network to be “widened" or “deepened"
in a manner that maintains functional equivalence. For architecture
search, this allows for easy parameter sharing after a perturbation in
a network’s architecture.
Other Methods: Methods that do not subscribe to either an EA or
RL paradigm have also shown success in architecture search. Liu
et al. [27] presents a method that progressively expands networks
from simple cells and only trains the best Knetworks that are pre-
dicted to be promising by a RNN meta-model of the encoding space.
Dong et al . [9] extended this method to use a multi-objective ap-
proach, selected the Knetworks based on their Pareto-optimality
when compared to other networks. Hsu et al . [18] also presents a
meta-modeling approach that generates models with state-of-the-art
accuracy. This approach may be ad-hoc as no analysis is presented
on how the progressive search affects the trade-off frontier. Elsken
et al. [11] use a simple hill climbing method along with a network
morphism [ 46] approach to optimize network architectures quickly
on limited resources. Chen et al . [5] combine the ideas of RL and
EA. A population of networks is maintained and are selected for mu-
tation with tournament selection [ 13]. A recurrent network is used as
a controller to learn an effective strategy to apply mutations to net-
works. Networks are then trained and the worst performing network
in the population is replaced. This approach generates state of the art
results for the ImageNet classification task. Chen et al . [3] presented
an augmented random search approach to optimize networks for a
semantic segmentation application. Kandasamy et al . [22] presents a
Gaussian process based approach to optimize network architectures,
viewing the process through a Bayesian optimization lens.
3 PROPOSED APPROACH
Compute devices are often constrained by hardware resources in
terms of their power consumption, available memory, availableFLOPs, and latency constraints. Hence, real-world design of DNNs
are required to balance these multiple objectives (e.g., predictive
performance and computational complexity). Often, when multiple
design criteria are considered simultaneously, there may not exist
a single solution that performs optimally in all desired criteria, es-
pecially with competing objectives. Under such circumstances, a
set of solutions that provide representative trade-off information
between the objectives is more desirable. This enables a practitioner
to analyze the importance of each criterion, depending on the appli-
cation, and to choose an appropriate solution on the trade-off frontier
for implementation. We propose NSGA-Net, a genetic algorithm
based architecture search method to automatically generate a set of
DNN architectures that approximate the Pareto-front between per-
formance and complexity on an image classification task. The rest of
this section describes the encoding scheme, and main components
of NSGA-Net in detail.
3.1 Encoding
Genetic algorithms, like any other biologically inspired search meth-
ods, often do not directly operate on phenotypes . From the biological
perspective, we may view the DNN architecture as a phenotype, and
the representation it is mapped from as its genotype . As in the natural
world, genetic operations like crossover and mutation are only car-
ried out in the genotype space; such is the case in NSGA-Net as well.
We refer to the interface between the genotype and the phenotype as
encoding in this paper.
Most existing CNN architectures can be viewed as a composition
of computational blocks that define the layer-wise computation (e.g.
ResNet blocks [ 14], DenseNet block [ 19], and Inception block [ 43],
etc.) and a scheme that specifies the spatial resolution changes. For
example, down-sampling is often used after computational blocks
to reduce the spatial resolution of information going into the next
computational blocks in image classification DNNs. In NSGA-Net,
each computational block, referred to as a phase , is encoded using
the method presented by Xie and Yuille [47], with the small change
of adding a bit to represent a skip connection that forwards the input
information directly to the output bypassing the entire block. And
we name it as the Operation Encoding xoin this study.
Operation Encoding xo: Unlike most of the hand-crafted and NAS
generated architectures, we do not repeat the same phase (compu-
tational block) to construct a network. Instead, the operations of
a network are encoded by xo=
x(1)
o,x(2)
o, . . . , x(np)
o
where npis
3