implementation in PyTorch [ 33]. Then the classification error is
measured on our validation set.
4.3 Architecture Validation
For comparing with other single-objective NAS methods, we adopt
the training procedure used in [ 29] and a quick summary is given as
follows.
We extend the number of epochs to 600 with a batch-size of 96 to
train the final selected models (could be the entire trade-off frontier
architectures or a particular one chosen by the decision-maker). We
also incorporate a data pre-processing technique cutout [8], and a
regularization technique scheduled path dropout introduced in [ 51].
In addition, to further improve the training process, an auxiliary
head classifier is appended to the architecture at approximately 2/3
depth (right after the second resolution-reduction operation). The
loss from this auxiliary head classifier, scaled by a constant factor
0.4, is aggregated with the loss from the original architecture before
back-propagation during training. Other hyper-parameters related
to the back-propagation training remain the same as during the
architecture search.
For the fairness of the comparison among various NAS methods,
we incorporate the NASNet-A cell [ 51], the AmoebaNet-A cell [ 39]
and the DARTS(second order) cell [ 29] into our training procedures
and report their results under the same settings as NSGA-Net found
architectures.
4.4 Results Analysis
We first present the overall search progression of NSGA-Net in
the objective-space. Figure 5 shows the bi-objective frontiers ob-
tained by NSGA-Net through the various stages of the search, clearly
showcasing a gradual improvement of the whole population. Fig-
ure 6 shows two metrics: normalized HV and offspring survival rate,
through the different generations of the population. The monotonic
increase in the former suggests that a better set of trade-off network
architectures have been found over the generations. The monotonic
decrease in the latter metric suggests that, not surprisingly, it is
increasingly difficult to create better offspring (than their parents).
We can use a threshold on the offspring survival rate as a potential
criterion to terminate the current stage of the search process and
switch between the exploration and exploitation.
To compare the network architecture obtained from NSGA-Net
to other hand-crafted and search-generated architectures, we pick
the network architectures with the lowest classification error from
the final frontier (the dot in the lower right corner on the green curve
in Figure 5) and extrapolate (by following the setup as explained
in Section 4.3) the network by increasing the number of filters of
each node in the phases, and train with the entire official CIFAR-10
training set. The chosen network architecture, shown in Figure 2,
results in 3.85% classification error on the CIFAR-10 testing set with
3.34 Millions of parameters and 1290 MFLOPs. Table 1 provides a
summary that compares NSGA-Net with other multi-objective NAS
methods. Unfortunately, hypervolume comparisons between these
multi-objective NAS methods are not feasible due to the following
two reasons: 1) The entire trade-off frontiers obtained by the other
multi-objective NAS methods are not reported and 2) different objec-
tives were used to estimate the complexity of the architectures. Due
Figure 5: Progression of trade-off frontiers after each stage of
NSGA-Net.
Figure 6: Generational normalized hypervolume and survival
rate of the offspring network architectures.
Table 1: Multi-objective methods for CIFAR-10 (best accuracy
for each method)
Method Error (%) Other Objective Compute
PPP-Net [9] 4.36FLOPs or
Params or Inference TimeNvidia Titan X
MONAS [17] 4.34 Power Nvidia 1080Ti
NSGA-Net 3.85 FLOPsNvidia 1080Ti
8 GPU Days
to space limitation, the other architectures on the trade-off frontier
found by NSGA-Net are reported in Appendix.
The CIFAR-10 results comparing state-of-the-art CNN architec-
tures from both human-designed and search-generated are presented
in Table 2. NSGA-Net achieves comparable results with state-of-the-
art architectures designed by human experts [ 19] while having order
of magnitude less parameters in the obtained network architecture.
When compared with other state-of-the-art RL- and evolution-based
NAS methods [ 39,51], NSGA-Net achieves similar performance by
using two and half orders of magnitude less computation resources
(GPU-days). Even though NSGA-Net falls short in search efficiency
when compared to the gradient-based NAS method DARTS [ 29]
6