NSGA-Net: Neural Architecture Search using Multi-Objective
Genetic Algorithm
Zhichao Lu, Ian Whalen, Vishnu Boddeti, Yashesh Dhebar,
Kalyanmoy Deb, Erik Goodman and Wolfgang Banzhaf
Michigan State University
East Lansing, Michigan
{luzhicha,whalenia,vishnu,dhebarya,kdeb,goodman,banzhafw}@msu.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper introduces NSGA-Net – an evolutionary approach for
neural architecture search (NAS). NSGA-Net is designed with three
goals in mind: (1) a procedure considering multiple and conflict-
ing objectives, (2) an efficient procedure balancing exploration and
exploitation of the space of potential neural network architectures,
and (3) a procedure finding a diverse set of trade-off network archi-
tectures achieved in a single run. NSGA-Net is a population-based
search algorithm that explores a space of potential neural network
architectures in three steps, namely, a population initialization step
that is based on prior-knowledge from hand-crafted architectures,
anexploration step comprising crossover and mutation of architec-
tures, and finally an exploitation step that utilizes the hidden useful
knowledge stored in the entire history of evaluated neural archi-
tectures in the form of a Bayesian Network. Experimental results
suggest that combining the dual objectives of minimizing an error
metric and computational complexity, as measured by FLOPs, al-
lows NSGA-Net to find competitive neural architectures. Moreover,
NSGA-Net achieves error rate on the CIFAR-10 dataset on par with
other state-of-the-art NAS methods while using orders of magni-
tude less computational resources. These results are encouraging
and shows the promise to further use of EC methods in various
deep-learning paradigms.
KEYWORDS
Deep Learning, Image classification, Neural Architecture Search,
multi objective, Bayesian Optimization
1 INTRODUCTION
Deep convolutional neural networks have been overwhelmingly suc-
cessful in a variety of image analysis tasks. One of the key driving
forces behind this success is the introduction of many CNN archi-
tectures, such as AlexNet [ 25], VGG [ 41], GoogLeNet [ 43], ResNet
[14], DenseNet [ 19] etc. in the context of image classification. Con-
currently, network designs such as MobileNet [ 16], XNOR-Net [ 38],
BinaryNets [ 6], LBCNN [ 21] etc. have been developed with the goal
of enabling real-world deployment of high performance models on
resource constrained devices. These developments are the fruits of
years of painstaking efforts and human ingenuity.
Neural architecture search (NAS) methods, on the other hand,
seek to automate the process of designing network architectures.
State-of-the-art reinforcement learning (RL) methods like [ 40] and
[51] are inefficient in their use of their search space and require
3,150 and 2,000 GPU days, respectively. Gradient-based methods
like [ 29] focus on the single objective of minimizing an error metricon a task and cannot be easily adapted to handle multiple conflicting
objectives. Furthermore, most state-of-the-art approaches search
over a single computation block, similar to an Inception block [ 43],
and repeat it as many times as necessary to form a complete network.
In this paper, we present NSGA-Net, a multi-objective genetic
algorithm for NAS to address the aforementioned limitations of
current approaches. A pictorial overview of NSGA-Net is provided
in Figure 1. The salient features of NSGA-Net are,
(1)Multi-Objective Optimization : Real-world deployment of
NAS models demands small-sized networks, in addition the
models being accurate. For instance, we seek to maximize
performance on compute devices that are often constrained by
hardware resources in terms of power consumption, available
memory, available FLOPs, and latency constraints, to name
a few. NSGA-Net is explicitly designed to optimize such
competing objectives.
(2)Flexible Architecture Search Space : The search space for
most existing methods is restricted to a block that is repeated
as many times as desired. In contrast, NSGA-Net searches
over the entire structure of the network. This scheme over-
comes the limitations inherent in repeating the same com-
putation block throughout an entire network, namely, that a
single block may not be optimal for every application and
it is desirable to allow NAS to discover architectures with
different blocks in different parts of the network.
(3)Non-Dominated Sorting : The core component of NSGA-
Net is the Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II
(NSGA-II) [ 7], a multi-objective optimization algorithm that
has been successfully employed for solving a variety of multi-
objective problems [ 34,44]. Here, we leverage its ability to
maintain a diverse trade-off frontier between multiple con-
flicting objectives, thereby resulting in a more effective and
efficient exploration of the search space.
(4)Efficient Recombination : In contrast to state-of-the-art evolution-
based NAS methods [ 39,40] in which only mutation is used,
we employ crossover (in addition to mutation) to combine
networks with desirable qualities across multiple objectives
from the diverse frontier of solutions.
(5)Bayesian Learning : We construct and employ a Bayesian
Network inspired by the Bayesian Optimization Algorithm
(BOA) [ 35] to fully utilize the promising solutions present
in our search history archive and the inherent correlations
between the layers of the network architecture.
We demonstrate the efficacy of NSGA-Net on the CIFAR10 [ 24]
image classification task by minimizing two objectives: classificationarXiv:1810.03522v2  [cs.CV]  18 Apr 2019