Parent 11
2 3
4⊗
Parent 21
2 3
4=
Child1
2 3
4(Parent 2) DenseNet: 1-11-111-0(Parent 1) VGG: 1-01-001-0
——————————————(Child) ResNet: 1-01-101-0
: common
: VGG
: DenseNetFigure 3: Crossover Example: A crossover (denoted by ⊗) of a VGG-like structure with a DenseNet-like structure may result in a
ResNet-like network. In the figure, red and blue denotes connections that are unique to VGG and DenseNet respectively, and black
shows the connections that are common to both parents. All black bits are retained in the final child encoding, and only the bits that
are not common between the parents can potentially be selected at random from one of the parent.
the number of phases. Each x(i)
oencodes a directed acyclic graph
consisting of nonumber of nodes that describes the operation within
a phase using a binary string. Here, a node is a basic computational
unit, which can be a single operation like convolution, pooling,
batch-normalization [ 20] or a sequence of operations. This encoding
scheme offers a compact representation of the network architectures
in genotype space, yet is flexible enough that many of the computa-
tional blocks in hand-crafted networks can be encoded, e.g. VGG
[41], ResNet [ 14] and DenseNet [ 19]. Figure 2 and Figure 3 shows
examples of the operation encoding.
Search Space : With a pre-determined scheme of spatial resolution
reduction (similarly in [ 29,39,51]), the total search space in the
genotype space is governed by our operation encoding xo:
Ωx= Ωxo=np×2no(no−1)/2+1
where npis the number of phases (computational blocks), and no
is the number of nodes (basic computational units) in each phase.
However, for computationally tractability, we constrain the search
space such that each node in a phase carries the same sequence of
operations, i.e. a 3×3convolution followed by batch-normalization
[20] and ReLU.
It is worth noting that, as a result of nodes in each phase having
identical operations, the encoding between genotype and pheno-
type is a many-to-one mapping. Given the prohibitive computational
expense required to train each network architecture before its perfor-
mance can be assessed, it is essential to avoid evaluating genomes
that decode to the same architecture. We develop an algorithm to
quickly and approximately identify these duplicate genomes (see
Appendix for details).
3.2 Search Procedure
NSGA-Net is an iterative process in which initial solutions are made
gradually better as a group, called a population . In every iteration, the
same number of offspring (new network architectures) are generated
from parents selected from the population. Each population member
(including both parents and offspring) compete for both survival
and reproduction (becoming a parent) in the next iteration. Theinitial population may be generated randomly or guided by prior-
knowledge (e.g. seeding the hand-crafted network architectures into
the initial population). Following initialization, the overall NSGA-
Net search proceeds in two sequential stages, an exploration and
exploitation .
Exploration : The goal of this stage is to discover diverse ways of
connecting nodes to form a phase (computational block). Genetic
operations, crossover and mutation, offer an effective mean to realize
this goal.
Crossover: Theimplicit parallelism of population-based search ap-
proaches can be unlocked when the population members can effec-
tively share (through crossover) building-blocks [ 15]. In the context
of NAS, a phase or the sub-structure of a phase can be viewed as
a building-block. We design a homogeneous crossover operator,
which takes two selected population members as parents, to create
offspring (new network architectures) by inheriting and recombining
the building-blocks from parents. The main idea of this crossover op-
erator is to 1) preserve the common building-blocks shared between
both parents by inheriting the common bits from both parents’ binary
bit-strings; 2) maintain, relatively, the same complexity between the
parents and their offspring by restricting the number of “1" bits in
the offspring’s bit-string to lie between the number of “1" bits in
both parents. The proposed crossover allows selected architectures
(parents) to effectively exchange phases or sub-structures within a
phase. An example of the crossover operator is provided in Figure 3.
Mutation: To enhance the diversity (having different network ar-
chitectures) of the population and the ability to escape from local
optima, we use a bit-flipping mutation operator, which is commonly
used in binary-coded genetic algorithms. Due to the nature of our
encoding, a one bit flip in the genotype space could potentially
create a completely different architecture in the phenotype space.
Hence, we restrict the number of bits that can be flipped to be at
most one for each mutation operation. As a result, only one of the
phase architectures can be mutated at one time.
Exploitation : The exploitation stage follows the exploration stage
in NSGA-Net. The goal of this stage is to exploit and reinforce the
4