(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Figure 8: (a) Trade-off frontier comparison between random search and NSGA-Net. (b) Trade-off frontier comparison with and
without crossover. (c) Comparison between sampling from uniformly from the encoding space and the Bayesian Network constructed
from NSGA-Net exploration population archive.
Table 3: Comparison with different classifiers on CIFAR-100.
Architectures Params Test Error GPU Search
(M) (%) Days Method
Wide ResNet [48] 36.5 20.50 - manual
Block-QNN-S [49] 6.1 20.65 96 RL
Block-QNN-S *[49] 39.8 18.06 96 RL
NSGA-Net 3.3 20.74 8 evolution
NSGA-Net * 11.6 19.83 8 evolution
*denotes architectures with extended number of filters
4.6 Ablation Studies
Here, we first present results comparing NSGA-Net with uniform
random sampling (RSearch) from our encoding as a sanity check. It’s
clear from Figure 8a that much better set of network architectures
are obtained using NSGA-Net. Then we present additional results to
showcase the benefits of the two main components of our approach:
crossover and Bayesian network based offspring creation.
Crossover Operator: Current state-of-the-art NAS search results
[28,39] using evolutionary algorithms use mutation alone with
enormous computation resources. We quantify the importance of
crossover operation in an EA by conducting the following small-
scale experiments on CIFAR-10. From Figure 8b, we observe that
crossover helps achieve a better trade-off frontier.
Bayesian Network (BN) based Offspring Creation: Here we quan-
tify the benefits of the exploitation stage i.e., off-spring creation by
sampling from BN. We uniformly sampled 120 network architec-
tures each from our encoding and from the BN constructed on the
population archive generated by NSGA-Net at the end of exploration.
The architectures sampled from the BN dominate (see Fig.8c) all
network architectures created through uniform sampling.
4.7 Discussion
We analyze the intermediate solutions of our search and the trade-off
frontiers and make some observations. Upon visualizing networks,
like the one in Figure 2, we observe that as network complexity
decreases along the front, the search process gravitates towards re-
ducing the complexity by minimizing the amount of processing at
higher image resolutions i.e., remove nodes from the phases that areclosest to the input to the network. As such, NSGA-Net outputs a set
of network architectures that are optimized for wide range of com-
plexity constraints. On the other hand, approaches that search over a
single repeated computational block can only control the complexity
of the network by manually tuning the number of repeated blocks
used. Therefore, NSGA-Net provides a more fine-grained control
over the two objectives as opposed to the control afforded by arbi-
trary repetition of blocks. Moreover, some objectives, for instance
susceptibility to adversarial attacks, may not be easily controllable
by simple repetition of blocks. A subset of networks discovered on
the trade-off frontier for CIFAR-10 is provided in Appendix.
5 CONCLUSIONS
This paper presented NSGA-Net, a multi-objective evolutionary ap-
proach for neural architecture search. NSGA-Net affords a number of
practical benefits: (1) the design of neural network architectures that
can effectively optimize and trade-off multiple competing objectives,
(2) advantages afforded by population-based methods being more
effective than optimizing weighted linear combination of objectives,
(3) more efficient exploration and exploitation of the search space
through a customized crossover scheme and leveraging the entire
search history through BOA, and finally (4) output a set of solutions
spanning a trade-off front in a single run. Experimentally, by opti-
mizing both prediction performance and computational complexity
NSGA-Net finds networks that are significantly better than hand-
crafted networks on both objectives and is compares favorably to
other state-of-the-art single objective NAS methods for classification
on CIFAR-10.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This material is based in part upon work supported by the Na-
tional Science Foundation under Cooperative Agreement No. DBI-
0939454. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommenda-
tions expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.
6 APPENDIX
6.1 Duplicate Checking and Removal
Due to the directed acyclic nature of our encoding, redundancy exists
in the search space defined by our coding, meaning that there exist
8