p/parenleftBig
x(1)
o/parenrightBig
p/parenleftBig
x(3)
o/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglex(2)
o/parenrightBig
p/parenleftBig
x(2)
o/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglex(1)
o/parenrightBig
ˆx(1)
o=0-01-000-0010-00101-0 ˆx(3)
o=0-00-111-0111-00000-1 ˆx(2)
o=0-00-000-0101-10101-0Figure 4: Exploitation: Sampling from the Bayesian Network (BN) constructed by NSGA-Net. The histograms represent estimates
of the conditional distributions between the network structure between the phases explored during the exploration step and updated
during the exploitation step (i.e., using the population archive). During exploitation, networks are constructed by sampling phases
from the BN. Fig. 2 shows the architectures that the sampled bit strings, {ˆx(1)
o,ˆx(2)
o,ˆx(3)
o}decode to.
patterns commonly shared among the past successful architectures
explored in the previous stage. The exploitation step in NSGA-Net
is heavily inspired by the Bayesian Optimization Algorithm (BOA)
[35] which is explicitly designed for problems with inherent cor-
relations between the optimization variables. In the context of our
NAS encoding, this translates to correlations in the blocks and paths
across the different phases. Exploitation uses past information across
all networks evaluated to guide the final part of the search. More
specifically, say we have a network with three phases, namely x(1)
o,
x(2)
o, and x(3)
o. We would like to know the relationship of the three
phases. For this purpose, we construct a Bayesian Network (BN)
relating these variables, modeling the probability of networks be-
ginning with a particular phase x(1)
o, the probability that x(2)
ofollows
x(1)
o, and the probability that x(3)
ofollows x(2)
o. In other words, we
estimate the distributions p
x(1)
o
,p
x(2)
o|x(1)
o
, and p
x(3)
o|x(2)
o
by
using the population history, and update these estimates during the
exploitation process. New offspring solutions are created by sam-
pling from this BN. Figure 4 shows a pictorial depiction of this
process.
4 EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we explain the experimental setup and implemen-
tation details of NSGA-Net, followed by the empirical results to
demonstrate the efficacy of NSGA-Net to automate the NAS process
on image classification task.
4.1 Performance Metrics
We consider two objectives to guide NSGA-Net based NAS, namely,
classification error and computational complexity. A number of
metrics can serve as proxies for computational complexity: number
of active nodes, number of active connections between the nodes,
number of parameters, inference time and number of floating-point
operations (FLOPs) needed to execute the forward pass of a given
network. Our initial experiments considered each of these different
metrics. We concluded from extensive experimentation that inference
time cannot be estimated reliably due differences and inconsistencies
in computing environment, GPU manufacturer, temperature, etc.
Similarly, the number of parameters, active connections or active
nodes only relate to one aspect of computational complexity. Incontrast, we found an estimate of FLOPs to be a more accurate
and reliable proxy for network complexity. See Appendix for more
details. Therefore, classification error and FLOPs serve as the twin
objectives for selecting networks.
For the purpose of quantitatively comparing different multi - ob-
jective search methods or different configuration setups of NSGA-
Net, we use the hypervolume (HV) performance metric, which calcu-
lates the dominated area (hypervolume in the general case) from the
a set of solutions (network architectures) to a reference point which
is usually an estimate of the nadir point—a vector concatenating
worst objective values of the Pareto-frontier. It has been proven that
the maximum HV can only be achieved when all solutions are on the
Pareto-frontier [ 12]. Hence, the higher the HV measures, the better
solutions that are being found in terms of both objectives.
4.2 Implementation Details
Dataset: We consider the CIFAR-10 [ 24] dataset for our classifi-
cation task. We split the original training set (80%-20%) to create
our training and validation sets for architecture search. The original
CIFAR-10 testing set is only utilized at the conclusion of the search
to obtain the test accuracy for the models on the final trade-off front.
NSGA-Net hyper-parameters: We set the number of phases np
to three and the number of nodes in each phase noto six. We also fix
the spatial resolution changes scheme similarly as in [ 51], in which
a max-pooling with stride 2is placed after the first and the second
phase, and a global average pooling layer after the last phase. The
initial population is generated by uniform random sampling. The
probabilities of crossover and mutation operations are set at 0.9 and
0.02 respectively. The population size is 40 and the number of gen-
erations is 20 for the exploration stage. And another ten generations
for exploitation. Hence, a total of 1,200 network architectures are
searched by NSGA-Net.
Network training during searching: During architecture search,
we limit the number of filters (channels) in any node to 16 for each
one of the generated network architecture. We then train them on
our training set using standard stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
back-propagation algorithm and a cosine annealing learning rate
schedule [ 30]. Our initial learning rate is 0.025 and we train for 25
epochs, which takes about 9 minutes on a NVIDIA 1080Ti GPU
5