Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
In this paper, we propose a principled probabilistic approach called RNNLogic which overcomes the
above limitations. Our approach consists of a rule generator as well as a reasoning predictor with
logic rules, which are simultaneously trained to enhance each other. The rule generator provides
logic rules which are used by the reasoning predictor for reasoning, while the reasoning predictor
provides effective reward to train the rule generator, which helps signiﬁcantly reduce the search space.
Speciﬁcally, for each query-answer pair, e.g., q= (h;r;?)anda=t, we model the probability of
the answer conditioned on query and existing knowledge graph G, i.e.,p(ajG;q), where a set of logic
rulesz1is treated as a latent variable. The rule generator deﬁnes a prior distribution over logic rules
for each query, i.e., p(zjq), which is parameterized by a recurrent neural network. The reasoning
predictor computes the likelihood of the answer conditioned on the logic rules and the existing
knowledge graphG, i.e.,p(ajG;q;z). At each training iteration, we ﬁrst sample a few logic rules
from the rule generator, and further update the reasoning predictor to try out these rules for prediction.
Then an EM algorithm (Neal & Hinton, 1998) is used to optimize the rule generator. In the E-step, a
set of high-quality logic rules are selected from all the generated rules according to their posterior
probabilities. In the M-step, the rule generator is updated to imitate the high-quality rules selected in
the E-step. Extensive experimental results show that RNNLogic outperforms state-of-the-art methods
for knowledge graph reasoning2. Besides, RNNLogic is able to generate high-quality logic rules.
2 R ELATED WORK
Our work is related to existing efforts on learning logic rules for knowledge graph reasoning. Most
traditional methods enumerate relational paths between query entities and answer entities as candidate
logic rules, and further learn a scalar weight for each rule to assess the quality. Representative methods
include Markov logic networks (Kok & Domingos, 2005; Richardson & Domingos, 2006; Khot et al.,
2011), relational dependency networks (Neville & Jensen, 2007; Natarajan et al., 2010), rule mining
algorithms (Gal ´arraga et al., 2013; Meilicke et al., 2019), path ranking (Lao & Cohen, 2010; Lao et al.,
2011) and probabilistic personalized page rank (ProPPR) algorithms (Wang et al., 2013; 2014a;b).
Some recent methods extend the idea by simultaneously learning logic rules and the weights in
a differentiable way, and most of them are based on neural logic programming (Rockt ¨aschel &
Riedel, 2017; Yang et al., 2017; Cohen et al., 2018; Sadeghian et al., 2019; Yang & Song, 2020) or
neural theorem provers (Rockt ¨aschel & Riedel, 2017; Minervini et al., 2020). These methods and
our approach are similar in spirit, as they are all able to learn the weights of logic rules efﬁciently.
However, these existing methods try to simultaneously learn logic rules and their weights, which is
nontrivial in terms of optimization. The main innovation of our approach is to separate rule generation
and rule weight learning by introducing a rule generator and a reasoning predictor respectively, which
can mutually enhance each other. The rule generator generates a few high-quality logic rules, and
the reasoning predictor only focuses on learning the weights of such high-quality rules, which
signiﬁcantly reduces the search space and leads to better reasoning results. Meanwhile, the reasoning
predictor can in turn help identify some useful logic rules to improve the rule generator.
The other kind of rule learning method is based on reinforcement learning. The general idea is to
train pathﬁnding agents, which search for reasoning paths in knowledge graphs to answer questions,
and then extract logic rules from reasoning paths (Xiong et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018; Das et al.,
2018; Lin et al., 2018; Shen et al., 2018). However, training effective pathﬁnding agents is highly
challenging, as the reward signal (i.e., whether a path ends at the correct answer) can be extremely
sparse. Although some studies (Lin et al., 2018) try to get better reward by using embedding-based
methods for reward shaping, the performance is still worse than most embedding-based methods. In
our approach, the rule generator has a similar role to those pathﬁnding agents. The major difference
is that we simultaneously train the rule generator and a reasoning predictor with logic rules, which
mutually enhance each other. The reasoning predictor provides effective reward for training the rule
generator, and the rule generator offers high-quality rules to improve the reasoning predictor.
Our work is also related to knowledge graph embedding, which solves knowledge graph reasoning
by learning entity and relation embeddings in latent spaces (Bordes et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2014c;
Yang et al., 2015; Nickel et al., 2016; Trouillon et al., 2016; Cai & Wang, 2018; Dettmers et al., 2018;
Balazevic et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2019). With proper architectures, these methods are able to learn
1More precisely, zis a multiset. In this paper, we use “set” to refer to “multiset” for conciseness.
2The codes of RNNLogic are available: https://github.com/DeepGraphLearning/RNNLogic
2