Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Performance w.r.t. the Number of Training Triplets. To better evaluate different methods under
cases where training triplets are very limited, in this section we reduce the amount of training data on
Kinship and UMLS to see how the performance varies. The results are presented in Fig. 4. We see
that RNNLogic w/o emb. achieves the best results. Besides, the improvement over RotatE is more
signiﬁcant as we reduce training triplets, showing that RNNLogic is more robust to data sparsity.
Performance w.r.t. Embedding Dimension. RNNLogic with emb. uses entity and relation embed-
dings to improve the reasoning predictor. Next, we study its performance with different embedding
dimensions. The results are presented in Fig. 3, where we compare against RotatE (Sun et al.,
2019). We see that RNNLogic signiﬁcantly outperforms RotatE at every embedding dimension. The
improvement is mainly from the use of logic rules, showing that our learned rules are indeed helpful.
Comparison of Optimization Algorithms. RNNLogic uses an EM algorithm to optimize the rule
generator. In practice, the generator can also be optimized with REINFORCE (Williams, 1992) (see
App. F for details). We empirically compare the two algorithms in the w/o emb. case. The results on
Kinship and UMLS are presented in Tab. 4. We see EM consistently outperforms REINFORCE.
33% 67% 100%
Training Triplets0.10.20.30.40.50.6MRR
Kinship
Algorithm
NeuralLP
DRUM
MINERVA
RotatE
RNNLogic w/o emb.
33% 67% 100%
Training Triplets0.10.20.30.40.50.60.7MRR
UMLS
Algorithm
NeuralLP
DRUM
MINERVA
RotatE
RNNLogic w/o emb.
Figure 4: Performance w.r.t. # training triplets. RNNLogic is
more robust to data sparsity even without using embeddings.Kinship UMLS
MRR MRR
REINFORCE 0.312 0.504
EM 0.639 0.745
Table 4: Comparison between
REINFORCE and EM.
Case Study of Generated Logic Rules. Finally, we show some logic rules generated by RNNLogic
on the FB15k-237 dataset in Tab. 5. We can see that these logic rules are meaningful and diverse.
The ﬁrst rule is a subrelation rule. The third and ﬁfth rules are two-hop compositional rules. The rest
of logic rules have even more complicated forms. This case study shows that RNNLogic can indeed
learn useful and diverse rules for reasoning. For more generated logic rules, please refer to App. E.
Table 5: Case study of the rules generated by the rule generator.
Appears inTVShow (X;Y ) Actor of(X;Y )
Appears inTVShow (X;Y ) Creator of(X;U )^HasProducer (U;V)^Appears inTVShow (V;Y)
ORG. inState (X;Y ) ORG. inCity (X;U )^City Locates inState (U;Y)
ORG. inState (X;Y ) ORG. inCity (X;U )^Address ofPERS. (U;V)^Born in(V;W )^Town inState (W;Y )
Person Nationality (X;Y ) Born in(X;U )^Place inCountry (U;Y)
Person Nationality (X;Y ) Student ofEducational Institution (X;U )^ORG. Endowment Currency (U;V)^
Currency Used inRegion (V;W )^Region inCountry (W;Y )
5 C ONCLUSION
This paper studies learning logic rules for knowledge graph reasoning, and an approach called
RNNLogic is proposed. RNNLogic treats a set of logic rules as a latent variable, and a rule generator
as well as a reasoning predictor with logic rules are jointly learned. We develop an EM-based
algorithm for optimization. Extensive expemriments prove the effectiveness of RNNLogic. In the
future, we plan to study generating more complicated logic rules rather than only compositional rules.
Besides, we plan to extend RNNLogic to other reasoning problems, such as question answering.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project is supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC)
Discovery Grant, the Canada CIFAR AI Chair Program, collaboration grants between Microsoft
Research and Mila, Samsung Electronics Co., Ldt., Amazon Faculty Research Award, Tencent AI
Lab Rhino-Bird Gift Fund and a NRC Collaborative R&D Project (AI4D-CORE-06). This project
was also partially funded by IV ADO Fundamental Research Project grant PRF-2019-3583139727.
10