Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
RNNL OGIC : LEARNING LOGIC RULES FOR REASON -
ING ON KNOWLEDGE GRAPHS
Meng Qu1;2, Junkun Chen3, Louis-Pascal Xhonneux1;2, Yoshua Bengio1;2;5, Jian Tang1;4;5
1Mila - Qu ´ebec AI Institute
2Universit ´e de Montr ´eal
3Tsinghua University
4HEC Montr ´eal
5Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR)
ABSTRACT
This paper studies learning logic rules for reasoning on knowledge graphs. Logic
rules provide interpretable explanations when used for prediction as well as being
able to generalize to other tasks, and hence are critical to learn. Existing methods
either suffer from the problem of searching in a large search space (e.g., neural logic
programming) or ineffective optimization due to sparse rewards (e.g., techniques
based on reinforcement learning). To address these limitations, this paper proposes
a probabilistic model called RNNLogic. RNNLogic treats logic rules as a latent
variable, and simultaneously trains a rule generator as well as a reasoning predictor
with logic rules. We develop an EM-based algorithm for optimization. In each
iteration, the reasoning predictor is ﬁrst updated to explore some generated logic
rules for reasoning. Then in the E-step, we select a set of high-quality rules from all
generated rules with both the rule generator and reasoning predictor via posterior
inference; and in the M-step, the rule generator is updated with the rules selected
in the E-step. Experiments on four datasets prove the effectiveness of RNNLogic.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Knowledge graphs are collections of real-world facts, which are useful in various applications. Each
fact is typically speciﬁed as a triplet (h;r;t)or equivalently r(h;t), meaning entity hhas relation
rwith entityt. For example, Bill Gates is the Co-founder ofMicrosoft . As it is impossible to
collect all facts, knowledge graphs are incomplete. Therefore, a fundamental problem on knowledge
graphs is to predict missing facts by reasoning with existing ones, a.k.a. knowledge graph reasoning.
This paper studies learning logic rules for reasoning on knowledge graphs. For example, one may
extract a rule8X;Y;Z hobby (X;Y ) friend (X;Z)^hobby (Z;Y), meaning that if Zis a
friend ofXandZhas hobbyY, thenYis also likely the hobby of X. Then the rule can be applied
to infer new hobbies of people. Such logic rules are able to improve interpretability and precision
of reasoning (Qu & Tang, 2019; Zhang et al., 2020). Moreover, logic rules can also be reused and
generalized to other domains and data (Teru & Hamilton, 2020). However, due to the large search
space, inferring high-quality logic rules for reasoning on knowledge graphs is a challenging task.
Indeed, a variety of methods have been proposed for learning logic rules from knowledge graphs. Most
traditional methods such as path ranking (Lao & Cohen, 2010) and Markov logic networks (Richard-
son & Domingos, 2006) enumerate relational paths on graphs as candidate logic rules, and then learn
a weight for each rule as an assessment of rule qualities. There are also some recent methods based
on neural logic programming (Yang et al., 2017) and neural theorem provers (Rockt ¨aschel & Riedel,
2017), which are able to learn logic rules and their weights simultaneously in a differentiable way.
Though empirically effective for prediction, the search space of these methods is exponentially large,
making it hard to identify high-quality logic rules. Besides, some recent efforts (Xiong et al., 2017)
formulate the problem as a sequential decision making process, and use reinforcement learning to
search for logic rules, which signiﬁcantly reduces search complexity. However, due to the large
action space and sparse reward in training, the performance of these methods is not yet satisfying.
*Equal contribution.
1arXiv:2010.04029v2  [cs.AI]  16 Jul 2021