GF-VAE: A Flow-based Variational Autoencoder
for Molecule Generation
Changsheng Ma
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
changsheng.ma@kaust.edu.saXiangliang Zhang∗
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
xiangliang.zhang@kaust.edu.sa
ABSTRACT
Generating novel molecules with desired properties is a funda-
mental problem in modern drug discovery. This is a challenging
problem because it requires the optimization of the given objectives
while obeying the rules of chemical valence. An effective approach
is to incorporate the molecular graph with deep generative mod-
els. However, recent generative models with high-performance are
still computationally expensive. In this paper, we propose GF-VAE,
a flow-based variational autoencoder (VAE) model for molecular
graph generation. Specifically, the model equips VAE a lightweight
flow model as its decoder, in which, the encoder aims to accelerate
the training process of the decoder, while the decoder in turns to
optimize the performance of the encoder. Thanks to the invertibility
of flow model, the generation process is easily accomplished by re-
versing the decoder. Additionally, the final generated molecules are
processed by validity correction. Therefore, our GF-VAE inherits
the advantages of both VAE and flow-based methods. We validate
our model on molecule generation and reconstruction, smooth-
ness of learned latent space, property optimization and constrained
property optimization. The results show that our model achieves
state-of-the-arts performance on these tasks. Moreover, the time
performance of GF-VAE on two classical datasets can achieve 31.3%
and62.9%improvements separately than the state-of-the-art model.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Theory of computation →Graph algorithms analysis ;•Com-
puting methodologies →Machine learning ;Maximum likelihood
modeling ;Latent variable models ;Unsupervised learning ;
KEYWORDS
Graph Generative Model, Variational AutoEncoder, Normalizing
Flow, Molecular Generation, Molecular property optimization
ACM Reference Format:
Changsheng Ma and Xiangliang Zhang. 2021. GF-VAE: A Flow-based Vari-
ational Autoencoder for Molecule Generation. In Proceedings of the 30th
ACM Int’l Conf. on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM ’21),
∗Xiangliang Zhang is the corresponding author
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CIKM ’21, November 1–5, 2021, Virtual Event, Australia.
©2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8446-9/21/11. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3459637.3482260November 1–5, 2021, Virtual Event, Australia. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3459637.3482260
1 INTRODUCTION
Finding new molecules with desired properties is a fundamental
problem in chemical biology and drug discovery. The discovery
paradigm involves investments both in organic synthesis and in
biological testing of large compound collections. According to the
estimation of chemists, there are 1060drug-like compounds that
could be made [ 24]. Moreover, for each drug in market, there can
be millions of compounds that are chemically almost identical to
it, some of which may work better than the approved drug by just
slightly changing the compound structure with an extra hydrogen
or double bound [ 24]. Computer algorithms with scripted instruc-
tions have been used to screen millions of compounds for finding
the top-ranked alternative candidates [ 22]. Recently, machine learn-
ing based algorithms are designed to study the less-explored regions
of chemical space and generate novel compounds with desirable
property profiles from scratch [4].
The basic idea of molecule generation based on machine learn-
ing is to approximate one data distribution, which could capture
as much as possible the patterns that are presented in the given
data set. In recent years, different generative models have been
developed to learn data distribution, such as generative adversarial
networks (GANs) [ 11], Variational autoencoders (VAEs) [ 17] and
flow-based models [ 7,8]. They have been applied to molecule gen-
eration resulting in, for example, MolGAN [ 6] and GCPN [ 32] based
on GAN, CVAE [ 10] and JT-VAE [ 14] based on VAE, GraphNVP
[21] and MoFlow [33] based on flow-based models.
Current VAE-based molecule generation models, e.g., GVAE [ 18]
and GraphVAE [ 30], first use the encoder 𝑓to map a molecular
from its source space to a latent space vector z, and then use the
decoder𝑔hoping to map it back. The mapping functions 𝑓and
𝑔can be deep networks learned through optimizing a variational
lower bound on the log-likelihood of the data, such that the gener-
ator𝑔approximately inverts the encoder 𝑓. Although enjoying the
flexibility of the forms of 𝑓and𝑔, the optimization of a lower bound
criterion might yield a suboptimal solution with respect to the true
log-likelihood [ 7]. The failure to optimize the decoder variance in
typical implementations of VAE is a major cause of poor quality
of generated samples [ 5]. In contrast, the flow-based models seek
for a perfect auto-encoder pair, i.e., 𝑔=𝑓−1. The invertible map-
ping allows exact and tractable likelihood estimation for training,
ensures to reconstruct all the training samples, and supports for
various applications such as interpolations between samples and
meaningful modifications of existing samples [ 15]. The flow-based
models thus have potential capability of deeper exploration of the
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution International 4.0 License . 
CIKM ’21, November 1 –5, 2021, Virtual Event, Australia.  
© 2021 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).  
ACM ISBN 978 -1-4503-8446-9/21/11 . 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3459637.3482260   
Full Paper Track
CIKM ’21, November 1–5, 2021, Virtual Event, Australia
1181