(a)
 (c)
 (e)
(b)
 (d)
 (f)
Figure 6: Comparison of the encoder in 𝑝T(optimized with a typical neural network decoder) and the same encoder in GF-
VAE (optimized with a flow-based decoder). (a) and (b) are two randomly sampled molecules from QM9. (c) and (d) show the
heatmap of atom-atom cosine similarity in graph (a) and (b), which are calculated based on the embedding vectors from 𝑝T
encoder. (e) and (f) show the similarity calculated based on the atom embedding vectors from the encoder of GF-VAE.
may capture a better result for small datasets from empirically
prospective. Since this is a time-consuming process, we set the
dimension of each layer to 16 and train 5 epochs. The result is
shown in Figure 4. The horizontal axis represents the combination
of𝐿𝐵and𝐿𝐴, and the vertical axis is the value of Score. The result
shows that GF-VAE is always better than MoFlow when they have
the same model size. If taking Score =90%as an anchor value, our
model accesses this score at the combination of (𝐿𝐵,𝐿𝐴)=(6,6),
which costs 35.9 seconds/epoch. On contrast, MoFlow accesses this
value at(𝐿𝐵,𝐿𝐴)=(8,14), which costs 56.1 seconds/epoch. That
is to say, our model can achieve the same performance of MoFlow,
but with a lighter set of weights and less time cost. This verifies the
effectiveness of the design of GF-VAE on reducing the model size
in flow-generator.
We apply ZINC-250K for the second experiment, setting 𝐾𝐵and
𝐾𝐴as 1, and conducting 3 different combinations of (𝐿𝐵,𝐿𝐴), which
are(1,3),(2,6)and(3,9)separately. We train 100 epochs for each
combination and take random sample 1,000 times at each epoch to
calculate the Score at current model parameter. The result is shown
in Figure 5, the horizontal axis represents training epoch(s) and the
vertical axis is the value of Score. We can see at (𝐿𝐵,𝐿𝐴)=(1,3),
we are much better than MoFlow since we can achieve 84.4% inScore, but the maximum Score of MoFlow is 56.4%. Similarly for the
left two combinations, we have a better performance especially at
the first few epochs. Moreover, lightweight GF-VAE ( (𝐿𝐵,𝐿𝐴)=
(2,6)) has better performance than heavier-weight MoFlow with
(𝐿𝐵,𝐿𝐴)=(3,9). That is to say, our model can achieve better
performance when we share the same parameter size with MoFlow.
To a certain extent, this also shows the powerful ability of our
model in exploring the latent space of molecules.
In summary, our GF-VAE not only memorizes and reconstructs all
the source input molecular, but also achieves the highest generation
score in a short time than existing models, which means we can
generates more valid, novelty and unique molecular graphs very
efficiently.
4.3 Optimization of Decoder to Encoder
The typical VAE-based models apply linear neural network as de-
coder, while our GF-VAE uses a flow-generator as a decoder. To
evaluate the encoding capability learned with different decoders, we
compare the embedding results of two example molecular graphs.
We implement a simple graph-VAE generative model 𝑝Twhich
uses the exactly same encoder of GF-VAE, but a three-layer linear
neural network as its decoder. Both 𝑝Tand GF-VAE model are
Full Paper Track
CIKM ’21, November 1–5, 2021, Virtual Event, Australia
1187