Figure 1: Architecture of GF-VAE (training stage)
neural network layers, such as linear layer, convolutional layer) in
total, which require a long training process. We thus propose to
combine VAEs and flow-based models in molecular generation to
take the advantages of both, while alleviating the shortcomings of
both.
3 THE PROPOSED GF-VAE MODEL
In this section, we first give the problem definition, and then de-
scribe each component of our model in detail. The architecture of
our model at the training stage is shown as Figure 1.
3.1 Problem Definition
From the perspective of graph, a molecule can be viewed as an
undirected graph with multi-type nodes and multi-type edges, each
node of a molecular graph pictures an atom while each edge repre-
sents a chemical bond. Giving 𝑅types of bonds (e.g., single, double,
etc.) and𝑀types of atoms (e.g., oxygen, carbon, etc.), a molecular
graph can then be denoted by 𝐺=(𝐴,𝑋), where𝐴∈{0,1}𝑁×𝑁×𝑅
is an adjacency tensor of 𝑁atoms, and𝑋∈{0,1}𝑁×𝑀is a feature
matrix showing the node types of 𝑁atoms.
Our main goal is to learn a generative model 𝑝G(𝐺)from a given
set of graphsG, such that a sample drawn from the distribution 𝑝G
is a valid molecular graph.
Our proposed GF-VAE model attaches a VAE-encoder with a
flow-generator, as shown in Figure 1.
3.2 VAE-encoder
The VAE-encoder maps a molecular graph 𝐺=(𝐴,𝑋)to a latent
vector z∈R𝑁∗𝑁∗𝑅+𝑁∗𝑀, which belongs to a Gaussian distribution
N𝑧(𝜇𝑧,Σ𝑧), where𝜇𝑧andΣ𝑧are mean and diagonal covariance ma-
trix of zseparately. We implement the encoder by Relational-GCN
[28], which is a classical and effective model for graph embedding
with multiple types of edges. From the layer 𝑙, the feature vector of
node (atom) 𝑖at layer𝑙+1is updated as
𝒉(ℓ+1)
𝑖=𝑓(ℓ)
𝑠
𝒉(ℓ)
𝑖,𝒙𝒊
+𝑁Õ
𝑗=1𝑅Õ
𝑟=1𝐴𝑖𝑗𝑟
|S𝑖|𝑓(ℓ)
𝑟
𝒉(ℓ)
𝑗,𝒙𝒊
𝒉(ℓ+1)
𝑖=tanh
𝒉(ℓ+1)
𝑖(1)
Figure 2: Atom Flow &Bond Flow in GF-VAE
where 𝒙𝑖∈{0,1}𝑀is the atom feature from 𝑋, and 𝒉(ℓ)
𝑖is the
feature vector of the node 𝑖at layerℓ(at the initial layer 𝒉(0)
𝑖=𝒙𝑖).
The function 𝑓(ℓ)
𝑠acts as a self-connection of node 𝑖between layers,
to merge 𝒉(ℓ)
𝑖and𝒙𝑖for propogation to next layer. The 𝑓(ℓ)
𝑟is an
edge type-specific function, which takes all one-hop neighbors of
node𝑖to update its feature vector. The set S𝑖denotes the neighbors
for node𝑖.
After several layers of propagation, following [ 19], we aggregate
nodes embedding into a graph level representation vector as
𝒉′
𝐺=Õ
𝑣∈V𝜎
𝑛𝑛
𝒉(𝐿)
𝑣,𝒙𝑣
⊙tanh
𝑛𝑛
𝒉(𝐿)
𝑣,𝒙𝑣
𝒉𝐺=tanh𝒉′
𝐺(2)
whereVincludes all nodes in the graph, 𝜎(·)is the sigmoid func-
tion,𝑛𝑛is a linear neural network and ⊙denotes element-wise
multiplication.
To force the encoding vector zto roughly conform to a normal
distribution, we separately apply linear neural network to 𝒉𝐺to
get a mean vector 𝜇zand a diagonal covariance matrix Σz,
𝜇z=𝑛𝑛(𝒉𝐺); Σz=𝑛𝑛(𝒉𝐺). (3)
Then, based on the reparameterization trick, the latent vector zis
obtained by
z=𝜇z+𝝐⊙Σz (4)
where 𝝐is a random Gaussian variable. The capability of the en-
coder is measured by the Kullback–Leibler divergence between the
posterior distribution and a simple prior, e.g., a standard Gaussian
distirbution:
LKL=KL[N𝑧(𝜇𝑧,Σ𝑧)∥N(0,𝑰)] (5)
whereKL denotes the Kullback–Leibler divergence.
3.3 Flow-generator
Our flow-generator is composed of two cooperative parts: the atom
flow aims to approximate the distribution of atoms, and the bond
flow is used to capture the distribution of bonds. Since the process
of probability calculation by flow models refers to Jacobian matrix,
Full Paper Track
CIKM ’21, November 1–5, 2021, Virtual Event, Australia
1183