huge chemical space, which could produce more valid and novel
molecules. However, in order to capture a better invertible mapping
function for flow models, a large number of coupling layers are
required, since the mapping function is often implemented by com-
posing a series of easily invertible modules (e.g., additive coupling
layers). For example, Glow [ 15] has 192 layers. Therefore, the flow
models are often heavyweight and require a long training process.
This shortcoming of flow models has been investigated in image
domain [ 23], not yet for molecular domain. Unlike image genera-
tion, molecular generation suffers from very low fault tolerance and
is very sensitive to noise. Even one wrong generation of valence
will lead to failure of molecule generation. Therefore, molecular
generation naturally benefits from the attribute of exact density
evaluation of flow models. It is thus essential to design light-weight
flow-based molecular generator.
In this paper, we propose GF-VAE which is short for GraphFlow
-Variational AutoEncoder to generate molecular graphs. The key
idea behind it is to attach a VAE-encoder with a flow-generator,
which plays the role of decoder. During the training process, the
encoder learns a mapping from original molecular space to a Gauss-
ian space, and the decoder will also learn this mapping as well as
optimize it, guiding the encoder to learn more meaningful high
level molecule representation (shown in experiment 5.3). This is
a perfect marriage between VAE model and normalization flow
model, which combines the advantages of both, while alleviating
or even eliminating their shortcomings. On the side of flow models,
the model weight is lightened because its mapping target 𝑝(z)is a
Gaussian distribution from VAE-encoder rather than a typical tar-
get which is a standard Gaussian distribution without any original
data distribution information. i.e., 𝑓is not necessarily implemented
by a large number of additive coupling layers any more. On the
other side of VAE-based models, since the poor performance of
typical VAE is due to the failure to optimize the decoder variance
[26], and [ 16] pointed out that the posterior be made more flexi-
ble via the use of normalizing flows. Therefore, attaching the flow
model to VAE-encoder, providing a tighter, modified variational
lower bound, which enables the approximate posterior of VAE can
achieve a better fit to the true posterior.
The flow-generator in GF-VAE is designed with the coopera-
tion of two sub-flow modules followed by a validity check module.
The generator learns the molecular graph structure (bond) and
molecular atom assignments separately based on the global feature
from VAE-encoder. This design allows the generator to generate
molecules in one-shot. GF-VAE is thus more efficient than the se-
quential generation models that generate atoms and bonds of a
molecule one by one [ 29]. It’s also not restricted by the limitation
that the sequential model requires a predefined sequence to specify
the generation process (usually in accordance with the SMILES
sequence). In addition, due to the reversibility of flow-generator,
GF-VAE bypasses the reconstruction loss that usually involves in
computationally demanding graph matching process [30].
In summary, our contributions in this work are as follows:
•We propose GF-VAE, a seamless combination of VAE and nor-
malizing flow model, for one-shot molecule graph generation.
GF-VAE uses a flow-generator to guide a VAE-encoder to
learn more meaningful high-level molecule representations,while it adopts a VAE-encoder to make the flow-generator
lightened with less weights.
•Experimental results on two benchmark datasets show that
GF-VAE outperforms the state-of-the-art models on all eval-
uation metrics, such as validity, novelty, uniqueness and
reconstruction. The flow-generator effectively guides the
learning of the encoder. The meaningfulness of the molecule
embedding and the smoothness of the learned latent space
are demonstrated.
•The lightweight GF-VAE is around two times faster than the
state-of-the-art MoFlow model in training. Our extensive
evaluation also shows that a lightweight GF-VAE can have
better performance than heavier-weight MoFlow.
2 RELATED WORK
A variety of deep generative models have been proposed for de-novo
molecule generation. Some models take molecular SMILES codes
[31] as input, and others directly deal with the molecular graph
structure. Models working with SMILES strings address molecule
generation as a text generation problem, which has been extensively
studied in natural language processing field. However, the linear
string description of molecular structures in SMILES causes two
difficulties in molecule generation. First, the SMILES representation
cannot well capture the structural information of molecules, e.g.,
two structurally similar molecules may be encoded into notable
different SMILES strings, making the distribution complicated to
learn [ 14]. Second, the models tend to learn the specific grammar
rules of SMILES strings, rather than the molecular features [ 3]. We
thus focus on learning from molecular graphs, and discuss next the
related work using VAE and flow-based models.
In the group of VAE-based models, from our best knowledge,
CVAE [ 10] is the first work using VAE to encode and generate
molecular SMILES. GVAE [ 18] parses SMILES as a tree from a
context-free grammar and employs VAE model for encoding and
decoding these parsed trees, ensuring the generated outputs are
always valid. Unlike these SMILES-oriented models, GraphVAE
[30] is a pioneering work using VAE for molecular graph gener-
ation, applying VAE to realize graph-to-graph autoencoding. By
transforming a constrained optimization problem to a regularized
unconstrained one, RVAE [ 20] presents a regularization framework
for VAE-based molecule generation as a step toward semantic valid-
ity. In stead of generating atoms one by one, JT-VAE [ 14] generates
scaffold of chemical substructure components step by step.
In the group of flow-based models, GraphNVP [ 21] is the first
work, generating molecular graphs by invertible flow model in a
one-shot manner. GRF [ 12] improves GraphNVP by using resid-
ual flows. GraphAF [ 29] is an autoregressive flow-based model
which generates molecular graphs in a sequential manner with
validity check when adding any new atom or bond. MoFlow [ 33]
is a recent model achieving state-of-the-art performance in molec-
ular graph generation. The model consists of a variant of Glow
model [ 15] for generating bonds, a novel graph conditional flow for
generating atoms given bonds, and then combining them with va-
lidity corrections. To enable the invertible mapping function to map
complicated molecular structures to a simple standard Gaussian
distribution, one-shot flow generative models (such as GraphNVP
and MoFlow) stack around 50 coupling layers (more than 100 basic
Full Paper Track
CIKM ’21, November 1–5, 2021, Virtual Event, Australia
1182