trained with the same input by 100 epochs on QM9 dataset. Then
we randomly sample two molecules to check their atom embedding
vectors (output of Eq 1) learned by the two models. The pair-wise
cosine similarity of two atoms in one graph is calculated and visu-
alised in the heatmap of Figure 6. The results of 𝑝Tare shown in
Figure 6(c) and (d), while the results of GF-VAE are given in Figure
6(e) and (f) for the example molecular graphs in Figure 6(a) and (b),
respectively.
For molecular (a), 𝑝Tencodes {atom0, atom1, atom4, atom5}
closely (cosine similarity=0.94 ∼1), while encoding the other atoms
closely to the same position (cosine similarity ∼1). Although {atom0,
atom1, atom4, atom5} are connected on the graph, they should not
be encoded compactly as a cluster. The other atoms in molecular (a)
are not connected, and are different in types. It is not appropriate
to encode them compactly. In contrast, GF-VAE encodes the atoms
by preserving both their closeness on graph and their intrinsic
feature. In Figure 6(e), we can see atom4-8 are encoded closely,
while the other atoms are placed appropriately. For example, atom0
and atom7 are the furthest to the other atoms.
For molecular (b) including a ring, 𝑝Tencodes atom2-8 com-
pactly close (all similarities are about 1), while atom0 and atom1 are
encoded close. In fact, the ring includes only atom1-6. The atom7-8
should not be encoded closely to the ring atoms. In addition, the
learned similarities of atom2-5 are 1, which shows that 𝑝Tcannot
distinguish these differernt atoms. By contrast, GF-VAE encodes
well the ring atoms, and maps atom7-8 as a compact cluster, as
shown in Figure 6(f). However, the small differences between them
are well recognized. Although they form a carbon-carbon triple
bond, they have different neighbors.
To conclude, the encoder of GF-VAE learns more reasonable atom
embedding than the encoder of 𝑝T. Although the two encoders
are trained under the exact same setting, they were optimized
with different decoders. The flow-generator can optimize better the
encoder than a typical neural network.
4.4 Smoothness of the Learned Latent Space
Guaranteeing the smoothness of the learned latent space is crucial
in biological application scenarios. For instance, generating prop-
erty desired molecular for instance could be realized by perturbing
the latent representation of an original molecular graph. We qual-
itatively examine the smoothness of learned latent space in two
ways. One is using grid search method in two random orthogonal
directions to find neighborhoods of a randomly selected molecule in
latent space and visualize them. The other is to interpolate between
two latent points of molecular graphs. We choose Tanimoto index
[1] as the chemical similarity metrics and indicate their similarity
values by a heatmap.
Figure 7 (a) shows that our learned latent space is smooth be-
cause the neighboring latent points correspond to molecules with
minor variations. Figure 7 (b) also exhibits that the interpolations
between two latent points only slightly change the molecular graph
except at the first step. This may be because the learned latent space
does not follow the uniform distribution, and similar molecules clus-
tered closely together, while dissimilar molecules loosely scattered
around. It is worth noting that, unlike other VAE-based models, our
model can complete this process through a single pass inverse trans-
formation, because our decoding is deterministic. GVAE decodes
(a):The grid neighbors of a seed molecular
of ZINC-250K in latent space
(b):interpolation between two molecules of QM9
Figure 7: Smoothness of the learned latent space
each latent point 1000 times and selects the most common molecule
as the representative one. This process for JT-VAE normally need
dozens of times.
4.5 Molecule Optimization
Molecule optimization has two branches generally. One is property
optimization, which generates novel molecules with the best prop-
erty score. The other is constrained property optimization, which
means to find molecules similar to a given molecule, but possessing
a better chemical property. We solve these problems in three steps.
1) train a GF-VAE model and fix it; 2) train a Multilayer Percep-
tron (MLP) as a regressor on the latent space of molecules with
target chemical property; and 3) search the molecules with the best
property score by the gradient ascend method between the output
and the input of the learned regressor. For constrained property
optimization, we additionally need to add similarity constrain 𝛿
between the original molecule and the generated novel molecule.
The optimization process fails when the similarity score is smaller
then𝛿or the property score is not improved within limited steps.
We choose two widely used metrics as the target property: Quan-
titative Estimate of Druglikeness (QED) [ 2] and penalized logP
(plogp) [ 9]. QED quantifies how likely a molecule is to be a po-
tential drug, while plogp is defined as the penalized logarithm of
the ratio of the concentrations between two solvents of a solute,
which is a relative complex metric. Molecular similarity is measured
by Tanimoto similarity of Morgan fingerprint [27].
Full Paper Track
CIKM ’21, November 1–5, 2021, Virtual Event, Australia
1188