Page 8 of 10 Saood and Hatem  BMC Med Imaging           (2021) 21:19 
0.086. These low values indicate highly consistent accu -
racies in the test partition of the dataset.
The results of our SegNet show enhancements 
over Inf-Net and Semi-Inf-Net presented in [25] in 
terms of Dice, specificity, and sensitivity Metrics. As 
well, the U-NET outperforms them only in terms of 
sensitivity. Both works utilize the same dataset. As a 
binary segmentor, Inf-Net focuses on edge informa -
tion and allocates a portion of computations to high -
light it. This would remove focus from the important 
internal texture and allocate more weight to the fractal 
shaped edge, especially that no evidence of high con -
trast between the infection and lung tissue is found. 
Secondly, the parallel partial decoder used by the net -
work gives less weights to low-level features which are 
considered a key for texture highlighting. Another rea -
son might be that the SegNet was trained on dataset 
images that contain only lung areas.
SegNet outperforms the Semi-Inf-Net network, an 
architecture utilizes pseudo labeling to generate addi -
tional training data, by a small margin. This might be 
because the used pseudo-labeling technique generated 
1600 labels from only 50 labeled images which were used 
to train the network.
SegNet also surpasses the COVID-SegNet architec -
ture proposed in [22] in sensitivity and Dice metrics. This 
might be because, according to the authors, COVID-19 
lesions were difficult to distinguish from the chest wall. 
COVID-SegNet was able to segment the lung region 
with close-to-perfect performance, yet was not able to 
match this accuracy in segmenting the infection regions 
that are close to the wall. A more detailed comparison, in which both architectures are trained and tested on the 
same dataset, might be necessary to further generalize 
this result.
It should be noted here that increasing the mini-batch 
size has a negative effect on the networks performance; 
further tests may lead to a generalized statement regard -
ing this.A previous study investigated the mini-batch size 
role in the VGG16 network convergence. It concluded 
that smaller mini-batch sizes coupled with a low learning 
rate would yield a better training outcome [32]. Another 
study concluded that smaller mini-batch sizes tend to 
produce more stable training for ResNet networks by 
updating the gradient calculations more frequently [33].
Multi class problem
Table  6 shows how good the U-NET is in segmenting the 
Ground Glass Opacification and the Consolidation. The 
U-NET produced moderate results in segmenting the 
pleural effusion; a Dice of 0.23 and F2 score of 0.38 which 
downplays its role as a reliable tool for pleural effusion 
segmentation.
The C3 class, as discussed in the Dataset section, is the 
least represented class in the dataset. Therfore, such a 
result is expected from a multi-class segmentation model 
constructed using 72 image instances only.
The standard deviation values of the multiclass seg -
mentors were, on average, a little higher than those of 
the binary segmentors. Yet, they still indicate that the 
networks are solid performers in terms of accuracy. The 
high specificity rates clearly state that the models are reli -
able in identifying non-infected tissue (class C0 ).
Fig. 5 SegNet binary segmentor Deep Dream image Deep dream image laying out key features the network is using to segment the CT scans. 
infected tissue (right), non-infected (left)