Page 3 of 10
 Saood and Hatem  BMC Med Imaging           (2021) 21:19 
 
some portions of the lungs are more prone to infection 
than others. Therefore, the spatial values of pixels tend to 
be a key feature in this research.
Deep neural networks
The overall methodology of semantically segment -
ing images is to design a structure that extracts features 
through successive convolutions and uses that infor -
mation to create a segmentation map as an output. See 
Fig. 3. In the following two paragraphs, we present a brief 
description of the two DL networks used in this research.U‑NET architecture
U-NET was originally developed for medical image 
understanding and segmentation. It has vast applications 
in the domain and has been a key architecture in the 
medical imaging automation society. In this section, we 
detail the key technical features of this network and their 
role in achieving good results.
The architecture of this network includes two main 
parts: contractive and expansive. The contracting path 
consists of several patches of convolutions with filters of 
size 3×3 and unity strides in both directions, followed 
by ReLU layers. This path extracts the key features of the 
input and results a feature vector of a specific length. The 
second path pulls information from the contractive path 
via copying and cropping, and from the feature vector via 
up-convolutions, and generates, by a successive opera -
tion, an output segmentation map. The key component 
of this architecture is the operation linking the first and 
second paths together. This linkage allows the network to 
attain highly accurate information from the contractive 
path, thus generating the segmentation mask as close as 
possible to the intended output. A detailed overview of 
the architecture can be found in [28].
SegNet architecture
SegNet is a Deep Neural Network originally designed 
to model scene segmentors such as road image segmen -
tation tool. This task requires the network to converge 
using highly imbalanced datasets since large areas of road 
images consist of classes such as road, sidewalk, sky. In 
the dataset section, we demonstrated numerically how 
the dataset used in this work exhibit disparity in class 
representation. As a consequence, SegNet was our first 
choice for this task.
Fig. 1 Dataset sample. CT scan (left), masked lungs (middle), and labeled classes (right), where black is class C0, dark gray is  C1, light gray is C2, and 
white is C3.
Fig. 2 Accumulation of the dataset’s labels. All the labels of the 
dataset were summed up to form a graphic that illustrates the 
regions of the lungs most prune to infection