Page 6 of 10 Saood and Hatem  BMC Med Imaging           (2021) 21:19 
These criteria are selected because of the dataset imbal -
ance nature discussed in the Materials and Methods 
section.
The evaluation was carried out as follows: the global 
accuracy of the classifier was calculated for each test 
image and averaged over all the images. Using the mean 
values of global accuracies, the best experiment of each 
network was chosen for a ”Class Level” assessment. Then, 
statistical scores (2)–(6) were calculated for each class 
and tabulated properly.
Results
Binary segmentation
Test images results
Table   3 shows results for both models of binary classi -
fiers after evaluating every experiment of each network. 
We can see from the results that our networks achieve 
accuracy values larger than 0.90 in all cases, and 0.954 
accuracy in the best case (experiment 4 of the network 
SegNet). The standard deviation of experiment 4 is 
0.029. The second best network is experiment 4 of the 
U-NET architecture with an accuracy of 0.95 and a stand -
ard deviation of 0.043.
The best experiment of each architecture is selected for 
further performance investigation on the class level.
Class Level
Based on the criteria discussed in the “Methods” sec -
tion, the best two networks found in the previous sec -
tion are evaluated. We can see that the SegNet network 
surpasses U-NET with noticeable margins for all metrics 
except sensitivity and G-mean, where both networks pro -
duce similar results. See Table 4.Multi class segmentation
Test images results
Similarly, we obtain the best experiment for each multi-
classification network. The best experiment of the Seg -
Net architecture is number 7, giving an accuracy of 0.907 
with a standard deviation of 0.06. We also found that the 
overall best accuracy of 0.908 is achieved by the fourth 
experiment of U-NET network with a standard deviation 
of 0.065. All the experiments achieve higher accuracy 
than 0.8 except for the first three experiments of Seg -
Net. Refer to Table 5.
Class level
In the same manner as the binary segmentation results 
section, the best experiment of each architecture is evalu -
ated as presented in Table  6. Both networks struggled to 
recognize the  C3 class. Nevertheless, they achieve good 
results for C1 and C2 . We also notice the high specific -
ity rate regarding all the classes. The U-NET architec -
ture recorded higher values for all parameters except the 
specificity.
Discussion
Binary classification problem
It can be referred from Table  5 that SegNet outper -
forms U-NET architecture by a noticeable margin. 
Both networks have an exceptionally high true positive 
Table 4 Statistical results for the binary segmentor
Bold values indicate the highest number of a comparable set
SegNet  and U-NET binary segmentation tools results is terms of sensitivity, 
specificity, dice, G-mean, and F2 scoreNet. Sens. Spec. Dice G-mean F2
SegNet 0.956 0.9542 0.749 0.955 0.861
U-NET 0.964 0.948 0.733 0.956 0.856Table 3 Global accuracy metrics of  the Test data images calculated for  the  nine experiments of  the  UNET and  SegNet  
networks as binary class segmentors. The “plot” columns visualize the mean accuracy and the standard deviation of each 
experiment