models are used for an environment. Review of the entire categorizations is
represented in Fig. 1. From the following, each category is described in detail.
The main objective of the categorization is to highlight the key contribution of
each approach. Note that a certain approach could be a combination of various
techniques. For example, Go-explore [31] utilizes reward novel states methods,
but the main contribution is best described by goal-based methods.
3.1. Reward Novel States
Figure 2: Overview of the reward novel state methods. In general, in reward novel states,
the agent is given additional reward rintfor discovering novelty. This additional reward is
generated from intrinsic reward module rext.
In this section, approaches on reward novel state are discussed and com-
pared. Reward novel state approaches give agents a reward for discovering new
states. This reward is called an intrinsic reward. As can be observed in Fig. 2,
the intrinsic reward ( rint) supplements rewards given by the environment ( rext
called an extrinsic reward). By rewarding novel states, agents will incorporate
exploration into their behaviours [30].
These approaches were generalised in [30]. In general, there are two necessary
components: "an adaptive predictor or compressor or model of the growing data
history as the agent is interacting with its environment to provide an intrinsic
reward, and a general reinforcement learner to learn behaviours" [30]. In this
division, the reinforcement learner is asked to invent things which predictor does
not know yet. In our review, the former is simply referred to as an intrinsic
reward module, and the latter is referred to as an agent.
There are dierent ways of classifying intrinsic rewards [32, 16]. Here, we
largely follow the classication of [16] with the following categories: (i) predic-
tion error methods, (ii) count-based methods and (iii) memory methods.
3.1.1. Prediction Error Methods
In prediction error methods, the error of a prediction model when predicting
a previously visited state is used to compute the intrinsic reward. For a certain
state, if a model's prediction is inaccurate, it means that a given state has not
been seen often and the intrinsic reward is high. One of the key questions that
needs to be addressed is how to use the model's error to compute the intrinsic
reward. To this end, Achiam et al. [33] compared two intrinsic reward functions:
(i) how big the error is in a prediction model and (ii) the learning progress. The
8