agent's next action leads to an unsafe position and avoids it. In [139], a rover
traversing a terrain of dierent heights was considered. The Gaussian process
model provides estimates of the height at a given location. If the height is
lower than the safe behaviour limit, the robot can explore safely. A heuristic
safety model using a priori knowledge was proposed in [140]. To this end,
they proposed an algorithm called action pruning, which uses the heuristics to
prevent agent from committing to unsafe actions.
Discussion. In human designer knowledge methods, the barriers to unsafe be-
haviours are placed by a human designer. Baseline behaviours and human inter-
vention methods guarantee certain performance in certain situations but they
will only work in pre-dened situations. Prediction model methods require a
model of the environment. This can be either in the form of a mathematical
model [139] or heuristic rules [140]. Prediction models have a higher chance of
working on previously unseen environments and have a higher chance of adapt-
ability than baseline behaviours and human intervention methods.
3.6.2. Auxiliary Reward Methods
In auxiliary rewards, the agent is punished for putting itself into a dangerous
situation. This approach requires the least human intervention, but it generates
the weakest safety behaviours.
One of the methods is to nd states in which an episode terminates and dis-
courages an agent from approaching using an intrinsic fear [141]. The approach
counts back a certain number of states from death and applies the distance-to-
death penalty. Additionally, they made a simple environment in which a highest
positive reward was next to the negative reward. The DQN eventually jumps
to the negative rewards. The authors state "We might critically ask, in what
real-world scenario, we could depend upon a system [DQN] that cannot solve
[these kinds of problems]". A similar approach, but with more stochasticity,
was later proposed in [142].
Allowing the agent to learn undesirable states from previous experiences
autonomously was discussed in [143]. The states and their advantage values
were stored in a common buer. Then, frequently visited states with the lowest
advantage have additional negative rewards associated with them.
Discussion. Auxiliary rewards can be an eective method of discouraging agents
from unsafe behaviours. For example, in [141], half of the agent's death was
prevented. Moreover, some approaches, such as Karimpanal et al. [143], have
shown the ability to fully automatically determine undesirable states and avoid
them. This, however, assumes that when the agent perishes, it has a low score;
this may not always be the case.
3.6.3. Summary
An overview of the safety approaches is shown in Table 6. Safety is a
vital aspect of reinforcement learning for practical applications in many do-
mains. There are three general approaches: human designer knowledge, pre-
diction models, and auxiliary rewards. Human designer knowledge guarantees
31