Figure 5: Overview of self-supervised exploration via the disagreement method. The intrinsic
reward is based on disagreement between models. (adapted from [45])
intrinsic reward. These methods do not suer from problems with the speed
of prediction and state recognition. However, they rely on the designer expe-
rience to dene parts of the state space appropriately. Finally, in uncertainty
about the environmental approaches, the agent's uncertainty is used to generate
the intrinsic reward. The key advantage of this approach is its high scalability
and automatic transition between exploration and exploitation. Prediction er-
ror methods have also shown the ability to solve the couch-potato (noisy-TV)
problem by storing observations in a memory buer [60]. An intrinsic reward is
given only when observation is suciently far away (in terms of time steps) from
the observations stored in the buer. This mitigates the couch potato problem
since repeatedly visiting states close to each other is not rewarded.
3.1.2. Count-Based Methods
In count-based methods, each state is associated with the visitation count
numberN(s). If the state has a low count, the agent will be given a high intrinsic
reward to encourage revisiting. The method of computing the reward based on
the count was discussed in [61]. It has been shown that 1/ N(s) guarantees a
faster convergence rate than the commonly used 1/p
N(s).
In problems with large number of states, counting visits to states is dicult
because it requires saving the count for each state. To solve this problem, count
is normally done on a reduced-size state representation.
Count on state representation methods. In count on state representation meth-
ods, the states are represented in a reduced form to alleviate memory require-
ments. This allows storing the count and a state with minimal memory in a
table, even in the case of a large state space.
One of the popular methods of this type was proposed in [62], where static
hashing was used. Here, a technique called SimHash [63] was used, which rep-
12