from the weight distribution. Colas et al. [115] split the exploration into two
phases: (i) explore randomly and (ii) compare experiences to an expert-created
imitation to determine the good behavior.
In [116], the successor state representation was utilised as a model of the
environment. The exploration was performed by sampling parameters from the
Bayesian linear regression model which predicts successor representation.
Policy and Q-value uncertainty. In policy and Q-value uncertainty, the agent
holds uncertainty over Q-values/actions and samples the appropriate action.
Some of the simplest approaches rely on optimisation to determine the distri-
bution parameters. For example, in [117], the cross-entropy method (CEM)
was used to control the variance of a Gaussian distribution from which actions
were drawn. Alternatively, policies can be sampled [118]. In this study, a set
of sampling policies sampled from a base policy were used. At the end of the
episode, the best policy was chosen as an update to the base policy.
The most prevalent approach of this type is to use the Bayesian framework.
In [119], the hypothesis is generated once and then followed for a certain number
of steps, which saves computational time. This idea was further developed in
[120], where Bayesian sampling was combined with a tree-based state represen-
tation for further eciency gains. To enable Bayesian uncertainty approaches to
deep learning, O'Donoghue et al. [121] derived Bayesian uncertainty such that
it can be computed using the Bellman principle and the output of the neural
network.
To minimize the uncertainty about policy and/or Q-values, information-
theoretic approaches can be used. Agents choose actions that will result in
maximal information gain, thus reducing uncertainty about the environment.
An example of this approach, called information-directed sampling (IDS), is
discussed in [122]. In IDS, the information gain function is expressed as a ratio
between regret and how informative the action is.
Network ensembles. In the network ensemble method, the agent uses several
models (initialised with dierent parameters) to approximate the distribution.
Sampling one model from the ensemble to follow was discussed in [123]. In this
study, a DQN with multiple heads, each estimating Q-value, was proposed. At
each episode, one head was chosen randomly for use.
It is dicult to determine the model convergence by sampling one model at
a time. Therefore, multiple models to approximate the distribution over states
were devised in [124]. In this approach, Q-values estimated by dierent models
were computed and tted into a Gaussian distribution. A similar approach was
developed in [125], using the information gain among the environmental models
to decide where to go. Another ensemble model was presented in [126]. Explo-
ration is achieved by nding a policy which results in the highest disagreement
among the environmental models.
Discussion. In parameter sampling, the policy is parameterized (i.e. repre-
sented by the neural network), and the probability over parameters is devised.
25