Scalability. Exploration in reinforcement learning does not scale well to real-
world problems. This is caused by two limitations: training time and inecient
state representation. Currently, even the fastest training requires millions of
samples in complex environments. Note that even the most complex environ-
ments currently used in reinforcement learning are still relatively simple com-
pared to the real world. In the real world, collecting millions of samples for
training is unrealistic owing to wear and tear of physical devices. To cope with
the real world, either a sim-to-real gap needs to be reduced or exploration needs
to become more sample ecient.
Another limitation is ecient state representation so that memorising states
and actions is possible in large domains. For example, Go-Explore [31] does not
scale up well if the environment is large. This problem was discussed in [159]
by comparing how the brain stores memories and computes novelty. It states
that the human brain is much faster at determining scene novelty and has a
much larger capacity. To achieve this, the brain uses an agreement between
multiple neurons. The more neurons indicate that the given image is novel, the
higher the novelty is. Thus, the brain does not need to remember full states;
instead, it trains itself to recognise the novelty. This is currently unmatched in
reinforcement learning in terms of the representation eciency.
Exploration-exploitation dilemma. The exploration{exploitation dilemma is an
ongoing research topic not only in reinforcement learning but also in a gen-
eral problem. Most current exploration approaches have a built-in solution to
exploration-exploitation, but not all methods do. This is particularly true in
goal-based methods that rely on hand-designed solutions. Moreover, even in
approaches that solve it automatically, the balance is still mostly decided by
the designer-provided threshold. One potential way of solving this problem is
to train a set of skills (policies) during exploration and combine skills in greater
goal-oriented policies [160]. This is similar to how humans solve problems by
learning smaller skills and then using them later to exploit them as a larger
policy.
Intrinsic reward. Reward novel states and diverse behaviour approaches can be
improved in two ways: (i) the agent should be more free to reward itself and (ii)
better balance between long-term and short-term novelty should be achieved.
In most intrinsic reward approaches, the exact reward formulation is per-
formed by an expert. Designing a reward that guarantees good exploration is a
challenging and time-consuming task. Moreover, there might be ways of reward-
ing agents which were not conceived by designers. Thus, it could be benecial
if an agent is not only trained in the environment but is also trained on how to
reward itself. This would be closer to human behaviour where the self-rewarding
mechanism was developed through evolution.
Balancing the long-term novelty and short-term novelty is another challenge.
In this problem, the agent tries to balance two factors: revisiting states often to
nd something new or abandoning states quickly to try to nd something new.
This is currently a hand-designed parameter, but its tuning is time-consuming.
37