Legend: A - action space, Ac - action, R - reference, MB - model based, MF - model free, D - dis-
crete, C - continuous, Q - Q values, V - values, P - policy, O - output, S - state space, U - underlying
algorithm and Top score on a key benchmark explanation - [benchmark]:[scenario] [score] ([baseline
approach] [score]).
4. Future Challenges
In this section, we discuss the following future challenges on exploration in re-
inforcement learning: evaluation, scalability, exploration-exploitation dilemma,
intrinsic reward, noisy TV problems, safety, and transferability.
Evaluation. Currently, evaluating and comparing dierent exploration algo-
rithms is challenging. This issue arises from three reasons: lack of a common
benchmark, lack of a common evaluation strategy, and lack of good metrics to
measure exploration.
Currently, four major benchmarks used by the community are VizDoom [27],
Minecraft [28], Atari Games [15] and Mujoco [29]. Each benchmark is charac-
terised by dierent complexities in terms of state space, reward sparseness, and
action space. Moreover, each benchmark oers several scenarios with various
degrees of complexity. Such a wealth of benchmarks is desirable for exposure of
agents to various complexities; however, the dierence in complexity between
dierent benchmarks is well-understood. This leads to diculty in comparing
algorithms using dierent benchmarks. There have been attempts to solve the
evaluation issues using a common benchmark, for example, in [158]. However,
this study is not commonly adopted yet.
Regarding the evaluation strategy, most algorithms use a reward after a
certain number of steps. Note that in the context of this paragraph, steps could
also mean episodes, iterations and epochs. This makes the reporting of results
inconsistent in two aspects: (i) the number of steps in which the algorithm
was tested and (ii) how the reward is reported. The rst makes comparisons
between algorithms dicult because performance can vary widely depending on
when the comparison is made. The second concern is how rewards are reported.
Most authors choose to report the average reward the agent has scored; however,
sometimes comparison with the average human performance is used (without
clear indication of what average human performance means exactly). Moreover,
sometimes the distinction between the average reward or maximum reward is
not clearly made.
Finally, it is arguable if a reward is an appropriate measure for evaluation
[37]. One of the key issues is that it fails to account for the speed of learning,
which should be higher if exploration is more ecient [37]. Attempts have been
made to address this issue in [37], but as of the time of writing this review
paper, this new metric is not widely adopted. Another issue with rewards is
that it does not provide any information regarding the goodness of exploratory
behaviour. This is even more dicult in continuous action space problems where
computing novelty is considerably more challenging.
36