the position was proposed in [51]. The environment is split into the x-y grid
where each node's intrinsic reward is placed. When the episode terminates, the
rewards are restored to a default value.
Sound as a source of intrinsic reward was used in [52]. To model sounds,
the model is trained to recognise when the sound and the corresponding frame
match. If the model indicates misalignment between frames and sounds, it
means that the state is novel.
Uncertainty about the environment methods. In these methods, the intrinsic
reward is based on the uncertainty the agent has. If the agent is exploring
highly uncertain areas of the environment, the reward is high. Uncertainty can
be utilized using the following techniques Bayesian, ensembles of models and
information-theoretic.
Bayesian approaches are generally intractable for large problem spaces; thus,
approximations are used. Kotler et al. [53] presented a close to optimal approx-
imation method using the Dirichlet probability distribution over state, action,
and next state triplet. Another approximation could be to use ensembles of
models as proposed in [45]. The intrinsic reward is given based on model dis-
agreement as shown in Fig. 5. The models were initialised with dierent random
weights and were trained on dierent mini-batches to maintain diversity.
In information-theoretic approaches, the intrinsic reward is computed using
the information gained from agent actions. The higher the gain is, the more the
agent learns, and the higher the intrinsic reward is. The general framework for
these types of approaches was presented in [54, 55]. One of the most popular
information-theoretic approach is called variational information maximization
exploration (VIME) [56]. In this approach, the information gain is approxi-
mated as a Kullback{Leibler (KL) divergence between the weight distribution
of the Bayesian neural network, before and after seeing new observations. In
[57], maximising mutual information between a sequence of actions leads to a
state that is rewarded. Rewarding this mutual information gain means max-
imising the information contained in the action sequence about a state. Mutual
information gain was combined with the state prediction error into a single
intrinsic reward in [58, 59].
Discussion. The key advantages of prediction error methods are that they rely
only on a model of the environment. Thus, there is no need for buers or com-
plex approximation methods. Each of the four dierent categories of methods
has unique advantages and challenges.
While predicting the state directly requires little to no a priori knowledge,
the model needs to learn how to recognise dierent states. Additionally, they
struggle when many states are present in the environment. State representa-
tion methods can cope with large state spaces at the cost of increased designer
burden and reduced accuracy. Moreover, in a state representation method, the
agent cannot aect the state representation, which can often lead to dierent
states being represented similarly. Utilising a priori knowledge relies on dening
a special element of the state space as a source of an error for computing the
11