teleportation was replaced with policy learning. Go-exploration was extended
to continuous domains in [85]. Concurrently, similar concepts were developed
in [86, 87, 88, 89]. In these approaches, a trajectory from the past is selected
as an agent to exploit or explore randomly. If exploration is selected, a sample
state from the trajectory is selected as a goal to explore based on the visitation
count.
Another goal method was proposed in [90], where the least visited state
was selected as a goal from the x-y grid on an Atari game. This reduces the
computational eort of remembering where the agent has been signicantly.
Learn from goal methods assume that the agent knows how the state with
maximum reward looks like, but does not know how to get there. In this case, it
is plausible to utilise this knowledge, as described in [91, 92]. In [91], the model
was trained to predict the backward steps in reinforcement learning. With such
a model, the agent can 'imagine' states before the goal and thus can explore
from the goal state. Similarly, another scenario, in which the agent can start
at the reward position, can be conceived; then, it can also explore the starting
position from the goal [92].
Discussion. Memorise visited states and trajectories methods have shown some
remarkable results in hard exploration benchmarks such as Montezuma's revenge
and pitfall. By utilising a reward state as a goal, as outlined in learn from the
goal methods, the exploration problem can be mitigated, as the agent knows
where to look for the reward.
3.3.2. Exploratory Goal Methods
In this subsection, an exploratory goal is given to the agent to try to reach.
Exploration occurs when the agent attempts to reach the goal. The following
techniques are considered: (i) meta-controllers, (ii) goals in the region of the
highest uncertainty, and (iii) sub-goal methods.
Meta-controllers. In meta-controllers, the algorithm consists of two parts: a
controller and a worker. The controller has a high-level overview and provides
goals that the worker is trying to nd.
One of the simple approaches is to generate and sample goals randomly [93].
The random goal selection mechanism was rened in [94] with goal selection
based on the learning progress. A similar approach in two phases was proposed
by Pere et al. [95]. First, the agent explores randomly to learn the environ-
ment representation. Second, the goals are randomly sampled from the learned
representation. An approach in which both goal creation and selection mech-
anisms are devised by a meta-controller was proposed in [96]. In this work, a
meta-controller proposes goals within a certain horizon for a worker to nd.
In [97], a multi-arm bandit-based method to choose one strategy from a
group of hand-designed strategies was proposed. At each episode, every ten
steps, the agent chooses a strategy based on its performance. The goal selection
mechanism from a group of hand-designed goals is also discussed in Kulkarni
et al. [98]. The low-level controller is trained on a state-action space, and the
20