Recently, there has been a x proposed in [15] where meta-learning decides the
appropriate balance, but at the cost of computational complexity for training.
Noisy-TV problem. The noisy-TV (or couch potato problem) remains largely
unsolved. While using memory can be used to solve it, they are limited by
memory requirements. Thus, it can be envisioned that if the noisy sequence is
very long and the state space is complex, memory approaches will also struggle
to solve it. One method that has shown some promise is the use of clustering
[107] to cluster noisy states and avoid that cluster. However, this requires the
design of correct clusters.
Optimal exploration. One area which is rarely considered in the current explo-
ration in reinforcement learning research is how to explore optimally. For op-
timal exploration, the agent does not revisit states unnecessarily and explores
the most promising areas rst. This problem and the proposed solution are de-
scribed in detail in [161]. The solution uses a demand matrix, which is an mby
nmatrix ofmstates andnactions, indicating state-action exploration counts.
It then denes the exploration cost for exploration policy, which is the number
of steps each state-action pair needs to be explored. Note that the demand
matrix does not need to be known a priori and can be updated online. This
aspect needs further developments.
Safe exploration. Safe exploration is of paramount importance for real-world
applications. However, so far, there have been very few approaches to cope
with this issue. Most of them rely heavily on hand-designed rules to prevent
catastrophes. Moreover, it has been shown in [141] that current reinforcement
learning is struggling to prevent catastrophes even with carefully engineered
rewards. Thus, there exists a need for the agent to recognise unsafe situations
and act accordingly. Moreover, what constitutes an unsafe situation is not well
dened beyond hand-designed rules. This leads to problems with regard to the
scalability and transferability of safe exploration in reinforcement learning. A
more rigorous denition of an unsafe situation would be benecial to address
this problem.
Transferability. Most exploratory approaches are currently limited to the do-
main on which they were trained. When faced with new environments (e.g.,
increased state space and dierent reward functions), exploration strategies do
not seem to perform well [49, 43]. Coping with this issue would be helpful in two
scenarios. First, it would be benecial to be able to teach the agent behaviours
in smaller scenarios and then allow it to perform well on larger scenarios to
alleviate computational issues. Second, in some domains, dening state spaces
suitable for exploration is challenging and may vary in size signicantly between
tasks (e.g., search for a victim of an accident).
38