Figure 10: Overview of imitation-based methods. In imitation-based methods, the agent
receives demonstrations from expert on how to behave. These are then used in two ways: (i)
directly learning on demonstrations or (ii) using demonstrations as a start for other exploration
techniques.
a higher probability of being selected. Deep Q learning from demonstration
(DQfD) [128] diers in two aspects from [127]. First, the agent was pre-trained
on demonstrations only. Second, the ratio between the samples from the agent's
run and demonstrations was controlled by a parameter. A similar work with
R2D2 was reported in [129]. Storing states in two dierent replays was presented
in [130]. Every time the agent samples for learning, it samples a certain amount
from each buer.
Discussion. Using one or two experience replays seems to have negligible impact
on performance. However, storing in one experience replay is conceptually and
implementation-wise easier. Moreover, it allows agents to stop using imitation
experiences when they are not needed anymore.
3.5.2. Imitation with Exploration Strategy Methods
Instead of using experience replays, imitations and exploration strategies can
be combined directly. In such an approach, imitations are used as a 'kick-start'
for exploration.
A single demonstration was used as a starting point for exploration in [131].
The agent randomly explores from a state alongside a single demonstration run.
The agent trained from a mediocre demonstration can score highly in Mon-
tezuma's Revenge. The auxiliary reward approach was proposed in Aytar et al.
[26]. The architecture can combine several YouTube videos into a single embed-
ding space for training. The auxiliary reward is added to every Nframe from
the demonstration video. The agent that can ask for help from the demonstra-
tor was proposed in [132]. If the agent detects an unknown environment, the
human demonstrator is asked to show the agent how to navigate.
Discussion. Using imitations as a starting point for exploration has shown im-
pressive performance in dicult exploratory games. In particular, [26] and [131]
28