Exploration in Deep Reinforcement Learning: A
Survey?
Pawel Ladosza, Lilian Wengb, Minwoo Kima, Hyondong Oha,
aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and
Technology (UNIST), 50 UNIST-gil, Ulsan, Republic of Korea
bOpenAI LP, 3180 18th St, San Francisco, CA 94110
Abstract
This paper reviews exploration techniques in deep reinforcement learning. Ex-
ploration techniques are of primary importance when solving sparse reward
problems. In sparse reward problems, the reward is rare, which means that the
agent will not nd the reward often by acting randomly. In such a scenario, it
is challenging for reinforcement learning to learn rewards and actions associa-
tion. Thus more sophisticated exploration methods need to be devised. This
review provides a comprehensive overview of existing exploration approaches,
which are categorized based on the key contributions as follows reward novel
states, reward diverse behaviours, goal-based methods, probabilistic methods,
imitation-based methods, safe exploration and random-based methods. Then,
the unsolved challenges are discussed to provide valuable future research direc-
tions. Finally, the approaches of dierent categories are compared in terms of
complexity, computational eort and overall performance.
Keywords: Deep reinforcement learning, Exploration, Intrinsic motivation,
Sparse reward problems
1. Introduction
In numerous real-world problems, the outcomes of a certain event are only
visible after a signicant number of other events have occurred. These types
of problems are called sparse reward problems since the reward is rare and
?This research was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the
National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education
(2020R1A6A1A03040570), National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) grant funded by
the Korea government(MSIT) (2020R1F1A1049066), and Unmanned Vehicles Core Technol-
ogy Research and Development Program through the National Research Foundation of Ko-
rea(NRF), Unmanned Vehicle Advanced Research Center(UVARC) funded by the Ministry
of Science and ICT, the Republic of Korea (2020M3C1C1A01082375)
Corresponding author
Email addresses: pladosz@unist.ac.kr (Pawel Ladosz), lilian@openai.com (Lilian
Weng), red9395@unist.ac.kr (Minwoo Kim), h.oh@unist.ac.kr (Hyondong Oh)
Preprint submitted to Information Fusion May 3, 2022arXiv:2205.00824v1  [cs.LG]  2 May 2022