meta-controller is trained on a goal-state space. An approach in which each
subtask is learned by one learner was proposed in [99]. To allow any sub-task
learner to perform its task from all states, the starting points for learning are
shared between sub-task learners.
Sub-goals. In sub-goal methods, the algorithms nd the sub-goals for the agent
to reach. In general, sub-goal methods can be split into: (i) bottleneck states
which lead to many others as exploratory goals, (ii) progress towards the main
goal which is likely to lead to the reward and (iii) uncertainty based sub-goals.
One of the early methods of discovering bottleneck states was described in
[100] using an ant colony optimisation method. Bottleneck states are said to
be the states often visited by ants when exploring (by measuring pheromone
levels). To discover bottleneck states, [101] proposed the use of proto-value
functions based on the eigenvalue of representations. This allows the computa-
tion of eigenvector centrality [102], which has a high value if the node has many
connections. This was later improved in [103] by replacing the handcrafted
adjacency matrix with successor representations.
To design sub-goals which lead to a reward, Fang et al. [104] proposed pro-
gressively generating sub-tasks that are closer to the main task. To this end,
two components are used: the learning progress estimator and task generator.
The learning progress estimator determines the learning progress on the main
task. The task generator then uses the learning progress to generate sub-tasks
closer to the main tasks.
In uncertainty based methods, sub-goals the goals for the agent are posi-
tioned at the most uncertain states. One of the earliest attempts of this type
was proposed by Guestrin et al. [105]. Here, the upper and lower bounds of
the reward are estimated. Then, states with high uncertainty regarding the re-
ward are used as exploratory goals. Clustering states using k-means and visiting
least-visited clusters were proposed in [106]. Clustering can also help to solve
the couch potato problem, as described in [107]. In this approach, the states are
clustered using Gaussian mixture models. The agent avoids the couch potato
problem by clustering all states from a TV into a single avoidable cluster.
Discussion. There are two main categories of exploratory goal methods: meta-
controllers, and sub-goals. The key advantage of meta-controllers is that they
allow the agent to set its own goals without excessively rewarding itself. How-
ever, training the controller is a challenge, which was not fully solved yet. In
sub-goals methods, what constitutes a goal is dened by human designers. This
puts a signicant burden on the designer to provide suitable and meaningful
goals.
3.3.3. Summary
The goal-based methods are summarised in Table 3. Goals to explore from
methods have shown very good performance recently [84, 89] in dicult ex-
ploratory games such as Montezuma's Revenge. The key challenges of these
21