without a clear link to previous actions. We note that sparse reward problems
are common in a real world. For example, during search and rescue missions,
the reward is only given when an object is found, or during delivery, the reward
is only given when an object is delivered. In sparse reward problems, thousands
of decisions might need to be made before the outcomes are visible. Here, we
present a review on a group of techniques that can solve this issue, namely
exploration in reinforcement learning.
In reinforcement learning, an agent is given a state and a reward from the
environment. The task of the agent is to determine an appropriate action. In
reinforcement learning, the appropriate action is such that it maximises the
reward, or it could be said that the action is exploitative. However, solving
problems with just exploitation may not be feasible owing to reward sparseness.
With reward sparseness, the agent is unlikely to nd a reward quickly, and thus,
it has nothing to exploit. Thus, an exploration algorithm is required to solve
sparse reward problems.
The most common technique for exploration in reinforcement learning is
random exploration [1]. In this type of approach, the agent decides what to
do randomly regardless of its progress. The most commonly-used technique of
this type, called -greedy, uses the time decaying parameter to reduce explo-
ration over time. This can theoretically solve the sparse reward problem given
a sucient amount of time. However, this is often impractical in real-world
applications because learning times can be very large. However, we note that
even just with random exploration, deep reinforcement learning has shown some
impressive performance in Atari games [2], Mujoco simulator [3], controllers tun-
ing [4], autonomous landing [5], self-driving cars [6] and healthcare [7].
Another solution for exploration could be reward shaping. In reward shap-
ing, the designer 'articially' imposes a reward more often. For example, for
search and rescue missions, agents can be given a negative reward every time
they do not nd the victim. However, reward shaping is a challenging problem
that is heavily dependent on the experience of the designer. Punishing the agent
too much could lead to the agent not moving at all [8], while rewarding it too
much may cause the agent to repeat certain actions innitely [9]. Thus, with
the issues of random exploration and reward shaping, there is a need for more
sophisticated exploration algorithms.
While exploration in reinforcement learning was considered as early as 1991
[10, 11], it is still under development. Recently, exploration has shown a signi-
cant gain in performance compared to non-exploratory algorithms: Diversity is
all you need (DIYAN) [12] improved on MuJoCo benchmarks; random network
distillation (RND) [13] and pseudocounts [14] were the rst to score on dicult
Montezuma's Revenge problem; and Agent57 [15] is the rst to beat humans in
all 57 Atari games.
This review focuses on exploratory approaches which full at least one of the
following criteria: (i) determines the exploration degree based on the agent's
learning, (ii) actively decides to take certain actions in hopes of nding new
outcomes, and (iii) motivates itself to continue exploring despite a lack of en-
vironmental rewards. In addition, this review focuses on approaches that have
2