only rewarded when the appropriate drop-o point has been found; otherwise,
the reward is 0. Exploration could be considered as a ubiquitous problem that
is highly relevant to many domains with ongoing research.
2.3. Challenging Problems
In this section, some of the challenging problems for exploration in reinforce-
ment learning are described, namely noisy-TV and sparse reward problems.
2.3.1. Noisy-TV
In a noisy-TV [13] problem, the agent is stuck in exploring an innite number
of states which lead to no reward. This phenomenon can be easily explained
with an example. Imagine a state consisting of a virtual TV where the agent
can operate the remote, but operating the remote controller leads to no reward.
A new random image is generated on the TV every time a remote is operated.
Thus, the agent will experience novelty all the time. This keeps the agent's
attention high innitely but clearly leads to no meaningful progress. This kind
of behaviour can also be described as a couch potato problem.
2.3.2. Sparse Reward Problems
Sparse rewards are a classical problem in exploration. In the sparse reward
problem, the reward is relatively rare. In other words, there is a long gap
between an action and a reward. This is problematic for reinforcement learning
because for a long time (or at all times) it has no reward to learn from. The
agent cannot learn any useful behaviours and eventually converges to a trivial
solution. As an example, consider a maze where the agent has to complete
numerous steps before reaching the end and being rewarded. The larger the
maze is, the less likely it is for the agent to see the reward. Eventually, the
maze will be so large that the agent will never see the reward; thus, it will have
no opportunity to learn.
2.4. Benchmarks
In this section, the most commonly used benchmarks for reinforcement learn-
ing are brie
y introduced and described. We highlight four benchmarks: Atari
Games, VizDoom, Minecraft, and Mujoco.
2.4.1. Atari Games
The Atari games benchmark are a set of 57 Atari games combined under
the Atari Learning Environment (ALE) [25]. In Atari games, the state space
is normally either images or random-access memory (RAM) snapshots. The
action space consists of ve joystick actions (up, down, left, right, and action
button). Atari games can be largely split into two groups: easy (54 games) and
dicult exploration (3 games) [26]. In the easy exploration problem, the reward
is relatively easy to nd. In hard exploration problems, the reward is not often
given, and the association between states and rewards is complex.
5