3.7. Random-Based Methods
In random-based approaches, improvements to simple random exploration
are discussed. Random exploration tends to be inecient as it often revisits the
same states. To solve this problem, the following approaches are considered:
(i) reduced states/actions for exploration methods, (ii) exploration parameters
methods, and (iii) network parameter noise methods, as illustrated in Fig. 13.
Figure 13: Overview of random based methods. In random-based methods, simple random
exploration is modied for improved eciency. In modifying the states for exploration, the
number of actions to be taken randomly is reduced. In modifying the exploration parameters,
the exploration is automatically decided. In the network parameter noise, the noise is imposed
on the policy parameters.
3.7.1. Exploration Parameters Methods
In this section, exploration is parameterized (for example, in-greedy).
Then, the parameters are modied according to the agent's learning progress.
One technique to adapt the exploration rate is by simply considering a re-
ward and adjusting the random exploration parameter accordingly, as described
in [144]. Using a pure reward can lead to problems with sparse rewards. To
solve this problem, in [145], was made to depend on the error of the value-
function estimates instead of the reward. It is also possible to determine the
amount of random exploration using the environmental model entropy, as dis-
cussed in [146]. The learning rate [147] can also depend on exploration in which
a parameter that is functionally equivalent to the learning rate is introduced.
If the agent is exploring a lot, the value of slows down the learning to account
for uncertainty. Khamassi et al. [148] used long-term and short-term reward
averages to control exploration and exploitation. When the short-term average
is below the long-term average, exploration should be increased.
Chang et al. [149] used multiple agents (ants) to adjust the exploration
parameters. At each step, the ants chose their actions randomly, but were
skewed by pheromone values left by other ants.
33