resents images as a set of numbers called a hash. To generate an even more
compact representation, in [64], the state was represented as the learned x-
y position of an agent. This was achieved using an attentive dynamic model
(ADM). Successor state representation (SSR) [65] is a method which combines
count and representation. The SSR is based on the count and order between
the states. Intuitively, the SSR can be used as a count replacement.
It is also possible to approximate count on state representation by using
a function. For example, Bellemare et al. [14] proposed an approximation
based on a density model. The density models include context tree switching
(CTS) [14], Gaussian mixture models [66] or PixelCNN [67]. Martin et al. [68]
proposed an improvement in the approximate count by making counts on the
feature space rather than raw inputs.
Discussion. Count-based methods approximate the intrinsic reward by count-
ing the number of times a given state has been visited. To reduce computational
eorts of count-based methods, usually counts are associated with state repre-
sentations rather than states. This, however, relies on being able to eciently
represent states. State representations can still require a lot of memory and
careful design.
3.1.3. Memory Methods
In these methods, an intrinsic reward is given on how easy it is to distinguish
a state from all others. The easier it is to distinguish from the others, the more
novel the given state is. As comparing states directly is computationally ex-
pensive, several approximation methods have been devised. Here, we categorize
them into comparison models and experience replay.
Models can be trained for comparing state-to-state to reduce the compu-
tational load. One example method is to use exemplar model [69] developed
in [70]. Exemplar models are a set of nclassiers, each of which is trained
to distinguish a specic state from the others. Training multiple classiers is
generally computationally expensive. To further reduce the computational cost,
the following two strategies are proposed: updating a single exemplar with a
each new data point and sampling kexemplars from a buer.
Instead of developing models for comparison, a limited size of experience
replay was combined with prediction error methods in [71]. To devise intrin-
sic rewards, two rewards are combined: (i) intrinsic episodic experience replay
is used to store states and compare them to others; and (ii) intrinsic motiva-
tion RND [13] is used to determine the state's long-term novelty. Additionally,
multiple policies are trained, each with a dierent ratio between the extrinsic
and intrinsic reward. A meta learner to automatically choose dierent ratios of
extrinsic and intrinsic rewards at each step was proposed in [15].
Discussion. In memory-based approaches, the agent derives an intrinsic reward
by comparing its current state with states stored in the memory. The com-
parison model method has the advantage of small memory requirements, but
requires careful model parameter tuning. On the other hand, using a limited
13