2.4.2. VizDoom
VizDoom [27] is a benchmark based on the Doom game. The game has a
rst-person perspective (i.e., view from characters' eyes), and the image seen
by the character is normally used as a state space. The action space is nor-
mally eight directional control and two action buttons (picking up key cards
and opening doors). Note that more actions can be added, if needed. One of
the key advantages of VizDoom is the availability of easy-to-use tools for editing
scenarios and low computational burden.
2.4.3. Malmo
Malmo [28] is a benchmark based on the game Minecraft. In Minecraft,
environments are built using same-shaped blocks, similar to how Lego bricks
are used for building. Similar to VizDoom, it is also from the rst-person
perspective, and the image is the state space. The key advantage of Malmo is
its 
exibility in terms of the environment structure, domain size, custom scripts,
and reward functions.
2.4.4. Mujoco
MuJoCo [29] represents multi-joint dynamics with contact. Mujoco is a pop-
ular benchmark used for physics-based simulations. In reinforcement learning,
Mujoco is typically used to simulate walking robots. These are typically cheetah,
ant, humanoids, and their derivatives. The task of reinforcement learning is to
control various joint angles and forces to develop walking behaviour. Normally,
the task is to walk as far as possible or to reach a specic goal.
3. Exploration in Reinforcement Learning
Exploration in reinforcement learning can be split into two main streams: ef-
ciency and safe exploration. In eciency, the idea is to make exploration more
sample ecient so that the agent can explore in as few steps as possible. In
safe exploration, the focus is on ensuring safety during exploration. We suggest
splitting eciency-based methods further into imitation-based and self-taught
methods. In imitation-based learning, the agent learns how to utilise a policy
from an expert to improve exploration. In self-taught methods, learning is per-
formed from scratch. Self-taught methods can be further divided into planning,
intrinsic rewards, and random methods. In planning methods, the agent plans
its next action to gain a better understanding of the environment. In random
methods, the agent does not make conscious plans; rather, it explores and then
sees a consequence of this exploration. We distinguish intrinsic reward meth-
ods into two categories: (i) reward novel states{reward agents for visiting novel
states; and (ii) reward diverse behaviours-reward agents for discovering novel
behaviours. Note that intrinsic rewards are a part of a larger notion of intrinsic
motivation. For an extensive review of intrinsic motivation, see [16] and [30]. In
planning methods, two distinguished categories are considered: (i) goal-based:
an agent is given an exploratory goal to reach; and (ii) probability- probabilistic
6