Another approach of this type could be reducing states for exploration based
on some predened metric. An approach using the adaptive resonance theorem
(ART) [150] was presented in [151] and was later extended in [152]. In ART,
knowledge about actions can be split into: (i) positive chunk which leads to
positive rewards, (ii) negative chunk which leads to negative results, and (iii)
empty chunk which is not yet taken. In this approach, the action is randomly
chosen from positive and no chunks; thus, the agent is exploring either new
things or ones with the positive reward. Wang et al. [152] extended this to
include the probability of selecting the remaining actions based on how well
they are known.
Discussion. Dierent parameters can be changed based on learning progress.
Initially, approaches used learning progress, reward, or value of states to deter-
mine the rate of exploration. The challenge with these approaches is determining
the parameters controlling the exploration. However, it is also possible to adjust
the learning rate based on exploration [147]. The advantage is that the agent
avoids learning uncertain information, but it slows down the training. Finally,
reducing states for exploration can make exploration more sample ecient, but
it struggles to account for unseen states that occurs after the eliminated states.
3.7.2. Random Noise
In random noise approaches, random noise is used for exploration. The
random noise can be either imposed on networks parameters or be produced
based on states met during exploration.
The easiest method of including the noise is to include a xed amount of
noise [153]. This paper reviews the usage of small perturbations in the pa-
rameter space. In [154], chaotic networks were used to induce the noise in the
network. It is also possible to adjust the noise strength using backpropaga-
tion, as described in [155] where the noise is created by a constant noise source
multiplied by a gradient-adaptable parameter. Another way of the using the
noise is by comparing the decision made by the noisy and noiseless policy [156].
Exploration is imposed, if decisions are suciently dierent.
In [157], the problem of assigning rewards when the same state is present
multiple times is discussed. In such a problem, the agent will be likely to take
dierent actions for the same state, making credit assignment dicult. To solve
this problem, a random action generation function dependent on the input state
was developed; if the state is the same, the random action is the same.
Discussion. Network parameter noise was rst developed for evolutionary ap-
proaches, such as [153]. Recently, the noise of parameters has been used in
policy-based methods. In particular, good performance was achieved in [155]
which was able to achieve 50% improvement averaged over 52 Atari games.
3.7.3. Summary
A comparison of the random-based approach is presented in Table 7. The
key advantage of reduced states for exploration methods is that the exploration
34