been applied to deep reinforcement learning. Note that this review is intended
for beginners in exploration for deep reinforcement learning; thus, the focus is
on the breadth of approaches and their relatively simplied description. Note
also that, throughout the paper, we will use 'reinforcement learning' as it is a
more general term rather than 'deep reinforcement learning'.
Several review articles exist in the eld of reinforcement learning. Aubert
et al. [16] presented an overview of intrinsic motivation in reinforcement learn-
ing, Li [17] presented a comprehensive overview of techniques and applications,
Nguyen et al. [18] considered an application to multi-agent problems, Levine [19]
provided a tutorial and extensive comparison with probabilistic inference meth-
ods and [20] provided an extensive description of the key breakthrough methods
in reinforcement learning, including ones in exploration. However, none of the
aforementioned reviews focused on exploration or considered it in great detail.
The only other review focused on exploration is from 1999 and is now outdated
and inaccurate [21].
The contributions of this study are as follows. First, the systematic overview
of exploration in deep reinforcement learning is presented. As mentioned above,
no other modern review exists with this focus. Second, a categorization of ex-
ploration in reinforcement learning is provided. The categorization is devised to
provide a good way of comparing dierent approaches. Finally, future challenges
are identied and discussed.
2. Preliminaries
2.1. Introduction to Reinforcement Learning
2.1.1. Markov Decision Process
We consider a standard reinforcement setting in which an agent interacts
with a stochastic and fully observable environment by sequentially choosing
actions in a discrete time step to maximise cumulative rewards. This series of
processes is called Markov decision process (MDP). An MDP has a tuple of
(S;A;P;R;
 ), whereSis a set of states, Ais a set of actions the agent can
select,Pis a transition probability that satises the Markov property given as:
p(st+1js1;a1;s2;a2;;st;at) =p(st+1jst;at); (1)
Ris a set of rewards, and 
2(0;1] is a discount factor. At each time step
t, an agent receives states st2Sfrom the environment and selects the best
possible actions at2Aaccording to policy (atjst), which maps from states
stto actionsat. The agent receives a reward rt2Rfrom the environment to
take an action at. The goal of the agent is to maximise the discounted expected
rewardGt=P1
k=0
krk+tfrom each state st.
2.1.2. Value-Based Methods
Given that the agent follows policy , a state-value function is dened as
V(st) =E[GtjSt=s]. Similarly, the action-value function, Q(st;at) =
3