5. Conclusions
This paper presents a review of the exploration in reinforcement learning.
The following methods were discussed: reward novel states, reward diverse be-
haviours, goal-based methods, uncertainty, imitation-based methods, safe ex-
ploration, and random methods.
In reward novel state methods, the agent is given a reward for discovering a
novel or surprising state. This reward can be computed using prediction error,
count, or memory. In prediction error methods, the reward is given based on the
accuracy of the agent's internal environmental model. In count-based methods,
the reward is given based on how often a given state is visited. In memory-based
methods, the reward is computed based on how dierent a state is compared to
other states in a buer.
In reward diverse behaviour methods, the agent is rewarded for discovering
as many diverse behaviours as possible. Note here that we use word behaviour
loosely as a sequence of actions or a policy. Reward diverse behaviour methods
can be divided into: evolutionary strategies and policy learning. In evolution
strategies, diversity among the population of agents is encouraged. In policy
learning, the diversity of policy parameters is encouraged.
In goal-based methods, the agent is given the goal of either exploring from or
exploring while trying to reach the goal. In the rst method, the agent chooses
the goal to get to and then explore from it. This results in a very ecient
exploration as the agent visits predominantly unknown areas. In the second
method, called the exploratory goal, the agent is exploring while travelling to-
ward a goal. The key idea of this method is to provide goals which are suitable
for exploration.
In probabilistic methods, the agent holds an uncertainty model about the
environment and uses it to make its next move. The uncertainty method has
two subcategories: optimistic and uncertainty methods. In optimistic methods,
the agent follows the optimism under uncertainty principle. This means that
the agent will sample the most optimistic understanding of the reward. In
uncertainty methods, the agent will sample from internal uncertainty to move
toward the least known areas.
Imitation-based methods rely on using demonstrations to help exploration.
In general, there are two methods: combining demonstrations with experience
replay and combining them with an exploration strategy. In the rst method,
samples from demonstrations and collected by the agent are combined into one
buer for the agent to learn from. In the second method, the demonstrations
are used as a starting point for other exploration techniques such as the reward
novel state.
Safe exploration methods were devised to ensure the safe behaviour of the
agents during exploration. In safe exploration, the most prevalent method is
to use human designer knowledge to develop boundaries for the agent. Fur-
thermore, it is possible to train a model that predicts and stops agents from
making a disastrous move. Finally, the agent can be discouraged from visiting
dangerous states with a negative reward.
39