Random exploration methods improve standard random exploration. These
improvements include modifying the states for exploration, modifying explo-
ration parameters, and putting the noise on network parameters. In modifying
states for exploration, certain states and actions are removed from the ran-
dom choice if they have been suciently explored. In modifying exploration
parameter methods, the parameters aecting when to randomly explore are au-
tomatically chosen based on the agent's learning progress. Lastly, in the network
parameter noise approach, random noise is applied to the parameters to induce
exploration before the weight convergence.
Finally, the best approaches in terms of ease of implementation, compu-
tational cost and overall performance are highlighted. The easiest methods to
implement are reward novel states, reward diverse behaviours and random-based
approaches. Basic implementation of those approaches can be used with almost
any other existing reinforcement learning algorithms; they might require a few
additions and tuning to work. In terms of computational eciency, random-
based, reward novel states and reward divers behaviours generally require the
least resources. Particularly, random-based approaches are computationally ef-
cient as the additional components are lightweight. Currently, best-performing
methods are goal-based and reward novel states methods where goal-based
methods have achieved high scores in dicult exploratory problems such as
Montezuma's revenge. However, goal-based methods tend to be the most com-
plex in terms of implementation. Overall, reward novel states methods seem
like a good compromise between ease of implementation and performance.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing nancial interests or
personal relationships that could have appeared to in
uence the work reported
in this paper.
References
[1] R. S. Sutton, A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction, A
Bradford Book, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2018.
[2] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G.
Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski,
S. Petersen, C. Beattie, A. Sadik, I. Antonoglou, H. King, D. Ku-
maran, D. Wierstra, S. Legg, D. Hassabis, Human-level Control Through
Deep Reinforcement Learning, Nature 518 (2015) 529{533. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature14236 . doi: 10.1038/nature14236 .
[3] T. P. Lillicrap, J. J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y. Tassa, D. Sil-
ver, D. Wierstra, Continuous Control with Deep Reinforcement Learning,
4th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2016
(2016). arXiv:1509.02971 .
40