Figure 9: Overview of probabilistic methods. The agent uses uncertainty over the environment
model to either behave optimistically (left) or follow the most uncertain solution (right). Both
should lead to a reduction in the uncertainty of the agent.
presented in [109]. The GP readily provides uncertainty, which can be used for
reward estimation. The linear Gaussian algorithm can also be used as a model of
the reward [110]. Bootstrapped deep-Q networks (DQN) and Thomson sampling
were utilised in [111]. Bootstrapped DQNs naturally provide a distribution over
rewards and values so that optimistic decisions can be taken.
It is also possible to hold a set of value functions and samples during explo-
ration [112, 113]. The most optimistic value function is used by the agent for
an episode. At the end of the episode, the distribution of the value functions
was updated.
Discussion. In optimistic approaches, the agent attempts to utilise optimism
under the uncertainty principle. To utilize this principle the agent needs to be
able to model the reward. It is possible to do this modeling by either modelling
reward directly or by approximating value functions. Value function approxima-
tion can be advantageous as reward sparsity increases. With increased reward
sparsity, the agent can utilize the partial reward from value functions for learn-
ing.
3.4.2. Uncertainty Methods
In uncertainty-based methods, the agent holds a probability distribution over
actions and/or states which represent the uncertainty of the environment. Then,
it chooses an action that minimises the uncertainty. Here, ve subcategories are
distinguished: parameter uncertainty, value uncertainty, network ensemble, and
information-theoretic.
Parameter uncertainty. In parameter uncertainty, the agent holds uncertainty
over the parameters dening a policy. Then, the agent samples from those and
follows this policy for a certain time and updates the parameters based on the
performance. One of the simplest approaches is to hold a distribution over the
parameters of the network [114]. Here, the network parameters were sampled
24