Unremarkable AI CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland Uk
Generalizability Beyond VAD
Our interviews with clinicians outside of VAD centers showed
that multidisciplinary decision meetings take place across
many clinical domains for some of their most aggressive
interventions. They are also referred to as internal medicine
panel meetings, tumor boards, or floor meetings (referring
to meetings between critical and general care physicians).
These meetings happen widely because for patients are very
sick and are being considered for their last-option surgi-
cal intervention, their illness usually have involved multiple
organs. Treating them requires physicians from multiple clin-
ical domains. Multidisciplinary meetings therefore occurred
naturally.
Esophageal cancer, COPD, diabetes, cystic fibrosis, LIT-
ERALLY everything in psychiatry, gastric bypass, end
stage renal disease, hernia repair, syndromes like Down
and Turner, any disease that requires management with
meds with nasty side effects, and even emergency room
situations to expedite processes. Any of the above dis-
eases the approach has to be multidisciplinary almost
by definition because they affect multiple systems and
usually but not always the last option is a surgical
intervention. (Pediatric surgeon)
6 DISCUSSION: DESIGNING AND EVALUATING
DST AS A SITUATED EXPERIENCE
Clinical DSTs, despite compelling evidence of their effective-
ness in labs, have mostly failed when moving out of labs and
into healthcare practice [ 15,19]. A lack of contextual inte-
gration in the design of these systems played a critical role
in these repeated failures. Prior work suggests that current
interaction conventions, that clinicians will recognize their
own need for a DSTs help and then walk up and use a system
separate from the EMR, is not likely to work [25].
There is a real need to design DSTs not only as a functional
utility but as an integrated experience. Their effectiveness
should be measured not only by prediction accuracy, but by
effectiveness when situated within its social and physical
context such as workplace culture and social structures. This
presents exiting new opportunities and challenges to HCI
and UX research.
Our design makes three dependent proposals about mak-
ing a DST a situated VAD decision making experience. First,
we propose that the decision meeting presents a good time
and place . Second, assuming the meeting is correct, we pro-
pose that situating the DST output into the meeting slides
would offer an effective form . Third, assuming that having
the DST as part of the slides is a good form, we propose that
the DST plays a fairly unremarkable role in clinician decision
making by appearing in one corner. We claim it needs to
be easily passed over when it agrees with current decisionmaking and that it must only be present enough to slow de-
cision making down when its predictions are in conflict with
a seasoned physician’s suggested course of action. All three
proposals aimed to naturally augment the current activities
of decision making, rather than pulling clinicians away from
doing their routine.
Below, we discuss the design implications of these pro-
posals. We then share challenges encountered and lessons
learned in evaluating the DST as a situated experience.
Designing DST to Augment Clinical Routine
Time and Place. Findings of this work suggested that DSTs
may more effectively fit into clinical practice if their interac-
tions are tailored for a specific time and place within the cur-
rent decision-making workflow. Taking lessons from prior
HCI work, we should not only make AI more intelligent, but
make them highly situated in people’s routines. In doing so,
AI can become part of the decision-making routines, part of
the very glue of clinicians’ everyday work.
Our assessment findings largely suggest that decision
meetings are a routine activity that is promising for DST
integration, for several reasons:
(1)The meeting is part of an existing clinical decision-making
routine . Clinicians therefore would naturally encounter
the DST at the meeting;
(2)The meeting is a socially aggregated decision point. The
DST could therefore leverage mid-level clinicians to advo-
cate for its information and value to the decision makers;
(3)The meeting offers a moment of deliberation in their
otherwise fast-moving decision-making workflow. The
meetings offer clinicians time to collectively digest the
implications of the prognostics;
(4)Finally, the meeting is a best practice promoted globally
in VAD patient care, and across several clinical domains.
Therefore this DST design could potentially make its
place across diverse practices in different hospital sites
and domains.
Decision meetings represent only one way of integrating
DSTs into clinical practice. Similar opportunities may lie in
other time and place in existing clinical decision-making
routine that is socially-aggregated, deliberative and shared
across hospitals. Future research shall advance this work by
systemically searching for such opportunities.
Interaction Form. Besides situating the DST in decision-making
routine, we also motivated mid-level clinicians’ use by prepar-
ing patient information for the decision meetings for them.
Our field study suggested this was a useful tactic. DSTs sup-
porting various clinical decisions can potentially automate
tedious information retrieval tasks for clinicians to offer ad-
ditional motivations for adoption.