CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland Uk Q. Yang et al.
mid-level clinicians who use computers. Almost no VAD
decision-making took place in front of a computer.
Embracing the rich context of the implant decision, we
designed a radically new DST that automatically generates
slides for the required decision meeting. The design em-
beds prognostic decision supports into the corner of decision
meeting slides. We wanted decision makers to encounter the
computational advice at a relevant time and place across the
decision process, and we wanted this support to only slow
them down for the few cases where the DST adds value to
the decision. This design draws inspiration from Tolmie et
al.’s notion of Unremarkable Computing, that technology
needs to have the right level of remarkableness to valuably
situate itself in people emerging routines and becoming the
glue of their everyday lives [21].
This paper presents this DST’s interaction design as well
as a field evaluation at three VAD implant hospitals. We
also spoke with physicians working on clinical decisions
outside of VAD implant, probing whether this design might
generalize to other critical, clinical decisions. Our findings
suggest that clinicians are more likely to encounter and em-
brace a DST that binds “unremarkable" decision supports
with their current work routine. Drawing on clinicians’ re-
sponses, we discuss the importance and intricacies of finding
the right level of unremarkableness in a DST design. We dis-
cuss lessons learned and unexpected challenges in evaluating
critical AI systems as a situated experience.
This paper makes two contributions. First, we offer one
concrete solution to the long-standing challenge of effec-
tively situating DSTs in clinical practice. Second, we offer a
rare description of clinicians’ responses to a DST situated in
their workflow. This surfaced intriguing insights valuable
for future investigations of critical AI systems.
2 RELATED WORK
Clinical Decision Support Tools in Practice
Clinical decision support tools (DSTs) are computational
systems that support one of three tasks: diagnosing patients,
selecting treatments, or making prognostic predictions of
the likely course of a disease or outcome of a treatment [ 24].
This project focuses on clinician-facing, prognostic DSTs.
A significant strand of recent HCI work focused on critical
issues in this area, including AI interpretability and fairness,
data visualization, accuracy of risk communication, and more
[17,18,20]. The significance of this body of work has led
some to describe it as “the rise of design science in clinical
DST research" [ 1]. These studies typically investigated DST
in lab settings, using prototypes that are dedicated to a single
clinical decision. Clinicians came out of their day-to-day
workflow, used these systems for a pre-identified task, then
provided feedback on the system design.Despite success in labs, the vast majority of clinician-
facing DSTs failed when moving to clinical practice. Clin-
icians rarely use them [ 4,5,23], and therefore they have
shown no significant improvement on healthcare outcomes.
Healthcare researchers identified a lack of HCI consideration,
rather than poor technical performance, as the main cause
of these failures [ 15,19]. These HCI considerations include
workflow integration, integration with social context, and
clinicians’ lack of motivation to use a DST.
Relatively few research projects have focused on how
to integrate DST output into clinical contexts. Within HCI
there are initiatives to engage with real clinical users and
contexts, yet the lack of meaningful access remains a major
barrier. Researchers have shared that they were not allowed
to evaluate incomplete designs, that evaluations took months
or even years, that iterative design or repeated evaluation
was not possible, and finally, that design evaluations had to
be conducted by healthcare professionals rather than by HCI
professionals [3, 9, 14].
VAD Decision-Making and Its Context
Due to many of the aforementioned barriers, investigations
of the VAD implant decision making and field assessment of
DST designs are rare. An exception is a field study conducted
at three VAD programs [ 25]. Researchers made a number of
observations that informed this work:
First, clinicians perceived no need for computational sup-
port; They considered most patient cases as textbook cases
that follow a standard, systematic process of therapy escala-
tion and a staged unfolding of decision considerations.
Second, clinicians made implant decisions during daily
rounding of patient wards, during hallway conversations,
and in multidisciplinary VAD decision meetings. Decisions
were rarely discussed or made in front of a computer.
Finally, the clinical workplace culture was strongly hi-
erarchical yet highly collaborative. Cardiologists and sur-
geons, who function at the top of the hierarchy, decided who
gets classified as a difficult case and who gets discussed dur-
ing the required multidisciplinary meeting which the whole
VAD team attends. This cultural context poses a two-fold
challenge for DST use. First, decision makers (physicians)
and computer users (the midlevel clinicians, including nurse
practitioners, social workers and VAD coordinators) rarely
overlap at any point of the decision-making process. Second,
physicians have great trust in their colleagues’ suggestions,
much more so than in computational support.
3 DESIGN PROCESS AND RATIONALE
We set out to design a new form of DST for VAD patient
selection to explore how to overcome its real-world adoption
barriers that many prognostic DSTs face. Drawing upon prior
work, we had two design goals: