Unremarkable AI CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland Uk
1 -Embedding DST in current workflow : Clinicians, espe-
cially cardiologists and surgeons, need to naturally encounter
the DST within their current decision-making workflow, be-
cause they are unlikely to recognize when they might need
help and then walk up to a computer for help;
2 -Slowing down decision-making only when necessary :
The DST outputs need to be easily ignored in most patient
cases that are textbook. However, it should also be present
enough to slow the decision-making down when there is a
meaningful disagreement between the clinicians’ view and
the DSTs view of the situation;
These orientations are very different from the convention
of DST design in which decision supports are always avail-
able, waiting for clinicians to walk up and use at any point
across the decision-making process. Instead, we wanted to
tailor the DST for particular moments in the process, such
that clinicians do not have to take pause and invent se-
quences of action anew. We wanted the DST to naturally
augment the actions of decision making, rather than pulling
the user away from doing their routine work.
Making Clinical DST Unremarkable
Tolmie et al. [ 21] introduced the notion of unremarkable com-
puting when discussing how ubiquitous computing should
arrive and create its place in people’s homes. They argued
that technology can augment people’s actions in ways that
have a wealth of significance but seem unremarkable, be-
cause its interactions are “so highly situated, so fitting, so
natural”. They argued that home technology should not only
be more intelligent, it should also be more subservient to
people’s daily routines. In doing so, the technology becomes
part of the routines, part of the very glue of their everyday
life.
We draw connections between this ambition and our afore-
mentioned design goals. We also draw connections between
this notion of routine and VAD decision making. While these
are daunting life-and-death decisions, the implant decisions
are part of a work routine for clinicians. To fit a DST into their
practice, we need to make it subservient to the day-to-day
decision-making workflow they engage in.
We wanted to operationalize this idea of unremarkable
technology in the context of critical, clinical decision making.
This is a difficult goal because it requires a right level of
“unremarkableness" such that the DST does not constrain
clinicians’ decision making flow except when it needs to .
Design Process
To situate a DST into the current VAD decision-making rou-
tine, we first needed to identify a time and place where
clinicians should naturally and impactfully encounter the it.
We chose the multidisciplinary patient evaluation meetings,
for a number of reasons. First, the meeting is a rare socialtouch point where most clinicians involved in the decision
are present, and they are actively forming a collective de-
cision about patient treatment. Second, it is one of the few
decision points where a computer is present and being used.
Third, decision meetings are common across hospital sites.
VAD centers in the US are legally required to take a mul-
tidisciplinary approach to patient care, therefore regularly
scheduled meetings are common. Globally, these meetings
are also recommended [ 16]. Fourth, multidisciplinary meet-
ings have become an increasingly common best practice in
organ transplantation [ 13]. Designing DST for decision meet-
ings therefore could potentially generalize beyond VADs to
include a number of other clinical decisions.
Next, we considered how to fit the DST comfortably within
the meetings. Drawing lessons from prior work [ 12,25], we
wanted to embed the DST into Electronic Medical Records
(EMR) to minimize the effort needed from clinicians to type
in patient information. We also wanted to augment clini-
cians’ paperwork to provide them additional motivation for
adoption. We therefore integrated the DST output into a
meeting slide generator, a system that automatically extracts
patient information from EMR and populates slides for the
decision meeting, which could be projected or printed.
We sketched what the DST predictions output might look
like. We iterated on the design based on feedback of two col-
laborating clinicians (an attending Cardiologist and a nurse
practitioner). The final design was a small line chart that
showed a patient’s predicted chance of survival (Figure 1). It
also showed the most likely causes of death, such as right
ventricular failure or renal failure.
We placed this chart in the top-right corner of the slide
summarizing an individual patient’s current state. The sub-
tlety was a deliberate choice toward achieving the right level
of unremarkableness. In the most common case, when the
DST agreed with the clinicians’ assessment, the visual dis-
play of the agreement could help clinicians gain trust in the
system without slowing them down. In the rare case that the
DST prediction conflicted with the clinicians’ assessment,
the DST could slow the decision down. Everyone attending
the meeting would see the disagreement. We speculated this
would apply social pressure on the senior physicians to ratio-
nalize and articulate their decision making. We speculated
it could also encourage the medical students, residents and
other mid-level clinicians to participate in the discussion
when they disagreed with the senior clinician’s decision. It
could allow them to disagree by pointing to the conflict with
the DST and not claiming that they personally knew more
than the senior physician.
We worked out the detailed contents of the slide with the
two collaborating clinicians. We also referenced the meeting
printouts and workup checklists currently in use.