Unremarkable AI CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland Uk
was unparalleled to any other artifact they had access to. A
prognostic DST that indicates post-surgery quality of life
could potentially amplify their voices.
There is not a way to present (my reasoning) formally.
It’s just me saying: ‘This, this and this’. [...] I think it’s
good to have something visual for anybody to see. It’s
like, OK. LOOK. Let’s slow down a bit here. (Nurse
practitioner)
Intricacies of Making DST Unremarkable
Both seasoned physicians and mid-levels expressed appre-
ciation for DSTs that could slow them down “only when
necessary". They liked this aspect of our design. However,
we could not easily conclude whether our specific design
had achieved this goal. Instead, clinicians’ discussions and
questions, which we will soon describe, depicted many un-
expected intricacies in this notion of the “right" level of
unremarkableness.
Challenges of Engaging Synthetic Patient Cases via Data. Clin-
icians shared that they could not draw on their experience of
making critical clinical decisions seeing only patient data on
paper. This presented the biggest barrier to assessing how
clinicians might respond to a conflicting DST prediction.
Patient history data alone did not give clinicians enough
confidence to make an implant decision. Physicians described
the meeting data as merely a surrogate for the actual patient.
The data did not allow them to see patients “ as a whole. ” They
stressed that to understand a patient clinically, they needed
to “look at the patient, talk to the patient, take care of the
patient. ” Social workers shared that they had not met with
this patient nor talked to their family. In our field evaluation,
presentations of the synthetic patient cases were always
followed by a long, awkward silence.
A very sick but highly motivated patient can do better
than their illness would otherwise be left them, com-
pared to a less sick, less motivated patient. These things
are hard to capture. The eyeball tests. (Surgeon, B6)
Clinicians also had wildly different readings into the same
DST prognostics. We presented the same two synthetic cases
with the same implant survival predictions to all participants.
Interestingly, they generated wildly different reactions and
interpretations of the cases. Some viewed the survival esti-
mate as implying that an implant would not work. “ Gee... VAD
is futile here. ” Others viewed the DST output as implying the
patient should be immediately implanted, before things got
worse. ‘ ‘We still have a chance. ” Few clinicians believed that
all VAD implant candidates would have a similar prognosis
as the synthetic case we presented: “ This chart is meaningless.
Every VAD candidate’s projection would look like this. ”
That the data was based upon synthetic patient cases made
any real discussion about the patient even more difficult.Instead, clinicians started to focus on the DST prognostics.
They probed on where the model comes from. It took a long
time for us to explain the data source and the ML mechanism
to clinicians with no ML experience and without a deep
understanding of statistics. It took even longer to explain it
to clinicians with statistical depth and ML experience. They
fixated on the fact that the ML systems’ performance was
not the focus of our assessment. The synthetic patient data
often turned this into an assessment of the DST’s quality in
the minds of many meeting participants.
Is the Model Validated by Clinical Trials? Clinicians com-
monly expressed a need to know more about the model’s
source and credibility. When they learned that the model
presented has not been rigorously validated through clinical
trials and published in prestigious clinical journals, they sug-
gested we were wasting their time. Physicians and surgeons
considered discussing an unvalidated model unethical; as
misleading as “ looking at a crystal ball ”. Others tended to
judge DST quality based on the journal it was published in.
Physicians also desired a model that had been validated
with data from their own hospital. “ It’s better to be home-
grown. ” Models should be published in a good journal and
then validated in a national scale study across several implant
centers. Some suggested including links to the peer reviewed
clinical trial within the DST output on the slide. It “ lends a
lot of weight to a clinical model ”.
Are the Predictions Based on Clinicians’ Best Efforts? Physi-
cians highlighted that the predictive models, regardless of
how well they measure medical uncertainties, would never
replace human, clinical decision-making. They viewed their
own decision making as focused on managing and reducing
uncertainties. “ If we think that we will be able to tell everybody
what to do based on a model, we ignore the fact that we also
have tools and mechanisms for dealing with the uncertainty
that is inherent when putting VADs in patients. ” (Cardiologist)
Many clinicians’ questions, as well as their discussion
around the DSTs, revealed a tension between what they
saw as the DST’s static view of patient conditions and the
clinicians’ desire and ability to also focus on future actions
and interventions. They wanted to know which modifiable
factors most influenced the DST predictions. They wanted
to be able to offer treatments that they could improve these
factors, thus increasing the likelihood of a positive surgical
outcome at some time in the future.
These predictions are (what will happen) despite our
best efforts, right? (VAD manager, C8)
Having an understanding of what’s driving the risk
[features that most influence the prediction] is very im-
portant for us to understand what is modifiable at that
patient. [...] Is it age or something we cannot change?