CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland Uk Q. Yang et al.
Designing a Right Level of Unremarkableness
The walk-up-and-use convention of current DSTs assume
clinicians will know when they need help. Our design chal-
lenges this convention by proposing the notion of Unremark-
able AI . Our unremarkable DST is designed to be situated
naturally in an existing decision-making routine and only
noticed when it might add value to the decision. DST’s in-
teraction should have a right level of unremarkableness, yet
the information it provides should significantly impact care.
Our field assessment illustrated some positive indicators
that making DSTs unremarkable helped reduce the resistance
clinicians commonly show towards clinical DSTs [ 6,19,25].
For example, we did not observe clinicians feeling threatened
or feeling they might be replaced by the technology. Clini-
cians appreciated that DSTs could inform their discussions,
“though the discussion is unlikely to center around the DST. "
While our DST was visually unremarkable, its very exis-
tence seems be, to an extent, transforming clinical decision
making. It introduced predictions into a culture rooted in
facts and statistical significance. Moreover, when predictive
risk models were used officially to measure patient risk and
clinician skills, clinicians’ decision making became centered
around these models. DSTs substantialized their performance
pressure in decision making.
These observations forced us to take a step and ask: What
is the preferred role for DST to play in clinical practice?
Where does a right level of unremarkableness lie? More re-
search is needed to find the right balance between DST aug-
menting decision-making in natural and intuitive ways and
transforming the nature of clinical decision-making. Under-
standing these tradeoffs should be a critical research question
in DST design and research.
Experience Prototyping DST In-Situ
Restricted access to the clinical environment is known to
impose fundamental challenges to iterative UX design and
evaluation. Our experience of conducting the field assess-
ment echoed this. Upon reflection, we identified several tac-
tics effective at reducing the risks of our one-shot design
evaluation:
(1)Designing a generalizable DST: The work flows and so-
cial contexts in clinical practices are complex and highly
divergent across hospitals. Therefore, generalizability is
a necessity for many DST designs. This work took a step
further than hospital-site generalizablility, designing a
DST that can work for a class of structurally similar deci-
sions (data-intensive, last-option surgical interventions).
A DST’s design and evaluation can become more produc-
tive than those dedicated to one specific clinical decision
as well as specific DST models;(2)Designing the evaluation methods for describing and
unpacking the complex, subtle, and multi-faceted nature
of experience, rather than explicitly measuring it;
(3)Using prototypes rather than functioning DST models.
This allowed us to probe various possible DST outputs
and to easily adjust our prototype to incorporate partici-
pant feedback.
The Impossibility of
Experience Prototyping Critical DSTs
Nonetheless, we encountered additional, seemingly-inevitable
challenges of assessing DST’s situated user experience. For
example, whether a DST design has indeed achieved a right
level of remarkableness was impossible to assess without
real patient data and fully functioning ML systems.
Clinicians need more than just synthetic patient cases to
connect with their own decision making. We speculate that
clinicians need to see one of their own patients’ data to really
assess the DST information design and to see what an actual
prediction would look like. This means early DST prototypes
will need actual patient data to assess their interactions in
context and their impact on care. This is currently impossible
in critical clinical cases due to ethics, policies and hospital
regulations.
Clinicians were unable to engage in a group discussion
without a fully functioning ML system. Clinicians described
using an unvalidated DST as unethical and misleading. They
suggested that a DST should be validated via randomized
clinical trials on both retrospective patients and prospective
patients, both at a national level and on their own hospital’s
patient population. This gives rise to a chicken-and-egg prob-
lem in our design assessment: Clinicians could not effectively
assess the DST design without a working DST that has been
validated on prospective patients; and validating a DST on
prospective patient data requires a DST design that has been
proven effective.
We suspect these challenges are likely to occur not only in
evaluating DSTs for artificial heart implant, but in assessing
DSTs for many other critical, high-consequence decisions as
well. As data-driven DSTs increasingly move out of research
labs and into critical decision making in the real world, we
encourage DST designers and researchers to join in mak-
ing these challenges explicit and investigating new design
assessment methods and tools to address them.
7 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by grants from NIH, National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) # 1R01HL122639-01A1.
The first author was also supported by the Center for Ma-
chine Learning and Health (CMLH) Fellowships in Digital
Health. We thank the participants in this work for their ded-
ication, time and valuable inputs.