CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland Uk Q. Yang et al.
Otherwise there is a lot of potential here. (Hospital C
decision meeting)
Clinicians did not seem to actively make the subtle but
critical distinction between features that were important
to predicting an outcome and features that are causal to
that outcome. For example, an observation that people are
carrying umbrellas can be used to predict that it will rain.
However, taking people’s umbrellas away will not prevent
rain. ML systems make predictions based on covariance of
features. They do not assess the causality of those features.
When prompted, clinicians claimed that this distinction is
“absolutely important ”. However, in our conversations, we
did not observe them distinguishing ML predictions from
general statistics. They seemed to strongly believed DSTs
should be able to distinguish causality from prediction and
that they should present only causal features. “ This is the
whole point of statistical processes. A DST model should address
that, right? "
There was a sense that if the DST predictions were not
based on causal factors, then the predictions should not be
presented at all. Clinicians described differentiating correla-
tion (predication) versus causality as a central part of their
decision making. For example, many patients being eval-
uated for left-ventricular VAD also have right-ventricular
heart failure. An important decision cardiologists must make
is whether the heart failure on the right was caused by the
left heart failure or if it is independent. Will fixing only the
left side also fix the right? Currently, clinicians speculate
by probing patients with medication. They try different left
heart medications and observe how the right side responds.
Clinicians wanted help: “ If you can help us understand [...]
which factors seem to be most dominant, or most closely asso-
ciated with certain outcomes, then that helps. ” They wanted
to know the causal links and features for individual cases.
Are Data-Driven Prognostics Facts OR Predictions? Clinicians
frequently asked us to clarify whether DST prognostics are
predictions that carry agency and subjectivity, or if predic-
tions are facts rooted in historic data. We sensed they wanted
to limit discussions to facts, including how heart failure has
played out for the patient they were treating and the statistics
from previous, similar cases. We observed resistance from
some clinicians toward the idea of showing predictions. Our
collaborating physicians, who created the synthetic cases
and helped us select contents for the slides suggested that
the DST output should be “ one statistical representation of
100 patients who are similar to him ” rather than a prediction
for this individual patient.
I think if you continue to call it “VAD projections” 65%,
people are going to poke holes at it. They are gonna try
to prove you wrong. This [DST projection] is just what
the historical outcomes were. But this guy is different,this guy has his own things that make him special.
(Collaborating cardiologist, hospital A)
Are the Predictions Individual Medicine OR Population Medicine?
Most clinicians share that they thought of DST output as an
“average ”. They seemed to find the notion of personalized
predictions difficult to grasp. Some voiced strong concerns
that using DST was the same as applying “ populational statis-
tics” to individual patient decision making. They felt this was
unethical. Others proposed that “ instead of having one model
that we apply to the entire population, we would have a group
of models. Those models predict for that group of patients. ”
(Surgeon, B4)
What Does “Now” Mean in DST Predictions? The DST vi-
sualized the patient outcome predictions, including life ex-
pectancy, estimated time until right heart failure, and likely
cause of death. For example, Figure 1 shows that the pa-
tient’s post-implant life expectancy is 21 days if a VAD was
implanted now, under the condition shown on the slides.
Clinicians were confused by this notion of “now” because
it was extremely unlikely that they would implant a patient
on the same day as the decision meeting. Is “ that 21 days
from today? If we are gonna lose the patient in 21 days [21
days following after implant], can we just wait? ”
DSTs Do Not Account For the X Factors. Clinicians said that
the DST would only ever be one factor in their decision
because of “ X factors ”; the many factors beyond a patient’s
condition that impacts the implant decision. One X factors
they spoke of was O/E ratio (observed-to-expected mortality
ratio). The O/E ratio is a rating that measures the surgeon
and care teams’ performance. Surgeons cared about keeping
a high rating. They described the implant decision for high-
risk patients as “ taking on new O/E ratio debts. ” This seemed
to strongly influence whether they take on another high-risk
patient. It seemed to depend strongly on how many patients
had recently had poor outcomes.
It’s not that we don’t help that [VAD candidate] patient,
but if we take this shot and do poorly, then we cannot
take on the next 10 patients like him. Because now we
got too much of a cluster of high-risk patients who’ve
done poorly, then we have to do some lower risk ones
before we can go back up [in O/E ratings]. Insurance
companies and Medicare and all that... they will mark
you. They may not pay. It all plays into the complex
factor for deciding who, especially sicker patients, we
would take a shot. (Surgeon, B6)
Some surgeons described that, for some cardiac surgeries
that have officially defined models used to rate surgeons and
care teams, their decision meetings had became centered
around risk models. This is not yet the case for VAD implants.