Unremarkable AI CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland Uk
were recorded using pen and paper. Interviews were audio-
recorded and transcribed. We analyzed our data using affinity
diagrams [10] and by performing thematic analysis.
Assessing Generalizability of the DST Design
We chose to situate the DST within slides used for decision
meetings partially because these meetings are best practices
in other critical medical domains as well. To gain some in-
sights as to if this design might generalize, we chose to probe
a small set of clinicians from other medical domains who
participate in these meetings.
To recruit these participants, we asked participants from
the VAD study to help us identify other clinical domains
and decisions that have interdisciplinary decision meetings.
We then interviewed 6 physicians whose practices include
decisions meetings for pediatric surgery, pediatric critical
care, adult cardio-thoracic surgery, internal medicine emer-
gency care, orthopedic surgery, and obstetrics/gynecology.
We audio-recorded, transcribed and analyzed these inter-
views using the same methods as we used for our VAD par-
ticipants.
5 DESIGN ASSESSMENT FINDINGS
We first offer an overview of observations from the individual
sites, describing the different cultures, facilities, and practices.
We then report findings across the three sites related to the
aforementioned assessment goals: the likelihood of encoun-
tering DST during decision-making, the acceptance of DST,
the right level of remarkableness, and finally, generalizability
to other kinds of medical decisions.
Overview
Hospital A was the least technologically advanced. They
recently transitioned from paper-based to electronic clinical
records. Phone signals generally did not penetrate the build-
ing, built in the late 1800s. Many common web services, such
as Google search, were blocked on their internal network.
The weekly meeting took place in a long, grandiose, turn-
of-the-century board room. This contained one long, 40-seat
table above which hung four large chandeliers. At one end
of the table (the “head” of the table) there was a portable, low
resolution projector. They sat according to an unspoken seat
chart based on clinical role hierarchy. Physicians sat near
the head end, and a small group of these physicians would
present the individual cases. Nurses sat near the middle. So-
cial workers and others sat farthest from the projector. Only
participants sitting near the head of the table participated in
the discussion. The content on the projector screen was also
too small to read since most sat far from the screen. They all
interacted with bulky printouts of EMR data for each patient
discussed.Hospital B had in-house statisticians dedicated to outcome
analysis and patient risk modeling. The physicians and this
site were also actively involved in VAD risk modeling re-
search. Interestingly, when it came to using a risk model to
inform their own implant decisions, they described them-
selves as “ very minimalist despite all these interests in ML. ”
Cardiologists and surgeons led implant decision making both
within and outside of the implant meetings. Meeting partic-
ipants did not vote on how to proceed. Hospital B did not
provide us authorization to observe its decision meeting.
Hospital C was more technology-friendly. The meeting
room had large projector, which most participants could
read. In addition, participants had access to a printout of
the presented materials. One program manager and two
mid-level clinicians arrived more than 40 minutes before
the meeting to set up the computer, projector, and remote
conference connections. As the presenting physicians spoke,
a seasoned nurse practitioner operated the computer, pulling
out and zooming into relevant patient information from EMR.
This nurse practitioner had been performing this role for
more than 5 years. Physicians and mid-levels used laptops
to search for relevant information in the EMR or online and
to add items to their digital to-do lists. Many more people
engaged in discussing the patients. Following the discussion
of each patient, all clinicians present voted on the next step.
Hospital C had previously experimented with bringing
computational predictions into their meetings. Cardiologists
chose a model that had been nationally validated through
five randomized clinical trials. They had a nurse practitioner
input all of the data for each patient discussed and show
the DST prediction in the decision meeting. One year later,
they stopped this practice because two recent journal articles
reported that the models used were “ horribly mis-calibrated ”.
“That was a lot of work to type in all that sh-t and generate
that number, and that’s not that helpful. ” Their EMR held four
other implant outcome prediction models, which predicted
things such as the chance of depression. However, the clin-
icians never used these models, stating that each required
manually entry of all of a patient’s data.
Likelihood of Encountering DST in Workflow
Our observations suggested that most clinicians involved
in the VAD implant decision would likely encounter the
DST output if it was included as part of an individual pa-
tient’s information presented at the decision meeting. All
three facilities hosted a weekly implant decision meeting.
Clinicians of all ranks and roles attended, ranging from sea-
soned surgeons to residents, to nurse practitioners to social
workers to palliative care coordinators. Although the weight
that the meetings carried for influencing an implant deci-
sion appeared to vary across the three sites, the occurrence