Unremarkable AI: Fitting Intelligent Decision Support
into Critical, Clinical Decision-Making Processes
Qian Yang
HCI Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
yangqian@cmu.eduAaron Steinfeld
Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
steinfeld@cmu.eduJohn Zimmerman
HCI Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
johnz@cs.cmu.edu
ABSTRACT
Clinical decision support tools (DST) promise improved health-
care outcomes by offering data-driven insights. While effec-
tive in lab settings, almost all DSTs have failed in practice.
Empirical research diagnosed poor contextual fit as the cause.
This paper describes the design and field evaluation of a rad-
ically new form of DST. It automatically generates slides for
clinicians’ decision meetings with subtly embedded machine
prognostics. This design took inspiration from the notion of
Unremarkable Computing , that by augmenting the users’ rou-
tines technology/AI can have significant importance for the
users yet remain unobtrusive. Our field evaluation suggests
clinicians are more likely to encounter and embrace such a
DST. Drawing on their responses, we discuss the importance
and intricacies of finding the right level of unremarkable-
ness in DST design, and share lessons learned in prototyping
critical AI systems as a situated experience.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Human-centered computing →User centered design ;
KEYWORDS
Decision Support Systems, Healthcare, User Experience.
ACM Reference Format:
Qian Yang, Aaron Steinfeld, and John Zimmerman. 2019. Unre-
markable AI: Fitting Intelligent Decision Support into Critical,
Clinical Decision-Making Processes. In CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems Proceedings (CHI 2019), May 4–9,
2019, Glasgow, Scotland Uk. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300468
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland Uk
©2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5970-2/19/05. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.33004681 INTRODUCTION
The idea of leveraging machine intelligence in healthcare
in the form of decision support tools (DSTs) has fascinated
healthcare and AI researchers for decades. These tools often
promise insights on patient diagnosis, treatment options, and
likely prognosis. With the adoption of electronic medical
records and the explosive technical advances in machine
learning (ML) in recent years, now seems a perfect time for
DSTs to impact healthcare practice.
Interestingly, almost all these tools have failed when mi-
grating from research labs to clinical practice in the past
30 years [ 5,7,8]. In a review of deployed DSTs, healthcare
researchers ranked the lack of HCI considerations as the
most likely reason for failure [ 11,22]. This includes a lack
of consideration for clinicians’ workflow and the collabora-
tive nature of clinical work. The interaction design of most
clinical decision support tools instead assumes that individ-
ual clinicians will recognize when they need help, walk up
and use a system that is separate from the electronic health
record, and that they want and will trust the system’s output.
We are collaborating with biomedical researchers on the
design of a DST supporting the decision to implant an ar-
tificial heart. The artificial heart, VAD (ventricular assist
device), is an implantable electro-mechanical device used to
partially replace heart function. For many end-stage heart
failure patients who are not eligible for or able to receive a
heart transplant, VADs offer the only chance to extend their
lives. Unfortunately, many patients who received VADs die
shortly after the implant [ 2]. In this light, a DST that can
predict the likely trajectory a patient will take post-implant,
should help identify the patients who are mostly likely to
benefit from the therapy.
We draw insight from a field study investigating the VAD
decision processes, searching for opportunities where ML
might help [ 25]. The findings revealed that clinicians are
unlikely to encounter or to actively engage with a DST for
help at the time and place of decision making. For most
cases, they did not find the implant decision challenging;
thus, they had no desire for computational support. In ad-
dition, the extremely hierarchical healthcare culture strati-
fied senior physicians who make implant decisions and thearXiv:1904.09612v1  [cs.HC]  21 Apr 2019