CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland Uk Q. Yang et al.
of the meetings was one of the few events that happened
everywhere.
These meetings offered one of the extremely few situa-
tions where senior clinicians actively discussed decisions
in proximity of a computer. Meetings in all three hospitals
had a shared computer projecting patient information. Two
hospitals projected dedicated meeting materials. The other
projected patient profiles from the EMR. Clinicians described
the other key decision points as “just talk on the fly” with
no EMR access or paper records in hand. The other decision
points most often only included attending physicians and
surgeons. “Everything is happening live.” Mid-level clini-
cians, who spend more time with each individual patient, did
not participate in the decisions made outside of the meeting.
Acceptance of DST in Decision Meetings
None of our interview participants expressed any resistance
to the including DST output within the context of the deci-
sion meeting. One site (Hospital C) had already made the
effort to manually include DST data into their meeting but
had abandoned this practice due to their loss of confidence
in its quality. Seasoned physicians and surgeons voiced their
appreciation for what a prognostic DST might bring, stating
that it would “ give its perspective ” and offer a chance for an
“occasional recalibration. ” Clinicians also shared that making
an objective decision could sometimes be hard. The decision
to not implant was usually a death sentence for a patient.
“When I really like this patient, really want to help him or her,
it sometimes helps to get a more factual view. ”
Seasoned physicians shared that their dream DST should
play a role similar to mid-level clinicians. They should pro-
vide additional context for the seasoned physicians’ decision.
The DST could provide additional context and a different
perspective to the senior physicians. They recognized the
value a DST might bring from its statistical consideration
across many cases. “ The value is you are looking at thousands
of cases, I’m looking at 100 and overweighting the last three I
saw.” They also shared that input from mid-levels was not
always “ taken really into account ”.
Mid-levels agreed they only inform and support the dis-
cussions. They did not make decisions.
My role in selecting patients for VAD... hmm. I don’t
select patients. But I do talk about it... We are there to
help discuss patients. (Nurse practitioner, B2)
Mid-level clinicians enthusiastically welcomed the idea of
a decision meeting slide generator. They envisioned a num-
ber of possible benefits. They shared that the slide generator
would automate work that is not currently billable. At hospi-
tal A and B, meeting slides were prepared by staff who had
little to no medical training. Physicians could get frustrated
with the result, characterizing the unfiltered materials asbeing prepared by “amateurs.” These staff members could
not personalize patient presentations because they could
not risk skipping information that might prove to be critical.
Mid-levels felt they could benefit from the automation and
seasoned physicians felt they would benefit by the removal
of the copious, irrelevant data being pulled out of the EMR.
Mid-level clinicians viewed the slides as a potentially im-
portant vehicle for communicating their opinions to physi-
cians. In all three hospitals, senior physicians set the agenda
for decision meetings. They decided which patients to present,
and during the meeting, they called out the information that
they felt was important enough to discuss. This hierarchical
culture was well captured by the design of a custom patient
review tool at hospital C. Two VAD coordinators customized
a patient review dashboard within EMR in order to help them-
selves better track medical tests and share results within the
team. Although cardiologists and surgeons rarely used the
tool, they controlled which pieces of information could be
placed on the dashboard and which elements would not be
included when the patient case was classified as urgent.
Mid-levels often doubted that their voice was heard or
that their expertise was considered. They were hesitant to
directly disagree with a physician. They described the sit-
uation as more complicated than just the power dynamics.
They shared that the cardiologists were incentivized to im-
plant more patients and to implant sicker patients. They
found themselves often advocating for patient mortality (let
the patient die). Mid-levels felt their opinions focused on
post-implant quality of life. Unlike the physicians, mid-levels
worked intimately “ with all the problems that can come from
a patient that maybe shouldn’t have been implanted. ” They
noted there was no right or wrong answer between length
of life and quality of life. They shared it was often hard to
argue with great confidence that letting patients die was
better than offering them a small chance to live. In such situ-
ations, mid-levels frequently cited “ you never know what will
happen ” as a reason to not to pursue further discussion with
attending physicians. Some shared that over time, they had
slowly removed themselves from the decision making.
There is risk stratification for each patient, but I don’t
know... It’s like, we talk about it, but I don’t know if it’s
really taken really into account. (Nurse practitioner,
B2)
Mid-levels consider the ability to organize the contents
of meeting slides as one way to increase their influence.
Meeting slides provide additional, visual presence they could
use in support of the facts they felt were important. This
would make it less like they were only sharing an opinion
with the physicians. The meeting slides could be facts in a
space where only the seasoned physicians’ opinions carried
any weight. They felt the formality the meeting slides carried