CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland Uk Q. Yang et al.
Figure 1: The decision meeting slide design. We designed a DST that automatically generates decision-meeting slides for clin-
icians with subtly embedded machine prognostics at the top right corner.
We wanted to finalize the design by populating with real
patient data. However, a variety of policies and legal regu-
lations would not allow this. As a work-around, we asked
our clinical collaborators to help us populate the slides with
synthetic patient cases. Interestingly, they found it very chal-
lenging to generate a prototypical patient case including
dozens of vital signs and test results. They instead selected
elements across several of their former cases, removing iden-
tifiable demographic information and molding parts of the
medical condition to disguise the identity.
In our final design (Figure 1), the DST outputs are in the
top right corner of the slide, next to a summarized patient
history visualization. Patient test results are categorized and
put in the center. The patient demographics and links to
social and financial evaluations are on the left.
4 DESIGN ASSESSMENT
We had several questions we wanted to answer with our as-
sessment, including: (1) Would clinicians naturally encounter
the DST within their current workflow? (2) Would clinicians
accept computational decision support in the public context
of the meeting? (3) Does placing the prediction in the corner
present the right amount of unremarkability? Specifically,
does the DST get ignored when its predictions align with
the clinicians’ judgment, and would it slow decisions down
when its output conflicts with clinicians?
Assessment in VAD Implant Centers
We gained access to three hospitals that regularly perform
VAD implantation, all within the US. Two were sites from
our formative field study and one was new. The facilities
varied geographically and in scale. The smallest we studied
performs about 40 VAD implants a year; the largest performs
over 100.
We wanted to assess our design within the context of an
actual implant decision meeting in order to observe whetherit impacted discussion. Unfortunately, this proved to be im-
practical. None of the sites would allow us to present slides
showing information for the patients they were currently
implanting. All felt this could impact the life and death de-
cision. The clinicians doing the VAD implants were quite
busy. They would only agree to interact with a single design.
They did not have the time for us to make revisions and
then revisit. Finally, one of the sites had a specific policy
preventing us from observing the decision meeting. They
would only participate in one-on-one interviews.
In reaction to these restrictions, we re-designed the as-
sessment process with the goal of making the most use of
our participant pool within one round of assessment. We
carried out all following procedures in hospital C. In hospi-
tal B, we carried out all except (3) presenting at a decision
meeting. In hospital A, we carried out all procedures except
(4) interviewing all physicians and surgeons.
(1) At each site, we first interviewed the mid-levels to
understand their practice around the decision meeting, and to
probe the DST design’s fit in their respective hospitals. When
necessary, we adjusted the designs to fit specific hospital’s
routine practice;
(2) Our research collaborator at each site recommended
one attending physician to be our confederate. We conducted
interviews with them, discussing the DST design, and con-
firming there was no glaring mismatch between the design
and the practice at their respective sites;
(3) The confederate physician presented the patient case
with the DST on display in the decision meeting. We observed
clinicians’ responses and discussions;
(4) Finally, we interviewed the rest of the VAD team to
further individually discuss the DST design.
In total, we interviewed nine attending cardiologists or sur-
geons and eight mid-level clinicians. Each interview lasted
for at least one hour. The DST design was presented in two
hospitals’ multidisciplinary decision meetings. Field notes