Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:13
Fig. 2. The AI industry holds a connecting position to organize multi-disciplinary practitioners, including
users, academia, and government in the establishment of trustworthy AI. In Section 3, we discuss the cur-
rent approaches toward trustworthy AI in the five main stages of the lifecycle of an AI system, i.e., data
preparation, algorithmdesign,development, deployment, andmanagement.
the comprehensive justification of each concrete requirement of trustworthy AI. Its realization is
composedofevaluationsoftheserequirementsoverthelifecycleofanAIsystem[ 272].Hence,the
evaluationofaccountabilityisreflectedbytheextenttowhichtheserequirementsoftrustworthi-
nessand theirimpactcanbe evaluated.
3 TRUSTWORTHY AI: A SYSTEMATIC APPROACH
We have introduced the concepts relevant to trustworthy AI in Section 2. Since the early 2010s,
diverse AI stakeholders have made efforts to enhance AI trustworthiness. In Section Ain our
appendix, we briefly review their recent practices in multi-disciplinary areas, including research,
engineering,andregulation,andstudiesthatareexemplarsofindustrialapplications,includingon
facerecognition,autonomousdriving,and NaturalLanguageProcessing(NLP) .Thesepractices
have made important progress in improving AI trustworthiness.However, we find that this work
remains insufficient from the industrial perspective. As depicted in Section 1and Figure 2,t h eA I
industryholdsapositiontoconnectmulti-disciplinaryfieldsfortheestablishmentoftrustworthy
AI.Thispositionrequiresthatindustrialstakeholderslearnandorganizethesemulti-disciplinary
approachesandensuretrustworthinessthroughoutthelifecycle ofAI.
Inthissection,weprovideabriefsurveyoftechniquesusedforbuildingtrustworthyAIproducts
and organize them across the lifecycle of product development from an industrial perspective.
As shown by the solid-lined boxes in Figure 2, the lifecycle of the development of a typical AI
productcanbepartitionedintodatapreparation,algorithmdesign,development–deployment,and
management [ 26]. We review several critical algorithms, guidelines, and government regulations
thatarecloselyrelevanttothetrustworthinessofAIproductsineachstageoftheirlifecycle,with
the aim of providing a systematic approach and an easy-to-follow guide to practitioners from
varyingbackgroundstoestablishtrustworthyAI.Theapproachesandliteraturementionedinthis
sectionaresummarized in Figure 3and Table 1.
3.1 Data Preparation
Current AI technology is largely data driven. The appropriate management and exploitation of
data not only improves the performance of an AI system but also affects its trustworthiness. In
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.