Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:23
in terms of different aspects of interest, benchmarking (a.k.a. performance testing in software en-
gineering)isoftenappliedtoensuresystemperformanceandstabilitywhenthesecharacteristics
can beautomatically measured.
Robustness is an important aspect of trustworthiness that is relatively amenable to automatic
evaluation. References [ 88,153] introduced a suite of black-box and white-box attacks to auto-
maticallyevaluatetherobustnessofAIsystems.Itcanpotentiallybeperformedasasanitycheck
before such systems are deployed to affect millions of users. Software fairness has also been a
concernsinceconventionalsoftwaretesting[ 56,127].CriteriaforAIsystemshavebeenstudiedto
spot issues of unfairness by investigating the correlation among sensitive attributes, system out-
comes,andthetruelabelwhenapplicabletowell-designeddiagnosticdatasets[ 327].Well-curated
datasetsandmetricshavebeenproposedintheliteraturetoevaluateperformanceonfairnessmet-
ricsthatareof interestfordifferent tasks[ 40,123,307].
More recently, there has been growing interest in benchmarking explainability when models
output explanations in NLP applications. For instance, Reference [ 238] asks crowd workers to
annotate salient pieces of text that lead to their belief that the text is hateful or offensive, and
examines how well model-predicted importance fits human annotations. Reference [ 93] instead
introduces partial perturbations to the text for human annotators, and observes if the system’s
explanationsmatchperturbationsthatchangehumandecisions.Inthemeantime,Reference[ 267]
reported that explainability benchmarking remains relatively difficult, because visual stimuli are
higherdimensionaland continuous.
3.3.3 Development by Simulation. While benchmarks serve to evaluate AI systems in terms of
predictivebehaviorgivenstaticdata,thebehaviorofmanysystemsisdeeplyrootedintheirinter-
actionswiththeworld.Forexample,benchmarkingautonomousvehiclesystemsonstaticscenar-
ios is insufficient to help us evaluate their performance on dynamic roadways. For these systems,
simulation oftenplaysan importantrolein ensuringtheirtrustworthinessbeforedeployment.
Robotics is a sub-fields of AI where simulations are most commonly used. Control systems for
robots can be compared and benchmarked in simulated environments such as Gazebo [ 192], Mu-
JoCo [324], and VerifAI [ 103]. Similarly, simulators for autonomous driving vehicles have been
widelyused,includingCARLA[ 102],TORCS[ 359],CarSim[ 42],andPRESCAN[ 323].Thesesoft-
wareplatformssimulatetheenvironmentinwhichrobotsandvehiclesoperateaswellastheactu-
ationofcontrolsonthesimulatedrobotsorcars.InNLP,especiallyconversationalAI,simulators
arewidelyusedtosimulateuserbehaviortotestsystemabilityandfulfilluserneedsbyengaging
in a dialog [ 205]. These simulators can help automatically ensure the performance of AI systems
in an interactiveenvironment anddiagnose issuesbeforetheirdeployment.
Despite the efficiency, flexibility, and replicability afforded by software simulators, they of-
ten still fall short of perfectly simulating constraints faced by the AI system when deployed as
well as environmental properties or variations in them. For AI systems that are deployed on em-
bedded or otherwise boxed hardware, it is important to understand the system behavior when
theyarerunonthehardwareusedinreal-worldscenarios.Hardware-in-the-loopsimulationscan
help developers understand system performance when it is run on chips, sensors, and actuators
in a simulated environment, and is particularly helpful for latency- and power-critical systems
like autonomous driving systems [ 50,54]. By taking real-world simulations a step further, one
can also construct controlled real-world environments for fully integrated AI systems to roam
around in (e.g., test tracks for self-driving cars with road signs and dummy obstacles). This pro-
vides more realistic measurements and assurances of performance before releasing such systems
to users.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.