177:12 B. Li et al.
In addition to internal privacy protection within an enterprise, recent developments in data
exchange across AI stakeholders has yielded new challenges for privacy protection. For example,
when training a medical AI model, each healthcare institution typically only has data from the
local residents, which might be insufficient. This leads to the demand to collaborate with other
institutionsandjointlytrainamodel[ 299]withoutleakingprivateinformationacrossinstitutions.
Existing protection techniques penetrate the entire lifecycle of AI systems to address rising
concerns about privacy. In Section 3, we briefly review techniques to protect the privacy in data
collection and processing, model training (Section 3.2.5), and model deployment (Section 3.4.4).
The realization of privacy protection is also related to other aspects of trustworthy AI. For ex-
ample, the transparency principle is widely used in AI systems. It informs users of personal data
collection and enables privacy settings. In the development of privacy-preserving ML software,
such as federated learning (e.g., FATE and PySyft), open source is a common practice to increase
transparencyandcertifytheprotectivenessofthesystem.
Evaluation. Laws for data privacy protection like the GDPR require data protection impact
assessment(DPIA) ifanydataprocessingposesarisktodataprivacy.Measureshavetobetaken
to address the risk-related concerns and demonstrate compliance with the law [ 10]. Data privacy
protectionprofessionalsandotherstakeholdersneedtobe involved toevaluateit.
Previous research has devised various mathematical methods to formally verify the protective-
ness of privacy-preserving approaches. Typical verification can be conducted under assumptions
such as semi-honest security, which implies all participating parties follow a protocol to perform
thecomputationaltaskbutmaytrytoinferthedataofotherpartiesfromtheintermediateresults
of computation (e.g., Reference [ 215]). A stricter assumption is the malicious attack assumption,
whereeachparticipatingpartyneednotfollowthegivenprotocol,andcantakeanypossiblemea-
suretoinfer thedata [ 214].
In practical scenarios, the empirical evaluation of the risk of leakage of privacy is usually con-
sidered [283,360]. For example, Reference [ 283] showed that 15 demographic attributes were suf-
ficienttorender99%oftheparticipantsunique.Anassessmentofsuchdatare-identificationintu-
itively reflectsprotectivenesswhendesigninga datacollectionplan.
2.7 Accountability: A Holistic Evaluation throughout the above Requirements
We have described a series of requirements to build trustworthy AI. Accountability addresses the
regulation on AI systems to follow these requirements. With gradually improving legal and in-
stitutional norms on AI governance, accountability becomes a crucial factor for AI to sustainably
benefitsocietywithtrustworthiness[ 100].
Accountability runs through the entire lifecycle of an AI system and requires that the stake-
holders of an AI system be obligated to justify their design, implementation, and operation as
aligned with human values. At the level of executive, this justification is realized by considerate
productdesign,reliabletechniquearchitecture,aresponsibleassessmentofthepotentialimpacts,
andthedisclosureofinformationontheseaspects[ 209].Notethatintermsofinformationdisclo-
sure, transparency contributes the basic mechanism used to facilitate the accountability of an AI
system[94,100].
Fromaccountabilityisalsoderivedtheconceptofauditability,whichrequiresthejustificationof
asystemtobereviewed,assessed,andaudited[ 209].Algorithmicauditingisarecognizedapproach
toensuretheaccountabilityofanAIsystemandassessitsimpactonmultipledimensionsofhuman
values[272].SeealsoSection 3.5.2.
Evaluation. Checklist-based assessments have been studied to qualitatively evaluate account-
ability and auditability [ 10,315]. As mentioned in this section, we consider accountability to be
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.