Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:11
ofqualifiedcandidatesamongmaleandfemalecandidates(knownas testfairness [80,147]).
Thisisclosely relatedtomodel calibration[ 266].
Note that these principles are mutually exclusive under certain circumstances (e.g., indepen-
dence and separation cannot both hold when the sensitive variable is correlated with the ground
truth). Reference [ 187] has discussed the tradeoff between various fairness metrics. Furthermore,
Reference [ 84] advocated an extended view of these principles, where the utility of the predicted
and true outcomes is factored into consideration (e.g., the risk and cost of recidivism in violent
crimes compared with the cost of detention), and can be correlated with the sensitive variables.
We referthereaderto thiswork fora more detaileddiscussion.
Evaluation. Despite the simplicity of the abstract criteria outlined in the previous section, fair-
ness can manifest in many different forms following these principles (see Reference [ 66,356]f o r
comprehensive surveys, and Reference [ 228] for AI ethics’ checklists). We categorize metrics of
fairness according to the properties of models and tasks to help the reader choose appropriate
onesfor theirapplication:
Discretevs.continuousvariables. Thetaskoutput,modelprediction,andsensitivevariables
can all be discrete (e.g., classification and nationality), ranked (e.g., search engines, recommen-
dationsystems),orcontinuous(e.g.,regression,classifierscores,age,etc.)innature.Anempirical
correlationofdiscretevariablescanbeevaluatedwithstandardstatisticaltools,suchascorrelation
coefficients(Pearson/Kendall/Spearman)and AnalysisofVariance(ANOVA) ,whilecontinuous
variables oftenfurtherrequirebinning,quantization,orlossfunctionsto evaluatefairness[ 66].
Lossfunction. Thecriteriaoffairnessoftencannotbeexactlysatisfiedgiventhelimitationsof
empiricaldata(e.g.,demographicparitybetweengroupswhenhiringonlythreecandidates).Loss
functions are useful in this case to gauge how far we are from empirical fairness. The choice of
loss function can be informed by the nature of the variables of concern: If the variables represent
probabilities, then likelihood ratios are more meaningful (e.g., disparate impact [ 117]); for real-
valued regression, the difference between mean distances to the true value aggregated over each
group might be used instead to indicate whether we model one group significantly better than
another[ 59].
Multiple sensitive variables. In many applications, the desirable AI system should be fair to
more than one sensitive variables (e.g., the prediction of risk posed by a loan should be fair in
terms of both gender and ethnicity; inter alia, a recommendation system should ideally be fair
to both users and recommendees). One can either form a tradeoff of “marginal fairness” between
these variables when they are considered one at a time, i.e., evaluate the fairness of each vari-
able separately and combine the loss functions for final evaluation, or explore the full Cartesian
product [ 307] of all variables to achieve joint fairness, which typically requires more empirical
observationsbuttendsto satisfystrongerethicalrequirements.
2.6 Privacy Protection
Privacy protection mainly refers to protecting against unauthorized use of the data that can di-
rectly or indirectly identify a person or household. These data cover a wide range of information,
including name, age, gender, face image, fingerprints, and so on. Commitment to privacy protec-
tion is regarded as an important factor determining the trustworthiness of an AI system. The
recently released AI ethics guidelines also highlight privacy as one of the key concerns [ 9,178].
Governmentagenciesareformulatingagrowingnumberofpoliciestoregulatetheprivacyofdata.
TheGeneral Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) is a representative legal framework, which
pushesenterprisestotakeeffectivemeasuresfor userprivacyprotection.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.