177:6 B. Li et al.
2.2 Generalization
GeneralizationhaslongbeenasourceofconcerninMLmodels.Itrepresentsthecapabilitytodistill
knowledge from limited training data to make accurate predictions regarding unseen data [ 133].
Although generalization is not a frequently mentioned direction in the context of trustworthy
AI, we find that its impact on AI trustworthiness should not be neglected and deserves specific
discussion.Ontheonehand,generalizationrequiresthatAIsystemsmakepredictionsonrealistic
data, even on domains or distributions on which they are not trained [ 133]. This significantly
affectsthereliabilityandriskofpracticalsystems.Ontheotherhand,AImodelsshouldbeableto
generalizewithouttheneedtoexhaustivelycollectandannotatelargeamountsofdataforvarious
domains [ 343,391], so that the deployment of AI systems in a wide range of applications is more
affordableand sustainable.
InthefieldofML,thecanonicalresearchongeneralizationtheoryhasfocusedontheprediction
of unseen data, which typically share the same distribution as the training data [ 133]. Although
AI models can achieve a reasonable accuracy on training datasets, it is known that a gap (a.k.a
generalization gap) exists between their training and testing accuracies. Approaches in different
areas, ranging from statistic learning to deep learning, have been studied to analyze this problem
andenhancethemodelgeneralization.Typicalrepresentativeslikecross-validation,regularization,
anddata augmentationcan befound inmany MLtextbooks[ 133].
Thecreationofamoderndata-drivenAImodelrequiresalargeamountofdataandannotations
in the training stage. This leads to a high cost for manufacturers and users for re-collecting and
re-annotating data to train the model for each task. The cost highlights the need to generalize
the knowledge of a model to different tasks, which not only reduces data cost but also improves
model performance in many cases. Various directions of research have been explored to address
knowledge generalization under different scenarios and configurations within the paradigm of
transferlearning[ 255,350].We review therepresentativeapproachesinSection 3.2.2.
TheinclusiveconceptofgeneralizationiscloselyrelatedtootheraspectsofAItrustworthiness,
especiallyrobustness.InthecontextofML,therobustnessagainstdistributionalshifts(Section 2.1)
is also considered a problem of generalization. This implies that the requirements of robustness
and generalization have some overlapping aspects. The relationship between adversarial robust-
ness and generalization is more complicated. As demonstrated in Reference [ 362], an algorithm
that is robust against small perturbations has better generalization. Recent research [ 271,331],
however, has noted that improving robustness by adversarial training may reduce the testing ac-
curacyandleadstoworsegeneralization.Toexplainthisphenomenon,Reference[ 116]hasargued
thattheadversarialrobustnesscorrespondstodifferentdatadistributionsthatmayhurtamodel’s
generalization.
Evaluation. Benchmarkingontestdatasetswithvariousdistributionsisawidelyusedapproach
toevaluatethegeneralizationofanAImodelinrealisticscenarios.Asummaryofcommonlyused
datasets and benchmarks for domain generalization can be found in Reference [ 391] and covers
thetasksof objectrecognition,actionrecognition,segmentation,andface recognition.
In terms of theoretical evaluation, past ML studies have developed rich approaches to measure
the bounds of a model’s generalization error. For example, Rademacher complexity [ 35]i sc o m -
monlyusedtodeterminehowwellamodelcanfitarandomassignmentofclasslabels.Inaddition,
theVapnik–Chervonenkis (VC) dimension [ 337] is a measure of the capacity/complexity of a
learnablefunctionset.A largernumber ofVC dimensions indicatesahighercapacity.
Advances in the DNN has led to new developments in the theory of generalization. Reference
[377] observed that modern deep learning models can achieve a generalization gap despite their
massive capacity. This phenomenon has led to academic discussions on the generalization of the
Deep Neural Network (DNN) [23,39]. For example, Reference [ 39] examined generalization
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.