177:26 B. Li et al.
Auditing might involve the entire or selective parts of the lifecycle of an AI system. A compre-
hensive framework of internal auditing can be found in Reference [ 272]. The means of auditing
might include interviews, documented artifacts, checklists, code review, testing, and impact as-
sessment. For example, documentation like product requirement documents, model cards [ 246],
and datasheets [ 129] serve as important references to understand the principle alignment during
development. Checklists are widely used as a straightforward qualitative approach to evaluate
fairness [ 228], transparency [ 292], and reproducibility [ 263]. Quantitative testing also serves as
a powerful approach and has been successfully executed to audit fairness in, for example, the
Gender Shade study [ 58]. Inspiredby the EU’s European Union’s Data Protection Impact As-
sessment(DPIA) ,theconceptof Algorithmic ImpactAssessmenthasbeenproposedto evaluate
theclaimsoftrustworthinessanddiscovernegativeeffects[ 277].Besidestheaboverepresentatives,
designsof approachesto algorithmicauditingcanbe foundin References[ 290,356].
3.5.3 Cooperation and Information Sharing. A ss h o w ni nF i g u r e 2, the establishment of trust-
worthyAIrequirescooperationbetweenstakeholders.Fromtheperspectiveofindustry,coopera-
tionwithacademiaenablesthefastapplicationofnewtechnologytoenhancetheperformanceof
the product and reduce the risk posed by it. Cooperation with regulators certifies the products as
appropriately following the principles of trustworthiness. Moreover, cooperation between indus-
trialenterpriseshelpsaddressconsensus-basedproblems,suchasdataexchange,standardization,
andecosystembuilding[ 27].RecentpracticesofAIstakeholdershaveshowntheefficacyofcoop-
erationinvariousdimensions.We summarize thesepracticesin thefollowingaspectsbelow.
Collaborativeresearchanddevelopment. Collaborationhasbeenasuccessfuldrivingforce
in the development of AI technology. To promote research on AI trustworthiness, stakeholders
are setting-up various forms of collaboration,such as researchworkshopson trustworthyAI and
cooperativeprojectslike DARPAXAI[ 144].
Trustworthy data exchange. The increasing business value of data raises the demand to ex-
change them across companies in various scenarios (e.g., the medical AI system in Section 2.6).
Beyond privacy-based computing techniques, the cooperation between data owners, technology
providers, and regulators is making progress in establishing an ecosystem of data exchange, and
solvingproblemssuchas datapricingand data authorization.
Cooperative development of regulation. Active participation in the development of stan-
dards and regulations serves as an important means for academia, the industry, and regulators to
align theirrequirementsand situations.
Incident sharing. The AI community has recently recognized incident sharing as an effective
approachtohighlightandpreventpotentialriskstoAIsystems[ 57].TheAIIncidentDatabase[ 91]
providesaninspiringexampleforstakeholderstosharenegativeAIincidentssothattheindustry
canavoid similar problems.
3.6 TrustAIOps: A Continuous Workflow toward Trustworthiness
TheproblemoftrustworthyAIarisesfromthefastdevelopmentofAItechnologyanditsemerging
applications.AItrustworthinessisnotawell-studiedstaticbartoreachbysomespecificsolutions.
The establishment of trustworthiness is a dynamic procedure. We have witnessed the evolution
of different dimensions of trustworthiness over the past decade [ 178]. For example, research on
adversarial attacks has increased concerns regarding adversarial robustness. The applications of
safety-criticalscenarioshaverenderedmorestringenttherequirementsofaccountabilityofanAI
system.ThedevelopmentofAIresearch,theevolutionoftheformsofAIproducts,andthechang-
ingperspectivesofsocietyimplythecontinualreformulationoftherequirementsofandsolutions
to trustworthiness. Therefore, we argue that beyond the requirements of an AI product, the AI
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.