177:4 B. Li et al.
Fig. 1. The relation between different aspects of AI trustworthiness discussed in this survey. Note that im-
plicit interactionwidely exists between aspects,andwe cover onlyrepresentativeexplicit interactions.
In this section, we illustrate the motivation for and definition of each requirement. We also sur-
vey approaches to the evaluation of each requirement. It should also be noted that the selected
requirementsarenotorthogonal,andsomeofthemarecloselycorrelated.Weexplaintherelation-
ships with the corresponding requirements in this section. We also use Figure 1to visualize the
relationshipsbetweenaspects,includingtradeoffs,contributions,andmanifestation.
2.1 Robustness
Ingeneral,robustnessreferstotheabilityofanalgorithmorsystemtodealwithexecutionerrors,
erroneous inputs, or unseen data. Robustness is an important factor affecting the performance
of AI systems in empirical environments. The lack of robustness might also cause unintended or
harmful behavior by the system, thus diminishing its safety and trustworthiness. In the context
of ML systems, the term robustness is applicable to a diversity of situations. In this review, we
non-exhaustivelysummarizetherobustnessofanAIsystembycategorizingvulnerabilitiesatthe
levels of data,algorithms,andsystems,respectively.
Data.With the widespread application of AI systems, the environment in which an AI
model is deployed becomes more complicated and diverse. If an AI model is trained without
considering the diverse distributions of data in different scenarios, then its performance might
be significantly affected. Robustness against distributional shifts has been a common problem
in various applications of AI [ 19]. In high-stake applications, this problem is even more critical
owingtoitsnegativeeffectonsafetyandsecurity.Forexample,inthefieldofautonomousdriving,
besides developing a perceptual system working in sunny scenes, academia and the industry are
usingnumerousdevelopmentandtestingstrategiestoenhancetheperceptualperformanceofthe
vehiclesinnighttime/rainyscenestoguaranteethesystem’sreliabilityunderavarietyofweather
conditions[ 318,382].
Algorithms. It is widely recognized that AI models might be vulnerable to attacks by adver-
sarieswithmaliciousintentions.Amongthevariousformsofattacks,theadversarialattackandde-
fensesagainstithaveraisedconcernsinbothacademiaandtheindustryinrecentyears.Literature
has categorized the threat of adversarial attacks in several typical aspects and proposed various
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.