Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:3
•We dissect the entire lifecycle of the development and deployment of AI systems in indus-
trialapplications,anddiscusshowAItrustworthinesscanbeenhancedateachstage—from
data to AI models and from system deployment to its operation. We propose a systematic
framework to organize the multi-disciplinary and fragmented approaches toward trustwor-
thy AI and propose pursuing it as a continuous workflow to incorporate feedback at each
stage of thelifecycle of theAI system.
•We dissect the entire development and deployment lifecycle of AI systems in industrial ap-
plications and discusshow AI trustworthinesscan be enhancedat each stage—from data to
AI models and from system deployment to its operation. We propose a systematic frame-
worktoorganizethemulti-disciplinaryandfragmentedapproachestowardtrustworthyAI
and further propose to pursue AI trustworthiness as a continuous workflow to incorporate
feedback at each stage of the AI system lifecycle. We also analyze the relationship between
differentaspectsoftrustworthinessinpractice(mutualenhancementand,sometimes,trade-
offs).TheaimistoprovidestakeholdersofAIsystems,suchasresearchers,developers,oper-
ators,andlegalexperts,withanaccessibleandcomprehensiveguidetoquicklyunderstand
theapproachestowardAI trustworthiness(Section 3).
•WediscussoutstandingchallengesfacingtrustworthyAIonwhichtheresearchcommunity
and industrial practitioners should focus in the near future. We identify several key issues,
includingtheneedforadeeperandfundamentalunderstandingofseveralaspectsofAItrust-
worthiness(e.g.,robustness,fairness,andexplainability),theimportanceofuserawareness,
and thepromotionof inter-disciplinaryand internationalcollaboration(Section 4).
With these contributions, we aim to provide the practitioners and stakeholders of AI systems
not only with a comprehensive introduction to the foundations and future of AI trustworthiness
butalso withanoperationalguidebookforhow toconstructAI systemsthataretrustworthy.
2 AI TRUSTWORTHINESS: BEYOND PREDICTIVE ACCURACY
The success of ML technology in the past few decades has largely benefited from the accuracy-
basedperformancemeasurements.Byassessingtaskperformancebasedonquantitativeaccuracy
or loss, training AI models becomes tractable in the sense of optimization. Meanwhile, predictive
accuracyiswidelyadoptedtoindicatethesuperiorityofanAIproductoverothers.However,with
therecentwidespreadapplicationsofAI,thelimitationofanaccuracy-onlymeasurementhasbeen
exposedtoanumberofnewchallenges,rangingfrommaliciousattacksagainstAIsystemstomis-
usesofAIthatviolatehumanvalues.Tosolvetheseproblems,theAIcommunityhasrealizedinthe
lastdecadethatfactorsbeyondaccuracyshouldbeconsideredandimprovedwhenbuildinganAI
system.Anumberofenterprises[ 57,62,136,166,254,338],academia[ 122,199,218,301,322],pub-
lic sectors, and organizations [ 9,210,334] have recently identified these factors and summarized
themasprinciplesofAItrustworthiness.Theyincluderobustness,security,transparency,fairness,
and safety [ 178]. Comprehensive statistics relating to and comparisons between these principles
havebeenprovidedinReferences[ 145,178].Inthisarticle,westudytherepresentativeprinciples
that have recently garnered wide interest and are closely related to practical applications. These
principlescan becategorizedas follows:
•We consider representative requirements that pertain to technical challenges faced by cur-
rentAIsystems.Wereviewaspectsthathavesparkedwideinterestinrecenttechnicalstud-
ies,includingrobustness,explainability,transparency,1reproducibility,andgeneralization.
•We consider ethical requirements with broad concerns in recent literature [ 9,57,121,145,
178,199,218,301,334],includingfairness,privacy,and accountability.
1We followReference[ 333] toexcludetransparency asanethicalrequirement.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.