177:22 B. Li et al.
withoutknowingtheclients’privatedata[ 241].VerticalFLreferstothesettinginwhichallparties
share the same sample ID space but have different features. Reference [ 148] used homomorphic
encryption for vertical logistic regression-based model learning. In Reference [ 138], an efficient
method of kernel learning was proposed. Federated transfer learning is applicable to the condi-
tion in which none of the parties overlaps in either the sample or the feature space [ 222]. The
connectionbetweenFLandotherresearchtopics,suchasmulti-tasklearning,meta-learning,and
fairnesslearning,hasbeendiscussedinReference[ 180].ToexpediteFL-relatedresearchanddevel-
opment,manyopensourcelibrarieshavebeenreleased,suchasFATE,FedML[ 149],andFedlearn-
Algo [217].
3.3 Development
Themanufactureofreliableproductsrequiresconsiderableeffortinsoftwareengineering,andthis
is sometimes overlooked by AI developers. This lack of diligence, such as insufficient testing and
monitoring, may incur long-term costs in the subsequent lifecycle of AI products (a.k.a. techni-
cal debt[296]). Software engineering in the stages of development and deployment has recently
arousedwideconcernasanessentialconditionforreliableAIsystems[ 17,203].Moreover,various
techniquesresearchedforthisstagecancontributetothetrustworthinessofanAIsystem[ 17].In
thissection,we surveytherepresentativetechniques.
3.3.1 Functional Testing. Inherited from the workflow of canonical software engineering, the
testing methodology has drawn growing attention in the development of AI systems. In terms of
AI trustworthiness, testing serves as an effective approach to certify that the system is fulfilling
specificrequirements.RecentresearchhasexploredtoadaptfunctionaltestingtoAIsystems.This
hasbeenreviewedintheliterature,suchasReferences[ 164,235,381].Wedescribetwoaspectsof
adaptionfrom theliteraturethatareusefultoenhancethetrustworthinessof an AIsystem.
Test criteria. Different from canonical software engineering where exact equity is tested be-
tweentheactualandtheexpectedoutputsofasystem,anAIsystemisusuallytestedbyitspredic-
tiveaccuracyonaspecifictestingdataset.Beyondaccuracy,varioustestcriteriahavebeenstudied
tofurtherreflectandtestmorecomplexpropertiesofanAIsystem.Theconceptoftestcoveragein
softwaretestinghasbeentransplantedintoDNNmodels[ 226,260].Thenameofarepresentative
metric—neuron coverage [ 260]—figuratively illustrates that it measures the coverage of activated
neuronsinaDNNinanalogytocodebranchesincanonicalsoftwaretesting.Suchcoveragecriteria
areeffectivefor certifyingtherobustnessof aDNN againstadversarialattacks[ 226].
Testcasegeneration. Human-annotateddatasetsareinsufficientforthoroughlytestinganAI
system, and large-scale automatically generated test cases are widely used. Similar to canonical
software testing, the problem to automatically generate the expected ground truth, known as the
oracle problem [34], also occurs in the AI software testing scenario. The hand-crafted test case
template is an intuitive but effective approach in applications of NLP [ 281]. Metamorphic testing
is also a practical approach that converts the input/output pairs into new test cases. For example,
[382] transfers images of road scenes taken in daylight to rainy images by using Generative Ad-
versarialNetwork(GAN) asnewtestcases,andre-usestheoriginal,invariantannotationtotest
an autonomous driving systems. These testing cases are useful for evaluating the generalization
performanceofanAImodel.Asimilarmethodologywasadoptedbyaddingadversarialpatternsto
normal images to test adversarial robustness [ 226]. Simulated environments are also widely used
to test applications such as computer vision and reinforcement learning. We further review this
topicin Section 3.3.3.
3.3.2 Performance Benchmarking. Unlike conventional software, the functionality of AI sys-
tems is often not easily captured in functional test alone. To ensure that systems are trustworthy
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.