177:28 B. Li et al.
systems, which offers recommendations for every step of the development and use of these sys-
tems. We recognize that fully adopting this systematic approach to build trustworthy AI systems
requires that practitioners embrace the concepts underlying the key aspects that we have identi-
fied. More importantly, it requires a shift of focus from performance-driven AI totrust-driven AI.
Intheshortrun,thisshiftwillinevitablyinvolveside-effects,suchaslongerlearningtime,slowed
development, and/or increased cost to build AI systems. However, we encourage practitioners to
focusonthelong-termbenefitsofgainingthetrustofallstakeholdersforthesustaineduseandde-
velopmentofthesesystems.Inthissection,weconcludebydiscussingsomeoftheopenchallenges
andpotentialopportunitiesinthefuturedevelopment of trustworthyAI.
4.1 AI Trustworthiness as Long-term Research
Our understanding of AI trustworthiness is far from complete or universal and will inevitably
evolve as we develop new AI technologies and understand their societal impact more clearly.
This procedure requires long-term research in multiple key areas of AI. In this section, we dis-
cuss several open questions that we think are crucial to address for the future development of AI
trustworthiness.
4.1.1 Immaturity of Approaches to Trustworthiness. As mentioned in Section 2, several aspects
of AI trustworthiness, such as explainability and robustness, address the limitation of current AI
technologies.Despitewide interestin AI research,satisfactorysolutionsarestillfar fromreach.
Consider explainability as an example. Despite being an active field of AI research, it remains
poorly understood. Both current explanatory models and post hoc model explanation techniques
shareafewcommonissues,e.g.,(1)theexplanationisfragiletoperturbations[ 130],(2)theexpla-
nationisnotalwaysconsistentwithhumaninterpretation[ 47],and(3)itisdifficulttojudgeifthe
explanation is correct or faithful [ 250]. These problems pose important questions in the study of
explainabilityand providevaluable directionsof researchin theoreticalresearchon AI.
Another example is robustness. The arms race between adversarial attack and defense reflects
the immaturity of our understanding of the robustness of AI. As in other areas of security, at-
tacksevolvealongwiththedevelopmentofdefenses.Conventionaladversarialtraining[ 134]has
been shown to be easily fooled by subsequently developed attacks [ 328]. The corresponding de-
fense [328] is later shown to be vulnerable against new attacks [ 99]. This not only requires that
practitionersbeagileinadoptingdefensivetechniquestomitigatetheriskofnewattacksinapro-
cess of long-term and continual development but also poses long-term challenges to theoretical
research [ 270].
4.1.2 Frictional Impact of Trustworthy Aspects. A sw eh a v es h o w ni nS e c t i o n 2,t h e r ea r ea
wealth of connections and support between different aspects of trustworthiness. However, re-
searchhasshownthattherearefrictionsortradeoffsbetweentheseaspectsinsomecases,which
we review here.
IncreasedtransparencyimprovestrustinAIsystemsthroughinformationdisclosure.However,
disclosing inappropriateinformation might increase potential risks. For example, excessive trans-
parency on datasetsand algorithms might leak private data and commercial intellectualproperty.
Disclosure of detailed algorithmic mechanisms can also lead to the risk of targeted hacking [ 12].
However, an inappropriate explanation might also cause users to overly rely on the system and
follow wrong decisions of AI [ 311]. Therefore, the extent of transparency of an AI system should
bespecifiedcarefullyand differently fortheroles ofpublicusers,operators,and auditors.
Fromanalgorithmicperspective,theeffectsofdifferentobjectivesoftrustworthinessonmodel
performance remain insufficiently understood. Adversarial robustness increases the model’s gen-
eralizabilityandreducesoverfitting,buttendstonegativelyimpactitsoverallaccuracy[ 331,380].
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.