177:2 B. Li et al.
1 INTRODUCTION
Therapiddevelopmentof ArtificialIntelligence(AI) continuestoprovidesignificanteconomic
andsocialbenefitstosociety.WiththewidespreadapplicationofAIinareassuchastransportation,
finance,medicine,security,andentertainment,thereisrisingsocietalawarenessthatweneedthese
systems to be trustworthy. This is because the breach of stakeholders’ trust can lead to severe so-
cietalconsequencesgiventhepervasivenessoftheseAIsystems.Suchbreachescanrangefrombi-
asedtreatmentbyautomatedsystemsinhiringandloandecisions[ 49,146]tothelossofhumanlife
[52]. By contrast, AI practitioners, including researchers, developers, and decision-makers, have
traditionally considered system performance (i.e., accuracy) to be the main metric in their work-
flows.ThismetricisfarfromsufficienttoreflectthetrustworthinessofAIsystems.Variousaspects
ofAIsystemsbeyondsystemperformanceshouldbeconsideredtoimprovetheirtrustworthiness,
includingbutnotlimitedtotheirrobustness,algorithmicfairness,explainability,andtransparency.
While most active academic research on AI trustworthiness has focused on the algorithmic
propertiesofmodels,advancementsinalgorithmicresearchaloneisinsufficientforbuildingtrust-
worthyAIproducts.Fromanindustrialperspective,thelifecycleofanAIproductconsistsofmul-
tiplestages,includingdatapreparation,algorithmicdesign,development,anddeploymentaswell
as operation, monitoring, and governance. Improving trustworthiness in any single aspect (e.g.,
robustness) involves efforts at multiple stages in this lifecycle, e.g., data sanitization, robust algo-
rithms, anomaly monitoring, and risk auditing. On the contrary, the breach of trust in any single
link or aspect can undermine the trustworthiness of the entire system. Therefore, AI trustworthi-
nessshouldbeestablishedand assessedsystematicallythroughoutthelifecycleof an AI system.
InadditiontotakingaholisticviewofthetrustworthinessofAIsystemsoverallstagesoftheir
lifecycle, it is important to understand the big picture of different aspects of AI trustworthiness.
In addition to pursuing AI trustworthiness by establishing requirements for each specific aspect,
we call attention to the combination of and interaction between these aspects, which are impor-
tant and underexplored topics for trustworthy real-world AI systems. For instance, the need for
data privacy might interfere with the desire to explain the system output in detail, and the pur-
suit of algorithmic fairness may be detrimental to the accuracy and robustness experienced by
some groups [ 284,361]. As a result, trivially combining systems to separately improve each as-
pect of trustworthiness does not guarantee a more trustworthy and effective end result. Instead,
elaborated joint optimization and tradeoffs between multiple aspects of trustworthiness are nec-
essary[47,158,331,361,380].
These facts suggest that a systematic approach is necessary to shift the current AI paradigm
toward trustworthiness. This requires awareness and cooperation from multi-disciplinary stake-
holders who work on different aspects of trustworthiness and different stages of the system’s
lifecycle. We have recently witnessed important developments in multi-disciplinary research on
trustworthy AI. From the perspective of technology, trustworthy AI has promoted the develop-
ment of adversarial learning, private learning, and the fairness and explainability of machine
learning (ML) . Some recent studies have organized these developments from the perspective of
eitherresearch[ 182,218,357]orengineering[ 57,62,199,338,353].Developmentsinnon-technical
areashavealsobeenreviewedinafewstudies,andinvolveguidelines[ 145,178,294],standardiza-
tion[210],andmanagementprocesses[ 31,274,301].Wehaveconductedadetailedanalysisofthe
variousreviews,includingalgorithmicresearch,engineeringpractices,andinstitutionalization,in
SectionA.2in the appendix. These fragmented reviews have mostly focused on specific views
of trustworthy AI. To synchronize these diverse developments in a systematic view, we organize
multi-disciplinaryknowledgeinanaccessiblemannerforAIpractitioners,andprovideactionable
andsystematicguidanceinthecontextofthelifecycleofanindustrialsystemtobuildtrustworthy
AI systems.Our main contributionsareasfollows:
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.