Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:17
For example, Reference [ 176] introduces several approaches into de-anonymize user information
fromgraphdata.Tomitigatetheriskofprivacyleakage,anopensourceplatformwasprovidedin
Reference[ 174]toevaluatetheprivacyprotection-relatedperformanceofgraphdataanonymiza-
tion algorithmsagainst de-anonymization attacks.
Differential privacy (DP). DP shares information of groups within datasets while withhold-
ing individual samples [ 108–110]. Typical DP can be formally defined by ϵ-differential privacy. It
measures the extent to which a (randomized) statistical function on the dataset reflects whether
an element has been removed [ 108]. DP has been explored in various data publishing tasks,
such as log data [ 159,385], set-valued data [ 76], correlated network data [ 75], and crowdsourced
data[278,344].Ithasalsobeenappliedtosingle-andmulti-machinecomputingenvironments,and
integratedwithMLmodelsforprotectingmodelprivacy[ 2,120,349].EnterpriseslikeApplehave
used DP to transform user data into a form from which the true data cannot be reproduced [ 21].
InReference[ 113],researchersproposedtheRAPPORalgorithmthatsatisfiesthedefinitionofDP.
The algorithm is used for crowdsourcing statistical analyses of user software. DP is also used to
improve therobustnessof AI modelsagainst adversarialsamples[ 204].
3.2 Algorithm Design
AnumberofaspectsoftrustworthyAIhavebeenaddressedasalgorithmicproblemsinthecontext
of AI research, and have attracted widespread interest. We organize recent technical approaches
bytheircorrespondingaspectsofAItrustworthiness,includingrobustness,explainability,fairness,
generalization,and privacyprotection,to providea quickreferenceforpractitioners.
3.2.1 Adversarial Robustness. The robustness of an AI model is significantly affected by the
trainingdataandthealgorithmsused.Wedescribeseveralrepresentativedirectionsinthissection.
Comprehensive surveys can be found in the literature such as References [ 12,19,45,69,213,304,
373].
Adversarialtraining .Sincethediscoveryofadversarialattacks,ithasbeenrecognizedthataug-
menting the training data with adversarial samples provides an intuitive approach for defense
against them. This is typically referred to as adversarial training [ 134,211,346]. The augmenta-
tion can be carried out in a brute-force manner by feeding both the original data and adversarial
samplesduringtraining[ 201],orbyusingaregularizationtermtoimplicitlyrepresentadversarial
samples [ 134]. Conventional adversarial training augments data with respect to specific attacks.
It can defend against the corresponding attack but is vulnerable to other kinds of attacks. Vari-
ous improvements have been studied to improve this defense [ 45,229,304]. Reference [ 328]a u g -
mentedthetrainingdatawithadversarialperturbationstransferredfromothermodels.Itisshown
to further provide defense against black-box attacks that do not require knowledge of the model
parameters This can help defend against black-box attacks, which do not require knowledge of
the model parameters. Reference [ 231] combined multiple types of perturbations into adversarial
trainingtoimprove therobustnessof themodelagainstmultiple typesof attacks.
Adversarial regularization . In addition to the regularization term that implicitly represents ad-
versarial samples, recent research further explores network structures or regularization to over-
come the vulnerabilities of the DNN to adversarial attacks. An intuitive motivation for this reg-
ularization is to prevent the outcome of the network from changing dramatically in case of
smallinputperturbations.Forexample,Reference[ 139]penalizedlargepartialderivativesofeach
layer to improve the stability of its output. A similar regularization on gradients was adopted by
Reference [ 286]. Parseval networks [ 82] train the network by imposing a regularization on the
Lipschitzconstantineachlayer.
Certified robustness . Adversarial training and regularization improve the robustness of AI mod-
elsinpracticebutcannottheoreticallyguaranteethatthemodelsworkreliably.Thisproblemhas
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.