Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:27
industryshouldconsidertrustworthinessasanethosofitsoperationalroutineandbepreparedto
continually enhancethetrustworthinessof itsproducts.
TheconstantenhancementofAItrustworthinesspositionsrequirementsonanewworkflowfor
the AI industry. Recent studies on industrial AI workflow extend the mechanism of DevOps [ 36]
to MLOps [ 233], to enable improvements in ML products. The concept of DevOps has been
adopted in modern software development to continually deploy software features and improve
their quality. MLOps [ 233] and its variants, such as ModelOps [ 165] and SafetyOps [ 303], extend
DevOps to cover the ML lifecycle of data preparation, training, validation, and deployment, in its
workflow.TheworkflowofMLOpsprovidesastartpointtobuildtheworkflowfortrustworthyAI.
ByintegratingtheMLlifecycle,MLOpsconnectsresearch,experimentation,andproductdevelop-
ment to enable the rapid leveraging of the theoretical development of trustworthy AI. A wealth
of toolchains of MLOps have been released recently to track AI artifacts such as data, model, and
meta-datatoincreasetheaccountabilityandreproducibilityofproducts[ 165].Recentresearchhas
sought to extend MLOps to further integrate trustworthiness into the AI workflow. For example,
[303]extended MLOpswithsafetyengineeringasSafetyOpsfor autonomousdriving.
As we have illustrated in this section, building trustworthiness requires the continual and sys-
tematicupgradeoftheAIlifecycle.ByextendingMLOps,wesummarizethisupgradeofpractices
as a new workflow, TrustAIOps , which focuses on imposing the requirements of trustworthiness
over theentireAI lifecycle.Thisnewworkflowcontainsthefollowing properties:
•Closecollaborationbetweeninter-disciplinaryroles. BuildingtrustworthyAIrequires
organizingdifferentroles,suchasMLresearchers,softwareengineers,safetyengineers,and
legalexperts.Closecollaborationmitigatesthegapinknowledgebetweenformsofexpertise
(e.g.,Reference[ 208],cf.,Sections 3.5.3andA.2).
•Aligned principles of trustworthiness. The risk of untrustworthiness exists in every
stage in the lifecycle of an AI system. Mitigating such risks requires that all stakeholders
in the AI industry be aware of and aligned with unified trustworthy principles (e.g., Refer-
ence[301],cf.,Section A.2).
•Extensive management of artifacts. An industrial AI system is built upon various arti-
factssuchasdata,code,models,configuration,productdesign,andoperationmanuals.The
elaborate management of these artifacts helps assess risk and increases reproducibility and
auditability(cf.,Section 3.5.1).
•Continuous feedback loops. Classical continuous integration and continuous develop-
ment (CI/CD) workflows provide effective mechanisms to improve the software through
feedback loops. In a trustworthy AI system, these feedback loops should connect and itera-
tivelyimprovethefivestagesofitslifecycle,i.e.,data,algorithm,development,deployment,
and management (e.g.,References[ 272,310]).
The evolution of the industrial workflow of AI is a natural reflection of the dynamic proce-
dure to establish its trustworthiness. By systematically organizing stages of the AI lifecycle and
inter-disciplinarypractitioners,theAIindustryisabletounderstandtherequirementsoftrustwor-
thiness from various perspectives, including technology, law, and society, and deliver continual
improvements.
4 CONCLUSION, CHALLENGES, AND OPPORTUNITIES
In this survey, we outlined the key aspects of trustworthiness that we think are essential to AI
systems. We introduced how AI systems can be evaluated and assessed on each of these aspects,
and reviewed current efforts in this direction in the industry. We further proposed a system-
atic approach to consider these aspects of trustworthiness in the entire lifecycle of real-world AI
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.