Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:7
from the perspective of the bias–variance tradeoff to explain and evaluate the generalization of
theDNN.
2.3 Explainability and Transparency
TheopaquenessofcomplexAIsystemshasledtowidespreadconcernsinacademia,theindustry,
and society at large. The problem of how DNNs outperform other conventional ML approaches
has been puzzling researchers [ 24]. From the perspective of practical systems, there is a demand
among users for the right to know the intention, business model, and technological mechanism
of AI products [ 9,135]. A variety of studies have addressed these problems in terms of nomencla-
ture including interpretability, explainability, and transparency [ 5,24,47,141,216,250]a n dh a v e
delvedintodifferentdefinitions.Tomakeourdiscussionmoreconciseandtargeted,wenarrowthe
coverageofexplainabilityandtransparencytoaddresstheaboveconcernsintheoreticalresearch
and practicalsystems,respectively.
•Explainability addressestounderstandhowan AI modelmakesdecision[ 24].
•Transparency considersAIasasoftwaresystem,andseekstodiscloseinformationregard-
ing itsentirelifecycle(cf.,“operatetransparently”in Reference[ 9]).
2.3.1 Explainability. Explainability, i.e., understanding how an AI model makes its decision,
stays at the core place of modern AI research and serves as a fundamental factor that determines
thetrustinAItechnology.ThemotivationfortheexplainabilityofAIcomesfromvariousaspects
[24,25]. From the perspective of scientific research, it is meaningful to understand all intrinsic
mechanismsofthedata,parameters,procedures,andoutcomesinanAIsystem.Themechanisms
also fundamentally determine AI trustworthiness. From the perspective of building AI products,
there exist various practical requirements on explainability. For operators like bank executives,
explainability helps understand the AI credit system to prevent potential defects in it [ 25,184].
Users like loan applicants are interested to know why they are rejected by the model, and what
theycandotoqualify[ 25].SeeReference[ 25]foradetailedanalysisofthevariousmotivationsof
explainability.
ExplainingMLmodelshasbeenanactivetopicnotonlyinMLresearchbutalsoinpsychological
researchinthepastfiveyears[ 5,24,47,141,216,250].Althoughthedefinitionoftheexplainability
of an AI model is still an open question, research has sought to address this problem from the
perspectives of AI [ 141,285] and psychology [ 144,245]. In summary, the relevant studies divide
explainability intotwo levels toexplain it.
•Modelexplainabilitybydesign. AseriesoffullyorpartiallyexplainableMLmodelshave
been designed in the past half-century of ML research. Representatives include linear re-
gression, trees, the k-nearest neighbors (KNN) , rule-based learners, generalized additive
model, and Bayesian models [ 24]. The design of explainable models remains an active area
in ML.
•Posthocmodelexplainability. Despitethegoodexplainabilityoftheaboveconventional
models, more complex models such as the DNN or Gradient Boosting Decision Tree
(GDBT)haveexhibitedbetterperformanceinrecentindustrialAIsystems.Becausetherel-
evant approaches still cannot holistically explain these complex models, researchers have
turnedtoposthocexplanation.Itaddressesamodel’sbehaviorbyanalyzingitsinput,inter-
mediateresult,andoutput.Arepresentativecategoryinthisveinapproximatesthedecision
surface either globally or locally by using an explainable ML model, i.e., explainer, such as
a linear model [ 225,279] and rules [ 140,280]. For deep learning models like the Convolu-
tionalNeuralNetwork(CNN) orthetransformer,theinspectionofintermediatefeatures
is awidely usedmeans of explainingmodel behavior[ 332,366].
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.