Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:9
Evaluation. Although a unified quantitative evaluation is not yet available, the qualitative eval-
uation of transparency has undergone recent advances in the AI industry. Assessment check-
lists[10,292]havebeenregardedasaneffectivemeanstoevaluateandenhancethetransparency
of a system. In the context of the psychology of users or the public, user studies or A/B test can
provide ausefulevaluationbasedonusersatisfaction[ 249].
Quality evaluations of AI documentation have also been explored in recent years. Some stud-
ies [22,129,156,246,273] have proposed standard practices to guide and evaluate the documen-
tation of an AI system. Reference [ 265] summarized the general qualitative dimensions for more
specifiedevaluations.
2.4 Reproducibility
Modern AI research involves both mathematical derivation and computational experiments. The
reproducibilityofthesecomputationalproceduresservesasanessentialsteptoverifyAIresearch.
In terms of AI trustworthiness, this verification facilitates the detection, analysis, and mitigation
of potential risks in an AI system, such as a vulnerability on specific inputs or unintended bias.
WiththegradualestablishmentoftheopencooperativeecosystemintheAIresearchcommunity,
reproducibilityisemergingasaconcernamongresearchersanddevelopers.Inadditiontoenabling
theeffectiveverificationofresearch,reproducibilityallowsthecommunitytoquicklyconvertthe
latestapproachesinto practiceorconductfollow-up research.
There has been a new trend in the AI research community to regard reproducibility as a re-
quirement when publicizing research [ 142]. We have seen major conferences, such as Neural
InformationProcessingSystems(NeurIPS) ,InternationalConferenceonMachineLearn-
ing (ICML) ,a n dACM Multimedia (ACMMM) , introduce reproducibility-related policies or
programs [ 263] to encourage the reproducibility of works. To obtain a clear assessment, de-
grees of reproducibility have been studied in such works as the ACM Artifact Review and Ref-
erences [106,143]. For example, in Reference [ 143], the lowest degree of reproducibility requires
theexactreplicationofanexperimentwiththesameimplementationanddata,whileahigherde-
greerequiresusingdifferentimplementationsordata.Beyondthebasicverificationofresearch,a
higherdegreeofreproducibilitypromotesabetterunderstandingoftheresearchbydistinguishing
among thekeyfactorsinfluencingeffectiveness.
Some recently developed large scale pre-trained AI models, such as Generative Pre-trained
Transformer 3 (GPT-3) andBidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers
(BERT), are representative of the challenges to the reproducibility of AI research. The creation
of these models involves specifically designed data collection strategies, efficient storage of big
data, communication and schedulingbetween distributedclusters,algorithm implementation,ap-
propriatesoftwareandhardwareenvironments,andotherkindsofknowhow.Thereproducibility
ofsuchamodelshouldbeconsideredoveritsentirelifecycle.Inrecentstudiesonthereproducibil-
ity of ML, this requirement has been decomposed into the reproducibility of data, methods, and
experiments[ 142,143,169],wherethelatterrangeoveraseriesoflifecycleartifactssuchascode,
documentation, software, hardware, and deployment configuration. Based on this methodology,
anincreasingnumberofMLplatformsarebeingdevelopedthatassistresearchersanddevelopers
bettertrackthelifecycle in areproduciblemanner [ 169,374].
Evaluation. ReproducibilitychecklistshavebeenrecentlywidelyadoptedinMLconferencesto
assess the reproducibility of submissions [ 263]. Beyond the replication of experiments in publica-
tion, References[ 142,143] also specifiedcheckliststo evaluate reproducibilityat varyingdegrees.
In addition to checklists, mechanisms such as challenges to reproducibility and paper tracks of
reproducibility have been adopted to evaluate the reproducibility of publications [ 118,263]. To
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.