Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:25
This mechanism is also emerging as an important requirement in recent AI guidelines, such as
Reference [ 9]. The fail-safe design has been observedin multiple areas of robotics in the past few
years. In the area of Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) , the fail-safe algorithm has been studied
foralongtimetoavoidfrequentcollisionofquadrocopters[ 126]andtoensuresafelandingupon
system failure [ 252]. In autonomous driving where safety is critical, a fail-safe mechanism like
standing still has become an indispensable component in Advanced Driver-Assistant System
(ADAS)products[ 160], and isbeingresearchedata higherlevelof automation[ 230].
3.4.4 Hardware Security. AI systems are widely deployed on various hardware platforms to
copewiththediversescenarios,rangingfromserversincomputingcenterstocellphonesandem-
beddedsystems.AttacksonOSandhardwareleadtonewrisks,suchasdatatamperingorstealing,
and threaten the robustness, security, and privacy of AI systems. Various approaches have been
studied to address this new threat [ 364]. From the perspective of hardware security, the concept
of atrusted execution environment (TEE) is a recent representative technique that has been
adoptedbymanyhardwaremanufacturers[ 287].ThegeneralmechanismoftheTEEistoprovide
a secure area for the data and the code. This area is not interfered with by the standard OS such
that the protected program cannot be attacked. ARM processors support TEE implementation us-
ingtheTrustZonedesign[ 264].TheysimultaneouslyrunasecureOSandanormalOSonasingle
core. The secure part provides a safe environment for sensitive information. The Intel Software
Guard Extensions implement the TEE by hardware-based memory encryption [ 240]. Its enclave
mechanismallowsfortheallocationofprotectedmemorytoholdprivateinformation.Suchsecu-
rity mechanisms have been used to protect sensitive information like biometric ID and financial
accountpasswordsandareapplicabletootherAIuse cases.
3.5 Management
AI practitioners such as researchers and developers have studied various techniques to improve
AItrustworthinessintheaforementionedstagesofthedata,algorithm,development,anddeploy-
mentstages.Beyondtheseconcreteapproaches,appropriatemanagementandgovernanceprovide
a holistic guarantee that trustworthiness is consistently aligned throughout the lifecycle of a AI
system. In this section, we introduce several executable approaches that facilitate the AI commu-
nity toimprove management andgovernance on AItrustworthiness.
3.5.1 Documentation. Conventional software engineering has accumulated a wealth of expe-
rience in leveraging documentation to assist development. Representative documentation types
include requirement documents, product design documents, architecture documents, code docu-
ments, and test documents [ 11]. Beyond conventional software engineering, multiple new types
of documents have been proposed to adapt to the ML training and testing mechanisms. Their
scopemayincludethepurposesandcharacteristicsofthemodel[ 246],datasets[ 41,129,156],and
services [ 22]. As mentioned in Sections 2.3.2and2.7, documentation is an effective and impor-
tant approach to enhance the system’s transparency and accountability by tracking, guiding, and
auditingitsentirelifecycle[ 272]andservesasacornerstoneofbuildingatrustworthyAIsystem.
3.5.2 Auditing. Withlessonslearnedfromsafety-criticalindustries,e.g.,financeandaerospace,
auditing has been recently recognized as an effective mechanism to examine whether an AI sys-
tem complies with specific principles [ 58,356]. In terms of the position of auditors, the auditing
process can be categorized as internal or external. Internal auditing enables self-assessment and
iterative improvement for manufacturers to follow the principles of trustworthiness. It can cover
the lifecycle of the system without the leakage of trade secrets [ 272]. However, external auditing
by independentpartiesis more effectiveingaining publictrust[ 58].
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.