Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3233 10 of 17
Most convolutional neural networks learn to detect features like color and edges in their ﬁrst
convolutional layer. In deeper convolutional layers, the network learns to detect features that are more
complicated. Later layers build up their features by combining features of earlier layers. Figure 10
shows the activation map in early convolutional layers, the deep convolutional layer, and the strongest
activation channel for each of the models.
3.4. Di erent Experiments
Three di erent forms of performance evaluations and comparisons were carried out in this study:
two classes (normal and pneumonia), three classes (normal, bacterial pneumonia, and viral pneumonia),
and two classes (bacterial pneumonia and viral pneumonia) classiﬁcation using four di erent deep
learning algorithms through transfer learning.
The experiment carried out in this study consists of three steps. In the ﬁrst step, the dataset divided
into normal and pneumonia. In the second step, the dataset divided into normal, bacterial, and viral
pneumonia. In the last step, the dataset divided into bacterial and viral pneumonia. An end-to-end
training approach was adopted to classify normal, bacterial, and viral pneumonia images.
3.5. Performance Matrix for Classiﬁcation
Four CNNs were trained and evaluated using ﬁve-fold cross-validation in this study.
The performance of di erent networks for the testing dataset is evaluated after the completion
of the training phase and was compared using the following six performances metrics: accuracy,
sensitivity or recall, speciﬁcity, precision (PPV), the area under curve (AUC), and F1 score. Table 3
shows six performance metrics for di erent deep CNNs:
Accuracy =(TP+TN)
(TP+FN)+(FP+TN)(1)
Sensitivity =(TP)
(TP+FN)(2)
Speci f icity =(TN)
(FP+TN)(3)
Precision =(TP)
(TN+FP)(4)
F1Score =(2TP)
(2TP+FN+FP)(5)
In the above equations, while classifying normal and pneumonia patients, true positive (TP),
true negative (TN), false positive (FP), and false negative (FN) were used to denote the number of
pneumonia images identiﬁed as pneumonia, the number of normal images identiﬁed as normal,
the number normal images incorrectly identiﬁed as pneumonia images, and the number of pneumonia
images incorrectly identiﬁed as normal, respectively. On the other hand, while classifying viral and
bacterial pneumonia, TP , TN, FP , and FN were used to denote the number of viral pneumonia images
identiﬁed as viral pneumonia, the number of bacterial pneumonia images identiﬁed as bacterial
pneumonia, the number bacterial pneumonia images incorrectly identiﬁed as viral pneumonia images,
and the number of viral pneumonia images incorrectly identiﬁed as bacterial pneumonia, respectively.
4. Results and Discussions
The comparative performance of training and testing accuracy for di erent CNNs for classiﬁcation
schemes are shown in Figure 11. It can be noted that, for three classiﬁcation schemes, DenseNet201 is
producing the highest accuracy for both training and testing. For normal and pneumonia classiﬁcation,
the test accuracy was 98%, while, for normal, bacterial, and viral pneumonia classiﬁcation, it was