Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3233 3 of 17
the result either by using di erent deep learning algorithms or modifying the existing outperforming
algorithms or combining several outperforming algorithms as an ensemble model to produce a better
classiﬁcation accuracy, particularly in classifying viral and bacterial pneumonia. The proposed study is
reporting a transfer learning approach using four di erent pre-trained network architectures (AlexNet,
ResNet18, DenseNet201, and SqueezeNet) and analyzed their performances. The key contribution of
this work is to provide a CNN-based transfer-learning approach using di erent pre-trained models to
detect pneumonia and classify bacterial and viral pneumonia with higher accuracy compared to the
recent works. In addition, the paper also provides the methodological details of the work, which can
be utilized by any research group to take the beneﬁt of this work. Moreover, radiographic ﬁndings
are poor indicators for the diagnosis of the cause of pneumonia until now. Therefore, the motivation
of the present study was to utilize the power of machine learning, ﬁrstly to diagnose pneumonia by
analyzing radiograph and secondly to di erentiate viral and bacterial pneumonia with better accuracy.
The rest of the paper is divided in the following section: Section 2 summarizes di erent pre-trained
networks used for this study and Section 3 describes the methodology used in the study, where the
details of the dataset and the pre-processing steps to prepare the data for training and testing are
provided. Section 4 provides the results of the classiﬁcation algorithms, which is compared with some
other recent studies, and the results are discussed in this section. Finally, the conclusion is presented in
Section 5.
2. Background of Deep Machine Learning Algorithms
2.1. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
As discussed earlier, CNNs have been popular due to their improved performance in image
classiﬁcation. The convolutional layers in the network along with ﬁlters help in extracting the spatial
and temporal features in an image. The layers have a weight-sharing technique, which helps in
reducing computation e orts [37,38].
Architecture wise, CNNs are simply feedforward artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) with two
constraints: neurons in the same ﬁlter are only connected to local patches of the image to preserve
spatial structure and their weights are shared to reduce the total number of the model’s parameters.
A CNN consists of three building blocks: (i) a convolution layer to learn features, (ii) a max-pooling
(subsampling) layer is to down sample the image and reduce the dimensionality and thereby reduction
in computational e orts, and (iii) a fully connected layer to equip the network with classiﬁcation
capabilities [39]. The architectural overview of CNN is illustrated in Figure 1.
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 18 
is reporting a transfer learning approach using four different pre-trained network architectures 97 
(AlexNet, ResNet18, Dens eNet201, and SqueezeNet) and anal yzed their performances. The key 98 
contribution of this work is to provide a CNN-ba sed transfer-learning approach using different pre- 99 
trained models to detect pneumonia and classify bacterial and viral pneumonia with higher accuracy 100 
compared to the recent works. In addition, the paper also provides the methodological details of the 101 
work, which can be utilized by any research grou p to take the benefit of this work. Moreover, 102 
radiographic findings are poor indicators for the diagnosis of the cause of pneumonia until now. 103 
Therefore, the motivation of the present study was to  utilize the power of machine learning, firstly to 104 
diagnose pneumonia by analyzing radiograph and secondly to differentiate viral and bacterial 105 
pneumonia with better accuracy. 106 
The rest of the paper is divided in the follow ing section: Section 2 summarizes different pre- 107 
trained networks used for this study and Section 3 describes the methodology used in the study, 108 
where the details of the dataset and the pre-proce ssing steps to prepare the data for training and 109 
testing are provided. Section 4 provides the results of  the classification algorithms, which is compared 110 
with some other recent studies, and the results are di scussed in this section. Finally, the conclusion is 111 
presented in Section 5 112 
2. Background of Deep Machine Learning Algorithms 113 
2.1. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) 114 
As discussed earlier, CNNs have been popula r due to their improved performance in image 115 
classification. The convolutional layers in the networ k along with filters help in extracting the spatial 116 
and temporal features in an image. The layers have a weight-sharing technique, which helps in 117 
reducing computation e ﬀorts [37,38]. 118 
Architecture wise, CNNs are simply feedforward artificial neural networks (ANNs) with two 119 
constraints: neurons in the same filter are only connected to local patches of the image to preserve 120 
spatial structure and their weights are shared to re duce the total number of the model’s parameters. 121 
A CNN consists of three building blocks: i) a convolution layer to learn features, ii) a max-pooling 122 
(subsampling) layer is to down sample the im age and reduce the dimensionality and thereby 123 
reduction in computational efforts, and iii) a fully connected layer to equip the network with 124 
classification capabilities [39]. The architectural overview of CNN is illustrated in Figure 1.  125 
 126 
Figure 1. Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) Architecture 127 
2.2. Deep Transfer learning  128 
CNNs typically outperform in a larger dataset than  a smaller one. Transfer learning can be useful 129 
in those applications of CNN where the dataset is no t large. The concept of transfer learning is shown 130 
in Figure 2, where the trained model from large data sets, such as ImageNet [40,41], can be used for 131 
application with a comparatively smaller dataset. 132 
Figure 1. Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) Architecture.
2.2. Deep Transfer Learning
CNNs typically outperform in a larger dataset than a smaller one. Transfer learning can be useful
in those applications of CNN where the dataset is not large. The concept of transfer learning is shown