Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3233 9 of 17
The rotation operation used for image augmentation is normally done by rotating the image in the
clockwise direction by an angle between 0 to 360 degrees, which rotates the pixel of the image frame
and ﬁlls the area of the image where there was no image pixel. In this work, the rotation of 315 degrees
(counter clockwise 45 degrees) was used. The scaling operation is the magniﬁcation or reduction
of frame size of the image, which is another augmentation technique used. In total, 10% of image
magniﬁcation, as done as shown in Figure 9C. Image translation can be done by either translating the
image in a horizontal (width shift) or vertical direction (height shift) or in both directions. The original
image was horizontally translated by 10% and vertically translated by 10%.
3.3. Visualization of the Activation Layer
We investigated the features of the image by observing which areas in the convolutional layers
activated on an image by comparing with the matching regions in the original images. Each layer of a
CNN consists of many 2D arrays called channels. The input image was applied to di erent networks,
and the output activations of the ﬁrst convolution layer was examined.
The activations for di erent network models is shown in Figure 10. The activation map can take
dierent range values and was therefore normalized between 0 and 1. The strongest activation channels
were observed and compared with the original image. It was noticed that this channel activates on
edges. It activates positively on light left /dark right edges and negatively on dark left /light right edges.
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 18 
 270 
Figure 10. Activation map for different network models of  (i) the first convolutional layer, (ii) the 271 
strongest activation channel, (iii) the deep layer im ages set, and (iv) the deep convolutional layer in 272 
specific image. 273 
3.5. Performance Matrix for Classification 274 
Four CNNs were trained and evaluated using five-fold cross-validation in this study. The 275 
performance of different networks for the testing dataset is evaluated after the completion of the 276 
training phase and was compared using the following six performances metrics: accuracy, sensitivity 277 
or recall, specificity, precision (PPV), the area under curve (AUC), and F1 score. Table 3 shows six 278 
performance metrics for different deep CNNs: 279 
𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 ൌሺ𝑇𝑃 ൅ 𝑇𝑁 ሻ
ሺ𝑇𝑃 ൅ 𝐹𝑁 ሻ൅ሺ𝐹𝑃 ൅ 𝑇𝑁 ሻ (1) 
𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦 ൌሺ𝑇𝑃ሻ
ሺ𝑇𝑃 ൅ 𝐹𝑁 ሻ (2) 
𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦 ൌሺ𝑇𝑁ሻ
ሺ𝐹𝑃 ൅ 𝑇𝑁 ሻ (3) 
𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 ൌሺ்௉ሻ
ሺ்ேାி௉ ሻ  (4) 
𝐹1 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 ൌሺ2∗𝑇 𝑃 ሻ
ሺ2∗𝑇 𝑃൅𝐹 𝑁൅𝐹 𝑃 ሻ (5) 
Figure 10. Activation map for di erent network models of ( i) the ﬁrst convolutional layer, ( ii) the
strongest activation channel, ( iii) the deep layer images set, and ( iv) the deep convolutional layer in
speciﬁc image.