Goal-conditioned Imitation Learning
Yiming Ding
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Berkeley
dingyiming0427@berkeley.eduCarlos Florensa
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Berkeley
florensa@berkeley.edu
Mariano Phielipp
Intel AI Labs
mariano.j.phielipp@intel.comPieter Abbeel
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Berkeley
pabbeel@berkeley.edu
Abstract
Designing rewards for Reinforcement Learning (RL) is challenging because it
needs to convey the desired task, be efﬁcient to optimize, and be easy to compute.
The latter is particularly problematic when applying RL to robotics, where detecting
whether the desired conﬁguration is reached might require considerable supervision
and instrumentation. Furthermore, we are often interested in being able to reach
a wide range of conﬁgurations, hence setting up a different reward every time
might be unpractical. Methods like Hindsight Experience Replay (HER) have
recently shown promise to learn policies able to reach many goals, without the
need of a reward. Unfortunately, without tricks like resetting to points along the
trajectory, HER might require many samples to discover how to reach certain areas
of the state-space. In this work we propose a novel algorithm goalGAIL , which
incorporates demonstrations to drastically speed up the convergence to a policy
able to reach any goal, surpassing the performance of an agent trained with other
Imitation Learning algorithms. Furthermore, we show our method can also be used
when the available expert trajectories do not contain the actions or when the expert
is suboptimal, which makes it applicable when only kinesthetic, third-person or
noisy demonstrations are available. Our code is open-source2.
1 Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has shown impressive results in a plethora of simulated tasks, ranging
from attaining super-human performance in video-games [ 1,2] and board-games [ 3], to learning
complex locomotion behaviors [ 4,5]. Nevertheless, these successes are shyly echoed in real world
robotics [ 6,7]. This is due to the difﬁculty of setting up the same learning environment that is enjoyed
in simulation. One of the critical assumptions that are hard to obtain in the real world are the access
to a reward function. Self-supervised methods have the power to overcome this limitation.
A very versatile and reusable form of self-supervision for robotics is to learn how to reach any previ-
ously observed state upon demand. This problem can be formulated as training a goal-conditioned
policy [ 8,9] that seeks to obtain the indicator reward of having the observation exactly match the goal.
Such a reward does not require any additional instrumentation of the environment beyond the sensors
the robot already has. But in practice, this reward is never observed because in continuous spaces like
the ones in robotics, it is extremely rare to observe twice the exact same sensory input. Luckily, if we
Equal contribution
2https://sites.google.com/view/goalconditioned-il/
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.