(a) Continuous Four rooms
 (b) Pointmass block pusher
 (c) Fetch Pick & Place
 (d) Fetch Stack Two
Figure 5: Effect of sub-optimal demonstrations on goalGAIL and Behavorial Cloning method. We
produce sub-optimal demonstrations by making the expert -greedy and adding Gaussian noise to the
optimal actions.
In Fig. 5 we observe that approaches that directly try to copy the action of the expert, like Behavioral
Cloning, greatly suffer under a sub-optimal expert, to the point that it barely provides any improvement
over performing plain Hindsight Experience Replay. On the other hand, methods based on training a
discriminator between expert and current agent behavior are able to leverage much noisier experts. A
possible explanation of this phenomenon is that a discriminator approach can give a positive signal
as long as the transition is "in the right direction", without trying to exactly enforce a single action.
Under this lens, having some noise in the expert might actually improve the performance of these
adversarial approaches, as it has been observed in many generative models literature [42].
5.5 Using state-only demonstrations
Figure 6: Output of the Dis-
criminatorD(;g)for the four
rooms environment. The goal
is the lower left white dot, and
the start is at the top right.Behavioral Cloning and standard GAIL rely on the state-action (s;a)
tuples coming from the expert. Nevertheless there are many cases
in robotics where we have access to demonstrations of a task, but
without the actions. In this section we want to emphasize that all the
results obtained with our goalGAIL method and reported in Fig. 3
and Fig. 4 do notrequire any access to the action that the expert took.
Surprisingly, in all environments but Fetch Pick & Place, despite the
more restricted information goalGAIL has access to, it outperforms
BC combined with HER. This might be due to the superior imitation
learning performance of GAIL, and also to the fact that these tasks
are solvable by only matching the state-distribution of the expert. We
run the experiment of training GAIL only conditioned on the current
state, and not the action (as also done in other non-goal-conditioned
works [ 25]), and we observe that the discriminator learns a very well
shaped reward that clearly encourages the agent to go towards the
goal, as pictured in Fig. 6. See the Appendix for more details.
6 Conclusions and Future Work
Hindsight relabeling can be used to learn useful behaviors without any reward supervision for
goal-conditioned tasks, but they are inefﬁcient when the state-space is large or includes exploration
bottlenecks. In this work we show how only a few demonstrations can be leveraged to improve the
convergence speed of these methods. We introduce a novel algorithm, goalGAIL , that converges
faster than HER and to a better ﬁnal performance than a naive goal-conditioned GAIL. We also study
the effect of doing expert relabeling as a type of data augmentation on the provided demonstrations,
and demonstrate it improves the performance of our goalGAIL as well as goal-conditioned Behavioral
Cloning. We emphasize that our goalGAIL method only needs state demonstrations, without using
expert actions like other Behavioral Cloning methods. Finally, we show that goalGAIL is robust to
sub-optimalities in the expert behavior.
All the above factors make our goalGAIL algorithm very suited for real-world robotics. This is a
very exciting future work. In the same line, we also want to test the performance of these methods in
vision-based tasks. Our preliminary experiments show that Behavioral Cloning fails completely in
the low data regime in which we operate (less than 20 demonstrations).
8