are using an off-policy RL algorithm [ 10,11], we can “relabel" a collected trajectory by replacing its
goal by a state actually visited during that trajectory, therefore observing the indicator reward as often
as we wish. This method was introduced as Hindsight Experience Replay [ 12] or HER, although
it used special resets, and the reward was in fact an -ball around the goal, which is only easy to
interpret and use in lower-dimensional state-spaces. More recently the method was shown to work
directly from vision with a special reward [ 13], and even only with the indicator reward of exactly
matching observation and goal [14].
In theory these approaches could learn how to reach any goal, but the breadth-ﬁrst nature of the
algorithm makes that some areas of the space take a long time to be learned [ 15]. This is specially
challenging when there are bottlenecks between different areas of the state-space, and random motion
might not traverse them easily [ 16]. Some practical examples of this are pick-and-place, or navigating
narrow corridors between rooms, as illustrated in Fig. 2 depicting the diverse set of environments we
work with. In both cases a speciﬁc state needs to be reached (grasp the object, or enter the corridor)
before a whole new area of the space is discovered (placing the object, or visiting the next room). This
problem could be addressed by engineering a reward that guides the agent towards the bottlenecks,
but this defeats the purpose of trying to learn without direct reward supervision. In this work we
study how to leverage a few demonstrations that traverse those bottlenecks to boost the learning of
goal-reaching policies.
Learning from Demonstrations, or Imitation Learning (IL), is a well-studied ﬁeld in robotics [ 17,
18,19]. In many cases it is easier to obtain a few demonstrations from an expert than to provide a
good reward that describes the task. Most of the previous work on IL is centered around trajectory
following, or doing a single task. Furthermore it is limited by the performance of the demonstrations,
or relies on engineered rewards to improve upon them. In this work we ﬁrst illustrate how IL methods
can be extended to the goal-conditioned setting, and study a more powerful relabeling strategy
that extracts additional information from the demonstrations. We then propose a novel algorithm,
goalGAIL , and show it can outperform the demonstrator without the need of any additional reward.
We also investigate how our method is more robust to sub-optimal experts. Finally, the method we
develop is able to leverage demonstrations that do not include the expert actions. This considerably
broadens its application in practical robotics, where demonstrations might be given by a motion
planner, by kinesthetic demonstrations [ 20] (moving the agent externally, instead of using its own
controls), or even by another agent [ 21]. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst framework that can boost
goal-conditioned policy learning with only state demonstrations.
2 Related Work
Imitation Learning is an alternative to reward crafting to train a desired behaviors. There are
many ways to leverage demonstrations, from Behavioral Cloning [ 22] that directly maximizes the
likelihood of the expert actions under the training agent policy, to Inverse Reinforcement Learning
that extracts a reward function from those demonstrations and then trains a policy to maximize it
[23,24,25]. Another formulation close to the latter is Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning
(GAIL), introduced by Ho and Ermon [26]. GAIL is one of the building blocks of our own algorithm,
and is explained in more details in the Preliminaries section.
Unfortunately most work in the ﬁeld cannot outperform the expert, unless another reward is available
during training [ 27,28,29], which might defeat the purpose of using demonstrations in the ﬁrst
place. Furthermore, most tasks tackled with these methods consist of tracking expert state trajectories
[30, 31], but cannot adapt to unseen situations.
In this work we are interested in goal-conditioned tasks, where the objective is to reach any state upon
demand [ 8,9]. This kind of multi-task learning is pervasive in robotics [ 32,33], but challenging and
data-hungry if no reward-shaping is available. Relabeling methods like Hindsight Experience Replay
[12] unlock the learning even in the sparse reward case [ 14]. Nevertheless, the inherent breath-ﬁrst
nature of the algorithm might still produce inefﬁcient learning of complex policies. To overcome
the exploration issue we investigate the effect of leveraging a few demonstrations. The closest prior
work is by Nair et al. [34], where a Behavioral Cloning loss is used with a Q-ﬁlter. We found that a
simple annealing of the Behavioral Cloning loss [ 35] works well and allows the agent to outperform
demonstrator. Furthermore, we introduce a new relabeling technique of the expert trajectories that is
2