(a) Continuous Four rooms
 (b) Pointmass block pusher
 (c) Fetch Pick & Place
 (d) Fetch Stack Two
Figure 2: Four continuous goal-conditioned environments where we tested the effectiveness of the
proposed algorithm goalGAIL and expert relabeling technique.
We evaluate these questions in four different simulated robotic goal-conditioned tasks that are detailed
in the next subsection along with the performance metric used throughout the experiments section.
All the results use 20 demonstrations reaching uniformly sampled goals. All curves have 5 random
seeds and the shaded area is one standard deviation.
5.1 Tasks
Experiments are conducted in four continuous environments in MuJoCo [ 41]. The performance
metric we use in all our experiments is the percentage of goals in the feasible goal space the agent is
able to reach. We call this metric coverage. To estimate this percentage we sample feasible goals
uniformly, and execute a rollout of the current policy. It is consider a success if the agent reaches
withinof the desired goal.
Four rooms environment : This is a continuous twist on a well studied problem in the Reinforcement
Learning literature. A point mass is placed in an environment with four rooms connected through
small openings as depicted in Fig. 2a. The action space of the agent is continuous and speciﬁes the
desired change in state space, and the goals-space exactly corresponds to the state-space.
Pointmass Block Pusher : In this task, a Pointmass needs to navigates itself to the block, push the
block to a desired position (x;y)and then eventually stops a potentially different spot (a;b). The
action space is two dimensional as in four rooms environment. The goal space is four dimensional
and speciﬁes (x;y;a;b ).
Fetch Pick and Place : This task is the same as the one described by Nair et al. [34], where a fetch
robot needs to pick a block and place it in a desired point in space. The control is four-dimensional,
corresponding to a change in (x;y;z )position of the end-effector as well as a change in gripper
opening. The goal space is three dimensional and is restricted to the position of the block.
Fetch Stack Two : A Fetch robot stacks two blocks on a desired position, as also done in Nair et al.
[34]. The control is the same as in Fetch Pick and Place while the goal space is now the position of
two blocks, which is six dimensional.
5.2 Goal-conditioned GAIL with Hindsight: goalGAIL
In goal-conditioned tasks, HER [ 12] should eventually converge to a policy able to reach any desired
goal. Nevertheless, this might take a long time, specially in environments where there are bottlenecks
that need to be traversed before accessing a whole new area of the goal space. In this section we show
how the methods introduced in the previous section can leverage a few demonstrations to improve the
convergence speed of HER. This was already studied for the case of Behavioral Cloning by [ 34], and
in this work we show we also get a beneﬁt when using GAIL as the Imitation Learning algorithm,
which brings considerable advantages over Behavioral Cloning as shown in the next sections. In all
four environments, we observe that our proposed method goalGAIL considerably outperforms the
two baselines it builds upon: HER and GAIL. HER alone has a very slow convergence, although as
expected it ends up reaching the same ﬁnal performance if run long enough. On the other hand GAIL
by itself learns fast at the beginning, but its ﬁnal performance is capped. This is because despite
collecting more samples on the environment, those come with no reward of any kind indicating what
6