the supervised task. We also show that, through further ﬁne-
tuning, LA trained models obtain state-of-the-art results on
the PASCAL object detection task.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: in
section 2, we discuss related work; in section 3, we describe
the LA method; in section 4, we show experimental results;
in section 5, we present analyses illustrating how this algo-
rithm learns and justifying key parameter choices.
2. Related Work
Unsupervised learning methods span a very broad spec-
trum of approaches going back to the roots of artiﬁcial neu-
ral networks [57, 43, 3, 62, 30, 45, 31, 33, 27], and are
too numerous to fully review here. However, several recent
works have achieved exciting progress in unsupervised rep-
resentation learning [7, 72, 76]. Although the LA method
draws inspiration from these works, it differs from them in
some important conceptual ways.
DeepCluster. DeepCluster [7] (DC) trains a DCNN in a
series of iterative rounds. In each round, features from the
penultimate layer of the DCNN from the previous round
are clustered, and the cluster assignments are used as self-
generated supervision labels for further training the DCNN.
Like DC, LA also uses an iterative training procedure, but
the speciﬁc process within each iteration differs signiﬁ-
cantly. First, unlike the clustering step of DC where all
examples are divided into mutually-exclusive clusters, our
method identiﬁes neighbors separately for each example, al-
lowing for more ﬂexible statistical structures. Indeed, as
shown in Section 5.2, the use of individual semantic neigh-
bor identiﬁers rather than global clustering is important for
performance improvement. Secondly, LA optimizes a ob-
jective function which is different from DC. Speciﬁcally,
DC optimizes the cross-entropy loss between predicted and
ground truth cluster labels, requiring an additional and com-
putationally expensive readout layer. Moreover, due to ar-
bitrary changes in the cluster label indices across iterative
rounds, this additional readout layer needs to be frequently
recomputed. In contrast, LA employs an objective func-
tion that directly optimizes a local soft-clustering metric,
requiring no extra readout layer and only a small amount of
additional computation on top of the feature representation
training itself. These differences lead both to better ﬁnal
performance and substantially improved training efﬁciency.
Instance Recognition. Instance Recognition [72] (IR)
treats each example as its own “category” and optimizes
the DCNN to output an embedding in which all examples
are well-separated from each other. LA uses a similar em-
bedding framework, but achieves signiﬁcantly better per-
formance by pursuing a distinct optimization goal. Specif-
ically, while IR optimizes for equally separating all exam-
ples, LA encourages a balance between separation and clus-
tering on a per-example basis, as measured by the local ag-gregation criterion. For this reason, LA can be thought of
as a principled hybrid between DC and IR.
Self-supervised “missing-data” tasks. These tasks
build representations by hiding some information about
each example input, and then optimizing the network to
predict the hidden information from the visible information
that remains. Examples include context prediction [14],
colorization of grayscale images [14], inpainting of miss-
ing portions of images [56], predicting rotations of im-
ages [20], spotting artifacts of images [36], and the Split-
Brain method [76]. However, it is ultimately unclear
whether these tasks are perfectly aligned with the needs
of robust visual representation. Indeed, it has been found
that deeper networks better minimizing the loss functions
used in such tasks gain little transfer learning performance
on object recognition tasks [15]. Moreover, most missing-
data tasks rely on structures that are speciﬁc to visual
data, making them potentially less general than the embed-
ding/clustering concepts used in DC, IR or our LA method.
Generative models . Another broad class of unsuper-
vised learning algorithm, often termed deep generative
models, focuses on reconstructing input images from a bot-
tlenecked latent representation. The latent representation
is then used for other tasks, including object recognition.
These learning methods include classical ones such as Re-
stricted Boltzman Machines [30, 45] as well as more recent
ones such as Variational Auto-Encoders [39] and Genera-
tive Adversarial Networks [16, 22]. Although the features
learned by generative models have been put to a wide vari-
ety of exciting uses [44, 74, 13, 47, 37], their power as latent
representations for downstream visual tasks such as object
recognition has yet to be fully realized.
Information based methods. Several concurrent meth-
ods [67, 2, 28] optimizing mutual information of represen-
tations from different views of the same image achieve com-
parable performances to LA while using signiﬁcantly larger
architectures. These methods can be complementary to LA
as they aim at the consistency between multiple variants of
the same image and LA focus on the local aggregation of
embeddings of many images.
3. Methods
Our overall objective is to learn an embedding func-
tionfθ(realized via a neural network) that maps images
I={x1,x2,...,xN}to features V={v1,v2,...,vN}
withvi=fθ(xi)in a compact D-dimension representation
space where similar images are clustered while dissimilar
images are separated. To achieve this objective, we design
an iterative procedure to bootstrap the aggregation power of
a deep non-linear embedding function. More speciﬁcally, at
any given stage during training the embedding function, we
dynamically identify two sets of neighbors for an xiand its
embedding vi:close neighbors Ciandbackground neigh-
6003