Local Aggregation for Unsupervised Learning of Visual Embeddings
Chengxu Zhuang
Stanford University
chengxuz@stanford.eduAlex Lin Zhai
Stanford University
alexlinzhai@gmail.comDaniel Yamins
Stanford University
yamins@stanford.edu
Abstract
Unsupervised approaches to learning in neural networks
are of substantial interest for furthering artiﬁcial intelli-
gence, both because they would enable the training of net-
works without the need for large numbers of expensive
annotations, and because they would be better models of
the kind of general-purpose learning deployed by humans.
However, unsupervised networks have long lagged behind
the performance of their supervised counterparts, espe-
cially in the domain of large-scale visual recognition. Re-
cent developments in training deep convolutional embed-
dings to maximize non-parametric instance separation and
clustering objectives have shown promise in closing this
gap. Here, we describe a method that trains an embedding
function to maximize a metric of local aggregation, caus-
ing similar data instances to move together in the embed-
ding space, while allowing dissimilar instances to separate.
This aggregation metric is dynamic, allowing soft clusters
of different scales to emerge. We evaluate our procedure
on several large-scale visual recognition datasets, achiev-
ing state-of-the-art unsupervised transfer learning perfor-
mance on object recognition in ImageNet, scene recognition
in Places 205, and object detection in PASCAL VOC.
1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) have
achieved great success on many tasks across a variety of
domains, such as vision [41, 64, 26, 25, 8], audition [29, 23,
12, 51], and natural language processing [73, 32, 10, 42].
However, most successful DCNNs are trained in a super-
vised fashion on labeled datasets [41, 64, 26, 11, 29], requir-
ing the costly collection of large numbers of annotations.
There is thus substantial interest in ﬁnding methods that can
train DCNNs solely using unlabeled data, which are often
readily available. Over many decades of work, substantial
progress has been achieved using a wide variety of unsuper-
vised learning approaches [7, 72, 76, 40, 14, 16, 75, 52, 68,
53]. Nevertheless, unsupervised networks are still signiﬁ-
cantly lower performing than their supervised counterparts,and are rarely used in real-world applications [7, 51, 8].
In contrast to the inefﬁciency of unsupervised learning in
artiﬁcial neural networks, humans and non-human primates
develop powerful and domain-general visual systems with
very few labels [46, 6, 70, 1, 24, 5, 65]. Although the mech-
anisms underlying this efﬁciency still remain largely un-
known [6], researchers reliably report that infants as young
as three months can group perceptually similar stimuli [50],
even for unfamiliar stimulus types to the infants. Moreover,
this ability arises long before these infants appear to have
an explicit concept of object category [50, 58, 34, 9]. These
ﬁndings suggest that biological unsupervised learning may
take advantage of inherent visual similarity, without requir-
ing sharp boundaries between stimulus categories.
Inspired by these results, we propose a novel unsuper-
vised learning algorithm through local non-parametric ag-
gregation in a latent feature space. First, we non-linearly
embed inputs in a lower-dimensional space via a neural
network. We then iteratively identify close neighbors sur-
rounding each example in the embedding space, while op-
timizing the embedding function to strengthen the degree
of local aggregation. Our procedure, which we term Local
Aggregation (LA), causes inputs that are naturally dissim-
ilar to each other to move apart in the embedding space,
while allowing inputs that share statistical similarities to ar-
range themselves into emergent clusters. By simultaneously
optimizing this soft clustering structure and the non-linear
embedding in which it is performed, our procedure exposes
subtle statistical regularities in the data. The resulting rep-
resentation in turn robustly supports downstream tasks.
Here, we illustrate the LA procedure in the context of
large-scale visual learning. Training a standard convolution
neural network with LA using images from ImageNet [11]
signiﬁcantly outperforms current state-of-art unsupervised
algorithms on transfer learning to classiﬁcation tasks on
both ImageNet and the Places 205 dataset [77]. In addition,
LA shows consistent improvements as the depth of the em-
bedding function increases, allowing it to achieve 60.2%
top-1 accuracy on ImageNet classiﬁcation. This is, as far
as we know, the ﬁrst time an unsupervised model has sur-
passed the milestone AlexNet network trained directly on
6002