Nearest neighborsSuccessful imagesFailure imagesGT: Binoculars Pred: Mountain bike
GT: BoletePred: StinkhornGT: Table LampPred: Saltshaker
ZebraRock_beautyGreat grey owl
Figure 3. For each of several validation images in the left-most
column, nearest neighbors in LA-trained RestNet-50 embedding,
with similarity decreasing from left to right. The three top columns
are successfully-classiﬁed cases, with high KNN-classiﬁer con-
ﬁdence, while the lower three are failure cases, with low KNN-
classiﬁer conﬁdence.
siﬁed according to the nearest-neighbor classiﬁer. Unsur-
prisingly, the successful examples show that the LA-trained
model robustly groups images belonging to the same cat-
egory regardless of backgrounds and view points. Interest-
ingly, however, the network shows substantial ability to rec-
ognize high-level visual context. This is even more obvious
for the failure cases, where it can be seen that the network
coherently groups images according to salient characteris-
tics. In fact, most failure cases produced by the LA model
appear to be due to the inherently ill-posed nature of the
ImageNet category labelling, in which the category label is
only one of several potentially valid object types present in
the image, and which no unsupervised method could unam-
biguously resolve. To further illustrate this point, we use the
multi-dimensional scaling (MDS) algorithm [4] to visualize
part of the embedding space (see Fig. 4). In particular, the
LA successfully clusters images with trombones regardless
of background, number of trombones, or viewpoint, while
it (perhaps inevitably) distinguishes those images from im-
ages of humans playing trombones.
5.2. Ablations
In this subsection, we empirically justify the design of
the LA procedure by ablating or modifying several key fea-
High Accuracy Classes Low Accuracy Classes
Figure 4. Multi-dimensional scaling (MDS) embedding results
for network outputs of classes with high validation accuracy (left
panel) and classes with low validation accuracy (right panel). For
each class, we randomly choose 100 images of that class from
the training set and apply the MDS algorithm to the resulting 600
images. Dots represent individual images in each color-coded cat-
egory. Gray boxes show examples of images from a single class
(”trombone”) that have been embedded in two distinct subclusters.
Choice of Bi{1,2,...,N}Cluster-basedN4096
NN performance 30.2 33.2 35.7
Table 4. Nearest neighbor validation performances of ResNet-18
trained with different choices of Bi. We use H= 3 andm=
1000 for cluster-based Bito make the number of neighbors in Bi
comparable to 4096. In all experiments, we use cluster-based Ci
withH= 1andm= 10000 .
tures of the procedure. We also provide analyses suggesting
intuitive reasons underlying the meaning and inﬂuence of
parameters on ﬁnal performance. Please refer to the supple-
mentary material for further analyses.
Dynamic Locality for Background Neighbors. We
chose a nearest-neighbor based procedure for identifying
Bito embody the idea of dynamically rescaling the local
background against which closeness is judged. We tested
two ablations of our procedure that isolate the relevance of
this choice, including (i) simply using all inputs for back-
ground, or (ii) using a ﬁxed clustering-based identiﬁcation
procedure. (See supplement for details on how these were
deﬁned.) Experiments show that the local dynamic nearest-
neighbor procedure is substantially more performant than
either ablation (see Table 4). The desirability of a lo-
cal rather than global background measurement is consis-
tent with the observation that the density of features varies
widely across the embedding space (see Figure 2). That
the dynamic nature of the computation of the background is
useful is illustrated by the comparison of results from com-
puting neighbors in an online fashion from vi, relative to
the cluster-based procedure depending only on ¯V.
Robust Clustering for Close Neighbors. We also
sought to understand the importance of the speciﬁc cluster-
6008