Ci{i}Nk′(1,10k)(3,10k)(10,10k)(10,30k)
NN 33.9 0.1 35.7 36.2 36.1 37.9
Table 5. Nearest neighbor validation performances of ResNet-18
trained with different choices of Ci. All experiments use N4096
asBi.{i}meansCionly includes viitself.(1,10k) means
clustering-based CiwithH= 1 andm= 10000 . Other pairs
have similar meanings. See the supplementary material for details.
ing procedure for deﬁning close neighbors Ci. One alter-
native to using cluster-based identiﬁcation would be to in-
stead identify “especially close” neighbors as those within
a neighborhoodNk′, for some k′≪k. Using this in the
deﬁnition of Ciis equivalent to optimizing the embedding
to bring especially close neighbors closer together, while
somewhat further away neighbors are moved apart. While
this approach would have been a conceptually simpler way
to deﬁne local aggregation than the cluster-based deﬁnition
of close neighbors, it turns out to be substantially less effec-
tive in producing a useful representation (see Table 5).
Given the need for cluster-based identiﬁcation, a variety
of alternative approaches to k-means are theoretically pos-
sible, including DBSCAN [17], Afﬁnity Propagation [19],
spectral methods [63, 66], and gaussian mixtures [60, 61].
However, our present context is strongly constrained by the
requirement that the clustering algorithm scale well to large
datasets, effectively limiting the options to k-means and
DBSCAN. Unfortunately, DBSCAN is known to perform
poorly in settings with high ambient dimensions or highly
variable density distributions [17], both of which are char-
acteristics of the embedding space we work with here (see
Figure 2). Indeed, we ﬁnd that replacing k-means with DB-
SCAN leads to trivial representations, across a wide variety
of parameter settings (see supplement for details).
The robust clustering procedure described in Section 3.1
has several hyperparameters, including number of clusters
mand number of clusterings H. To intuitively understand
their effect, we performed a set of network characterization
experiments (see supplement). These experiments indicated
that two basic factors were of importance in creating clus-
terings that lead to good representations: the skewness of
the cluster of close neighbors around its intended target, as
measured by the distance from the cluster center to the em-
bedded vector vi, and the sizeof the cluster, as measured
by its cardinality as a set. We found that (i) clusterings
of close neighbors with lower skewness were robustly as-
sociated with better performance, indicating that skewness
should be minimized whenever possible; and (ii) there was
an optimal size for the set of close neighbors that scaled
with the representation capacity (i.e. depth) of the under-
lying network. Both of these facts are consistent with a
picture in which the ideal embedding is one in which each
category is equally likely to occur and in which each ex-
ample of each category is equally “representative” – e.g. inwhich clusters of points corresponding to natural categories
occupy isotropic spheres of equal size. Networks of smaller
capacity that cannot completely achieve the optimal distri-
bution will (poorly) approximate the optimal embedding by
fracturing their embeddings of single categories into subsets
that maintain isotropy by reducing the relative size of clus-
ters, each containing only part of the true category. These
considerations help explain the optimal settings for parame-
tersHandm: higherH(i.e. more clusterings) will tend to
produce more isotropic clusters, as outliers due to random-
ness are averaged out. However, increasing Hbeyond a
point set by the capacity of the network will lead to clusters
of too large a size for the network to handle (see supple-
ment Figure 1, from A to B, or from B to C). This nega-
tive inﬂuence can be shown in Table 5 by the slight perfor-
mance drop from (3,10k) to(10,10k) . Increasing m(e.g.
the number of clusters) can then compensate by decreasing
the neighborhood size without increasing cluster anisotropy
(see supplement Figure 1, from C to D). This conpensation
can be shown in Table 5 by the performance increase from
(10,10k) to(10,30k) . More details are shown in the sup-
plementary material.
6. Discussion
In this work, we have introduced a local aggregation
(LA) objective for learning feature embeddings that seeks to
discover a balance between bringing similar inputs together
and allowing dissimilar inputs to move apart, embodying a
principled combination of several key ideas from recent ad-
vances in unsupervised learning. We have shown that when
applied to DCNNs, the LA objective creates representations
that are useful for transfer learning to a variety of challeng-
ing visual tasks. We also analyze aspects of our procedure,
giving an intuition for how it works.
In future work we hope to improve LA along a vari-
ety of directions, including incorporating non-local mani-
fold learning-based priors for detecting similarity, improv-
ing identiﬁcation of dissimilarity via measures of represen-
tational change over multiple steps of learning, and extend-
ing to the case of non-deterministic embedding functions.
We also seek to apply the LA objective beyond the image
processing domain, including to video and audio signals.
Finally, we hope to compare LA to biological vision sys-
tems, both in terms of the feature representations learned
and the dynamics of learning during visual development.
Acknowledgments. This work was supported by the Mc-
Donnell Foundation (Grant No. 220020469), the Simons
Foundation (543061), the Sloan Foundation (FG-2018-
10963), the National Science Foundation (1703161), and
the National Institutes of Health (R01 MH069456), and
hardware donation from the NVIDIA Corporation.
6009