...
...
...InputConvNetConvNetConvNetEmbedding Space After Optimization
......
 ......
x1x3x2x4v1
Close Neighbors
Background 
NeighborsFigure 1. Illustration of the Local Aggregation (LA) method. For each input image, we use a deep neural network to embed it into a lower
dimension space (”Embedding Space” panel). We then identify its close neighbors (blue dots) and background neighbors (black dots). The
optimization seeks to push the current embedding vector (red dot) closer to its close neighbors and further from its background neighbors.
The blue arrow and black arrow are examples of inﬂuences from different neighbors on the current embedding during optimization. The
”After Optimization” panel illustrates the typical structure of the ﬁnal embedding after training.
3.3. Memory Bank
As deﬁned above, the neighbor identiﬁcation procedures
and the loss function implicitly describe computations in-
volving all the embedded features V, which soon becomes
intractable for large datasets. To address this issue, we fol-
low [72, 71] and maintain a running average for V, which
is called the memory bank , denoted ¯V={¯ v1,¯ v2,...,¯ vN}.
Similarly to [72, 71], we initialize the memory bank with
randomD-dimensional unit vectors and then update its val-
ues by mixing ¯ viandviduring training as follows:
¯ vi←(1−t)¯ vi+tvi (5)
wheret∈[0,1]is a ﬁxed mixing hyperparameter. With the
help of¯V, we can then rewrite the neighbor identiﬁcation
procedures and equation 1 by replacing the feature sets V
with¯V. In particular for Ci, the cluster label function gis
applied to ¯ viby index identiﬁcation, ensuring the chosen
cluster includes the index iitself. After this replacement, it
is no longer necessary to recompute Vbefore every step to
identify (good approximations of) CiandBi.
4. Results
In this section, we describe tests of the LA method on
visual representation learning and compare its performance
to that of other methods.
4.1. Experiment Settings
We ﬁrst list key parameters used for network training.
Following [72], we set parameter τ= 0.07,D= 128 ,
λ= 0.0001 , andt= 0.5. For all network structures, we
use SGD with momentum of 0.9 and batch size 128. Initial
learning rates are set to 0.03, and dropped by a factor of 10
when validation performances saturate, typically leading to
training for 200 epochs with two learning rate drops. Most
of these parameters are taken from [72], as our conceptualframework is similar, but a further hyper-parameter search
might lead to better results, given that our optimization goal
differs substantially.
As a warm start for our models, we begin training using
the IR loss function for the ﬁrst 10 epochs, before switch-
ing over to using the LA method. Following the methods
of [7], for AlexNet [41] and VGG16 [64] architectures, we
add batch normalization (BN) layers [35] after all convolu-
tion and fully-connected layers, before ReLu operations, to
allow a higher learning rate and a faster convergence speed.
Though adding BN is known to improve convergence speed
but not typically to lead to higher ﬁnal ImageNet perfor-
mance levels using supervised training regimes, it is unclear
whether this remains true when using unsupervised train-
ing methods. Importantly, the potentially competitive IR
method [72] did not originally include BN in their AlexNet
and VGG16, so to ensure that we have fairly compared that
method to LA or DC, we also train AlexNet and VGG16
with BN on the IR task. For all structures, we replace the ﬁ-
nal category readout layer with a linear layer with Doutput
units, followed by a L2-normalization operation to ensure
that the output is a unit vector.
We setk= 4096 for computing Biusing the near-
est neighbors procedure. In computing Ci, we use k-
means [48] implemented in Faiss [38] as the standard unsu-
pervised clustering algorithm, generating multiple cluster-
ings for robustness via different random initializations. Us-
ing the notation of Section 3, AlexNet is trained with H=
3,m= 30000 , VGG16 is trained with H= 6,m= 10000 ,
all ResNet structures are trained with H= 10,m= 30000 .
We justify all parameter choices and intuitively explain why
they are optimal in Section 5.2. All code for reproduc-
ing our training is available at: https://github.com/
neuroailab/LocalAggregation .
6005