Modality Competition: What Makes Joint Training of Multi-modal Network Fail in Deep Learning? (Provably)
•Training error is zero:
1
nX
(Xr,y)∈DrI{∃j̸=y:
funi,r
y(T)(Xr)≤funi,r
j(T)(Xr)o
= 0.
•The test error satisfies:
Pr
(Xr,y)∼Pr(∃j̸=y:funi,r
y(T)(Xr)≤funi,r
j(T)(Xr))
= (1±o(1))µr
Recall that µrrepresents the proportion of data falling into
the insufficient class for modality Mr. Note that funi,r(T)
not only minimizes the training error, but the primary source
of its test error is from the insufficient data that cannot pro-
vide enough feature-related information for the classification
task. Therefore, Theorem 4.1 suggests that the uni-modal
networks funi,rcan learn ideal feature representations for
the used single modality Mr.
4.2. Multi-modal Network with Joint Training
In order to evaluate how good the feature representation
learned by the encoder of each modality in joint training,
we consider a uni-modal network fr(t):=C(φ(t)
Mr), where
φ(t)
Mris theMr’s encoder learned by joint training at itera-
tiont, andCis the non-trainable linear head we defined in
Section 3.2. The input for fr(t)is simply the data Xrfrom
Mr. We will measure the goodness of φ(T)
Mrby the test per-
formance of fr(T), which is analogous to the method widely
employed in empirical studies of self-supervised learning
to evaluate the learned feature representations (Chen et al.,
2020a).
Theorem 4.2. For sufficiently large K > 0and every η≤
1
poly( K), after T=poly(K)
ηmany iteration, for the multi-
modal network f(t),fr(t):=C(φ(t)
Mr)w.h.p :
•Training error is zero:
1
nX
(X,y)∈DI{∃j̸=y:f(T)
y(X)≤f(T)
j(X)}= 0.
•Forr∈[2], with probability p3−r>0, the test error
offr(T)is high:
Pr
(Xr,y)∼Pr(∃j̸=y:fr
y(T)(Xr)≤fr
j(T)(Xr))≥1
K
where p1+p2= 1−o(1), andpr≥m−O(1),∀r∈[2].Discussion of pr:prrepresents the probability that modal-
ityM3−rfails to learn a good feature representation. The
specific values of p1andp2are associated with the relative
relation between the marginal distribution of z1andz2from
sufficient class. Typically, if the lower bound of Supp(zr
y)is
larger than the upper bound of Supp(z3−r
y),prtends to be
larger than p3−r. Nevertheless, our results indicate that no
matter how such relation varies, even in extreme cases (e.g.,
the lower bound of Supp(zr
y)is excessively larger than the
upper bound of Supp(z3−r
y), both of p1andp2are lower
bounded by a non-trivial value.
Feature representations learned in joint training are
unsatisfactory. From the optimization perspective, The-
orem 4.2 shows that the multi-modal networks with joint
training can be guaranteed to find a point that achieves
zero error on the training set. However, such a solution is
not optimal for both modalities. In particular, the output
of the uni-modal network fr(T), which we defined earlier
to assess the quality of the learned modality encoder for
Mr, has a non-negligible probability to generalize badly
and give a test error over 1/K(almost random guessing
forK-classification, and exceedingly larger than funi,r
y(T)).
The occurrence of such poor test performance indicates
thatw.h.p , at least one of the modality encoding networks
learned relatively deficient knowledge about the modality-
associated features.
Remark. Originally, the intention of joint training is that
for a multi-modal sample, if some of these modalities have
insufficient structure, the information provided by remain-
ingsufficient modalities can assist training and improve the
accuracy. Nevertheless, Theorem 4.2 indicates that adding
more modalities through naive joint possibly impairs the
feature representation learning of the original modalities
Consequently, the modal not only fails to exploit the ex-
tra modalities, but also loses the expertise of the original
modality.
Based on the results in Theorem 4.2, we are able to charac-
terize the performance gap between uni-modal and multi-
modal with joint training in the following corollary.
Corollary 4.3 (Failure of Joint Training) .Suppose the as-
sumptions in Theorem 4.2 holds, w.h.p, for joint training,
the learned multi-modal network f(T)satisfies:
Pr
(X,y)∼P(∃j̸=y:f(T)
y(X)≤f(T)
j(X))
∈[X
r∈[2](pr−o(1))µr,X
r∈[2](pr+o(1))µr]
Combining with the results in Theorem 4.1, we immediately