Modality Competition: What Makes Joint Training of Multi-modal Network Fail in Deep Learning? (Provably)
is approximately: Γ(t+1)
j,r≈Γ(t)
j,r+η·A(t)
r(Γ(t)
j,r)q−1, with
A(t)
r= Θ(1) , which is similar to power method for q-th
(q≥3) order tensor decomposition. By the behavior ob-
served in randomly initialized tensor power method (Anand-
kumar et al., 2015; Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020c), a slight initial
difference can create very dramatic growth gap. Based on
this intuition, we introduce the Property 5.1 to characterize
how much difference of initialization can make one of the
modalities stand out to be the winning modality and propose
the modality competition to further show that the neurons
for the winning modality maintain the edge until they be-
come roughly equal to Θ(β) =eO(1), while the others are
still around initialization eO(σ0)(recall that the networks are
initialized by N(0, σ0Idr)).
Remark. The idea that only part of modalities will win dur-
ing the training is also motivated by a phenomenon called
“winning the lottery ticket” identified in recent theoretical
analysis for over-parameterized neural networks (Li et al.,
2020c; Wen & Li, 2021; Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020b). That
is, for over-parameterized neural networks, only a small
fraction of neurons has much larger norms than an average
norm. Their works focus on who wins in the neural net-
works, while our focus is the winner of inputs, the modality.
Phase 2: converge to the winning modality. The next
phase of our analysis begins when one of the modalities
already won the competition near random initialization, and
focuses on showing that it will dominate until the end of
the training. After the first phase, the pre-activation of the
winning modality’s neurons will reach the linear region,
while the pre-activation of the others still remain in the
polynomial region or even negative. Yet, the loss starts
to decrease significantly, and we prove that Γ(t)
j,3−rjwill
no longer exceed eO(σ0)until the training loss are close to
converge. Therefore, the winning modality will remain the
victory throughout the training.
5.2. Overview of the Uni-modal Training Process
The training process of uni-modal can also be decom-
posed into two phases, i.e., 1) learning the pattern, and
2) converging to the learned features. Similarly, we de-
fineΨ(t)
j,r= max l∈[m][⟨Mr
j, ν(t)
j,l,r⟩]+to quantify the feature
learning for the uni-modal network funi,r.
We briefly describe the difference between the uni-modal
and the joint-training case. The main distinction arises from
Phase 1. Intuitively, since there is only one predictive signal
source without competitors, we prove that the network will
focus on learning the features from the given modality in
Phase 1. In particular, Ψ(t)
j,rwill grow fast to eO(1)at the end
of this phase. Then in Phase 2, the uni-modal will continue
to explore the learned patterns until the end of training.6. Discussions
Practical insights. Modality competition reveals an essen-
tial defect of late-fusion that features from part of modalities
cannot be learned if we naively train them jointly. An im-
mediate practical implication for practitioners is that, for
late-fusion, one can dynamically adjust the level of partici-
pation of modalities or introduce regularization terms during
training, to enforce the network to fully explore each modal-
ity encoder. For instance, Wang et al. (2020) added weighted
blending of supervision signals to joint training loss; Panda
et al. (2021) and Peng et al. (2022) selected on-the-fly the
optimal modalities during training. Our work offers theo-
retical supports for such adaptive learning. Moreover, our
work reflects how the prevailing pre-training methods e.g.
UNITER (Chen et al., 2020b), M6 (Lin et al., 2021), which
are capable of extracting favorable features for every modal-
ity, lead to better performance for multi-modal learning.
Limitations and future directions. Our analysis focuses
on a simplified data model and network architecture which
capture the realistic property of multi- modal learning under
late-fusion framework. An immediate future direction is
to study the sub-optimality of joint training in other fusion
frameworks (Wang et al., 2020). Furthermore, it is also
important to relax the data assumptions and generalize our
analysis to deep neural networks.
7. Conclusions
In this paper, we provide a novel theoretical understanding
towards a qualitative phenomenon commonly observed in
deep multi-modal applications, that the best uni-modal net-
work outperforms the multi-modal network trained jointly
under late-fusion settings. We analyze the optimization pro-
cess and theoretically establish the performance gaps for
these two approaches in terms of test error. In theory, we
characterize the modality competition phenomenon to tenta-
tively explain the main cause of the sub-optimality of joint
training. Empirical results are provided to verify that our
theoretical framework does coincide with the superior of the
best uni-modal networks over joint training in practice. Our
results also facilitate further theoretical analyses in multi-
modal learning through a new mechanism that focuses on
how modality encoder learns the features.
Acknowledgement
The work of Yu Huang and Longbo Huang is supported
by the Technology and Innovation Major Project of the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China under Grant
2020AAA0108400 and 2020AAA0108403.