Modality Competition: What Makes Joint Training of Multi-modal Network Fail in Deep Learning? (Provably)
(a) Error curves for video-only, audio-only
and video+audio (MM) models.
(b) Error curves for the directly trained uni-
modal models and the ones with a fixed encoder.
Audio loses the competition and has not been explored
(c) Top 10improved class accuracy
Evidence that Video has not been learned (d) Top 10 dropped class accuracy
Figure 2: Evidence of modality competition: we experiment on Kinetics-400 with the setup of multi-modal joint training.
For each modality encoder obtained from joint training, then we train a linear classifier head over it (with that encoder
fixed) to evaluate its feature representations, which is widely used to measure self-supervised representations (Chen et al.,
2020a). Figures 2c and 2d illustrate the similar comparison as Figure 1 for the ones with a fixed encoder initialized by the
multi-modal joint training. Detailed setups and additional experimental results are provided in Appendix C.
joint training. We have similar observations for visual
modality by comparing Figures 1b and 2d. Moreover,
Figure 2b shows that the feature representations ob-
tained from joint training for each modality degrade
compared to directly trained uni-modal.
2. Related Work
Success of multi-modal application. With the develop-
ment of deep learning, combining different modalities (text,
vision, etc.) to solve the tasks has become a common ap-
proach in machine learning approach, and have demon-
strated great power in various applications (Liang et al.,
2021). Achievements have been made on tasks, which it is
insufficient for single-modal models to learn, e.g., speech
recognition (Schneider et al., 2019; Dong et al., 2018),sound localization (Zhao et al., 2019) and VQA (Ander-
son et al., 2018). On the other hand, a large body of studies
in vision & language learning (Chen et al., 2020b; Li et al.,
2020b;a; Lin et al., 2021) use pre-trained encoders to extract
features from different modalities. These studies which
demonstrate the success of multi-modal learning are be-
yond the scope of our research. Instead, in this paper, we
focus on the end-to-end late-fusion multi-modal network
with different modalities trained jointly and aim to theoreti-
cally explore the commonly observed phenomenon (Wang
et al., 2020) in this setting that multi-modal network does
not make performance improvement over best uni-modal.
Theory of Multi-modal Learning. Theoretical progress
in understanding multi-modal learning has lagged. Existing
analysis for multi-view learning (Xu et al., 2013; Amini