Modality Competition: What Makes Joint Training of Multi-modal Network Fail in Deep Learning? (Provably)
“Insufficient” structure for Audio 
(a) Top 10improved class accuracy
“Insufficient” structure for Video (b) Top 10 dropped class accuracy
Figure 1: Top 10classes based on the accuracy improvement and downgrade of video-only over audio-only uni-model
training on Kinetics-400 dataset (Kay et al., 2017) for action recognition task. Detailed setups are provided in Appendix C.
alone cannot adequately predict the task. Such a structure is
common in practical multi-modal applications (Yang et al.,
2015; Liu et al., 2018; Gat et al., 2020). Under this data
model, we consider joint training based on late-fusion multi-
modal network with one-layer neural network, activated by
smoothed ReLU as modality encoder, and features from
different modalities are passed to one-layer linear classifier
after being fused by sum operation. Comparatively, the uni-
modal network has similar pattern with the fusion operation
eliminated. Both networks are trained by gradient descent
(GD) over the multi-modal training set Dor its uni-modal
counterpart Dr.
We analyze the optimization and generalization of multi and
uni-network to probe the origin of the gap between theory
and practice of multi-modal joint training in deep learning.
Our key theoretical findings are summarized as follows.
•When only single modality is applied to training, the
uni-modal network will focus on learning the modality-
associated features, which leads to good performance
(Theorem 4.1).
•When naive joint training is applied to the multi-modal
network, the neural network will not efficiently learn
all features from different modalities, and only a subset
of modality encoders will capture sufficient feature
representations (Theorem 4.2). We call this process
“Modality Competition” and sketch its high-level idea
below.
•With the different feature learning process and the exis-
tence of insufficient structure, we further establish the
theoretical guarantees for performance gap measuredby test error, between the uni-modal and multi-modal
networks (Corollary 4.3).
Modality Competition
During joint training, multiple modalities will compete
with each other. Only a subset of modalities which
correlate more with their encoding network’s random
initialization will win and be learned by the final net-
work with other modalities failing to be explored.
Empirical justification: We also support our findings
with empirical results.
•Evidence of insufficient structure. For each modality,
there exist certain classes where the corresponding uni-
modal network has relatively low accuracy as shown
in Figures 1a and 1b. For example, the class “play-
ing poker” for audio modality in Figure 1a and ”tap
dancing” for visual modality in Figure 1b. Such obser-
vations verify the insufficient structure of uni-modal
data.
•Sub-optimality of naive joint training. Figure 2a sup-
ports the findings in Wang et al. (2020) that the best
uni-modal outperforms the multi-modal.
•Only a subset of modalities learns good feature repre-
sentations. As illustrated in Figure 2c for audio modal-
ity, on some classes, e.g., “eating spaghetti”, “watering
plants” that were originally with slightly high accuracy
(from Figure 1a), the accuracy still drops , which in-
dicates that audio is not learned for these classes in