Modality Competition: What Makes Joint Training of Multi-modal Network Fail in Deep Learning? (Provably)
Proof. Training error analysis. For every data pair (Xr, y), we can bound the training error in the similar manner as joint
training, and obtain:
1
TTX
t=Tr
0L(funi,r(t)) =1
TTX
t=Tr
01
nX
(X,y)∈Dr−log(ℓy(funi,r(t),X))≤1
poly( K)
Therefore,
1
nX
(X,y)∈Dr(1−ℓy(funi,r(T),X))≤1
nX
(X,y)∈Dr−log(ℓy(funi,r(T),X))≤1
poly( K)
Therefore, we can conclude the training error is sufficiently small at the end of the iteration T.
Test error analysis. For the test error of funi,r(T), given j∈[K], we will have crΠ(T)
j,r−Π(T)
i,r≤ −Ω(log( K))for
anyi, j. Hence for sufficient data, by function approximation for uni-modal, we immediately have funi,r
y(T)(Xr)≥
max j̸=yfuni,r
j(T)(Xr) + Ω(log k). By Induction Hypothesis B.1, no doubt that Mrhas been learned. However for
insufficient data, , we will have funi,r
y(T)(Xr)≤O(γr) +1
polylog( K)due to the data distribution. For every other i̸=y, as
long as i∈ Sr, we will have funi,r
j(T)(Xr)≥eΩ(ρr). Therefore, with probability at least 1−e−Ω(log2k), for insufficient
data, we have
funi,r
y(T)(Xr)≤max
j̸=yfuni,r
j(T)(Xr)−1
polylog( K)
Recall that insufficient data occurs in Mrwith probability µr, then we finish the proof.
C. Experiment Details
C.1. Eexperimental Setup
For empirical justification, we conduct experiments on different datasets to verify the results presented by Wang et al.
(2020), and also provide empirical support for our theoretical analysis. Specifically, we conduct experiments on a standard
benchmark dataset for action recognition task, Kinetics-400 (Kay et al., 2017) and an internal product classification dataset.
Kinetics-400. The dataset consists of around 260K videos covering 400 categories. We use 240K samples for training and
around 20K samples for testing. For visual representation, we randomly select a frame from the video and resize it to the
resolution of 224×224, and for audio representation, we transform the wave input to the mel-scaled spectrogram. For the
evaluation of training accuracy, we sample 10Kproducts from the training set. For the multi-modal late fusion model, we
use two Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) models as bi-encoders for both vision and audio. We element-wisely sum up
their output representations, each of which is an average pooling of the Transformer outputs, and send it to a linear classifier
for prediction.
Internal product dataset. The dataset consists of products, each of which has an image, which is usually a photograph
of the product, and a title text, which describes the key information, e.g., category, feature, etc. We split the dataset into
two sets for training and validation. The training set consists of around 600Ksamples, and the validation set consists
of10Ksamples. We build a Transformer model for image model and text model respectively. Specifically, the image
model is a ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) network, consisting of 6transformer layers, each of which has a self attention
and Feed-Forward Network (FFN) module with layer normalization and residual connection. The hidden size is 512, and
the intermediate size is 2048 . The image is preprocessed by resizing to the resolution of 256×256, and split into 16×16
patches. Each patch is projected to a vector by linear projection, and the patch vectors as a sequence is the input of the
Transformer. The text model is also a Transformer model with the identical setup. Specifically, we tokenize each text with
the Chinese BERT tokenizer (Devlin et al., 2019).