Modality Competition: What Makes Joint Training of Multi-modal Network Fail
in Deep Learning? (Provably)
Yu Huang1Junyang Lin2Chang zhou2Hongxia Yang2Longbo Huang1
Abstract
Despite the remarkable success of deep multi-
modal learning in practice, it has not been well-
explained in theory. Recently, it has been ob-
served that the best uni-modal network outper-
forms the jointly trained multi-modal network ,
which is counter-intuitive since multiple signals
generally bring more information (Wang et al.,
2020). This work provides a theoretical explana-
tion for the emergence of such performance gap
in neural networks for the prevalent joint training
framework. Based on a simplified data distribu-
tion that captures the realistic property of multi-
modal data, we prove that for the multi-modal
late-fusion network with (smoothed) ReLU activa-
tion trained jointly by gradient descent, different
modalities will compete with each other. The en-
coder networks will learn only a subset of modal-
ities. We refer to this phenomenon as modality
competition. The losing modalities, which fail
to be discovered, are the origins where the sub-
optimality of joint training comes from. Experi-
mentally, we illustrate that modality competition
matches the intrinsic behavior of late-fusion joint
training.
1. Introduction
Deep multi-modal learning has achieved remarkable per-
formance in a wide range of fields, such as speech recogni-
tion (Chan et al., 2016), semantic segmentation (Jiang et al.,
2018), and visual question-answering (VQA) (Anderson
et al., 2018). Intuitively, signals from different modali-
ties often provide complementary information leading to
performance improvement. However, Wang et al. (2020)
1Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Ts-
inghua University, China2DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group,
China. Correspondence to: Longbo Huang <longbo-
huang@tsinghua.edu.cn >.
Proceedings of the 39thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copy-
right 2022 by the author(s).observed that the best uni-modal network outperforms the
multi-modal network obtained by joint training. Moreover,
the analogous phenomenon has been noticed when using
multiple input streams (Goyal et al., 2017; Gat et al., 2020;
Alamri et al., 2019).
Although deep multi-modal learning has become an essen-
tial practical machine learning approach, its theoretical un-
derstanding is quite limited. Some recent works have been
proposed for understanding multi-modal learning from a
theoretical standpoint (Zhang et al., 2019; Huang et al.,
2021; Sun et al., 2020; Du et al., 2021). Huang et al. (2021)
provably argued that the generalization ability of uni-modal
solutions is strictly sub-optimal than that of multi-modal
solutions. Du et al. (2021) aimed at identifying the reasons
behind the surprising phenomenon of performance drop.
Remarkably, these works have not analyzed what happened
in the training process of neural networks , which we deem
as crucial to understanding why naive joint training fails in
practice. In particular, we state the fundamental questions
that we address below and provably answer these questions
by studying a simplified data model that captures key proper-
ties of real-world settings under the popular late-fusion joint
training framework (Baltru ˇsaitis et al., 2018). We provide
empirical results to support our theoretical framework. Our
work is the first theoretical treatment towards the degenerat-
ing aspect of multi-modal learning in neural networks to the
best of our knowledge.
Fundamental Questions
1. How does the neural network encoder of each modal-
ity, trained by multi-modal learning, learn its feature
representation?
2. Why does multi-modal learning in deep learning
collapse in practice when naive joint training is applied?
1.1. Our Contributions
We study the multi-classification task for a data distribu-
tion where each modality Mris generated from a sparse
coding model, which shares similarities with real scenarios
(formally presented and explained in Section 3). Our data
model for each modality owns a special structure called “in-
sufficient data,” which represents cases where each modality