Agronomy 2021 ,11, 1227 5 of 14
Agronomy 2021 , 11, x 5 of 15 
 
  
Figure 1. Conceptualization of the several agricultural operations and AI related technologies of the 
European research projects  described in the paper. 
3.1. AI-Based Data Fusion for Crop Monitoring 
Data collection from agricultural areas related to soil watering, plant health or pest 
infestation often relies on manual inspection due to insufficient capturing methods and 
missing aggregation of different data sources. However, thanks to the increasing digitiza-
tion of the sector, the fusion of remote sens ing for automated scanning and data analysis 
with other sources of information (soil analyses, weather forecasts) and powerful AI algo-rithms is leading to a reduction in the application of fertilizers and pesticides. 
In this context, the German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy has 
recently funded the large scale NaLamKI initiative, which aims at developing a cloud-
based Software as a Service (SaaS) platform with open interfaces for providers from the 
upstream and downstream sector s of agriculture, industry, and service providers for spe-
cial applications in crop production. The initiative aims at the creation of a dataset by the 
fusion of sensor data from ma chines, remote sensing (satellites and drones), soil, weather 
and other existing data sources [12], so that agricultural processes like irrigation, fertiliza-tion, or pest control can be optimized thanks to the application of advanced AI methodol-
ogies. 
An important focus of the initiative is the visual analysis of plants and fields from 
images captured by satellites [13], drones or  agricultural vehicles. Furthermore, the com-
bination of multispectral imaging with rada r and soil sensors addresses the determination 
of plant and soil condition [14]. Finally, powerful AI algorithms will fuse the data and 
extract information for the optimization of the agricultural processes.  
The initiative will target two open research challenges within the AI community. On 
the one hand, even though methods based on AI have shown precise performance, they 
degrade with small training datasets (e.g., when  trying to detect rare events or diseases 
on plants). Thus, domain specific knowledge and semantic models should be integrated 
into the AI methods to increase precision. On  the other hand, AI algorithms look like black 
box systems for farmers, who find it difficult to understand results, reducing acceptance 
of such solutions. Therefore, methods for ex plainability will be exploited to validate net-
work decisions and to improve trai ning and network generalization.  
Finally, it should be mentioned that the initiative will also focus on the potential 
problems arising from data privacy with cloud-based agriculture as data will be shared 
among different stakeholders. Thus, the development of AI methods and services must always ensure data sovereignty along the entire value chain and interoperability between Machine Learning
and Deep LearningAGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS RESEARCH PROJECTS AI TECHNOLOGIES
NaLamKI
MoveonDEMETERVINBOTIoF2020DEAL
Visual computing
Robotics
Data analyticsMonitoring
HarvestingManagement
Figure 1. Conceptualization of the several agricultural operations and AI related technologies of the European research
projects described in the paper.
An important focus of the initiative is the visual analysis of plants and ﬁelds from
images captured by satellites [ 13], drones or agricultural vehicles. Furthermore, the combi-
nation of multispectral imaging with radar and soil sensors addresses the determination of
plant and soil condition [ 14]. Finally, powerful AI algorithms will fuse the data and extract
information for the optimization of the agricultural processes.
The initiative will target two open research challenges within the AI community. On
the one hand, even though methods based on AI have shown precise performance, they
degrade with small training datasets (e.g., when trying to detect rare events or diseases
on plants). Thus, domain speciﬁc knowledge and semantic models should be integrated
into the AI methods to increase precision. On the other hand, AI algorithms look like black
box systems for farmers, who ﬁnd it difﬁcult to understand results, reducing acceptance of
such solutions. Therefore, methods for explainability will be exploited to validate network
decisions and to improve training and network generalization.
Finally, it should be mentioned that the initiative will also focus on the potential
problems arising from data privacy with cloud-based agriculture as data will be shared
among different stakeholders. Thus, the development of AI methods and services must
always ensure data sovereignty along the entire value chain and interoperability between
various central and decentralized cloud providers and users in order to increase the
acceptance by partners and farmers.
3.2. Agricultural Digital Twins for Geospatial Monitoring
Within the manufacturing domain, the digital twin (DT) concept allows for testing
hypotheses through simulations, establishing continuous monitoring and implementing
measures for management and maintenance. Although agriculture cannot be compared
one-to-one with a factory production line, this concept can be extended to fulﬁl similar
expectations as in the Industry 4.0.
An agricultural DT [ 15] represents a generic key component for agricultural applica-
tions to build up a reliable database for plantations and ﬁelds, to increase accuracy and
coverage of crop prediction, and to signiﬁcantly reduce costs and time expenditure. Acting
as a virtual replica of the physical system, the DT provides the ability to examine complex
scenarios which involve multiple, intertwined factors at once. Limited existing use cases
include, for example, the ability to take measurements ranging from phenotype traits to
plantation inventory, the generation of precise weed control maps, or the control of the
evolution of the assets over time.