Agronomy 2021 ,11, 1227 6 of 14
A distinctive characteristic of a DT in agriculture lies on the spatio-temporal dimen-
sion of its operation, as it ranges from individual plants to twins of land parcels, farms or
regions [ 16]. Thus, one of the key concepts required for geospatial DT consists in ﬁnding
adequate feature spaces for geospatial entities. As a basis for so-called “Spatial Digital
Twins”, 3D point clouds can be deﬁned as a universal digital 3D representation for environ-
ments in almost all geoscale ranges. They are characterized by their enormous data volume
and lack of semantics, so that their added value is often limited to manual evaluation and
interpretation (e.g., by surveying ofﬁces). However, a single point of the 3D point cloud
does not allow constructing meaningful feature vectors.
Therefore, geospatial AI algorithms based on ML and DL have been implemented in
the German project DEAL to automatically derive vegetation objects from 3D point clouds
so that a fully automatic workﬂow that generates an agricultural DT can be implemented
(Figure 2) [ 17]. In such context, geospatial AI offers manifold ways to “distil” object-based
information from 3D point clouds, as ML and DL algorithms are able to identify and
interpret orchards and tree plantations, including the whole range of what constitutes
“trees” and “vegetation” (e.g., “crooked trees”, “ﬂat bushes”, “diseased trees”, etc.).
Agronomy 2021 , 11, x 6 of 15 
 
 various central and decentraliz ed cloud providers and users in order to increase the ac-
ceptance by partners and farmers. 
3.2. Agricultural Digital Twins for Geospatial Monitoring 
Within the manufacturing domain, the digital twin (DT) concept allows for testing 
hypotheses through simulation s, establishing continuous monitoring and implementing 
measures for management and maintenance.  Although agriculture cannot be compared 
one-to-one with a factory production line, th is concept can be extended to fulfil similar 
expectations as in the Industry 4.0. 
An agricultural DT [15] represents a generic key component for agricultural applica-
tions to build up a reliable database for plan tations and fields, to increase accuracy and 
coverage of crop prediction, and to significa ntly reduce costs and time expenditure. Act-
ing as a virtual replica of the physical system, the DT provides the ability to examine com-
plex scenarios which involve multiple, intert wined factors at once. Limited existing use 
cases include, for example, the ability to take measurements ranging from phenotype 
traits to plantation inventory, the generation  of precise weed control maps, or the control 
of the evolution of the assets over time. 
A distinctive characteristic of a DT in ag riculture lies on the spatio-temporal dimen-
sion of its operation, as it ranges from individual plants to twins of land parcels, farms or 
regions [16]. Thus, one of the key concepts requ ired for geospatial DT consists in finding 
adequate feature spaces for geospatial entities. As a basis for so-called “Spatial Digital 
Twins”, 3D point clouds can be defined as a universal digital 3D representation for envi-ronments in almost all geoscale ranges. They are characterized by their enormous data 
volume and lack of semantics, so that thei r added value is often lim ited to manual evalu-
ation and interpretation (e.g., by surveying offices). However, a single point of the 3D 
point cloud does not allow constructing meaningful feature vectors. 
Therefore, geospatial AI algorithms based on ML and DL have been implemented in 
the German project DEAL to automatically derive vegetation objects from 3D point clouds 
so that a fully automatic workflow that generates an agricultural DT can be implemented 
(Figure 2) [17]. In such context, geospatial AI offers manifold ways to “distil” object-based information from 3D point clouds, as ML and DL algorithms are able to identify and in-
terpret orchards and tree plantations, incl uding the whole range of what constitutes 
“trees” and “vegetation” (e.g.,  “crooked trees”, “flat bushes ”, “diseased trees”, etc.).  
Figure 2. Two examples of derived vegetation obje cts based on 3D point cloud analysis. 
Furthermore, a knowledge base can be built to answer questions such as the location 
and main characteristics of orchards and tree plantations (e.g., height, crown set, volume, 
diameter of trees, flowering characterizing, ripe ning velocity); the location of other vege-
tation stocks (e.g., shrubs, bushes, ground le vel vegetation, green areas); or the detection 
of differences between inventory data and cu rrent state of the orchards and tree planta-
tions. 
  
Figure 2. Two examples of derived vegetation objects based on 3D point cloud analysis.
Furthermore, a knowledge base can be built to answer questions such as the location
and main characteristics of orchards and tree plantations (e.g., height, crown set, volume,
diameter of trees, ﬂowering characterizing, ripening velocity); the location of other vegeta-
tion stocks (e.g., shrubs, bushes, ground level vegetation, green areas); or the detection of
differences between inventory data and current state of the orchards and tree plantations.
3.3. AI-Based Irrigation to Optimize Water Use
The European project Internet of Food and Farm 2020 (IoF2020) explores the potential
of the Internet of Things (IoT) technologies for the European food and farming industry
to make precision farming a reality [ 18]. IoT-driven PA enables farmers to optimize
their operating tasks to increase crop yields and to minimize costs of inputs such as
water, fertilizer, insecticides, and herbicides. The project has implemented the QUHOMA
platform [ 19], a smart irrigation solution developed as a FIWARE-backed end application
(Figure 3). The irrigation schedule is calculated by a complex event processing (CEP) AI
approach based on current algorithms used for irrigation. This approach relies on the daily
accumulated sensor data. Therefore, if the data stream were interrupted or inaccurate
due to malfunction or failure of the sensors, and/or loss of connection during long-time
periods, calculations would deviate from the optimized target.