Agronomy 2021 ,11, 1227 9 of 14
Moreover, a general underestimation of actual yield based on the combination of image
analysis and automatic canopy porosity assessment using a laser range ﬁnder has been
observed. This result can be attributed to a combined effect of bunch occlusions, low
accuracy of grape detection algorithms, and empirical relationships used in ﬁnal yield
calculations. Thus, further research on computer vision algorithms, especially related to
hidden bunches by vegetation, is needed to improve the reliability and accuracy of the
yield estimations.
Agronomy 2021 , 11, x 10 of 18 
 
 The navigation solution is based  on a hybrid reactive/GPS based  navigation scheme tested successfully in the 
vineyard ( Figure 5 ). On the one hand, the naviga tion scheme uses a laser range fi nder and RGBD device to perform 
reactive row following and obstacle avoidance. On the other han d, the scheme includes other reactive behaviors or 
GPS waypoint navigation to change from row to row or field to f ield, thus supporting different levels of automation 
(Figure 6 ). 
 
Figure 5. Sensors and components of the VINBOT Platform. 
 
Figure 6. Block diagram of feature extractor service architecture. 
A ground truth evaluation trial was set up in an experimental v ineyard in Lisbon with two plots of the white 
varieties “Alvarinho” and “Arint o”. For each varietal plot, six  smart points were selected with 10 contiguous vines 
each [23]. During the ripening period of the 2016 season, the vines were  manually assessed for canopy dimensions. 
The VINBOT platform showed an acceptable performance for the au tomated estimation of canopy features, 
although results were very depende nt on the variety of the grap es (Figure 7 ). Moreover, a general underestimation 
of actual yield based on the combination of image analysis and automatic canopy porosity assessment using a laser 
Figure 6. Block diagram of feature extractor service architecture.
Agronomy 2021 , 11, x 10 of 15 
 
  
Figure 7. (A) Actual vs. estimated values of av eraged (±standard error) yield per smart point (10 m canopy length); ( B) 
relationship between actu al and estimated values; ●—‘Alvarinho’; ▲—‘Arinto’. 
3.5. Yield Prediction of Olive Trees Based on Phenotypic Data 
Phenology is one important parameter when  estimating final yield. Thus, models 
simulating phenological phases are valuable tools to plan agronomic strategies to opti-
mize production and to assess the impact of climate change. Prediction of flowering and 
yield, and monitoring phenology, as well as pests and diseases, are important to model 
the impact of climate change on productivity . In olive trees, a relation between phenolog-
ical phases and climate variables has been found. Indeed, the occurrence of each pheno-
logical stage is based on the accumulation of temperatures above a base temperature cal-
culated on daily (growing degree day—GDD) or hourly (e.g., normal heat hours) time 
steps up to a fixed amount that depends on crop and variety.  
The EU-funded project DEMETER is developi ng prediction models of the phenolog-
ical state based on the day of the year (DOY ) and GDD using ML algorithms. Such models 
have been trained and tested with data collected during the monitoring of phenology in 
olive orchards in Tuscany (Italy) in 2008–2010. For each olive orchard, five olive trees in 
good health conditions and with homogeneou s productivity were selected. The monitor-
ing consisted in visiting the orchards at diff erent time spans during the year, according to 
the development stage of olive trees  in the different seasons [24]. 
There are 821 data points in the dataset that  belong to 22 different locations with an 
average of 34 data points per location and 274 data points per year. The dataset was split 
into training (60%), validation (20%), and test (20%) disjoint sets with the particularity that data were chosen using stratified sampling  from the data for the different years. 
Four different ML models have been tested  (linear regression, CART regression tree, 
random forest, and neural network). Each mo del was used twice, one time with linear 
features and another time with polynomial fe atures up to the fourth degree. A baseline 
model was used to benchmark the performance of the ML models. For each phenological phase, the average GDD accumulated from the 1st of January until the DOY of observation 
with a base temperature of 10 °C is the baseline model taken as prediction and benchmark. 
The olive tree phase is predicted with the GDD, considering whether the GDD cumulated 
are equal to or greater than the GDD of the ba seline model, but lower than the GDD of the 
next phase.  
The different models were evaluated accordin g to the root mean square error (RMSE) 
metric on the validation set. The model with the lowest RMSE on the validation set was 
the selected model. For this dataset, random forest with linear features was the best model 
using GDD and DOY as predictors and rounding the prediction to an integer. The trained 
models can predict GDD indices with a RMSE of 0.65% on the datasets considered in the validation. 
  
Figure 7. (A) Actual vs. estimated values of averaged ( standard error) yield per smart point (10 m canopy length);
(B) relationship between actual and estimated values; —‘Alvarinho’; N—‘Arinto’.
3.5. Yield Prediction of Olive Trees Based on Phenotypic Data
Phenology is one important parameter when estimating ﬁnal yield. Thus, models
simulating phenological phases are valuable tools to plan agronomic strategies to optimize
production and to assess the impact of climate change. Prediction of ﬂowering and yield,
and monitoring phenology, as well as pests and diseases, are important to model the impact
of climate change on productivity. In olive trees, a relation between phenological phases
and climate variables has been found. Indeed, the occurrence of each phenological stage is
based on the accumulation of temperatures above a base temperature calculated on daily
(growing degree day—GDD) or hourly (e.g., normal heat hours) time steps up to a ﬁxed
amount that depends on crop and variety.
The EU-funded project DEMETER is developing prediction models of the phenological
state based on the day of the year (DOY) and GDD using ML algorithms. Such models
have been trained and tested with data collected during the monitoring of phenology in
olive orchards in Tuscany (Italy) in 2008–2010. For each olive orchard, ﬁve olive trees in
good health conditions and with homogeneous productivity were selected. The monitoring