Agronomy 2021 ,11, 1227 2 of 14
impact of farming on the environment, e.g., such that stems from the over-application of
pesticides and fertilizers, and inefﬁcient irrigation.
The emergence of new technological trends like artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) enables
farmers to take a data-driven approach to collect and analyze large amounts of data
to gain knowledge about the real-time status of their ﬁelds to improve farm yield and
mitigate risks from weeds, pests, and diseases. The development of intelligent sensors,
instrumentation and machines is beginning to play a crucial role in agricultural systems,
which are affected by several factors such as environmental conditions, soil characteristics,
water availability, harvesting practices, plant diseases, weeds, and other pests. In the
near future, the integration of automated data collection and analysis, AI algorithms and
decision support tools will provide advanced tools towards PA. Moreover, robotic systems,
on the ground and in the air, will also have a major role in bringing PA and digitalization
to the ﬁeld, for harvesting, pest control or data collection, just to name a few.
This paper explains how data-driven AI applications are key enablers for PA in several
European countries. First, the paper summarizes several deﬁnitions about terms and con-
cepts related to PA; describes global trends and policies that will foster the implementation
of the AI-based solutions in the agricultural sector; provides an overview of the current
state-of-the-art regarding the application of AI technologies within the PA. Secondly, the
paper provides a summary of the most recent research activities in the form of research
projects implemented and validated by the authors in several European countries, with the
objective of showing the already achieved results, the current investigations and the still
open technical challenges. Finally, several conclusions and future works are presented.
2. Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Precision Agriculture
2.1. Global Trends
From ending poverty and hunger to responding to climate change and sustaining
natural resources, agriculture is a key component in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SGD), as it can be said that
agriculture is the common thread which holds the 17 SDGs together. Despite greater
productivity, the agricultural sector faces new challenges that threaten human civilization
worldwide. With a growing population and the complexity of climate change, the sector
has been forced to transition away from industrial methods to data-driven management
and automation to grow more food while using fewer precious resources.
In Europe, the Farm to Fork Strategy presented in the ﬁrst quarter of 2020 plays a key
role to achieve the goals of the EU’s Green Deal, which sets out how to make the continent
climate-neutral by 2050 [ 1]. It ﬁxes the measures needed to create more efﬁcient, climate-
smart agricultural systems that provide healthy food, while securing a decent living for
EU farmers. The Strategy targets a signiﬁcant reduction of the dependency, risk and use of
chemical pesticides, as well as of fertilizers; an increase in the EU’s land area dedicated to
organic farming; the development of innovative farming techniques that protect harvest
from pests and diseases; the reduction of the carbon footprint and water pollution.
To achieve the objectives of both the SDGs and the Farm to Folk Strategy, European
farmers need to transform their production methods more quickly and make the best use of
nature-based, technological, digital and space-based solutions to optimize their inputs (e.g.,
water, pesticides, fertilizers) and deliver better climate and environmental results. Such a
new paradigm will only be possible with the adoption of technological applications and
solutions that are driven by the convergence of several fundamental technologies, which
keep a farm productive and proﬁtable by collecting and analyzing data to help farmers
manage their resources, produce better crops while optimizing energy and chemical use
and mitigating risk.
2.2. What Is Precision Agriculture (P A)?
In the context of digitization in agriculture, two concepts are usually mentioned:
precision farming and smart farming. On the one hand, the former can be deﬁned as “an