Agronomy 2021 ,11, 1227 7 of 14
Agronomy 2021 , 11, x 7 of 15 
 
 3.3. AI-Based Irrigation to Optimize Water Use 
The European project Internet of Food and Farm 2020 (IoF2020) explores the potential 
of the Internet of Things (IoT) technologies  for the European food and farming industry 
to make precision farming a reality [18]. IoT- driven PA enables farmers to optimize their 
operating tasks to increase crop yields and to minimize costs of inputs  such as water, fer-
tilizer, insecticides, and herbicides. The project has implemented the QUHOMA platform 
[19], a smart irrigation solution developed as a FIWARE-backed end application (Figure 
3). The irrigation schedule is calculated by a complex event processing (CEP) AI approach based on current algorithms used for irrigati on. This approach relie s on the daily accu-
mulated sensor data. Therefore, if the data stream were inte rrupted or inaccurate due to 
malfunction or failure of the sensors, and/or  loss of connection during long-time periods, 
calculations would deviate from the optimized target.  
 
Figure 3. Sensors and components of  the QUHOMA platform.  
To overcome these limitations, the project has implemented AI-based predictive an-
alytics that fuse the gathered datasets with other public data sources to train models. As 
a result, data customized to the field are generated and used as a workaround for the 
following two scenarios. On the one hand, se nsor data streams may become unavailable 
for a period longer than the estimated tolera nce threshold of the CEP algorithm. In this 
case, accumulated historical data from sensors and previously defined irrigation sched-
ules are used to calculate the irrigation sche dule. On the other hand, sensor data may be 
inaccurate. Thus, predictive analytics based on the historical data can detect anomalies in 
the values of the sensor data (e.g., when stre am data values are not in the estimated ac-
ceptable value span) and use this informatio n for the proactive maintenance of the af-
fected sensors. 
Real-life irrigation experiments started in 2020 in Cyprus and Slovenia. The objec-
tives and methodology of the pilots are available in [20]. As an example, an experiment 
was conducted during a crop session of strawb erries (approx. 100 days), planted in a tun-
nel farm with Clay Loam soil in the coastal Ammochostos district in Cyprus (Figure 4). In order to perform this experiment, critical valu es of the climate zone, ETo (reference evap-
otranspiration), ETc (crop evap otranspiration) and other sens itive irrigation parameters 
were implemented on the algorithm which ha ndles the smart irrigation schedule on 
QUHOMA. Several tasks such as quality assessment and cleaning of weather data, or the 
Figure 3. Sensors and components of the QUHOMA platform.
To overcome these limitations, the project has implemented AI-based predictive
analytics that fuse the gathered datasets with other public data sources to train models.
As a result, data customized to the ﬁeld are generated and used as a workaround for the
following two scenarios. On the one hand, sensor data streams may become unavailable for
a period longer than the estimated tolerance threshold of the CEP algorithm. In this case,
accumulated historical data from sensors and previously deﬁned irrigation schedules are
used to calculate the irrigation schedule. On the other hand, sensor data may be inaccurate.
Thus, predictive analytics based on the historical data can detect anomalies in the values of
the sensor data (e.g., when stream data values are not in the estimated acceptable value
span) and use this information for the proactive maintenance of the affected sensors.
Real-life irrigation experiments started in 2020 in Cyprus and Slovenia. The objectives
and methodology of the pilots are available in [ 20]. As an example, an experiment was
conducted during a crop session of strawberries (approx. 100 days), planted in a tunnel
farm with Clay Loam soil in the coastal Ammochostos district in Cyprus (Figure 4). In
order to perform this experiment, critical values of the climate zone, ETo (reference evapo-
transpiration), ETc (crop evapotranspiration) and other sensitive irrigation parameters were
implemented on the algorithm which handles the smart irrigation schedule on QUHOMA.
Several tasks such as quality assessment and cleaning of weather data, or the identiﬁcation
of inputs and their impact on water retention have been completed. Algorithms and models
have been calibrated and adjusted for the experiments. The use of the QUHOMA irrigation
platform led to a reduction of the 10.88% in water used when compared to the empirical
irrigation scheduling program available for the farmer.
Although predicting yield in vineyards represents a challenging task due to high
interannual and spatial variability derived from the effects of several factors, quantifying
temporal, regional and local variability of vigor and yield of a vineyard can bring several
advantages for the entire production chain [ 21]. In this context, the EU-funded project
VINBOT aimed at developing an all-terrain AGV with a set of sensors capable of capturing
and analyzing vineyard images and 3D data by means of cloud computing applications, to
obtain yield maps representing the spatial variability of the vineyard plots [22].