Agronomy 2021 ,11, 1227 8 of 14
Agronomy 2021 , 11, x 8 of 15 
 
 identification of inputs and their impact on  water retention have been completed. Algo-
rithms and models have been calibrated and adjusted for the experiments. The use of the 
QUHOMA irrigation platform led to a reduction of the 10.88% in water used when com-pared to the empirical irrigation schedu ling program available for the farmer. 
 
Figure 4. Implementation of the QUHOMA platform on a tunnel farm. 
3.4. Robotics for Precision Viticulture 
Although predicting yield in vineyards represents a challenging task due to high in-
terannual and spatial variability derived from the effects of several factors, quantifying 
temporal, regional and local variability of vi gor and yield of a vineyard can bring several 
advantages for the entire production chain [2 1]. In this context, the EU-funded project 
VINBOT aimed at developing an all-terrain AGV with a set of sensors capable of captur-
ing and analyzing vineyard images and 3D data by means of cloud computing applica-
tions, to obtain yield maps representing the spatial variability of the vineyard plots [22]. 
The navigation solution is based on a hybr id reactive/GPS based navigation scheme 
tested successfully in the vineyard (Figure 5). On the one hand, the navigation scheme 
uses a laser range finder and RGBD device to perform reactive row following and obstacle 
avoidance. On the other hand, the scheme in cludes other reactive behaviors or GPS way-
point navigation to change from row to row or field to field, thus supporting different 
levels of automation (Figure 6). 
Figure 4. Implementation of the QUHOMA platform on a tunnel farm.
3.4. Robotics for Precision Viticulture
The navigation solution is based on a hybrid reactive/GPS based navigation scheme
tested successfully in the vineyard (Figure 5). On the one hand, the navigation scheme
uses a laser range ﬁnder and RGBD device to perform reactive row following and obstacle
avoidance. On the other hand, the scheme includes other reactive behaviors or GPS
waypoint navigation to change from row to row or ﬁeld to ﬁeld, thus supporting different
levels of automation (Figure 6).
Agronomy 2021 , 11, x 9 of 15 
 
  
Figure 5. Sensors and components of the VINBOT Platform. 
 
Figure 6. Block diagram of feature extr actor service architecture. 
A ground truth evaluation trial was set up in an experimental vineyard in Lisbon 
with two plots of the white varieties “Alvarinho” and “Arinto”. For each varietal plot, six 
smart points were selected with 10 contiguous  vines each [23]. During  the ripening period 
of the 2016 season, the vines were manually assessed for canopy dimensions. The VINBOT 
platform showed an acceptable performance for the automated estimation of canopy fea-
tures, although results were very dependent on  the variety of the grapes (Figure 7). More-
over, a general underestimation of actual yi eld based on the combination of image analy-
sis and automatic canopy porosity assessment using a laser range finder has been ob-
served. This result can be attributed to a combined effect of bunch occlusions, low accu-racy of grape detection algorithms, and empirical relationships used in final yield calcu-
lations. Thus, further research on computer vi sion algorithms, especially related to hidden 
bunches by vegetation, is needed to improve the reliability and accuracy of the yield esti-
mations. 
Figure 5. Sensors and components of the VINBOT Platform.
A ground truth evaluation trial was set up in an experimental vineyard in Lisbon with
two plots of the white varieties “Alvarinho” and “Arinto”. For each varietal plot, six smart
points were selected with 10 contiguous vines each [ 23]. During the ripening period of
the 2016 season, the vines were manually assessed for canopy dimensions. The VINBOT
platform showed an acceptable performance for the automated estimation of canopy
features, although results were very dependent on the variety of the grapes ( Figure 7 ).