Agronomy 2021 ,11, 1227 3 of 14
information-led management concept in both plant and animal production that is based
on a wide range of technologies”. This concept is based on digital processing of speciﬁc
information so it can support decision making processes. On the other hand, the latter
relates to a “knowledge-based approach in which machines can at least take partially
autonomous decisions in collaboration with management systems. The decisions taken
by machines are based on autonomously obtained and processed information in real-time,
even though farmers always have the possibility to correct them” [2].
Moreover, the PA concept has also gained ground in the European Union as a “farm-
ing management concept based upon observing, measuring and responding to inter and
intra-ﬁeld variability in crops or in aspects of animal rearing” [ 3]. PA brings about a
change in the land use, by fostering “whole-farm management strategies using information
technology, highlighting the potential improvements on production while reducing envi-
ronmental impacts”. Yost et al. simpliﬁed this deﬁnition and described PA as a “suite of
Information Technologies that focus on producing immediate beneﬁts by being conscious
of the environment” [ 4]. Moreover, Lezoche et al. have deﬁned the term “Agriculture 4.0”
as “the provision of advanced technologies to farmers to meet their production challenges”
by establishing the linkages between new 4.0 trends in technologies and agri-food supply
chain challenges [5].
Regardless of the term used, it is undeniable that digitization is leading to on- and off-
farm management tasks that focus on different data sources (location, weather, phytosani-
tary status, inputs consumption, prices) using sensors, machines, unmanned autonomous
vehicles (UAV) and satellites to monitor soil, water, plants and humans. Obtained data
can be used to make more informed decisions and to reduce uncertainty when predicting
the future.
2.3. AI in Precision Agriculture (P A)
Current adoption rate of AI technologies in the agricultural sector is not high due to
distinct factors among which a lack of knowledge on its real use plays an important role.
Therefore, several studies have focused on the identiﬁcation of the main AI technologies
used in PA as well as documented implementations.
Liakos et al. have presented a comprehensive review of research dedicated to applica-
tions of machine learning (ML) in agricultural production systems [ 6]. The key ﬁelds of
application were categorized into crop management, water management, and soil man-
agement. They concluded that it is undeniable that agriculture will beneﬁt from ML
technologies, which will allow Farm Management Systems to evolve into real-time decision
support systems (DSS) thanks to the application of AI algorithms.
Furthermore, van Klompenburg, Kassahun and Catal have performed a systematic
literature review (SLR) about the ML algorithms and features used in crop yield prediction
studies [ 7]. The results show that no speciﬁc conclusion can be drawn as to what the best
model is, but they clearly show that some ML models such as the random forest, neural
networks, linear regression, and gradient boosting tree are used more than the others.
Additionally, Noon et al. have presented a large survey of the application of deep
learning (DL) techniques for plant leaf stress identiﬁcation [ 8]. The techniques reviewed
were divided in vegetables, fruits and other crops on the basis of stress type, size of dataset,
training/test size and the deep network used. Several research gaps have been identiﬁed,
such as the detection and classiﬁcation of all severity levels of a stress to detect contagious
diseases, or the generalization of algorithms to different crops.
Finally, AI and robotics are playing a key role in helping or substituting manual
intervention in the agricultural sector, which covers a large application panel. On the one
hand, robotics has played a key role in agricultural production and management, so robots
are performing several operations autonomously such as weeding, irrigating or managing
individual plants. Zhang et al. have provided a detailed summary of the state-of-the-art
robotic grippers, grasping and sensor-based control methods, as well as their applications
in robotic agricultural tasks [ 9]. Compared to industrial grasping, higher requirements