Agronomy 2021 ,11, 1227 11 of 14
crops themselves and to determine the location of the robot related to the crop lines or tree
rows to auto-steer.
Researchers from the French–German MOVEON project have recently demonstrated
a comprehensive breakdown of a visual SLAM system based only on a single camera
combined with state-of-the-art multi-view stereo (MVS) algorithms and DL techniques [ 27].
It overcomes some of the constraints of current autonomous vehicles or robots working
on agricultural environments, such as overly repetitive patterns, the need of very detailed
reconstructions, or the abrupt movements caused by uneven roads. The results of the
project have been extended towards the agricultural sector. Therefore, experiments have
been conducted over the Rosario dataset, which consists of six sequences recorded in a
soybean ﬁeld, captured by forward looking stereo camera, showing real and challenging
cases such as highly repetitive scenes, reﬂection and burned images caused by direct
sunlight and rough terrain, among others.
In our approach, the dense point cloud can be generated ofﬂine up to real scale
(see Figure 9a), so that it is suitable for tasks like 4D monitoring of the crop and the
provision of valuable information to the farmer (e.g., size, disposition, maturity, volume,
width and height of the crop). As dense mapping can be achieved also in real-time, the
agricultural vehicle or robot can sense the environment to its position and auto-steer. More
important, it is also possible to use unsupervised depth estimation using convolutional
neural network (CNN) combined with the SLAM system (see Figure 9b) to tackle the
problem of manual labeling of agricultural data, and further boost the performance of
real-time dense reconstruction of the agricultural environment.
Agronomy 2021 , 11, x 12 of 15 
 
 (a) ( b) 
Figure 9. (a) Geo-referenced map (dense point cloud) of soybean field reconstructed from dataset Rosario [26] using SLAM 
and MVS; ( b) scene geometric estimation (depth map) from an unsupervised CNN, which can be used to simulate RGB-
D SLAM and boost real-time dense reconstruction [27]. 
4. Conclusions  
As stated in the report Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth , the World Eco-
nomic Forum (2018) observed that smart agriculture has the potential to “fundamentally 
change agriculture even more than the 20th  century mass farming methods did” [28]. In 
particular, PA technologies that deploy AI an d advanced robotics are expected to improve 
decision support at farm level, monitoring conditions and optimizing production to allow 
farmers to apply the optimal number of inputs  for each crop, thereby boosting yields and 
reducing water use and greenhouse gas emissions. 
This paper summarized the most recent research activities in the form of research 
projects implemented and validated by the au thors in several European countries, with 
the objective of presenting the already achieved  results, the current investigations and the 
still open technical challenges  
First, as low cost and accurate monitoring of crop and soil health has long been key 
to a successful agricultural economy, two examples of current German projects that deal 
with the availability of agricultural data and its potential use in DT to provide insights 
into such complex systems have been described. On the one hand, the large scale 
NaLamKI initiative will lead the implementation  of a dataset by the fusion of sensor data 
from machines, remote sensing (satellites and drones), soil, weather, and other existing data sources to overcome the current limitati on of data availability when implementing 
advanced AI methodologies for the optimization of agricultur al processes. Furthermore, 
current research challenges for AI such as explainability and the integration of semantic 
agricultural models will be targeted. 
On the other hand, even though still in primary stages, the application of DT in agri-
culture can bring a technological breakthrough in the near future. In order to provide in-
sights into complex agricultural systems, the DEAL project has implemented geospatial 
ML and DL algorithms to automatically derive vegetation objects from 3D point clouds, 
transcending explicit geospatial modeling an d overcoming heuristics-based reconstruc-
tions and model-based abstractions. Therefore, agricultural DT can be fully automatically implemented to simulate, plan, analyze and improve the way crops are grown so that 
yields are maximized, stress on water supplies and soil quality is re duced, and agriculture 
becomes a sustainable practice.  
Secondly, AI in agriculture is helping farmers to shift their management strategies to 
precise cultivation for higher crop yield and better quality while using fewer resources. 
On the one hand, AI applications in agriculture such as for irrigation, weeding or spray-
ing, save the excess use of water, pesticides and herbicides while maintaining the fertility 
of the soil to improve both productivity and quality of produced goods. In this way, the 
Figure 9. (a) Geo-referenced map (dense point cloud) of soybean ﬁeld reconstructed from dataset Rosario [ 26] using SLAM
and MVS; ( b) scene geometric estimation (depth map) from an unsupervised CNN, which can be used to simulate RGB-D
SLAM and boost real-time dense reconstruction [27].
4. Conclusions
As stated in the report Harnessing Artiﬁcial Intelligence for the Earth , the World Economic
Forum (2018) observed that smart agriculture has the potential to “fundamentally change
agriculture even more than the 20th century mass farming methods did” [ 28]. In particular,
PA technologies that deploy AI and advanced robotics are expected to improve decision
support at farm level, monitoring conditions and optimizing production to allow farmers
to apply the optimal number of inputs for each crop, thereby boosting yields and reducing
water use and greenhouse gas emissions.
This paper summarized the most recent research activities in the form of research
projects implemented and validated by the authors in several European countries, with the
objective of presenting the already achieved results, the current investigations and the still
open technical challenges.
First, as low cost and accurate monitoring of crop and soil health has long been key to
a successful agricultural economy, two examples of current German projects that deal with