Agronomy 2021 ,11, 1227 12 of 14
the availability of agricultural data and its potential use in DT to provide insights into such
complex systems have been described. On the one hand, the large scale NaLamKI initiative
will lead the implementation of a dataset by the fusion of sensor data from machines, remote
sensing (satellites and drones), soil, weather, and other existing data sources to overcome
the current limitation of data availability when implementing advanced AI methodologies
for the optimization of agricultural processes. Furthermore, current research challenges
for AI such as explainability and the integration of semantic agricultural models will
be targeted.
On the other hand, even though still in primary stages, the application of DT in
agriculture can bring a technological breakthrough in the near future. In order to provide
insights into complex agricultural systems, the DEAL project has implemented geospatial
ML and DL algorithms to automatically derive vegetation objects from 3D point clouds,
transcending explicit geospatial modeling and overcoming heuristics-based reconstructions
and model-based abstractions. Therefore, agricultural DT can be fully automatically
implemented to simulate, plan, analyze and improve the way crops are grown so that
yields are maximized, stress on water supplies and soil quality is reduced, and agriculture
becomes a sustainable practice.
Secondly, AI in agriculture is helping farmers to shift their management strategies to
precise cultivation for higher crop yield and better quality while using fewer resources. On
the one hand, AI applications in agriculture such as for irrigation, weeding or spraying,
save the excess use of water, pesticides and herbicides while maintaining the fertility of
the soil to improve both productivity and quality of produced goods. In this way, the
QUHOMA irrigation platform developed within the IoF2020 project has been extended
with AI-based predictive analytics that fuse the gathered datasets with other public data
sources to train models when data stream is interrupted or inaccurate due to malfunction
or failure of the sensors, and/or loss of connection during long time periods. Real-life
experiments conducted in strawberry crops in Cyprus led to a signiﬁcant reduction (from 6
to 11% less) in water used when compared to the empirical irrigation scheduling program
available for the farmer. The platform is currently being adapted to groves of olives in
order to optimize their irrigation using the minimum number of sensors.On the other
hand, while many analytical models have been developed to plan agronomic strategies to
optimize production, AI leads current research since it enables to take into account complex
multidimensional holistic approaches. This paper describes two examples of the use of ML
techniques for the yield prediction, both in the automated estimation of canopy features of
an experimental vineyard in Lisbon and in olive tree plantations based on phenotypic data.
First, the VINBOT project aims at predicting yield in vineyards using an all-terrain
AGV with a set of sensors capable of capturing and analyzing vineyard images and
3D data by means of cloud computing applications. Although the platform showed an
acceptable performance, with a better accuracy within the “Alvarinho” plot than in the
“Arinto” one, a general underestimation of actual yield for both plots was observed. This
result can be attributed to a combined effect of bunch occlusions, low accuracy of grape
detection algorithms, and empirical relationships used in ﬁnal yield calculations. Thus,
further research on computer vision algorithms, especially related to hidden bunches by
vegetation, is needed to improve the reliability and accuracy of the yield estimations.
Secondly, prediction models of the phenological state for olive trees have been devel-
oped within the DEMETER project, as models simulating phenological phases are valuable
tools to plan agronomic strategies to optimize production and assess the impact of climate
change. Four different ML models have been tested and compared according to the RMSE.
The use of low base temperature resulted in better model prediction.
Finally, robotics agriculture will not only make agriculture more precise but also
a sustainable business, as it is undeniable that the average age of farmers is rising, and
younger generations are less likely to take their place causing concern about labor shortages
in the agricultural sector. The MOVEON project has demonstrated a comprehensive
breakdown of a visual SLAM system based only on a single camera combined with state-