Agronomy 2021 ,11, 1227 10 of 14
consisted in visiting the orchards at different time spans during the year, according to the
development stage of olive trees in the different seasons [24].
There are 821 data points in the dataset that belong to 22 different locations with an
average of 34 data points per location and 274 data points per year. The dataset was split
into training (60%), validation (20%), and test (20%) disjoint sets with the particularity that
data were chosen using stratiﬁed sampling from the data for the different years.
Four different ML models have been tested (linear regression, CART regression tree,
random forest, and neural network). Each model was used twice, one time with linear
features and another time with polynomial features up to the fourth degree. A baseline
model was used to benchmark the performance of the ML models. For each phenological
phase, the average GDD accumulated from the 1st of January until the DOY of observation
with a base temperature of 10C is the baseline model taken as prediction and benchmark.
The olive tree phase is predicted with the GDD, considering whether the GDD cumulated
are equal to or greater than the GDD of the baseline model, but lower than the GDD of the
next phase.
The different models were evaluated according to the root mean square error (RMSE)
metric on the validation set. The model with the lowest RMSE on the validation set was
the selected model. For this dataset, random forest with linear features was the best model
using GDD and DOY as predictors and rounding the prediction to an integer. The trained
models can predict GDD indices with a RMSE of 0.65% on the datasets considered in
the validation.
3.6. Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) in Agricultural Robotics
Implementations of automatic agricultural robotics or vehicles can be grouped into
four categories [ 25] which are not independent. As illustrated in Figure 8, the robot or
vehicle needs information about its position, the map of the surroundings for guidance,
and the awareness of the presence of trees or moving obstacles in its navigation for safe
and successful navigation. This information can be integrated into a SLAM system.
Agronomy 2021 , 11, x 11 of 15 
 
 3.6. Simultaneous Localization and Mapp ing (SLAM) in Agricultural Robotics 
Implementations of automatic agricultural ro botics or vehicles can be grouped into 
four categories [25] which are not independent.  As illustrated in Figure 8, the robot or 
vehicle needs information abou t its position, the map of the surroundings for guidance, 
and the awareness of the presence of trees or moving obstacles in its navigation for safe 
and successful navigation. This information can be integrated into a SLAM system. 
(a) ( b) 
Figure 8. (a) Relation between the four most important implementations of an agricultural service 
unit (an agricultural robot or vehicle) [25]; ( b) weed removing robot in the soybean field, image 
extracted from open-source dataset Rosario [26]. 
SLAM is a proper solution for occluded GPS (sometimes blocked by dense foliage), 
crop-relative guidance in open fields, tree-re lative guidance in orchards, and more im-
portantly, sensing the crops and its environmen t [27]. Various sensors, such as on-board 
cameras, laser scanners and ultrasonic devices , have been used to extract features from 
the crops themselves and to determine the locati on of the robot related to the crop lines or 
tree rows to auto-steer.  
Researchers from the French–German MOVEON project have recently demonstrated 
a comprehensive breakdown of a visual SLAM system based only on a single camera com-
bined with state-of-the-art multi-view stereo (MVS) algorithms and DL techniques [27]. It 
overcomes some of the constrai nts of current autonomous vehi cles or robots working on 
agricultural environments, such  as overly repetitive patterns, the need of very detailed 
reconstructions, or the abrupt movements caus ed by uneven roads. The results of the pro-
ject have been extended towards the agricultur al sector. Therefore, experiments have been 
conducted over the Rosario dataset, which cons ists of six sequences recorded in a soybean 
field, captured by forward looking stereo camera, showing real and challenging cases 
such as highly repetitive scenes, reflection and burned images caused by direct sunlight and rough terrain, among others. 
In our approach, the dense point cloud can be  generated offline up to real scale (see 
Figure 9a), so that it is suitable for tasks like 4D monitoring of the crop and the provision of valuable information to the farmer (e.g., size, disposition, maturity, volume, width and 
height of the crop). As dense mapping can be achieved also in real-time, the agricultural 
vehicle or robot can sense the environment to its position and auto-steer. More important, 
it is also possible to use unsupervised depth estimation using convolutional neural net-
work (CNN) combined with the SLAM system (see Figure 9b) to tackle the problem of 
manual labeling of agricultural data, and fu rther boost the performance of real-time dense 
reconstruction of the agricultural environment. 
Figure 8. (a) Relation between the four most important implementations of an agricultural service
unit (an agricultural robot or vehicle) [ 25]; (b) weed removing robot in the soybean ﬁeld, image
extracted from open-source dataset Rosario [26].
SLAM is a proper solution for occluded GPS (sometimes blocked by dense foliage),
crop-relative guidance in open ﬁelds, tree-relative guidance in orchards, and more im-
portantly, sensing the crops and its environment [ 27]. Various sensors, such as on-board
cameras, laser scanners and ultrasonic devices, have been used to extract features from the