Agronomy 2021 ,11, 1227 4 of 14
of grasping in agriculture are rising since most of the food and agricultural products are
always fragile, easily marked or bruised, adhesive or/and slippery.
On the other hand, drones are being implemented in agriculture for crop health
monitoring, irrigation equipment monitoring or weed identiﬁcation. Roshanianfard et al.
described different aspects of autonomous agricultural vehicles that have been developed
at Hokkaido University [ 10]. The development procedures and characteristics of each
unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) were compared and discussed. Case studies of autonomous
vehicles designed and the development process have been presented as practical cases and
representative development challenges.
In last years, the EU has actively undertaken R&D activities related to the application
of AI for the digitization of agriculture. For example, Bacco et al. provided a survey
of the most recent research activities with two main contributions: a survey of relevant
research projects recently funded by the EU in the ﬁeld of PA; a review of the scientiﬁc
works that propose solutions for its implementation [ 11]. Regarding the former, they aim at
highlighting the increasing attention towards those research activities and the identiﬁcation
of the involved technologies.
However, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, there are no recent surveys of research
activities at European level related to the application of AI technologies for the agricultural
sector. Following the approach from Bacco et al., this paper aims at providing an updated
version of several European research projects that have been or are being run by the authors.
Taken together, these examples represent the current abilities and future potential for AI
applications in European agricultural research projects.
3. Results of the European Research Projects
Low replicability and the corresponding difﬁculty in systematic data gathering is a
key challenge in agriculture, as no two ﬁelds are exactly alike. Therefore, the comparison
of several pilot experiments in different ﬁelds, weather conditions and farming techniques
can enhance the collective knowledge. Thus, this section provides a summary of the
most recent research activities in the form of research projects implemented and validated
by the authors in several European countries, with the objective of showing the already
achieved results, the current investigations and the still open technical challenges. Figure 1
depicts relevant agricultural operations faced by the research projects, and the AI-based
technological solutions for each of those projects. The objectives, methodologies and
material used are different for each of the research projects, and when available, can be
further assessed from the existing references.
3.1. AI-Based Data Fusion for Crop Monitoring
Data collection from agricultural areas related to soil watering, plant health or pest
infestation often relies on manual inspection due to insufﬁcient capturing methods and
missing aggregation of different data sources. However, thanks to the increasing dig-
itization of the sector, the fusion of remote sensing for automated scanning and data
analysis with other sources of information (soil analyses, weather forecasts) and powerful
AI algorithms is leading to a reduction in the application of fertilizers and pesticides.
In this context, the German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy has
recently funded the large scale NaLamKI initiative, which aims at developing a cloud-
based Software as a Service (SaaS) platform with open interfaces for providers from the
upstream and downstream sectors of agriculture, industry, and service providers for special
applications in crop production. The initiative aims at the creation of a dataset by the fusion
of sensor data from machines, remote sensing (satellites and drones), soil, weather and
other existing data sources [ 12], so that agricultural processes like irrigation, fertilization,
or pest control can be optimized thanks to the application of advanced AI methodologies.