Agronomy 2021 ,11, 1227 13 of 14
of-the-art multi-view stereo (MVS) algorithms and DL techniques, overcoming some of the
constraints of current autonomous vehicles or robots working on agricultural environments,
such as overly repetitive patterns, the need of very detailed reconstructions, or the abrupt
movements caused by uneven roads.
5. Future Work
A key goal of PA is to retrieve accurate information about the spatial and temporal
variability of soil and plant parameters, with the aim to reduce inputs such as fertilizers,
seeds, water or pesticides. This allows better quantitative assessment of how much of a
speciﬁc input is needed, so that agriculture has a lighter impact on the environment and
at the same time, “produces more with less” in the same area. However, current plant
sampling techniques are time-consuming and involve intensive human labor and costs,
which leads to signiﬁcant limitations on the frequency and the number of samples that can
be collected to quantify the experimental error among treatment repetitions.
New concepts based on autonomous and intelligent robots for plant and soil sample
retrieval should be introduced to obtain more and better plant data in a shorter time with
less human labor. Therefore, groups of heterogeneous intelligent and autonomous agricul-
tural vehicles (UAVs) and ground robots (UGVs) capable of approaching and recognizing,
manipulating, sampling and collecting, transporting and delivering soil and plant samples
required for inspection should be developed. High-quality sampling data gathered by
robots will allow the development of novel DDS, which in turn will facilitate decisions on
exactly how, where and in which amount inputs should be used to improve production
and to use resources sustainably. The concept, once applied, will greatly increase precision
and quality in farming processes.
Furthermore, future extensions of this work will include the implementation of AI
algorithms for the smart farming concept, including effective livestock management. For
example, automated video monitoring of animal behavior to detect events like calving,
heat periods or other physiological phenomena, is of great interest to help farmers and
breeders improve efﬁciency in their professional activity. Advantages of an automated
solution are to provide a 24 h/7 days assistance, to allow anticipating alerts, to facilitate
reporting, to ensure traceability and all this to alleviate the burden for the farmers and
attend to the health of the animals. The livestock monitoring will be progressively enriched
with advanced functionalities based on IA and sensing that will be kept noninvasive
for animals.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.T.L., J.P . and J.B.; methodology, M.T.L., J.P . and J.B.;
validation, M.T.L., J.P . and J.B.; resources, P .E., M.Q., J.D., A.P ., I.G.O., A.B., T.M. and L.L.; writing—
original draft preparation, M.T.L.; writing—review and editing, M.T.L., J.P ., J.B., P .E., M.Q., J.D.,
A.P ., I.G.O., A.B., T.M. and L.L.; supervision, J.P . and J.B. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available in the article.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declared no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Farm to Fork Strategy. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/food/sites/food/ﬁles/safety/docs/f2f_action-plan_2020
_strategy-info_en.pdf (accessed on 5 April 2020).
2. Munz, J.; Gindele, N.; Doluschitz, R. Exploring the characteristics and utilisation of Farm Management Information Systems
(FMIS) in Germany. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2020 ,170, 105246. [CrossRef]
3. European Parliament. Precision Agriculture and the Future of Farming in Europe ; European Parliamentary Research Service (EPRS);
European Parliament: Bruxelles, Belgium, 2016. [CrossRef]