Gobert noted, “generalizing results beyond the demographics for whom the study was
designed could mean that students might get interventions that are not suitable forthem. ”du Boulay distinguished between “two main areas of concern ”for AIED
research: “the danger of harm to participants, ”including (1) “harm arising from
decisions that the AIED system might make, ”and (2) “the careful curation of data
derived from the research, ”including the related issue of “the models of individuals
that the AIED system might build. ”Other responses focused specifically on the unique
sensitivity of the data collected and used by AIED systems. For example, Boticario said“Data are no longer data because there is so much information available on anyone.
Data are people themselves and should be treated as such [...]we are [providing]
personalised support to our students based on [an] increasing body of data, which is
starting to include personal and affective information. This information is by its naturesensitive and demands a careful consideration and management. ”Finally, one respon-
dent noted that the need for AIED researchers to attend to the ethics of their work had
been “argued in a journal article [in]IJAIED back in 2000, ”(Aiken and Epstein 2000 )
and asked, “how has it changed? ”
Most Important Ethical Issues for AIEDWhen asked ‘What are the most important ethical issues for AIED? ’, nine respondents
directly referenced ‘data’, with several more identifying issues overlapping with the
governance of data. Many of the issues cited are not specific to education settings.
These included: (1) Data ownership and control, both within and outside the context of
research: “In a research context, the data normally “belongs “to the researcher. Once
a system is deployed in normal teaching, the issue of the ownership of this data is muchmore problematic ”(du Boulay). (2) Expectations of privacy, while recognising that
“privacy is more than a binary value, it has many nuances and shades ”(Boticario). (3)
Limitations of data, bias and representation, “where information is inferred without
noticing the existing limitations or the actual evidence behind results ”(Boticario). (4)
Consequently, “the management of the data collection, where users need to be properly
informed ”(Santos). (5) The transparency and intelligibility of decisions: “user agency,
and user awareness of how the technology functions are important issues ”(Walker).
Emerging technologies can bring new dimensions to these issues, with one respondentasking “
How to treat facial recognition technology? ”(Scanlon).
In addition, several respondents identified properties of AI in education which, in
combination together, make education distinct to other sectors: “All the generic con-
cerns around big data and algorithms apply to education. What ’s more interesting are
the features that make the formal education system, and learning as a phenomenon,
distinctive from the other sectors of society being impacted by data science ”
(Buckingham Shum). These issues relate not just to the ethics of the development ofAIED tools in and of themselves, but to their educational context –when, how, and to
what end, an AIED tool is being used.
Unsurprisingly, the implications of AIED for teaching and learning was central to
many of the respondents ’concerns. The “quality of education ”(Aleven) enabled by
AIED tools was highlighted. There was a recognition of the pedagogical choicesinherent within the design of AIED tools, with one respondent emphasising a desire
for“designing a pedagogy that empowers learners and teachers ”(Sharples), while512 International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2022) 32:504 –526