at least worth considering its potential role in informing those broader debates from its
unique perspective of designing AI specifically for the purpose of influencing humancognition. AIED ’s ambition to support human learning and the field ’s proximity to the
learning sciences, educational neuroscience and educational practice, likely affords avery human-centric, human-developmental understanding of ethics and related dimen-sions of fairness, transparency, accountability etc., than is afforded by the more general
socio-political and legal considerations in the context of other AI subfields.
Furthermore, as well as contributing to the broader ethics of AI debates, there is a
more specific question related to whether or not AIED as community might serve as aguiding discipline with respect to ethics best practices in non-academic areas such asthe educational technology industry –something that Blikstein touched upon during his
AIED 2018 conference keynote speech. Deciding how this might work best is non-trivial. To begin with, it might be worth considering a distinction between “the ethics of
AIED research ”(which should be informed by standards such as APA 2014 and
BERA 2004), “the ethics of AIED tools and practices in and outside of classrooms ”
(for which, as we have noted, little has been published), and “the ethics of commercial
AIED products ”(for which nothing has so far been seen). For each of these, the
community might benefit from drawing on the experience of other communities inrelated areas. In web accessibility research, for example, researchers have critiquedapproaches that appear reasonable but that embody counterproductive assumptions thatneed to be problematised (e.g., Lewthwaite 2014 ).
The various stakeholders (developers, educators, policymakers) all need to be
provided key information about the pros and cons of specific AIED technologies –
perhaps something in the style of the list of ingredients and allergy warnings on food, orside-effects on medicines. Such key information could include both the known limita-tions (e.g. in terms of pedagogies, biases of interpretation, privacy etc.), as well asbenefits that are likely to emerge from the use of specific AIED systems. Can such anopen approach serve to better inform the users ’choices and transparency of what we
create? Would it allow the community to become more accountable, more in touch withthe broader developments and debates in AI as well as educational practice? The idea is
certainly worth exploring as it carries a potential for both making AIED more influen-
tial with respect to AI in Education policy and practice, and for informing AIED ’s
future innovations and its standing in the broader scientific, educational practice and AIcontexts.
First Steps towards a FrameworkAs noted above, the ethics of AI raises a variety of complex issues centred on data (e.g.,
consent and data privacy) and how that data is analysed (e.g., transparency and trust).
However, it is also clear that the ethics of AIED cannot be reduced to questions aboutdata and computational approaches alone. In other words, investigating the ethics ofAIED data and computations is necessary but not sufficient . Given that, by definition,
AIED is the application of AI techniques and processes in education, the ethics ofAIED also as noted earlier needs to account for the ethics of education (Holmes et al.2019b ). Yet, while the ethics of education has been the focus of debate and research for
more than 2000 years (e.g., Aristotle 2009 ; Macfarlane 2003 ; Peters 1970 ), it is mostly
unacknowledged and unaccounted for by the wider AIED community.520 International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2022) 32:504 –526