not just part of the academic community ’s discourse but part of wider public discus-
sion. ”Similarly, Bittencourt suggested that “since [there is so much] news and
arguments about the implications of AI, researchers are starting to think about ethicsin AIED. ”Buckingham Shum framed growing concerns around the ethics of AIED as a
consequence of the field ’s growth in real-world applications: “It is only relatively
recently with ‘adaptive products ’hitting the mainstream that AIED has found itself
being touched by the broader public spotlight. Until then, it was an academic commu-
nity, with such a small user base that nobody was asking ethics questions. ”
Only one participant out of 17 outright disagreed that AIED researchers pay
insufficient attention to ethics. However, this participant ’s response focused exclusively
on AIED research ethics , noting that institutional ethics boards in university settings
ensure that researchers consider certain ethical dimensions of their research practice.Four of 17 respondents described themselves as “on the fence, ”or stated that they
agreed only “to an extent. ”Koedinger noted that “many of us got into AIED because
we wanted to improve education, and especially for students who most need the help of
free public education, ”characterizing the pursuit of this goal as “doing ethics, which
goes beyond research about [ethics] .”Aleven similarly said that “one suspects that
many AIED researchers are fundamentally motivated by ethical concerns, ”while
acknowledging that “so far the field has not often addressed [ethics] explicitly or
discussed it publicly. ”Other respondents pointed out that “this is a problem inherent to
many fields of technology research and not solely AIED ”(Walker). In line with this
view, Sharples characterized the practice of AIED as being “primarily led by technol-
ogy,”noting that “its impacts on stakeholders, including direct users, those indirectly
affected and society at large has been largely ignored. ”Finally, some respondents
commented that this is a complex question to answer. McLaren noted that it may bedifficult to make generalizations across the whole of the AIED community, as “some
researchers are very cognizant and sensitive to ethical issues [...]others, not as much. ”
Other respondents emphasised that the AIED community has attended to certainaspects of ethics (e.g., data privacy and research ethics), although historically it hasattended less to others (Rodrigo).
In a follow-up question, survey respondents were asked to reflect upon why it is
important for AIED researchers to pay careful consideration to the ethics of their work.Respondents highlighted the role AIED research may play in shaping what educationlooks like for the next generation of students. For example, Cukurova emphasised thepotential for “long term adoption of technology. ”McLaren noted that AIED research
“could have an impact on students, their education, and thus the future of mankind. ”
Walker, Rodrigo, and Holstein emphasised the moral responsibilities that come withAIED being a design discipline, not solely an empirical science. As Walker put it, “we
are shaping a future where technology can personalize instruction to learners ’unique
needs, and should be more involved in ensuring that future is a positive one. ”
Similarly, Rodrigo highlighted that AIED researchers are engaged in “trying to create
systems that can assist in the formation of the next generation. These students have tobe treated fairly, with respect, with consideration, and their needs as individuals haveto be attended to, to the extent possible. ”
A number of respondents emphasised that AIED researchers have a responsibility to
make their “research more accessible, and more transparent ”(Buckingham Shum),
and to “be particularly mindful of the ways that people interpret our results ”(Kay). AsInternational Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2022) 32:504 –526 511