to engage with and affirm may be an intermediate step ”(Walker); “I think it would be
very useful to create such a check list of issues to consider ”(Kay).
Discussion
The survey results presented in this paper indicate that AIED researchers recognise the
importance and value of engaging with the ethics of their work (e.g., “We need to be
sure that our work is of both the highest standards of research and the higheststandards of ethics. ”McLaren). Nonetheless, there are nuances of opinion with respect
to what this might include and how it might be best achieved. With this in mind, in thissection, we first summarise key emergent themes and identify some issues that webelieve are missing from the discussion; then we propose a draft of an initial AIEDethics framework to help galvanise further debate.
As noted previously, there is no doubt that all respondents do wish to explore, better
understand and engage with the ethics of the design and application of AI in educa-tional contexts. However, some respondents appear to believe that we, as a community,are already ‘doing ethics ’by virtue of operating with best intentions in the educational
domain, which is in and of itself ethical (e.g., “Many of us got into AIED because we
wanted to improve education [...].Pursuing that goal is doing ethics [...].Yet, definitely,
we could do more .”Koedinger). However, the reality is that “no ethical oversight is
required to deploy an elearning system or an AIED system as part of the normal
teaching process ”(du Boulay).
Clearly, good intentions are not by themselves sufficient. As was acknowledged by
several respondents, we need to understand more precisely the ethical risks and to bealways on the lookout for unintended consequences that relate specifically to thepedagogical designs (including their readiness for real-world use) that are encapsulatedin the AI systems we develop and deploy (e.g., “One could envisage a time when
judgements about progress through educational stages might be taken by AIEDsystems and these might be seriously damaging to individuals ’progress and well-
being if they were wrong. ”du Boulay).
The precision of such an understanding needs to be expressed in an actionable code
of best practice that the community can rely on in designing and deploying AIED
technologies in diverse educational contexts. However, although there appears to be aclear appetite for some kind of ethics of AIED framework that would build uponuniversity research ethics, the community also recognises that such a framework alsoneeds to be distinct from the generally established research ethics approvals andprocedures. In particular, such a framework would need to incorporate guidance
addressing the many issues raised by respondents (including fairness, accountability,
transparency, bias, autonomy, agency, and inclusion) specifically at the intersection ofAI and the learning sciences, and ensure that AIED is ethical by design and not just byintention.
In this context, the respondents were also cognizant of the problems that such a
framework might itself inadvertently entail. In particular, in line with Bietti ( 2020 ),
having such a framework might both stifle innovation and lead to accusations of, oractual, in-house “ethics washing ”. So, while the community recognises the critical
importance of AIED ’s specific code of ethical practice, what is meant by ethical AIED518 International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2022) 32:504 –526