another arguing that the scope of many AIED tools remains narrow and therefore there
may be elements of education that are better off without AIED, asking: “What do we
risk losing through automation, and are we prepared to preserve those aspects thatshould be preserved (e.g., intentionally ‘not’automated)? Are we diminishing the
quality of education, overall, by conveying that we have reached human parity in AI-based teaching systems (but failing to emphasise that we have done so on a very
narrow set of teaching tasks, whereas good education involves much more than this)? ”
(Holstein).
A further set of concerns for several respondents centered on the experience of users.
These included reflections on agency, transparency and intelligibility in educationcontexts. For example, “making the teaching and learning actions transparent to
learners and teachers ”(Sharples), or “avoiding alienation on the part of teachers,
students, and other stakeholders ”(Aleven). These also included reference to equity and
fairness. For example, “some students may need to work longer than others; ideally,
every student should reach the same level of mastery of the content they need to learn ”
(Woolf), or “are we diminishing the quality of education for ‘certain groups of
students ’, in cases where ‘business as usual ’would have worked better for these
groups? ”(Holstein). That respondent also identified a risk at a societal level that users
of AIED could be subjected to “cultural imperialism as we scale up AIED systems to a
diverse range of contexts ”(Holstein).
A final group of concerns related to the ethics of AIED research ,r a t h e rt h a ni t s
applications and uses. These covered the need to treat research subjects –particularly
children –ethically and fairly (McLaren), reporting results while respecting confiden-
tiality and anonymity, particularly given p otential to re-identify data (Santos,
Boticario), and data collection (Gobert). In addition, the potential for AIED researchto be (mis)used by companies was identified: ‘How will our outputs be used (or
misused) by more profit-driven entities? How do we manage misuses of our outputs? ’
(Holstein).
Most Ignored Yet Critical Ethical Issues for AIED
When asked what were the most ignored ethical issues for AIED, several of the
respondents (Bittencourt, Boticario, du Boulay, Santos, Scanlon, Sharples) againemphasised issues centred on data, for example: (1) The problems of data collection:“What I think it is […]critical is how to approach the need to collect data in a real
world scenario when you need to compare proposals and you think one of them mightbe bad for the students, or give them less opportunities for learning ”(Santos). (2) “The
lack of clarity of what happens to the data collected by AIED systems ”(du Boulay). (3)
Data ownership and control: “The student is providing data for their benefit, and
thereof they should have to control what data and what usage of that data is to beallowed. No one but them must have the control or right to manipulate those data foranything else but to support their learning ”(Boticario). (4) Data anonymity: “In many
journal papers, the reporting of the data is anonymized, yet participants are able torecognize themselves in the reporting because there is only one woman who is 26 yearsold and has 3 years of experience as [a]teacher ”(Santos). In a similar vein, other
researchers mentioned issues around transparency: “How to make the teaching deci-
sions and the system ’s model of the learner visible and inspectable ”(Sharples).International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2022) 32:504 –526 513