learning sciences, cognitive and educational neuroscience, and philosophical in-
trospection. All of these are necessary to help us identify and explore the unknownunknowns, in order to establish a comprehensive framework for the ethics ofAIED. In fact, establishing such a framework is only the first step in the process.If our efforts in this area are to have genuine and future use value for the AIEDcommunity, teachers, students, policymak ers and other stakeholders, considerable
effort then needs to be focused on how that framework might be best implemented
in practice.
Finally, but no less importantly, we should recognise another perspective on
AIED ethical questions: ethics is not just about stopping ‘unethical ’activities.
Instead, the ethical cost of inaction and failure to innovate must be balancedagainst the potential for AIED innovatio n to result in real benefits for learners,
educators, educational institutions and br oader society. In other words, the ethics
of AIED cannot just be preventative –it cannot just be about stopping researchers
and developers from ‘doing harm ’. Instead, it needs to provide a proactive set of
foundational guidance, within which to ground AIED research and development,which is both protective and facilitative, to help ensure the best outcomes for allstakeholders from the inevitable push of AI into educational contexts.
Conclusion
While the low numbers of researchers attending the Ethics of AIED workshops
and responding to the survey reported in this paper suggest that the AIEDcommunity have a low level of interest in the ethics of AIED, the responses tothis survey and the other papers in this SI indicate otherwise. Clearly, many AIEDresearchers do recognise the importance and value of engaging with the ethics of
their work (indeed, there is no evidence of AIED work that is deliberatelyunethical). However, as the responses reported here have demonstrated, thisengagement now needs to be surfaced, the nuances of opinion need to be
discussed in depth, and issues around data, human cognition, and choices of
pedagogy need to be investigated, challenged and resolved. In particular, theAIED community needs to debate the value and usefulness of developing anethical framework and practical guidelines, to inform our ongoing research, andto ensure that the AIED tools that we develop and the approaches that we take are,in the widest sense, ethical by design. It is also clear that without a more targetedapproach to the ethics of AIED, the work conducted by the community mayremain largely invisible to the rest of the AI subfields and related policies, also
potentially stifling the impact of the A IED research on the increasingly human-
oriented, real-world applications of AI . With its deep understanding of the human
u s e r so fA Ia n dt h eA I ’s potential to support human learning and behaviour
change, AIED offers critical perspect ive on the way that people interact with
and change due to the interaction with AI systems, and on the potential benefitsand pitfalls of such an engagement. The time is ripe to bring this perspective intothe open and to allow for cross-fertilisation of AI science and approaches with thebenefits for human learning and development as investigated for decades within
the AIED field as the guiding principles for AIED and beyond.522 International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2022) 32:504 –526