research was approved by the Open University ’s Human Research Ethics Committee
(HREC/3339/Holmes: 02/08/2019).
Potential invitees for the survey were identified by reviewing contributions to the
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education and the proceedings of the
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education , both from the last
10 years. The names of researchers with the most citations, together with those
researchers otherwise known by reputation (e.g., they hold or have held a central role
in the International Artificial Intelligence in Education Society ), were collated. To this
list were added some mid- and early-career researchers who had already made anoteworthy impact in the community (e.g., they had received a Best Paper award atan AIED conference). In total, the list comprised 60 candidate survey invitees, all ofwhom were invited to participate in the survey. An invitation email and up to threereminder emails were sent to each invitee, 17 of whom completed the questionnaire.
At the beginning of the questionnaire, respondents were asked to give explicit
permission for their names to be given in the proposed paper, and for any of their
responses included in the paper to be attributed to them (this approach draws onGuideline 41 of the British Educational Research Association ’s Ethical Guidelines
for Educational Research 2018). This was both to ensure transparency and to maximiseimpact on early- and mid-career AIED researchers. All respondents gave their permis-sion. In addition, before the paper was submitted for publication, the respondents weregiven the opportunity to check, amend, agree, and/or delete any quote that wasattributed to them. No respondent requested any substantive change. Finally, to further
acknowledge their contribution, the respondents were given the opportunity to be
named as a co-author of the paper. Six respondents took this up (Holstein andBuckingham Shum also made substantial contributions to the writing of the paper).
Results
Paying Attention to Ethics in AIED
Survey respondents were first asked to reflect upon whether and why they agree or
disagree with the statement, “AIED researchers do not pay sufficient attention to the
ethics of AIED. ”All 17 respondents answered this question, revealing overall agree-
ment that there is room for improvement. For instance, Buckingham Shum noted thatwhile “there are vibrant communities and journals ”focusing on the ethics of tech-
nology, these exist as “a‘parallel universe ’separate from the AIED circuit. ”Similar-
ly, Holstein observed that when the topic of AIED comes up in communities other than
AIED itself, “ethical considerations tend to be the first topics raised by those outside
the community, ”but that “within AIED [...]this is not so. ”Several respondents noted
that the field lacks shared frameworks for thinking through ethical issues in AIED. AsWalker noted, “collectively we lack the training in frameworks and principles that
would allow us to grapple with major ethical questions of AIED research. ”
However, five out of 17 respondents reported that they perceive growing urgency
and attention to ethical issues within the AIED research community. For example,Scanlon noted that “there is much discussion now of ethics because of high profile
examples in AI which are hitting the media [...]ethical consideration [s]are becoming510 International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2022) 32:504 –526