To highlight just some of the potential breadth of issues, AIED ethical questions
include:
&How does the transient nature of student goals, interests and emotions impact on the
ethics of AIED?
&How can K12 students give genuinely informed consent for their involvement with
AIED tools?
&What are the AIED ethical obligations of private organisations (developers of AIED
products) and public authorities (schools and universities involved in AIEDresearch)?
&How might schools, students and teachers opt out from, or challenge, how they are
represented in large datasets?
&What are the ethical implications of not being able to easily interrogate how some
AIED deep decisions (e.g., those using multi-level neural networks) are made?
&What are the ethical consequences of encouraging students to work independently
with AI-supported software (rather than with teachers or in collaborative groups)?
Notably, as mentioned above, some guidelines were proposed almost 20 years ago
(Aiken and Epstein 2000 ), but have not been widely adopted by the AIED community.
Aiken and Epstein start with a negative and a positive meta-principle related to theimpact of AIED on ‘dimensions of human being ’; with the dimensions ethical,
aesthetic, social, intellectual, and physical, together with psychological traits such as
‘the individual ’s ability to lead a happy and fulfilling life ’. Aiken and Epstein ’s
negative meta-principle is that ‘(AIED) technology should not diminish the student
along any of the fundamental dimensions of human being .’The positive meta-principle
is that ‘AIED technology should augment the student along at least one of the
fundamental dimensions of human being .’They go on to provide and discuss ten
‘fundamental principles ’for educational technologies that incorporate AI methods.
Some of these (such as ‘avoid information overload ’) are essential tenets of good user
experience and effective pedagogy for most educational technologies. The principles
that are most specific to the application of AI in education are: ‘7. Develop systems that
give teachers new and creative roles that might not have been possible before the use oftechnology. Systems should not attempt to replace the teacher. ’and‘10. Avoid
glorifying the use of computer systems, thereby diminishing the human role and thehuman potential for learning and growth. ’
Method
Broadly, the aim of this work is to galvanise the AIED research community ’s engage-
ment with the ethics of its domain. Accordingly, it was first important to establishcommunity members ’existing beliefs and understandings of the ethics of AI applied in
educational contexts, to which end a survey of AIED researchers was developed andconducted. The survey questionnaire comprised 10 substantive open questions (Ap-pendix 1), which covered the following themes: (i) what it means for AIED researchersto consider the ethics of their work, (ii) pertinent AI and education ethical issues, and
(iii) what distinguishes the ethics of AIED from the ethics of other AI domains. TheInternational Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2022) 32:504 –526 509