students ’learning outcomes and their lifelong opportunities. However, as has been seen
in other domains of AI application, ethical intentions are not by themselves sufficient,as good intentions do not always result in ethical designs or ethical deployments (e.g.,Dastin 2018 ; Reich and Ito 2017 ; Whittaker et al. 2018 ). Significant attention is
required to understand what it means to be ethical specifically in the context of AIED .
The educational contexts which AIED technologies aspire to enhance highlight the
need to differentiate between doing ethical things and doing things ethically ,t o
understand and to make pedagogical choices that are ethical, to account for the ever-present possibility of unintended consequences, along with many other considerations.However, addressing these and related questions is far from trivial, not least because itremains true that “no framework has been devised, no guidelines have been agreed, no
policies have been developed, and no regulations have been enacted to address thespecific ethical issues raised by the use of AI in education ”(Holmes et al. 2018 ,p .
552).
As a first step towards addressing this critical gap, we invited 60 of the AIED
community ’s leading researchers (operationalised mainly by citations and/or reputa-
tion) to respond to a survey of questions about ethics and the application of AI ineducational contexts.
The 17 respondents (in alphabetical order by surname) were: Vincent Aleven
(CMU, USA), Ig Ibert Bittencourt (UFAL, Brazil), Jesus Boticario (UNED, Spain),Simon Buckingham Shum (UTS, Australia), Mutlu Cukurova (UCL, UK), Ben duBoulay (University of Sussex, UK), Janice Gobert (Rutgers, USA), Ken Holstein
(CMU, USA), Judy Kay (University of Sydney, Australia), Ken Koedinger (CMU,
USA), Bruce McLaren (CMU, USA), Ma. Mercedes T. Rodrigo (Ateneo de ManilaUniversity, Philippines), Olga C. Santos (UNED, Spain), Eileen Scanlon (OU, UK),Mike Sharples (OU, UK), Erin Walker (University of Pittsburgh, USA), and BeverlyWoolf (UMASS, USA).
In this paper, we first summarise the background (including the ethics of AI in
general, and the ethics of educational data) and introduce the ethics of AI in education.Next, we outline the methods used in this project, before going on to summarise the
survey responses (NB all responses quoted in this paper are verbatim, with any words
that have been added or deleted for clarity marked by square parentheses or ellipses asappropriate). We finish with a discussion of the issues raised by the survey, and asuggestion for next steps.
Background
The AIED conferences in 2018 and 2019 hosted a workshop called “Ethics of AIED.
Who Cares? ”(Holmes et al. 2019a ; Holmes et al. 2018 ). Although the workshop
discussions were engaging and productive, the small number of attendees suggested adisappointingly low level of interest in the topic from the broader AIED community.While other AI communities are increasingly attending to ethical considerations aroundthe design and deployment of AI-based technologies, ethical dimensions of AIED donot yet appear to be a central area of focus for many in the AIED community. SinceAiken and Epstein published their ethical guidelines two decades ago to begin a
conversation around the ethics of AIED (Aiken and Epstein 2000 ), there has been aInternational Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2022) 32:504 –526 505