reveals a tension between how researcher s frame the ethical issues and potential
‘harms ’associated with AIED.
Another issue noted by the respondents was the value of transparency in AIED
systems, with one respondent suggesting that teachers might prefer an AI system that isless accurate but offers more transparency around decision-making “over an AI system
that is perfectly accurate but not transparent ”(Cukurova). Others referred to the
importance of giving learners agency and control over their data, and the potential
impact of algorithmic bias on different sub-populations and demographics of learners.There was particular concern that biased data sets have the potential to benefit moreadvantaged groups of learners: “Instructional strategies that aim to benefit all learners
might disproportionately benefit more advantaged groups of learners. Our communityneeds to learn to integrate fairness-promoting algorithms into the system and deploythem for real students ”(Woolf).
Markedly less common were responses that identified issues specific to the ethics of
education, and how these intersect with the ethics of AI more generally. Choice of
pedagogy was mentioned by a few respondents, who acknowledged that AIED em-bodies assumptions about which instructional strategies are ‘best’for learners. For
example, “pedagogy driven AI in Education is often considered as good regardless of
[whether] the pedagogy chosen to drive AI is an appropriate one or not in the first
place ”(Cukurova). One respondent also referred to issues relating to the accuracy and
validity of learning assessments more generally: “classifying students in terms of
educational tests has to consider the inherent ambiguity and variability in the measure,
but for computer scientists we usually consider them as rigid labels ”(Santos). Brief
reference was also made to the particular responsibilities of educators and the depen-dent relationship between learners and educators/teaching systems.
Advice for Teachers, Faculty Members and Professors about Teaching the Ethics
of AIED
When asked for their advice on how best to teach AIED students to properly address
the ethics of AIED, some respondents acknowledged that they did not feel sufficiently
qualified: “To be quite honest, I do not know.... I would like to note that very few of us
are trained in ethics! ”(Aleven). “I feel like I need to better educate myself about this
(and in fact, I joined a committee to introduce an ethics curriculum in my department inpart to try to better inform myself) ”(Walker). One suggestion for how this might be
addressed was to: “bring together voices from academics who study ethics, those who
build systems and those who will use them. ”(Scanlon). Aleven broadly agreed: “To
properly address ethical issues, we probably need to look at a bigger picture than we
are used to doing as AIED researchers. And [...], we should avoid armchair ethics and
work with experts in ethics ”.Nonetheless, a starting point might be for academics to
‘practise what they preach ’:“Ethics need to be modeled in order to be taught. We
academics have to conduct ourselves and our research practices as ethically as weknow how ”(Rodrigo).
Other respondents suggested that academics “should start with the philosophy of
technology use and adoption in general ”(Cukurova), and should “learn from the
history of AIED, to understand how AIED implements an explicit or implicit theory of
teaching and learning, to understand how that affects the learning outcomes and lifeInternational Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2022) 32:504 –526 515