someone ’s behavior with full knowledge of their identity, the person being monitored
does not enjoy any privacy ”(Anwar and Greer 2012 ,p .6 3 ) .H o w e v e r ,i ti sn o t a b l et h a t
other researchers in e-learning appear more interested in the ethical practices of thestudents, such as cheating and fraud (e.g., Gearhart 2012 ). Finally, researchers and
developers of intelligent agents such as chatbots are also increasingly focusing on theethical issues raised by their work (e.g., Murtarelli et al. 2020 ;R i c h a r d sa n dD i g n u m
2019 ). Most recently, the World Economic Forum has launched ‘RESET ’, a framework
and set of principles for governing responsible use of conversational AI (WEF 2020 )–
which, although focused on healthcare, have self-evident potential for the ethics ofintelligent agents in education. The RESET principles focus on safety/non-maleficence,efficacy, data protection, human agenc y, accountability, transparency, fairness,
explainability, integrity and inclusiveness.
The Ethics of AIED in Particular
As with AI in general, concerns exist about the large volumes of data collected to
support AIED (such as the recording of student competencies, inferred emotionalstates, strategies and misconceptions). Who owns and who is able to access these data,what are the privacy concerns, and who should be considered responsible if somethinggoes wrong?
Other major AIED ethical concerns, again as with AI in general, centre on the
computational approaches. How should the data be analysed, interpreted, shared and
acted upon? How should the biases (conscious or unconscious), that might impact
negatively on the civil rights of individual students, be prevented or ameliorated –
especially given that the scale of AIED in the coming years is likely to amplify anydesign biases (e.g., about gender, age, race, social status, income inequality …)?
Finally, as the Facebook and Cambridge Analytica data scandal showed, data isvulnerable to hacking and manipulation: ‘it’s impossible to have personal privacy
and control at scale, so it is critical that the uses to which data will be put are ethical–and that the ethical guidelines are clearly understood ’(Tarran 2018 ,p p .4 –5).
However, the ethics of AIED cannot be reduced to questions about data or
computational approaches alone (Holmes et al. 2019b ). AIED research also needs
to account for the ethics of education , which, although the subject of decades of
research, is all too often overlooked. For example, AIED research needs to addressexplicitly issues such as (1) the purpose of the learning (e.g., to prepare students topass exams or to help them self-actualise), (2) the choice of pedagogy (with acommon approach, instructionism, bein g contested by the learning sciences com-
munity), (3) the role of the technology with respect to teachers (to replace or
augment human functions), and (4) access to education (often seen by the commu-
nity through the ethical dimension of fairness and equity). In addition, there remainslimited research into what teachers and students actually want from AIED systems -such as requirements around student agency and privacy about which teachers andstudents might not agree (Holstein et al. 2019 ). Furthermore, where AIED inter-
ventions target behavioural change (such as by ‘nudging ’individuals towards a
particular course of action), the entire sequence of AIED enhanced pedagogicalactivity needs to be ethically warranted in the context of the broader activities
within which AIED systems are being deployed.508 International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2022) 32:504 –526