Many respondents (including Aleven, Holstein, Koedinger, Rodrigo, Walker and
Woolf) raised issues around representativeness and equity: are we diminishing qualityeducation for certain groups, are AIED systems biased against some groups, and aresome other groups being ignored? The many complementary comments are worthquoting: “I think because it is so difficult to collect representative data sets and
because funding is structured so as not to reach out to a multitude of populations, it
is accepted that data sets will always be limited ”(Rodrigo). “The challenge of
designing equitable AIED technologies that do not show bias against a particulargroup is not discussed much in the community, and probably should be engaged with ”
(Walker). “Are we diminishing the quality of education for ‘certain groups of students ’,
in cases where ‘business as usual ’would have worked better for these groups? ”
(Holstein). “The degree of personalisation for some students might be less than that
for others, which could lead to inequitable outcomes. Personalised instructionalstrategies could ignore under-served/ underrepresented/minority students and fall
short of providing fair learning opportunities to each student ”(Woolf). “It seems
inevitable that giving the same instruction to students who are well prepared for thatinstruction versus students who are not well prepared for it will lead to differentresults. [...]Should we now conclude that this instructional intervention is unethical,
as it seems to be increasing inequality? ”(Aleven). “There could be more projects that
have direct impact on disadvantaged learners ”(Koedinger).
Finally, issues were raised over AIED systems and human agency, for example
“How to embed pedagogies of learner and teacher empowerment into AIED systems ”
(Sharples). Areas that need specific attention are: “The ongoing misplaced belief that
AIED systems can wholly replace human teachers and still enable effective and sociallyresponsible learning. ”(du Boulay), “The lack of human agency in fully autonomous AI
in Education systems ”(Cukurova), and “What […]we risk losing through automation,
[…]are we prepared to preserve those aspects that should be preserved (e.g.,
intentionally ‘not’automated)? ”(Holstein).
What Distinguishes the Ethics of AIED from Other AI Applications?
Survey respondents were asked to reflect on what distinguishes the ethics of AIED
from other AI applications/domains a n dt oi d e n t i f yt h em o s ti m p o r t a n t ‘educational ’
ethical issues for AIED. The majority of r esponses identified how issues common to
the‘ethics of AI ’manifest in educational contexts - particularly issues of consent,
transparency, control over data and algorit hmic bias. In particular, the application of
AI to children and young people was noted as a distinguishing feature of AIED(e.g., McLaren). This was not only associated with issues of consent, but also the
longer-term individual and social impacts of engaging with young people during a
formative period: “We are influencing impressi onable young people, and that
comes with a moral obligation to be as correct and proper as possible ”
(Rodrigo).
Despite a general recognition of the potential long-term impacts of AIED, tworespondents (du Boulay, Santos) also noted that AIED systems do not make thesame ‘life and death ’decisions typical of other AI applications, such as autonomous
vehicles or medicine: “a bad treatment in learning might imply more effort from the
student or more time, but it does not seem as critical as a bad treatment in medicine
or a bad decision in an autonomous car, which can cause death ”(Santos). This514 International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2022) 32:504 –526