opportunities of learners, and to explore how this relates to [the] ethics of research in
education ”(Sharples). Starting with the wider context and previous literature is
important perhaps because “we need better guidance than we currently have. A
checklist, with items linked to the relevant foundation documents ”(Kay). “Maybe a
good starting point is to collect some interesting examples of how research can helpwith ethical issues in AIED ”(Aleven).
A common thought was that students would learn best through direct experience:
“Don ’tj u s t ‘build ethics into the curriculum ’. Have students learn by doing. Make
ethical considerations a core part of the evaluation criteria (e.g., for student deliver-ables in project-based courses). Make class discussions around ethics part of theactual formative evaluation / feedback process for student projects ”(Holstein). “I
would also suggest that they should give actual hands-on experience with AI systems,let their students build, test, play with AI tools in controlled conditions to understandpotential ethical issues through experience ”(Cukurova). “Introduce them to accessible
frameworks (such as those beginning to emerge in AI FATE [e.g., https://
facctconference.org ]work) and develop exercises that help people to apply them.
This will in turn refine them ”(Buckingham Shum) .
Other respondents took this approach an intriguing step further: students might
benefit from experience of AIED tools that have been developed without addressingany ethics: “I think it could be an interesting approach to ask them [to]be part of a
study where ethics are not considered, so they can perceive the need to take care of it ”
(Santos). “Mak[e]them investigate a scenario where those principles are not followed
and have them research all possible consequences. This way they could figure out not
just the basic principles involved but also possible flaws or missing considerations ”
(Boticario).
Advice for Early- and Mid-career Researchers About the Ethics of AIEDSurvey respondents were asked what advice they would give to early- and mid-career
researchers about the ethics of AIED. The 16 responses to this question encouraged
early- to mid-career researchers to take ethics seriously (Bittencourt, Boticario, du
Boulay, Gobert, Holstein, Koedinger, Rodrigo, Sharples, Woolf), to actively participatein discussions about what ethical practice in AIED should look like (Aleven, Kay,Scanlon, Sharples), to critically reflect upon and question their own research practices(Boticario, Cukurova, Holstein, Walker), and to engage with relevant expertise outsideof the AIED community (Buckingham Shum, Cukurova, Santos).
Sharples encouraged early- to mid-career researchers to actively contribute to the
“development of a code of ethical practice in AIED, ”and to abide by this code. A
number of respondents urged researchers towards more critical reflection around their
own research practice. Walker advised researchers to “think about the implications of
what you ’re doing and be able to critically engage with them. ”Similarly, Boticario
said, “we have the *responsibility* to keep our eyes open and respond to what is
happening in the world around us. As AIED researchers we are constantly changingthe trajectories of others ’lives. [...]If we cannot take responsibility for our actions, we
do not deserve to remain in this field. ”Holstein advised that “we are a generation [of
researchers] that cannot afford to ignore the ethics of AIED, ”noting that “generations
that are trying to push an innovative technology into the world have the luxury of516 International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2022) 32:504 –526