striking paucity of published work in the AIED community that explicitly focuses on
ethics. In any case, the potential impact of AIED designs and methods of deploymenton students, teachers and wider society appears yet to be fully worked out.
Nonetheless, it is generally accepted within the community that AIED raises far-
reaching questions with important ethical implications for students, educators, parents,policymakers, and other stakeholders. Ethical concerns permeate many of the
community ’s core interests, including but not limited to: accuracy of diagnoses of
learners interacting with AIED systems; choices of pedagogies employed by AIEDsystems; predictions of learning outcomes made by those systems; issues of fairness,accountability, and transparency; and questions related to the influence of AI andlearning analytics on teachers ’decision making.
In many ways, AIED is itself a response to each of those issues and more –with
most being addressed, one way or another, in work conducted in the varied researchsubdomains of AIED. For example, questions around data ownership and control over
their interpretations have long been recognised as critical in AIED (e.g., in the context
of open learner modelling: Bull and Kay 2016 ; Conati et al. 2018 ). However, what is
currently missing is a basis for the meaningful ethical reflection necessary for innova-tion in AIED, to help researchers determine how they might best contribute towardsaddressing those challenges explicitly. This requires a deep engagement both withrecent ethics related debates and frameworks in other AI research subdomains, and withethical questions specific to the AIED subdomain itself (e.g., issues around pedagogy),many of which remain unasked and unanswered (although there are some exceptions -
e.g., Aiken and Epstein 2000 ; Friedman and Kahn 1992 ;H o l m e se ta l . 2019b ;S h a r k e y
2016 ).
The Ethics of AI in GeneralAs with any transformative technology, some AI applications may raise new ethical
and legal questions, for example related to liability or potentially biased decision-making. The ethics of artificial intelligence in general has received a great deal of
attention, by researchers (e.g., Boddington 2017 ; Floridi 2019 ; Jobin et al. 2019 ;
Whittaker et al. 2018 ; Winfield and Jirotka 2018 ) and more widely (e.g., the European
Union 2019 ;t h eU K ’s House of Lords 2018 ;U N E S C O 2019 ; and the World Economic
Forum 2019 ), with numerous other AI ethics initiatives emerging in recent years (e.g.,
Ada Lovelace Institute 2019 ; AI Ethics Initiative 2017 ; AI Now Institute 2017 ;
DeepMind Ethics & Society 2017 ; Future of Life Institute 2013 ; The Institute for
Ethical AI & Machine Learning 2018 ).
All of these efforts principally focus o n data (involving issues such as informed
consent, data privacy, and biased data sets) and how that data is analysed (involving
issues such as biased assumptions, tran sparency and statistical apophenia –finding
patterns where no meaningful, causal patte rns are present). The Montréal Declara-
tion for Responsible Developmen t of Artificial Intelligence ( 2018 ), for example,
offers a comprehensive approach involving ten human-centred principles,encompassing: well-being, respect for aut onomy, protection of privacy, solidarity,
democratic participation, equity, diversity , prudence, responsibility, and sustainable
development. No such declaration current ly exists for the specific issues raised by
AIED.506 International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2022) 32:504 –526