ARTICLE
Ethics of AI in Education: Towards
a Community-Wide Framework
Wayne Holmes1&Kaska Porayska-Pomsta1&Ken Holstein2&
Emma Sutherland3&Toby Baker3&Simon Buckingham Shum4&
Olga C. Santos5&Mercedes T. Rodrigo6&Mutlu Cukurova1&
Ig Ibert Bittencourt7&Kenneth R. Koedinger2
Accepted: 26 January 2021 / Published online: 9 April 2021
Abstract
While Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED) research has at its core the desire to
support student learning, experience from other AI domains suggest that such ethical
intentions are not by themselves sufficient. There is also the need to consider explicitly
issues such as fairness, accountability, transparency, bias, autonomy, agency, and
inclusion. At a more general level, there is also a need to differentiate between doing
ethical things and doing things ethically , to understand and to make pedagogical
choices that are ethical, and to account for the ever-present possibility of unintended
consequences. However, addressing these and related questions is far from trivial. As a
first step towards addressing this critical gap, we invited 60 of the AIED community ’s
leading researchers to respond to a survey of questions about ethics and the application
of AI in educational contexts. In this paper, we first introduce issues around the ethics
of AI in education. Next, we summarise the contributions of the 17 respondents, and
discuss the complex issues that they raised. Specific outcomes include the recognition
that most AIED researchers are not trained to tackle the emerging ethical questions. A
well-designed framework for engaging with ethics of AIED that combined a multidis-
ciplinary approach and a set of robust guidelines seems vital in this context.
Keywords Artificial intelligence in education .Ethics .Fairness .Agency .Pedagogy .
Human cognition
Introduction
It is almost certainly the case that all members of the Artificial Intelligence in Education
(AIED) research community are motivated by ethical concerns, such as improvingInternational Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2022) 32:504 –526
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-021-00239-1
*Wayne Holmes
wayne.holmes@ucl.ac.uk
Extended author information available on the last page of the article#The Author(s) 2021