remains an open question (e.g., “There is no agreement on the guiding principles. ”
Boticario). Thus, establishing a useful framework for the ethics of AI in education,although desirable and potentially useful, is likely to be a challenging and long-termtask. Specifically, given the diversity of interpretations within the community, asindicated in the survey, it is likely that as well as incorporating presently knownethics-related issues and challenges, any ethics framework developed for the AIED
context will need to allow for a degree of flexibility to incorporate new knowledge, new
understandings and new ways of supporting learning and teaching, as our science,socio-cultural norms, values, and educational systems change over time (e.g.,Porayska-Pomsta and Rajendran 2019 ).
A related important point that emerged from the survey is the observation that AIED
is not merely an empirical science but also a design science (Holstein). We understandthis to mean that AIED operates in both the theoretical and practical spheres of AI andthe learning sciences, and further that as a design science it aims to create educational
tools and interventions that are adapted to the demands of different specific users and
contexts of use. Highlighting the practical and human-centric orientation of AIEDbrings into focus the fact that AIED is explicitly concerned with designing interven-tions which by definition aim to foster positive behaviour change in the users. This is
especially important given that many of the intended users of AIED are at pivotal pointsin their intellectual development.
Adopting a design science orientation also points to another practical outworking of
ethical principles –namely, the use of human-centred design methods that give
stakeholders genuine agency in shaping digital tools, thus increasing the chances of
producing tools that are usable, effective, organisationally acceptable, and ethicallysound. However, the AIED community also has to be aware that, despite the best ofintentions, human-centred design may itself, in some senses, be sometimes harmful tosome users (Norman 2019 ). Nonetheless, a community is emerging around the critical
adoption of human-centred design methods and tools for educational technologiespowered by analytics and AI (e.g., Buckingham Shum et al. 2019 ). In common with
the survey reported in this paper, they ask what makes the specific stakeholders and
contexts of teaching and learning distinctive from other domains, that raise specific
challenges for human-centred design.
All of these considerations further highlight related ethical implications for AIED.
For example, “The system forms an explicit or implicit model of the learner ’sk n o w l -
edge and skills that it uses to make teaching interventions. That model may embodyassumptions by the AIED designer as to appropriate methods of teaching and theabilities of the learner. ”(Sharples). Thus, AIED ’s explicit aim to foster behaviour
change in its users, adds additional pressure on the community, to embrace ethics and
the related dimensions both as a necessity and as a moral obligation for the community.
The flip side of this is that the field (alongside related fields such educational datamining, learning analytics, and user modelling) has a real potential to influence theeducational systems at the frontline, precisely because it designs for and deploys inreal-world contexts, and to contribute to broader approaches of designing for anddeploying AI in other than educational human contexts.
In particular, it might be useful to consider how AIED research may contribute to
broader debates about the ways in which AI might impact human cognition, decision-
making and functioning. Given AIED ’s focus on human learning and development, it isInternational Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2022) 32:504 –526 519