The Ethics of Educational Data
Similarly, the ethics of educational data and learning analytics has also been the focus
of much research (e.g., Ferguson et al. 2016 ; Slade and Prinsloo 2013 ; Potgieter 2020 ).
This work is extensive, far too wide to summarise here; however, some key issues canbe noted. First, because the field is still emerging, exactly what an ethics of learning
analytics should include remains the subject of debate: ‘the ethical and privacy aspects
of learning analytics are varied, and they shift as the use of data reveals informationthat could not be accessed in the past ’(Ferguson et al. 2016 , p. 5). Second, the ethics of
learning analytics involves several types of questions, including but not limited to:informed consent and privacy, the interpretation of data, the management of data, andperspectives on data (e.g., institutional versus individual); as well as on much broaderissues such as power relations, surveillance, and the purpose of education (Slade andPrinsloo 2013 ). Third, it has been argued that ‘educational data mining [...]is not the
superconductor of truth that some of its proponents believe [...]and the transformative
impact that it will have on the autonomy of learners is cause for concern ’(Potgieter
2020 , pp. 3, 6) .
The learning analytics community have endeavoured to agree principles against
which learning analytics research and practice can judge itself and be judged. TheDELICATE checklist, for example, comprises guidance centred on determining addedvalue and the rights of participants, being open about intentions and objectives,legitimising the collection of data, involving all stakeholders including the data sub-
jects, ensuring consent is genuinely informed and freely given, ensuring that data is
truly anonymised, establishing and implementing procedures to guarantee individualprivacy, and adopting clear and transparent obligations with any external agencies thatmight be involved with the data (Drachsler and Greller 2016 ). In fact, the clear overlaps
between learning analytics and AIED, that are centred on educational data, suggest thatan ethics of AIED might usefully draw on approaches such as the DELICATEchecklist. However, there are also clear differences between the two fields, “with an
emphasis on agents and tutors for AIED, [...]and visualization for LA ”(Labarthe et al.
2018 , p. 70). This active engagement/passive representation distinction, although
radically oversimplified, suggests that a comprehensive ethics of AIED is likely tohave additional requirements.
The Ethics of Other Related Research AreasEthics have also received attention in related research areas such as user modeling, e-
learning environments, and intelligent agents. For example, in the user modeling
community, issues centred on security and privacy (e.g., Schreck 2003 ), inspectability
(e.g., Zapata-Rivera and Greer 2004 ), and privacy (e.g., Kobsa 2007 ) have long been
considered. Most recently, dedicated workshops have been held at leading conferences(e.g., FairUMAP, Mobasher et al. 2020 ), with contributions exploring issues such as
fairness (Sacharidis et al. 2020 ), transparency (Schelenz et al. 2020 ), and biases
(Deshpande et al. 2020 ). Researchers in e-learning are also interested in ethical issues
raised by the systems that they build; issues such as equity and diversity, surveillanceand consent, identity and confidentiality (e.g., Anderson and Simpson 2007 ), and
student privacy: “when an observer [which could be an automated system] monitorsInternational Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2022) 32:504 –526 507