Because of the rich history, there is inevi tably insufficient space here to provide
a comprehensive account of the ethics of education. Instead, we will simplyidentify some pertinent issues, each of which continues to be the subject of debate:the ethics of teacher expectations, of resource allocations (including teacherexpertise), of gender and ethnic biases, of behaviour and discipline, of theaccuracy and validity of assessments, of what constitutes useful knowledge, of
teacher roles, of power relations between teachers and their students, and of
particular approaches to pedagogy (teaching and learning, such as instructionismand constructivism).
The three foci identified –the ethics of data, computational approaches and
education –together constitute the foundational level for a hypothesised compre-
hensive ethics of AIED framework (see Fig. 1). There is, however, a second level,
which is concerned with the overlaps bet ween the three foci (as illustrated in
Fig. 1): the ethics of data in AI in general (which is, as discussed, an ongoing
focus of much research; e.g., Boddington 2017 ), the ethics of data in education
(also an ongoing focus; e.g., Ferguson et al. 2016 ), and the ethics of algorithms
applied in educational contexts. This third overlap remains the least developedarea of research.
However, a serious effort to develop a full ethics of AIED cannot be limited
even to these six areas (data, computational approaches, education, and theoverlaps between them). These constitute the ‘known unknowns ’of AIED ethics,
but what about the ‘unknown unknowns ’, the ethical issues raised by AIED that
have yet to be even identified (i.e., those issues at the central intersection of data,
computation and education, and the spec ific interaction between AI systems use
and human cognition at the individual level, indicated by the question mark inFig. 1)? Any sufficient ethics of AIED nee ds to involve horizon scanning,
interdisciplinary conversations, explicitly taking into account insights from the
Fig. 1 A‘strawman ’draft framework for the ethics of AIEDInternational Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2022) 32:504 –526 521