thinking primarily about hypotheticals, ”whereas “the generation that carries forward
this work once the systems are already being [used] and impacting lives at scale ”must
reckon with more immediate ethical concerns.
Finally, several respondents urged early- to mid-career AIED researchers to expand
beyond the AIED literature, and to engage with the broader research communityoutside of AIED. For example, Buckingham Shum encouraged AIED researchers to
“consider engaging with academics in critical data studies and tech-ethics. ”Similarly,
Cukurova encouraged researchers to “read fundamental philosophy as most ethical
questions come down to philosophical discussions and frameworks that are driven bycertain values. ”
Should the IJAIED Require an Ethics Statement for all Articles?Respondents were asked whether they agreed with the suggestion that all articles
published in this journal should be accompanied by a statement explaining how the
authors have fully accounted for the ethics of their AIED work. Of the 16 respondentsto this question, only two disagreed, but mainly because “the ethics of AIED are not yet
defined sufficiently to make this useful or viable ”(du Boulay). This was echoed by
many of the respondents who did agree (Bittencourt, Boticario, Buckingham Shum,Gobert, Kay, Sharples, Walker), who for example pointed out that “we need much
more nuanced conceptions of what ‘ethical ’means ”(Buckingham Shum), and that the
journal would first need “to indicate clearly what is meant by ‘fully accounted for the
ethics ’”(Sharples).
Nonetheless, the respondents were broadly in favour. Santos, for example, noted “I
think it would help to get more awareness and try to do things right. Maybe it can beasked to have a short section at the end of the paper that the authors explain in theirown words how they have covered the ethics in the research reported. It would besomething similar to the bios some journals have, or the highlights section .”Other
tangible suggestions included: “Perhaps the Journal can ask authors to upload a copy
of their ethics clearance ”(Rodrigo), and “A u t h o r ss h o u l db er e q u i r e dt op r o v i d e
statements of both positive and negative broader impacts, along with a discussion of
trade-offs. Reviewers should then be specifically asked to evaluate these statements,and should be incentivized not to let shallow, ‘ticking the box ’-style slide. ”(Holstein).
Woolf brought the discussion back to AIED specifics: “Researchers should deter-
mine whether the current adaptive tutor is biased in every applied paper published. For[example,] examine the algorithm or the model or knowledge tracing used to track
student progress. Does an algorithm select problems that allow students to demon-strate skill mastery before moving on to new content? All authors should evaluate
whether their teaching system learned on training data that introduced bias along
certain socio-demographic categories. ”
Another challenge noted by respondents was how to ensure that such a policy was
meaningful: “I do think this is a good idea. As to how it won ’t become a tick box, I am
totally unsure ”(Gobert). In any case, Walker noted, “in practice I do think it is difficult
to enforce ”.Others proposed ways in which the spirit of the statement might more
effectively be addressed: “My suggestion is to change that statement into a clear and
easily affordable questionnaire, where the most basic issues can be specified ”
(Boticario); “Publishing a more specific list of ethical principles you expect peopleInternational Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2022) 32:504 –526 517