Energies 2020 ,13, 1473 3 of 38
Energies 2020 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 36 
  
Figure 1.  AI knowledge map, derived from [25]. 
Today, AI applications are being deployed in all facets of cities [26,27]. We can classify these 
applications based on their underlying AI technolo gies along with other relevant smart technologies 
as shown in Figure 1. 
AI applications are used to improve and innovate  the delivery of public services [28]. Various 
cities have begun ‘robotic proc ess automation’ (RPA) projects. These projects are focused on 
automating tasks that are currently conducted by public workers that are mundane, repetitive, and costly. Thus, freeing up valuable resources to be better deployed. Cities are using RPA to process online applications for items such as permits. RPA follows structured rules to reach an outcome [29]. 
The interest in autonomous vehicles (AV) is palpable. AVs open opportunities for cities to 
modernize their public transport infrastructure [3 0]. Autonomous buses are expected to start carrying 
fare-paying customers in Scotland by mid-2020 after successful trials across a 14-mile route on the 
Forth Road Bridge between Fife and Edinburgh. All Nippon Airways (ANA) has commenced trials 
of autonomous buses with minimal human over sight at Haneda International Airport [31]. 
Depending on the success of these trials, ANA plans do a full-scale deployment by the end of 2020. 
In recent times, we have also seen AVs co mplete successful tests in more complex urban 
environments including London and Paris [32]. 
The interest in autonomous systems is not limited  to RPA or AVs. Smart cities are exploring how 
to take advantage of advances in robotics [33]. The City of Houston will be beginning trails of robot 
police shortly at various transit centers to curb petty crime and free up law enforcement resources 
[34]. Robots are also being tested to augment la w enforcement personnel and lower incidents of 
conflict between them and the public. In the US wher e, in recent times, several routine traffic stops 
have led to confrontations, robots are being tested in mediating encounters between police officers and drivers [35]. 
Engagement platforms between public agencies and various stakeholders of the city are also 
being transformed through a range of AI applications. Chatbots are the most popular set of AI 
applications in this regard. Rammas, a chatbot, was deployed by the Dubai Electricity and Water 
Authority (DEWA) in January 2017 [36]. DEWA can respond to queries from residents in Arabic and 
English, and promotes greater knowledge awareness on utility matters. In its first year of operations, 
Rammas responded to roughly 700,000 queries, wh ich led to an 80% drop in in-person visits. 
AI systems ingest vast amounts of data, apply learning algo rithms, and learn patterns from the 
data to enable predicting outcomes [37]. Today, cities are deploying machine learning systems to 
Figure 1. AI knowledge map, derived from [25].
Today, AI applications are being deployed in all facets of cities [ 26,27]. We can classify these
applications based on their underlying AI technologies along with other relevant smart technologies
as shown in Figure 1.
AI applications are used to improve and innovate the delivery of public services [ 28]. Various
cities have begun ‘robotic process automation’ (RPA) projects. These projects are focused on automating
tasks that are currently conducted by public workers that are mundane, repetitive, and costly. Thus,
freeing up valuable resources to be better deployed. Cities are using RPA to process online applications
for items such as permits. RPA follows structured rules to reach an outcome [29].
The interest in autonomous vehicles (AV) is palpable. AVs open opportunities for cities to
modernize their public transport infrastructure [ 30]. Autonomous buses are expected to start carrying
fare-paying customers in Scotland by mid-2020 after successful trials across a 14-mile route on the
Forth Road Bridge between Fife and Edinburgh. All Nippon Airways (ANA) has commenced trials of
autonomous buses with minimal human oversight at Haneda International Airport [ 31]. Depending
on the success of these trials, ANA plans do a full-scale deployment by the end of 2020. In recent
times, we have also seen AVs complete successful tests in more complex urban environments including
London and Paris [32].
The interest in autonomous systems is not limited to RPA or AVs. Smart cities are exploring how
to take advantage of advances in robotics [ 33]. The City of Houston will be beginning trails of robot
police shortly at various transit centers to curb petty crime and free up law enforcement resources [ 34].
Robots are also being tested to augment law enforcement personnel and lower incidents of conﬂict
between them and the public. In the US where, in recent times, several routine tra c stops have led to
confrontations, robots are being tested in mediating encounters between police o cers and drivers [ 35].
Engagement platforms between public agencies and various stakeholders of the city are also being
transformed through a range of AI applications. Chatbots are the most popular set of AI applications in
this regard. Rammas, a chatbot, was deployed by the Dubai Electricity and Water Authority (DEWA) in
January 2017 [ 36]. DEWA can respond to queries from residents in Arabic and English, and promotes
greater knowledge awareness on utility matters. In its ﬁrst year of operations, Rammas responded to
roughly 700,000 queries, which led to an 80% drop in in-person visits.