Energies 2020 ,13, 1473 8 of 38
The third and ﬁnal phase is reporting and dissemination. This phase involved critically
documenting and presenting the results from the 93 articles analyzed. A discussion of the perceived
beneﬁts and concerns associated with AI implementation were outlined.
4. Results
4.1. General Observations
The ﬁrst step in the analysis of the selected 93 articles was to classify them by date of publication.
This process revealed interest in AI technology had grown exponentially in recent times. Almost half
of the reviewed articles were published in 2019 (n =46; 49%), one-ﬁfth in 2018 (n =18; 20%), and nearly
one-tenth in 2017 (n =8; 9%). Slightly less than a quarter of all articles were published before 2016
(n=21; 23%). The earliest article included in the literature review was published in 1999. Despite the
fact that articles on AI and the city dated back to 1990, the earliest one that met our selection criteria
was [ 63]. These ﬁgures reﬂect the results of other review studies and are representative of the increased
interest in how AI systems interact and impact the development of smart cities [64].
Leading authors are a liated with institutions in Europe (n =28), East Asia (n =24) and North
America (n =21). Nonetheless, the Oceania context, particularly in Australia, is often referenced
among the best applications of AI in practice [ 65,66]. Regarding the academic journals, the articles
published in IEEE Access appear most often (n =8), followed by Sensors (n =5), and then three articles
in both Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine (n =3) and Procedia Computer Science (n =3).
Articles were categorized under four groups. These groups were based on the main smart city
domains of: (a) Economy; (b) Society; (c) Environment; (d) Government. More than one-sixth of them
(n=17) were in the economy domain, slightly more than a quarter (n =24) in the society domain, over
one-third (n =33) in the environment domain, and slightly less than quarter of them (n =19) were in
the governance domain.
With reference to the ‘AI Knowledge Map’ (Figure 1), the majority of articles discusses AI
applications or techniques that ﬁt within the machine learning paradigm (n =71), followed by
probabilistic methods (n =25), knowledge-based (n =21), search and optimization (n =21), logic-based
(n=18), and embodied intelligence (n =15). Regarding AI applications, the most commonly mentioned
in the selected literature are neural networks (n =55), evolutionary algorithms (n =21), distributed
artiﬁcial intelligence (n =15), computer vision (n =13), and decision networks (n =9). The most
common AI paradigms and applications identiﬁed in the literature are outlined in Table 2. A complete
list of all articles and the identiﬁed AI paradigms, applications, techniques, and supporting technology
are shown in Appendix A. Please note, there is some crossover with the number of AI paradigms and
applications identiﬁed in the literature as many articles discuss multiple, or hybrid AI systems.
We acknowledge that there is a potential risk in bias resulting from our strategy for selecting
literature to be included in the review. Our review focused on journals only, whereas cutting edge works
in engineering, design, and technology ﬁeld are often published in conference papers. Nonetheless,
in order to complement the reviewed 93 journal articles, the paper also cited or quoted 112 relevant
literature pieces on the ‘AI and smart cities’ topic.
4.2. AI in the Economy Dimension of Smart Cities
Papers categorized under the economy dimensions of smart cities are those that provide insights
into ‘how AI can contribute to and enhance the productivity and innovation of smart cities’ [ 33].
Research in this area focused predominately on technological innovation, economy and management
areas, and the contribution of AI can be summarized as: (a) Enhancing productivity and innovation
by automating data management and analysis; (b) Reducing costs and increasing resources through
pattern recognition; (c) Supporting decision-making by analyzing large volumes of data from multiple
sources, and; (d) Drawing conclusions based on logic, reason and intuition. Appendix A lists the
analysis highlights of the reviewed literature.