Energies 2020 ,13, 1473 5 of 38
reluctantly paid a $460,000 ‘ransom’ to attackers after all their council systems were shut down [ 47].
Researchers from MIT developed an AI platform called AI2 that outperforms existing systems in
predicting cyber-attacks [ 48]. AI2 detects 85% of cyberattacks, performing about 300% better than
previous systems. The system is also able to reduce the instance of false-positive readings to one-ﬁfth
of previous outcomes. This high detection rate is enabled through supervised and unsupervised
machine learning.
While we have treated each AI application in isolation, it is common to have them bundled and
integrated. Researchers from Carnegie Mellon University collaborated with the City of Pittsburgh to
develop a Scalable Urban Tra c Control (SURTRAC), which was able to simultaneously monitor and
control the ﬂow of tra c [49]. The system has been deployed in the East Liberty neighborhood since
2012 and covers nine intersections. On average, 29,940 vehicles pass through this area daily. SURTRAC
is a schedule-driven system designed to manage multiple competing tra c ﬂows shifts. SUTRAC is a
multi-agent decentralized system, where an agent system runs each intersection. Each agent system
controls tra c signals for their intersection and monitors tra c ﬂow by dynamically coordinating with
other agents in real-time. The deployment of SURTRAC resulted in a 34% increase in vehicle speed,
and a reduction of 25% in travel time, 40% in waiting time, 31% in tra c stops, and 21% in emissions.
While AI systems have signiﬁcant potential, their deployments are never straightforward.
In Detroit, a $9 million initiative ‘Neighborhood Real-Time Intelligence Program’ implemented facial
recognition software and video surveillance cameras at 500 di erent Detroit intersections. This
initiative built on the previous ‘Project Green Light’ Initiative, which installed 500 cameras outside
of businesses capable of recording and reporting real time video footage to the police. The software
boasts an ability to match faces with 50 million driver’s license photographs in the Michigan police
database. Nevertheless, recent research has shown that current facial recognition software more
often misidentiﬁes black faces than white faces [ 50]. Whilst intended to increase public safety, there
is widespread public criticism directed towards this technology, as residents feel their privacy is
compromised and knowledge of the racial biases continues to increase.
Fake news in its purest form refers to completely made up information, nonetheless, such
information is often hard to identify as it can resemble credible journalism and attract maximum
attention, spreading like wildﬁre through various social media channels [ 51]. A man was caught after
he carried an assault riﬂe and ﬁred shots at a pizza parlor in Northwest Washington Upon arrest, the
man informed the police that he was investigating a conspiracy theory which claimed that the pizza
parlor—Comet Ping Pong—was the headquarters of a pedophilia ring [ 52]. This incident caused panic
among people in the neighborhood, resulting in the lockdown of several businesses.
In Arizona, the hotbed for testing of AVs by major technology providers, we have seen incidents
of residents throwing rocks at these vehicles [ 53]. There, AVs are seen as a threat to jobs, livelihood,
and are a source of frustration. As noted by Selby & Desouza [ 54], “If theory and practice advance
over the next few years without paying attention to fragility, then cities will continue to be vulnerable
to manageable threats. As the trends of urbanization continue, it is even more imperative to attend to
fractures of social compacts. Cities will continue to grow, and their complexity will only increase. This
complexity will continue to mask fragility in the city and could result in the breakdown in one of our
society’s most valuable artifacts, developed cities, representing a potential loss of life and economic
prosperity”. AI technologies, for all their good, do make cities more fragile [ 55] as they put pressures
on local governments to maintain existing, and strengthen, social compacts in the face of job losses,
automation, shifts in public ﬁnances, and so on.
In May 2016, a Tesla Model S car collided with a tractor-trailer in Williston, Florida. The accident
occurred on the highway when the car, on autopilot mode, collided with the truck while crossing an
uncontrolled intersection. The Tesla driver sustained fatal injuries, raising several questions about
the autopilot functionality. However, the National Highway Tra c Safety Administration’s (NHTSA)
ﬁnal investigation report concluded that the accident was caused by the driver’s inattention [ 56]. Since