(a){c,0}
 (b){c,z1}
 (c){c,z2}
Figure 2. View-common and view-peculiar variables represent dif-
ferent visual information.
(a) Thickness
 (b) Angle
 (c) Width
 (d) Height
(e) Size
 (f) Grayscale
 (g) Angle
 (h) Orientation
Figure 3. Disentangled view-peculiar visual representations of dif-
ferent datasets.
is better than that of single-view methods especially for the
datasets with large visual gaps (e.g., Object-Digit-Product
and Digit-Product). The reason is that, intuitively, multi-
view clustering methods are designed for handling multi-
view data which can exploit richer properties to improve
the clustering performance. 2) On all datasets, our method
consistently achieves the best performance in terms of most
metrics. The intrinsic reason is that, by learning disentan-
gled visual representations, Multi-V AE reduces the inter-
ference between each view’s peculiar information and all
views’ common cluster information. Further, it becomes
more effective to discover the complementary information
and common cluster structures of multiple views. 3) The
clustering performance on the global latent representation
(Multi-V AE-CZ) is better than that on the view-common
representation (Multi-V AE-C). The principal reason is that
some visual information hidden in view-peculiar represen-
tations is complementary for multi-view clustering.
5.2. Disentangled Visual Representation Analysis
Multi-V AE can generate images by decoding the latent
variable {c,zv}. We show the samples generated by vary-
ing the view-common variable c(in form of one-hot) while
setting zvto0. In Figure 2(a), each unit of the view-
common variable generates the standard samples of one
class, which are all views’ common characteristics and pre-
Figure 4. Learning process. The clustering performance of view-
common representation gradually enhances, and that of view-
peculiar representations is the opposite.
(a) Epoch 10
 (b) Epoch 100
 (c) Epoch 200
 (d) Epoch 300
Figure 5. Visualization of the global latent representation [c;{zv}]
witht-SNE [26].
cisely represent their cluster information. Then, for the v-
th view, cis fixed and the continuous view-peculiar vari-
ablezvis randomly sampled. As shown in Figure 2(b)
and (c), the samples belonging to the same class contain
different visual characteristics in different views. Further,
we fix each cluster representation in cand show the results
generated with traversals of certain components of view-
peculiar variable zv. In Figure 3, it is discovered that the
view-peculiar visual representations are also disentangled,
such as thickness, angle, width, and height for MNIST; size
and grayscale for Fashion; angle and orientation for COIL.
Those visual factors are continuous.
Intuitively, the negative effects are likely to occur if peo-
ple do not disentangle each view’s continuous visual fac-
tors from its cluster factor. Different from other methods
(e.g., fusion of features or learning common subspace), in
Multi-V AE, all views’ common cluster information is en-
coded in the view-common representation, and each view’s
peculiar or superfluous information is encoded in the re-
spective view-peculiar representation. Hence, our method
can learn the disentangled and explainable representations,
which is the most fundamental reason for its improvement
compared to other approaches.
5.3. Multi-view Clustering Process Analysis
The learning process on Object-Digit-Product is shown
in Figure 4. In the beginning, the view-common variable
chas no representation capability for cluster information
of multiple views. The view-common and view-peculiar
representations are mixed in latent variables, which corre-
9240