Variants ACC NMI ARI
Multi-V AE (vanilla V AE) 0.872 0.907 0.862
Multi-V AE ( β-V AE) 0.683 0.780 0.632
Multi-V AE ( Cz) 0.704 0.726 0.592
Multi-V AE ( Cc) 0.902 0.959 0.880
Multi-V AE ( Cc+Cz) 0.993 0.989 0.985
Table 3. Ablation study on the variants of Multi-V AE.
sponds to low clustering performance and entanglement of
representations, as shown in Figure 5(a). Gradually, the
clustering performance of view-common representation is
improved and that of view-peculiar representations is re-
duced. The global latent representations are also separated
correspondingly as shown in Figure 5 (b)–(d).
Accordingly, we can conclude the mechanism of Multi-
V AE to improve clustering performance: 1) The view-
common variable captures the common cluster informa-
tion of multiple views, which plays a major role in clus-
tering. Disentangling the view-common variable from all
latent variables facilitates the view-common representation
to learn better cluster structures. 2) Except for the clus-
ter information, each view’s peculiar visual information is
learned by its view-peculiar variable. Although the view-
peculiar visual representation has no clear cluster structures,
it may be complementary for other views. This is in accord
with the conclusion 3 obtained in Section 5.1.
5.4. Ablation Study
In this subsection, four variants are tested to exam-
ine the effect of our proposed framework: 1) Multi-V AE
(vanilla V AE) consists of multiple vanilla V AEs with the
proposed architecture. 2) Multi-V AE ( β-V AE) denotes the
variant applying β-V AE without setting any controlled ca-
pacity. 3) Multi-V AE ( Cz) is the model with the controlled
capacity only for view-peculiar variables. Similarly, 4)
Multi-V AE ( Cc) denotes the controlled capacity is only set
for view-common variable. Multi-V AE ( Cc+Cz) repre-
sents the complete framework. Table 3 shows the results
on Multi-COIL-10 and interesting validations are made as
follows. Compared with using vanilla V AE, directly im-
proving the weight of KL divergence terms (i.e., using β-
V AE) is not helpful to learn the multi-view clustering in-
formation. The worst performance comes from applying
controlled capacity only to view-peculiar variables, which
makes the model’s learning focus on the peculiar informa-
tion among multiple views. The application of controlled
capacity to view-common variable results in considerable
improvement, because the view-common variable empha-
sizes learning common cluster information of all views. The
optimal setting is both controlled capacities are adopted
during learning the disentangled representations. Hence,
the model’s different parts have distinct contributions that
(a)
 (b)
Figure 6. (a) Parameter sensitivity analysis of βandCz. (b) Train-
ing loss on Object-Digit-Product.
are in accordance with our motivation.
5.5. Parameter and Convergence Analysis
The hyper-parameters of Multi-V AE include the trade-
off coefficient βand the maximum controlled capacity Cz
for view-peculiar variables. As shown in Figure 6(a), we
employ the grid search strategy and test the mean cluster-
ing performance on them. Even though most frameworks
for disentanglement are sensitive to the choice of hyper-
parameters [6], βandCzare insensitive to the clustering
performance of our method. The possible reason is, in
the proposed multiple V AEs architecture, the inference that
comes from all views increases the robustness compared to
single-view architectures. The training loss is shown in Fig-
ure 6(b), from which we know that although different views
have large gaps in visual information, Multi-V AE has good
convergence property.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented a novel generative
model (Multi-V AE) that can learn disentangled visual rep-
resentations for multi-view clustering. In Multi-V AE,
all views’ cluster representation and each view’s specific
visual representations are disentangled by the proposed
view-common variable and view-peculiar variables, respec-
tively. Extensive experiments demonstrate that Multi-V AE
achieves state-of-the-art clustering performance. In addi-
tion, Multi-V AE has linear complexity to data size. Its
framework to learn disentangled and explainable visual rep-
resentations is instructive for multi-view learning.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported in part by National Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of China (No. 61806043), Sichuan Sci-
ence and Technology Program (Nos. 2021YFS0172 and
2020YFS0119), Fundamental Research Funds for the Cen-
tral Universities of China (No. ZYGX2021YGLH022),
NSF ONR (No. N00014-18-1-2009), and Lehigh’s Accel-
erator Grant (No. S00010293).
9241