Multi-V AE: Learning Disentangled View-common and View-peculiar
Visual Representations for Multi-view Clustering
Jie Xu1, Yazhou Ren1∗, Huayi Tang1, Xiaorong Pu1, Xiaofeng Zhu1, Ming Zeng2, Lifang He3
1School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China
2Department of Electrical Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, PA 15213, USA
3Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Lehigh Univerisity, PA 18015, USA
jiexuwork@outlook.com, {yazhou.ren,puxiaor }@uestc.edu.cn
{tangh4681,seanzhuxf,mingzcmu }@gmail.com, lih319@lehigh.edu
Abstract
Multi-view clustering, a long-standing and important re-
search problem, focuses on mining complementary infor-
mation from diverse views. However, existing works often
fuse multiple views’ representations or handle clustering in
a common feature space, which may result in their entan-
glement especially for visual representations. To address
this issue, we present a novel VAE-based multi-view clus-
tering framework (Multi-VAE) by learning disentangled vi-
sual representations. Concretely, we define a view-common
variable and multiple view-peculiar variables in the gen-
erative model. The prior of view-common variable obeys
approximately discrete Gumbel Softmax distribution, which
is introduced to extract the common cluster factor of multi-
ple views. Meanwhile, the prior of view-peculiar variable
follows continuous Gaussian distribution, which is used to
represent each view’s peculiar visual factors. By controlling
the mutual information capacity to disentangle the view-
common and view-peculiar representations, continuous vi-
sual information of multiple views can be separated so that
their common discrete cluster information can be effectively
mined. Experimental results demonstrate that Multi-VAE
enjoys the disentangled and explainable visual represen-
tations, while obtaining superior clustering performance
compared with state-of-the-art methods.
1. Introduction
Clustering analysis is a fundamental research topic in
many fields, such as computer vision, machine learning, and
data mining, etc. Its goal is to partition data items with sim-
ilar patterns or characteristics into the same group. With
∗Corresponding authorthe unprecedented growth of deep learning, deep cluster-
ing methods [9, 37, 44, 47] overcome the shortcomings of
shallow models and make considerable progress in cluster-
ing performance. In real-world applications, however, vi-
sual data is often collected from multiple views or diverse
sources, e.g., 1) various writing styles of one digit written
by different people, 2) multiple views of an object captured
from cameras in multiple directions. Compared with single-
view clustering, accordingly, multi-view clustering (MVC)
can access to more comprehensive characteristics contained
in multi-view data and thus attracts increasing attention.
Existing MVC methods can be roughly divided into three
categories: 1) The first category is multi-view spectral clus-
tering [18, 23, 32, 33], where multiple graph structures are
constructed for clustering. 2) The second category [25, 52]
uses non-negative matrix factorization to decompose the
feature matrix and obtain cluster assignments. 3) The third
category is based on subspace clustering [21, 53], which
conducts self-representation on a subspace shared by multi-
ple views. More researches on MVC can be found in [49].
For many MVC methods, the central bottleneck is their
high complexity that makes it unrealistic for handling
large-scale data clustering tasks. Recent approaches have
achieved inspirational progress by applying deep models
[3, 7, 34, 45, 50, 55]. However, most of them learn the clus-
ter structures by exploring common representations or fus-
ing features of all views. Although complementary infor-
mation can be fetched in this way, the interference caused
by the entanglement among multiple views is also ignored.
We are inspired by two observations: 1) Cluster infor-
mation is discrete, which is an abstraction of the maximum
common visual information of all views. 2) Each view’s
peculiar visual information is often continuous, which has
different effects on clustering. For example, the observa-
tions from multiple sides of an object are conducive to bet-
9234