View -common variable
View -peculiar variable
…………𝜇1𝑧1
𝑧𝑉𝜇𝑉𝜎1
𝜎𝑉𝜖1~𝒩(0,1)
𝜖𝑉~𝒩(0,1)𝑐,𝑧1
𝑐,𝑧𝑉𝑥1
𝑥𝑉ො𝑥1
ො𝑥𝑉
Concatenating featuresReparametrization ……𝑐1
𝑐𝐾𝑐2
𝑠𝐾𝑠2𝑠1
Embedding Latent variable𝑔1,𝑔2,…,𝑔𝐾~𝐺𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑙(0,1)Encoder
(conv)
Encoder
(conv)Decoder
(deconv )
Decoder
(deconv )
Figure 1. The framework of Multi-V AE. Inference process: zvextracts the v-th view’s peculiar visual information that is contained in
the embedding transformed by the corresponding encoder. crepresents the cluster information among all views’ embeddings. Generative
process: the v-th view’s latent variable is composed of zvandc, which is fed into the corresponding decoder to generate samples.
ter describe itself. Nevertheless, the two writing styles of a
digit have no complementary effect for clustering, instead,
which may even cause interference. How to disentangle
them and learn explainable multi-view visual representa-
tions? This is an interesting but challenging problem. For-
tunately, some advancements about disentangled represen-
tation learning [1] have been made. Some generative mod-
els, such as variational autoencoders (V AE) [2] and gener-
ative adversarial networks (GAN) [4], are used to learn the
explainable representations, each unit of which corresponds
to a single factor of variation of the data. However, learning
disentangled visual representations has been rarely studied
for multi-view clustering .
In this paper, we propose a novel V AE-based framework
for multi-view clustering (dubbed Multi-V AE), which can
learn disentangled and explainable visual representations
and tackle large-scale data clustering problems. Different
from the existing multi-view clustering methods, as shown
in Figure 1, we introduce a view-common variable cand
multiple view-peculiar variables {z1,z2, . . . ,zV}in a mul-
tiple V AEs architecture. In order to learn the common visual
representation across views (i.e., cluster information), the
view-common variable cis inferred from all views’ embed-
dings. Meanwhile, each view-peculiar variable zvis only
inferred from the corresponding view’s embedding so as to
learn peculiar visual representations (like angle, styles, and
size, etc). For each view, its latent variable is made up of
candzvand is used to generate examples. Since the clus-
ter information is discrete and peculiar visual information
is continuous, the prior distributions of candzvwe se-
lected are Gumbel Softmax distribution and Gaussian dis-tribution, respectively. By controlling the mutual informa-
tion capacity of KL divergence between the posterior of the
latent variables and their prior during training, the common
and peculiar visual representations of multiple views can be
disentangled, which are further used for clustering.
Specifically, the contributions of this work include:
• We propose a novel multi-view V AE framework,
namely Multi-V AE, where the view-common and
view-peculiar variables are introduced to mine the dis-
crete clusters and continuous visual factors.
• Our model can disentangle all views’ common cluster
representation and each view’s peculiar visual repre-
sentations. In this way, the interference of multiple
views’ superfluous information is reduced when min-
ing their complementary information for clustering.
• Multi-V AE shows clearly superior clustering perfor-
mance compared with other methods. Moreover, its
complexity is linear to data size. To our knowledge,
this is the first attempt to implement MVC by learning
disentangle and explainable representations.
2. Related Work
Autoencoder-based Clustering . In recent years, au-
toencoder (AE) has shown impressive performance in rep-
resentation of high-dimensional data. DEC [44] is the well-
known method that utilizes AE to perform clustering. Its
improved version (IDEC) [11] introduced a reconstruction
term to address the distortion of embedded space. The con-
volutional autoencoder was applied in [9] to deal with im-
9235