A Broader Study of
Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning
Yunhui Guo1, Noel C. Codella2, Leonid Karlinsky2, James V . Codella2, John R.
Smith2, Kate Saenko3, Tajana Rosing1, and Rogerio Feris2
1University of California San Diego
2IBM Research AI
3Boston University
Abstract. Recent progress on few-shot learning largely relies on annotated data
for meta-learning: base classes sampled from the same domain as the novel classes.
However, in many applications, collecting data for meta-learning is infeasible
or impossible. This leads to the cross-domain few-shot learning problem, where
there is a large shift between base and novel class domains. While investiga-
tions of the cross-domain few-shot scenario exist, these works are limited to nat-
ural images that still contain a high degree of visual similarity. No work yet
exists that examines few-shot learning across different imaging methods seen
in real world scenarios, such as aerial and medical imaging. In this paper, we
propose the Broader Study of Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning (BSCD-FSL)
benchmark, consisting of image data from a diverse assortment of image ac-
quisition methods. This includes natural images, such as crop disease images,
but additionally those that present with an increasing dissimilarity to natural im-
ages, such as satellite images, dermatology images, and radiology images. Ex-
tensive experiments on the proposed benchmark are performed to evaluate state-
of-art meta-learning approaches, transfer learning approaches, and newer meth-
ods for cross-domain few-shot learning. The results demonstrate that state-of-art
meta-learning methods are surprisingly outperformed by earlier meta-learning
approaches, and all meta-learning methods underperform in relation to simple
ﬁne-tuning by 12.8% average accuracy. In some cases, meta-learning even un-
derperforms networks with random weights. Performance gains previously ob-
served with methods specialized for cross-domain few-shot learning vanish in
this more challenging benchmark. Finally, accuracy of all methods tend to cor-
relate with dataset similarity to natural images, verifying the value of the bench-
mark to better represent the diversity of data seen in practice and guiding fu-
ture research. Code for the experiments in this work can be found at https:
//github.com/IBM/cdfsl-benchmark .
Keywords: Cross-Domain, Few-Shot Learning, Benchmark, Transfer Learning
1 Introduction
Training deep neural networks for visual recognition typically requires a large amount
of labelled examples [28]. The generalization ability of deep neural networks relies
Equal contribution.arXiv:1912.07200v3  [cs.CV]  17 Jul 2020