6 Guo, Yunhui, et al.
or in some cases not possible. Image similarity to natural images is measured by 3 or-
thogonal criteria: 1) existeence of perspective distortion, 2) the semantic data content,
and 3) color depth. According to this criteria, the datasets demonstrate the following
spectrum of image types: 1) CropDiseases images are natural images, but are very spe-
cialized (similar to existing cross-domain few-shot setting, but speciﬁc to agriculture
industry), 2) EuroSAT images are less similar as they have lost perspective distortion,
but are still color images of natural scenes, 3) ISIC2018 images are even less similar
as they have lost perspective distortion and no longer represent natural scenes, and 4)
ChestX images are the most dissimilar as they have lost perspective distortion, do not
represent natural scenes, and have lost 2 color channels. Example images from Ima-
geNet and the proposed benchmark datasets are shown in Figure 1.
Having a few-shot learning model trained on a source domain such as ImageNet [9]
that can generalize to domains such as these, is highly desirable, as it enables effective
learning for rare categories in new types of images, which has previously not been
studied in detail.
4 Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning Formulation
The cross domain few-shot learning problem can be formalized as follows. We deﬁne
adomain as a joint distribution Pover input spaceXand label spaceY. The marginal
distribution ofXis denoted as PX. We use the pair (x;y)to denote a sample xand
the corresponding label yfrom the joint distribution P. For a model f:X!Y with
parameterand a loss function `, the expected error is deﬁned as,
(f) =E(x;y)P[`(f(x);y)] (1)
In cross-domain few-shot learning, we have a source domain (Xs;Ys)and a tar-
get domain (Xt;Yt)with joint distribution PsandPtrespectively, PXs6=PXt, and
Ysis disjoint fromYt. The base classes data are sampled from the source domain
and the novel classes data are sampled from the target domain. During the training
or meta-training stage, the model fis trained (or meta-trained) on the base classes
data. During testing (or meta-testing) stage, the model is presented with a support set
S=fxi;yigKN
i=1 consisting of Nexamples from Knovel classes. This conﬁguration
is referred to as “ K-wayN-shot” few-shot learning, as the support set has Knovel
classes and each novel class has Ntraining examples. After the model is adapted to the
support set, a query set from novel classes is used to evaluate the model performance.
5 Evaluated Methods for Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning
In this section, we describe the few-shot learning algorithms that will be evaluated on
our proposed benchmark.
5.1 Meta-learning based methods
Single Domain Methods Meta-learning [13,43], or learning to learn, aims at learn-
ing task-agnostic knowledge in order to efﬁciently learn on new tasks. Each task Ti
is assumed to be drawn from a ﬁxed distribution, TiP(T). Specially, in few-shot
learning, each task Tiis a small dataset Di:=fxj;yjgKN
j=1.Ps(T)andPt(T)are
used to denote the task distribution of the source (base) classes data and target (novel)
classes data respectively. During the meta-training stage, the model is trained on Ttasks