A Broader Study of Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning 7
fTigT
i=1which are sampled independently from Ps(T). During the meta-testing stage,
the model is expected to be quickly adapted to a new task TjPt(T).
Meta-learning methods differ in their way of learning the parameter of the initial
modelfon the base classes data. In MatchingNet [60], the goal is to learn a model
fthat can map an unlabelled example ^xto its label ^yusing a small labelled set
Di:=fxj;yjgKN
j=1 as^y=PKN
j=1a(^x;xj)yj, whereais an attention kernel which
leveragesfto compute the distance between the unlabelled example ^xand the labelled
examplexj, andyjis the one-hot representation of the label. In contrast, MAML [13]
aims at learning an initial parameter that can be quickly adapted to a new task. This
is achieved by updating the model parameter via a two-stage optimization process. Pro-
toNet [53] represents each class kwith the mean vector of embedded support examples
asck=1
NPN
j=1f(xj). Classiﬁcation is then conducted by calculating distance of the
example to the prototype representations of each class. In RelationNet [55] the metric
of the nearest neighbor classiﬁer is meta-learned using a Siamese Networks trained for
optimal comparison between query and support samples. More recently, MetaOpt [33]
employs convex base learners and aims at learning feature embeddings that generalize
well under a linear classiﬁcation rule for novel categories. All the existing meta-learning
methods implicitly assume that Ps(T)=Pt(T)so the task-agnostic knowledge learned
in the meta-training stage can be leveraged for fast learning on novel classes. However,
in cross-domain few-shot learning Ps(T)6=Pt(T)which poses severe challenges for
current meta-learning methods.
Cross-Domain Methods Only few methods speciﬁcally tailored to learning in the
condition of cross-domain few-shot learning have been previously explored, includ-
ing feaure-wise transform (FWT) [58], and Adversarial Domain Adaptation with Re-
inforced Sample (ADA-RSS) Selection [11]. Since the problem setting of ADA-RSS
requires the existence of unlabelled data in the target domain, we study FWT alone.
FWT is a model agnostic approach that adds a feature-wise transform layer to pre-
trained models to learn scale and shift parameters from a collection of several dataset
domains, or use parameters empirically determined from a single dataset domain. Both
approaches have been previously found to improve performance. Since our benchmark
is focused on ImageNet as the single source domain, we focus on the single data do-
main approach. The method is studied in combination with all meta-learning algorithms
described in the prior section.
5.2 Transfer learning based methods
An alternative way to tackle the problem of few-shot learning is based on transfer learn-
ing, where an initial model fis trained on the base classes data in a standard supervised
learning way and reused on the novel classes. There are several options to realize the
idea of transfer learning for few-shot learning:
Single Model Methods In this paper, we extensively evaluate the following commonly
variants of single model ﬁne-tuning:
–Fixed feature extractor (Fixed) : simply leverage the pre-trained model as a ﬁxed
feature extractor.
–Fine-tuning all layers (Ft All ): adjusts all the pre-trained parameters on the new
task with standard supervised learning.