2 Guo, Yunhui, et al.
Fig. 1: The Broader Study of Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning (BSCD-FSL) benchmark. Ima-
geNet is used for source training, and domains of varying dissimilarity from natural images are
used for target evaluation. Similarity is measured by 3 orthogonal criteria: 1) existence of perspec-
tive distortion, 2) the semantic content, and 3) color depth. No data is provided for meta-learning,
and target classes are disjoint from the source classes.
heavily on the size and variations of the dataset used for training. However, collecting
sufﬁcient amounts of data for certain classes may be impossible in practice: for exam-
ple, in dermatology, there are a multitude of instances of rare diseases, or diseases that
become rare for particular types of skin [48,1,25]. Or in other domains such as satel-
lite imagery, there are instances of rare categories such as airplane wreckage. Although
individually each situation may not carry heavy cost, as a group across many such
conditions and modalities, correct identiﬁcation is critically important, and remains a
signiﬁcant challenge where access to expertise may be impeded.
Although humans generalize to recognize new categories from few examples in cer-
tain circumstances, such as when categories exhibit predictable variations across exam-
ples and have reasonable contrast from background [32,31], even humans have trouble
recognizing new categories that vary too greatly between examples or differ from prior
experience, such as for diagnosis in dermatology, radiology, or other ﬁelds [48]. Be-
cause there are many applications where learning must work from few examples, and
both machines and humans have difﬁculty learning in these circumstances, ﬁnding new
methods to tackle the problem remains a challenging but desirable goal.
The problem of learning how to categorize classes with very few training examples
has been the topic of the “few-shot learning” ﬁeld, and has been the subject of a large
body of recent work [34,43,60,13,53,5,55]. Few-shot learning is typically composed of
the following two stages: meta-learning and meta-testing. In the meta-learning stage,
there exists an abundance of base category classes on which a system can be trained
to learn well under conditions of few-examples within that particular domain. In the
meta-testing stage, a set of novel classes consisting of very few examples per class is
used to adapt and evaluate the trained model. However, recent work [5] points out that
meta-learning based few-shot learning algorithms underperform compared to traditional
pre-training and ﬁne-tuning when there exists a large shift between base and novel class
domains. This is a major issue that occurs commonly in practice: by the nature of the