A Broader Study of Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning 3
problem, collecting data from the same domain for many few-shot classiﬁcation tasks is
difﬁcult. This scenario is referred to as cross-domain few-shot learning , to distinguish it
from the conventional few-shot learning setting. Although benchmarks for conventional
few-shot learning are well established, the cross-domain few-shot learning evaluation
benchmarks are still in early stages. All established works in this space have built cross-
domain evaluation benchmarks that are limited to natural images [58,5,56]. Under these
circumstances, useful knowledge may still be effectively transferring across different
domains of natural images, implying that methods designed in this setting may not
continue to perform well when applied to domains of other types of images, such as
industrial natural images, satellite images, or medical images. Currently, no works study
this scenario.
To ﬁll this gap, we propose the Broader Study of Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning
(BSCD-FSL) benchmark (Fig. 1), which covers a spectrum of image types with varying
levels of similarity to natural images. Similarity is deﬁned by 3 orthogonal criteria: 1)
whether images contain perspective distortion, 2) the semantic content of images, and
3) color depth. The datasets include agriculture images (natural images, but speciﬁc
to agriculture industry), satellite (loses perspective distortion), dermatology (loses per-
spective distortion, and contains different semantic content), and radiological images
(different according to all 3 criteria). The performance of existing state-of-art meta-
learning methods, transfer learning methods, and methods tailored for cross-domain
few-shot learning is then rigorously tested on the proposed benchmark.
In summary, the contributions of this paper are itemized as follows:
–We establish a new Broader Study of Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning (BSCD-
FSL) benchmark, consisting of images from a diversity of image types with varying
dissimilarity to natural images, according to 1) perspective distortion, 2) the seman-
tic content, and 3) color depth.
–Under these conditions, we extensively evaluate the performance of current meta-
learning methods, including methods speciﬁcally tailored for cross-domain few-
shot learning, as well as variants of ﬁne-tuning.
–The results demonstrate that state-of-art meta-learning methods are outperformed
by older meta-learning approaches, and all meta-learning methods underperform
in relation to simple ﬁne-tuning by 12.8% average accuracy. In some cases, meta-
learning underperforms even networks with random weights .
–Results also show that accuracy gains for cross-domain few-shot learning methods
are lost in this new challenging benchmark.
–Finally, we ﬁnd that accuracy of all methods correlate with the proposed measure
of data similarity to natural images, verifying the diversity of the problem repre-
sentation, and the value of the benchmark towards future research.
We believe this work will help the community understand what methods are most
effective in practice, and help drive further advances that can more quickly yield beneﬁt
for real-world applications.
2 Related Work
Few-shot learning Few-shot learning [32,60,31] is an increasingly important topic
in machine learning. Many few-shot methods have been proposed, including meta-