14
The Predictron was introduced by Silver et al. and combines end-
to-end planning and model learning [Silver et al., 2017b]. As
with [Oh et al., 2017], the model is an abstract model that consists
of four components: a representation model, a next-state model, a
reward model, and a discount model. All models are differentiable.
The goal of the abstract model in Predictron is to facilitate value
prediction (not state prediction) or prediction of pseudo-reward
functions that can encode special events, such as “staying alive”
or “reaching the next room.” The planning part rolls forward its
internal model ksteps. As in the Dyna architecture, imagined
forward steps can be combined with samples from the actual
environment, combining model-free and model-based updates.
The Predictron has been applied to procedurally generated mazes
and a simulated pool domain. In both cases it out-performed
model-free algorithms.
Latent models of the dynamics of the environment can also be
viewed as World Models , a term used by [Ha and Schmidhuber,
2018a,b]. World Models are inspired by the manner in which
humans are thought to contruct a mental model of the world
in which we live. World Models are generative recurrent neural
networks that are trained unsupervised to generate states for sim-
ulation using a variational autoencoder and a recurrent network.
They learn a compressed spatial and temporal representation of the
environment. By using features extracted from the World Model as
inputs to the agent, a compact and simple policy can be trained to
solve a task, and planning occurs in the compressed or simpliﬁed
world. For a visual environment, World Models consist of a vision
model, a memory model, and a controller. The vision model is
often trained unsupervised with a variational autoencoder. The
memory model is approximated with a mixture density network
of a Gaussian distribution (MDN-RNN) [Bishop, 1994, Graves,
2013]. The controller model is a linear model that maps directly to
actions. It uses the CMA-ES Evolutionary Strategy for optimizing
Controller models. Rollouts in World Models are also called
dreams , to contrast them with samples from the real environment.
With World Models a policy can in principle even be trained
completely inside the dream, using imagination only inside the
World Model, to test it out later in the actual environment. World
Models have been applied experimentally to VizDoom tasks such
as Car Racing [Kempka et al., 2016].
Taking the development of AlphaZero further is the work
onMuZero [Schrittwieser et al., 2019]. Board games are well
suited for model-based methods because the transition function is
given by the rules of the game. However, would it be possible
to do well if the rules of the game were notgiven? In MuZero
a new architecture is used to learn transition functions for a
range of different games, from Atari to board games. MuZero
learns the transition model for all games from interaction with the
environment, with one architecture, that is able to learn different
transition models. As with the Predictron [Silver et al., 2017b]
and Value Prediction Networks [Oh et al., 2017], MuZero has an
abstract model with different modules: representation, dynamics,
and prediction function. The dynamics function is a recurrent
process that computes transition latent state) and reward. The
prediction function computes policy and value functions. For plan-
ning, MuZero uses a version of MCTS, without the rollouts, and
with P-UCT as selection rule, using information from the abstract
model as input for node selection. MuZero can be regarded as
joining the Predictron with self-play. It performs well on Atari
games and on board games, learning to play the games from
scratch, after having learned the rules of the games from scratch
Fig. 11. Cartpole Pendulum [Sutton and Barto, 2018]
from the environment.
Conclusion
Latent models represent states with a number of smaller, latent
models, allowing planning to happen in a smaller latent space.
They are useful for explicit planning and with end-to-end learnable
planning, as in the Predictron [Silver et al., 2017b]. Latent models
allow end-to-end planning to be applied to a broader range of ap-
plications, beyond small mazes. The Predictron creates an abstract
planning network, in the spirit of, but without the limitations of,
Value Iteration Networks [Tamar et al., 2016]. The World Models
interpretation links latent models to the way in which humans
create mental models of the world that we live in.
After this detailed survey of model-based methods—the
agents—it is time to discuss our ﬁndings and draw conclusions.
Before we do so, we will ﬁrst look at one of the most important
elements for reproducible reinforcement learning research, the
benchmark.
4 B ENCHMARKS
Benchmarks—the environments—play a key role in artiﬁcial in-
telligence. Without them, progress cannot be measured, and results
cannot be compared in a meaningful way. The benchmarks deﬁne
the kind of intelligence that our artiﬁcial methods should approach.
For reinforcement learning, Mountain car and Cartpole are well-
known small problems that characterize the kind of problem to
solve (see Figure 11). Chess has been called the Drosophila
of AI [Landis and Yaglom, 2001]. In addition to Mountain car
and chess a series of benchmark applications have been used to
measure progress of artiﬁcially intelligent methods. Some of the
benchmarks are well-known and have been driving progress. In
image recognition, the ImageNet sequence of competitions has
stimulated great progress [Fei-Fei et al., 2009, Guo et al., 2016,
Krizhevsky et al., 2012]. The current focus on reproducibility
in reinforcement learning emphasizes the importance of bench-
marks [Henderson et al., 2017, Islam et al., 2017, Khetarpal et al.,
2018].
Most papers that introduce new model-based reinforcement
learning algorithms perform some form of experimental evaluation
of the algorithm. Still, since papers use different versions and
hyper-parameter settings, comparing algorithm performance re-
mains difﬁcult in practice. A recent benchmarking study compared
the performance of 14 algorithms, and some baseline algorithms