1
Model-Based Deep Reinforcement Learning for
High-Dimensional Problems, a Survey
Aske Plaat, Walter Kosters, Mike Preuss
Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science
F
Abstract —Deep reinforcement learning has shown remarkable success
in the past few years. Highly complex sequential decision making prob-
lems have been solved in tasks such as game playing and robotics. Un-
fortunately, the sample complexity of most deep reinforcement learning
methods is high, precluding their use in some important applications.
Model-based reinforcement learning creates an explicit model of the
environment dynamics to reduce the need for environment samples.
Current deep learning methods use high-capacity networks to solve
high-dimensional problems. Unfortunately, high-capacity models typi-
cally require many samples, negating the potential beneﬁt of lower sam-
ple complexity in model-based methods. A challenge for deep model-
based methods is therefore to achieve high predictive power while
maintaining low sample complexity.
In recent years, many model-based methods have been introduced
to address this challenge. In this paper, we survey the contemporary
model-based landscape. First we discuss deﬁnitions and relations to
other ﬁelds. We propose a taxonomy based on three approaches: using
explicit planning on given transitions, using explicit planning on learned
transitions, and end-to-end learning of both planning and transitions.
We use these approaches to organize a comprehensive overview of
important recent developments such as latent models. We describe
methods and benchmarks, and we suggest directions for future work
for each of the approaches. Among promising research directions are
curriculum learning, uncertainty modeling, and use of latent models for
transfer learning.
Index Terms —Model-based reinforcement Learning, latent models,
deep learning, machine learning, planning.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Deep reinforcement learning has shown remarkable successes in
the past few years. Applications in game playing and robotics
have shown the power of this paradigm with applications such
as learning to play Go from scratch or ﬂying an acrobatic model
helicopter [Abbeel et al., 2007, Mnih et al., 2015, Silver et al.,
2016]. Reinforcement learning uses an environment from which
training data is sampled; in contrast to supervised learning it does
not need a large database of pre-labeled training data. This opens
up many applications for machine learning for which no such
database exists. Unfortunately, however, for most interesting ap-
plications many samples from the environment are necessary, and
the computational cost of learning is prohibitive, a problem that is
common in deep learning [LeCun et al., 2015]. Achieving faster
learning is a major goal of much current research. Many promising
approaches are tried, among them metalearning [Hospedales et al.,
2020, Huisman et al., 2020], transfer learning [Pan et al., 2010],
curriculum learning [Narvekar et al., 2020] and zero-shot learn-ing [Xian et al., 2017]. The current paper focuses on model-based
methods in deep reinforcement learning.
Model-based methods can reduce sample complexity. In con-
trast to model-free methods that sample at will from the envi-
ronment, model-based methods build up a dynamics model of
the environment as they sample. By using this dynamics model
for policy updates, the number of necessary samples can be re-
duced substantially [Sutton, 1991]. Especially in robotics sample-
efﬁciency is important (in games environment samples can often
be generated more cheaply).
The success of the model-based approach hinges critically on
the quality of the predictions of the dynamics model, and here
the prevalence of deep learning presents a challenge [Talvitie,
2015]. Modeling the dynamics of high dimensional problems
usually requires high capacity networks that, unfortunately, require
many samples for training to achieve high generalization while
preventing overﬁtting, potentially undoing the sample efﬁciency
gains of model-based methods. Thus, the problem statement of the
methods in this survey is how to train a high-capacity dynamics
model with high predictive power and low sample complexity .
In addition to promising better sample efﬁciency than model-
free methods, there is another reason for the interest in model-
based methods for deep learning. Many problems in reinforce-
ment learning are sequential decision problems, and learning the
transition function is a natural way of capturing the core of long
and complex decision sequences. This is what is called a forward
model in game AI [Risi and Preuss, 2020, Torrado et al., 2018].
When a good transition function of the domain is present, then
new, unseen, problems can be solved efﬁciently. Hence, model-
based reinforcement learning may contribute to efﬁcient transfer
learning.
The contribution of this survey is to give an in-depth overview
of recent methods for model-based deep reinforcement learning.
We describe methods that use (1) explicit planning on given
transitions, (2) explicit planning on a learned transition model,
and (3) end-to-end learning of both planning and transitions.
For each approach future directions are listed (speciﬁcally: latent
models, uncertainty modeling, curriculum learning and multi-
agent benchmarks).
Many research papers have been published recently, and the
ﬁeld of model-based deep reinforcement learning is advancing
rapidly. The papers in this survey are selected on recency and
impact on the ﬁeld, for different applications, highlighting re-
lationships between papers. Since our focus is on recent work,
some of the references are to preprints in arXiv (of reputable
groups). Excellent works with necessary background informationarXiv:2008.05598v2  [cs.LG]  1 Dec 2020