13
Approach Learning Planning Reinforcement Learning Application
VIN [Tamar et al., 2016] CNN Rollout in network Value Iteration Mazes
VProp [Nardelli et al., 2018] CNN Hierarch Rollouts Value Iteration Navigation
TreeQN [Farquhar et al., 2018] Tree-shape Net Plan-functions DQN/Actor-Critic Box pushing
ConvLSTM [Guez et al., 2019] CNN+LSTM Rollouts in network A3C Sokoban
I2A [Weber et al., 2017] CNN/LSTM encoder Meta-controller A3C Sokoban
Predictron [Silver et al., 2017b] k;
; -CNN-predictr k-rollout -accum Mazes
World Model [Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018b] V AE CMA-ES MDN-RNN Car Racing
MuZero [Schrittwieser et al., 2019] Latent MCTS Curriculum Go/chess/shogi+Atari
TABLE 6
Overview of End-to-End Planning/Transition Methods
larger than the ones seen at training time. VProp is evaluated
on grid-worlds and also on dynamic environments and on a
navigation scenario from StarCraft.
A different approach is taken in TreeQN/ATreeC. Again, the
aim is to create differentiable tree planning for deep reinforce-
ment learning [Farquhar et al., 2018]. As VIN, TreeQN is focused
on combining planning and deep reinforcement learning. Unlike
VIN, however, TreeQN does so by incorporating a recursive tree
structure in the network. It models an MDP by incorporating an
explicit encoder function, a transition function, a reward function,
a value function, and a backup function (see also latent models in
the next subsection). In this way, it aims to achieve the same goal
as VIN, that is, to create a differentiable neural network architec-
ture that is suitable for planning. TreeQN is based on DQN-value-
functions, an actor-critic variant is proposed as ATreeC. TreeQN
is a prelude to latent models methods in the next subsection. In
addition to being related to VIN, this approach is also related to
VPN [Oh et al., 2017] and the Predictron [Silver et al., 2017b].
TreeQN is tried on box pushing applications, like Sokoban, and
nine Atari games.
Another approach to differentiable planning is to teach a
sequence of convolutional neural networks to exhibit planning
behavior. A paper by [Guez et al., 2019] takes this approach. The
paper demonstrates that a neural network architecture consisting
of modules of a convolutional network and LSTM can learn to
exhibit the behavior of a planner. In this approach the planning
occurs implicitly, by the network, which the authors call model-
free planning, in contrast to the previous approaches in which the
network structure more explicitly resembles a planner [Farquhar
et al., 2018, Guez et al., 2018, Tamar et al., 2016]. In this
method model-based behavior is learned with a general recur-
rent architecture consisting of LSTMs and a convolutional net-
work [Schmidhuber, 1990b] in the form of a stack of ConvLSTM
modules [Xingjian et al., 2015]. For the learning of the ConvL-
STM modules the A3C actor-critic approach is used [Mnih et al.,
2016]. The method is tried on Sokoban and Boxworld [Zambaldi
et al., 2018]. A stack of depth D, repreatedNtimes (time-
ticks) allows the network to plan. In harder Sokoban instances,
larger capacity networks with larger depth performed better. The
experiments used a large number of environment steps, future
work should investigate how to achieve sample-efﬁciency with
this architecture.
Conclusion
Planning networks combine planning and transition learning. They
fold the planning into the network, making the planning process
itself differentiable. The network then learns which planning
decisions to make. Value Iteration Networks have shown howlearning can transfer to mazes that have not been seen before. A
drawback is that due to the marriage of problem size and network
topology the approach has been limited to smaller sizes, something
that subsequent methods have tried to reduce. One of these
approaches is TreeQN, which uses multiple smaller models and a
tree-structured network. The related Predictron architecture [Silver
et al., 2017b] also learns planning end-to-end, and is applicable to
different kinds and sizes of problems.
The Predictron uses abstract models, and will be discussed in
the next subsection.
3.3.1 End-to-End Planning/Transitions with Latent Models
We will now discuss latent model approaches in end-to-end
learning of planning and transitions.
The ﬁrst abstract imagination-based approach that we discuss
isImagination-Augmented Agent , or I2A, by [Buesing et al.,
2018, Pascanu et al., 2017, Weber et al., 2017]. A problem of
model-based algorithms is the sensitivity of the planning to model
imperfections. I2A deals with these imperfections by introducing
a latent model, that learns to interpret internal simulations and
adapt a strategy to the current state. I2A uses latent models of
the environment, based on [Buesing et al., 2018, Chiappa et al.,
2017]. The core architectural feature of I2A is an environment
model, a recurrent architecture trained unsupervised from agent
trajectories. I2A has four elements that together constitute the
abstract model: (1) It has a manager that constructs a plan,
which can be implemented with a CNN. (2) It has a controller
that creates an action policy. (3) It has an environment model
to do imagination. (4) Finally, it has a memory, which can be
implemented with an LSTM [Pascanu et al., 2017]. I2A uses a
manager or meta-controller to choose between rolling out actions
in the environment or by imagination (see [Hamrick et al., 2017]).
This allows the use of models which only coarsely capture
the environmental dynamics, even when those dynamics are not
perfect. The I2A network uses a recurrent architecture in which
a CNN is trained from agent trajectories with A3C [Mnih et al.,
2016]. I2A achieves success with little data and imperfect models,
optimizing point-estimates of the expected Q-values of the actions
in a discrete action space. I2A is applied to Sokoban and Mini-
Pacman by [Buesing et al., 2018, Weber et al., 2017]. Performance
is compared favorably to model-free and planning algorithms
(MCTS). Pascanu et al. apply the approach on a maze and a
spaceship task [Pascanu et al., 2017].
Planning networks (VIN) combine planning and learning end-
to-end. A limitation of VIN is that the tight connection between
problem domain, iteration algorithm, and network architecture
limited the applicability to small grid world problem. The Pre-
dictron introduces an abstract model to remove this limitation.