8
Approach Learning Planning Application
PILCO [Deisenroth and Rasmussen, 2011] Gaussian Processes Gradient based Pendulum
iLQG [Tassa et al., 2012] Quadratic Non-linear MPC Humanoid
GPS [Levine and Abbeel, 2014] iLQG Trajectory Swimmer
SVG [Heess et al., 2015] Value Gradients Trajectory Swimmer
PETS [Chua et al., 2018] Uncertainty Ensemble MPC Cheetah
Visual Foresight [Finn and Levine, 2017] Video Prediction MPC Manipulation
TABLE 3
Overview of Explicit Planning/Learned Transitions Methods
prediction methods. Finally, methods that focus on uncertainty and
ensemble methods will be introduced. We know that deep neural
nets need much data and learn slowly, or will overﬁt. Uncertainty
modeling is based on the insight that early in the training the
model has seen little data, and tends to overﬁt, and later on, as it
has seen more data, it may underﬁt. This issue can be mitigated by
incorporating uncertainty into the dynamics models, as we shall
see in the later methods [Chua et al., 2018].
For smaller models, environment samples can be used to
approximate a transition model as a Gaussian Process of random
variables. This approach is followed in PILCO, which stands
for Probabilistic Inference for Learning Control, see [Deisenroth
and Rasmussen, 2011, Deisenroth et al., 2013a, Kamthe and
Deisenroth, 2017]. Gaussian Processes can accurately learn simple
processes with good sample efﬁciency [Bishop, 2006], although
for high dimensional problems they need more samples. PILCO
treats the transition model Ta(s;s0)as a probabilistic function
of the environment samples. The planner improves the policy
based on the analytic gradients relative to the policy parameters
. PILCO has been used to optimize small problems such as
Mountain car and Cartpole pendulum swings, for which it works
well. Although they achieve model learning using higher order
model information, Gaussian Processes do not scale to high
dimensional environments, and the method is limited to smaller
applications.
A related method uses a trajectory optimization approach with
nonlinear least-squares optimization. In control theory, the lin-
ear–quadratic–Gaussian (LQG) control problem is one of the most
fundamental optimal control problems. Iterative LQG [Tassa
et al., 2012] is the control analog of the Gauss-Newton method
for nonlinear least-squares optimization. In contrast to PILCO,
the model learner uses quadratic approximation on the reward
function and linear approximation of the transition function. The
planning part of this method uses a form of online trajectory
optimization, model-predictive control (MPC), in which step-by-
step real-time local optimization is used, as opposed to full-
problem optimization [Richards, 2005]. By using many further
improvements throughout the MPC pipeline, including the trajec-
tory optimization algorithm, the physics engine, and cost function
design, Tassa et al. were able to achieve near-real-time perfor-
mance in humanoid simulated robot manipulation tasks, such as
grasping.
Another trajectory optimization method takes its inspiration
from model-free learning. Levine and Koltun [Levine and Koltun,
2013] introduce Guided Policy Search (GPS) in which the search
uses trajectory optimization to avoid poor local optima. In GPS,
the parameterized policy is trained in a supervised way with
samples from a trajectory distribution. The GPS model optimizes
the trajectory distribution for cost and the current policy, to create
a good training set for the policy. Guiding samples are generatedby differential dynamic programming and are incorporated into
the policy with regularized importance sampling. In contrast to
the previous methods, GPS algorithms can train complex policies
with thousands of parameters. In a sense, Guided Policy Search
transforms the iLQG controller into a neural network policy 
with a trust region in which the new controller does not deviate
too much from the samples [Finn et al., 2016, Levine and Abbeel,
2014, Montgomery and Levine, 2016]. GPS has been evaluated on
planar swimming, hopping, and walking, as well as simulated 3D
humanoid running.
Another attempt at increasing the accuracy of learned pa-
rameterized transition models in continuous control problems
isStochastic Value Gradients (SVG) [Heess et al., 2015]. It
mitigates learned model inaccuracy by computing value gradients
along the real environment trajectories instead of planned ones.
The mismatch between predicted and real transitions is addressed
with re-parametrization and backpropagation through the stochas-
tic samples. In comparison, PILCO uses Gaussian process models
to compute analytic policy gradients that are sensitive to model-
uncertainty and GPS optimizes policies with the aid of a stochastic
trajectory optimizer and locally-linear models. SVG in contrast
focuses on global neural network value function approximators.
SVG results are reported on simulated robotics applications in
Swimmer, Reacher, Gripper, Monoped, Half-Cheetah, and Walker.
Other methods also focus on uncertainty in high dimensional
modeling, but use ensembles. Chua et al. propose probabilistic
ensembles with trajectory sampling (PETS) [Chua et al., 2018].
The learned transition model of PETS has an uncertainty-aware
deep network, which is combined with sampling-based uncertainty
propagation. PETS uses a combination of probabilistic ensem-
bles [Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017]. The dynamics are modelled
by an ensemble of probabilistic neural network models in a model-
predictive control setting (the agent only applies the ﬁrst action
from the optimal sequence and re-plans at every time-step) [Naga-
bandi et al., 2018]. Chua et al. report experiments on simulated
robot tasks such as Half-Cheetah, Pusher, Reacher. Performance
on these tasks is reported to approach asymptotic model-free
baselines, stressing the importance of uncertainty estimation in
model-baed reinforcement learning.
An important problem in robotics is to learn arm manipulation
directly from video camera input by seeing which movements
work and which fail. The video input provides a high dimensional
and difﬁcult input and increases problem size and complexity
substantially. Both Finn et al. and Ebert et al. report on learning
complex robotic manipulation skills from high-dimenstional raw
sensory pixel inputs in a method called Visual Foresight [Ebert
et al., 2018, Finn and Levine, 2017]. The aim of Visual Foresight
is to generalize deep learning methods to never-before-seen tasks
and objects. It uses a training procedure where data is sampled
according to a probability distribution. Concurrently, a video