3
Transition ModelPolicy/Value
planning acting
Fig. 3. Planning
Q(s;a). ThisQ-function gives the expected sum of discounted
rewards when following action ain states, and then afterwards
policy. The valueV(s)is the maximum of the Q(s;a)-values
of that state. The optimal value-function is denoted as V?(s). The
optimal policy can be found by recursively choosing the argmax
action withQ(s;a) =V?(s)in each state.
To ﬁnd the policy by planning, models for TandRmust be
known. When they are not known, an environment is assumed to
be present for the agent to query in order to get the necessary
reinforcing information, see Figure 1, after Sutton and Barto
[2018]. The samples can be used to build the model of Tand
R(model-based reinforcement learning) or they can be used to
ﬁnd the policy without ﬁrst building the model (direct or model-
free reinforcement learning). When sampling, the environment is
in a known state s, and the agent chooses an action awhich it
transmits to the environment, that responds with a new state s0
and the corresponding reward value r0=Ra(s;s0).
The literature provides many solution algorithms. We now
very brieﬂy discuss classical planning and model-free approaches,
before we continue to survey model-based algorithms in more
depth in the next section.
2.2 Planning
Planning algorithms use the transition model to ﬁnd the optimal
policy, by selecting actions in states, looking ahead, and backing
up reward values, see Figure 2 and Figure 3.
Algorithm 1 Value Iteration
InitializeV(s)to arbitrary values
repeat
for allsdo
for allado
Q[s;a] =P
s0Ta(s;s0)(Ra(s;s0) +
V(s0))
end for
V[s] = maxa(Q[s;a])
end for
until V converges
return V
In planning algorithms, the agent has access to an explicit
transition and reward model. In the deterministic case the tran-
sition model provides the next state for each of the possible
actions in the states, it is a function s0=Ta(s). In the stochastic
case, it provides the probability distribution Ta(s;s0). The reward
model provides the immediate reward for transitioning from state
sto states0after taking action a. Figure 2 provides a backup
diagram for the transition and reward function. The transition
function moves downward in the diagram from state stos0,
and the reward value goes upward in the diagram, backing up
the value from the child state to the parent state. The transition
function follows policy with actiona, after which state s0isEnvironmentPolicy/Value
learning acting
Fig. 4. Model-Free Learning
chosen with probability p, yielding reward r0. The policy function
(s;a)concerns the top layer of the diagram, from stoa. The
transition function Ta(s;s0)covers both layers, from stos0. In
some domains, such as chess, there is a single deterministic state s0
for each action a. Here each move leads to a single board position,
simplifying the backup diagram.
Together, the transition and reward functions implicitly deﬁne
a space of states that can be searched for the optimal policy ?
and valueV?.
The most basic form of planning is Bellman’s dynamic pro-
gramming [Bellman, 1957, 2013], a recursive traversal of the
state and action space. Value iteration is a well-known, very
basic, dynamic programming method. The pseudo-code for value
iteration is shown in Algorithm 1 [Alpaydin, 2020]. It traverses all
actions in all states, computing the value of the entire state space.
Many planning algorithms have been devised to efﬁciently
generate and traverse state spaces, such as (depth-limited) A*,
alpha-beta and Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) [Browne et al.,
2012, Hart et al., 1968, Korf, 1985, Moerland et al., 2018, 2020c,
Pearl, 1984, Plaat et al., 1996].
Planning algorithms originated from exact, table-based, al-
gorithms [Sutton and Barto, 2018] that ﬁt in the symbolic AI
tradition. For planning it is relevant to know how much of the
state space must be traversed to ﬁnd the optimal policy. When state
spaces are too large to search fully, deep function approximation
algorithms can be used to approximate the optimal policy and
value [Plaat, 2020, Sutton and Barto, 2018].
Planning is sample-efﬁcient in the sense that, when the agent
has a model, a policy can be found without interaction with the
environment. Sampling may be costly, and sample efﬁciency is an
important concept in reinforcement learning.
A sampling action taken in an environment is irreversible,
since state changes of the environment can not be undone by
the agent. In contrast, a planning action taken in a transition
model is reversible [Moerland et al., 2020a]. A planning agent can
backtrack, a sampling agent cannot. Sampling ﬁnds local optima
easily. For ﬁnding global optima the ability to backtrack out of a
local optimum is useful, which is an advantage for model-based
planning methods.
Note, however, that there are two ways of ﬁnding dynamics
models. In some problems, the transition and reward models are
given by the problem, such as in games, where the move rules are
known, as in Go and chess. Here the dynamics models follow the
problem perfectly, and many steps can be planned accurately into
the future without problem, out-performing model-free sampling.
In other problems the dynamics model must be learned from
sampling the environment. Here the model will not be perfect,
and will contain errors and biases. Planning far ahead will only
work when the agent has a TandRmodel of sufﬁcient quality.
With learned models, it may be more difﬁcult for model-based
planning to achieve the performance of model-free sampling.