11
Approach Learning Planning Reinforcement Learning Application
Video predict [Oh et al., 2015] CNN/LSTM Action Curriculum Atari
VPN [Oh et al., 2017] CNN encoder d-stepk-step Mazes, Atari
SimPLe [Kaiser et al., 2019] V AE, LSTM MPC PPO Atari
PlaNet [Hafner et al., 2018] RSSM (V AE/RNN) CEM MPC Cheetah
Dreamer [Hafner et al., 2019] RSSM+CNN Imagine Actor-Critic Control
Plan2Explore [Sekar et al., 2020] RSSM Planning Few-shot Control
TABLE 5
Overview of Latent Modeling Methods
to-end model learning and planning. Finally, latent models are
applied to transfer learning in few-shot learning. In the next
subsection more methods are described that also use latent models
(see Table 6 and the overview Table 1).
Let us now have a look at the latent model approaches.
An important application in games and robotics is the
long range prediction of video images. Building a generative
model for video data is a challenging problem involving high-
dimensional natural-scene data with temporal dynamics, intro-
duced by [Schmidhuber and Huber, 1991]. In many applications
next-frame prediction also depends on control or action variables,
especially in games. A ﬁrst paper by [Oh et al., 2015] builds
a model to predict Atari games using a high-dimensional video
encoding model and action-conditional transformation. The au-
thors describe three-step experiments with a convolutional and
with a recurrent (LSTM) encoder. The next step performs action-
conditional encoding, after which convolutional decoding takes
place. To reduce the effect of small prediction errors compounding
through time, a multi-step prediction target is used. Short-term
future frames are predicted and ﬁne-tuned to predict longer-
term future frames after the previous phase converges, using a
curriculum that stabilizes training [Bengio et al., 2009]. Oh et al.
perform planning on an abstract, encoded, representation; showing
the beneﬁt of acting in latent space. Experimental results on Atari
games showed generation of visually-realistic frames useful for
control over up to 100-step action-conditional predictions in some
games. This architecture was developed further into the VPN
approach, which we will describe next.
TheValue Prediction Network (VPN) approach [Oh et al.,
2017] integrates model-free and model-based reinforcement learn-
ing into a single abstract neural network that consists of four mod-
ules. For training, VPN combines temporal-difference search [Sil-
ver et al., 2012] and n-step Q-learning [Mnih et al., 2016].
VPN performs lookahead planning to choose actions. Classical
model-based reinforcement learning predicts future observations
Ta(s;s0). VPN plans future values without having to predict
future observations, using abstract representations instead. The
VPN network architecture consists of the modules: encoding,
transition, outcome, and value. The encoding module is applied
to the environment observation to produce a latent state s. The
value, outcome, and transition modules work in latent space, and
are recursively applied to expand the tree.1It does not use MCTS,
but a simpler rollout algorithm that performs planning up to a
1. VPN uses a convolutional neural network as the encoding module. The
transition module consists of an option-conditional convolution layer (see [Oh
et al., 2015]). A residual connection from the previous abstract-state to the next
asbtract-state is used [He et al., 2016]. The outcome module is similar to the
transition module. The value module consists of two fully-connected layers.
The number of layers and hidden units varies depending on the application
domain.planning horizon. VPN uses imagination to update the policy. It
outperforms model-free DQN on Mazes and Atari games such
as Seaquest, QBert, Krull, and Crazy Climber. Value Prediction
Networks are related to Value Iteration Networks and to the
Predictron, which we will describe next.
For robotics and games, video prediction methods are im-
portant. Simulated policy learning, or SimPLe, uses stochastic
video prediction techniques [Kaiser et al., 2019]. SimPLe uses
video frame prediction as a basis for model-based reinforcement
learning. In contrast to Visual Foresight, SimPLe builds on model-
free work on video prediction using variational autoencoders,
recurrent world models and generative models [Chiappa et al.,
2017, Leibfried et al., 2016, Oh et al., 2015] and model-based
work [Azizzadenesheli et al., 2018, Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018b,
Oh et al., 2017]. The latent model is formed with a variational
autoencoder that is used to deal with the limited horizon of past
observation frames [Babaeizadeh et al., 2017, Bengio et al., 2015].
The model-free PPO algorithm [Schulman et al., 2017] is used
for policy optimization. In an experimental evaluation, SimPLe is
more sample efﬁcient than the Rainbow algorithm [Hessel et al.,
2017] on 26 ALE games to learn Atari games with 100,000 sample
steps (400k frames).
Learning dynamics models that are accurate enough for plan-
ning is a long standing challenge, especially in image-based
domains. PlaNet trains a model-based agent to learn the en-
vironment dynamics from images and choose actions through
planning in latent space with both deterministic and stochastic
transition elements. PlaNet is introduced in Planning from Pix-
els[Hafner et al., 2018]. PlaNet uses a Recurrent State Space
Model (RSSM) that consists of a transition model, an observation
model, a variational encoder and a reward model. Based on these
models a Model-Predictive Control agent is used to adapt its
plan, replanning each step. For planning, the RSSM is used by
the Cross-Entropy-Method (CEM) to search for the best action
sequence [Buesing et al., 2018, Doerr et al., 2018, Karl et al.,
2016]. In contrast to many model-free reinforcement learning
approaches, no explicit policy or value network is used. PlaNet
is tested on tasks from MuJoCo and the DeepMind control suite:
Swing-up, Reacher, Cheetah, Cup Catch. It reaches performance
that is close to strong model-free algorithms.
A year after the PlaNet paper was pubished [Hafner et al.,
2019] published Dream to Control: Learning Behaviors by Latent
Imagination . World models enable interpolating between past
experience, and latent models predict both actions and values.
The latent models in Dreamer consist of a representation model,
an observation model, a transition model, and a reward model. It
allows the agent to plan (imagine) the outcomes of potential action
sequences without executing them in the environment. It uses
an actor-critic approach to learn behaviors that consider rewards
beyond the horizon. Dreamer backpropagates through the value