12
model, similar to DDPG [Lillicrap et al., 2015] and Soft-actor-
critic [Haarnoja et al., 2018]. Dreamer is tested with applications
from the DeepMind control suite: 20 visual control tasks such as
Cup, Acrobot, Hopper, Walker, Quadruped, on which it achieves
good performance.
Finally, Plan2Explore [Sekar et al., 2020] studies how rein-
forcement learning with latent models can be used for transfer
learning, in partiular, few-shot and zero-shot learning [Xian et al.,
2017]. Plan2Explore is a self-supervised reinforcement learning
method that learns a world model of its environment through
unsupervised exploration, which it then uses to solve zero-shot
and few-shot tasks. Plan2Explore was built on PlaNet [Hafner
et al., 2018] and Dreamer [Hafner et al., 2019] learning dynamics
models from images, using the same latent models: image encoder
(convolutional neural network), dynamics (recurrent state space
model), reward predictor, image decoder. With this world model,
behaviors must be derived for the learning tasks. The agent
ﬁrst uses planning to explore to learn a world model in a self-
supervised manner. After exploration, it receives reward functions
to adapt to multiple tasks such as standing, walking, running
and ﬂipping. Plan2Explore achieved good zero-shot performance
on the DeepMind Control Suite (Swingup, Hopper, Pendulum,
Reacher, Cup Catch, Walker) in the sense that the agent’s self-
supervised zero-shot performance was competitive to Dreamer’s
supervised reinforcement learning performance.
Conclusion
In the preceding methods we have seen how a single network
model can be specialized in three or four separate models. Dif-
ferent rollout methods were proposed, such as local rollouts, and
differentiable imagination. Latent, or abstract, models are a direct
descendent of model learning networks, with different models for
different aspects of the reinforcement learning algorithms. The
latent representations have lower capacity, allowing for greater
accuracy, better generalization and reduced sample complexity.
The smaller latent representation models are often learned un-
supervised or self-supervised, using variational autoencoders or
recurrent LSTMs. Latent models were applied to transfer learning
in few-shot learning.
3.3 End-to-end Learning of Planning and Transitions
In the previous subsection the approach is (1) to learn a transition
model through backpropagation and then (2) to do conventional
lookahead rollouts using a planning algorithm such as value iter-
ation, depth-limited search, or MCTS. A larger trend in machine
learning is to replace conventional algorithms by differentiable
or gradient style approaches, that are self-learning and self-
adapting. Would it be possible to make the conventional rollouts
differentiable as well? If updates can be made differentiable, why
not planning?
The ﬁnal approach of this survey is indeed to learn both
the transition model and planning steps end-to-end. This means
that the neural network represents both the transition model and
executes the planning steps with it. This is a challenge that has
to do with a single neural network, but we will see that abstract
models, with latent representations, can more easily be used to
achieve the execution of planning steps.
When we look at the action that a neural network normally
performs as a transformation and ﬁlter activity (selection, or
classiﬁcation) then it is easy to see than planning, which consistsEnvironment (Latent) Trans NetworkPolicy/Value
learningacting differentiable planning
Fig. 10. End-to-End Planning/Transitions
of state unrolling and selection, is not so far from what a neural
network is normally used for. Note that especially recurrent neural
networks and LSTM contain implicit state, making their use as a
planner even easier.
Some progress has been made with this idea. One approach is
to map the planning iterations onto the layers of a deep neural
network, with each layer representing a lookahead step. The
transition model becomes embedded in a transition network , see
Figure 10.
In this way, the planner becomes part of one large trained end-
to-end agent. (In the ﬁgure the full circle is made bold to signal
end-to-end learning.) Table 6 summarizes the approaches of this
subsection. We will see how the iterations of value iteration can
be implemented in the layers of a convolutional neural network
(CNN). Next, two variations of this method are presented, and a
way to implement planning with convolutional LSTM modules.
All these approaches implement differentiable, trainable, planning
algorithms, that can generalize to different inputs. The later meth-
ods use elaborate schemes with latent models so that the learning
can be applied to different application domains.
Value Iteration Networks (VIN) are introduced by Tamar et
al. in [Tamar et al., 2016], see also [Niu et al., 2018]. A VIN
is a differentiable multi-layer network that is used to perform
the steps of a simple planning algorithm. The core idea it that
value iteration (VI, see Algorithm 1) or step-by-step planning
can be implemented by a multi-layer convolutional network: each
layer does a step of lookahead. The VI iterations are rolled-out in
the network layers QwithAchannels. Through backpropagation
the model learns the value iteration parameters. The aim is to
learn a general model, that can navigate in unseen environments.
VIN learns a fully differentiable planning algorithm. The idea
of planning by gradient descent exists for some time, several
authors explored learning approximations of dynamics in neural
networks [Ilin et al., 2007, Kelley, 1960, Schmidhuber, 1990a].
VIN can be used for discrete and continuous path planning,
and has been tried in grid world problems and natural language
tasks. VIN has achieved generalization of ﬁnding shortest paths in
unseen mazes.
However, a limitation of VIN is that the number of layers of
the CNN restricts the number of planning steps, restricting VINs
to small and low-dimensional domains. Schleich et al. [Schleich
et al., 2019] extend VINs by adding abstraction, and Srinivas et
al. [Srinivas et al., 2018] introduce universal planning networks,
UPN, which generalize to modiﬁed robot morphologies. VProp,
orValue Propagation [Nardelli et al., 2018] is another attempt
at creating generalizable planners inspired by VIN. By using a
hierarchical structure VProp has the ability to generalize to larger
map sizes and dynamic environments. VProp not only learns to
plan and navigate in dynamic environments, but their hierarchical
structure provides a way to generalize to navigation tasks where
the required planning horizon and the size of the map are much