4
2.3 Model-Free
When the transition or reward model are not available to the agent,
then the policy and value function have to be learned through
querying the environment. Learning the policy or value function
without a model, through sampling the environment, is called
model-free learning, see Figure 4.
Recall that the policy is a mapping of states to best actions.
Each time when a new reward is returned by the environment the
policy can be improved: the best action for the state is updated
to reﬂect the new information. Algorithm 2 shows the simple
high-level steps of model-free reinforcement learning (later on the
algorithms become more elaborate).
Algorithm 2 Model-Free Learning
repeat
Sample envEto generate data D= (s;a;r0;s0)
UseDto update policy (s;a)
untilconverges
Model-free reinforcement learning is the most basic form
of reinforcement learning. It has been successfully applied to a
range of challenging problems [Deisenroth et al., 2013b, Kober
et al., 2013]. In model-free reinforcement learning a policy is
learned from the ground up through interactions (samples) with
the environment.
The main goal of model-free learning is to achieve good
generalization: to achieve high accuracy on test problems not seen
during training. A secondary goal is to do so with good sample
efﬁciency: to need as few environment samples as possible for
good generalization.
Model-free learning is essentially blind, and learning the
policy and value takes many samples. A well-known model-free
reinforcement learning algorithm is Q-learning [Watkins, 1989].
Algorithms such as Q-learning can be used in a classical table-
based setting. Deep neural networks have also been used with
success in model-free learning, in domains in which samples
can be generated cheaply and quickly, such as in Atari video
games [Mnih et al., 2015]. Deep model-free algorithms such as
Deep Q-Network (DQN) [Mnih et al., 2013] and Proximal Policy
Optimzation (PPO) [Schulman et al., 2017] have become quite
popular. PPO is an algorithm that computes the policy directly,
DQN ﬁnds the value function ﬁrst (Section 2.1).
Although risky, an advantage of ﬂying blind is the absence
of bias. Model-free reinforcement learning can ﬁnd global optima
without being distracted by a biased model (it has no model).
Learned models in model-based reinforcement learning may in-
troduce bias, and model-based methods may not always be able to
ﬁnd as good results as model-free can (although it does ﬁnd the
biased results with fewer samples).
Let us look at the cost of our methods. Interaction with
the environment can be costly. Especially when the environment
involves the real world, such as in real robot-interaction, then
sampling should be minimized, for reasons of cost, and to prevent
wear of the robot arm. In virtual environments on the other hand,
model-free approaches have been quite successful, as we have
noted in Atari and other game play [Mnih et al., 2015].
A good overview of model-free reinforcement learning can be
found in [C ¸ alıs ¸ır and Pehlivano ˘glu, 2019, Kaelbling et al., 1996,
Sutton and Barto, 2018].2.4 Model-Based
It is now time to look at model-based reinforcement learning, a
method that learns the policy and value in a different way than
by sampling the environment directly. Recall that the environment
samples return (s0;r0)pairs, when the agent selects action ain
states. Therefore all information is present to learn the transition
modelTa(s;s0)and the reward model Ra(s;s0), for example
by supervised learning. When no transition model is given by
the problem, then the model can be learned by sampling the
environment, and be used with planning to update the policy and
value as often as we like. This alternative approach of ﬁnding the
policy and the value is called model-based learning.
If the model is given, then no environment samples are needed
and model-based methods are more sample efﬁcient. But if the
model is not given, why would we want to go this convoluted
model-and-planning route, if the samples can teach us the optimal
policy and value directly? The reason is that the convoluted route
may be more sample efﬁcient.
When the complexity of learning the transition/reward model
is smaller than the complexity of learning the policy model
directly, and planning is fast, then the model-based route can
be more efﬁcient. In model-free learning a sample is used once
to optimize the policy, and then thrown away, in model-based
learning the sample is used to learn a transition model, which can
then be used many times in planning to optimize the policy. The
sample is used more efﬁciently.
The recent successes in deep learning caused much interest and
progress in deep model-free learning. Many of the deep function
approximation methods that have been so successful in supervised
learning [Goodfellow et al., 2016, LeCun et al., 2015] can also be
used in model-free reinforcement learning for approximating the
policy and value function.
However, there are reasons for interest in model-based meth-
ods as well. Many real world problems are long and complex
sequential decision making problems, and we are now seeing
efforts to make progress in model-based methods. Furthermore,
the interest in lifelong learning stimulates interest in model-based
learning [Silver et al., 2013]. Model-based reinforcement learning
is close to human and animal learning, in that all new knowledge
is interpreted in the context of existing knowledge. The dynamics
model is used to process and interpret new samples, in contrast to
model-free learning, where all samples, old and new, are treated
alike, and are not interpreted using the knowledge that has been
accumulated so far in the model.
After these introductory words, we are now ready to take a
deeper look into recent concrete deep model-based reinforcement
learning methods.
3 S URVEY OF MODEL -BASED DEEPREINFORCE -
MENT LEARNING
The success of model-based reinforcement learning depends on
the quality of the dynamics model. The model is typically used
by planning algorithms for multiple sequential predictions, and
errors in predictions accumulate quickly. We group the methods
in three main approaches. First the transitions are given and used
by explicit planning, second the transitions are learned and used
by explicit planning, and third both transitions and planning are
learned end-to-end:
1)Explicit Planning on Given Transitions
First, we discuss methods for problems that give us