2
exist for reinforcement learning [Sutton and Barto, 2018], deep
learning [Goodfellow et al., 2016], machine learning [Bishop,
2006], and artiﬁcial intelligence [Russell and Norvig, 2016]. As
we mentioned, the main purpose of the current survey is to focus
on deep learning methods, with high-capacity models. Previous
surveys provide an overview of the uses of classic (non-deep)
model-based methods [Deisenroth et al., 2013b, Kaelbling et al.,
1996, Kober et al., 2013]. Other relevant surveys into model-based
reinforcement learning are [C ¸ alıs ¸ır and Pehlivano ˘glu, 2019, Hui,
2018, Justesen et al., 2019, Moerland et al., 2020b, Polydoros and
Nalpantidis, 2017, Wang et al., 2019b].
The remainder of this survey is structured as follows. Sec-
tion 2 provides necessary background and a familiar formalism
of reinforcement learning. Section 3 then surveys recent papers in
the ﬁeld of model-based deep reinforcement learning. Section 4
introduces the main benchmarks of the ﬁeld. Section 5 provides
a discussion reﬂecting on the different approaches and provides
open problems and future work. Section 6 concludes the survey.
EnvironmentAgent
r0s0 a
Fig. 1. Reinforcement Learning: Agent Acting on Environment, that
provides new State and Reward to the Agent
2 B ACKGROUND
Reinforcement learning does not assume the presence of a
database, as supervised learning does. Instead, it derives the
ground truth from an internal model or from an external envi-
ronment that can be queried by the learning agent, see Figure 1.
The environment provides a new state s0and its reward r0(label)
for every action athat the agent tries in a certain state s[Sutton
and Barto, 2018]. In this way, as many action-reward pairs can be
generated as needed, without a large hand-labeled database. Also,
we can learn behavior beyond that what a supervisor prepared for
us to learn.
As so much of artiﬁcial intelligence, reinforcement learning
draws inspiration from principles of human and animal learn-
ing [Hamrick, 2019, Kahneman, 2011]. In psychology, learning is
studied as behaviorial adaptation, as a result of reinforcing reward
and punishment. Publications in artiﬁcial intelligence sometimes
explicitly reference analogies in how learning in the two ﬁelds is
described [Anthony et al., 2017, Duan et al., 2016, Weng, 2018].
Supervised learning frequently studies regression and classi-
ﬁcation problems. In reinforcement learning most problems are
decision and control problems. Often problems are sequential
decision problems, in which a goal is reached after a sequence
of decisions are taken (behavior). In sequential decision making,
the dynamics of the world are taken into consideration. Sequential
decision making is a step-by-step approach in which earlier
decisions inﬂuence later decisions. Before we continue, let us
formalize key concepts in reinforcement learning.s
a
s0r
Fig. 2. Backup Diagram [Sutton and Barto, 2018]. Maximizing the reward
for statesis done by following the transition function to ﬁnd the next state
s0. Note that the policy (s;a)tells the ﬁrst half of this story, going from
s!a; the transition function Ta(s;s0)completes the story, going from
s!s0(viaa).
2.1 Formalizing Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning problems are often modeled formally as
a Markov Decision Process (MDP). First we introduce the basics:
state, action, transition and reward. Then we introduce policy and
value. Finally, we deﬁne model-based and model-free solution
approaches.
A Markov Decision Process is a 4-tuple (S;A;Ta;Ra)where
Sis a ﬁnite set of states, Ais a ﬁnite set of actions; AsA
is the set of actions available from state s. Furthermore, Tais
the transition function: Ta(s;s0)is the probability that action ain
statesat timetwill lead to state s0at timet+1. Finally,Ra(s;s0)
is the immediate reward received after transitioning from state s
to states0due to action a. The goal of an MDP is to ﬁnd the best
decision, or action, in all states s2S.
The goal of reinforcement learning is to ﬁnd the optimal policy
a=?(s), which is the function that gives the best action ain
all statess2S. The policy contains the actions of the answer
to a sequential decision problem: a step-by-step prescription of
which action must be taken in which state, in order to maximize
reward for any given state. This policy can be found directly—
model-free—or with the help of a transition model—model-based.
Figure 2 shows a diagram of the transitions. More formally, the
goal of an MDP is to ﬁnd policy (s)that chooses an action in
statesthat will maximize the reward. This value Vis the expected
sum of future rewards V(s) =E(P1
t=0
tR(st)(st;st+1))
that are discounted with parameter 
overttime periods, with
s=s0. The function V(s)is called the value function of the
state. In deep learning the policy is determined by the parameters
(or weights) of a neural network, and the parameterized policy
is written as .
There are algorithms to compute the policy directly, and
there are algorithms that ﬁrst compute this function V(s).
For stochastic problems often direct policy methods work best,
for deterministic problems the value-methods are most often
used [Kaelbling et al., 1996]. (A third, quite popular, approach
combines the best of value and policy methods: actor-critic [Konda
and Tsitsiklis, 2000, Mnih et al., 2016, Sutton and Barto, 2018].)
In classical, table-based, reinforcement learning there is a close
relation between policy and value, since the best action of a state
leads to both the best policy and the best value, and ﬁnding
the other can usually be done with a simple lookup. When the
value and policy function are approximated, for example with
a neural network, then this relation becomes weaker, and many
advanced policy and value algorithms have been devised for deep
reinforcement learning.
Value function algorithms calculate the state-action value