17
5.1 Benchmarking
Benchmarks are the lifeblood of AI. We must test our algo-
rithms to know if they exhibit intelligent behavior. Many of
the benchmarks allow difﬁcult decision making situations to be
modeled. Two-person games allow modeling of competition. In
real world decision making, collaboration and negotiation are
also important. Real-time strategy games allow collaboration,
competition and negotiation to be modelled, and multi-agent and
hierarchical algorithms are being developed for these decision
making situations [Jaderberg et al., 2019, Kulkarni et al., 2016,
Makar et al., 2001].
Unfortunately, the wealth of choice in benchmarks makes it
difﬁcult to compare results that are reported in the literature.
Not all authors publish their code. We typically need to rerun
experiments with identical benchmarks to compare algorithms
conclusively. Outcomes often differ from the original works, also
because not all hyperparameter settings are always clear and
implementation details may differ [Henderson et al., 2017, Islam
et al., 2017, Wang et al., 2019b]. Authors should publish their
code if our ﬁeld wants to make progress. The recent attention for
reproducibility in deep reinforcement learning is helping the ﬁeld
move in the right direction. Many papers now publish their code
and the hyperparameter settings that were used in the reported
experiments.
5.2 Curriculum Learning and Latent Models
Model-based reinforcement learning works well when the transi-
tion and reward models are given by the rules of the problem.
We have seen how perfect models in games such as chess and Go
allow deep and accurate planning. Systems were constructed [An-
thony et al., 2017, Silver et al., 2018, Tesauro, 1995a] where
curriculum learning facilitated tabula rasa self-learning of highly
complex games of strategy; see also [Bengio et al., 2009, Narvekar
et al., 2020, Plaat, 2020]. The success of self-play has led to
interest in curriculum learning in single-agent problems [Doan
et al., 2019, Duan et al., 2016, Feng et al., 2020, Laterre et al.,
2018].
When the rules are not given, they might be learned , to create
a transition model. Unfortunately, the planning accuracy of learned
models is less than perfect. We have seen efforts with Gaussian
Processes and ensembles to improve model quality, and efforts
with local planning and Model-Predictive Control, to limit the
damage of imperfections in the transition model. We have also
discussed, at length, latent, abstract, models, where for each of the
functions of the Markov Decision Process a separate sub-module
is learned. Latent models achieve better accuracy with explicit
planning, as planning occurs in latent space [Hafner et al., 2019,
Kaiser et al., 2019, Oh et al., 2017].
The work on Value Iteration Networks [Tamar et al., 2016]
inspired end-to-end learning, where both the transition model and
the planning algorithm are learned, end-to-end. Combined with
latent models (or World Models [Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018b])
impressive results where achieved [Silver et al., 2017b], and mod-
el/planning accuracy was improved to the extent that tabula rasa
curriculum self-learning was achieved, in Muzero [Schrittwieser
et al., 2019] for both chess, Go, and Atari games. End-to-end
learning and latent models together allowed the circle to be closed,
achieving curriculum learning self-play also for problems where
the rules are not given. See Figure 14 for relations between theMBDRLgiven modelTDgammonExItSingle Cur
AlphaGoAlphaZero
end2endPredictron VProp TreeQN
I2AMuZero
World modelConvLSTM
VIN
learned model
explicit planPILCO
iLQG
GPSForesight
SVG PETS
PlaNet Dreamer Plan2Explimagination
VPNLocal
MVE
PolicyOptimMeta
GATS
SimPLeVideoPred
Fig. 14. Inﬂuence of Model-Based Deep Reinforcement Learning Ap-
proaches. Green: given transitions/explicit planning; Red: learned tran-
sitions/explicit planning; Y ellow: end-to-end transitions and planning.
Dashed: latent models.
different approaches of this survey. The main categories are color-
coded, latent methods are dashed.
Optimizing directly in a latent space has been successful with
a generative adversarial network [V olz et al., 2018]. World Models
are linked to neuroevolution by [Risi and Stanley, 2019]. For
future work, the combination of curriculum learning, ensembles,
and latent models appears quite fruitful. Self-play has been used
to achieve further success in other challenging games, such as
StarCraft [Vinyals et al., 2019], DOTA [Berner et al., 2019],
Capture the Flag [Jaderberg et al., 2019], and Poker [Brown
and Sandholm, 2019]. In multi-agent real-time strategy games
the aspect of collaboration and teams is important, and self-
play model-based reinforcement learning has been combined with
multi-agent, hierarchical, and population based methods.
In future work, more research is needed to explore the potential
of (end-to-end) planning with latent representational models more
fully for larger problems, for transfer learning, and for cooperative
problems. More research is needed in uncertainty-aware neural
networks. For such challenging problems as real-time strategy
and other video games, more combinations of deep model-based
reinforcement learning with multi-agent and population based
methods can be expected [B ¨ack, 1996, Risi and Preuss, 2020,
Vinyals et al., 2019].
In end-to-end planning and learning, latent models introduce
differentiable versions of more and more classical algorithms. For
example, World Models [Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018b] have a trio
of Vision, Memory, Control models, reminding us of the Model,
View, Controller design pattern [Gamma et al., 2009], or even
of classical computer architecture elements such as ALU, RAM,
and Control Unit [Hennessy and Patterson, 2017]. Future work
will show if differentiable algorithms will be found for even more
classical algorithms.