5
clear transition rules. In this case transition models are
perfect, and classical, explicit, planning methods are used
to optimize the value and policy functions of large state
spaces. Recently, large and complex problems have been
solved in two-agent games using self-learning methods
that give rise to curriculum learning. Curriculum learning
has also been used in single agent problems.
2)Explicit Planning on Learned Transitions
Second, we discuss methods for problems where no clear
rules exist, and the transition model must be learned from
sampling the environment. (The transitions are again used
with conventional planning methods.) The environment
samples allow learning by backpropagation of high-
capacity models. It is important that the model has as
few errors as possible. Uncertainty modeling and limited
lookahead can reduce the impact of prediction errors.
3)End-to-end Learning of Planning and Transitions
Third, we discuss the situation where both the transition
model and the planning algorithm are learned from the
samples, end-to-end. A neural network can be used in a
way that it performs the actual steps of certain planners,
in addition to learning the transitions from the samples, as
before. The model-based algorithm is learned fully end-
to-end. A drawback of this approach is the tight con-
nection between network architecture and problem type,
limiting its applicabily. This drawback can be resolved
with the use of latent models, see below.
In addition to the three main approaches, we now discuss two
orthogonal approaches. These can be used to improve performance
of the three main approaches. They are the hybrid imagination idea
from Sutton’s Dyna [Sutton, 1991], and abstract, or latent, models.
Hybrid Model-Free/Model-Based Imagination
We ﬁrst mention a sub-approach where environment sam-
ples are not only used to train the transition model,
but also to train the policy function directly, just as in
model-free learning. This hybrid approach thus combines
model-based and model-free learning. It is also called
imagination because the looking ahead with the dynamics
model resembles simulating or imagining environment
samples outside the real environment. In this approach
the imagined, or planned, “samples” augment the real
(environment) samples. This augmentation reduces sample
complexity of model-free methods.
Latent Models
Next, we discuss a sub-approach where the learned dy-
namics model is split into several lower-capacity, special-
ized, latent models. These latent models are then used
with planning or imagination to ﬁnd the policy. Latent
models have been used with and without end-to-end model
training and with and without imagination. Latent models
thus build on and improve the previous approaches.
The different approaches can and have been used alone and in
combination, as we will see shortly. Table 1 provides an overview
of all approaches and methods that we will discuss in this survey.
The methods are grouped into the three main categories that were
introduced above. The use of the two orthogonal approaches by the
methods (imagination and latent models) is indicated in Table 1
in two separate columns. The ﬁnal column provides an indication
of the application that the method is used on (such as Swimmer,Chess, and Cheetah). In the next section, Sect. 4, these applications
will be explained in more depth.
All methods in the table will be explained in detail in the
remainder of this section (for ease of reference, we will repeat the
methods of each subsection in their own table). The sections will
again mention some of the applications on which they were tested.
Please refer to the section on Benchmarks.
Model-based methods work well for low-dimensional tasks
where the transition and reward dynamics are relatively sim-
ple [Sutton and Barto, 2018]. While efﬁcient methods such as
Gaussian processes can learn these models quickly—with few
samples—they struggle to represent complex and discontinuous
systems [Wang et al., 2019b]. Most current model-free meth-
ods use deep neural networks to deal with problems that have
such complex, high-dimensional, and discontinuous characteris-
tics, leading to a high sample complexity.
The main challenge that the model-based reinforcement learn-
ing algorithms in this survey thus address is as follows. For high-
dimensional tasks the curse of dimensionality causes data to be
sparse and variance to be high. Deep methods tend to overﬁt on
small datasets, and model-free methods use large data sets and
have bad sample efﬁciency. Model-based methods that use poor
models make poor planning predictions far into the future [Talvi-
tie, 2015]. The challenge is to learn deep, high-dimensional
transition functions from limited data, that can account for model
uncertainty, and plan over these models to achieve policy and value
functions that perform as well or better than model-free methods.
We will now discuss the algorithms. We will discuss (1) meth-
ods that use explicit planning on given transitions, (2) use explicit
planning on a learned transition model, and (3) use end-to-end
learning of planning and transitions. We will encounter the ﬁrst
occurrence of hybrid imagination and latent models approaches in
the second section, on explicit planning/learned transitions.
3.1 Explicit Planning on Given Transitions
The ﬁrst approach in model-based learning is when the transition
and reward model is provided clearly in the rules of the problem.
This is the case, for example, in games such as Go and chess.
Table 2 summarizes the approaches of this subsection. Note the
addition of the reinforcement learning method in an extra column.
With this approach high performing results have recently
been achieved on large and complex domains. These results have
been achieved by combining classical, explicit, heuristic search
planning algorithms such as Alpha-beta and MCTS [Browne
et al., 2012, Knuth and Moore, 1975, Plaat, 2020], and deep
learning with self-play, achieving tabula rasa curriculum learning.
Curriculum learning is based on the observation that a difﬁcult
problem is learned more quickly by ﬁrst learning a sequence
of easy, but related problems—just as we teach school children
easy concepts (such as addition) ﬁrst before we teach them harder
concepts (such as multiplication, or logarithms).
In self-play the agent plays against the environment, which is
also the same agent with the same network, see Figure 5. The
states and actions in the games are then used by a deep learning
system to improve the policy and value functions. These functions
are used as the selection and evaluation functions in MCTS, and
thus improving them improves the quality of play of MCTS.
This has the effect that as the agent is getting smarter, so is the
environment. A virtuous circle of a mutually increasing level of
play is the result, a natural form of curriculum learning [Bengio