7
Approach Learning Planning Reinforcement Learning Application
TD-Gammon [Tesauro, 1995a] Fully connected net Alpha-beta Temporal Difference Backgammon
Expert Iteration [Anthony et al., 2017] Pol/Val CNN MCTS Curriculum Hex
Alpha(Go) Zero [Silver et al., 2017a] Pol/Val ResNet MCTS Curriculum Go/chess/shogi
Single Agent [Feng et al., 2020] ResNet MCTS Curriculum Sokoban
TABLE 2
Overview of Explicit Planning/Given Transitionds Methods
search eval
trainexamples new netreward
Fig. 6. Self-Play/Curriculum Learning Loop
function is the sum of the policy-loss and the value-loss [Wang
et al., 2019a]. The planning algorithm is based on Monte Carlo
Tree Search [Browne et al., 2012, Coulom, 2006] although it does
not perform random rollouts. Instead, it uses the value head of the
resnet for evaluation and the policy head of the ResNet to augment
the UCT selection function [Kocsis and Szepesv ´ari, 2006], as in P-
UCT [Rosin, 2011]. The residual network is used in the evaluation
and selection of MCTS. The self-play mechanism starts from a
randomly initialized resnet. MCTS is used to play a tournament of
games, to generate training positions for the resnet to be trained
on, using a DQN-style replay buffer [Mnih et al., 2015]. This
trained resnet is then again used by MCTS in the next training
tournament to generate training positions, etc., see Figure 6. Self-
play feeds on itself in multiple ways, and achieving stable learning
is a challenging task, requiring judicious tuning, exploration, and
much training. AlphaZero is currently the worldwide strongest
player in Go, chess, and shogi [Silver et al., 2018].
The success of curriculum learning in two-player self-play
has inspired work on single-agent curriculum learning . These
single-agent approaches do not do self-play, but do use curriculum
learning. Laterre et al. introduce the Ranked Reward method for
solving bin packing problems [Laterre et al., 2018] and Wang
et al. presented a method for Morpion Solitaire [Wang et al.,
2020]. Feng et al. use an AlphaZero based approach to solve
hard Sokoban instances [Feng et al., 2020]. Their model is an 8
block standard residual network, with MCTS as planner. Solving
Sokoban instances is a hard problem in single-agent combinatorial
search. The curriculum approach, where the agent learns to solve
easy instances before it tries to solve harder instances, is a
natural ﬁt. In two-player games, a curriculum is generated in
self-play. Feng et al. create a curriculum in a different way, by
constructing simpler subproblems from hard instances, using the
fact that Sokoban problems have a natural hierarchical structure.
As in AlphaZero, the problem learns from scratch, no Sokoban
heuristics are provided to the solver. This approach was able to
solve harder Sokoban instances than had been solved before.
Conclusion
In self-play curriculum learning the opponent has the same model
as the agent. The opponent is the environment of the agent. As the
agent learns, so does its opponent, providing tougher counterplay,
teaching the agent more. The agent is exposed to curriculumEnvironment Transition ModelPolicy/Value
learningacting planning
Fig. 7. Explicit Planning/Learned Transitions
Algorithm 3 Explicit Planning/Learned Transitions
repeat
Sample envEto generate data D= (s;a;r0;s0)
UseDto learnTa(s;s0)
UseTto update policy (s;a)by planning
untilconverges
learning, a sequence of increasingly harder learning tasks. In this
way, learning strong play has been achieved in Backgammon, Go,
chess and shogi [Silver et al., 2018, Tesauro, 1995b].
In two-agent search a natural idea is to duplicate the agent
as the environment, creating a self-play system. Self-play has
been used in planning (as minimax), with policy learning, and
in combination with latent models. Self-generated curriculum
learning is a powerful paradigm. Work is under way to see if it
can be applied to single-agent problems as well [Doan et al., 2019,
Feng et al., 2020, Laterre et al., 2018, Narvekar et al., 2020], and
in multi-agent (real-time strategy) games, addressing problems
with specialization of two-agent games (Sect. 4.4 [Vinyals et al.,
2019]).
3.2 Explicit Planning on Learned Transitions
In the previous section, transition rules could be derived from the
problem directly (by inspection). In many problems, this is not the
case, and we have to resort to sampling the environment to learn
a model of the transitions. The second category of algorithms of
this survey is to learn the tranition model by backpropagation from
environment samples. This learned model is then still used by
classical, explicit, planning algorithms, as before. We will discuss
various approaches where the transition model is learned with
supervised learning methods such as backpropagation through
time [Werbos, 1988], see Figure 7.
Algorithm 3 shows the steps of using explicit planning and
transition learning by backpropagation. Table 3 summarizes the
approaches of this subsection, showing both the learning and
theplanning approach. Two variants of this approach are also
discussed in this subsection: hybrid imagination and latent models,
see Table 4 and Table 5.
We will ﬁrst see how simple Gaussian Processes and quadratic
methods can create predictive transition models. Next, precision is
improved with trajectory methods, and we make the step to video