9
Environment Transition ModelPolicy/Value
learninglearningacting planning
Fig. 8. Hybrid Model-Free/Model-Based Imagination
prediction model is trained with the samples. This model generates
the corresponding sequence of future frames based on an image
and a sequence of actions, as in GPS. At test time, the least-
cost sequence of actions is selected in a model-predictive control
planning framework. Visual Foresight is able to perform multi-
object manipulation, pushing, picking and placing, and cloth-
folding tasks.
Conclusion
Model learning with a single network works well for low-
dimensional problems. We have seen that Gaussian Process mod-
eling achieves sample efﬁciency and generalization to good poli-
cies. For high-dimensional problems, generalization and sample
efﬁciency deteriorate, more samples are needed and policies do
not perform as well. We have discussed methods for improvement
by guiding policies with real samples (GPS), limiting the scope
of predictions with model-predictive control, and using ensem-
bles and uncertainty aware neural networks to model uncertainty
(PETS).
3.2.1 Hybrid Model-Free/Model-Based Imagination
In the preceding subsection, we have looked at how to use envi-
ronment samples to build a transition model. Many methods were
covered to learn transition models with as few samples as possible.
These methods are related to supervised learning methods. The
transition model was then used by a planning method to optimize
the policy or value function.
We will now review methods that use a complementary ap-
proach, a hybrid model-based/model-free approach of using the
environment samples for two purposes. Here the emphasis is no
longer on learning the model but on using it effectively. This
approach was introduced by Sutton [Sutton, 1990, 1991] in the
Dyna system, long before deep learning was used widely. Dyna
uses the samples to update the policy function directly (model-
free learning) and also uses the samples to learn a transition
model, which is then used by planning to augment the model-free
environment-samples with the model-based imagined “samples.”
In this way the sample-efﬁciency of model-free learning is im-
proved quite directly. Figure 8 illustrates the working of the Dyna
approach. (Note that now two arrows learn from the environment
samples. Model-free learning is drawn bold.)
Dyna was introduced for a table-based approach before deep
learning became popular. Originally, in Dyna, the transition model
is updated directly with samples, without learning through back-
propagation, however, here we discuss only deep imagination
methods. Algorithm 4 shows the steps of the algorithm (compared
to Algorithm 3, the line in italics is new, from Algorithm 2). Note
how the policy is updated twice in each iteration, by environment
sampling, and by transition planning.
We will describe ﬁve deep learning approaches that use imagi-
nation to augment the sample-free data. Table 4 summarizes theseAlgorithm 4 Hybrid Model-Free/Model-Based Imagination
repeat
Sample envEto generate data D= (s;a;r0;s0)
UseDto update policy (s;a)
UseDto learnTa(s;s0)
UseTto update policy (s;a)by planning
untilconverges
approaches. Note that in the next subsection more methods are
described that also use hybrid model-free/model-based updating
of the policy function. These are also listed in Table 4. We will
ﬁrst see how quadratic methods are used with imagination rollouts.
Next, short rollouts are introduced, and ensembles, to improve
the precision of the predictive model. Imagination is a hybrid
model-free/model-based approach, we will see methods that build
on successful model-free deep learning approaches such as meta-
learning and generative-adversarial networks.
Let us have a look at how Dyna-style imagination works
in deep model-based algorithms. Earlier, we saw that lin-
ear–quadratic–Gaussian methods were used to improve model
learning. Gu et al. merge the backpropagation iLQG aproaches
with Dyna-style synthetic policy rollouts [Gu et al., 2016]. To
accelerate model-free continuous Q-learning they combine lo-
cally linear models with local on-policy imagination rollouts.
The paper introduces a version of continuous Q-learning called
normalized advantage functions, accelerating the learning with
imagination rollouts. Data efﬁciency is improved with model-
guided exploration using off-policy iLQG rollouts. As application
the approach has been tested on simulated robotics tasks such as
Gripper, Half-Cheetah and Reacher.
Feinberg et al. present model-based value expansion (MVE)
which, like the previous algorithm [Gu et al., 2016], controls for
uncertainty in the deep model by only allowing imagination to
ﬁxed depth [Feinberg et al., 2018]. Value estimates are split into
a near-future model-based component and a distant future model-
free component. In contrast to stochastic value gradients (SVG),
MVE works without differentiable dynamics, which is important
since transitions can include non-differentiable contact interac-
tions [Heess et al., 2015]. The planning part of MVE uses short
rollouts. The overall reinforcement learning algorithm that is used
is a combined value-policy actor-critic setting [Sutton and Barto,
2018] and deep deterministic policy gradients (DDPG) [Lillicrap
et al., 2015]. As application re-implementations of simulated
robotics were used such as for Cheetah, Swimmer and Walker.
An ensemble approach has been used in combination with
gradient-based meta-learning by Clavera et al. who introduced
Model-based Reinforcement Learning via Meta-Policy Optimiza-
tion (MP-MPO) [Clavera et al., 2018]. This method learns an
ensemble of dynamics models and then it learns a policy that can
be adapted quickly to any of the ﬁtted dynamics models with
one gradient step (the MAML-like meta-learning step [Finn et al.,
2017]). MB-MPO frames model-based reinforcement learning as
meta-learning a policy on a distribution of dynamic models, in
the form of an ensemble of the real environment dynamics. The
approach builds on the gradient-based meta-learning framework
MAML [Finn et al., 2017]. The planning part of the algorithm
samples imagined trajectories. MB-MPO is evaluated on contin-
uous control benchmark tasks in a robotics simulator: Ant, Half-
Cheetah, Hopper, Swimmer, Walker. The results reported indicate
that meta-learning a policy over an ensemble of learned models