16
Fig. 13. Half-Cheetah
4.4 Real-Time Strategy and Video Games
The Atari benchmarks are based on simple arcade games of 35–40
years ago, most of which are mostly challenging for eye-hand-
coordination skills. Real-time strategy (RTS) games and games
such as StarCraft, DOTA, and Capture the Flag provide more
challenging tasks. The strategy space is large; the state space of
StarCraft has been estimated at 101685, much larger than chess
(1047) or go ( 10147). Most RTS games are multi-player, non-
zero-sum, imperfect information games that also feature high-
dimensional pixel input, reasoning, team collaboration, as well as
eye-hand-coordination. The action space is stochastic and is a mix
of discrete and continuous actions. A very high degree of diversity
is necessary to prevent specialization.
Despite the challenging nature, impressive achievements have
been reported recently in all three mentioned games where human
performance was matched or even exceeded [Berner et al., 2019,
Jaderberg et al., 2019, Vinyals et al., 2019]. In these efforts deep
model-based reinforcement learning is combined with multi-agent
and population based methods. These mixed approaches achieve
impressive results on RTS games; added diversity diminishes the
specialization trap of two-agent approaches [Vinyals et al., 2019],
their approaches may combine aspects of self-play and latent
models, although often the well-tuned combination of a number
of methods is credited with the high achievements in these games.
The mixed approaches are not listed separately in the taxonomy
of the next section.
4.5 Robotics
Reinforcement learning is a paradigm that is well-suited for
modeling planning and control problems in robotics. Instead of
minutely programming high-dimensional robot-movements step-
by-step, reinforcement learning is used to train behavior more
ﬂexibly, and possibly end-to-end from camera input to arm ma-
nipulation.
Training with real-world robots is expensive and complicated.
In robotics sample efﬁciency is of great importance because of
the cost of interaction with real-world environments and the wear
of physical robot arms. For this reason virtual environments have
been devised. Todorov et al. [Todorov et al., 2012] introduced
MuJoCo, a software suite for simulated robot behavior. It is
used extensively in reinforcement learning research. Well-known
benchmark tasks are Reacher, Swimmer, Half-Cheetah, and Ant,
in which the agent’s task is to teach itself the appropriate move-
ment actions, see Figure 13 for an example. Many model-based
deep reinforcement learning methods are tested on MuJoCo [Az-
izzadenesheli et al., 2018, Chua et al., 2018, Clavera et al., 2018,
Feinberg et al., 2018, Gu et al., 2016, Hafner et al., 2018, Heesset al., 2015, Janner et al., 2019] and other robotics tasks [Finn
and Levine, 2017, Hafner et al., 2019, Levine and Abbeel, 2014,
Sekar et al., 2020, Tassa et al., 2012]. The action space of these
tasks is continuous, and the emphasis in experiments is on sample
efﬁciency.
Conclusion
No discussion on empirical deep reinforcement learning is com-
plete without the mention of OpenAI Gym [Brockman et al.,
2016]. Gym is a toolkit for developing and comparing reinforce-
ment learning algorithms and provides a training environment
for reinforcement learning agents. Gym includes interfaces to
benchmark sets such as ALE and MuJoCo. Other software suites
are [Bellemare et al., 2013, Tassa et al., 2018, Todorov et al., 2012,
Vinyals et al., 2017, Yu et al., 2020].
Baseline implementations of many deep reinforcement learn-
ing agent algorithms can also be found at the Gym website
https://gym.openai.com.
Research into suitable benchmarks is active. Further interest-
ing approaches are Procedural Content Generation [Togelius et al.,
2013], MuJoCo Soccer [Liu et al., 2019], and the Obstacle Tower
Challenge [Juliani et al., 2019].
Now that we have seen the benchmarks on which our model-
based methods are tested, it is time for an in-depth discussion and
outlook for future work.
5 D ISCUSSION AND OUTLOOK
Model-based reinforcement learning promises lower sample com-
plexity. Sutton’s work on imagination, where a model is created
with environment samples that are then used to create extra imag-
ined samples for free, clearly suggests this aspect of model-based
reinforcement learning. The transition model acts as a multiplier
on the amount of information that is used from each environment
sample.
Another, and perhaps more important aspect, is generaliza-
tion performance. Model-based reinforcement learning builds a
dynamics model of the domain. This model can be used multiple
times, for new problem instances, but also for new problem
classes. By learning the transition and reward model, model-based
reinforcement learning may be better at capturing the essence of
a domain than model-free methods. Model-based reinforcement
learning may thus be better suited for solving transfer learning
problems, and for solving long sequential decision making prob-
lems, a class of problems that is important in real world decision
making.
Classical table based approaches and Gaussian Process ap-
proaches have been quite succesful in achieving low sample com-
plexity for problems of moderate complexity [Deisenroth et al.,
2013b, Kober et al., 2013, Sutton and Barto, 2018]. However, the
topic of the current survey is deep models, for high dimensional
problems with complex, non-linear, and discontinuous functions.
These application domains pose a problem for classical model-
based approaches. Since high-capacity deep neural networks re-
quire many samples to achieve high generalization (without over-
ﬁtting), a challenge in deep model-based reinforcement learning
is to maintain low sample complexity.
We have seen a wide range of approaches that attempt this
goal. Let us now discuss and summarize the benchmarks, the
approaches for deep models, and possible future work.