10
Approach Learning Planning Reinforcement Learning Application
Local Model [Gu et al., 2016] Quadratic Non-linear Short rollouts Q-learning Cheetah
MVE [Feinberg et al., 2018] Samples Short rollouts Actor-critic Cheetah
Meta Policy [Clavera et al., 2018] Meta-ensembles Short rollouts Policy optimization Cheetah
GATS [Azizzadenesheli et al., 2018] Pix2pix MCTS Deep Q Network Cheetah
Policy Optim [Janner et al., 2019] Ensemble Short rollouts Soft-Actor-Critic Cheetah
Video predict [Oh et al., 2015] CNN/LSTM Action Curriculum Atari
VPN [Oh et al., 2017] CNN encoder d-step k-step Mazes, Atari
SimPLe [Kaiser et al., 2019] V AE, LSTM MPC PPO Atari
TABLE 4
Overview of Hybrid Model-Free/Model-based Imagination Methods
approaches the level of performance of model-free methods with
substantially better sample complexity.
Another attempt to improve the accuracy and efﬁciency of
dynamics models has been through generative adversarial net-
works [Goodfellow et al., 2014]. Azizzadenesheli et al. aim to
combine successes of generative adversarial networks with
planning robot motion in model-based reinforcement learning [Az-
izzadenesheli et al., 2018]. Manipulating robot arms based on
video input is an important application in AI (see also Visual Fore-
sight in Section 3.2, and the SimPLe approach, in Section 3.2.2).
A generative dynamics model is introduced to model the transition
dynamics based on the pix2pix architecture [Isola et al., 2017]. For
planning Monte Carlo Tree Search [Browne et al., 2012, Coulom,
2006] is used. GATS is evaluated on Atari games such as Pong,
and does not perform better than model-free DQN [Mnih et al.,
2015].
Achieving a good performing high-dimensional predictive
model remains a challenge. Janner et al. propose in Model-
based Policy Optimization (MBPO) a new approach to short
rollouts with ensembles [Janner et al., 2019]. In this approach
the model horizon is much shorter than the task horizon. These
model rollouts are combined with real samples, and matched
with plausible environment observations [Kalweit and Boedecker,
2017]. MBPO uses an ensemble of probabilistic networks, as in
PETS [Chua et al., 2018]. Soft-actor-critic [Haarnoja et al., 2018]
is used as reinforcement learning method. Experiments show that
the policy optimization algorithm learns substantially faster with
short rollouts than other algorithms, while retaining asymptotic
performance relative to model-free algorithms. The applications
used are simulated robotics tasks: Hopper, Walker, Half-Cheetah,
Ant. The method surpasses the sample efﬁciency of prior model-
based algorithms and matches the performance of model-free
algorithms.
Conclusion
The hybrid imagination methods aim to combine the advantage
of model-free methods with model-based methods in a hybrid
approach augmenting “real” with “imagined” samples, to improve
sample effciency of deep model-free learning. A problem is that
inaccuracies in the model may be enlarged in the planned rollouts.
Most methods limited lookahead to local lookahead. We have
discussed interesting approaches combining meta-learning and
generative-adversarial networks, and ensemble methods learning
robotic movement directly from images.
3.2.2 Latent Models
The next group of methods that we describe are the latent or
abstract model algorithms. Latent models are born out of the needEnvironmentTransition Model
Representation ModelObservation ModelReward ModelPolicy & Value
learningactingplanning
Fig. 9. Latent Models
for more accurate predictive deep models. Latent models replace
the single transition model with separate, smaller, specialized, rep-
resentation models, for the different functions in a reinforcement
learning algorithm. All of the elements of the MDP-tuple may now
get their own model. Planning occurs in latent space.
Traditional deep learning models represent input states directly
in a single model: the layers of neurons and ﬁlters are all related
in some way to the input and output of the domain, be it an
image, a sound, a text or a joystick action or arm movement.
All of the MDP functions, state, value, action, reward, policy, and
discount, act on this single model. Latent models, on the other
hand, are not connected directly to the input and output, but are
connected to other models and signals. They do not work on direct
representations, but on latent, more compact, representations. The
interactions are captured in three to four different models, such as
observation, representation, transition, and reward models. These
may be smaller, lower capacity, models. They may be trained with
unsupervised or self-supervised deep learning such as variational
autoencoders [Kingma and Welling, 2013, 2019] or generative
adversarial networks [Goodfellow et al., 2014], or recurrent net-
works. Latent models use multiple specialized networks, one for
each function to be approximated. The intuition behind the use of
latent models is dimension reduction: they can better specialize
and thus have more precise predictions, or can better capture the
essence of higher level reasoning in the input domains, and need
fewer samples (without overﬁtting) due to their lower capacity.
Figure 9 illustrates the abstract (latent) learning process (using
the modules of Dreamer [Hafner et al., 2019] as an example).
Table 5 summarizes the methods of this subsection (three are also
mentioned in Table 4). Quite a few different latent (abstract) model
approaches have been published. Latent models work well, both
for games and robotics. Different rollout methods are proposed,
such as local rollouts, and differentiable imagination, and end-