5.1. Analyzing PIRL Representations
Does PIRL learn invariant representations?
PIRL was designed to learn representations that are invari-
ant to image transformation t∈ T. We analyzed whether
the learned representations actually have the desired invari-
ance properties. Speciﬁcally, we normalize the representa-
tions to have unit norm and compute l2distances between
the (normalized) representation of image, f(vI), and the
(normalized) representation its transformed version, g(vIt).
We repeat this for all transforms t∈ T and for a large set of
images. We plot histograms of the distances thus obtained
in Figure 4. The ﬁgure shows that, for PIRL, an image rep-
resentation and the representation of a transformed version
of that image are generally similar. This suggests that PIRL
has learned representations that are invariant to the trans-
formations. By contrast, the distances between Jigsaw rep-
resentations have a much larger mean and variance, which
suggests that Jigsaw representations covary with the image
transformations that were applied.
Which layer produces the best representations?
All prior experiments used PIRL representations that were
extracted from the res5 layer and Jigsaw representations
that were extracted from the res4 layer (which work bet-
ter for Jigsaw). Figure 5studies the quality of representa-
tions in earlier layers of the convolutional networks. The
ﬁgure reveals that the quality of Jigsaw representations im-
proves from the conv1 to theres4 layer but that their qual-
ity sharply decreases in the res5 layer. We surmise this
happens because the res5 representations in the last layer of
the network covary with the image transformation tand are
not encouraged to contain semantic information. By con-
trast, PIRL representations are invariant to image transfor-
mations, which allows them to focus on modeling semantic
information. As a result, the best image representations are
extracted from the res5 layer of PIRL-trained networks.
Multi-task Jigsaw and NPID++. To further under-
stand PIRL, we implemented a multi-task baseline, similar
to [17], which does not learn invariance to the Jigsaw task.
This baseline uses two separate loss functions - NPID [ 81]
which learns invariance to data augmentation, and Jigsaw
classiﬁcation which learns to predict the Jigsaw permuta-
tion applied to the input. This baseline performs similar
or worse to NPID++ (within 0.2% transfer performance on
ImageNet) showing that learning invariance to Jigsaw is im-
portant for better representations.
5.2. Analyzing the PIRL Loss Function
What is the effect of λin the PIRL loss function?
The PIRL loss function in Equation 5contains a hyperpa-
rameterλthat trades off between two NCE losses. All prior
experiments were performed with λ=0.5. NPID(++) [ 81]
is a special case of PIRL in which λ=0, effectively remov-
conv1
 res2
 res3
 res4
 res5
Layers
10
20
30
40
50
60Top-1 Accuracy
PIRL
 Jigsaw [19]Figure 5: Quality of PIRL representations per layer. Top-1 accuracy of
linear models trained to predict ImageNet classes based on representations
extracted from various layers in ResNet-50 trained using PIRL and Jigsaw.
0
 0.25
 0.5
 0.75
 1
Relative weight of loss terms ( ) in Equation 5
55
60
65Top-1 Accuracy
ImageNet
Figure 6: Effect of varying the trade-off parameter λ.Top-1 accuracy
of linear classiﬁers trained to predict ImageNet classes from PIRL repre-
sentations as a function of hyperparameter λin Equation 5.
100
 2,000
 10,000
 362880
# of permutations of patches
60
65
70
75
80mAP
PIRL
 Jigsaw [19]
Figure 7: Effect of varying the number of patch permutations in T.
Performance of linear image classiﬁcation models trained on the VOC07
dataset in terms of mAP. Models are initialized by PIRL and Jigsaw, vary-
ing the number of image transformations, T, from1to9!≈3.6×105.
ing the pretext-invariance term from the loss. At λ=1, the
network does not compare untransformed images at training
time and updates to the memory bank mIare not dampened.
We study the effect of λon the quality of PIRL represen-
tations. As before, in Figure 6, we measure representation
quality by the top-1 accuracy of linear classiﬁers operat-
ing on ﬁxed ImageNet representations. The performance of
PIRL is sensitive to the setting of λ, and the best perfor-
mance is obtained by setting λ=0.5.
Effect of the number of image transforms. Both in PIRL
6713