2,000
 4,000
 8,000
 16,000
 32,000
 64,000
Number of negatives N in Equation 4
61
62
63
64Top-1 Accuracy
ImageNetFigure 8: Effect of varying the number of negatives. Top-1 accuracy
of linear classiﬁers trained to perform ImageNet classiﬁcation using PIRL
representations as a function of the number of negative samples, N.
and Jigsaw, it is possible to vary the complexity of the task
by varying the number of permutations of the nine image
patches that are included in the set of image transforma-
tions,T. Prior work on Jigsaw suggests that increasing
the number of possible patch permutations leads to better
performance [ 21,54]. However, the largest value |T |can
take is restricted because the number of learnable param-
eters in the output layer grows linearly with the number
of patch permutations in models trained to solve the Jig-
saw task. This problem does not apply to PIRL because it
never outputs the patch permutations, and thus has a ﬁxed
number of model parameters. As a result, PIRL can use all
9!≈3.6×105permutations in T.
We study the quality of PIRL and Jigsaw as a function
of the number of patch permutations included in T. To fa-
cilitate comparison with [ 21], we measure quality in terms
of image classiﬁcation performance of linear models using
the VOC07 dataset, following the setup in Section 4.2. The
results are presented in Figure 7and show that PIRL out-
performs Jigsaw for all cardinalities of T. PIRL particu-
larly beneﬁts from being able to use very large numbers of
image transformations ( i.e., large|T |) during training.
Effect of the number of negative samples. We study the
effect of the number of negative samples, N, on the qual-
ity of the learned image representations. We measure the
accuracy of linear ImageNet classiﬁers on ﬁxed represen-
tations produced by PIRL as a function of the value of N
used in pre-training. The results are presented in Figure 8.
They suggest that increasing the number of negatives tends
to have a positive inﬂuence on the quality of the image rep-
resentations constructed by PIRL.
5.3. Generalizing PIRL to Other Pretext Tasks
Although we studied PIRL in the context of Jigsaw
in this paper, PIRL can be used with any set of image
transformations, T. We performed an experiment eval-
uating the performance of PIRL using the Rotation pre-
text task [ 20]. We deﬁne Tto contain image rotations byMethod Params Transfer Dataset
ImageNet VOC07 Places205 iNat.
Rotation [ 20] 25.6M 48.9 63.9 41.4 23.0
PIRL (Rotation; ours ) 25.6M 60.2 77.1 47.6 31.2
∆of PIRL - +11.3 +13.2 +6.2 +8.2
Combining pretext tasks using PIRL
PIRL (Jigsaw; ours ) 25.6M 62.2 79.8 48.5 31.2
PIRL (Rotation + Jigsaw; ours )25.6M 63.1 80.3 49.7 33.6
Table 5: Using PIRL with (combinations of) different pretext tasks.
Top-1 accuracy / mAP of linear image classiﬁers trained on PIRL image
representations. Top : Performance of PIRL used in combination with the
Rotation pretext task [ 20]. Bottom: Performance of PIRL using a combi-
nation of multiple pretext tasks.
{0◦,90◦,180◦,270◦}, and measure representation quality
in terms of image-classiﬁcation accuracy of linear models.
The results of these experiments are presented in Table 5
(top). In line with earlier results, models trained using PIRL
(Rotation) outperform those trained using the Rotation pre-
text task of [ 20]. The performance gains obtained from
learning a rotation-invariant representation are substantial,
e.g.+11% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet. We also note that
PIRL (Rotation) outperforms NPID++ (see Table 2).
In a second set of experiments, we combined the pre-
text image transforms from both the Jigsaw and Rotation
tasks in the set of image transformations, T. Speciﬁcally,
we obtain Itby ﬁrst applying a rotation and then perform-
ing a Jigsaw transformation. The results of these experi-
ments are shown in Table 5(bottom). The results demon-
strate that combining image transforms from multiple pre-
text tasks can further improve image representations.
6. Discussion and Conclusion
We studied Pretext-Invariant Representation Learning
(PIRL) for learning representations that are invariant to im-
age transformations applied in self-supervised pretext tasks.
The rationale behind PIRL is that invariance to image trans-
formations maintains semantic information in the represen-
tation. We obtain state-of-the-art results on multiple bench-
marks for self-supervised learning in image classiﬁcation
and object detection. PIRL even outperforms supervised
ImageNet pre-training on object detection.
In this paper, we used PIRL with the Jigsaw and Rotation
image transformations. In future work, we aim to extend to
richer sets of transformations. We also plan to investigate
combinations of PIRL with clustering-based approaches [ 6,
7]. Like PIRL, those approaches use inter-image statistics
but they do so in a different way. A combination of the two
approaches may lead to even better image representations.
Acknowledgments: We are grateful to Rob Fergus, Yann LeCun, and Andrea
Vedaldi for encouragement and feedback; Aaron Adcock, Naman Goyal, Priya Goyal,
and Myle Ott for help with the code development; Rohit Girdhar, and Ross Girshick
for feedback on the manuscript; Yuxin Wu, and Kaiming He for help with Detectron2.
6714