information from the model. The extracted information can
then be analyzed and displayed using standard data analysis
methods, such as scatter plots and histograms. The ability of
the interpretations to properly describe what the model has
learned is denoted by descriptive accuracy.
Iterate If suﬃcient answers are uncovered after the post hoc
analysis stage, the practitioner ﬁnishes. Otherwise, they up-
date something in the chain (problem, data, and/or model)
and iterate, potentially multiple times ( 27). Note that they
can terminate the loop at any stage, depending on the context
of the problem.
A. Interpretation methods within the PDR framework. In the
framework described above, most interpretation methods fall
eitherinthemodelingorposthocanalysisstages. Wecallinter-
pretability in the modeling stage model-based interpretability
(Sec 4). This part of interpretability is focused upon constrain-
ing the form of ML models so that they readily provide useful
information about the uncovered relationships. As a result
of these constraints, the space of potential models is smaller,
which can result in lower predictive accuracy. Consequently,
model-based interpretability is best used when the underlying
relationship is relatively simple.
We call interpretability in the post hoc analysis stage post
hoc interpretability (Sec 5). These interpretation methods take
a trained model as input, and extract information about what
relationships the model has learned. They are most helpful
when the underlying relationship is especially complex, and
practitioners need to train an intricate, black-box model in
order to achieve a reasonable predictive accuracy.
After discussing desiderata for interpretation methods, we
investigate these two forms of interpretations in detail and
discuss associated methods.
3. The PDR desiderata for interpretations
In general, it is unclear how to select and evaluate interpre-
tation methods for a particular problem and audience. To
help guide this process, we introduce the PDR framework,
consisting of three desiderata that should be used to select
interpretation methods for a particular problem: predictive
accuracy, descriptive accuracy, and relevancy.
A. Accuracy. The information produced by an interpretation
method should be faithful to the underlying process the practi-
tioner is trying to understand. In the context of ML, there are
two areas where errors can arise: when approximating the un-
derlying data relationships with a model (predictive accuracy)
and when approximating what the model has learned using an
interpretation method (descriptive accuracy). For an interpre-
tation to be trustworthy, one should try to maximize both of
the accuracies. In cases where the accuracy is not very high,
the resulting interpretations may still be useful. However, it
is especially important to check their trustworthiness through
external validation, such as running an additional experiment.
A.1. Predictive accuracy. The ﬁrst source of error occurs during
the model stage, when an ML model is constructed. If the
model learns a poor approximation of the underlying relation-
ships in the data, any information extracted from the model is
unlikely to be accurate. Evaluating the quality of a model’s ﬁt
has been well-studied in standard supervised ML frameworks,through measures such as test-set accuracy. In the context of
interpretation, we describe this error as predictive accuracy.
Note that in problems involving interpretability, one often
requires a notion of predictive accuracy that goes beyond just
average accuracy. The distribution of predictions matters. For
instance, it could be problematic if the prediction error is
much higher for a particular class. Moreover, the predictive
accuracy should be stable with respect to reasonable data
and model perturbations. For instance, one should not trust
interpretations from a model which changes dramatically when
trained on a slightly smaller subset of the data.
A.2. Descriptive accuracy. The second source of error occurs dur-
ing the post hoc analysis stage, when interpretation methods
are used to analyze a ﬁtted model. Oftentimes, interpretation
methods provide an imperfect representation of the relation-
ships learned by a model. This is especially challenging for
complex black-box models such as deep neural networks, which
store nonlinear relationships between variables in non-obvious
forms.
⊿Deﬁnition We deﬁne descriptive accuracy , in the con-
text of interpretation, as the degree to which an interpretation
method objectively captures the relationships learned by ma-
chine learning models.
A.3. A common conﬂict: predictive vs descriptive accuracy. In se-
lecting what model to use, practitioners are often faced with
a trade-oﬀ between predictive and descriptive accuracy. On
the one hand, the simplicity of model-based interpretation
methods yields consistently high descriptive accuracy, but
can sometimes result in lower predictive accuracy on complex
datasets. On the other hand, in complex settings such as
image analysis, complicated models generally provide high
predictive accuracy, but are harder to analyze, resulting in a
lower descriptive accuracy.
B. Relevancy. When selecting an interpretation method, it is
not enough for the method to have high accuracy - the ex-
tracted information must also be relevant. For example, in the
context of genomics, a patient, doctor, biologist, and statisti-
cian may each want diﬀerent (yet consistent) interpretations
from the same model. The context provided by the problem
and data stages in Fig 1 guides what kinds of relationships a
practitioner is interested in learning about, and by extension
the methods that should be used.
⊿Deﬁnition We deﬁne an interpretation to be relevant
if it provides insight for a particular audience into a chosen
domain problem.
Relevancy often plays a key role in determining the trade-
oﬀ between predictive and descriptive accuracy. Depending
on the context of the problem at hand, a practitioner may
choose to focus on one over the other. For instance, when
interpretability is used to audit a model’s predictions, such as
toenforcefairness, descriptiveaccuracycanbemoreimportant.
In contrast, interpretability can also be used solely as a tool
to increase the predictive accuracy of a model, for instance,
through improved feature engineering.
Having outlined the main desiderata for interpretation
methods, we now discuss how they link to interpretation in
the modeling and post hoc analysis stages in the data-science
life cycle. Fig 2 draws parallels between our desiderata for
interpretation techniques introduced in Sec 3 and our catego-
rization of methods in Sec 4 and Sec 5. In particular, both
Preprint |Murdoch et al. 2018 |3