of conﬁdence as feature importance scores, a standard tech-
nique taught in introductory statistics classes. By making
assumptions about the underlying data generating process,
models like linear and logistic regression can compute conﬁ-
dence intervals and hypothesis tests for the values, and linear
combinations, of their coeﬃcients. These statistics can be
helpful in determining the degree to which the observed coeﬃ-
cients are statistically signiﬁcant. It is important to note that
the assumptions of the underlying probabilistic model must be
fully veriﬁed before using this form of interpretation. Below we
present a cautionary example where diﬀerent assumptions lead
to opposing conclusions being drawn from the same dataset.
⊿Ex.Here, we consider the lawsuit Students for Fair
Admissions, Inc. v. Harvard regarding the use of race in un-
dergraduate admissions to Harvard University. Initial reports
by Harvard’s Oﬃce of Institutional Research used logistic re-
gression to model the probability of admission using diﬀerent
features of an applicant’s proﬁle, including their race ( 59).
This analysis found that the coeﬃcient associated with being
Asian (and not low income) had a coeﬃcient of -0.418 with
a signiﬁcant p-value (<0.001). This negative coeﬃcient sug-
gested that being Asian had a signiﬁcant negative association
with admission probability.
Subsequent analysis from both sides in the lawsuit at-
tempted to analyze the modeling and assumptions to decide on
the signiﬁcance of race in the model’s decision. The plaintiﬀ’s
expert report ( 60) suggested that race was being unfairly used
by building on the original report from Harvard’s Oﬃce of
Institutional Research. It also incorporates analysis on more
subjective factors such as “personal ratings” which seem to
hurt Asian students’ admission. In contrast, the expert report
supporting Harvard University ( 61) ﬁnds that by accounting
for certain other variables, the eﬀect of race on Asian students
acceptance is no longer signiﬁcant. Signiﬁcances derived from
statistical tests in regression or logistic regression models at
best establish association, but not causation. Hence the anal-
yses from both sides are ﬂawed. This example demonstrates
the practical and misleading consequences of statistical feature
importances when used inappropriately.
A.3. Visualizations. When dealing with high-dimensional
datasets, it can be challenging to quickly understand the
complex relationships that a model has learned, making
the presentation of the results particularly important. To
help deal with this, researchers have developed a number
of diﬀerent visualizations which help to understand what a
model has learned. For linear models with regularization,
plots of regression coeﬃcient paths show how varying a
regularization parameter aﬀects the ﬁtted coeﬃcients. When
visualizing convolutional neural networks trained on image
data, work has been done on visualizing ﬁlters ( 62,63),
maximally activating responses of individual neurons or
classes ( 64), understanding intra-class variation ( 65), and
grouping diﬀerent neurons ( 66). For Long Short Term
Memory Networks (LSTMs), researchers have focused on
analyzing the state vector, identifying individual dimensions
that correspond to meaningful features (e.g. position in line,
within quotes) ( 67), and building tools to track the model’s
decision process over the course of a sequence (68).
In the following example, relevant interpretations are pro-
duced by using maximal activation images for identifying
patterns that drive the response of brain cells.⊿Ex.A recent study visualizes learned information from
deep neural networks to understand individual brain cells ( 24).
In this study, macaque monkeys were shown images while
the responses of brain cells in their visual system (area V4)
were recorded. Neural networks were trained to predict the
responses of brain cells to the images. These neural networks
produce accurate ﬁts, but provide little insight into what pat-
terns in the images increase the brain cells response without
further analysis. To remedy this, the authors introduce Deep-
Tune, a method which provides a visualization, accessible to
neuroscientists and others, of the patterns which activate a
brain cell. The main intuition behind the method is to opti-
mize the input of a network to maximize the response of a
neural network model (which represent a brain cell).
The authors go on to analyze the major problem of in-
stability. When post hoc visualizations attempt to answer
scientiﬁc questions, the visualizations must be stable to rea-
sonable perturbations (e.g. the choice of model); if there are
changes in the visualization due to the choice of a model, it is
likely not meaningful. The authors address this explicitly by
ﬁtting eighteen diﬀerent models to the data and using a stable
optimization over all the models to produce a ﬁnal consensus
DeepTune visualization.
A.4. Analyzing trends and outliers in predictions. When interpret-
ing the performance of an ML model, it can be helpful to look
not just at the average accuracy, but also at the distribution
of predictions and errors. For example, residual plots can
identify heterogeneity in predictions, and suggest particular
data points to analyze, such as outliers in the predictions, or
examples which had the largest prediction errors. Moreover,
these plots be used to analyze trends across the predictions.
For instance, in the example below, inﬂuence functions are
able to eﬃciently identify mislabelled data points.
⊿Ex.This kind of analysis can also be used to identify
mislabeled training data. A recently introduced method ( 69)
uses the classical statistical concept of inﬂuence functions
to identify points in the training data which contribute to
predictions made by ML models. By searching for training
data points which contribute the most amount to individual
predictions, they were able to ﬁnd mislabelled data points
without having to look at too much data. Correcting these
mislabeled training points subsequently improved the test
accuracy.
B. Prediction-level interpretation. Prediction-level approaches
are useful when a practitioner is interested in understanding
how individual predictions are made by a model. Note that
prediction-level approaches can sometimes be aggregated to
yield dataset-level insights.
B.1. Feature importance scores. The most popular approach to
prediction-level interpretation has involved assigning impor-
tance scores to individual features. Intuitively, a variable
with a large positive (negative) score made a highly positive
(negative) contribution to a particular prediction. In the deep
learning literature, a number of diﬀerent approaches have been
proposed to address this problem ( 70–79), with some methods
for other models as well ( 80). These are often displayed in
the form of a heat map highlighting important features. Note
that feature importance scores at the prediction-level can oﬀer
much more information than feature importance scores at the
Preprint |Murdoch et al. 2018 |7