insight for a particular audience into a chosen domain problem.
These insights are often used to guide communication, actions,
and discovery. Interpretation methods use ML models to pro-
duce relevant knowledge about domain relationships contained
in data. This knowledge can be produced in formats such as
visualizations, natural language or mathematical equations,
depending on the context and audience. For instance, a doctor
who must diagnose a single patient will want qualitatively
diﬀerent information than an engineer determining if an image
classiﬁer is discriminating by race.
B. Background. Interpretability is a quickly growing ﬁeld in
machine learning, and there have been multiple works exam-
ining various aspects of interpretations (sometimes under the
heading explainable AI ). One line of work focuses on providing
an overview of diﬀerent interpretation methods with a strong
emphasis on post hoc interpretations of deep learning models
(7,8), sometimes pointing out similarities between various
methods ( 9,10). Other work has focused on the narrower
problem of how interpretations should be evaluated ( 11,12)
and what properties they should satisfy ( 13). These previous
works touch on diﬀerent subsets of interpretability, but do
not address interpretable machine learning as a whole, and
give limited guidance on how interpretability can actually be
used in data-science life cycles. We aim to do so by providing
a framework and vocabulary to fully capture interpretable
machine learning, its beneﬁts, and its applications to concrete
data problems.
Interpretability also plays a role in other research areas.
For example, interpretability is a major topic when considering
bias and fairness in ML models ( 14,15), with examples given
throughout the paper ( 16). In psychology, the general notions
of interpretability and explanations have been studied at a
more abstract level ( 17,18), providing relevant conceptual
perspectives. Additionally, we comment on two related areas
that are distinct but closely related to interpretability: causal
inference and stability.
Causal inference Causalinference( 19)isasubjectfromstatis-
tics which is related, but distinct, from interpretable machine
learning. Causal inference methods focus solely on extracting
causal relationships from data, i.e. statements that altering
one variable will cause a change in another. In contrast, in-
terpretable ML, and most other statistical techniques, are
generally used to describe non-causal relationships, or rela-
tionships in observational studies.
In some instances, researchers use both interpretable ma-
chine learning and causal inference in a single analysis ( 20).
One form of this is where the non-causal relationships ex-
tracted by interpretable ML are used to suggest potential
causal relationships. These relationships can then be further
analyzed using causal inference methods, and fully validated
through experimental studies.
Stability Stability, as a generalization of robustness in statis-
tics, is a concept that applies throughout the entire data-
science life cycle, including interpretable ML). The stability
principle requires that each step in the life cycle is stable with
respect to appropriate perturbations, such as small changes in
the model or data. Recently, stability has been shown to be
important in applied statistical problems, for example when
trying to make conclusions about a scientiﬁc problem ( 21)
and in more general settings ( 22). Stability can be helpfulin evaluating interpretation methods and is a prerequisite for
trustworthy interpretations. That is, one should not interpret
parts of a model which are not stable to appropriate pertur-
bations to the model and data. This is demonstrated through
examples in the text (20, 23, 24).
2. Interpretation in the data science life cycle
Before discussing interpretation methods, we ﬁrst place the
process of interpretable ML within the broader data-science
life cycle. Fig 1 presents a deliberately general description of
this process, intended to capture most data-science problems.
What is generally referred to as interpretation largely occurs in
the modeling and post hoc analysis stages, with the problem,
data and audience providing the context required to choose
appropriate methods.
Problem, Data, & AudienceModelPost hoc analysisIteratePredictive accuracyDescriptive accuracy
Fig. 1. Overview of different stages (black text) in a data-science life cycle where
interpretability is important. Main stages are discussed in Sec 2 and accuracy (blue
text) is described in Sec 3.
Problem, data, and audience At the beginning of the cycle, a
data-science practitioner deﬁnes a domain problem that they
would like to understand using data. This problem can take
many forms. In a scientiﬁc setting, the practitioner may be
interested in relationships contained in the data, such as how
brain cells in a particular area of the visual system relate to
visual stimuli ( 25). In industrial settings, the problem often
concerns the predictive performance or other qualities of a
model, such as how to assign credit scores with high accuracy
(26), or do so fairly with respect to gender and race ( 16). The
nature of the problem plays a role in interpretability, as the
relevant context and audience are essential in determining
what methods to use.
After choosing a domain problem, the practitioner collects
data to study it. Aspects of the data-collection process can
aﬀect the interpretation pipeline. Notably, biases in the data
(i.e. mismatches between the collected data and the population
of interest) will manifest themselves in the model, restricting
one’s ability to make interpretations regarding the problem of
interest.
ModelBased on the chosen problem and collected data, the
practitioner then constructs a predictive model. At this stage,
the practitioner processes, cleans, and visualizes data, extracts
features, selects a model (or several models) and ﬁts it. In-
terpretability considerations often come into play in this step
related to the choice between simpler, easier to interpret mod-
els and more complex, black-box models, which may ﬁt the
data better. The model’s ability to ﬁt the data is measured
through predictive accuracy.
Post hoc analysis Having ﬁt a model (or models), the prac-
titioner then analyzes it for answers to the original question.
The process of analyzing the model often involves using in-
terpretability methods to extract various (stable) forms of
Preprint |Murdoch et al. 2018 |2