rules (38,39), which can easily be simulated. Due to their sim-
plicity, simulatable models have very high descriptive accuracy.
When they can also provide reasonable predictive accuracy,
they can be very eﬀective. In the following example, a novel
simulatable model is able to produce high predictive accuracy,
while maintaining the high levels of descriptive accuracy and
relevancy normally attained by rules-based models.
⊿Ex.In medical practice, when a patient has been diag-
nosed with atrial ﬁbrillation, caregivers often want to predict
the risk that the particular patient will have a stroke in the
next year. Moreover, given the potential ramiﬁcations of med-
ical decisions, it is important that these predictions are not
only accurate, but interpretable to both the caregivers and
patients.
To make the prediction, ( 39) uses data from 12,586 patients
detailing their age, gender, history of drugs and conditions
preceding their diagnosis, and whether they had a stroke
within a year of diagnosis. In order to construct a model that
has high predictive and descriptive accuracy, ( 39) introduce a
method for learning lists of if-then rules that are predictive of
one year stroke risk. The resulting classiﬁer, displayed in Fig 3,
requires only seven if-then statements to achieve competitive
accuracy, and is easy for even non-technical practitioners to
quickly understand.
if hemiplegia and age > 60 then stroke risk 58.9% (53.8%–63.8%)else if cerebrovascular disorder then stroke risk 47.8% (44.8%–50.7%)else if transient ischaemic attack then stroke risk 23.8% (19.5%–28.4%) else if occlusion and stenosis of carotid artery without infarction then stroke risk 15.8% (12.2%–19.6%)else if altered state of consciousness and age > 60 then stroke risk 16.0% (12.2%–20.2%)else if age ≤ 70 then stroke risk 4.6% (3.9%–5.4%)else stroke risk 8.7% (7.9%–9.6%) 
Fig. 3. Rule list for classifying stroke risk from patient data (replicated Fig 5 from ( 39)).
One can easily simulate and understand the relationships between different variables
such as age on stroke risk . Reprinted with permission from the authors.
C. Modularity. We deﬁne an ML model to be modular if a
meaningful portion(s) of its prediction-making process can be
interpreted independently. While modular models are not as
easy to understand as sparse or simulatable models, they can
still be useful in increasing descriptive accuracy to provide
insights into the relationships the model has learned.
A wide array of models satisfy modularity to diﬀerent de-
grees. Generalized additive models ( 40) force the relationship
between variables in the model to be additive. In deep learning,
speciﬁc methods such as attention ( 41) and modular network
architectures ( 42) provide limited insight into a network’s in-
ner workings. Probabilistic models can enforce modularity by
specifying a conditional independence structure which makes it
easier to reason about diﬀerent parts of a model independently
(43).
The following example uses modularity to produce relevant
interpretations for use in diagnosing biases in training data.
⊿Ex.When prioritizing patient care for pneumonia pa-
tients in a hospital, one possible method is to predict the
likelihood of death within 60 days, and focus on the patients
with a higher mortality risk. Given the potential life and
death consequences, being able to explain the reasons for
hospitalizing a patient or not is very important.
A recent study ( 44) uses a dataset of 14,199 pneumoniapatients, with 46 features including from demographics (e.g.
age and gender), simple physical measurements (e.g. heart
rate, blood pressure) and lab tests (e.g. white blood cell
count, blood urea nitrogen). To predict mortality risk, they
use a generalized additive model with pairwise interactions,
displayed below. The univariate and pairwise terms ( fj(xj)
andfij(xi,xj)) can be individually interpreted in the form of
curves and heatmaps respectively.
g(E[y]) =β0+/summationdisplay
jfj(xj) +/summationdisplay
i /negationslash=jfij(xi,xj)[1]
By inspecting the individual modules, the researchers found
a number of counterintuitive properties of their model. For
instance, the ﬁtted model learned that having asthma is asso-
ciated with a lower risk of dying from pneumonia. In reality,
the opposite is true - patients with asthma are known to have
a higher risk of death from pneumonia. Because of this, in
the collected data all patients with asthma received aggressive
care, which was fortunately eﬀective at reducing their risk of
mortality relative to the general population.
In this instance, if the model were used without having been
interpreted, pneumonia patients with asthma would have have
been de-prioritized for hospitalization. Consequently, the use
of ML would increase their likelihood of dying. Fortunately,
the use of an interpretable model enabled the researchers to
identify and correct errors like this one, better ensuring that
the model could be trusted in the real world.
D. Domain-based feature engineering. While the type of
model is important in producing a useful interpretation, so
are the features that are used as inputs to the model. Having
more informative features makes the relationship that needs
to be learned by the model simpler, allowing one to use other
model-based interpretability methods. Moreover, when the
features have more meaning to a particular audience, they
become easier to interpret.
In many individual domains, expert knowledge can be use-
ful in constructing feature sets that are useful for building
predictive models. The particular algorithms used to extract
features are generally domain-speciﬁc, relying both on the
practitioner’s existing domain expertise and insights drawn
from the data through exploratory data analysis. For example,
in natural language processing, documents are embedded into
vectors using tf-idf ( 45) and in computer vision mathemat-
ical transformations have been developed to produce useful
representations of images ( 46). In the example below, do-
main knowledge about cloud coverage is exploited to design
three simple features that increase the predictive accuracy of
a model while maintaining the high descriptive accuracy of a
simple predictive model.
⊿Ex.When modelling global climate patterns, an im-
portant quantity is the amount and location of arctic cloud
coverage. Due to the complex, layered nature of climate mod-
els, it is beneﬁcial to have simple, easily auditable, cloud
coverage models for use by down-stream climate scientists.
In (47), the authors use an unlabeled dataset of arctic
satellite imagery to build a model predicting whether each
pixel in an image contains clouds or not. Given the qualita-
tive similarity between ice and clouds, this is a challenging
prediction problem. By conducting exploratory data analy-
sis and utilizing domain knowledge through interactions with
Preprint |Murdoch et al. 2018 |5