to propose novel methods which do not actually solve any
real-world problems.
There have been two dominant approaches for demonstrat-
ing improved relevancy. The ﬁrst, and strongest, is to directly
use the introduced method in solving a domain problem. For
instance, inoneexamplediscussedabove( 20), theauthorseval-
uated a new interpretation method (iterative random forests)
by demonstrating that it could be used to identify meaningful
biological Boolean interactions for use in experiments. In in-
stances like this, where the interpretations are used directly
to solve a domain problem, their relevancy is indisputable.
A second, less direct, approach is the use of human studies,
often through services like Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. Here,
humans are asked to perform certain tasks, such as evaluat-
ing how much they trust a model’s predictions ( 82). While
challenging to properly construct and perform, these studies
are vital to demonstrate that new interpretation methods are,
in fact, relevant to any potential practitioners. However, one
shortcoming of this approach is that it is only possible to use
a general audience of AMT crowdsourced workers, rather than
a more relevant, domain-speciﬁc audience.
B. Model-based. Now that we have discussed the general prob-
lem of evaluating interpretations, we highlight important chal-
lenges for the two main sub-ﬁelds of interpretable machine
learning: model-basedandposthocinterpretability. Whenever
model-based interpretability can achieve reasonable predictive
accuracy and relevancy, by virtue of its high descriptive ac-
curacy it is preferable to ﬁtting a more complex model, and
relying upon post hoc interpretability. Thus, the main focus
for model-based interpretability is increasing its range of pos-
sible use cases by increasing its predictive accuracy through
more accurate models and transparent feature engineering. It
is worth noting that sometimes a combination of model-based
and post hoc interpretations is ideal.
B.1. Building accurate and interpretable models. In many in-
stances, model-based interpretability methods fail to achieve
a reasonable predictive accuracy. In these cases, practitioners
are forced to abandon model-based interpretations in search
of more accurate models. Thus, an eﬀective way of increasing
the potential uses for model-based interpretability is to de-
vise new modeling methods which produce higher predictive
accuracy while maintaining their high descriptive accuracy
and relevance. Promising examples of this work include the
previously discussed examples on estimating pneumonia risk
from patient data ( 44) and Bayesian models for generating
rule lists to estimate a patient’s risk of stroke ( 39). Detailed
directions for this work are suggested in (88).
B.2. Tools for feature engineering. When we have more informa-
tive and meaningful features, we can use simpler modeling
methods to achieve a comparable predictive accuracy. Thus,
methods that can produce more useful features broaden the
potential uses of model-based interpretations. The ﬁrst main
category of work lies in improved tools for exploratory data
analysis. By better enabling researchers to interact with and
understand their data, these tools (combined with domain
knowledge)provideincreasedopportunitiesforthemtoidentify
helpful features. Examples include interactive environments
(89–91), tools for visualization ( 92–94), and data exploration
tools (95,96). The second category falls under unsupervisedlearning, which is often used as a tool for automatically ﬁnd-
ing relevant structure in data. Improvements in unsupervised
techniques such as clustering and matrix factorization could
lead to more useful features.
C. Post hoc. In contrast to model-based interpretability, much
of post hoc interpretability is relatively new, with many foun-
dational concepts still unclear. In particular, we feel that two
of the most important questions to be answered are what an
interpretation of an ML model should look like, and how post
hoc interpretations can be used. One of the most promising
potential uses of post hoc interpretations is to increase the
predictive accuracy of a model. In related work, it has been
pointed out that in high stakes decisions practitioners should
be very careful when applying post hoc methods with unknown
descriptive accuracy (88).
C.1. What should an interpretation of a black-box look like. Given a
black-box predictor and real-world problem, it is generally
unclear what format, or combination of formats, is best to
fully capture a model’s behavior. Researchers have proposed
a variety of interpretation forms, including feature heatmaps
(71), feature hierarchies ( 82) and identifying important ele-
ments in the training set ( 69). However, in all instances there
is a gap between the relatively simple information provided by
these interpretations and what the complex model has actually
learned. Moreover, it is unclear if any of the current inter-
pretation forms can fully capture a model’s behaviour, or if a
new format altogether is needed. How to close that gap, while
producing outputs relevant to a particular audience/problem,
is an open problem.
C.2. Using interpretations to improve predictive accuracy. In some
instances, post hoc interpretations uncover that a model has
learned relationships a practitioner knows to be incorrect. For
instance, prior interpretation work has shown that a binary
husky vs. wolf classiﬁer simply learns to identify whether there
is snow in the image, ignoring the animals themselves ( 78). A
natural question to ask is whether it is possible for the practi-
tioner to correct these relationships learned by the model, and
consequently increase its predictive accuracy. Given the chal-
lenges surrounding simply generating post hoc interpretations,
research on their uses has been limited ( 97,98). However, as
the ﬁeld of post hoc interpretations continues to mature, this
could be an exciting avenue for researchers to increase the pre-
dictive accuracy of their models by exploiting prior knowledge,
independently of any other beneﬁts of interpretations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. This research was supported in part
by grants ARO W911NF1710005, ONR N00014-16-1-2664, NSF
DMS-1613002, and NSF IIS 1741340, an NSERC PGS D fellowship,
and an Adobe research award. We thank the Center for Science
of Information (CSoI), a US NSF Science and Technology Center,
under grant agreement CCF-0939370. Reza Abbasi-Asl would like
to thank the Allen Institute founder, Paul G. Allen, for his vision,
encouragement and support.
1. Litjens G, et al. (2017) A survey on deep learning in medical image analysis. Medical image
analysis 42:60–88.
2. Brennan T, Oliver WL (2013) The emergence of machine learning techniques in criminology.
Criminology & Public Policy 12(3):551–562.
3. Angermueller C, Pärnamaa T, Parts L, Stegle O (2016) Deep learning for computational biol-
ogy. Molecular systems biology 12(7):878.
4. Vu MAT, et al. (2018) A shared vision for machine learning in neuroscience. Journal of Neu-
roscience pp. 0508–17.
5. Goodman B, Flaxman S (2016) European union regulations on algorithmic decision-making
and a" right to explanation". arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.08813 .
Preprint |Murdoch et al. 2018 |9