climate scientists, the authors identify three simple features
that are suﬃcient to cluster whether or not images contain
clouds. Using these three features as input to quadratic dis-
criminant analysis, they achieve both high predictive accuracy
and transparency when compared with expert labels (which
were not used in developing the features and the QDA cluster-
ing method).
E. Model-based feature engineering. There are a variety of
automatic approaches for constructing interpretable features.
Two examples are unsupervised learning and dimensionality
reduction. Unsupervised methods, such as clustering, ma-
trix factorization, and dictionary learning, aim to process
unlabelled data and output a description of their structure.
These structures often shed insight into relationships contained
within the data and can be useful in building predictive models.
Dimensionality reduction focuses on ﬁnding a representation
of the data which is lower-dimensional than the original data.
Methods such as principal components analysis ( 48), inde-
pendent components analysis ( 49), and canonical correlation
analysis ( 50) can often identify a few interpretable dimensions,
which can then be used as input to a model or to provide
insights in their own right. Using fewer inputs can not only
improve descriptive accuracy, but can increase predictive ac-
curacy by reducing the number of parameters to ﬁt. In the
following example, unsupervised learning (non-negative matrix
factorization) is used to represent images in a low-dimensional,
genetically meaningful, space.
⊿Ex.Heterogeneity is an important consideration in
genomic problems and associated data. In many cases, regu-
latory factors or biomolecules can play a speciﬁc role in one
context, such as a particular cell type or developmental stage,
and have a very diﬀerent role in other contexts. Thus, it is
important to understand the “local” behavior of regulatory
factors or biomolecules.
A recent study ( 51), uses unsupervised learning to learn
spatial patterns of gene expression in Drosophila (fruit ﬂy)
embryos. In particular, they use stability driven nonnegative
matrix factorization to decompose images of complex spa-
tial gene expression patterns into a library of 21“principal
patterns”, which can be viewed as pre-organ regions This de-
composition, which is interpretable to biologists, allows the
study of gene-gene interactions in pre-organ regions of the
developing embryo.
5. Post hoc interpretability
We now discuss how interpretability considerations come into
play in the post hoc analysis stage of the data-science life cycle.
At this stage, the practitioner analyzes a trained model in
order to provide insights into the learned relationships. This is
particularly challenging when the model’s parameters do not
clearly show what relationships the model has learned. To aid
in this process, a variety of post hoc interpretability methods
have been developed to provide insight into what a trained
model has learned, without changing the underlying model.
These methods are particularly important for settings where
the collected data is high-dimensional and complex, such as
with image data. Once the information has been extracted
from the ﬁtted model, it can be analyzed using standard,
exploratory data analysis techniques, such as scatter plots and
histograms.When conducting post hoc analysis, the model has already
been trained, so its predictive accuracy is ﬁxed. Thus, under
the PDR framework, a researcher must only consider descrip-
tive accuracy and relevancy (relative to a particular audience).
Improving on each of these criteria are areas of active research.
Most widely useful post hoc interpretation methods fall
into two main categories: prediction-level and dataset-level
interpretations, which are sometimes referred to as local and
global interpretations, respectively. Prediction-level interpreta-
tion methods focus on explaining individual predictions made
by models, such as what features and/or interactions led to
the particular prediction. Dataset-level approaches focus on
the global relationships the model has learned, such as what
visual patterns are associated with a predicted response. These
two categories have much in common (in fact, dataset-level
approaches often yield information at the prediction-level),
but we discuss them separately, as methods at diﬀerent levels
are meaningfully diﬀerent.
A. Dataset-level interpretation. When a practitioner is inter-
ested in more general relationships learned by a model, e.g.
relationshipsthatarerelevantforaparticularclassofresponses
or subpopulation, they use dataset-level interpretations.
A.1. Interaction and feature importances. Feature importance
scores, at the dataset-level, try to capture how much indi-
vidual features contribute, across a dataset, to a prediction.
These scores can provide insights into what features the model
has identiﬁed as important for which outcomes, and their
relative importance. Methods have been developed to score
individual features in many models including neural networks
(52), random forests, (53, 54), and generic classiﬁers (55).
In addition to feature importances, methods have been
developed to extract important interactions between features.
Interactions are important as ML models are often highly
nonlinear and learn complex interactions between features.
Methods exist to extract interactions from a variety of ML
models including random forests ( 20,56) and neural networks
(57,58). In the following example, the descriptive accuracy of
random forests is increased by extracting Boolean interactions
(a problem-relevant form of interpretation) from a trained
model.
⊿Ex.High-order interactions among regulatory factors
or genes play an important role in deﬁning cell-type speciﬁc
behavior in biological systems. As a result, extracting such
interactions from genomic data is an important problem in
biology.
A previous line of work considers the problem of searching
for biological interactions associated with important biological
processes ( 20,56). To identify candidate biological interac-
tions, the authors train a series of iteratively re-weighted RFs
and search for stable combinations of features that frequently
co-occuralongthepredictiveRFdecisionpaths. Thisapproach
takes a step beyond evaluating the importance of individual
features in an RF, providing a more complete description of
how features inﬂuence predicted responses. By interpreting
the interactions used in RFs, the researchers identiﬁed gene-
gene interactions with 80% accuracy in the Drosophila embryo
and identify candidate targets for higher-order interactions.
A.2. Statistical feature importances. In some instances, in addi-
tion to the raw value, we can compute statistical measures
Preprint |Murdoch et al. 2018 |6