Interpretable machine learning: deﬁnitions,
methods, and applications
W. James Murdocha,1, Chandan Singhb,1, Karl Kumbiera,2, Reza Abbasi-Aslb,c,2, and Bin Yua,b
aUC Berkeley Statistics Dept.;bUC Berkeley EECS Dept.;cAllen Institute for Brain Science
Machine-learning models have demonstrated great success in learning complex patterns that en-
able them to make predictions about unobserved data. In addition to using models for prediction,
the ability to interpret what a model has learned is receiving an increasing amount of attention.
However, this increased focus has led to considerable confusion about the notion of interpretabil-
ity. In particular, it is unclear how the wide array of proposed interpretation methods are related,
and what common concepts can be used to evaluate them.
We aim to address these concerns by deﬁning interpretability in the context of machine learning
and introducing the P redictive, D escriptive, R elevant (PDR) framework for discussing interpreta-
tions. The PDR framework provides three overarching desiderata for evaluation: predictive ac-
curacy, descriptive accuracy and relevancy, with relevancy judged relative to a human audience.
Moreover, to help manage the deluge of interpretation methods, we introduce a categorization of
existing techniques into model-based and post-hoc categories, with sub-groups including spar-
sity, modularity and simulatability. To demonstrate how practitioners can use the PDR framework
to evaluate and understand interpretations, we provide numerous real-world examples. These ex-
amples highlight the often under-appreciated role played by human audiences in discussions of
interpretability. Finally, based on our framework, we discuss limitations of existing methods and
directions for future work. We hope that this work will provide a common vocabulary that will
make it easier for both practitioners and researchers to discuss and choose from the full range of
interpretation methods.
1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) has recently received considerable
attention for its ability to accurately predict a wide
variety of complex phenomena. However, there is a growing
realization that, in addition to predictions, ML models are
capable of producing knowledge about domain relationships
contained in data, often referred to as interpretations. These
interpretations have found uses both in their own right, e.g.
medicine ( 1), policy-making ( 2), and science ( 3,4), as well as
in auditing the predictions themselves in response to issues
such as regulatory pressure (5) and fairness (6).
In the absence of a well-formed deﬁnition of interpretability,
a broad range of methods with a correspondingly broad range
of outputs (e.g. visualizations, natural language, mathematical
equations) have been labeled as interpretation. This has led
to considerable confusion about the notion of interpretability.
In particular, it is unclear what it means to interpret some-
thing, what common threads exist among disparate methods,
and how to select an interpretation method for a particular
problem/audience.
In this paper, we attempt to address these concerns. To do
so, we ﬁrst deﬁne interpretability in the context of machine
learning and place it within a generic data science life cycle.
This allows us to distinguish between two main classes of
interpretation methods: model-based∗and post hoc. We
then introduce the Predictive, Descriptive, Relevant (PDR)
framework, consisting of three desiderata for evaluating and
constructing interpretations: predictive accuracy, descriptive
∗For clarity, throughout the paper we use the term to refer to both machine-learning models and
algorithms.accuracy, and relevancy, where relevancy is judged by a human
audience. Using these terms, we categorize a broad range of
existing methods, all grounded in real-world examples†. In
doing so, we provide a common vocabulary for researchers and
practitioners to use in evaluating and selecting interpretation
methods. We then show how our work enables a clearer
discussion of open problems for future research.
A. Deﬁning interpretable machine learning. On its own, inter-
pretability is a broad, poorly deﬁned concept. Taken to its
full generality, to interpret data means to extract information
(of some form) from it. The set of methods falling under this
umbrella spans everything from designing an initial experiment
to visualizing ﬁnal results. In this overly general form, inter-
pretability is not substantially diﬀerent from the established
concepts of data science and applied statistics.
Instead of general interpretability, we focus on the use of
interpretations in the context of ML as part of the larger data-
science life cycle. We deﬁne interpretable machine learning
as the use of machine-learning models for the extraction of
relevant knowledge about domain relationships contained in
data. Here, we view knowledge as being relevant if it provides
†Examples were selected through a non-exhaustive search of related work.
W.M., C.S., K.K., R.A., and B.Y . helped identify important concepts and provided feedback on the
paper. W.M and C.S. wrote the paper with contributions from K.K., R.A., and B.Y .
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest exists.
1W.M. and C.S. contributed equally to this work.
2K.K. and R.A. contributed equally to this work.
3To whom correspondence should be addressed: binyu@berkeley.edu
Preprint |Murdoch et al. 2018 |1–11arXiv:1901.04592v1  [stat.ML]  14 Jan 2019