Fig. 4. Importance of different predictors in predicting the likelihood of arrest for a
particular person. Reprinted with permission from the authors.
dataset-level. This is a result of heterogeneity in a nonlin-
ear model: the importance of a feature can vary for diﬀerent
examples as a result of interactions with other features. In
the following example, feature importance scores are used to
increase the descriptive accuracy of black-box models in order
to validate their fairness.
⊿Ex.When using ML models to predict sensitive out-
comes, such as whether a person should receive a loan or
a criminal sentence, it is important to verify that the algo-
rithm is not discriminating against people based on protected
attributes, such as race or gender. This problem is often
described as ensuring ML models are “fair”. In ( 16), the au-
thors introduce a variable importance measure designed to
isolate the contributions of individual variables, such as gender,
among a set of correlated variables.
Based on these variable importance scores, the authors
construct transparency reports, such as the one displayed in
Fig 4. This ﬁgure displays the importance of features used to
predict that "Mr. Z" is likely to be arrested in the future (an
outcome which is often used in predictive policing), with each
bar corresponding to a feature provided to the classiﬁer, and
the y axis displaying the importance score for that feature. In
this instance, the race feature is the largest value, indicating
that the classiﬁer is indeed discriminating based on race. Thus,
in this instance, prediction-level feature importance scores are
able to identify that a model is unfairly discriminating based
on race.
B.2. Alternatives to feature importances. While feature impor-
tance scores can provide useful insights, they also have a
number of limitations. For instance, they are unable to cap-
ture when algorithms learn interactions between variables.
There is currently an evolving body of work centered around
uncovering and addressing these limitations. These methods
focus on explicitly capturing and displaying the interactions
learned by a neural network ( 81,82), alternative forms of
interpretations such as textual explanations ( 83), identifying
inﬂuential data points ( 69), and analyzing nearest neighbors
(84, 85).
6. Future work
Having introduced the PDR framework for deﬁning and dis-
cussing interpretable machine learning, we now leverage it to
frame what we feel are the ﬁeld’s most important challenges
moving forward. Below, we present open problems tied to eachof the paper’s three main sections: interpretation desiderata
(Sec 3), model-based interpretability (Sec 4), and post hoc
interpretability (Sec 5).
A. Measuring interpretation desiderata. Currently, there is no
clear consensus in the community around how to evaluate
interpretation methods, although some recent work has begun
to address it ( 11–13). As a result, the standard of evaluation
varies considerably across diﬀerent work, making it challeng-
ing both for researchers in the ﬁeld to measure progress, and
for prospective users to select suitable methods. Within the
PDR framework, to constitute an improvement, a new inter-
pretation method must improve at least one desideratum (pre-
dictive accuracy, descriptive accuracy, or relevancy) without
unduly harming the others. While improvements in predictive
accuracy are easy to measure, measuring improvements in
descriptive accuracy and relevancy remains a challenge. Less
important areas for improvement include computational cost
and ease of implementation.
A.1. Measuring descriptive accuracy. One way to measure an im-
provement to an interpretation method is to demonstrate that
its output better captures what the ML model has learned, i.e.
its descriptive accuracy. However, unlike predictive accuracy,
descriptive accuracy is generally very challenging to measure
or quantify. As a fall-back, researchers often show individual,
cherry-picked, interpretations which seem “reasonable”. These
kinds of evaluations are limited and unfalsiﬁable. In particular,
these results are limited to the few examples shown, and not
generally applicable to the entire dataset.
While the community has not settled on a standard evalua-
tion protocol, there are some promising directions. In particu-
lar, the use of simulation studies presents a partial solution. In
this setting, a researcher deﬁnes a simple generative process,
generates a large amount of data from that process, and trains
their ML model on that data. Assuming a proper simulation
setup, a suﬃciently powerful model to recover the generative
process, and suﬃciently large training data, the trained model
should achieve near-perfect generalization accuracy. To com-
pute an evaluation metric, they can then check whether their
interpretations recover aspects of the original generative pro-
cess. For example, ( 57,86) train neural networks on a suite of
generative models with certain built-in interactions, and test
whether their method successfully recovers them. Here, due to
the ML model’s near-perfect generalization accuracy, we know
that the model is likely to have recovered some aspects of
the generative process, thus providing a ground truth against
which to evaluate interpretations. In a related approach, when
an underlying scientiﬁc problem has been previously studied,
prior experimental ﬁndings can serve as a partial ground truth
to retrospectively validate interpretations (20).
A.2. Demonstrating relevancy to real-world problems. Another an-
gle for developing improved interpretation methods is to im-
prove the relevancy of interpretations for some audience or
problem. This is normally done by introducing a novel form
of output, such as feature heatmaps ( 71), rationales ( 87), fea-
ture hierarchies ( 82) or identifying important elements in the
training set ( 69). A common pitfall in the current literature
is to focus exclusively on the novel output, ignoring what real-
world problems it can actually solve. Given the abundance of
possible interpretations, it is particularly easy for researchers
Preprint |Murdoch et al. 2018 |8