Generally unchanged or decrease(data-dependent) No EffectIncreaseIncreaseModel-basedinterpretabilityPost hoc interpretabilityPredictiveAccuracyDescriptiveAccuracy
Fig. 2. Impact of interpretability methods on descriptive and predictive accuracies.
Model-based interpretability (Sec 4) involves using a simpler model to ﬁt the data
which can negatively affect predictive accuracy, but yields higher descriptive accuracy.
Post hoc interpretability (Sec 5) involves using methods to extract information from a
trained model (with no effect on predictive accuracy). These correspond to the model
and post hoc stages in Fig 1.
post hoc and model-based methods aim to increase descriptive
accuracy, but only model-based aﬀects the predictive accuracy.
Not shown is relevancy, which determines what type of output
is helpful for a particular problem and audience.
4. Model-based interpretability
We now discuss how interpretability considerations come into
play in the modeling stage of the data science life cycle (see
Fig 1). At this stage, the practitioner constructs an ML model
fromthecollecteddata. Wedeﬁnemodel-basedinterpretability
as the construction of models that readily provide insight into
the relationships they have learned. Diﬀerent model-based
interpretability methods provide diﬀerent ways of increasing
descriptiveaccuracybyconstructingmodelswhichareeasierto
understand, sometimes resulting in lower predictive accuracy.
The main challenge of model-based interpretability is to come
up with models that are simple enough to be easily understood
by the audience, yet sophisticated enough to properly ﬁt the
underlying data.
In selecting a model to solve a domain problem, the practi-
tioner must consider the entirety of the PDR framework. The
ﬁrst desideratum to consider is predictive accuracy. If the con-
structed model does not accurately represent the underlying
problem, any subsequent analysis will be suspect ( 28,29). Sec-
ond, the main purpose of model-based interpretation methods
is to increase descriptive accuracy. Finally, the relevancy of
a model’s output must be considered, and is determined by
the context of the problem, data, and audience. We now dis-
cuss some widely useful types of model-based interpretability
methods.
A. Sparsity. When the practitioner believes that the under-
lying relationship in question is based upon a sparse set of
signals, they can impose sparsity on their model by limiting
the number of non-zero parameters. In this section, we focus
on linear models, but sparsity can be helpful more generally.
When the number of non-zero parameters is suﬃciently small,
a practitioner can interpret the variables corresponding tothose parameters as being meaningfully related to the out-
come in question, and can also interpret the magnitude and
direction of the parameters. However, before one can interpret
a sparse parameter set, one should check for stability of the pa-
rameters. For example, if the set of sparse parameters changes
due to small perturbations in the data set, the coeﬃcients
should not be interpreted (30).
When the practitioner is able to correctly incorporate spar-
sity into their model, it can improve all three interpretation
desiderata. By reducing the number of parameters to analyze,
sparse models can be easier to understand, yielding higher
descriptive accuracy. Moreover, incorporating prior informa-
tion in the form sparsity into a sparse problem can help a
model achieve higher predictive accuracy and yield more rele-
vant insights. Note that incorporating sparsity can often be
quite diﬃcult, as it requires understanding the data-speciﬁc
structure of the sparsity and how it can be modelled.
Methods for obtaining sparsity often utilize a penalty on
a loss function, such as LASSO ( 31) and sparse coding ( 32),
or on a model selection criteria such as AIC or BIC ( 33,34).
Manysearch-basedmethodshavebeendevelopedtoﬁndsparse
solutions. These methods search through the space of non-
zero coeﬃcients using classical subset-selection methods (e.g.
orthogonal matching pursuit ( 35)). Model sparsity is often
useful for high-dimensional problems, where the goal is to
identify key features for further analysis. As a result, sparsity
penalties have been incorporated into complex models such
as random forests to identify a sparse subset of important
features (36).
In the following example from genomics, sparsity is used
to increase the relevancy of the produced interpretations by
reducing the number of potential interactions to a manageable
level.
⊿Ex.Identifying interactions among regulatory factors
or biomolecules is an important question in genomics. Typ-
ical genomic datasets include thousands or even millions of
features, many of which are active in speciﬁc cellular or devel-
opmental contexts. The massive scale of such datasets make
interpretation a considerable challenge. Sparsity penalties
are frequently used to make the data manageable for statisti-
cians and their collaborating biologists to discuss and identify
promising candidates for further experiments.
For instance, one recent study ( 23) uses a biclustering ap-
proach based on sparse canonical correlation analysis (SCCA)
to identify interactions among genomic expression features in
Drosophila melanogaster (fruit ﬂies) and Caenorhabditis ele-
gans(roundworms). Sparsity penalties enable key interactions
among features to be summarized in heatmaps which contain
few enough variables for a human to analyze. Moreover, this
study performs stability analysis on their model, ﬁnding it
to be robust to diﬀerent initializations and perturbations to
hyperparameters.
B. Simulatability. A model is said to be simulatable if a human
(for whom the interpretation is intended) is able to internally
simulate and reason about its entire decision-making process
(i.e. how a trained model produces an output for an arbitrary
input). This is a very strong constraint to place on a model,
and can generally only be done when the number of features is
low, and the underlying relationship is simple. Decision trees
(37) are often cited as a simulatable model, due to their hier-
archical decision-making process. Another example is lists of
Preprint |Murdoch et al. 2018 |4