LQ MFRL 6
3.2 Model free PG for MFC with MKV
simulator
Let us assume that we have access to the following
(stochastic) simulator, called MKV simulator ST
MKV:
given a control parameter θ,ST
MKV (θ)returns a sample
of the mean-ﬁeld cost (see § 2.1) for the MKV dynam-
ics(1)using the control θ. In other words, it returns
a realization of the social cost/summationtextT−1
t=0γtct, wherectis
the instantaneous mean-ﬁeld cost at time t. Notice
that, although the simulator needs to know the model
in order to sample the dynamics and compute the costs,
Algorithm 1 below uses this simulator as a black-box (or
an oracle), and hence uses only samples from the model
and not the model itself. Without full knowledge of the
model, we use derivative-free techniques (see Section C
of the appendix) to estimate the gradient of the cost.
We let Bτ⊂R/lscript×dbe the ball of radius τcentered at
the origin, and Sτ=∂Bτbe its boundary. The uniform
distributions on BτandSτare denoted by µBτand
µSτrespectively.
Algorithm 1 provides a (biased) estimator of the true
policy gradient∇C(θ). This method is very much in
the spirit of [ 10, Algorithm 1], except that here we have
two components (the state and the conditional mean)
playing diﬀerent roles. The choice of two independent
sources (v1i)and(v2i)of noise is important to get an
estimation of the gradients w.r.t. KandLsolely from
observing a single cost provided by the MKV simulator
ST
MKV (θi). We prove the following convergence result,
which generalizes [10, Theorem 30].
Algorithm 1: Model-free MKV-Based Gradient Esti-
mation
Data:Parameterθ= (K,L); number of perturbations
M; lengthT; radiusτ
Result: A biased estimator for the gradient ∇C(θ)
1begin
2fori= 1,2,...,Mdo
3 Samplev1i,v2ii.i.d.∼µSτ
4 Setθi= (Ki,Li) = (K+v1i,L+v2i)
5 Sample ˜CiusingST
MKV (θi)
6Set˜∇KC(θ) =d
τ21
M/summationtextM
i=1˜Civ1i,and
˜∇LC(θ) =d
τ21
M/summationtextM
i=1˜Civ2i
7return ˜∇C(θ) = diag/parenleftbig˜∇KC(θ),˜∇LC(θ)/parenrightbig
Theorem 5. Under our standing assumptions, if weuse the update rule ˜K(k+1)=˜K(k)−η˜∇C(θ(k))where
˜∇C(θ(k))is given by Algorithm 1, for every ε>0, ifk,
M,τ−1andTare large enough, then we have C(θ(k))−
C(θ∗)≤εwith probability at least 1−k(d/ε)−d. The
convergence rate is linear in the sense that it is suﬃcient
to takekof the order ofO(log(1/ε)).
The proof is deferred to Section C of the appendix, but
it is worth mentioning here some important steps. It
relies on the reparametrization xθ= [yK,zL]/latticetopof the
state process. Due to the idiosyncratic and common
noises, the sampled costs are not bounded but only sub-
exponentially distributed. A careful analysis is required
to obtain polynomial bounds on the parameters M,τ−1
andTused in the algorithm. The main diﬃculty turns
out to reduce to the study of a sequence of quadratic
forms of sub-Gaussian random vectors with dependent
coordinates (see [ 35, Proposition 2.5]). The discount
term also plays an important role here. We refer to
Lemma 35 in the appendix for more details on the
cornerstone of the proof.
3.3 Model-free PG for MFC with population
simulator
We now turn our attention to a more realistic setting
where one does not have access to an oracle simulating
the MKV dynamics, but only to an oracle merely capa-
ble of simulating the evolution of Nagents. We then
use the state sample average instead of the theoretical
conditional mean, and for the social cost, the empirical
average instead of the mean-ﬁeld cost provided by the
MKV simulator. We rely on the following population
simulatorST,N
pop: given a control parameter θ,ST,N
pop(θ)
returns a sample of the social cost obtained by sampling
realizations of the Nstate trajectories controlled by θ
and computing the associated cost for the population,
see(3)and(5). In other words, it returns a realization
of/summationtextT
t=0γt¯cN
t, where ¯cN
tis the instantaneous N-agent
social cost cost at time t.
Notice that this population simulator ST,N
popis arguably
more realistic and less powerful than the previous MKV
simulatorST
MKV, in the sense that the former has only
an approximation (or a noisy version) of the true mean
process. We stress that allthe agents use the same con-
trol (and in Algorithm 2, they use the sameperturbed
version of a control). This point is in line with the idea
that the problem corresponds to the one of a central
planner or the one of a population trying to ﬁnd the