R. Carmona, M. Laurière, Z. Tan 7
best common feedback control rule in order to optimize
a social cost (see § 2.2).
Algorithm 2: Model-free Population-Based Gradient
Estimation
Data:θ= (K,L); number of agents N; number of
perturbations M; lengthT; radiusτ
Result: A biased estimator for ∇C(θ).
1begin
2fori= 1,2,...,Mdo
3 Samplev1i,v2ii.i.d.∼µSτ
4 Setθi= (Ki,Li) = (K+v1i,L+v2i)
5 Sample ˜Ci,NusingST,N
pop(θi)
6Set˜∇KCN(θ) =d
τ21
M/summationtextM
i=1˜Ci,Nv1i,and
˜∇LCN(θ) =d
τ21
M/summationtextM
i=1˜Ci,Nv2i
7return ˜∇CN(θ) = diag/parenleftbig˜∇KCN(θ),˜∇LCN(θ)/parenrightbig
Theorem 6. Under our standing assumptions, if ˜h=
0, and if we use the update rule ˜K(k+1)=˜K(k)−
η˜∇CN(θ(k)),where ˜∇CN(θ(k))is given by Algorithm 2,
then for every ε>0, ifk,M,τ−1,TandNare large
enough, then CN(θ(k))−CN(θ∗)≤εwith probability
at least 1−k(d/ε)−d. The convergence rate is linear
in the sense that it is suﬃcient to take the number of
stepskof the order ofO(log(1/ε)).
The high-level structure of the proof follows the lines
of [10, Theorem 28], with several important modiﬁca-
tions that we highlight in the appendix. In particular,
it relies on several crucial estimates controlling the bias
introduced by MF interactions in the computation of
the gradient of the cost. See, in the appendix, Section D
for a sketch of proof and Section E for the details.
Remark 7. Recall that when ˜h= 0, the mean-ﬁeld and
the ﬁnite-population problems have the same θ∗. When
˜h > 0(agents are not perfectly identical), a similar
convergence result could be proved, at the expense of an
additional error term vanishing as ˜h→0. Numerical
tests conducted with heterogeneous agents in the next
section support this idea.
Remark 8. Even if the common noise were degenerate,
in theN−agent dynamics the average ¯xNwould remain
stochastic due to the term1
N/summationtextN
n/prime=1/epsilon11,n/prime
t+1. Hence, we
expect that Theorem 6 could be proved without the non-
degeneracy of the noises in Assumption 2.4 Numerical results
Although the main thrust of our work is theoretical, we
assess our convergence results by numerical tests. To
illustrate the robustness of our methods, we consider
a case where the agents are heterogeneous (i.e., ˜h >
0) and have idiosyncratic and common noise in the
dynamics. For the discount, we used γ= 0.9. We
consider here an example in which the state and the
controlareindimension 1becauseitiseasiertovisualize
and because it allows focusing on the main diﬃculty
of MFC problems, namely the MF interactions. For
brevity, the precise setting is postponed to Section F of
the appendix. The displayed curves correspond to the
mean over 10diﬀerent realizations. The shaded region,
if any, corresponds to the mean ±standard deviation.
For each model-free method, we look at how the control
learned by PG performs both in terms of the MF cost
and theN−agent social cost (see Figures 2). On Fig-
ure(2a)and(2b), one can see that the control learned
by PG is approximately optimal for the MF cost, pro-
vided that the number of agents is strictly larger than 1.
Indeed, as shown in Figure (3a), a single agent is able
to learn the second component of the optimal control
θ∗= (K∗,L∗)but not the ﬁrst component. This can be
explained by the fact that, when N= 1,x1−¯xNis iden-
tically 0. So the agent does not have any estimate of the
ycomponent of the state (see (6)) and is thus unable
to learn the associated control parameter. Figure (2b)
displays the relative error, namely, (C(θ(k))−C∗)/C∗
at iteration k, whereC∗=C(θ∗)is the optimal mean
ﬁeld cost (i.e., the MKV cost evaluated at the optimal
mean ﬁeld control parameter θ∗).
As for the evaluation in terms of the population cost,
Figure 2 also displays the N−agent social cost (2c)and
the error with respect to the optimal social cost (2d),
for each population size. Note that in our simulations,
for a ﬁnite population, the social cost takes into ac-
count the heterogeneities of the agents’s costs. In Fig-
ure(2c), the dashed line for each Ncorresponds to
the value of C∗,N=JN(Φ∗,N), which is the optimal
N−agent social cost (i.e., the social cost evaluated at
the optimal N−agent control Φ∗,Nintroduced in sec-
tion 2.2). Figure (2d)shows the relative error, deﬁned
as(CN(θ(k))−C∗,N)/C∗,Nat iteration k. Here, we
can see that the N-agents manage to learn a control
which is approximately optimal for theirown social cost
(even when N= 1). For the sake of comparison, we also