Linear-Quadratic Mean-Field Reinforcement Learning:
Convergence of Policy Gradient Methods
René Carmona†Mathieu Laurière†Zongjun Tan†
Abstract
We investigate reinforcement learning for
mean ﬁeld control problems in discrete time,
which can be viewed as Markov decision pro-
cesses for a large number of exchangeable
agents interacting in a mean ﬁeld manner.
Such problems arise, for instance when a large
number of robots communicate through a cen-
tral unit dispatching the optimal policy com-
puted by minimizing the overall social cost.
An approximate solution is obtained by learn-
ing the optimal policy of a generic agent in-
teracting with the statistical distribution of
the states of the other agents. We prove rigor-
ously the convergence of exact and model-free
policy gradient methods in a mean-ﬁeld linear-
quadratic setting. We also provide graphical
evidence of the convergence based on imple-
mentations of our algorithms.
1 Introduction
Typicalreinforcement learning (RL) applications in-
volve the search for a procedure to learn by trial and
error the optimal behavior so as to maximize a reward.
While similar in spirit to optimal control applications, a
key diﬀerence is that in the latter, the model is assumed
to be known to the controller. This is in contrast with
RL for which the environment has to be explored, and
the reward cannot be predicted with certainty. Still,
†Department of Operations Research and Financial Engi-
neering, Princeton Universitythe RL paradigm has generated numerous theoretical
developments and found plenty practical applications.
As a matter of fact, bidirectional links with the opti-
mal control literature have been unveiled as common
tools lie at the heart of many studies. The family of
linear-quadratic (LQ) models proved to be of great im-
portance in optimal control because of its tractability
and versatility. Not surprisingly, these models have also
been studied from a RL viewpoint. See e.g. [ 26,10].
Mean ﬁeld control (MFC), also called optimal control
of McKean-Vlasov (MKV) dynamics, is an extension
of stochastic control which has recently attracted a
surge of interest (see e.g. [ 5,1]). From a theoreti-
cal standpoint, the main peculiarity of this type of
problems is that the transition and reward functions
do not only involve the state and the action of the
controller, but also the distribution of the state and
potentially of the control. Practically speaking, they
appear as the asymptotic limits for the control of a
large number of collaborative agents, but they can also
be introduced as single agent problems whose evolution
and costs depend upon the distribution of her state and
her control. Such problems have found a wide range
of applications in distributed robotics, energy, drone
ﬂeet management, risk management, ﬁnance, etc. Al-
though they are bona ﬁde control problems for which
a dynamic programming principle can be formulated,
they generally lead to Bellman equations on the inﬁnite
dimensional space of measures, which are extremely
diﬃcult to solve ([ 2,22,25]). Luckily, for mean ﬁeld
LQ problems, simpler optimality conditions can often
be framed in terms of (algebraic) Riccati equations,
analogously to the non-mean ﬁeld case. Figure 1 con-
tains a schematic diagram of the relationships between
optimal control (i.e., planning with a model) and the
paradigms of MFC and RL. On the one hand, RL can
be viewed as a development of optimal control in whicharXiv:1910.04295v1  [math.OC]  9 Oct 2019