LQ MFRL 8
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
 (d)
Figure 2: Comparison of costs achieved by the controls learned with MKV and population simulator using
model-free PG. (a) : mean ﬁeld (MF) costs; (b) : relative error in MF cost wrt MF optimum; (c) : N-agent costs
and their respective optimal value; (d) : relative error in N-agent costs wrt N-agent optimal cost.
display the performance of the model-free method with
MKV simulator (measured in terms of the MKV cost),
which appears in Figure (2)as well. It converges better
since all the proposed methods attempt to learn the
optimal control for the mean ﬁeld problem. However,
as explained in section 2.3, the diﬀerence between the
N−agent optimal control and the mean-ﬁeld optimal
control vanishes as the heterogeneity degree ˜hgoes to
0.
Besides the fact that a single agent is not able to learn
K∗, we note in Figure (3b)that forN= 2the conver-
gence is almost as good with N≥10as with with MKV
simulator, but it is slower for N= 2. This certainly
comes from propagation of chaos, and we expect some
dependence on the dimension of the state, in accordance
with our theoretical bounds.
(a)
 (b)
Figure 3: Convergence of the control parameters. (a) 1-
agent simulator. (b) MKV and population simulators.
5 Conclusion and future research
In this work, we explored the central role played by
MKV dynamics in multi-agent RL and showed that arelatively small number of agents are able to learn a
mean ﬁeld optimal control, which can then be re-used
in larger systems with approximate optimality. We
established convergence of policy gradient methods for
linear-quadratic mean-ﬁeld Markov decision problems
using techniques from optimization and stochastic anal-
ysis. When a MKV simulator is available, we explained
how the problem can be tackled by generalizing known
results for standard LQ models. When one has only
access to a population simulator, we extended existing
results to the case of MF interactions. An important
feature of our model is the presence of common noise,
whose impact had to be controlled. The three con-
vergence results shed light on a hierarchy of settings,
namely: (1) knowledge of the mean ﬁeld model, (2)
access to a MKV simulator, and (3) access to a popula-
tion simulator. We believe that the strategy employed
here to successively prove these results (using a setting
as a building block for the next one) could be useful for
more general (i.e. non-linear-quadratic) mean-ﬁeld RL
problems.
Our results can be extended in several directions. Other
RL methods (such as Actor-Critic algorithms [ 18]) and
variance reduction techniques could be used to improve
the method proposed here and generalize to non-LQ
models. Our analysis and numerical implementations
can be applied to other LQ problems such as mean
ﬁeld games or mean ﬁeld control problems with several
populations, with important applications to multi-agent
sweeping and tracking.
Related work. Our work is at the intersection of RL
and MFC. The latter has recently attracted a lot of
attention, particularly since the introduction of mean
ﬁeld games (MFG) by Lasry and Lions [ 19,20,21]