6 Z. Rezaei et al.
According to several studies, there is a strong correlation betwe en the level
of trust in human-robot teammates with the performance of the r obotic agent’s
work, and it also impacts their interaction quality [31,10]. According to Xu [66],
high levels of trust among human-robot teammates often demonst rate great
synergy, in which matched decision-making capabilities of the human m ember
in the team complements the exhaustivecontrollingand executing ca pabilities of
theroboticagent.Incontrast,alowleveloftrustamonghuman- robotteammates
mightcauseahumantorefusetodelegatetaskstotheroboticage ntorsometimes
decide to disable the robotic agent [66]. Since there is often a high cor relation
among trust and performance of the work in human-robot collabor ation, trust
has been modeled based on the performance in many studies [64,52]. Most of
these performance-based trust models are used as a feedback lo op to adjust
actual performance of the robot to the human’s expectation of it s performance
to convince a human to act trusting toward robot. There are also s ome trust
models based on the performance of robot operations, which are n ot aimed to
modify the performance of collaboration. For example, in [45] a per formance-
based trust model for multi-robot tasks is designed to detect rob otic agents that
are not reliable. Then, less reliable agents are assigned to do less crit ical tasks
or sometimes disregarded while assigning tasks. On the other hand, the human-
robot collaboration’s performance can also be modeled based on tru st [16,17].
These models are used to modify the robot’s trust-related behavio r to manage
the overall performance of the collaboration.
A prevalent class of human-robot collaborations is supervisory colla boration
in which the human plays the role of supervisor and the robot plays th e role of
worker. The supervisor delegates tasks to the worker and overs ees the perfor-
mance of the operation. The supervisor also has the authority to t ake control
of the robot when the robot is doing something wrong. The model of trust for
supervisory collaboration presented in [64] is based on trust in betw een-human
collaboration. It generates a quantity showing the compatibility of r obot perfor-
mancewiththehumanexpectation,enablingtherobottomodifyitsp erformance
to fulﬁll human expectations and improve trust. Later this trust m odel was im-
proved [67], and more factors aﬀecting trust in supervisory collabo ration such as
failure rate in the autonomous agent and the rate of supervisorint ervention were
involved in designing the trust model. The Online Probabilistic Trust Inf erence
Model (OPTIMo) [65] is another model of trust in the supervisory c ollaboration
introduced by the same research group. This model formulates Ba yesian beliefs
over the human’s trust status based on the robot’s performance on the task over
time to generate a real-time estimate of the human’s trust.
When trust can be modeled and measured in a real-time manner in huma n-
robotcollaboration,it can help the robotrepairtrust wheneverth e human starts
under-trusting the robot [65]. A real-time model of trust (trust- POMDP) for
human-robot peer-to-peer collaboration is introduced in [8], which in tegrates
measured trust in the robot’s decision-making. The trust-POMDP m odel closes
theloopbetweenmeasuredtrustbythereal-timetrustmodeland robotdecision-
making process to maximize collaboration performance. This model g rants a