Modeling Trust in Human-Robot Interaction: A Survey 7
robot the ability to inﬂuence human trust systematically to reduce a nd increase
trust in over-reliance and under-reliance situations, respectively .
Hancock et al. [22] provided a meta-analysis of a great number of fa ctors
aﬀecting trust in HRI, and quantitative measurement for the eﬀec t of human-
based, robot-based, and environment-based factors on trust . Later they devel-
oped a model of human-robot team trust based on their ﬁndings in t he meta-
analysis [22]. In addition to the eﬀect of three classes of factors aﬀ ecting trust
introduced in the prior work, they considered the eﬀects of trainin g and design
implications on the ﬁnal model of trust [54].
Somerecent studiesin trustmodeling use subjectivetrust measur ementtech-
niques in companions with objective trust measurement techniques . These tech-
niquesaredeployedin bothHAI andHRI forincreasingthe accuracy androbust-
ness of trust measurements. There are some studies in human-au tomation trust,
human-computer interaction, and human trust in artiﬁcial intelligen ce that use
psycho-physiological measurements for trust modeling [1,20,21]. Kh alid et al.
[27] also introduce a trust model in HRI, which uses facial expressio ns, voice
features, and extracted heart rate features in combination with the self-reported
trust of humans to model trust. This trust model classiﬁes the tr ust level into
one of the low, natural, and high trust levels using a Neuro-fuzzy tr ust classiﬁer.
5 Trust Model: Inputs and Outputs
Trust models formulate the eﬀect of factors on the formation and variation of
trust in robots. In fact, trust models use factors aﬀecting trus t to estimate trust.
Since these factors vary in diﬀerent domains and environments, inp ut factors to
the trust models vary based on the application domain. For example, Robinette
et al. [51] models trust in emergency evacuation based on the situat ional risk
(e.g., amount of danger perceived by the human in the environment a round him)
and agent risk (e.g., agent’s behavior and appearance) to model pe rceived trust
by the human and the human’s decision to trust the robot’s guidance or not. In
contrast, [64] proposes a trust model for a supervisory collabor ation and formu-
lates trust as a function of the robot’s success and failure in perfo rming the task.
Theoutput ofthistrustmodel isclosingtheloopbetweenhumantru standrobot
function by adjusting the robot’s action to improve the collaboratio n eﬃciency.
Finally, [68] proposes a more general trust model based on team c onﬁguration,
task, system, context, and team process to scale trust for tru st measurement.
Many of the studies on modeling trust in HRI consider the performan ce of
collaboration as one of the main input elements for their model [65,17,5 2]. Most
of these models consider the eﬀect of performance in conjugate w ith some other
factors. For instance, the OPTIMo probabilistic trust model [65] u ses rates of
robot’s failures, and human interventions in conjugate with task pe rformance
as inputs to the model to estimate the human’s degree of trust in a r obotic
teammate. Meanwhile, [17] uses the operator’s perception of sys tem capabili-
ties, past experience, and training to assess initial trust. Trust g ets updated
in a loop based on system performance, cognitive workload, and fre quency of