Modeling Trust in Human-Robot Interaction: A Survey 3
robotic applications such as emergency evacuation robots [49], th e deﬁnition of
trust might diﬀer substantially from low-risk robotic applications suc h as bor-
der tracking robots [65]. One of the most thorough deﬁnitions of t rust, which is
deployed by many other studies concentrated on human-robot tr ust, is by Lee
and See [31]. They deﬁne trust from the perspective of automation . This deﬁ-
nition was generated by reviewing many other studies concentrate d on deﬁning
trust and was complementary for many other works. They deﬁne t rust as: “ the
attitude that an agent will help achieve an individual’s goa ls in a situation char-
acterized by uncertainty and vulnerability ”. This deﬁnition of trust is accepted
and used by many studies on trust in HRI. Wagner et al. [61] also prov ided a
comprehensive deﬁnition for trust: “ a belief, held by the trustor, that the trustee
will act in a manner that mitigates the trustor’s risk in a sit uation in which the
trustor has put its outcomes at risk ”. They also provided a model for determin-
ing if an interaction demands trust or not. All these deﬁnitions have one thing in
common, that is: “whether robot’s actions and behaviors corresp ond to human’s
interest or not?” To address this concern in each robotic applicatio n trust needs
to be modeled based on human interests in that domain.
3 Factors Aﬀecting Trust
Studies on factors aﬀecting trust in HRI can be considered an exte nsion to the
studies on factors aﬀecting human-automation trust. In [31], th e authors review
the factors aﬀecting trust in humans and generalize these factor s to factors af-
fecting trust in automation. Many other studies also review and ana lyze factors
aﬀecting trust in human-automation Interaction (HAI) [23,55]. How ever, robots
diﬀer from other forms of automation in many cases, such as mobility , embodi-
ment, and unfamiliarity to the general public. Therefore, factors aﬀecting trust
in HRI need to be investigated separately.
Hancock et al. [22] provides a meta-analysis of factors aﬀecting tr ust in HRI
and classiﬁes these factors in three categories each consist of tw o subcategories:
1. Human-related factors (i.e., including ability-based factors, cha racteristics);
2. Robot-related factors (i.e., including performance-based fact ors, attribute-
based factors); and 3. Environmental factors (i.e., including team collaboration,
tasking). In this study, we review and classify recent studies on fa ctors aﬀecting
trust with a similar classiﬁcation basis as in [22] with some updates in cat egories
andsubcategories.WeclassifyfactorsaﬀectingtrustinHRIintot hreecategories:
1. Robot-related factors (including robot-performance, robot -appearance, and
robot-behaviors),2.Human-relatedfactorsand3.TaskandEn vironment-related
factors. Table 1 shows our classiﬁcation of factors aﬀecting trus t. Most of these
factorsaresimilartotheonesthat arementionedinHancocketal.[ 22].However,
somefactorsareexcluded asrecentstudies paidless attentionst o them and some
new factors that are stressed more in recent studies are added t o this table.Some
factors are also classiﬁed under diﬀerent categories here in this wo rk compared
to [22].