8 Z. Rezaei et al.
changes from tele-operation to autonomous operation. This trus t model’s out-
put is a measure of gain and loss of trust and the impact of these cha nges of
trust on collaboration performance. Sadrfaridpour et al. [52] mo dels trust based
on human performance (i.e., muscles fatigue and dynamics of recove ry), robot
performance (i.e., speed of robot doing the speciﬁc task), workloa d and human
expectation of task performance. The output of this model is fee dback to the
robot to adjust its performance according to operator desires.
6 Conclusion and Future Work
Most of the existing trust models in HRI are developed for a speciﬁc f orm of
human-robot interaction or a speciﬁc type of robotic agent. For e xample, in
[51], a model of trust is speciﬁed for evacuation robots; in [12] the t rust model
is speciﬁed on robots with shared control, and in [65] the generated model is
usable for supervisory collaboration. As each of these trust mode ls belongs to
a speciﬁc domain, they can not be compared with each other, and th ere is no
scale to evaluate their accuracy. A general model of trust is need ed in HRI to
evaluate the accuracy of other trust models. Such a model can be applied to any
robotic domain and even can be deployed by newly emerged robotic ar eas and
eliminate the need for new trust models for these areas.
Trust is a subject of interest for researchin manyother ﬁelds suc h aspsychol-
ogy, sociology, and even physiology. In these ﬁelds, other indicato rs of trust are
used for trust measurement. For example, some studies use phys iological indica-
tors, such as oxytocin-related measures [60,15,25], and objective measures, such
as trust games that assess actual investment behavior [7,26]. Th ese trust assess-
ment methods can be used in HRI to develop a trust model that is inde pendent
of the countless parameters that aﬀect trust.
Manystudies examined the eﬀect ofrobot failure on trust [49,12,53 ,39]. How-
ever, there are limited studies focused on modeling the eﬀect of rob ot failure on
trust. While Desai et al. [10] investigated the eﬀect of robot’s redu ced perfor-
mance and timing of performance reduction on the operator’s trus t in a tele-
operation human-robot interaction, the eﬀect of trust violation n eeds to be in-
vestigated more deeply. Diﬀerent forms of trust violation in diﬀeren t robotic
domains need to be explored. A variety of factors aﬀecting trust- loss and trust-
repair after trust violation, such as task type, risk, robot type, robot behavior,
etc. need to be taken into accountin modeling the eﬀect ofrobot fa ilure on trust.
Modeling ﬂuctuations of trust in a human after a robot failure would h elp esti-
mate the time required for human trust to tend to a steady-state and formulate
timing of trust repair after trust violation.
Both modeling trust and modeling the eﬀects of failure on trust need to
be explored in a more general context. Since there are many diﬀere nt factors
aﬀecting trust, it will be challenging to develop a conclusive trust mod el that
incorporatesall ofthese factors.Therefore,future researc hintotrust modeling in
HRI needs to be more focused on developing general models of trus t, which are
based on measures other than the countless factors aﬀecting tr ust. Such models