2 Z. Rezaei et al.
disciplines, such as Computer Engineering [49], Psychology [22], Compu ter Sci-
ence [10] and MechanicalEngineering[52]. Trust isa signiﬁcantfacto rthat needs
to be taken into consideration when robots are going to work as tea mmates in
human-robot teams [19], used as autonomous agents [57], or where robots are
going to be used in a complex and dangerous situations [42,49]. In man y cases,
trustis themainfactordetermininghowmucharoboticagentwouldb eaccepted
and used by the human [44].
Weak partnerships resulting from inappropriate or non-calibrated trust be-
tweenhumansandrobotsmightcausemisuseordisuseofarobotica gent.Misuse
refers to the failures that occur due to a user’s over-trust of th e robotic agent
(e.g., accepting all the solutions and results presented by the robo t without
questioning). In contrast, disuse refers to the failures that occ ur due to human
under-trusttotheroboticagent(e.g.,rejectingthecapabilitieso faroboticagent)
[31]. To prevent human operators’ misuse and disuse of robots, tr ust needs to
be calibrated. We need to model trust to generate a measure of it a nd to enable
proper trust calibration [43].
There are many reviews available in HRI which are mostly concentrate d on
factors aﬀecting trust [22,55], but none of them is concentrated o n modeling
trust and diﬀerent trust models in HRI. This document’s purpose is t o review
diﬀerent studies concentrated on trust modeling in HRI. This review starts by
deﬁning trust, followed by summarizing factors aﬀecting trust, re viewing studies
focused on modeling trust, and a summary of input and output eleme nts to the
trust models. We conclude with a discussion of the shortcomings and challenges
of trust modeling and future avenues of research.
2 Deﬁnition of Trust in HRI
According to psychologists, trust is a mental state of a human [2]. Numerous
researchers have extensively explored the notion of trust for de cades. Trust is
not limited to just interpersonal interactions. It underlies diﬀeren t forms of in-
teractions, such as banks’ interaction with customers, governm ents with citi-
zens, employers with employees, etc., [61]. Therefore, we can say t rust can aﬀect
human-robot interaction, as it can aﬀect a human user or collabora tor’s will-
ingness to assign tasks, share information, cooperate, provide s upport, accept
results, and interact with a robot [16].
As trust is one of the necessities for building a successful human-r obot inter-
action, we need to create methodologies to model, measure, and ca librate trust.
The ﬁrst step for modeling trust is a clear deﬁnition of trust. Howev er, despite
the broad eﬀorts and number of studies concentrating on trust, there is little
consensus on a single deﬁnition, as the deﬁnition of trust is heavily de pendent
on the context in which trust is being discussed [6]. This is highlighted, for in-
stance, in [41], where trust is deﬁned as “ the reliance by one agent that actions
prejudicial to the well-being of that agent will not be under taken by inﬂuen-
tial others ”. Around each application and domain that robots are used, trust
needs to be deﬁned, measured and explored explicitly. For example, in high-risk