arXiv:2011.04796v1  [cs.RO]  9 Nov 2020Modeling Trust in Human-Robot Interaction: A
Survey
Zahra Rezaei Khavas1[0000−0002−5268−0197], S. Reza
Ahmadzadeh2[0000−0002−6651−8684], and Paul Robinette1[0000−0001−8066−156X]
1Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Massac husetts Lowell, Lowell,
MA 01854, USA ZahraRezaeiKhavas@student.uml.edu, paul robinette@uml.edu
2Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Low ell, MA 01854, USA
rezaahmadzadeh@uml.edu
Abstract. As the autonomy and capabilities of robotic systems in-
crease, they are expected to play the role of teammates rathe r than
tools and interact with human collaborators in a more realis tic manner,
creating a more human-like relationship. Given the impact o f trust ob-
served in human-robot interaction (HRI), appropriate trus t in robotic
collaborators is one of the leading factors inﬂuencing the p erformance of
human-robot interaction. Team performance can be diminish ed if people
do not trust robots appropriately by disusing or misusing th em based on
limited experience. Therefore, trust in HRI needs to be cali brated prop-
erly, rather than maximized, to let the formation of an appro priate level
of trust in human collaborators. For trust calibration in HR I, trust needs
to be modeled ﬁrst. There are many reviews on factors aﬀectin g trust
in HRI [22], however, as there are no reviews concentrated on diﬀerent
trust models, in this paper, we review diﬀerent techniques a nd methods
for trust modeling in HRI. We also present a list of potential directions
for further research and some challenges that need to be addr essed in
future work on human-robot trust modeling.
Keywords: human-robot interaction ·human-robot trust ·modeling trust
in HRI ·trust calibration in HRI ·trust measurement.
1 Introduction
Trust is one of the essential factors in the development of constr uctive relation-
ships, including relationships amonghuman individuals and automation. We can
mentiontrustasanoverarchingconcernthat aﬀectsthe eﬀectiv enessofasystem,
especially in terms of safety, performance, and use rate [31]. Havin g this concern
in mind, trust has become a critical element in the design and developm ent of
automated systems [35]. Autonomous systems are being designed a nd developed
withincreasedlevelsofindependenceanddecision-makingcapabilities ,andthese
capacities will be eﬃcient in uncertain situations [55].
Human-robot trust is an important branch of Human-Robot Inter action
(HRI), which has recently gained increasing attention among schola rs in many