Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 7 of 26
3.2. Identiﬁcation of Relevant Business Divisions
Since this paper focusses on AI applications within manufacturing companies, the
deﬁnition of business divisions was based on the value chain according to [ 51]. The
following divisions were thus identiﬁed:
- Procurement;
- Product development;
- Production planning and optimization;
- Facility management;
- Logistics (internal/external).
3.3. Identiﬁcation of Relevant Resource Efﬁciency Terms
To evaluate the inﬂuence on resource efﬁciency within manufacturing companies,
this paper focuses on operational input which directly affects natural resources, including
material (including operating and auxiliary materials), energy, and water. This proceeding
is in line with the above-stated deﬁnition of resource efﬁciency. Hence, material efﬁciency,
energy efﬁciency, and water efﬁciency are of interest in this paper. Additionally, the two
terms of resource efﬁciency, as well as efﬁciency itself, were identiﬁed as superordinate
terms and included in the search string.
3.4. Literature Review according to the PRISMA Guidelines
The literature review, following PRISMA guidelines, was conducted at the end of
September 2020. There were no time restrictions, and it was searched up to the latest issue
available. The databases Scopus and Web of Science were searched, with the following
search string, consisting of the identiﬁed AI methods, business divisions, and resource
efﬁciency terms: (“Artiﬁcial Intelligence” OR “Linear Regression” OR “Nonlinear Regres-
sion” OR “Support Vector Machines” OR “Logistic Regression” OR “Decision Trees” OR
“Naive Bayes Classiﬁcation” OR “K-means” OR “Hierarchical Clustering” OR “Principal
Component Analysis” OR “Isolation Forest” OR “Local Outlier Factor” OR “Convolutional
Neural Network” OR “Pattern Recognition” OR “Recurrent Neural Networks” OR “Long
short-term Memory” OR “Transformer” OR “Markov chain” OR “ State–action–reward–
state–action” OR “ Deep Q-Network”, “ Double Deep Q Network” OR “Q-Learning”)
AND (“manufacturing” OR “industrial” OR “procurement” OR “product development”
OR “logistics” OR “warehouse management” OR “facility management”) AND (“efﬁ-
ciency” OR “resource efﬁciency” OR “material efﬁciency” OR “energy efﬁciency” OR
“water efﬁciency”)
Figure 3 shows that 1347 papers were identiﬁed through database searching within
Scopus and Web of Science. Additionally, 49 papers were identiﬁed through other sources,
including expert recommendations, citations, and cross-references. Subsequently, dupli-
cates were removed, and the title and abstracts of the identiﬁed papers were screened.
Here, only papers using an AI method for an industrial application were included. A total
of 1012 papers not meeting these criteria were excluded, e.g., AI applications, used for en-
vironmental monitoring of landscapes, as this application is not suitable for manufacturing
companies. The resource efﬁciency aspect was still of secondary importance in this step and
not an exclusion criterion, since resource efﬁciency potentials were conceivable in many
approaches, but these were not explicitly described in the title or abstract. Subsequently,
151 articles were assessed for eligibility. In this step, papers were excluded if no (potential)
impact on at least one resource efﬁciency aspect could be found. At the end of the PRISMA
process, 70 papers were identiﬁed as relevant to this literature review and for subsequent
analysis. In accordance with the exclusion criteria, relevant, in this context, means that
these papers address AI applications in manufacturing companies and can potentially
impact at least one of the identiﬁed resource efﬁciencies (material, energy, or water).