Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 20 of 26
The increase in energy efﬁciency was identiﬁed as being the most commonly ad-
dressed resource efﬁciency aspect, and the use cases for the increase in energy efﬁciency in
production and facility management are deﬁned accordingly. These include the optimiza-
tion of different production processes, such as green electrical discharge machining, and
machine components, such as electric drives, via various AI methods. Despite the use of
such a variety of AI methods, methods of the AI task Modelling and Language Processing
are the most frequently applied. Furthermore, the optimization of building infrastructure,
such as heating, cooling and lighting, is identiﬁed as typical use case.
The use cases illustrate promising approaches to increasing resource efﬁciency with
AI applications and serve as a starting point for practitioners and applied research, con-
tributing to the diffusion of AI applications, with resource efﬁciency in mind.
6. Conclusions
To address climate change and the pressing environmental challenges such as biodiver-
sity loss, the integration of sustainability into business operations is becoming increasingly
important for companies and a key competitive advantage. In addition, AI applications are
becoming more relevant for practice and attractive for companies, due to current develop-
ments in the IT ﬁeld. Therefore, possible contributions by AI applications to sustainability
should be included from the beginning. This paper contributes to the necessity of inte-
grating sustainability with AI applications by explicitly examining the aspect of resource
efﬁciency increases caused by AI applications in manufacturing companies.
After analyzing 70 research papers, it was found that only a minority of papers had
resource efﬁciency as an explicit objective. Among those, energy efﬁciency was the most
commonly addressed resource efﬁciency aspect. Additionally, only a few papers were
identiﬁed that highly inﬂuence resource efﬁciency, and differences were found in the
AI tasks and AI methods used to address the resource efﬁciency aspects. The focus of
some AI applications is very narrow, and they only address two out of four predeﬁned
aspects, for example, Trend analysis with linear and non-linear regression or clustering
with Hierarchical Clustering. It needs to be taken into consideration that energy efﬁciency
and GHG emissions are closely related and, thus, only a few papers address these aspects
separately. Other AI tasks and AI methods consider several resource efﬁciency aspects at
once, and thus have a broader focus, such as classiﬁcation with decision tree and logistic
regression. Regarding business units, in most papers, the (potential) inﬂuence on resource
efﬁciency occurs within production planning and optimization.
Providing an overview of current AI applications, typical use cases were identi-
ﬁed, including predictive maintenance, production planning, fault detection and predic-
tion/predictive quality, as well as increasing energy efﬁciency in production and facility
management. Moreover, the link between AI and resource efﬁciency could be displayed in
more detail. The identiﬁed AI applications showed that there is potential for improvements
in both focused applications, such as increasing energy efﬁciency in lighting, and broad
applications, such as holistic process improvement, taking all four impact categories of
resource efﬁciency into account.
6.1. Limitations
This paper presents an extensive literature review, which aims to provide an overview
of current AI applications to increase resource efﬁciency in manufacturing companies.
However, this literature review is not without limitations. Through the deﬁnition of the
search string, methods involving machine learning were selected as the focus of this re-
search. An attempt was made to counteract this selection by including the overarching
term AI. However, further work could add to the selected methods, and thus provide a
more complete picture of AI applications for resource efﬁciency. In particular, AI methods
such as agent-based modeling, expert systems, e.g., with fuzzy systems or evolutionary al-
gorithms should be investigated for this purpose, since these are common AI methods, but
not machine learning methods, and therefore were not assessed in this paper. Additionally,