Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 3 of 26
improving resource efﬁciency and answers the following research question: What is the
current state of AI used for improving resource efﬁciency within manufacturing companies?
By providing a comprehensive meta-analysis of existing applications described in the
scientiﬁc literature and identifying current research deﬁcits, this article contributes to the
research ﬁeld of AI and resource efﬁciency. Additionally, the identiﬁcation of typical use
cases helps practitioners and researchers to determine possible use cases for increasing
resource efﬁciency within production.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides deﬁnitions for AI and resource
efﬁciency, which are essential for the literature review. Section 3 describes the proceedings
and method used in this paper. For the literature review, the Preferred Reporting Items for
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines were chosen. The papers
identiﬁed are listed and described according to AI tasks, AI methods, resource efﬁciency,
and business unit in Section 4. In Section 5, the results are discussed, analyzed, and typical
use cases are identiﬁed. Section 6 concludes the ﬁndings, states the limitations of this
papers and gives an outlook for future research directions.
2. Fundamentals of AI and Resource Efﬁciency
By deﬁning AI and resource efﬁciency, this section is the basis for the following
analysis. Additionally, the link between AI and resource efﬁciency is explored, clarifying
the possible impact of AI application on resource efﬁciency.
2.1. Deﬁnition of AI
Although AI is seen as a technology with disruptive potential in companies and
research, it lacks a universally valid deﬁnition and is not clearly distinguished from general
IT [10]. Broadly speaking, systems that incorporate AI possess analytical capabilities that
emulate human cognition. Nilsson [ 11] deﬁnes AI as “that activity devoted to making
machines intelligent, and intelligence is that quality that enables an entity to function
appropriately and with foresight in its environment.” Various scientiﬁc publications discuss
the complexity of determining the research domain of AI in detail and provide overviews
of different deﬁnitions [12–14].
While often falsely equated with AI, machine learning is a subset of AI, comprised
of various sub-branches such as deep learning [ 15,16]. Although various other meth-
ods and branches of AI (e.g., expert systems) exist, machine learning is one of the more
popular in the public and scientiﬁc dialogue [ 10]. Machine learning deploys statistical
methods for advancing the analytical abilities of the respective system [ 17,18]. This is
done autonomously in a predeﬁned framework and without detailed instructions in the
form of human programming [ 10]. Generally, three main categories of learning methods
are applied for state-of-the-art AI agents with machine learning algorithms (supervised,
unsupervised and reinforcement learning). Supervised learning, as the least autonomous
method, utilizes expert knowledge or given regularities to verify hypotheses derived from
data analyzation [ 19,20]. Humans predeﬁne and label the utilized data beforehand [ 21].
Based on derivations calculated from the correct result, the AI model learns systematically
by adjusting parameters [ 22]. Unsupervised learning lacks this kind of testing circle. Re-
spective models learn without comparing the potential solution to a desired result. Sathya
and Abraham [ 19] describe the operating principle as the identiﬁcation of “hidden patterns
in unlabeled input data”. While applicable to use cases where data quality does not allow
the implementation of supervised learning, the performance of unsupervised learning
models is often difﬁcult to quantitatively evaluate, as the comparison to an ideal result is
not possible [ 21]. Reinforcement learning is also known as semi-supervised learning as
it is a mixture of the two learning methods described above. The input data are labelled
beforehand; however, it might occur that the labelling is changed over the course of the
learning process [ 20]. The reinforcement is obtained from rewards emitted from the af-
fected environment. The system achieves a maximization of cumulated positive feedback
through a systematic and iterative approach [ 21]. The superordinate task of models based