Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 2 of 26
After an age of economic growth, in which industrial pollution was widely accepted as
an accompanying effect, the focus of many companies in recent years did not shift towards
reducing environmental impacts [ 2–4]. Due to this inactivity, the ﬁrst improvements could
easily be obtained when analyzing existing processes by taking the objective of increasing
sustainability into account [ 5]. Many measures identiﬁed during such evaluations are
commonly referred to as “low hanging fruits”, as the necessary effort and investment
for implementation is comparably low, while the implications can be signiﬁcant. After
implementing ﬁrst measures for reducing the ecological footprint of companies, the identi-
ﬁcation of further potential for improvement often becomes more complex. Here, targeted
data acquisition as well as efﬁcient data processing serve as enablers for the holistic and
effective optimization of manufacturing environments. Hence, digitization is widely seen
as a powerful enabler for improving the economical, ecological and societal performance
of the industrial sector. The adoption of information technology in the monitoring of
manufacturing systems bears the potential to increase the overall sustainability perfor-
mance [ 6]. Apart from basic digitization approaches, such as big data analytics and digital
twins, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) represents another promising enabling technology for a
sustainable transformation of the manufacturing industry.
While not solely focusing on sustainability in the context of industrial production,
Figure 1 illustrates the increasing visibility of “artiﬁcial intelligence” in combination with
the concept of sustainability in the scientiﬁc community. The number of respective scientiﬁc
publications has nearly exponentially increased during the last 30 years. A prominent
example is the work of Vinuesa et al. [ 7], who assesses potential impacts of AI regarding
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), proving both positive and negative effects.
Di Vaio et al. [ 8] explore the inﬂuences of AI on business models in the context of the
SDGs identifying a research gap for SGD 12 “sustainable consumption and production
patterns”. Nishant et al. [ 9] see the potential beneﬁt of AI in enabling effective and efﬁcient
environmental governance with a focus on developing resilient sustainable systems. Their
comprehensive literature review summarizes the applications of AI in societal matters
and aspects of national economics and the design of energy systems. In conclusion, they
mention the improvement in “industrial environmental performance” as one out of four
promising practical applications of AI [ 9]. Without a detailed description or speciﬁc
examples, the optimization of resource consumption in industrial processes is assessed as
being beneﬁcial for operations at every scale [ 9]. The present article addresses these issues
by identifying the utilization of AI in this regard by a thorough literature review.
Figure 1. Number of articles containing terms “artiﬁcial intelligence” and “sustainability” on Google Scholar since 1990.
While the correlation between general sustainability and AI is discussed extensively
in the literature (Figure 1), a holistic review of the implications of AI utilization on resource
use in the manufacturing industry does not exist to date. Thus, this paper addresses
the research gap by examining the (potential) inﬂuence and the current state of AI for