Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 5 of 26
objective is clearly formulated during the development and use of AI. In this sense, resource
efﬁciency is a sub-goal of sustainability and the SDG 12 and can, therefore, only make a
limited contribution to improving sustainability, but it is nonetheless an essential aspect.
3. Materials and Methods
Figure 2 presents the research process of this paper. By identifying AI methods,
relevant business divisions, and relevant resource efﬁciency terms, it was possible to
create a search string for a literature review according to the Preferred Reporting Items
for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines and a framework for
an analysis of the included papers. The results of the literature review were analyzed to
identify their potential to increase resource efﬁciency within a manufacturing company.
Figure 2. Research process of this paper.
3.1. Identiﬁcation of AI Methods
The identiﬁcation of AI methods is based on [ 19,20,31], focusing on machine learning.
Here, various methods were assigned to different tasks and clusters (Table 1) for application
as the basis for the subsequent analysis. In total, 21 AI methods were assigned to the AI
clusters of supervised, unsupervised and reinforcement learning, as described in Section 2 ,
and to AI tasks. Thus, this paper focuses on machine learning and other AI paradigms,
such as expert systems and generic algorithms, are not explicitly included. However, this
selection of AI methods is not meant to be conclusive, but rather represents the selection of
common AI methods. To include other papers, to which none of the identiﬁed AI methods
apply, the subordinate term of Artiﬁcial Intelligence was integrated in the search string.
Table 1. Identiﬁed AI Cluster, Tasks and Methods used for this research paper.
Cluster Task Method
Supervised
learningTrend analysisLinear regression
Non-linear regression
ClassiﬁcationDecision trees
Logistic regression
Naive Bayes classiﬁcation
Support Vector Machines (SVM)