Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 21 of 26
this paper focuses on resource efﬁciency aspects, which have a direct impact on the natural
resources comprising energy, material and water efﬁciency. Other aspects, such as human
resources, system or product efﬁciency, are not considered in this paper and could be part
of further research. The various efﬁciency aspects should also be placed within a broader
context, as, in some cases, it may be more effective to increase resource efﬁciency in the
use phase of a product than in production. Therefore, hotspots for a speciﬁc AI application
should be identiﬁed, e.g., by an evaluation of the environmental impact via Life Cycle
Assessment. As well as this, a variety of industry sectors and, thus, production processes,
was included in the literature review, as the focus was narrowed down to manufacturing
companies only. Therefore, rather heterogeneous industries and production processes
were included, from semiconductor manufacturing to textile processing, and from plasma
etching to additive manufacturing and materials science. A differentiation and analysis of
the suitability of AI applications within a speciﬁc industry sector or production process
was, therefore, not possible. Further research could focus on these aspects. A similar aspect
is the view on rather different levels of a manufacturing company. Improvements in both
entire factories and individual components, such as ball bearings, were considered. In the
future, detailed analyses could be prepared for such differing levels. Within this research,
the majority of papers were identiﬁed as (potentially) improving resource efﬁciency in
the business unit of production. For ongoing analysis, it is suggested to further detail the
business unit and to speciﬁcally classify maintenance and quality management applica-
tions. The identiﬁed use cases in Section 5.2 present a suitable ﬁrst approach for such a
detailed classiﬁcation.
6.2. Theoretical and Practical Implications
This paper provides an overview for researchers and practitioners of AI applications
and methods for increasing resource efﬁciency by examining their (potential) inﬂuence.
It is shown that AI methods have already been applied to increase resource efﬁciency in
manufacturing companies, but only to a limited extent. Future research should, therefore,
address more AI applications with this explicit objective. Additionally, this paper offers
a ﬁrst insight for practitioners regarding which AI applications could be beneﬁcial for
their speciﬁc use case. In this context, the identiﬁed use cases can serve as a starting point
for practitioners and applied research, and provide a promising approach to increasing
resource efﬁciency with AI applications, leading to more frequent dissemination and
consideration of resource efﬁciency within AI research.
Furthermore, this literature review highlights the fact that only few researchers have
taken the direct environmental impact caused by training and implementing AI into ac-
count, although this may result in multiple possible savings of energy and resources. For
example, training an AI algorithm may consume ﬁve times as much energy as a passenger
car over its entire life cycle [ 75]. Furthermore, many data centers are being built because of
the large amount of computing capacity required. In the USA, these already account for
2% of total, energy consumption, whereas worldwide, information and communication
technologies currently consume about 1% of total global energy and could be responsible
for up to 20% of global energy in 2030 [ 125,126]. Thus, it is strongly suggested that the
research ﬁeld of AI should also consider at least the energy and material consumed by
implementing AI applications to increase the transparency of the environmental impact.
Taking this a step further, more research is needed that explicitly considers sustainability
in the development and use phase of AI solutions. This includes the sustainability im-
provement of AI applications themselves (Green AI) and by AI (Green by AI), similar to
the research ﬁelds of Green IT and Green IS [ 127]. The ﬁrst approaches can already be
found in the literature [ 128]. Hence, more interdisciplinary research is required, connecting
sustainability and AI research ﬁelds.
By analyzing 70 research papers, this paper identiﬁes the research gaps and con-
tributes to the scientiﬁc discourse on how AI applications can support sustainability and, in
particular, resource efﬁciency in manufacturing companies. To increase resource efﬁciency