Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 16 of 26
Other AI methods are not used as frequently, as only ﬁve papers apply Naive Bayes
classiﬁcation, decision trees, LSTM, pattern recognition, Markov chain, k-means, and
PCA. Isolation forest, Local Outlier Factor and Q-Learning were only used once, while
SARSA, DQN, DDQN, and Transformer were not applied at all. Therefore, the most
frequently employed AI tasks are classiﬁcation, with 23 papers, followed by modelling
and language processing, with 17, trend analysis, with 13, and image recognition, with
12 papers. Only one paper addressed learning tasks and, thus, reinforcement learning.
From the literature review, it appears that papers dealing with reinforcement learning
applications are more frequently developed for scheduling problems, robot collaboration,
or supply chain problems [ 121–123]. However, as these papers neglect the aspect of resource
efﬁciency, they are beyond the scope of this literature review and were not further analyzed.
Figure 6 presents the number and distribution of research papers addressing resource
efﬁciency within a speciﬁc business unit. The majority of papers look at inﬂuences on
resource efﬁciency in production planning and optimization, while only a few papers focus
on facility management, development, logistics, or procurement.
Figure 6. Number of research papers addressing resource efﬁciency in a speciﬁc business unit.
Table 2 also analyzes the inﬂuence on resource efﬁciency within manufacturing com-
panies. As stated in Figure 7, the majority of papers, in total, 60 papers, conﬁrm the impacts
on energy efﬁciency. Papers dealing with inﬂuences on GHG emissions are also numerous,
due to the fact that GHG emissions and energy are closely related. Only for the latter two
aspects could a high potential be determined, meaning an improvement of 1%. A high
inﬂuence could be found for neither material efﬁciency nor water efﬁciency. Furthermore,
only 46 papers show a potential inﬂuence on material efﬁciency and 12 papers show an
inﬂuence on water efﬁciency. This can be explained by the fact that energy savings count
among the resource efﬁciency improvements that are most frequently addressed by com-
panies. Energy management systems, in particular, make companies more aware of their
energy consumption and of potential measures [ 124]. By contrast, material and water
saving measures are usually neither approached nor implemented, due to their having
more complex solutions and the nonexistence of comparable management systems.