Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 6 of 26
Table 1. Cont.
Cluster Task Method
Supervised
learningAnomaly detectionIsolation Forest
Local Outlier Factor
Image recognition Convolutional neural networks (CNN)
Modeling, language processingMarkov chain
Pattern recognition
Recurrent neural networks (RNN)
Transformer
Long short-term memory (LSTM)
Unsupervised learningClusteringHierarchical clustering
K-means
Dimension reduction Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
Reinforcement learning Learning tasksState–action–reward–state–action (SARSA)
Deep Q-Network (DQN)
Double Deep Q Network (DDQN)
Q-Learning
Linear regression examines a linear relationship between a so-called dependent vari-
able and an independent variable (bivariate regression) and maps this relationship with
a linear function or regression line [ 32]. In non-linear regression, functions are stud-
ied that cannot be written as linear functions in the parameters [ 33]. Decision trees are
used, especially for the classiﬁcation of data, and consist of nodes, edges, and leaves [ 34].
(Binary) logistic regression analysis is used for testing whether a relationship exists be-
tween a dependent binary variable and one or more independent variables [ 35]. Naïve
Bayes classiﬁcation is a probabilistic classiﬁer derived from Bayes’ theorem. It assigns
each object to the class to which it is most likely to belong, or for which the lowest costs
are incurred [ 36]. SVM is a mathematical method of pattern recognition [ 37]. Isolation
forest is an approach in which anomalies in datasets are detected and isolated instead of
removed, as occurs in most other machine learning algorithms. [ 38]. Local Outlier Factor
is an algorithm for detecting density-based outliers. It compares the density of the point
itself with that of its nearest neighbor to rank the individual datapoints and ﬁnd anomalies
or outliers [ 39]. CNNs consist of different convolutional layers and one pooling layer,
representing a biologically inspired approach. It is most commonly applied for image
recognition [ 40]. Markov chain is a stochastic model describing a sequence of processes
in which the probability of each state can be calculated and simulated in relation to the
previous states [ 41]. Pattern Recognition is the ability to recognize regularities, repetitions,
or similarities in a set of data [42]. In contrast to feedforward networks, RNNs are charac-
terized by connections from neurons in one layer to neurons in the same or a previous layer.
Thus, temporally encoded information in datasets can also be processed [ 43]. Transformers
are applied similar to RNNs in the classiﬁcation and traversal of ordered datasets and are
particularly suitable for recognizing and generating language [ 44]. LSTM is a speciﬁc RNN
architecture, which is well-suited to processing times series data [45].
Hierarchical clustering is a method of grouping objects into optimally homogenized
sets based on empirical similarity measures and sorting them into hierarchically arranged
structures [ 46]. K-means is suitable for the classiﬁcation of data into a known number of k
groups. It is one of the most frequently used algorithms for the clustering of objects [ 47].
PCA is used to reduce the dimensionality of datasets, making them easier to interpret with-
out losing information content. This is achieved by adding new, uncorrelated datapoints
until the maximum variance is successively reached [48].
SARSA is an algorithm for learning an action-value function. In contrast to Q-learning,
however, the agent remains true to its strategy when calculating its subsequent action.
DQN and DDQN are variants of Q-Learning [49,50].