Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 4 of 26
on reinforcement learning is to identify an equilibrium between the exploration of new
information and exploitation of existing information [21,23].
Generally, individual or combinations of various AI methods in manufacturing en-
vironments are able to analyze unstructured data such as audio or image signals. Conse-
quently, patterns are identiﬁed and deviations from the regular conditions of the monitored
system are detected rapidly and, in some cases, proactively [ 24]. These irregularities are
informationally processed and provided to decisional entities. Subsequently, measures
for improvement are automatically or manually derived and commissioned, depending
on the grade of autonomy of the AI solution. The effects of the implementation of AI in
manufacturing environments are mostly related to operational efﬁciencies. However, the
potential implications for resource efﬁciency have not been investigated in detail.
2.2. Deﬁnition of Resource Efﬁciency
According to VDI 4800 [ 25], resource efﬁciency is deﬁned as “the ratio of a speciﬁc
beneﬁt or result to the resource input required to achieve it”. A beneﬁt or result can be
the production of a product or the execution of a production process [ 26]. Resource input
in this context can be deﬁned as natural and operational input for production systems.
Natural resources represent a “resource that is part of nature. These include renewable
and non-renewable primary raw materials, physical space (surface area), environmental
media (water, soil, air), ﬂowing resources (e.g., geothermal, wind, tidal and solar energy)
and biodiversity.” [ 27]. Examples include operational input covers, operating and auxiliary
materials, materials, energy, capital, personnel, know-how, and time. As is common in the
context of environmental science, the present article focusses on the potential contribution
of AI to reducing the use of natural resources in manufacturing systems [ 28]. Therefore,
renewable and non-renewable primary raw materials are of special interest, with energy,
material and water being used as a resource input in this article.
Consequently, various operational inputs such as, for example, capital, human re-
source and know-how-related aspects are not considered in particular [ 26]. Other impact
categories, such as, for example, system and product efﬁciency [ 29] are neglected due to the
focus on natural resources as well as the system boundary of the manufacturing system.
2.3. Link between AI and Resource Efﬁciency
By identifying patterns and suggesting measures for improving the performance of
the observed system, AI bears the potential to play a relevant role in transforming the
industry to a sustainable, competitive and future-proof production. An optimized man-
ufacturing system utilizes its infrastructure and inputs to a perfect extent. In the context
of industrial manufacturing, the implementation of AI and the associated possibilities for
data analysis can, for example, result in optimized production planning. Thus, by taking
the introduced deﬁnition into account, all impact categories are potentially affected. By
reducing attrition and production waste through improved simulation and planning, the
material efﬁciency of the manufacturing system is improved. The same is true for water
usage, which often serves as the auxiliary and operating supply. Optimized production
planning reduces energy consumption, for example, through schedule and capacity plan-
ning. The improved coordination of various production processes and steps bears a large
potential to increase energy efﬁciency. AI supports decision makers in a holistic analysis of
the manufacturing system and, thus, in the identiﬁcation of potential correlations between
singular production entities.
AI thus provides support for the evaluation, identiﬁcation and implementation of
improvement measures in manufacturing companies. In this context, digitized knowledge
is very important in order to utilize the knowledge that is already available in a company
for AI applications and, thus, to create an enhanced knowledge base [ 30]. However, a
sole focus on AI to increase resource efﬁciency is not reasonable; rather, it should be seen
as a promising technology that could be a building block for enhanced sustainability.
This technology, however, can only fully contribute to increasing resource efﬁciency if this