Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 8 of 26
Figure 3. Literature review according to PRISMA guidelines.
3.5. Analysis of the Identiﬁed Literature
The included papers were then analyzed regarding the identiﬁed AI tasks, AI methods,
business divisions, and their (potential) inﬂuence on resource efﬁciency aspects. Due to the
high urgency of tackling climate change and reducing Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions,
a potential reduction in the latter was analyzed alongside the (potential) improvement
in energy, material and water efﬁciency. To objectify the evaluation of the inﬂuences on
resource efﬁciency, a scale was developed. This scale includes:
- High inﬂuence, if a paper states an improvement in a resource efﬁciency aspect of 1%
or more;
- Potential inﬂuence, if the AI application is able to improve a resource efﬁciency
aspect, e.g., by optimizing a process and decreasing product errors. However, no
quantiﬁcation of the improvement is given, or the improvement is below 1%;
- None, if the AI application does not inﬂuence any of the resource efﬁciency aspects;
- N/A, if not enough information is available to evaluate the potential inﬂuence.
Furthermore, the papers were categorized according to AI tasks, AI methods, and
business divisions.
3.6. Identiﬁcation of Typical Use Cases of AI Application Increasing Resource Efﬁciency
When analyzing the identiﬁed papers, it became clear that many addressed similar
use cases, especially within the business division production. To provide practitioners
and applied research with possible starting points for the promising implementation of AI
regarding resource efﬁciency, typical use cases were derived from the approaches. Here,
the AI applications itself, their aim of improvement, the addressed resource efﬁciency
aspects, and the improvement object (product or process) were analyzed and, thus, suitable
clusters were determined.
4. Results
The 70 research papers identiﬁed were analyzed and classiﬁed according to their
inﬂuence on resource efﬁciency. Table 2 shows the results of the respective classiﬁcation
regarding AI tasks, AI methods, business divisions, and the assessment of the inﬂuence on
resource efﬁciency and GHG emissions.