progress in the above matters is also observed; however,
these methods are tested mainly on simple silo problems or
standard sets of numerical functions, so their usefulness to
practitioners working on EA-based software applications isvery limited.
It is worth mentioning that the real usefulness of EAs
could be not only in industry. The spectacular achievementof EA is presented in [ 111]. The artiﬁcial intelligence
system, with the use of EA, the ﬁrst time discovered a new
theory, namely a mechanism of planar regeneration. The
remarkable ability of these small worms to regenerate body
parts made them a research model in human regenerativemedicine.
4 Summary and future trends
As it is shown in this paper, the evolutionary algorithms area popular research domain. Each year many new modiﬁ-
cations of these algorithms are proposed. Some of these
modiﬁcations are shortly described in Tables 1and2. The
EAs are applied to solve many industry problems. When
we cannot use a dedicated algorithm for a given problem,
one of the EAs will be a good choice. Of course, we mustremember about speciﬁc issues the user can face when
dealing with EAs. Here, we can mention two main prob-
lems. First of this problem is a premature convergence (thepopulation converging to a suboptimal solution instead of
an optimal one). We can solve this problem by introducing
the mechanism which will provide a lower transfer rate ofthe genetic material between individuals—the whole pop-
ulation is divided into several subpopulations (so-called
islands) and periodically migrate an individual betweenislands [ 15]. Another solution of the premature conver-
gence problem is a cooperation of EAs with branch and
bound algorithm endowed with interval propagation tech-niques, as it was shown in [ 112]. The second problem is
related to the optimal trade-off between exploration and
exploitation properties of EA. One of the solutions to thisproblem is control of the level of selection pressure [ 113].
We can do this by introducing specialized genetic operators
which will guarantee high population diversity at the startof the algorithm operation (high exploration property–
small exploitation property) and a low population diversity
at the end of the algorithm operation (low explorationproperty–high exploitation property). A survey about
exploration and exploitation in EAs can be found in [ 114].
As future trends in EAs, we can mention some main
directions. The ﬁrst of current trend is a hybridization of
two or more algorithms to obtain better results. Currently,
in the literature, we can ﬁnd an increasing number ofpapers where hybrid algorithms are presented. Also, many
researchers work on modiﬁcations of EAs to improve theircomputational performance. In many recently published
papers, we can ﬁnd modiﬁcations of GA [ 22,23,115,116],
GP [ 31,32,117,118], DE [ 48,49,119,120], ES [ 64,65],
and EP [ 74,75]. An interesting domain of future research
in EAs is also memetic algorithms. The term memetic
algorithm is widely used as a synergy of the evolutionary
algorithm or any other population-based approach withseparate local search techniques as the Nelder–Mead
method. We can ﬁnd very interesting information about
future trends in EAs in the paper [ 121] written by Eiben
et al. As one of the future trends in EAs, the authors point
out the increasing interest in applying EAs to embodied orembedded systems, that is, employing evolution in popu-
lations for which the candidate solutions are controllers or
drivers that implement the operational strategy for somesituated entities, and are evaluated within the context of
some rich, dynamic environment: not for what they are, but
for what they do. Finally, there is another one importantissue especially in the industrial application of EA meth-
ods. Very often in real-world problems, we must optimize a
function in a high-dimensional domain. This process usu-ally is very complex and takes a lot of computational time.
Therefore, in real applications, the EAs designed for this
type of problems should be designed to be implementedeasily to run in parallel (or easy to run in GPU) to reduce
their computational time. A greater effort in this feature
should be in future proposals because this could be a cru-cial feature to decide whether an algorithm is useful in real
applications. Some research in the area of EAs can be
connected with the so-called surrogate models (computa-tionally cheaper models of real-world problems) which can
be used in the place of full ﬁtness evaluation, and that
reﬁne those models through occasional full evaluations ofindividuals in the population [ 121]. Also, very often
industry problems have many objectives. In tandem with
algorithmic advances, the interactive evolutionary algo-
rithms are used to increase the efﬁciency of EAs in multi-
objective optimization [ 121]. As we know, each engi-
neering problem is deﬁned by the different objectivefunction and has a different landscape of search space. The
values of EAs parameters which are ‘‘good’’ in one prob-
lem cannot be sufﬁcient in another one. Therefore,searching for new techniques in such area as automated
tuning and adaptive parameter control is still a hot topic in
EAs. Another important issue in the industrial applicationof EA methods is a proper deﬁnition of an objective
function. The industrial problems are very complex.
Therefore, a deﬁnition of a good mathematical model(good objective function for EAs) for a given industry
process is also a very demanding task. The ‘‘quality’’ of the
chosen objective function will have a great inﬂuence on theresults obtained using EA methods. The next issue which
we want to mention in discussing is repeatability of the EANeural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:12363–12379 12375
123