discussed by Storn and Price [ 3]. The main advantages of
DE over a traditional GA are: It is easy to use, and it hasefﬁcient memory utilization, lower computational com-
plexity (it scales better when handling large problems), and
a lower computational effort (faster convergence) [ 52]. The
standard DE procedure is shown in Algorithm 2. Presented
there DE optimizes the problem with ndecision variables.
Parameter Fscales the values added to the particular
decision variables (mutation), and CRparameter represents
the crossover rate [ 52](x
i;jis the value of jth decision
variable stored in ith individual in the population). More
detailed information on how the parameters should be
tuned can be found in [ 53]. The main idea of the DE
algorithm is connected with computing the difference
between two individuals chosen randomly from the popu-
lation. (The DE determines the function gradient within agiven area—not at a single point.) Therefore, the DE
algorithm prevents the solution of sticking at a local
extreme of the optimized function [ 52]. Twenty years of
DE development resulted in many modiﬁcations. Some of
them are shortly presented in Table 1.2.4 Evolution strategies
The evolution strategies (ESs) are different when com-
pared to the GAs, mainly in the selection procedure. In the
GA, the next generation is created from the parental pop-
ulation by choosing individuals depending on their ﬁtnessvalue, keeping a constant size of the population. In the ES,
a temporary population is created; it has the different size
than the parental population (depending on the assumedparameters kandl). In this step, the ﬁtness values are not
important. Individuals in the temporary population undergo
crossover and mutations. From such populations, anassumed number of the best individuals are selected to the
next generation of the population (in a deterministic way).
ESs operate on the vectors of the ﬂoating point numbers,while the classical GA operates on binary vectors. The
primary types of ESs are ES(1 þ1), ES( lþkÞ, and
ES(l;k)[7].
2.4.1 Evolution strategy ES(1 11)
It is the oldest approach; only one individual xis evolved.
The initial individual xis randomly generated. In each
iteration, only one new individual yis created. The cross-
over operator does not exist, and the mutation operator
creates the individual yby adding a randomly generated
number to each gene of the individual x. The normal dis-
tribution Nwith a mean value equal to zero and a standard
deviation equal to one is used. The value of ith gene in the
individual yis computed as follows: y
i¼xiþr/C1Nið0;1Þ,
where ris a parameter which determines the range of the
mutation. Based on the ﬁtness value of individuals xandy,
the better one is selected for the new generation andbecomes a new individual x. Parameter rundergoes
adaptation by the so-called rule of 1/5 successes. Accord-
ing to this rule, the best results are obtained when therelation Rbetween successful mutations and all mutations
is equal to 1/5. When during ksuccessive generations, the
relation Ris higher than 1/5, then the value of the r
parameter is increased. When the relation Ris lower than
1/5, then the value of the rparameter is decreased. The r
parameter does not change when the relation Ris equal to
1/5 [ 7].Table 1 (continued)
Algorithm, references Author Short description Year
Colonial competitive DE [ 46] Ghasemi et al. Algorithm is based on mathematical modeling of sociopolitical evolution 2016
Memory-based DE [ 47] Parouha et al. Two ‘‘swarm operators’’ have been introduced into DE algorithm 2016
SQG-DE [ 48] Sala et al. Combines aspects of stochastic quasi-gradient methods within DE algorithm 2017
UDE [ 49] Trivedi et al. Unifying the main idea of CoDE, JADE, SaDE, and ranking-based mutation 2017
OCSinDE [ 50] Draa et al. Use a compound sinusoidal formula for scaling factor and crossover rate 201812366 Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:12363–12379
123