In the paper [ 104] (EEE), the problem of subsurface
inverse proﬁling of a 2-D inhomogeneous buried dielectric
target is presented and solved using proposed iterative
optimization method which is based on CMA-ES algo-rithm. In relation to the results obtained using EP and PSO,
the results obtained using CMA-ES signiﬁcantly outper-
form the other two optimization techniques in the inho-mogeneous imagining.
The paper [ 105] (EEE) by Emadi et al. presents CMA-
ES algorithm for tasks scheduling in the cloud computing
environment. The need for planning the scheduling of the
user’s jobs is an important challenge in the ﬁeld of cloudcomputing. The causes are manifold; the most important
are: ever-increasing advancements of information tech-
nology, an increase in applications and user needs for theseapplications with high quality, also the popularity of cloud
computing among user, and rapid growth of them during
recent years. The results obtained indicate that presentedalgorithm, led to a reduction in execution time of all tasks,
compared to the shortest processing time algorithm, longest
processing time algorithm, and GA and PSO algorithms.
3.5 Evolutionary programming in real-life
problems
In the literature, we can ﬁnd the applications of EP in many
different areas. However, in WoS the number of papers inwhich EP algorithm is used is decreasing since the 2013
year. Below we shortly present some of them.
The paper [ 106] (TST) by Yan et al. presents bi-sub-
group self-adaptive EP algorithm for seeking the Pareto
optimal solution of the multi-objective function of the
hybrid electric vehicle (HEV) and the best degree of hybrid(DOH) for this vehicle. In the proposed algorithm, the
evolution of Cauchy operator and Gauss operator are par-
allel performed with different mutation strategies. More-over, the Gauss operator owns the ability of self-adaptation
according to the variation of adaptability function. The
simulation results show that the optimal DOH is equal to0.311 for given HEV. Also, the validity of simulating
method was proved, and the fuel saving effect was con-
sistent with authors’ expectations.
In the paper [ 107] (CBT) by Gao, a new evolutionary
neural network whose architecture and connection weights
simultaneously evolve is proposed. This neural network isbased on immunized EP algorithm and is used in the novel
inverse back analysis for underground engineering. As a
numerical example, an underground roadway of theHuainan coal mine in China is chosen for the veriﬁcation of
the accuracy of the presented inverse back analysis. The
results obtained show that using the proposed method, thecomputed displacements agree with the measured ones.
Therefore, it is demonstrated that the new inverse backanalysis method is a high-performance method for usage in
underground engineering.
Jiang et al. [ 108] (EC) use EP algorithm to ﬁnd weights
and the threshold value in the neural network which isapplied to the trafﬁc signal light control. According to the
historical trafﬁc ﬂow data of a crossroad, the next node’s
trafﬁc ﬂow data are predicted. Due to predicted data, thetrafﬁc signal light frequency can be re-adjusted in order to
improve trafﬁc congestion and other trafﬁc problems. The
results obtained show that the connection of EP algorithm
with the neural network has a good effect on trafﬁc signal
light optimization.
The authors of [ 109] (CSSE) propose a novel approach
to navigate over 3-D terrain using best viewpoints. The
concept of viewpoint entropy is exploited for best viewdetermination, and greedy n-best view selection is used for
visibility calculation. In order to connect the calculated
viewpoints, the authors use an EP algorithm for the trav-eling salesman problem. It was shown that the computed
and planned viewpoints reduce human effort when used as
starting points for scene tour. The proposed method wastested on real terrain and road network datasets.
3.6 Which EA should be used for a given
problem?
What lesson for a potential user of evolutionary computa-
tion emerges from the above overview? The question is
simple, but the answer is hard. All discussed methods are
from the same family—evolutionary approaches to opti-mization problems. The principal question could be: Which
of the discussed methods is suitable for the given problem?
Expanding the answer to all heuristic methods in general,not just evolutionary algorithms, the best answer seems to
be: take the method you know best, you can deﬁne your
problem well in terms required by this method, youunderstand the sensitivity of this method to parameters, you
can ﬁne-tune this method. Let us see, for example, on
energy fuels area. Numerous evolutionary approaches areapplied within this scope. It is not possible to indicate one
of them as the best for this particular subject. The similar
situation is with other areas of industry.
As we can see, the literature on the evolutionary algo-
rithms in general and in their industrial applications is
plentiful, but very rarely this literature concerns applica-tions that have been used in practice. Following [ 110], we
can say that the theory does not support the practice; there
is a big gap between theory and practice. Theoreticalresults on properties such as convergence, diversity,
exploration, exploitation, deceptiveness, and epistasis are
not useful enough for practice. Signiﬁcant topics from thepractice point of view are constraint and noise handling
methods, robustness, or multi-objective optimization. The12374 Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:12363–12379
123