REVIEW ARTICLE
Evolutionary algorithms and their applications to engineering
problems
Adam Slowik1•Halina Kwasnicka2
Received: 27 November 2018 / Accepted: 5 March 2020 / Published online: 16 March 2020
/C211The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
The main focus of this paper is on the family of evolutionary algorithms and their real-life applications. We present thefollowing algorithms: genetic algorithms, genetic programming, differential evolution, evolution strategies, and evolu-
tionary programming. Each technique is presented in the pseudo-code form, which can be used for its easy implementation
in any programming language. We present the main properties of each algorithm described in this paper. We also showmany state-of-the-art practical applications and modiﬁcations of the early evolutionary methods. The open research issues
are indicated for the family of evolutionary algorithms.
Keywords Nature-inspired methods /C1Genetic algorithm /C1Genetic programming /C1Differential evolution /C1Evolution
strategy /C1Evolutionary programming /C1Real-life applications
1 Introduction
These days, in the area of soft computing research we can
observe a strong pressure to search for new optimization
techniques which are based on nature. Figure 1presents
some approaches in optimization techniques with a con-
centration on evolutionary approaches. Today, the whole
family of evolutionary optimization algorithms is referred
to as evolutionary computation (EC) algorithms. In the
evolutionary computation domain, we can mention the
following main algorithms: the genetic algorithm (GA) [ 1],
genetic programming (GP) [ 2],differential evolution (DE)
[3], the evolution strategy (ES) [ 4], and evolutionary pro-
gramming (EP) [ 5]. Each of these techniques has many
different varieties and is used in many different industrial
applications.This paper is a state-of-the-art paper which topic is
connected mainly with evolutionary algorithms (EAs) suchas GA, GP, DE, ES, and EP. (In the other paper [ 6], we
have presented swarm intelligence algorithms (SIAs) such
as ant colony optimization (ACO), particle swarm opti-mization (PSO), and others in which social collaboration
between agents exist.) The other nature-based methods,
like family of physical algorithms (e.g., simulated anneal-
ing, extremal optimization, harmony search, cultural
algorithm, gravitational search, river formation dynamics,black hole algorithm), or family of plant intelligence
algorithms (e.g., ﬂower pollination algorithm, invasive
weed optimization, paddy ﬁeld algorithm, artiﬁcial plantoptimization algorithm, photosynthetic algorithm, plant
growth optimization, rooted tree optimization), are not
considered here due to their less popularity.
The aim of this paper is to present a short overview of
the practical applications of evolutionary algorithms (EAs).
The paper is the complement to [ 6] where a state of the art
of industrial (real-life) applications of swarm intelligence is
presented. The paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 2,we
brieﬂy present the main EAs, namely genetic algorithm ,
genetic programming ,differential evolution ,evolution
strategies , and evolutionary programming . Section 3
describes the various uses of the considered methods in&Adam Slowik
aslowik@ie.tu.koszalin.pl
1Department of Electronics and Computer Science, Koszalin
University of Technology, Sniadeckich 2 Street,
75-453 Koszalin, Poland
2Department of Computational Intelligence, Wroclaw
University of Science and Technology, WybrzezeWyspianskiego 27 Street, 51-370 Wrocław, Poland
123Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:12363–12379
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-020-04832-8 (0123456789().,-volV) (0123456789(). ,- volV)