3.3 Differential evolution in real-life problems
The DE algorithm also found many real-world
applications.
In [95] (EF), Ramli et al. present an application of multi-
objective SaDE algorithm for optimal sizing of a photo-
voltaic (PV)/wind/diesel hybrid microgrid system (HMS)
with battery storage. The multi-objective optimization isused to analyze the loss of power supply probability, the
cost of electricity, and the renewable factor in relation to
HMS cost and reliability. The proposed approach is testedusing three case studies involving differing house numbers
for the city Yanbu, Saudi Arabia. The results obtained are
useful in investigating optimal scheduling of HMS com-ponents and can be used as a power reference for the
economic operation of PV and wind turbine generators.
Yao et al. [ 96] (EF) use a multi-objective DE algorithm
for optimizing a novel combined cooling, heating, and
power-based compressed air energy storage system. The
system combines a gas engine, ammonia–water absorptionrefrigeration system, and supplemental heat exchangers.
The proposed optimization technique is used to ﬁnd a
trade-off between the overall exergy efﬁciency and thetotal speciﬁc cost of ﬁnal product. The best trade-off
solution which was selected possesses a total product unit
cost of 20.54 cent/kWh and an overall exergy efﬁciency of53.04%.
In the paper [ 97] (ACS) by Wang et al., the DE algo-
rithm is applied for wind farm layout optimization with theaim of maximizing the power output. Due to a new
encoding mechanism in DE, the dimension of the search
space is reduced to two, and a crucial parameter (i.e., thepopulation size) is eliminated. In comparison with seven
other methods, the proposed approach is able to obtain the
best overall performance, in terms of the power output andexecution time.
The authors of [ 98] (EEE) investigate the problem of
linear dipole array synthesis. Dynamic DE algorithm isproposed for synthesizing shaped power pattern by using
element rotation and phase optimization for a linear dipole
array. Based on two experiments for synthesizing ﬂattopand cosecant squared pattern, the effectiveness and
advantages of the proposed approach were veriﬁed in
comparison with the phase-only optimization and the
amplitude-phase joint optimization.
Tian et al. [ 99] (EC) use a multi-objective hybrid
DE?PSO algorithm in order to create a set of Pareto
solutions for the problem of dual-objective scheduling of
rescue vehicles to distinguish forest ﬁres. The novel multi-objective scheduling model to handle forest ﬁres subject to
limited rescue vehicles constraints, in which a ﬁre spread
model is introduced into this problem to better describepractical forestry ﬁre is presented. Results show that the
proposed approach is able to quickly produce satisfactory
Pareto solutions in comparison with GA and PSO
algorithms.
3.4 Evolution strategies in real-life problems
Studying the literature, we can ﬁnd fewer papers with the
real-life applications of ESs than those with GAs. Below
we shortly present some of them.
The paper [ 100] (CBT) by Hasancebi presents ES inte-
grated parallel optimization algorithm to minimize the totalmember weight in each test steel frame. Steel frames with
various beam–column connection and bracing conﬁgura-
tion are considered for comparative cost analyzes. Threemulti-story buildings are chosen (10, 20, and 30-story
buildings) as examples for numerical veriﬁcation of pro-
posed method. The results collected are utilized to reachcertain recommendations regarding the selection of eco-
nomically feasible frames for the design of multi-story
steel buildings.
In [101] (EF), Fadda et al. consider the usage of electric
batteries in order to mitigate it. In energy distribution
systems, uncertainty is the single major cause of poweroutages; therefore, the authors propose intelligent battery
able to maximize its lifetime while guaranteeing to satisfy
all the electric demand peaks. The battery exploits a cus-tomized steady-state ES to dynamically adapt its recharge
strategy to changing environments. Experimental results on
both synthetic and real data demonstrate the efﬁcacy of theproposed approach.
In the paper [ 102] (EC) by Ogidan et al., the enhanced
non-dominated sorting ES algorithm that uses a specializedoperator to guide the algorithm toward known sanitary
sewer overﬂows (SSOs) locations is presented. The main
objectives of the proposed method are the maximization ofSSO reduction and minimization of rehabilitation cost. The
proposed method was tested in an existing network in the
eastern San Antonio Water System network. The presentedapproach improves the convergence rate by approximately
70% over the tested alternative algorithms.
The authors of [ 103] (EEE) investigate the problem of
wireless sensor fault diagnosis based on fusion data anal-
ysis. The fault diagnosis model is proposed based on the
hierarchical belief rule-based model, and the CMA-ESalgorithm is used to optimize the initial parameters of the
proposed model. In order to validation of presented
approach, a case study based on Intel laboratory dataset ofsensors is designed. The experiments prove the effective-
ness of the proposed method in comparison with back
propagation neural network model and the fuzzy expertsystem.Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:12363–12379 12373
123