selected areas. Finally, recent advances and the current
trends of the EAs are described.
2 Brief presentation of the EAs
2.1 Genetic algorithms
The genetic algorithm (GA) [ 1] is one of the oldest and
most known optimization techniques, which are based on
nature. In the GA, the search for solution space imitates the
natural process which takes place in the environment, andthe Darwinian theory of species evolution is taken into
consideration. In GAs, we have a population of individuals;
each, called a chromosome, represents a potential solutionto the problem. The problem being solved is deﬁned by the
objective function. Depending on how ‘‘good’’ the given
individual is ﬁtted to the objective function, the valuewhich represents its quality is attributed to it. This value is
referred to as the ﬁtness of the individual, and it is a main
evaluating factor. Highly valued individuals have a better
chance to be selected to the new generation of the popu-lation. In GAs, we have three operators: selection (a new
population of individuals is created based on the ﬁtness
values of individuals from the previous generation),crossover (typically parts of individuals are exchanged
between two individuals selected to the crossover), and
mutation (the values of particular genes are changed ran-
domly). Algorithm 1 presents the standard GA in the
pseudo-code form (for more details see [ 7]).
Many modiﬁcations of the standard GA have been
developed; some of them are listed in Table 1.
2.2 Genetic programming
Genetic programming (GP) [ 2] is relatively new; it is a spe-
cialized form of a GA which operates on very speciﬁc types of
solution, using modiﬁed genetic operators. The GP wasdeveloped by Koza [ 2] as an attempt to ﬁnd the way for the
automatic generation of the program codes when the evalua-
tion criteria for their proper operation is known. Because thesearched solution is a program, the evolved potential solutions
are coded in the form of trees instead of linear chromosomes
(of bits or numbers) widespread in GAs. As GP differs from
G At h eu s e dc o d i n gs c h e m a ,t h em a i nl o o po fG Pi st h es a m e
as in Algorithm 1. Of course, the genetic operators are spe-cialized for working on trees, e.g., crossover as exchanging the
subtrees, mutation as a change of node or leaf. Some modiﬁ-
cations of the GP are shown in Table 1.
2.3 Differential evolution algorithm
The differential evolution (DE) is a type of evolutionary
algorithm useful mainly for the function optimization in
continuous search space. Although a version of DE algo-rithm for combinatorial problems has also been discussed
[51], the principal version of the DE algorithm was
Fig. 1 Taxonomy of nature-inspired methods12364 Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:12363–12379
123