In [85] (EC) by Yan et al., a framework to determine the
investment plan to strengthen a railway system to earth-
quake hazard is proposed. This framework consists of four
parts. In the third part, an investment optimization model isformulated, and in part four, this model is solved using GA.
The proposed approach has been applied to the real Chi-
nese railway system. The obtained results show that thepresented framework is more responsive to the earthquake
impact on railway system compared to topology-based
methods.
In the paper [ 86] (EC) by Ascione et al., the multi-
objective optimization of operating cost for space condi-tioning and thermal comfort to achieve a high level of
building energy performance is presented. The main
objective of proposed GA is to optimize the hourly setpoint temperatures with a day-ahead horizon, based on a
forecast of weather conditions and occupancy proﬁle. In
comparison with the standard control strategy, the pre-sented approach generates a reduction of operating cost up
to 56%.
In [87] (EC) by Lin et al., a time-optimal train running
reference curve is designed with least time-consuming, but
highest energy consumption, and it is optimized by adding
multi-point coasting control to realize energy saving with arelative rise in time. Multi-population GA is adopted to
solve this multi-point combinatorial optimization problem.
Simulation results, based on real line condition and trainparameters of Shanghai line 7, demonstrate the advance-
ment of multi-point coasting control with the proposed
approach.
In [88] (EC), the application of GA to minimization of
average delay for an urban signalized intersection under the
oversaturated condition is presented. Relieving urbantrafﬁc congestion is an urgent call for trafﬁc engineering.
One of the key solutions to reduce congestion is the
effectiveness of trafﬁc signalization. The current trafﬁcsignal control system is not fully optimized for handling
the oversaturated condition. Simulation results show that
GA is able to control the trafﬁc signals for minimizing theaverage delay to 55 s/vehicle.
Zhang et al. [ 89] (EEE) use the ﬂexible GA for node
placement problems. Node placement problems areencountered in various engineering ﬁelds, e.g., the
deployment of radio-frequency identiﬁcation systems or
wireless sensor networks. The ﬂexible GA with variablelength encoding, subarea-swap crossover, and Gaussian
mutation is able to adjust the number of nodes and their
corresponding properties automatically. Experimentalresults show that the ﬂexible GA offers higher performance
than existing tools for solving node placement problems.
In the paper [ 90] (EF) by Reddy, the scheduling problem
considering the hybrid generation system is presented. The
new strategy based on GA for the optimal schedulingproblem taking into account the impact of uncertainties in
the wind, solar photovoltaic modules with batteries, and
load demand forecast is proposed. From simulation results
(for IEEE 30 and 300 bus test systems), it can be noticedthat with a marginal increase in the cost of day-ahead
generation schedule, a signiﬁcant reduction in real-time
mean adjustment cost is obtained.
3.2 Genetic programming in real-life problems
The GP possesses many practical applications.
In [91] (ACS) et al. the handwriting character recogni-
tion system for inertial-sensor-equipped pens is presented.
In this system, the characteristic function is calculated for
each character using a GP algorithm. The experimentalresults show that the performance of the proposed method
is superior to that one of the state-of-the-art works in the
area of recognizing Persian/Arabic handwriting characters.
Bagatur and Onen [ 92] (WR) propose novel models for
the prediction of ﬂood routing in natural channels using the
gene expression programming (GEP) algorithm, which isone of the extensions of GP algorithm. The GEP method
makes use of few hydrologic parameters such as inﬂow,
outﬂow, and time. The performance of the proposedmodels is evaluated by two goodness-of-ﬁt measures. The
proposed GEP models are tested for the three datasets
taken from the literature. It is proved that the GEP modelsshow superior performance to the other solution techniques
based on the Muskingum model.
In the paper [ 93] (EF) by Abkenar et al., an intelligent
fuel cell (FC) power management strategy is proposed. The
main objective of the proposed approach is to improve FC
performance at different operating points withoutemploying DC/DC interfacing converters. A hybrid all-
electric ships (AES) driveline model using GP is utilized to
formulate operating FC voltage based on the load current,FC air, and fuel ﬂow rates. The proposed approach main-
tains FC performance and reduces fuel consumption, and
therefore ensures the optimal power sharing between theFC and the lithium-ion battery in AES application.
The authors of [ 94] (EC) use GP algorithm to develop
models to predict the deterioration of pavement distress ofthe urban road network. Five models for the prediction of
pavement distress progression such as cracking, raveling,
pothole, rutting, and roughness are created. In order toobtain a training dataset, and validation dataset, the real
data from the roads of Patiala City, Punjab, India, have
been collected. It was shown that GP models predict withhigh accuracy for pavement distress and help the decision
makers for adequate and timely fund allocations for the
preservation of the urban road network.12372 Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:12363–12379
123