2.4.2 Evolution strategy ES( l+k)
This is an extension of the ES(1 ?1). The ES( lþk) has a
self-adaptive mutation range, which replaces the 1/5 suc-
cess rule implemented in ES(1 ?1). In the ES( lþk),
each individual in the population contains additional
chromosome r, consisting of values of standard deviation
for each gene. These values are used during mutationprocedure. The crossover operator operates before the
mutation. Both chromosomes (consisting of the value of
variables, and of the value of rparameters) undergo
mutation and crossover processes [ 7]. Algorithm 3 presents
the pseudo-code of the ES( lþk).
2.4.3 ES( l,k) evolution strategy
This type of the ES is used more often than ES( lþk). The
operation of both algorithms is almost identical. The only
one difference is that in the ES( l;k), the new population
P(t) is created using only the best individuals from the
‘‘children’’ population M(t). In this case, lhas to be greater
thank. Such selection gives the advantage of ES( l;k) over
the ES( lþk); in the latter, the population can be domi-
nated by one individual which is much better than others
and the values of standard deviations rare not well tuned.
The ES( l;k) does not have this disadvantage because the
individuals from the parental population Pðt/C01Þare not
copied to the new generation P(t)[7].
The pseudo-code of the ES( l;k) is almost the same as
Algorithm 3. The only one difference is line 10; here, it is:
‘‘10: select lthe best individuals to population P(t) from
the population M(t).’’
Today, the covariance matrix adaptation evolution
strategy (CMA-ES) is perceived as a state-of-the-art ES
[54,55]. Several variants of CMA-ES were developed [ 55]
to enhance the efﬁciency or robustness of the method bydifferent techniques. In the CMA-ES algorithm, the adap-
tation of the population size or other parameters was pre-
sented in papers [ 56]. The CMA-ES algorithm employs
global weighted recombination for both, strategy andobject variables, adapts the full covariance matrix for
mutation and, in general, is based on the scheme of the
ES(l;
k). The CMA-ES algorithm can handle poorly scaled
functions, and its performance remains invariant under
rotation of the search space [ 54]. Some modiﬁcations of
ESs are mentioned in Table 2.
2.5 Evolutionary programming
Evolutionary programming (EP) was developed as a tool
for discovering the grammar of the unknown language.However, EP became more popular when it was proposed
as the numerical optimization technique. The EP is similar
to the ES( lþk), but with one essential difference [ 7]. In
EP, the new population of individuals is created by
mutating every individual from the parental population,
while in the ES( lþk), every individual has the same
probability to be selected to the temporary population on
which the genetic operations are performed. In the EP, the
mutation is based on the random perturbation of the valuesof the particular genes of the mutated individual. The
newly created and the parental populations are the same
sizes ( l¼k). Finally, the new generation of the population
is created using the ranking selection of the individuals
from both, the parental and the mutated populations. The
pseudo-code of the standard EP method is presented inAlgorithm 4. EP, like other evolutionary methods, has
many modiﬁcations. Some of them are listed in Table 2.
2.6 Evolutionary algorithms: problems
and challenges
EAs are a very interesting research area. There are many
open research problems such as: control of the balance
between the exploration and exploitation properties; theNeural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:12363–12379 12367
123