of which 38% are positive reviews; 29% negative reviews; and 33% neutral reviews, as shown in Table 3. It can be obviously seen
from these statistics that there is a class balance in our corpus. Researchers have made efforts to develop corpora for carrying out
experimentsbutunfortunately,mostofthecurrentlytaggedcorporaarenotbigenoughandcoversthecontentfromjustafewgenres
ratherthanvariousgenressuchastheUCLRomanUrdudataset.2TheUCLdatasetisvastenoughtocarryoutsentimentanalysistask
but the sentences in this dataset are not categorized into different genres as our corpus which comprises data belonging to fivedifferent genres. Most of the corpora are restricted to a small number of domains and concentrated on just two classes, positive and
negative.
4. Dataandmethods
Inthissection,weaddressedtheexperimentaldetailsofourDeeplearningmodel,Rule-basedandN-gram-basedmethods.These
modelshavebeenimplementedonoursuggestedRUSA-19Corpusandforcomparison,werunsameexperimentsontheUCLRoman
Urdu dataset. In addition, we performed two types of experiments for the evaluation, namely: binary classification and tertiary
classification.
4.1. Experimental datasets
TheRUSA-19Corpuscomprises10,021RomanUrdusentenceswhichbelongtofivegenres:(i)drama,movies,andtalkshows;(ii)
food and recipes; (iii) politics; (iv) software, blogs, forums, and gadgets; and (v) sport collected from various social media websites.
Eachsentenceinourcorpusfallsintooneofthreeclasses:positive(denotedby1);negative(denotedby2);andneutral(denotedby
0). We have conducted two experiments: binary classification and tertiary classification. To carry out the binary classification ex-
periment,atfirstpositiveandnegativesentencesareextractedfromthewholecorpusandthenthesentencesaresegmented.Forthe
tertiary classification experiment, all the sentences belonging to positive, negative and neutral classes are used. For the comparison
purpose, we have used the UCL Roman Urdu dataset which comprises 20,228 Roman Urdu sentences belonging to three classes:
positive; negative; and neutral. The entire dataset consists of 6013 positive reviews; 5286 negative reviews; and 8929 neutral re-
views.Table 4provides the details of the datasets used in both experiments.
4.2. Classification approaches
Thissectionpresentsthedetailsofourdesignedbaselineanddeeplearningmethod.ThebaselinemethodcomprisesaRule-based
and an N-gram technique. Furthermore, we constructed a deep learning RCNN network to build a customized framework for the
Roman Urdu sentiment analysis. Fig. 1shows high-level architecture from data inputs to classification outputs.
4.2.1. Rule-based approach
Lexiconcomprising500positivewordsand500negativewords.Thelexiconsweregeneratedbyselecting300randomsentences
fromtheRUSA-19CorpusandtheRomanUrduUCLdataset. Fig.2illustratesthepseudo-codeofthistechniqueindetail.Atfirst,we
tokenized a sentence and classified each token as positive, negative or neutral by matching it to the polarity in the lexicon. The
sentiment of the sentence is determined by the tokens and the lexicons.
The polarity of a sentence is determinedby weighing the polarity of each individual tokenin a sentence.The following rules are
considered to classify the sentence into one of three classes: positive, negative or neutral.
i A sentence is considered as positive with polarity score 1 if it has more positive words.
ii A sentence is considered as negative with a polarity score of 2 if it has more negative words.
iii A sentence is considered as neutral with a polarity score of 0 if it has equal positive and negative words.
4.2.2. N-gram model
N-grams were first mentioned by Shannon in 1948 subjected to the theory of communication (Šilić, Chauchat, Bašić & Morin,
2007). N-grams are the sequence of words in a text with a fixed window size N which is used to find useful information in a corpus
(Liu, 2007). In research, a word-based N-grams was used on a 37 million word corpus belonging to poetry and prose domain
Adeeba,Akram,KhalidandHussain,(2014).Inthispaper,wehaveimplementedthecharacter-basedN-grammodelwherethelength
of N varies from 2 to 10.
4.2.3. Recurrent Convolutional Neural Network
The Recurrent Convolutional Neural Network model (Lai, Xu, Liu & Zhao, 2015; Safder, Hassan & Aljohani, 2018) was basically
introducedtoovercomesomeofthelimitationsofoldertraditionalneuralnetworkmodelssuchasRecurrentNeuralNetwork(RNN)
(Safder&Hassan2018)andConvolutionalNeuralNetwork(CNN)model.TheRNNmodelanalysesthetextwordbywordandstores
the contextual information of a sentence in a hidden layer. However, its disadvantage is that it only favors the recent words of a
sentencewhichcanaffecttheoverallsemanticsofthetext.Toovercomethisdisadvantage,CNNwasintroducedwithamax-pooling
2http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Roman+Urdu+Data+Set