Notethat
RomanUrduisanunder-resourcedlanguage,technicallyandlinguistically.Accordingtotheliteraturereview,manyof
the techniques relevant to sentiment analysis of other languages are inapplicable to the Roman Urdu language due to the spelling
variations of this language. The same word of Roman Urdu can be written with different spellings even by the same person
(Masroor, Saeed, Feroz, Ahsan & Islam, 2019; Rafae et al., 2015). Moreover, the lack of language and linguistic resources such as
datasets and lexicons and one to one mapping between Urdu letters and its corresponding Roman letter also makes it harder toimplement the existing sentiment analysis techniques as mentioned in the literature review, such as the accessibility of corpora and
lexicons.
In addition, available annotated corpora are not big enough to carry out efficient sentiment analysis. Moreover, most of the
corpora and sentences of limited genres belonging to positive and negative classes only. To overcome this limitation, this paper
focusesonconstructingaRomanUrducorpuscomprisingsentencesbelongingtofivedifferentgenres.Wefocusontheclassification
ofsentencesinto positive,negative andneutralclasses.Toperformsentimentanalysis,wehaveimplemented adeep learningmodel
RCNN on our constructed corpus RUSA-19 which has not yet explored fully for the sentiment analysis of Roman Urdu data.
3. Corpusgeneration
ThissectionintroducesthemeasuresadoptedtobuildanannotatedRomanUrducorpustoperformsentimentanalysis.Thesteps
taken in the construction of our RUSA-19 Corpus include the collection of raw data from different websites, the preparation of
annotationguidelines,theexecutionofmanualannotation,thestorageofcorpus,standardizationandfinally,thepresentationofthe
characteristics of the corpus.
3.1. Data collection from online resources
To construct a benchmark corpus for the evaluation of the Roman Urdu sentiment, we accumulate data from the websites that
provideunlimitedaccessandenableconsumerstopostinRomanUrdu. Table1highlightsallthewebsitesthatwehavesearchedfor
the data collection. Roman Urdu is an under-resourced language; therefore, internet repositories render information relating to
different genres available and easily accessible to the generation of a challenging benchmark for the Roman Urdu corpus. We
gathered information from five different genres, including drama, movies and, talk shows; food and recipes; politics; sport; and
software, blogs, forums and, gadgets. The data was collected manually by two individuals who were well aware of the objective
withinthe8to9months’timeframe.Initially,eachreviewwasstoredinanexcelspreadsheetalongwiththefollowinginformation:
(i) review ID; (ii) topic to which the review belongs; (iii) URL from where the review was collected; (iv) date of collection; and (v)
annotationtag.ThecorpuswasfinallystandardizedinXMLformataftersomedatacleaningsuchasremovalofillegalcharactersand
URLs from the comments.
3.2. Annotation process and guidelines
This section defines the full annotation method that we attended to manually annotate the full corpus. This stage involves the
preparingofrulesforannotation,themanualannotationoftheentirecorpusbyhumanannotators,andthecomputationofaninter-
annotator agreement. In order to evaluate the performance of our corpus and add value to our corpus, three annotators which were
native speakers of Urdu language and well familiar with the Roman Urdu script and the purpose annotated the entire corpus. We
prepared guidelines for sentiment analysis from distinct existing corpora prior to corpus annotation. Table 2demonstrates some of
the examples of reviews belonging to the positive, negative, and neutral class.
3.2.1. Positive class guidelines
i Asentenceismarkedaspositiveifthegivensentenceexpressesapositivesentimentforalltheaspectterm(Pontikietal.,2016).
ii In the case of a sentence expressing both positive and neutral sentiment, the positive sentiment dominates and the sentence is
Table.1
Roman Urdu data collection sources.
Genre Sources No of reviews
Food and recipes www.kfoods.com, www.urduweb.org, www.facebook.com, www.friendskorner.com, www.paksitan.web.
pk,1504 reviews
Sports www.urduweb.org, www.tafrehmella.com 2001 reviews
Politics www.siasat.pk, www.twitter.com 2014 reviews
Dramas, movies and talk shows www.hamariweb.com, www.zemtv.com, www.urduweb.org, www.dailydose.pk,www.siasat.pk, www.
reviewit.pk, www.tweettunnel.com, www.dramasonline.com, www.fashionuniverse.net2001 reviews
Software, blogs, fora, and
gadgetswww.mobilesmspk.net, www.itforumpk.com,www.baazauq.blogspot.com, www.dufferistan.com, www.
mbilalm.com, www.urduweb.org, www.urdudaan.blogspot.com, www.itdunya.com, www.achidosti.com,
www.itdarasgah.com, www.tafrehmella.com, www.sachiidosti.com, www.urdupoint.com2501 reviews((Durrani, Sajjad,  Fraser & Schmid,  2010; Naseem & Hussain,  2007), etc.