Deep sentiments in Roman Urdu text using Recurrent
Convolutional Neural Network model
Zainab Mahmood (Data Curation)a, Iqra Safdera, Rao Muhammad Adeel Nawabb,
Faisal Bukharic, Raheel Nawazd, Ahmed S. Alfakeeha, Naif Radi Aljohanie,
Saeed-Ul Hassana,⁎
aInformation Technology University, 346-B, Ferozepur Road, Lahore, Pakistan
bDepartment of Computer Science, COMSATS University Islamabad, Lahore Campus, Pakistan
cPunjab University College of Information Technology (PUCIT), University of the Punjab (PU), Lahore, Pakistan
dDepartment of Operations, Technology, Events and Hospitality Management, Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester, United Kingdom
eFaculty of Computing and Information Technology, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Roman Urdu corpusUrdu sentiment analysisUnder resource languageDeep learningText Classification
Recurrent Convolutional Neural Networks
(RCNN)ABSTRACT
Although over 64 million people worldwide speak Urdu language and are well aware of its
Roman script, limited research and efforts have been made to carry out sentiment analysis and
build language resources for the Roman Urdu language. This article proposes a deep learningmodel to mine the emotions and attitudes of people expressed in Roman Urdu - consisting of
10,021 sentences from 566 online threads belonging to the following genres: Sports; Software;
Food&Recipes;Drama;andPolitics.Theobjectivesofthisresearcharetwofold:(1)todevelopahuman-annotated benchmark corpus for the under-resourced Roman Urdu language for the
sentiment analysis; and (2) to evaluate sentiment analysis techniques using the Rule-based, N-
gram,andRecurrentConvolutionalNeuralNetwork(RCNN)models.UsingCorpus,annotatedbythree experts to be positive, negative, and neutral with 0.557 Cohen's Kappa score, we run twosetsoftests,i.e.,binaryclassification(positiveandnegative)andtertiaryclassification(positive,
negativeand neutral). Finally, the resultsof the RCNN model are analyzedby comparing it with
the outcome of the Rule-based and N-gram models. We show that the RCNN model outperformsbaseline models in terms of accuracy of 0.652 for binary classification and 0.572 for tertiary
classification.
1. Introduction
In recent years, the internet has become the most important platform for social interactions between different people
(Hassan,Akram&Haddawy,2017a; Liuetal.,2019; Lytos,Lagkas,Sarigiannidis&Bontcheva,2019).Astechnologyexpandsrapidly,
moreindividualsusetheInternetforonlineshopping,distancelearning,telemedicine,andcorrespondenceonvariousaspectsoflife
(Vuong, Saastamoinen, Jacucci & Ruotsalo, 2019). The growing use of social networking sites such as Blogs, Forums, Twitter, or
Facebook involves people to express their opinions and engage in discussion groups (Al-Smadi, Al-Ayyoub, Jararweh & Qawasmeh,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2020.102233
Received 10 August 2019; Received in revised form 20 February 2020; Accepted 27 February 2020⁎Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: mscs1605@itu.edu.pk (Z. Mahmood), iqra.safder@itu.edu.pk (I. Safder), adeelnawab@ciitlahore.edu.pk (R.M.A. Nawab),
faisal.bukhari@pucit.edu.pk (F. Bukhari), r.nawaz@mmu.ac.uk (R. Nawaz), asalfakeeh@kau.edu.sa (A.S. Alfakeeh),
nraljohani@kau.edu.sa (N.R. Aljohani), saeed-ul-hassan@itu.edu.pk (S.-U. Hassan).
0306-4573/ © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
T