2019;Fatima,Hasan,Anwar&Nawab,2017; Thompsonetal.,2013).Theanonymityofthewebhasallowedanindividualtoengage
in hostile social media speech content that has made text discourse (Hassan et al., 2017b; Hassan, Safder, Akram & Kamiran, 2018)
or,morespecifically,sentimentanalysisanimportanttaskofunderstandingthebehaviorofindividuals(Batista-Navarroetal.,2013;
Nawaz,Thompson&Ananiadou,2013, 2010;Shardlowetal.,2018; Thompson,Nawaz,McNaught&Ananiadou,2017; Hassanetal.,
2017).
The great significance of sentiment analysis can be seen from our need to understand both the attitude of others towards the
problemandwhattheythink(Sailunaz&Alhajj2019).Companiesandorganizationsareseekingsomeusefuldatafromtheseviews,such as the sentiments behind customer opinions (Ananiadou, Thompson & Nawaz, 2013; Anwaar, Iltaf, Afzal & Nawaz, 2018;
Imranetal.,2018; Nawaz,Thompson & Ananiadou,2012; Qadir,Khalid,Khan, Khan & Nawaz,2018).Sentimentanalysis relatesto
the analysis of emotions behind user-written texts using natural language processing, text analytics, computational linguistics, and
machinelearningtechniques (Ayyazetal.,2018; Xing,Pallucchini &Cambria,2019; Zhang etal.,2019).Dueto growing interestin
sentiment analysis, companies are interested to run campaigns, winning marketing strategies, have more customers, overcomeweaknesses and lead scoring. Companies are keen to understand what individuals tell about their products or services and their
emotionsbehindtheirwords(Luo,Huang&Zhu,2019).Inaddition,politiciansareinterestedinknowingtheirreputationsandwhat
media sources say about them. In recent years, the focus of sentiment analysis has shifted to the analysis of the emotions of social
media texts. Many topics, such as politics, sports, medicine, disasters, and harassment, have increased the use of sentiment analysis
(Araque, Zhu & Iglesias, 2019). Sentiment analysis includes advanced methods for natural language processing, data mining for
predictive analysis and contextual understanding of documents become an exciting area of research (Jahangir, Afzal, Ahmed,
Khurshid & Nawaz, 2017; Safder & Hassan 2019; Wang et al., 2011; Zhang, Wang & Liu, 2018).
EnglishandotherEuropeanlanguagesareregardedasaffluentlanguageswhenitcomestotheaccessibilityofthetoolsneededto
carryoutsentimentanalysis,buttherearemanyotherlanguagesthataredeemedresource-poor(Al-Ayyoub,Khamaiseh,Jararweh&
Al-Kabi,2019),andRomanUrduisoneofthem.Unfortunately,RomanUrdurequires standardcorporatoperformnaturallanguage
processingtasks.UrduisPakistan'snationallanguagespokeninfiveotherareasofSouthAsia.Duetoitsmorphologicaldifficulty,the
Urdu script is not very prevalent. Roman Urdu is a term used for the Urdu language written in Roman script i.e., with English
alphabets. In Pakistan, India and other South Asian nations, users mostly interact on social media platforms using the Roman Urdu
scriptor “Romanagari” whichisatermusedforHindilanguagewritteninRomanscript.UrduandHindiarethesamelanguageswith
a distinction in their writing script. However, both languages are very comparable and can be interpreted by individuals from bothnationsiftheyarepresentedintheRomanUrduscript.Forinstance,theRomanUrduscriptfor“Yourworkisawesome”goesas“apka
kaam lajawab hey”.
Sentiment analysis for the Roman Urdulanguage is equally important as forother languagesas it helps non-Urduspeaking users
tounderstandtheopinionofothersandtheemotionbehindatext.UrduisthenationallanguageofPakistanandiswidelyusedacross
Asia. When it comes to social media, People of Urdu as native language mostly use its Roman script to express their opinions and
thoughts. Its use can be seen on Twitter, Facebook and other websites nowadays. So sentiment analysis has become important even
for the Roman Urdu language so that people can understand the opinions of people expressed in this language. The challenge ofsentiment analysis for Roman Urdu has not yet been explored fully even after its immense use, therefore, in this paper, the primary
focus is Roman Urdu.
In this research,we aim to contribute a significantbenchmark manually annotatedRoman Urdu corpus for the task of sentiment
analysis, hereafter referred to as the RUSA-19 Corpus. To build the suggested Corpus, we gathered 10,021 sentences from five
differentgenres:sport,foodandrecipes,politics,software,anddrama.First,humanannotatorsmanuallyannotatedeachevaluation
and fell into one of three classifications: (1)positive;(2)negative; and (3)neutral. Second, we constructed a state-of-the-art model
thatdrawsontheadvancementsofdeeplearningtoshowtheefficiencyofourRUSACorpusinsentimentanalysistasks.
1Finally,we
provide a Python code for our Roman Urdu sentiment analysis framework. We believe that the RUSA-19 Corpus and model library
willbeusefulin 1fosteringresearchinRomanUrdu,anunder-resourcedlanguage; (2)allowinganimmediatecomparisonofcurrent
state-of-the-artsentimentanalysistechniquesinRomanUrdulanguage;and (3)developingandevaluatingnewtechniquesinRoman
Urdu sentiment analysis.
Therestofthe paperisorganizedinto sixsections.Inthesecondsection, wefocusonthepreviousrelatedresearchonsentiment
analysis.Section 3 discusses the entire corpus generation process, including the steps involved, annotation process, and corpus
characteristics. Section 4 focuses on the methodology. Section 5 discusses the experimental results obtained from our sentiment
analysis of Roman Urdu text classification models. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.
2. Literaturereview
In this section, we first discuss a brief overview of SemEval corpora and notable methods for sentiment analysis. We will then
introduce a survey of the Roman Urdu corpora and related methods of sentiment analysis.
2.1. Brief review on SemEval corpora and sentiment analysis
The most prominent attempts taken in the literature to develop benchmark corpora for sentiment analysis are the series of
1The data and code used in this paper can be accessed from the following URL to reproduce the results: https://github.com/slab-itu/rusa_19