Accuracy
is defined as the ratio of correctly classified subjects to the total number of subjects as shown in Equation 8.
=+
+ + +AccuracyTP TN
TP TN FP FN
(8)
where TP is the number of true positives TN is the number of true negatives, the correctly classified negative instances; FP is the
numberof falsepositivesandFNis thenumberoffalsenegatives.Precisionisthe ratioofcorrectlyclassifiedpositivesubjectstothe
totalnumberofpredictedpositivesubjects.Recallistheratioofpositivesubjectsthatarecorrectlyclassifiedasshownin Eq.(9)and
10.
=+PrecisionTP
TP FP
(9)
=+RecallTP
TP FN
(10)
F-Measure is defined as the harmonic mean of precision and recall. (see Eq. (11)).
= ××
+F1 score 2Precision recall
Precision recall
(11)
5. Resultsandanalysis
This section describes the results of experiments carried out in this research along with the demonstration of the effectiveness of
ourproposedmodelandthediscussionsoftheseoutcomesinlightoftheaimofthisresearch.Inthecomparisonofthethreemodels
which we have implemented, it is observed that the RCNN model outperforms the Rule-based model and N-gram model.
5.1. Binary and tertiary classification by RCNN model
Inthissection,wehavedescribedtheresultsobtainedfrombinaryandtertiaryclassificationexperimentsusingtheRCNNmodel
compared with the baseline models. Table 5shows the experimental results obtained for binary classification and tertiary classifi-
cationusingtheRCNNmodelonourRUSA-19CorpusandRomanUrduUCLdataset.ItisobservedthatRCNNperformanceisbetter
on RUSA-19 Corpus as compared to the UCL dataset on both experiments with an accuracy of 0.751 using binary classification and
0.713usingtertiaryclassification.TheobtainedresultclearlyindicatedthatbinaryclassificationoutperformedTertiaryclassification
task with 0.652 accuracy, 0.653 precision, 0.503 recall, and 0.568 F1-score on our corpus. The UCL Roman Urdu dataset performs
betterintertiaryclassificationintermsofPrecision,RecallandF-measure.ItisobservedthatRCNNcanperformbetterevenforthis
dataset along with our corpus. We realized that the poor performance of Tertiary classification is due to multiple reasons, such as
morenumberofclassesinthedeployeddatasetandalargernumberofreviewswithlongerlengthsofsentences.Additionally,wecan
conclude that the number of classes affects the performance of the RCNN model. Furthermore, we have compared our best results
obtainedfromtheRCNNmodelforbinaryclassificationofbothdatasetswithtwobaselinemodels:rule-based,andcharactern-grams
model.
Table.5
RCNN evaluation results.
Dataset Model Accuracy Precision Recall F1 Score
RUSA-19 Corpus Binary classification 0.751 0.738 0.744 0.741
Tertiary classification 0.713 0.710 0.683 0.696
Roman Urdu UCL dataset Binary classification 0.738 0.721 0.725 0.723
Tertiary classification 0.693 0.732 0.699 0.715Fig. 3 shows  the training accuracy  curve of 100 epochs  for binary and tertiary classification  experiments to analyze  the learning of 
the RCNN model. The epochs  are represented  on the x-axis  and training accuracy  is represented  on the y-axis.  It is observed from the 
training curves that at first the  model training gradually  increases and then  becomes stable after some epochs.  The RCNN model is 
considered to be an efficient model for low-resource languages such  as Roman Urdu due to  the fact that it  can preserve  longer 
contextual  information and introduce less noise.
4.3. Evaluation measures
We performed  two sets of experiments  (binary classification  & tertiary classification)  to evaluate  the suggested RCNN model. As  a 
baseline model for comparison and better insights,  we implemented  a Rule-based approach  with 6719 sentences for the binary 
classification  and 10,021 sentences for the  tertiary classification  from our corpus. For the evaluation  using a Rule-based approach,  the 
sentences are tokenized and each token is then equated with the lexicon entry for polarity detection. We have also applied a character 
N-gram model which  is evaluated  using the Naive Bayes algorithm.  Further,  we depict four performance metrics that we have used 
for evaluation  of our models namely:  accuracy,  precision, recall,  and F-measure.