classified as positive.
iii The presence of an agreement of approval makes the sentence positive. (Abdul-Mageed & Diab 2012).
iv Sentences with illocutionary speech act like praise, congratulations are classified as positive (Abdul-Mageed & Diab 2012).
3.2.2. Negative class guidelines
i If the aspect term in a sentence expresses a negative sentiment then the sentence is classified as negative (Maynard &
Bontcheva 2016).
ii A sentence is classified as negative if it has more negative terms then other sentiments.
iii Direct un-softened disagreements in a sentence make it a negative sentence (Abdul-Mageed & Diab 2012).
iv Banning, bidding, penalizing, and assessing terms in a sentence makes sentences negative (Abdul-Mageed & Diab 2012).
v If a sentence has a negative word with a positive adjective then it is considered as a negative sentence as it negates the positive
adjective in the sentence. (Ganapathibhotla & Liu 2008).
vi If negation is present in a sentence then it is considered as a negative sentence.
3.2.3. Neutral class guidelines
i Factual information in a sentence makes it a neutral sentence (Boland et al., 2013).
ii If thought is shared in a sentence then it is classified as neutral (Sorgente et al., 2014).
iii Sentences with a reduced degree of surety and liability such as words like “maybe (shayad)” are considered neutral sentences
(Abdul-Mageed & Diab 2012).
iv A sentence with both positive and negative sentiment in terms of the aspects and entities are classified as a neutral sentence
(Pontiki et al., 2016).
3.3. Corpus characteristics
ThefullRUSA-19Corpuswasmanuallyannotatedbythreeannotators(A,B,andC)inordertopreparethebenchmarkcorpora.All
thesentenceswere annotatedby graduatesandnativespeakers ofUrdualsofamiliar withthe RomanUrdu languageandthe taskof
sentiment analysis. In order to test the accuracy of our annotation guidelines, we sampled 100 reviews from all domains and sent
themtotwoannotators(AandB)toprovideamanuallabelforthereviews.Foreachevaluation,theyintroducedoneofthefollowing
three categories: neutral, positive, and negative. The conflicting pairs between the two annotators have been discussed and the
AnnotationGuidelineshavebeenupdatedasoutlinedabove.Theupdatedguidelineswereusedbytwoannotatorstolabelthecorpus
as a whole and, in the event of a disagreement, the third annotator gave the label to the review. We have accomplished an Inter-
Annotator Agreement (IAA) of 70.72% and a Cohens Kappa score of 0.557 (Moderate) for the full corpus. Moderate and acceptable
scores show the reality that the Annotation Guidelines have been well prepared, well understood, and followed by annotators
throughouttheannotationphase.Ourconflictanalysisrevealsthatthebulkofdisputeshappenedwhenthecoursesdifferedbetween
positive and neutral (12.07%) and negative and neutral (11.57%) classes. RUSA-19 Corpus consists of 10,021 Roman Urdu reviews,Positive review examples (with English translation) Negative review examples (with English
translation)Neutral review examples (with English translation)
Ap ka kaam lajawab.(Your work is awesome) Mujhe software pasand nai aya.(I don't
like the software)Beshak.(Indeed)
Us ka camera ki resolution aala ha.(His-camera
resolution is awesome)Bohat bura kaam hai apka (Your work is
very bad)Software acha ha per mujhe samaj nai araha.(The software is
good, but I can't comprehend it.)
Bohat achi recipe ha.(It is a very good recipe) Fazool.(Bad) Har jeet to khel ka hisa hoti hai.(Winning and losing is part of
the game.)
Table.3
Statistics of the Corpus.
Positive reviews 3778
Negative reviews 2941
Neutral reviews 3302
Num. of tokens 146,558
Num. of types 21,750
Review min. length 1 word
Review maximum length 154 words
reviews avg. length 15 words
Num. of reviews 10,021Table. 2
Examples of reviews  belonging to positive, negative and neutral class.