arXiv:2107.08119v2  [physics.comp-ph]  24 Jan 2022Neuroevolution machine learning potentials: Combining hi gh accuracy and low cost in
atomistic simulations and application to heat transport
Zheyong Fan,1,2,∗Zezhu Zeng,3Cunzhi Zhang,4Yanzhou Wang,5,2
Keke Song,5Haikuan Dong,1,2,6Yue Chen,3and Tapio Ala-Nissila2,7
1College of Physical Science and Technology, Bohai Universi ty, Jinzhou, P. R. China
2MSP group, QTF Centre of Excellence, Department of Applied P hysics,
Aalto University, FI-00076 Aalto, Espoo, Finland
3Department of Mechanical Engineering, The University of Ho ng Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong SAR, China
4Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering, The University o f Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, United States
5Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Materials Genome En gineering,
Department of Physics, University of Science and Technolog y Beijing, Beijing 100083, China
6Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Materials Genome En gineering,
Corrosion and Protection Center, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China
7Interdisciplinary Centre for Mathematical Modelling, Dep artment of Mathematical Sciences,
Loughborough University, Loughborough, Leicestershire L E11 3TU, UK
(Dated: January 25, 2022)
We develop a neuroevolution-potential (NEP) framework for generating neural network based
machine-learning potentials. They are trained using an evo lutionary strategy for performing large-
scale molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. A descriptor of the atomic environment is constructed
based on Chebyshev and Legendre polynomials. The method is i mplemented in graphic processing
units within the open-source gpumdpackage, which can attain a computational speed over 107
atom-step per second using one Nvidia Tesla V100. Furthermo re, per-atom heat current is available
in NEP, which paves the way for eﬃcient and accurate MD simula tions of heat transport in materials
with strong phonon anharmonicity or spatial disorder, whic h usually cannot be accurately treated
either with traditional empirical potentials or with pertu rbative methods.
I. INTRODUCTION
Classical interatomic potentials play a crucial role in
atomistic simulations, in particular in molecular dynam-
ics (MD) simulations, where various static and dynam-
ical materials properties can be eﬃciently computed.
Machine-learning (ML) potentials (or force ﬁelds) [ 1–5],
i.e., interatomic potentials constructed based on a ML
model, have been demonstrated to be able to achieve an
accuracy comparable to their quantum-mechanical train-
ing data while reducing the computation time to a small
fraction of the corresponding quantum-mechanical calcu-
lations.
Various ML models have been used to construct ML
potentials, including e.g., artiﬁcial neural networks [ 6],
Gaussian regression[ 7], and linear regression[ 8]. For any
ML model, there are many ﬁtting parameters that need
tobedeterminedbytrainingthemodelagainstquantum-
mechanical data. The large number of ﬁtting parameters
is the very foundation for the superior interpolation ca-
pability of ML potentials as compared to conventional
empirical potentials that only have a few to a few tens of
ﬁtting parameters. However, ﬁnding an optimized set of
parameters is a nontrivial task. The conventional train-
ing method in neural network potentials is based on gra-
dient descent, which could be trapped into a local min-
imum of the loss function of a ML model, leading to a
sub-optimal solution.
∗brucenju@gmail.comAn alternativetrainingmethod forMLmodelsis based
on evolutionary algorithms, such as genetic algorithms,
genetic programming, evolutionary programming, and
evolutionary strategy. This global-searching approach
combined with neural networks is known as neuroevo-
lution, and it has long been applied to evolve neural net-
works [9]. It has been greatly improved by state-of-the-
art evolutionaryalgorithms such as the natural evolution
strategies [ 10]. A variant called separable natural evolu-
tion strategies[ 11] has acomputational complexitylinear
in the number of ﬁtting parameters and is well suited to
evolve large-scale neural networks.
In this work, we develop a framework called neuroevo-
lution potentials (NEPs) for generating neural network
based ML potentials trained using the separable natu-
ral evolution strategy [ 11]. Although evolutionary algo-
rithms areless likely to be trapped into a local minimum,
these population based methods require evaluating the
loss function multiple times within one step (also called
one generation) and are usually more computationally
demanding than gradient-descent-based algorithms. To
speed up the calculations, we realize an eﬃcient graph-
ics processing units (GPU) implementation of the calcu-
lations within the open-source gpumdpackage [ 12–14].
The GPU implementation both speeds up the training
process and makes MD simulations signiﬁcantly faster
than the current implementations of ML potentials. We
demonstrate the eﬃciency and accuracy of NEP by com-
paringgpumdwithsomepopularimplementationsofML
potentials, including the quippackage [ 15] that imple-
ments the Gaussian approximation potential (GAP) [ 7],