6
The valuesofthe weightparametersinEq. ( 29) clearly
depend on the units of the relevant quantities. When
using eV/atom for energy and virial and eV/ ˚A for force,
we ﬁnd that λe=λf=λv= 1 is a very good choice.
The weight parameters for the regularization terms, λ1
andλ2, need to be tuned to keep a good balance between
encouraging over-ﬁtting (if λ1andλ2are too small) and
under-ﬁtting (if λ1andλ2are too large).
2. Separable natural evolution strategy as the training
algorithm
While the gradient descent based back-propagation
method is the standard one for training the neural net-
work parameters, here we use the separable natural evo-
lution strategyalgorithm[ 11] to train our neural network
parameters. This is a principled approach to real-valued
evolutionary optimization by following the natural gra-
dient of the loss function to update a search distribution
for a population of solutions. It can be considered as a
derivative-free blackbox optimizer, which is very suitable
to minimize the complex loss function in Eq. ( 29).
The workﬂow of our training algorithm is as follows:
1.Initialization. Create an initial search distribution
in the solution space (of dimension Npar) with the
mean vector mand standard deviation vector s.
The components of mcan be random numbers
evenly chosen between −1/2 to 1/2, and the com-
ponents of scan be chosen as constants such as
0.1.
2.Loop over Ngengenerations:
(a)Create a population of solutions zk(1≤k≤
Npop) based on the current mands(⊙de-
notes elementwise multiplication),
zk←m+s⊙rk, (35)
whereNpopis the population size and rkis a
set of Gaussian-distributed random numbers
with mean 0 and variance 1. Note that the
randomnumbervectors rkarediﬀerentfordif-
ferent individual solutions in the population.
(b)Evaluate the loss functions L(zk) for all the
individual solutions zkin the population, and
sortthem accordingtothelossfunctions, from
small to large.
(c)Update the natural gradients:
∇mJ←Npop/summationdisplay
k=1ukrk; (36)
∇sJ←Npop/summationdisplay
k=1uk(rk⊙rk−1), (37)whereukis a set of rank-based utility values
used to evolve the population towards the di-
rection of better individual solutions. For ex-
plicit values of uk, see Ref. 44.
(d)Update the mean and standard deviation of
the search distribution (the exponential func-
tion below is applied to its argument in an
elementwise way):
m←m+ηm(s⊙∇mJ) (38)
s←s⊙exp/parenleftBigηs
2∇sJ/parenrightBig
, (39)
whereηmandηscan be understood as the
learning rates for mands, respectively. We
use the suggested values [ 11] ofηm= 1 and
ηs= (3+log Npar)/5/radicalbig
Npar.
F. Computer implementation
We have implemented all the relevant calculations
(except for the generation of the training data) into
the open-source gpumdpackage [ 12–14] using compute
uniﬁed device architecture (CUDA). After compiling
gpumd, one can obtain three executables, including nep,
gpumd, andphonon. Thenepexecutable can be used to
train a NEP potential, the gpumdexecutable can be used
to run MD simulations, and the phononexecutable can
be used to calculate some phonon properties based on
harmonic lattice dynamics. All the calculations can be
done with the gpumdpackage without external depen-
dence. Moreover, both Windows and Linux operating
systems are supported, and the prerequisites for using
thegpumdpackage include only a CUDA-enabled GPU,
a suitable CUDA toolkit, and a suitable C++ compiler.
The NEP potential is no more complicated than the
empiricalTersoﬀbond-orderpotential[ 45], themajordif-
ference between them being the diﬀerent numbers of ﬁt-
ting parameters. Therefore, our GPU implementation of
the NEP potential closely follows the implementation of
the Tersoﬀ potential [ 13]. Most importantly, all the per-
atom quantities have closed forms in our formulations
and we can make a one-to-one correspondence between
one atom and one CUDA thread. This is an eﬃcient
parallelisation scheme for medium-to-large systems, as it
can attain a large degree of parallelism as well as a high
arithmetic intensity, both of which are vital for achiev-
inghigheﬃciencyinGPUcomputing. Forsmallsystems,
this is not an eﬃcient scheme due to the reduced degree
of parallelism. Because the systems (structures) in the
training dataset are usually quite small (of the order of
100 atoms), we combine all the individual structures into
a single one in the implementation of the NEP poten-
tial, following the same strategy as used in the gpuga
package [ 46] for empirical potential ﬁtting.