11
051015ν(THz)(a) NEP
Γ M K Γ
051015ν(THz)(b) SW1 and SW2
Γ M K Γ
FIG. 6. Phonon dispersions of silicene. (a) Comparison
between NEP (dashed line) and DFT (solid line) calcula-
tions. (b)Comparison between SW1(dashed line), SW2(dot-
dashed line) and DFT (solid line) calculations. The SW1 and
SW2 results are from Ref. 69.
conductivity by the Stillinger-Weber potential can be
partially understood by examining the phonon disper-
sions, as shown in Fig. 6. Both versions of the Stillinger-
Weber potential signiﬁcantly underestimate the frequen-
ciesand hencethe groupvelocitiesofthe phononsaround
the Γ point as compared to the DFT results. On the
other hand, the phonon dispersions from the NEP po-
tential agree well with the DFT results.
B. Thermal transport in bulk PbTe
We similarly calculated the thermal conductivity of
PbTefrom300to700K,andtheresultsareshownin Fig.
7. The predictions by NEP agree well with the experi-
mental data [ 91,92]. BTE calculations with force con-
stants from DFT [ 90] or the GAP-SOAP potential [ 59]
considering both three-phonon and four-phonon scatter-
ings also produce comparable results. However, if only
three-phonon scattering is considered in the BTE cal-
culations [ 90], the obtained lattice thermal conductiv-
ity values are about two times as large. This indicates
the importance of four-phonon scattering in PbTe. In
some other materials such as Tl 3VSe4, it has been sug-
gested that the perturbation theory as adopted in the
BTE approach can severely underestimate the phonon
scatterings even when four-phonon scattering is included300 400 500 600 7000123456
NEP-HNEMD
Zeng-GAP-BTE (3ph+4ph)
Xia-DFT-BTE (3ph)
Xia-DFT-BTE (3ph+4ph)
Fedorov-Experiments
El-Sharkawy-Experiments
FIG. 7. Lattice thermal conductivity of bulk PbTe as a func-
tion of temperature, from HNEMD simulations with the NEP
potential, from BTE calculations with the GAP-SOAP po-
tential considering both three-phonon and four-phonon sca t-
terings [ 59], from BTE-DFT calculations considering three-
phononscatteringonlyorboththree-phononandfour-phono n
scatterings [ 90], and from experiments [ 91,92].
[59]. Because phonon anharmonicity is fully taken into
account in MD simulations, we expect that our eﬃcient
NEP potential will serve as a promising tool for investi-
gating heat transport properties in materials with strong
phonon anharmonicity.
C. Thermal transport in amorphous silicon
Our NEP potential can also be applied to study heat
transport in materials with strong spatial disorder. We
show this by considering amorphous silicon (a-Si), using
the general silicon NEP potential ﬁtted above. To gener-
ate a-Si structures, we follow the MD simulation proto-
col as described in Ref. 47. Because our NEP potential
is much more eﬃcient than the GAP-SOAP potential,
we use a simulation cell with 64000 atoms instead of 64
atoms as used in Ref. 47.
The structural properties during the process of gener-
ating a-Si are shown in Fig. 8. The radial distribution
function g(r) and the angular distribution function p(θ)
at liquid (2000 K) and amorphous (500 K) states from
NEP agree well with the DFT and GAP results. This
ensures that the a-Si “samples” we constructed have rea-
sonable structural properties.
Figure9shows the calculated phonon density of states
(PDOS) from velocity-autocorrelationfunction and spec-
tral lattice thermal conductivity from virial-velocity cor-
relation function of a-Si at 300 K and zero pressure, aver-