12
FIG. 8. (a) Radial and (b) angular distribution functions of
liquidsilicon (2000 K).(c)Radial and(d)angular distribu tion
functions of a-Si (500 K). DFT and GAP results in (a-c) are
from Ref. 47. GAP results in (d) are from Ref. 93. The
vertical solid line in (d) represents the bond angle (about
109.5◦) in the diamond structure.
aged overﬁve a-Si samples. Although the high-frequency
phonons have a large contribution to the PDOS, the
thermal conductivity is still mainly contributed by low-
frequency phonons, similar to the case of crystalline 2D
silicene above. The total lattice thermal conductivity of
our a-Si samples is calculated to be 1 .5±0.1 W/mK,
from the classical MD simulations. Although there is so
far no universally applicable quantum correction method
forclassicalMDsimulationsofphonon thermaltransport
in perfect crystals, a feasible one [ 94–96] for disordered
materials is to multiply a factor to the classical spec-
tral thermal conductivity κµν(ω) to obtain the following
quantum-corrected spectral thermal conductivity:
κq
µν(ω) =κµν(ω)x2ex
(ex−1)2. (40)
Here,x= ¯hω/kBT, where ¯ handkBare the reduced
Planck constant and the Boltzmann constant, respec-
tively. The quantum-corrected spectral thermal conduc-
tivity is also shown in Fig. 9. We see that at 300 K, the
quantum eﬀects are very minor, which only reduce the
total thermal conductivity to 1 .4±0.1 W/mK. However,
we note that the quantum eﬀects can be very strong at
low temperatures. Our resultshere agreewell with previ-
ous studies using the GAP-SOAP potential [ 66] and the
DP potential [ 67]. A more systematical study consider-
ing diﬀerent temperatures, strains (stresses), cell sizes,
and quenching rates is beyond the scope of this paper.0 5 10 1500.050.10.15(a)
0 5 10 1500.10.20.30.40.5(b)
classical
quantum
FIG. 9. (a) PDOS and (b) spectral thermal conductivity of a-
Si at 300 K and zero pressure. In (b), the solid line represent s
the results from classical MD simulations and the dashed lin e
represents the quantum-corrected results. See text for det ails.
V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
In summary, we have presented NEP, a framework for
generating neural network based ML potentials using the
separablenaturalevolutionarystrategyalgorithmandan
atom-environment descriptor based on Chebyshev and
Legendre polynomials. Our NEP potential can achieve
accuracy comparable to that of the other ML potentials,
such as GAP-SOAP, MTP, and DP, and our GPU im-
plementation attains a high computational eﬃciency, in
terms of both computation time and memory usage. The
computation time of the NEP potential is of the order of
0.1 microsecond per atom per MD step using a single
Nvidia V100 GPU, and one can use this amount of re-
source to simulate systems up to a few million atoms.
Combining with the HNEMD and the related spec-
tral decomposition methods, our work makes it possible
to eﬃciently and accurately simulate heat transport in
various materials based on quantum-mechanical training
dataonly. We expect that the NEP approachwill be par-
ticularly useful for modeling heat transport properties
of materials with strong phonon anharmonicity or spa-