Fig. 8. Pipelined SpMMs: data production and consumption rates match
across consecutive SpMMs by allocating PEs in proportion to workload sizes.
Fig. 9. Matrix Blocking Optimization to reduce the off-chip bandwidth
requirement. The sub-SpMM of each pair of blocks is performed in column-
wise-product order. The numbers represent execution orders.
always requests and consumes data with continuous addresses,
the off-chip memory bandwidth and the burst mode access can
be efﬁciently utilized. Also, we use three extra methods to
reduce the off-chip bandwidth requirement: (1) as mentioned
above, Ais reused across layers; (2) matrix blocking is used
to improve the data locality and reuse of matrix A. Figure 9
illustrates how the proposed matrix blocking works without
affecting the efﬁciency of the rebalancing techniques which
are discussed in the next section. The numbers in the ﬁgure
are execution orders. Ais partitioned into multiple blocks.
Instead of calculating each column of A(XW)by multiplying
all blocks of Aand the corresponding column of (XW), we
calculate tcolumns of A(XW)in parallel. The calculation of
a certain block of Awill not start until the previous block is
reused ttimes and ﬁnishes calculating its intermediate results
of all tcolumns of the resulting matrix. By doing so, the
data reuse of matrix Ais improved by ttimes. Note that
this optimization will not hurt the efﬁciency of the autotuning
rebalancing of AWB-GCN, as the sub-SpMM of each block
ofAis still following column-wise product order. (3) AWB-
GCN is equipped with a scratchpad memory to cache parts of
Aon-chip as much as possible. For example, the AandX1 of
Cora can be entirely stored on-chip.
Based on our experiments, with the proposed optimizations,
the AWB-GCN accelerator requires at most 459 Gbps off-chip
bandwidth to keep the hardware busy with 1024 PEs for the 5
datasets evaluated. This bandwidth demand can be generally
satisﬁed by current platforms (e.g., Intel D5005 FPGA board
provides 614 Gbps DDR bandwidth; VCU-128 FPGA provides
3680 Gbps HBM bandwidth; NVIDIA V100 provides 7176
Gbps HBM bandwidth).
E. The Workload Balance Problem
The baseline architecture works well when non-zeros are
evenly distributed among the rows of A. However, when this
0 64 128 192 25600.20.40.60.81
0 64 128 192 256
PE IDCiteseer Nell
PE ID00.20.40.60.81UtilizationUtilizationFig. 10. PE utilization waves of 256-PE Baseline SpMM engine processing
A(XW)of Nell and Citeseer.
assumption does not hold, the performance of the baseline
architecture can degrade considerably due to workload im-
balance among PEs. Figures 10 illustrates the utilization of
256 PEs processing SpMMs with Adjacency matrices of the
Citeseer and NELL datasets. As mentioned in Section 1, evil
rows and regionally clustered non-zeros in power-law graph
matrices bring the inefﬁciency. The existence of evil rows
keeps only a few PEs busy while all others idle most of the
time, resulting in signiﬁcant major crests in the utilization
waves; the regionally clustered non-zero elements result in the
minor crests; the differences in the numbers of non-zeros in
neighboring rows result in other ﬂuctuations.
A common software approach for dealing with sparse
data structures is to proﬁle the structure, e.g., with symbolic
analysis, and then use that information to guide the “real”
processing. For GCNs, however, it has been demonstrated
that the preprocessing stage can take 10 more time than
the inference itself [31]. In this work, we dynamically adjust
hardware conﬁgurations for workload rebalancing. This design
can be applied to a variety of specialized accelerators for
processing sparse data structures.
IV. AWB-GCN A RCHITECTURE
In this section, we describe the AWB-GCN architecture.
The core is the handling of load balancing at three levels
of granularity: distribution smoothing for local utilization
ﬂuctuations among PEs, remote switching for the minor crests,
androw remapping for the major crests.
Figure 11 illustrates autotuning with 24 PEs performing
SpMM on a power-law matrix. The gray bars at the top
show the execution time of parallel PEs; the length changes
dynamically through the process. The narrower bars at the
bottom show the static density-per-row of the matrix. Ideally,
at the end of autotuning, all bars on the top becomes short
and have the same length. Each round of autotuning includes
two phases: First, data processing and distribution smoothing
in phase 1; then remote switching and row remapping.
Figure 11 (a)&(b) illustrate the ﬁrst round of autotuning.
The progression from Figure (a) to (b) shows the ﬁrst phase.
Figure (a) gives estimated execution time without distribution
smoothing; Figure (b) shows the actual execution time with
distribution smoothing applied. During phase 1, PEs keep
ofﬂoading workloads to their less busier neighbors, resulting
6