Row density of matrix (%)0100Execution time of parallel PEs0
PE stallPE utilizationRow densityin matrix
DistributionsmoothingPE3Row density of matrix (%)0100Execution time of parallel PEs0Phase1: Distribution smoothing (1st round)
Phase2: Remote switching + Row remapping (1st round)
!
Evil rows
PE1PE5
PE6
PE18Remote switchingEvil rowremapping
Distributionsmoothing
✅
 Balanced PE workload
✅
 High PE utilization
✅
 Less execution timeAutotuning converge to optimal balance
Distribution smoothing (2nd round)(a)(b)
(c)(d)40% workload
30% workload
PE18PE1220% workloadAdjust toFig. 11. Rebalancing process: distribution smoothing, remote switching and
row remapping per round. (a)&(b): 1st round; (c)&(d): 2nd round.
in a more ﬂat and smooth execution time wave (shown in (b)).
Meanwhile, the execution time of PEs at the wave crests and
troughs is recorded by the Autotuner.
After all the PEs have ﬁnished, phase 2 starts. The Auto-
tuner partitions and remaps evil rows to PEs at troughs and
switches workloads of the PEs at the minor crests with the ones
at the troughs. The green and blue arrows in (b) show evil row
remapping and remote switching decisions, respectively. After
these decisions are made, the second round of autotuning starts
(Figures (c)&(d)). With remote switching and row remapping
determined in the ﬁrst round, the initial workload distribution
among PEs at the start of the second round (shown in (c)) can
be more efﬁciently balanced by distribution smoothing (shown
in (d)). The blue arrows in (d) show that remote balancing not
only ﬁnds new pairs of PEs to switch workloads, but also
adjusts the switch fractions determined in the previous round.
After several rounds, the system converges to optimal balanced
status; this is then used for the remainder of the computation.
All proﬁling and adjustment are performed at runtime. We
now present design details.
A. Distribution Smoothing
At the start of processing, rows are evenly distributed among
PEs as introduced in Section 3.2 (as shown in Figure 6(B)).
During the calculation of each round, we employ distribution
smoothing by averaging out the workloads among neighbors.
The architecture is able to monitor the runtime PE utilization
information by tracking the number of pending tasks in TQs
and keep ofﬂoading the work of PEs with more pending tasks
to their less busy neighbors. However, the ofﬂoaded work
needs to be returned for aggregation after processing. Due to
Fig. 12. Simpliﬁed architecture of distribution smoothing.
chip area and design complexity restrictions, we may ofﬂoad
workloads among direct neighbors, 2-hop neighbors, or even
3-hop neighbors, but not farther ones.
Figure 12 illustrates the hardware design of 1-hop distribu-
tion smoothing for TDQ-1 and TDQ-2.
TDQ-1: Before a new task is pushed into the TQ of a PE,
the PE compares the number of pending tasks with those in
the neighboring TQs. The task is then forwarded to the TQ
with the fewest pending tasks. If forwarded to a neighbor, the
result needs to be returned to the ACC buffer of its original
PE after accumulation (see Figure 12-(B)). The calculation of
valid return address and accumulation of partial results are
done in the neighbor PE.
TDQ-2: The ﬁnal layer of the multi-stage Omega network
handles neighbor task forwarding. As shown in Figure 12-(C)
(also in Figure 13), multiple PEs share the same ﬁnal-layer
switch; we refer to these PEs as a group . AWB-GCN keeps
tracking the usage of TQs of the ﬁnal layer. Once a new task
is forwarded to the ﬁnal-layer switch, the TQ usages among
neighbors are compared and then the task is routed to the PE
with the lowest TQ usage. To enable PEs on the group edge
(i.e., the leftmost or rightmost PEs per group) to communicate
with their out-of-group neighbors, we augment the Omega-
network by adding 2 extra links per switch in the ﬁnal layer,
as shown in Figure 12-(D). Note that Figure 12-(D) shows
sharing only among 1-hop neighbors. By considering more
distant hop neighbors, a more balanced design is obtained
at the cost of higher hardware complexity and area. This is
discussed in the evaluation section.
Distribution smoothing helps remove local utilization ﬂuc-
tuations (Figures 11(a) to (b)), but is not sufﬁcient when (1)
non-zeros are clustered in a region across many PEs, so that
neighbors are mostly busy and have no chance to help each
7