Fig. 7. Architecture of the proposed baseline SpMM engine.
accept new tasks while processing. If the new task tries to
accumulate the same partial result of C (i.e., from the same
row of A), it actually fetches a stale partial result from the
ACC buffer and a RaW hazard occurs. To avoid this hazard,
we implement a stall buffer of size T, where T is the delay
of the MAC units. We track the row indices currently being
processed by the MAC and check whether the current element
is targeting the same row in the RaW-check-unit. If so, we
buffer that job and delay until the hazard is resolved. The
RaW hazard is detected by checking the row index of the
coming data.
TDQ-2 (Figure 7-right) is used when Sis ultra-sparse and
stored in CSC format. Since in CSC the non-zeros are con-
tiguous in a dense array, if we can directly process the dense
array, we gain from avoiding all the zeros. However, we suffer
from the overhead of navigating to the correct PE as the indices
of neighboring elements are highly scattered. We use a multi-
stage Omega-network for routing the non-zeros to the correct
PE according to their row indices. Each router in the Omega-
network has a local buffer in case the buffer of the next stage is
saturated. This design attempts to balance the data forwarding
rate and the processing capability of the PEs by sending NPE
non-zeros per cycle. This is achieved when non-zero elements
are distributed evenly among rows. Compared with a global
crossbar network, the Omega-network design scales better and
incurs lower hardware complexity.
When a PE receives a new non-zero pair [ d1;d2] from
TDQ, it (1) performs the new multiplication task with d1;d2,
(2) fetches the corresponding partial results [ dacc] of output
matrix Cfrom the ACC buffers according to the newly
received row index, (3) accumulates the multiplication result
and dacc, and (4) updates the ACC buffers with the new
accumulation result. Each PE is coupled with a bank of ACC
buffer to store the rows of Cit accounts for. A PE has
two units: a MAC and an Address-Generation-Unit (AGU)
for result address generation and forwarding. Since Cis a
dense matrix and stored in dense format, the rows of Care
statically partitioned among ACC buffers. Synchronization is
only needed when an entire column of the resulting matrix C
is completely calculated.
Overall, for each layer of GCN, we ﬁrst execute SpMMonXW. Since Xis generally sparse (except the ﬁrst layer)
and stored in dense format, we use TDQ-1. The result of XW
is dense. We then compute A(XW)which again is SpMM.
However, as Ais ultra-sparse and stored in CSC format, we use
TDQ-2. The result is dense, but after ReLU , a large fraction
of the entries become zero, and we again have a sparse matrix
as the input feature matrix for the next layer.
D. Pipelining SpMM Chains
Intra-Layer SpMM Pipelining: One can exploit the par-
allelism between consecutive SpMMs (i.e., XWand A
(XW)) in a layer through ﬁne-grained pipelining. This is based
on the observation that Ais constant for the inference of a
certain graph. Once a column of (XW)is calculated, we can
start the multiplication of this column with Aimmediately
without waiting for the entire XW (see Figure 8). This design
has two major beneﬁts: (i) we gain extra parallelism and
reduce the overall latency through this ﬁne-grained pipelining,
and (ii) instead of requiring off-chip storage to cache the
big resulting XW matrix, we only need to buffer a single
column of XW; this can be done on-chip. This method can be
reused within a GCONV layer if (AXW )is left-multiplied by
any other sparse matrices. For example, some GCNs collect
information from 2-hop neighbors so the layer formulation
becomes A(A(XW))and the three multiplications can
be pipelined and processed in parallel.
Inter-Layer SpMM Pipelining: SpMMs from different layers
can also be pipelined. To avoid pipeline bubbles and large
intermediate buffers, we allocate hardware resources (PEs) in
proportion to the workload of each layer (Figure 8). In this
way, the output generation of the previous layer matches the
data consumption of the current layer, so that the execution
time of different layers is similar, given optimal workload
balance and PE utilization. Pipelining SpMMs from different
layers has two beneﬁts. First, it exploits inter-layer parallelism.
Second, since Ais shared for all GCONV layers in the
inference of a particular graph, it can be reused by SpMM
engines across the layers, so off-chip accesses of Aare only
required by the ﬁrst layer. This is done by forwarding elements
ofAthrough the layers.
Bandwidth Analysis: Off-chip data access of the big Ad-
jacency matrix Acan be a concern. However, as AWB-GCN
5