Fig. 13. Overall architecture of SpMM engine in AWB-GCN with three rebalancing techniques: distribution smoothing, remote switching (red bordered) and
evil row remapping (purple bordered). Here every 128 PEs has one Super-PEs and four Labor-PEs. These numbers can be customized.
have too many non-zeros to be shared only by neighbors, extra
effort is required.
C. Evil Row Remapping
We address evil-row clustering by building row remapping
support into the remote switching hardware. With row remap-
ping, the evil row is distributed to the most under-loaded
PEs in troughs; in this way the neighbors of these PEs can
help. Row remapping is triggered based on demand at the end
of each round. The autotuner calculates the utilization gaps
between the most over- and under-loaded PEs and determines
whether their gaps are too big for remote switching to handle.
If yes, row remapping is performed. The workloads of the
PE overloaded in the current round are switched (temporarily)
with a Super-PE in the next round. During processing of the
next round, the Super-PE counts the numbers of non-zeros per
row and ﬁnds the evil rows containing the most non-zeros. In
the round after, the workloads of each evil row are partitioned
and distributed to a set of Labor-PEs controlled by the Super-
PE.
After evil rows are remapped to labor-PEs, the original
workloads of the labor-PEs can still be swapped with the most
under-loaded PEs via remote switching; this ensures that even
if the labor-PEs are overloaded originally, they do not become
new crests after row remapping. If a labor-PE itself is found
to have an evil row, evil row remapping will ﬁrst map its
workload to the master-PE, and then distributively remap the
evil row back to labor-PEs, including the one which has the
evil row originally. By remapping evil rows statically to certain
PEs instead of dynamically to random ones, the aggregation of
partial results becomes hardware efﬁcient. If row remapping
is not triggered, Super- and Labor-PEs serve as regular PEs.
The existence of evil rows is generally the most critical
bottleneck, especially when utilization is lower than 50%.
The proposed row remapping technique makes it possible for
the autotuner to ﬁnd the optimal workload distributions and
achieve high utilization. As evil row remapping is normally
triggered during the ﬁrst few rounds, the utilization of thesystem increases rapidly right at the start and the autotuner
generally converges quickly.
Figure 13 illustrates the hardware support of row remap-
ping. For clarity, only one Super-PE and its four Labor-PEs
are shown. The Labor-PE has an architecture similar to the
normal PE, but they are connected to an adder tree for result
aggregation. The aggregated results of evil rows are cached
in a small separate ACC buffer. The super-PE is much bigger
than other PEs, as it serves as a proﬁler to ﬁnd the evil rows. It
is equipped with two extra modules: a parallel sorting circuit
that tracks the rows with the most non-zeros; and a non-zero
counter (including a local buffer) that records the number of
non-zeros per row. Workload remapping between Super-PE &
Labor-PEs and workload switching between Super-PE & the
PE-with-evil-rows are handled by augmenting the Autotuner as
follows. First, the UGT module is equipped with a comparator
to identify whether evil row remapping is required; if it
does, then the UGT will send the information to WDC. The
WDC knows the IDs of the Super-PE and Labor-PEs. If row
remapping is triggered or an evil row is found, the entries
of the Super- and Labor-PE at Distribution Switch Table in
the WDC are updated. This enables workload switching and
remapping in the coming round.
V. E VALUATION
In this section, we evaluate AWB-GCNs with different
design choices and compare them with other platforms pro-
cessing the same networks.
A. Evaluation Conﬁguration
We implement AWB-GCNs in Verilog HDL and measure
PE utilization, performance, energy efﬁciency, and hardware
resource consumption on Intel acceleration card D5005 which
is equipped with a Stratix 10 SX FPGA. Note that the FPGA
is only used as an evaluation platform to demonstrate the per-
formance of AWB-GCN. The design is a general architecture
that does not leverage any FPGA-speciﬁc features.
To measure utilization, we add a counter to each PE to
track the number of idle cycles. The number of operating
9