Fig. 17. AWB-GCN PE (1K) average utilization per round of workload autotuning.
Fig. 18. Scalability evaluation: PE utilization and overall performance of Baseline, Design(B) and Design(D) of AWB-GCNs with 512, 1K, 2K and 4K PEs.
82%, to 79%, 77%, 86%, 39%, and 99%, respectively, leading
to 1:94, 1:25, 1:56, 5:93, and 1 :19performance
improvement. Enabling remote switching can further improve
PE utilization to 88%, 88%, 93%, 88%, and 99%, bringing
performance gain to 2 :11, 1:41, 1:62, 8:75, and 1 :20.
The results show that AWB-GCN always provides high uti-
lization and close to theoretical peak performance for datasets
with various levels of power-law distribution.
In AWB-GCN, hardware resources allocated to different
layers are in proportion to their volume of operations. Thus,
when perfect utilization is achieved, the same execution delay
is observed for all layers. As shown in Figure 14, the green
and red bars have similar lengths at Design(D), while their
lengths vary signiﬁcantly for the Baseline.
The shaded area in Figure 14 represents the performance
overhead of the proposed rebalancing techniques. Distribu-
tion smoothing is performed during the processing of PEs
incurring no overhead so Designs(A)&(B) are not shaded.
For Designs(C)&(D), most of the tasks for remote switching
and row remapping are also performed in parallel with the
processing of PEs, e.g., all tasks at PESM and the utilization
gap calculation at UGT. However, the table lookup for switch
fraction at UGT and data update at WDC must be done se-
quentially between the processing of two consecutive iterations
(columns). They introduce negligible overheads (shaded area
of bars for Design(C)&(D)), before the system converges to
optimal balanced status. The shaded areas are only visible for
Cora and Citeseer whose workloads are relatively lighter.
Figure 15 further breaks down the numbers of execution
cycles and shows results for every SpMM kernel; this demon-
strates the beneﬁts of AWB-GCN on kernels with various
sparsity, size and distributions. The shaded area of the bars
represents the Sync cycles due to workload imbalance; the
unshaded area represents the Ideal cycles assuming perfectworkload balance. The bars in different colors represent the
execution cycles of the four SpMM kernels in the two-layer
GCNs [8], [29]: A(XW)and XW at Layer 1 and 2 . The
lines show the corresponding PE utilizations. As shown in Fig-
ure 15, Design(D) signiﬁcantly minimizes the synchronization
overheads for all kernels of the 5 GCN models.
Comparing SpMM kernels, utilization improves signiﬁ-
cantly for A(XW)at both layers and XWat Layer-1. As
forXWat Layer-2, although Xis also sparse after activation
is performed, its sparsity is much lower than that of the X
at Layer-1 and its non-zero distribution does not follow the
power-law (similar to that of the sparse matrices in SCNNs);
utilization is thus high even with the baseline design.
Figure 16(A) compares the hardware resource usage of
the ﬁve designs over the ﬁve datasets. To show comparable
breakdowns to ASIC implementations, the results of hardware
resource usage are reported by Quartus Pro 19.4 after synthesis
(therefore, FPGA-speciﬁc optimizations are not included) and
are normalized to the number of Adaptive Logic Modules
(ALMs). ALM is the basic component of Intel FPGAs. In
an ASIC design the analogue would be the number of tran-
sistors. The blue segments represent the resource usage for
the modules of the baseline design including MAC units in
PEs, other modules in PEs, task queue control logic, and
omega/shufﬂe networks. The green and red segments refer
to the hardware overheads for the support of distribution
smoothing andremote switching + row remapping . Note that
in practical FPGA implementations, MAC units in PEs are
instantiated with ﬂoating-point DSP slices. In order to show
the area breakdown more clearly, we normalize the DSP
slices to ALMs. As shown in Figure (A), the overheads of
1-hop and 2-hop distribution smoothing are on average 3.5%
and 6.7%, respectively, which is acceptable; the overhead of
remote switching and row remapping is, on average 0.9%,
11