which is negligible.
Figure 16(B) compares on-chip storage demand. That of
Task Queues in the Omega-Network is in blue; the buffers for
remote switching + row remapping are in red; the others are in
green. As shown in Figure (B), the overall storage demands of
AWB-GCN with Design(D) are even lower than the baseline.
This is largely due to dramatically reduced per-PE Task
Queue size under more balanced workloads. With much more
balanced workload distributions in Design(D), the congestion
and backpressure in Omega-Network are signiﬁcantly relieved,
making the TQs narrower and shallower.
Finally, Figure 17 shows the utilization improvement due
to iterative workload autotuning. Rebalancing can be accom-
plished within 10 iterations. This means that most of the
iterations can beneﬁt from operating under the converged
optimal strategy. Note that the utilization of Nell has a sharp
improvement in round 3 due to effective evil row remapping.
C. Scalability of AWB-GCN
We evaluate the scalability of AWB-GCN by running GCN
inference of the ﬁve datasets on the baseline as well as Designs
(B) and (D) of AWB-GCN and varying the number of PEs
from 512, 1024, 2048 to 4096. In Figure 18, the bars represent
the performance speedup comparing with the baseline design
with 512 PEs. The lines represent average PE utilizations.
As shown in Figure 18, the PE utilization of the baseline de-
sign drops dramatically with increasing number of PEs. This is
because more PEs means fewer rows per PE, highlighting the
imbalance among PEs: they have fewer opportunities to absorb
inter-row imbalance. Due to the dropping PE utilization, the
performance speedup shows poor scalability. For AWB-GCN
with only distribution smoothing, PE utilization also drops but
more slowly than baseline. Nell is an outlier as the utilization
of baseline with 512 PEs is too low to drop. In contrast, the PE
utilization of the complete version of AWB-GCN, Design(D),
is high and stable. The performance scales almost linearly with
increasing number of PEs.
D. Cross-platform Comparison
We evaluate ﬁve scenarios: (i) AWB-GCN Design-(D) with
4096 PEs, (ii) PyG-based implementation on Intel Xeon E5-
2680v3 CPU (PyG-CPU), (iii) PyG-based implementation on
a NVIDIA RTX 8000 GPU (PyG-GPU), (iv) 4096-PE baseline
AWB-GCN without workload rebalancing, and (v) SCNN [45]
reproduction with 4096 multipliers (we build a system-C-
based cycle-accurate simulator for SCNN). We use the ﬁve
datasets: Cora, Citeseer, Pubmed, Nell, and Reddit for the
evaluation. The GCN model conﬁguration follows the original
GCN algorithm papers [29], [46], [47]. We label these GCNs
“Standard networks ”.
As shown in Table III, despite running at a relatively
low frequency, AWB-GCN achieves, on average, speedups of
2622and 136over the well-optimized PyG implementa-
tions on high-end CPUs and GPUs. It achieves a speedup of
6:1over the baseline design without workload rebalancing.
For the Nell dataset, the speedup over the baseline is 18.8 ,demonstrating in particular the impact of workload balanc-
ing. Reddit fails on GPU due to out-of-memory. AWB-GCN
achieves from 2.3to 19.7speedup compared with SCNN.
SCNN is inefﬁcient when working with GCNs because it uses
Cartesian Product-based SpMM which requires massive and
highly irregular reduction of intermediate results, especially
when the matrices are very big, sparse, and follow power-law.
SCNN also requires very high off-chip bandwidth for the re-
duction. In our evaluation, we assume SCNN is equipped with
a High Bandwidth Memory (HBM) which provides sufﬁcient
off-chip bandwidth. If DRAMs are used, the performance of
SCNN would be even lower.
The tremendous speedups over PyG-CPU and PyG-GPU
originate from AWB-GCN’s dedicated architecture which uses
features not available on general-purpose CPUs and GPUs: (a)
the dynamic autotuning techniques ensure balanced workload
and high PE utilization (Section 4); (b) all the SpMM kernels
of the GCN layers are deeply pipelined, leading to reduced on-
chip storage demand (Figure 8); (c) inter-layer data forwarding
and matrix blocking (with column-wise-product sub-SpMM
execution Figure 9) improve data reuse and guarantee that
off-chip memory accesses are to consecutive addresses.
We also compare AWB-GCN with existing GCN accelera-
tors. Prior to this work, to the best of our knowledge, the de-
sign proposed by Yan et al., HyGCN [31], is the only reported
accelerator of GCN inference. However, HyGCN customizes
the hidden layer of all GCN models to 128 channels, which is
distinct from the original settings [29], [46], [47]. We refer to
the HyGCN-customized models as HyGCN networks . Also,
the HyGCN report does not give absolute performance but,
rather, relative speedups over a E5-2680v3 CPU. To compare
AWB-GCN with HyGCN, we realize the HyGCN networks
on the same E5-2680v3 CPU, adopting the same software
framework (PyG [44] – HyGCN also uses PyG for the testing
on CPU). The PyG-CPU result is thus a common baseline for
comparing the relative speedups. Table IV shows the results.
With the HyGCN networks, AWB-GCN achieves on av-
erage 3888, 25:3, and 5 :1speedups over PyG-CPU,
PyG-GPU, and the HyGCN design, respectively. The perfor-
mance improvement is attributable, in part, to the features of
AWB-GCN as discussed, and one additional reason: HyGCN
scheduling is coarse-grained block-wise, while that of AWB-
GCN is ﬁne-grained element-wise. This avoids redundant data
access and results in more beneﬁt from a balanced workload.
As this design is implemented on an FPGA, it is difﬁcult to
compare energy efﬁciency to HyGCN, which is implemented
as an ASIC. Comparing to ASIC, the reconﬁgurable routing
switches on FPGA chip consume extra energy, making the
energy efﬁciency of FPGA design lower (approximately 14 
according to the numbers reported by Kuon [48]). To compare
the performance fairly, we limit the number of multipliers used
and make it comparable to HyGCN. In particular, we use
4k 32-bit ﬂoating-point multipliers and HyGCN uses 4608
32-bit ﬁxed-point multipliers. Floating-point multipliers also
consume more energy than ﬁxed-point ones.
12