Figure 4: An illustration of T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) text-to-text text generation approach for Machine Translation,
linguistic acceptability, text semantic similarity and summarizing tasks. Figure source: Raffel et al. (2020).
prior works according to their strategies in design-
ing the output sequences to solve NLP tasks with
generative models, and discuss their representative
techniques in each subsection. Table 5 provides a
brief summary.
4.1 Generating Label-Augmented Texts
In this strategy, the output sequence ycopies
the input text xand augments it with additional
markers that can be decoded into desired label an-
notations for xfor a given NLP task. The repetition
of the words from the input text aims to provide
explicit context to reduce ambiguity for the genera-
tion process (Paolini et al., 2021). This strategy is
often applied to structure prediction tasks that aim
to jointly extract the text spans of interest and their
relations or dependencies in an input text.
Athiwaratkun et al. (2020) explores the idea of
label-augmented text generation for sequence la-
beling problems, e.g. slot ﬁlling (identifying spans
that deﬁne the left or right “slot” of a relationship)
and Named Entity Recognition (NER). Given an
input sentence, the output sequence is formed by
marking the token sequences for the slots or entity
types of interest, for instance with square brack-
ets or another identiﬁer. The corresponding labels
are then introduced immediately after the token
sequences, within the brackets, separated by the
token by a bar “j”. The encoder-decoder PLM T5
is used to generate label-augmented texts. Paolini
et al. (2021) extends this idea to other structure
prediction tasks, including joint entity and relation
extraction, relation classiﬁcation, semantic role la-
beling (SRL), event extraction, coreference reso-
lution, and dialogue state tracking. To encode a
relation between two text spans the input text, thesecond text span might be annotated with both the
relation label and an indicator of the ﬁrst text span.
For example, for the joint entity and relation
extraction task, the input sentence xcan be trans-
formed into the label-augmented output sequence
y, where (1) the square brackets indicate token
spans for entity mentions; (2) person andbook
are the corresponding entity type labels; and
(3)author=Tolkien indicates the author re-
lation between Tolkien andThe Lord of
the Rings :
x=Tolkien’s epic novel The
Lord of the Rings was
published in 1954-1955.
y=[Tolkien|person]’s epic
novel [The Lord of the
Rings|book|author=Tolkien]
was published in 1954-1955.
In order to transform the generated label-
augmented texts into desired annotations, Paolini
et al. (2021) uses dynamic programming to match
the generated output sequence and the input text,
searching for the closest entity mention that exactly
matches the predicted tail entity and discarding in-
valid entity/relation types. Similarly, Zhang et al.
(2021a) utilize label-augmented text generation for
different variations of aspect-based sentiment anal-
ysis (ABSA), including aspect opinion pair extrac-
tion, uniﬁed ABSA, aspect sentiment triplet extrac-
tion, and target aspect sentiment detection. Zhang
et al. (2021a), also propose a normalization pre-
diction mechanism: if a generated token does not
belong to the original sentence or set of expected
labels, the closest word from the input sentence
using the Levenshtein distance is used instead.
Due to the uniﬁed text-to-text formulation, label-
19