autoregressive nature allows the computation to be
parallelized, so it is often more efﬁcient at infer-
ence time. Dynamic unfolding of all positions in
relation to the masked word provides efﬁciency at
training time.
There is a large family of models derived
from BERT, including RoBERTa (Liu et al.,
2019), which improves BERT’s pre-training, AL-
BERT (Lan et al., 2020), which is smaller and
faster to train, and XLNet (Yang et al., 2019) and
Transformer-XL (Dai et al., 2019), which incor-
porate an autoregressive pre-training approach to
better handle long-distance dependencies. There
are also a range of derived models trained on spe-
ciﬁc domains (Table 6 in Appendix A). See Qiu
et al. (2020) for a full taxonomy of BERT-derived
models.
2.2.3 Encoder-Decoder Language Models
The encoder-decoder model is a more ﬂexible “text
in, text out” model that learns to generate a se-
quence of token y1;:::;y ngiven an input sequence
x1;:::;x m. Given a pair of sequences, the train-
ing objective is to maximize the log-likelihood of
log(P(y1;:::;y njx1;:::;x m);T), in whichTare
the parameters in a full encoder-decoder Trans-
former model (Vaswani et al., 2017).
To generate adequate data for self-supervised
pre-training, researchers experiment with different
forms of sequence corruption. The input is a token
sequence modiﬁed in some particular way, and
the output is the reconstructed, original sequence.
Forms of sequence corruption include document
rotation, shown in Figure 1, sentence permutation,
text inﬁlling, token deletion/masking, and others.
Representative models include BART (Lewis et al.,
2020) and T5 (Raffel et al., 2020).
Given the sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) na-
ture, it is straightforward to ﬁne-tune the encoder-
decoder language model to perform seq2seq tasks
such as Machine Translation, style transfer, and
text summarization. The seq2seq formulation is
also versatile: many tasks can be reformulated as
“text in, text out”. We describe those approaches in
details in Section 4.
2.3 Pre-Training Corpora
The pre-training corpus is a primary distinguishing
factor between language models. Both the size and
the quality (source data characteristics) are impor-
tant considerations. Table 1 presents the sources
and the corpus size used for several popular lan-guage models. There is a clear trend of increasing
the size of the pre-training corpus as well as in-
creasing the diversity of the data. For example,
ULMFiT (Howard and Ruder, 2018) is trained on
a small, highly pre-processed corpus of 29,000
Wikipedia articles (103 million words), and is rep-
resentative of models of that year. A few years later,
models such as XLM-R (Conneau et al., 2020) and
GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) leveraged billions of
words of crawled web data (diverse in nature). Raf-
fel et al. (2020) observe that the primary gains in
performance are typically driven by model size and
dataset size (“the bigger, the better”), if the qual-
ity of the dataset is held constant. They ﬁnd that
quality can play a larger role if there is a genre
match to the task, but a larger dataset provides
more advantages, eventually overcoming any gain
from quality. For a detailed discussion of model
performance scaling by model size, dataset size,
and other factors, see Kaplan et al. (2020). De-
spite the advantages of the larger dataset, Raffel
et al. (2020) also demonstrate the importance of
cleaning large crawled datasets. They show that
a model trained on such an unﬁltered dataset per-
forms substantially worse than if ﬁltering heuristics
are applied. Similarly, GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019)
and GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) use heuristics to
improve the quality of the training data. However,
Hendrycks et al. (2020) noted that larger models do
not necessarily perform better out of domain. Lin
et al. (2021) also observe that larger language mod-
els (trained on these very diverse sources) are more
likely to incorrectly answer questions that some hu-
mans would answer incorrectly due to false beliefs
or misconceptions, thus mimicking the inaccura-
cies in their training data.
The domain of intended downstream applica-
tions is an important consideration for pre-training
source data selection. Table 6 (Appendix A) pro-
vides a list of domain-speciﬁc pre-trained language
models that achieved signiﬁcantly better perfor-
mance in the intended domain than general-purpose
language models. These models are either trained
from scratch or trained with domain-speciﬁc text
using a general-purpose model as the initialization.
2.4 Fine-Tuning: Applying PLMs to NLP
Tasks
Having described the various approaches to creat-
ing complex, meaningful representations through
pre-training, we turn to the ﬁne-tuning step that
5