ing the standard autoregressive next word pre-
diction (NWP) objective. Veyseh et al. (2021a)
shows that the ﬁne-tuned GPT-2 model can gener-
ate label-augmented data for different domains (e.g.
newswire, cybersecurity); however, the generated
data might include some noise, for instance, incor-
rect grammar, meaningless sentences, or incorrect
annotations. To minimize the impact of the noisy
generated examples and maximize the beneﬁts of
the generated data, Veyseh et al. (2021a) and Vey-
seh et al. (2021b) present a student-teacher network
framework: the teacher network is trained on the
original labeled data to obtain anchor knowledge,
while the student is trained over the combination
of original and synthetic data, with constraints in-
troduced to enforce consistency with the teacher’s
learned anchor knowledge. The framework leads
to signiﬁcant performance improvement over dif-
ferent datasets for event detection.
Guo and Roth (2021) employ GPT-2 to generate
synthetic labeled data for cross-lingual NER fol-
lowing the annotation projection approach: training
data in a source language is translated and projected
into a target language to train models. To project an-
notation, a training sentence in the source language
is ﬁrst translated into the target language using
word-to-word translation (via a dictionary). GPT-2
is then ﬁne-tuned to generate complete sentences
from the important words in target languages. A
hard-constrained generation mechanism is also en-
coded into the decoding process of GPT-2 to ensure
the appearance of the named entities in the origi-
nal source sentence in the automatically generated
sentences.
Synthetic data generation with GPT-2 is also ex-
plored for relation extraction in Papanikolaou and
Pierleoni (2020). This paper ﬁne-tunes GPT-2 over
labeled examples of the same relation type, where
each sentence in the training data is marked with
the two entity mentions in the corresponding rela-
tion. The ﬁne-tuned model for each relation type
is then leveraged to produce new training instances
for that relation.
5.1.2 Question Answering (QA)
Given an input paragraph Cand a sampled ex-
tractive short answer AinC, Alberti et al. (2019)
attempts to generate a question Qusing a sequence-
to-sequence Transformer (with BERT as its en-
coder). The triple, consisting of the input para-
graph, the generated question, and the sampled
answer (C;Q;A ), can be used as a new traininginstance for QA models. To mitigate the noise in
the generated data, Alberti et al. (2019) present a
round trip consistency approach where a second
generative model is trained to take the input pas-
sageCand generated question Qfrom the prior
step to produce an answer A0. The tuple (C;Q;A )
is only retained as new training data if A0==A.
Following a similar principle, Shakeri et al.
(2020) explore synthetic data generation for cross-
domain QA where models trained on a source do-
main (typically SQuAD) are evaluated on datasets
from a different target domain. The paper aims to
generate QA pairs in the target domain and com-
bine them with the source-domain training data to
train improved QA models. The data generation
model is also trained on the source domain dataset
SQuAD using BART and GPT-2. Starting with a
passage as the context, the generative models di-
rectly generate QA pairs. Generated QA pairs are
ﬁltered by the likelihood scores of the generative
models to reduce noise.
The data generation idea is extended to multi-
hop QA that requires combining disjoint pieces of
evidence to answer a question. In particular, Pan
et al. (2021b) aim to generate human-like multi-hop
question–answer pairs to train QA models. The
model consists of three components: operators,
reasoning graphs, and question ﬁltration. Opera-
tors are atomic operations that are implemented by
rules or off-the-shelf pretrained models to retrieve,
generate, or fuse relevant information from input
contexts. Approaches to fusing relevant informa-
tion from across contexts include: ﬁne-tuning a
T5 model on SQuAD to generate single-hop ques-
tions; generating descriptions of table entities with
GPT-TabGen (Chen et al., 2020b); and combining
single-hop questions with sentences about the same
entities to produce multi-hop questions via ﬁlling
in masked tokens of designed templates. Reason-
ing graphs then deﬁne different types of reasoning
chains for multi-hop QA using the operators as
building blocks. Training QA pairs are generated
by executing the reasoning graphs, which generate
output texts. Finally, question ﬁltration removes
irrelevant and unnatural QA pairs to produce the
ﬁnal generated training set for multi-hop QA. The
ﬁltration is done by choosing the samples ranked
as most ﬂuent by GPT-2, and paraphrasing each
generated question using BART.
5.1.3 Sentiment Analysis (SA)
Yu et al. (2021a) applies data augmentation for
24