matching, afﬁne transformations, gated linear units
(GLU, Dauphin et al., 2017) or clustering algo-
rithms to perform these tasks.
2.4.2 Fine-tuning the PLM
This approach ﬁne-tunes some or all the layers of
the PLM and then adds one or two simple out-
put layers (known as prediction heads, Wolf et al.,
2020). Typically, these are feed-forward layers for
classiﬁcation. The output layers and the PLM are
trained together in an end-to-end setup, but the bulk
of the computation is applied to ﬁne-tuning the lan-
guage model to produce the desired representation
of the input. The task of the output layers is merely
to condense the information provided by the em-
beddings of each token into the number of desired
classes. The word embeddings may come from the
top layer, or from a concatenation or a weighted
average of the top n(oftenn= 4) layers (Peters
et al., 2018). Figure 2 (left) shows an illustration
of this approach.
This approach is most suitable for sequence clas-
siﬁcation tasks (e.g. sentiment analysis, NLI, se-
mantic similarity), sequence tagging tasks such as
NER, and span extraction tasks (e.g. QA) in which
the newly trained layers learn the start and end span
of an answer.
For sequence classiﬁcation tasks, Devlin et al.
(2019) suggests ﬁne-tuning BERT’s representation
of the special [CLS] token, and following with a
single feed-forward layer that classiﬁes it as one
of the task labels. For token-level or span-level
classiﬁcation tasks, the representations of each to-
ken, or alternatively just the representation of the
ﬁrst sub-token of each token or span (as in De-
vlin et al., 2019), may be passed to the classiﬁer.
This ﬁne-tuning approach is use to apply BERT
to all 11 tasks in GLUE, as well as QA (SQuAD),
NER (CoNLL 2003), and common-sense inference
(SWAG). For many additional examples of this
highly popular approach, see Table 8 (Appendix
B).
In this setting, care is needed to choose an appro-
priate learning rate that works for both the weights
of the feed-forward layer(s) and for the PLM. Since
the PLM is already largely trained, a low learning
rate should be used (between 1e-3 (Raffel et al.,
2020) and 1e-5 (Liu et al., 2019)), with a lower
learning rate for smaller datasets. However, the
randomly initialized feed-forward layer weights
still require signiﬁcant training. As such, it is a
common practice to freeze the language model lay-ers temporarily while initially training the feed-
forward layers, then unfreeze the language model
gradually for additional ﬁne-tuning (Howard and
Ruder, 2018; Yang et al., 2019). The degree to
which this should be done depends on the size of
feed-forward layers, and whether a token such as
BERT’s [CLS] is being used. If the majority of
the labour is being done by [CLS] , as in all the
examples in Devlin et al. (2019), there are fewer
beneﬁts to training the feed-forward layer alone.
Again, this is a function of the availability of super-
vised training data.
The next choice is how many layers of the PLM
to ﬁne-tune. While the examples in the BERT pa-
per ﬁne-tune the entire model, this is not feasible
for NLP tasks with small datasets or in situations
where compute power is a limitation. Often, tun-
ing just the top few layers of the language model
is sufﬁcient; for example, Ross et al. (2020) only
ﬁne-tune the top layer of BERT on their small su-
pervised dataset of 2000 sentences. A range of pa-
pers in the growing ﬁeld of “BERTology” (Tenney
et al., 2019, Clark et al., 2019b, Rogers et al., 2020)
show that the lower layers of BERT contain word-
speciﬁc and syntactic information such as part of
speech, while the upper layers contain more seman-
tic and increasingly complex information such as
semantic roles and coreference information.
2.4.3 Fine-tuning the PLM in Customized
Models
Some tasks require signiﬁcant additional architec-
ture on top of a language model, as illustrated in
Figure 2 (center). With sufﬁcient training data and
computational power, researchers may choose to
train both a substantial task-speciﬁc architecture
and also ﬁne-tune the language model. This is
the preferred choice for structure prediction tasks,
in particular parsing tasks and occasionally se-
quence tagging tasks. Examples of sequence tag-
ging models using this approach include BERT-
CRF for NER (Souza et al., 2020b; Taher et al.,
2019), though notably Devlin et al. (2019) show
that the Conditional Random Field (CRF) layer is
not necessarily needed for NER with BERT. Ex-
amples of parsing models using this approach in-
clude UDapter for dependency parsing ( ¨Ust¨un et al.,
2020).
Any sequence-to-sequence task that uses a pre-
trained language model as its encoder may em-
ploy this approach. An interesting example is Zhu
et al. (2020)’s formulation of machine translation.
7