proaches (Park et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2018; Ling
et al., 2017). While model-intrinsic explanations
expose internal model state (e.g. feature impor-
tance or attention scores), in model-agnostic (post-
hoc) methods, explanations are generated via the
model predictions without inspecting the internal
state. Generative models are often applied for post-
hoc explanations, aiming to obtain either counterex-
amples (Kim et al., 2016; Wachter et al., 2018; Wu
et al., 2021a) or natural language texts (Camburu
et al., 2018; Kumar and Talukdar, 2020; Chen et al.,
2021c) for explaining purposes.
Generating counterexamples can shed light
on the decision boundaries of the models (i.e.
explaining when a model changes its decision),
thus improving intepretability. To this end, the
generated counterexamples should be close to the
decision boundaries so that small modiﬁcations
result in changing the model predictions. Tradi-
tionally, heuristic rules applied to the original
inputs create likely counterexamples (Wachter
et al., 2018; Ribeiro et al., 2018; Iyyer et al., 2018;
Li et al., 2021a). PLMs have been leveraged
to generate more diverse examples for better
evaluation (Madaan et al., 2021b; Wu et al.,
2021a; Ross et al., 2021). In particular, Wu et al.
(2021a) proposes a method based on GPT-2 to
generate counterfactuals that are close to the
original sentences and entail speciﬁc relationships
with the original, facilitating label induction (e.g.
negation, insertion, shufﬂe). Concretely, an input
sentence is concatenated with a relation label
(e.g. negation) and a template consisting of the
special tokens [BLANK] to form the prompt for
GPT-2 model. For instance, for the sentence “ It is
great for kids ” and the relation label “ negate ”,
the following prompt is constructed: “ It is
great for kids. [negation] It is
[BLANK] great for [BLANK]. [SEP] ”.
Next, the GPT-2 model generates answers
for the [BLANK] in the template (e.g. “ not
[ANSWER] children ”, separated by the
special token [ANSWER] ). To ﬁne-tune the GPT-2
model, non-parallel datasets (e.g. CommonGen,
Natural Questions and SQuAD) are automatically
processed to ﬁnd the relations between pairs of
sentences and to construct the templates for each
relation based on the obtained pairs. It is worth
noting that the sentences generated by GPT-2
might have the same label as the original input
sentence. In addition, Wu et al. (2021a) show thatthe generated counterexamples can be helpful to
improve the performance of the downstream mod-
els, e.g. for natural language inference, duplicate
question detection, and sentiment analysis.
Other research is informing the task of natural
language explanation generation , where the goal is
to expose the rationale behind the model decisions
in automatically generated natural language text.
Any approach must critically require that the gen-
erated response is faithful to the model behavior.
To this end, Kumar and Talukdar (2020) propose to
ﬁrst generate the explanations, and then employ the
explanations to obtain the ﬁnal model predictions.
They use natural language inference as the task re-
quiring explanations. Label-speciﬁc GPT-2 models
are ﬁne-tuned over concatenations of correspond-
ing premises, hypotheses, and human-provided ex-
planations, so that at inference, the model generates
an explanation based on premise and hypothesis.
Next, the explanations together with the premise
and the hypothesis are consumed by an explanation
processor model (e.g. RoBERTa) to select the most
likely label. This process obtains a more faithful
explanation for the label choice, compared to tradi-
tional prediction-ﬁrst approaches (Camburu et al.,
2018). However, this approach does not provide
explanations that reference non-selected labels. To
address the question of why other labels are not cho-
sen, Chen et al. (2021c) exploit counterexamples,
deriving them from original samples with heuristic
rules. The original samples and counterexamples
are provided to GPT-2 to generate an explanation
for the question “ Why A not B ”.
5.2.2 Knowledge Extraction
Generative PLMs are pre-trained on massive text
corpora containing a large amount of information
about entities and commonsense knowledge. As
such, PLMs might directly be used to elicit knowl-
edge required for downstream applications such
as information extraction, sentiment analysis and
question answering. To this end, it is important
to properly prompt these models so their outputs
contain the required information. Section 3.2 de-
scribes the prompt design for knowledge extrac-
tion/probing tasks, and in particular, the “Knowl-
edge Probing” subsection describes applications in
details. Here we focus on the text generation aspect
of knowledge extraction approaches.
Prior works can be categorized into two sub-
categories. The ﬁrst category involves prompting
PLMs with partial knowledge via a prompt and
26