trained on QAMR (Michael et al., 2018) achieved
the best results for argument extraction.
Identiﬁcation-only sub-tasks such as trigger
identiﬁcation (Du and Cardie, 2020), are ad-
dressed by more general questions, e.g. “What
is the trigger?”. In contrast, Zhou et al. (2021) uses
separate questions to address the identiﬁcation and
classiﬁcation of arguments.
Du et al. (2021a) addressed slot-ﬁlling , which
aims to extract task-speciﬁc slot ﬁllers (for exam-
ple, a ﬂight date) from user utterances by formulat-
ing it as a QA task. In particular, they addressed
the zero-shot slot-ﬁlling problem, where the model
needs to predict spans and their values, given utter-
ances from new, unsupervised domains. Extracting
slot-ﬁller spans from utterances with a QA model
improved the performance, compared to a direct
encoding of the slot descriptions.
Lastly, Gao et al. (2019) formulated the dialogue
state tracking task that aims to the estimate of the
current belief state of a dialog given all the pre-
ceding conversation, as a QA problem. The pro-
posed system uses a simple attention-based neural
network to point to the slot values within the con-
versation. This direction was pursued by Gao et al.
(2020b) who also included a multiple-choice set-
ting, where several candidate values for each slot in
the question are given. The latter setting was also
investigated by Zhou and Small (2020) who fur-
ther improved the results. Namazifar et al. (2020)
used this approach to address language understand-
ing problems in the dialogue context, experiment-
ing on ATIS (Airline Travel Information Systems,
Hemphill et al., 1990) and on the Restaurants-8k
dataset (Coope et al., 2020).
QA Task Design. Questions are typically gener-
ated via hand-crafted templates derived from the
task-speciﬁc ontologies. Some of the works intro-
duce contextualization, integrating relevant words
from the text into the question. For example, in
argument extraction, the question can include the
trigger extracted from the text (e.g Liu et al., 2020a;
Lyu et al., 2021) or another argument that was pre-
viously identiﬁed (Li et al., 2020a) (see the Event
Extraction row in Table 4). Neural based question
generation models can also improve the quality of
the question, as in Liu et al. (2020a), where mono-
lingual unsupervised machine translation (Lample
et al., 2018) is used to generate the part of the ques-
tion that does not depend on the template, trans-
lating a descriptive statement into a question-styleexpression.
Other aspects of QA-style proxy tasks are the
ability to use multiple questions, and to formulate
questions in any style. In addition to sequential
questions for determining event arguments, multi-
ple formulations of the same question may be used
in a weighted voting scheme to generate an ensem-
ble answer Zhao et al. (2020b). The input to the QA
system need not necessarily include natural ques-
tions. It may instead consist of pseudo-questions
such as keywords, synonyms, position index of la-
bels, or a single word/type from the ontology or
annotation guidelines (e.g. Li et al., 2020c; Du and
Cardie, 2020).
PLMs ﬁne-tuned on the SQuAD 2.0 dataset (Ra-
jpurkar et al., 2018) or on QAMR are particularly
useful to initialize QA-style prompt-based learn-
ing methods.9With the advent of web-scale QA
datasets (Huber et al., 2021), QA-infused PLMs
may provide signiﬁcantly richer representation, en-
abling a wider range of applications.
3.3.2 Textual Entailment as Proxy Task
Textual Entailment is a popular proxy for classi-
ﬁcation tasks (Yin et al., 2019), as these models
have shown a striking ability to perform few-shot
learning. Wang et al. (2021b) hypothesizes that
this phenomenon might be because the entailment
task is a true language understanding task; a model
that performs entailment well is likely to succeed
on similarly-framed tasks. An example of textual
entailment as a proxy for emotion classiﬁcation is
shown in Figure 3, while an example of its use for
topic detection is shown in Table 4.
For entailment prompting, developers deﬁne a
template that describes the task, and create a natural
language version (“verbalization”) of each poten-
tial label. Multiple hypotheses for entailment are
produced by inserting the potential labels into the
template. The inference is performed by selecting
the most probable candidate hypothesis given the
input. Some recent works also make use of multi-
ple verbalizations for each label to boost the system
performance (Sainz and Rigau, 2021; Sainz et al.,
2021).
Sainz et al. (2021) also proposed an approach
to guiding the “art” that is prompt crafting more
towards a “science”: the authors ﬁne-tune a model
on Textual Entailment data and use the model’s
probability of a prompt given the template, applied
9Fine-tuning on a PLM on QAMR corresponds to the p-
QuASE representation presented in He et al. (2020).
17