Giulio Ravasio and Leonardo Di Perna. 2020.
GilBERTo: An Italian pretrained language
model based on roberta. https://github.com/idb-
ita/GilBERTo . GitHub.
Liliang Ren, Chenkai Sun, Heng Ji, and Julia Hock-
enmaier. 2021. HySPA: Hybrid span generation
for scalable text-to-graph extraction. In Findings of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL-
IJCNLP) .
Laria Reynolds and Kyle McDonell. 2021. Prompt pro-
gramming for large language models: Beyond the
few-shot paradigm. In Extended Abstracts of the
2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems, CHI EA ’21 , New York, NY , USA.
Association for Computing Machinery.
Marco T ´ulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos
Guestrin. 2016. ”why should I trust you?”: Explain-
ing the predictions of any classiﬁer. In Proceedings
of the Demonstrations Session of 2016 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies (NAACL-HLT) .
Marco T ´ulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos
Guestrin. 2018. Semantically equivalent adversarial
rules for debugging NLP models. In Proceedings of
the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, (ACL) .
Anna Rogers, Olga Kovaleva, and Anna Rumshisky.
2020. A primer in BERTology: What we know
about how BERT works. Transactions of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics , 8:842–866.
Subendhu Rongali, Luca Soldaini, Emilio Monti, and
Wael Hamza. 2020. Don’t parse, generate! a se-
quence to sequence architecture for task-oriented se-
mantic parsing. In Proceedings of the International
World Wide Web Conference (WWW) .
Alexis Ross, Ana Marasovic, and Matthew E. Peters.
2021. Explaining NLP models via minimal con-
trastive editing (mice). In Findings of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: (ACL/IJCNLP) .
Hayley Ross, Jonathon Cai, and Bonan Min. 2020. Ex-
ploring Contextualized Neural Language Models for
Temporal Dependency Parsing. In Proceedings of
the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 8548–
8553, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Dan Roth. 2017. Incidental supervision: Moving be-
yond supervised learning. In Proc. of the Conferen-
nce on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI) .
Rachel Rudinger, Vered Shwartz, Jena D. Hwang,
Chandra Bhagavatula, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan
Le Bras, Noah A. Smith, and Yejin Choi. 2020.
Thinking like a skeptic: Defeasible inference in nat-
ural language. In Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (EMNLP) .Devendra Sachan, Yuhao Zhang, Peng Qi, and
William L. Hamilton. 2021. Do syntax trees help
pre-trained transformers extract information? In
Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Main Volume , pages 2647–2661, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ali Safaya, Moutasem Abdullatif, and Deniz Yuret.
2020. KUISAIL at SemEval-2020 task 12: BERT-
CNN for offensive speech identiﬁcation in social me-
dia. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation , pages 2054–2059, Barcelona
(online). International Committee for Computational
Linguistics.
Oscar Sainz, Oier Lopez de Lacalle, Gorka Labaka, An-
der Barrena, and Eneko Agirre. 2021. Label verbal-
ization and entailment for effective zero- and few-
shot relation extraction. In Proceedings of the 2021
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP) , Punta Cana, Domini-
can Republic. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Oscar Sainz and German Rigau. 2021.
Ask2Transformers: Zero-shot domain labelling
with pretrained language models. In Proceedings
of the 11th Global Wordnet Conference , pages
44–52, University of South Africa (UNISA). Global
Wordnet Association.
Julian Salazar, Davis Liang, Toan Q. Nguyen, and Ka-
trin Kirchhoff. 2020. Masked language model scor-
ing. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 2699–2712, Online. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and
Thomas Wolf. 2020. Distilbert, a distilled version
of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.01108 .
Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H.
Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai, Antoine
Chafﬁn, Arnaud Stiegler, Teven Le Scao, Arun Raja,
Manan Dey, M Saiful Bari, Canwen Xu, Urmish
Thakker, Shanya Sharma Sharma, Eliza Szczechla,
Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani, Nihal Nayak,
Debajyoti Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian
Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo Manica, Sheng Shen,
Zheng Xin Yong, Harshit Pandey, Rachel Baw-
den, Thomas Wang, Trishala Neeraj, Jos Rozen,
Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Thibault Fevry,
Jason Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan, Stella Biderman,
Leo Gao, Tali Bers, Thomas Wolf, and Alexan-
der M. Rush. 2021. Multitask prompted training en-
ables zero-shot task generalization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.0820 .
Cicero Nogueira dos Santos, Xiaofei Ma, Ramesh Nal-
lapati, Zhiheng Huang, and Bing Xiang. 2020. Be-
yond [CLS] through ranking by generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
41