Figure 1: Three types of pre-trained language models. Model architecture illustrations are from Lewis et al.
(2020). For the encoder-decoder model, the corruption strategy of document rotation is shown. Alternatives
include sentence permutation, text inﬁlling, token deletion/masking, etc.
and semantic role labeling (SRL). Collobert and
Weston proposed sharing the weights of their deep-
est convolutional layer – the word embeddings
learned by the model – between the multiple train-
ing tasks and ﬁne-tuning the weights of the two
remaining two feed-forward layers for each indi-
vidual task.
Pre-training and ﬁne-tuning did not gain popular-
ity in NLP until the advent of ELMo (Peters et al.,
2018) and ULMFiT (Howard and Ruder, 2018).
Both models are based on Long Short-Term Mem-
ory architecture (LSTMs) (Hochreiter and Schmid-
huber, 1997), but differ in signiﬁcant ways. ULM-
FiT pre-trains a three-layer LSTM on a standard
language modeling objective, predicting the next
token in a sequence. ELMo uses layers of bidirec-
tional LSTMs that combine two language model
tasks in forward and backward directions to capture
context from both sides. Both proposed ﬁne-tuning
the language model layer by layer for downstream
application. Both studies also suggested adding
additional classiﬁer layers on top of the language
model, which were ﬁne-tuned alongside the lan-
guage model layers. These changes, combined
with the substantially larger model size and pre-
training corpus size compared to previous models,
allowed the pre-training then ﬁne-tuning paradigm
to succeed. Both ELMo and ULMFiT showed com-
petitive or improved performance compared to the
then-state-of-the-art for a number of tasks, demon-
strating the value of language model pre-training
on a large scale.
The pace of this paradigm shift picked up dra-
matically in late 2018 when Vaswani et al. (2017)introduced the Transformer architecture that can be
used for language model pre-training. The Trans-
former’s multi-head self-attention mechanism al-
lows every word to attend to all previous words or
every word except the target, allowing the model to
efﬁciently capture long-range dependencies with-
out the expensive recurrent computation in LSTMs.
Multiple layers of multi-head self-attention allow
for increasingly more expressive representations,
useful for a range of NLP problems. As a result,
nearly all popular language models, including GPT,
BERT, BART (Lewis et al., 2020) and T5 (Raffel
et al., 2020), are now based on the Transformer
architecture. They also differ in a number of im-
portant ways, which we discuss in the following
sections. For more details about the Transformer ar-
chitecture, we refer the reader to the original paper
or to the excellent tutorials available3;4.
2.2 Modern Pre-Trained Language Models
There are three classes of pre-trained language
models: autoregressive language models (e.g.
GPT), masked language models (e.g. BERT), and
encoder-decoder models (e.g. BART, T5). Fig-
ure 1 shows the difference in model architecture
and training objectives with an example training
input for each.
2.2.1 Autoregressive Language Models
An autoregressive language model is trained
to predict the next word xigiven all previ-
3http://nlp.seas.harvard.edu/2018/04/
03/attention.html
4http://jalammar.github.io/
illustrated-transformer/
3