Figure 2: Typical “pre-train then ﬁne-tune” strategies. We illustrate strategies that ﬁne-tune the full PLM (left),
ﬁne-tune the full PLM in a custom model (center), and ﬁne-tune just a small adapter sub-layer per each Transformer
layer (right). We show the Transformer blocks that will be ﬁne-tuned for the speciﬁc tasks in blue, and the frozen
blocks (keep the pre-trained weights unchanged) in grey. For brevity, we represent the entire Transformer block
(stacked innlayers) by its multi-head self-attention and (if applicable) adapter layers. We refer interested readers
to Vaswani et al., 2017 and Pfeiffer et al., 2020a for more architecture details. “Heads” refers to task-speciﬁc
prediction functions (Wolf et al., 2020).
allows PLMs to perform accurately on disparate
NLP tasks. Figure 2 illustrates typical pre-training
then ﬁne-tuning strategies. We describe each of
them below. A more comprehensive list of prior
work using different pre-training then ﬁne-tuning
strategies are in Table 8 (Appendix B).
2.4.1 Contextual Embeddings
The simplest approach to using large pre-trained
language models is to “freeze” the model and use
its output as sophisticated, context-sensitive word
embeddings for a subsequent architecture, which
is trained from scratch for the speciﬁc task. In
other words, while this still involves a forward pass
through the pre-trained language model over the
input text, the language model’s weights are not
ﬁne-tuned, rendering this approach closer to a fea-
ture extraction family of approaches in classic sta-
tistical NLP. There are three types of scenarios for
using frozen PLMs.
In contexts with insufﬁcient labeled data or com-
pute power, “frozen” contextual embeddings are
employed. For non-benchmark tasks, the only la-
beled training datasets are too small to ﬁne-tune
even the top layers of BERT-base, let alone larger
models. The computational cost of ﬁne-tuning the
entire PLM may be prohibitive for some applica-
tions or developers, leading to use of the more
efﬁcient frozen PLM solution. Other data-efﬁcient
and time-efﬁcient approaches to ﬁne-tuning are dis-
cussed in Section 2.4.4.
Highly complex or difﬁcult NLP tasks oftenmake use of the frozen PLM technique to help
reduce training complexity. Examples are con-
stituency parsing (Zhang et al., 2020c), semantic
graph parsing using UCCA6(Jiang et al., 2019)
and AMR7(Zhang et al., 2019b; Naseem et al.,
2019; Zhou et al., 2020b), Aspect-Based Sentiment
Analysis (Li et al., 2019b) and Machine Transla-
tion (Zhu et al., 2020). For instance, Zhang et al.
(2020c) uses frozen BERT embeddings to seed an
innovative approach to Conditional Random Field
(CRF) modeling (Lafferty et al., 2001) that replaces
the inside-outside algorithm with backpropagation,
using a two-step process to ﬁrst bracket then label
the parses, and a batched version of the CKY al-
gorithm. For complex tasks like these, there may
only be enough data or compute power available
to train the secondary model (Zhang et al. (2019b)
cited limitations in compute power). While the use
of frozen PLM parameters is currently in vogue for
these tasks, perhaps due to researcher preference
for simplicity as well as computational require-
ments, we may see a shift to full-model ﬁne-tuning
for tasks with sufﬁcient training data.
Unsupervised tasks such as word sense disam-
biguation (Hadiwinoto et al., 2019) and word sense
induction (Amrami and Goldberg, 2019) are not
associated with a supervised dataset for ﬁne-tuning.
Instead, frozen BERT embeddings are fed through
a variety of strategies such as nearest-neighbour
6Universal Conceptual Cognitive Annotation (Abend and
Rappoport, 2013)
7Abstract Meaning Representation (Banarescu et al., 2013)
6