However, Zhu et al. did not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant
improvement over using BERT-based frozen word
embeddings.
A related and highly successful approach is to
ﬁne-tune the entire language model with a small
number of feed-forward layers, then layer on an
algorithmic approach that provides a substantial
amount of task-speciﬁc heavy lifting. For example,
it might transform the task from a classiﬁcation
problem (as understood by the language model)
into the desired target formulation, often a struc-
tured form such as a tree or a set of clusters. For
coreference resolution, Joshi et al. (2019, 2020)
adds a substantial algorithm, in their case e2e-coref
(Lee et al., 2018) which transforms ratings of pairs
of spans into valid mention clusters. Speciﬁcally,
for each candidate mention span, the algorithm
computes a distribution over possible antecedent
spans from the mention score (whether it is likely
to be a mention) and the compatibility score of
the two spans, which itself involves a feed-forward
network to compute. Two more structural pars-
ing examples in this vein are temporal dependency
parsing (Ross et al., 2020) and modal dependency
parsing (Yao et al., 2021). These studies approach
tree building algorithmically by ﬁrst performing a
classiﬁcation problem to identify suitable depen-
dency pairs, then ranking them to construct a valid
tree.
2.4.4 Efﬁcient Fine-tuning Approaches
A wide range of approaches, in addition to limiting
ﬁne-tuning to the top layers, seek to ﬁne-tune only
a small number of model weights. These can be
classiﬁed into two types: (a) ﬁne-tuning a separate,
small network that is tightly coupled with the PLM
(but does not change it), and (b) selecting only a
small number of the PLM’s weights to ﬁne-tune or
keep.
The most prominent approach of the ﬁrst type
are adapter modules (Houlsby et al., 2019; Bapna
and Firat, 2019; Pfeiffer et al., 2020b,a), as illus-
trated in Figure 2 (right). Adapters add a small
set of newly initialized weights at every layer of
the transformer. Houlsby et al. (2019) show that a
two-layer feed-forward network with a bottleneck
works well. The placement and conﬁguration of
the adapters within the Transformer blocks varies
in the literature (Houlsby et al., 2019; Bapna and
Firat, 2019; Stickland and Murray, 2019; Pfeiffer
et al., 2020b). During ﬁne-tuning, all weights in
the PLM remain frozen except for the few weightsin the adapters. One set of adapters is ﬁne-tuned
per task of interest. This approach is more efﬁcient
in training (typically <5%of all PLM weights),
and allows efﬁcient weight-sharing, both in terms
of using the same frozen PLM for each task, and in
allowing the weights of adapter modules to be dis-
tributed and also re-used. Notably, the weights of
adapters independently trained for different tasks
can be successfully combined to solve a new task
(Pfeiffer et al., 2020b). Finally, catastrophic for-
getting of old capabilities when ﬁne-tuning on a
new task or language is prevented. AdapterHub
(Pfeiffer et al., 2020a) and Trankit (Nguyen et al.,
2021) are examples of frameworks promoting an
adapter ecosystem; an example of using adapters
for Universal Dependency Parsing is ¨Ust¨un et al.
(2020).
A similar method is side-tuning (Zhang et al.,
2020b), which adapts a pre-trained network by
training a lightweight “side” network that is fused
with the (unchanged) pre-trained network using
a simple additive process. Also closely related
is diff-pruning (Guo et al., 2021), which adds a
sparse, task-speciﬁc difference vector to the orig-
inal (frozen) parameters. These difference vec-
tors are regularized to be sparse, which further de-
creases the number of weights that need to be stored
(around 0.5% of the original model’s parameters).
Moving to the second type of approach, Bit-
Fit (Zaken et al., 2021) proposes to limit ﬁne-tuning
to the bias terms (or a subset of the bias terms,
around 0.1% of the total parameters) of pre-trained
BERT models, plus a task-speciﬁc classiﬁcation
layer. This is shown to be competitive with, and
for some tasks better than, ﬁne-tuning all of BERT.
BitFit builds on the intuition that ﬁne-tuning ex-
poses existing capabilities, rather than teaching the
model new ones.
Similarly, Radiya-Dixit and Wang (2020) show
that it sufﬁces to ﬁne-tune only the “most sensitive”
layers, i.e. those which are most distant in param-
eter space from the rest of the model. In parallel,
they sparsify the model substantially by setting 1-
4% of pre-trained parameters to zero. This retains
performance, as also demonstrated by work like
DistilBERT (Sanh et al., 2020) and other pruning
studies (Prasanna et al., 2020 inter alia) which show
that many parameters in a large PLM are redundant.
In fact, Zhao et al. (2020a) propose masking, i.e.
setting weights to zero, as a sole alternative to ﬁne-
tuning the model weights. This approach freezes
8