all the weights of the PLM, selects the weights
that are relevant for a given task, and masks (dis-
cards) the rest. They train one mask per down-
stream task, with every layer masked except the
embedding layer. While in principle this trains as
many parameters as the original model, the mask
is both binary and sparse and thus much simpler to
learn and store. The initial sparsity of the mask is
an important hyperparameter in this approach, as
is deciding which layers to mask, since the differ-
ent layers encode various degrees of syntactic and
semantic knowledge (Tenney et al., 2019). Zhao
et al. show that masking “top-down” (mostly the
top layers, which are more task-speciﬁc and encode
more semantic and long-distance information) is
more effective than masking “bottom-up” (which
would mask mostly the layers dealing with ele-
mentary word meaning and syntax). In particular,
performance on CoLA increases as more layers are
masked top-down. The authors further show that
masking yields entirely comparable performance
to ﬁne-tuning on a range of tasks from POS tagging
to reading comprehension.
3 Paradigm 2: Prompt-based Learning
We use prompting to refer to the practice of adding
natural language text, often short phrases, to the
input or output to encourage pre-trained models to
perform speciﬁc tasks (Yuan et al., 2021). There are
several advantages to using prompts. Prompting,
especially in-context learning (e.g. Brown et al.,
2020), may not require updates to the PLM’s pa-
rameters, reducing computational requirements as
compared to ﬁne-tuning approaches, or in addition
to those described in 2.4.4. Prompts also encour-
age a better alignment of the new task formulation
with the pre-training objective, leading to better
use of knowledge captured in pre-training. The
closer match also enables a few-shot approach (Liu
et al., 2021b), especially for tasks with small train-
ing datasets; a good prompt can be worth hundreds
of labeled data points (Le Scao and Rush, 2021).
Finally, prompts allow probing of the PLMs, of-
ten in an unsupervised way, in order to assess the
knowledge acquired by the PLM for speciﬁc tasks
of interest (e.g. Petroni et al., 2019).
We discuss 3 types of prompt-based learning ap-
proaches below: Learning from instructions and
demonstrations, template-based learning, and learn-
ing from proxy tasks. Figure 3 shows illustrations
for each of the three approaches.Input Output
(1) Text pair generation (Schick and Sch ¨utze, 2021)
Task: Write two sentences
that mean the same thing.
Sentence 1: “A man is play-
ing a ﬂute.” Sentence 2:“He’s playing a ﬂute.”
(2) Mathematical reasoning (Reynolds and McDonell, 2021)
f(x) =xx. What is
f(f(3))? Let’s solve this
problem by splitting it into
steps.f(f(3)) =f(33) = 333 =
27. We can see that f(3) = 3
3 = 9 , sof(f(3)) = 27 .
Table 2: Example prompt designs for learning from in-
structions.
3.1 Learning from Instructions and
Demonstrations
First attempts made use of instructions such as
“translate X to Y:” (Raffel et al., 2020) to simultane-
ously teach the model varied tasks in a text-to-text
manner. However, this approach required a large
amount of labeled data.
With the emergence of large generative PLMs
(Radford et al., 2019), the ﬁrst signs that language
models are multi-task learners emerged. For in-
stance, GPT-2 understands that if the instruction
“TL;DR” (“too long; didn’t read”) is given, then
it should generate a summary of the context fol-
lowing the instruction. More recently, and with
even larger generative PLMs (GPT-3), Brown et al.
(2020) showed that those models are indeed very
good at few-shot learning. Brown et al. showed
that GPT-3 can perform few-shot tasks via priming
(in-context learning): given instructions and a few
input/output pairs, GPT-3 is able to produce the de-
sired outputs for new inputs. No gradient updates
are performed (see Figure 3, left box). Caveats
include the requirement of a very large LM to work
well, and an inability to scale to more than a few ex-
amples, because the context window of most LMs
is limited to a few hundred tokens. We refer readers
to the GPT-3 paper (Brown et al., 2020) for many
additional examples of learning from instructions
and/or demonstrations.
Schick and Sch ¨utze (2021) and Reynolds and
McDonell (2021) introduce new tasks based on de-
scriptions. For example, the text pair generation
task Schick and Sch ¨utze (2021) consists in gener-
ating a continuation sentence (Sentence 2) given
an input sentence (Sentence 1) and a description of
the relations between the sentences (Table 2(1)).8
8A variation of this task consists in generating both Sen-
tence 1 and Sentence 2 given the description (Schick and
Sch¨utze, 2021).
9