on the guideline example(s), to measure the quality
of manually designed prompts.
Obamuyide and Vlachos (2018) reformulated
relation extraction as a textual entailment task.
This approach has been pursued in the context of
PLMs by Sainz et al. (2021).
Roughly equivalent to textual entailment is
Yes/No Question Answering (Clark et al., 2019a)
where a model is asked about the veracity of some
fact given a passage. It has also been used as a
proxy task for text classiﬁcation by Zhong et al.
(2021a).
PLMs needs to be ﬁne-tuned to solve the textual
entailment task. They are commonly ﬁne-tuned on
MNLI (Williams et al., 2018), but other datasets
such as SNLI (Bowman et al., 2015), FEVER
(Thorne et al., 2018), ANLI (Nie et al., 2020) or
XNLI (Conneau et al., 2018) are also used. In ad-
dition, data from different tasks can be used when
framed properly (Zhong et al., 2021a).
4 Paradigm 3: NLP as Text Generation
The success of generative Transformer-based
PLMs10such as GPT, BART, and T5 has recently
sparked interest in leveraging generative PLMs to
solve various non-generative NLP tasks. These
tasks include, but are not limited to, traditional dis-
criminative tasks such as classiﬁcation and struc-
ture prediction. For example, Figure 4 illustrates
this “text-to-text” approach as described in Raf-
fel et al. (2020). Instead of using traditional dis-
criminative models for NLP tasks, these tasks are
reformulated as text generation problems so that
they can be directly solved with generative PLMs.
The generated output sequences usually include the
desired labels or other auxiliary information for the
given task, enabling accurate reconstruction of the
expected class labels (i.e. to avoid ambiguities in
mapping) and facilitating the generation/decoding
process (i.e. to provide sufﬁcient context for pre-
dictions).
It is worth noting that some NLP tasks are al-
ready text generation tasks. Therefore, a straight-
forward strategy for those tasks is to ﬁne-tune a
generative PLM using task-speciﬁc training data to
perform the speciﬁc tasks of interest. Examples in-
clude Machine Translation (Cooper Stickland et al.,
2021), text summarization (Lewis et al., 2020), text
style transfer (Lai et al., 2021), etc. We refer read-
10In this section and next, we use the term PLM to refer to
a generative PLM.ers to Section 2 for more detailed discussion of
this “pre-train then ﬁne-tune” approach. In this
section, we focus on tasks that are not traditionally
text generation tasks.
Reformulating NLP Tasks as Text Generation
Problems Pre-trained from large corpora, PLMs
demonstrate an extraordinary ability to generate
text. PLMs also capture rich knowledge that could
be used for many NLP tasks and show strong per-
formance on learning new patterns via ﬁne-tuning.
These factors lead to the hypothesis that many NLP
tasks can be reformulated as text generation prob-
lems. In particular, given an NLP task with an input
textx, this approach ﬁrst attempts to design an out-
put sequence ythat includes information about the
desired labels for x(e.g. markers). Then, a PLM
directly generates y, conditioning on the input x,
modelingP(yjx). In this formulation, the desired
labels/outputs for the task on xneed to be retrieved
unambiguously from y, requiringyto be generated
in a valid format by the design of the reformulated
task. In addition to the label information, evidence
useful for providing context can also be incorpo-
rated into the formulation of yto aid the generation
process. To train the PLMs, the original training
data of the NLP task is ﬁrst converted into pairs
(x;y)following the designed format. The PLMs
are usually ﬁne-tuned with such pairs using the
standard maximum likelihood loss.
There are a few advantages of this approach.
First, in this formulation, a uniﬁed text-to-
text/seq2seq framework can be used to solve differ-
ent NLP tasks via encoder-decoder architectures,
thus facilitating multi-task learning and transfer
learning across tasks of different natures (Raffel
et al., 2020). Second, the direct generation of la-
bels in output sequences allows the PLMs to exploit
the semantics of the labels to improve the perfor-
mance and data efﬁciency, a beneﬁt that cannot be
achieved in discriminative models (Paolini et al.,
2021). Finally, when adapting to structure predic-
tion problems, PLM-based models can naturally
capture the inter-dependencies between prediction
steps/tasks in the modeling process to further im-
prove the performance (Athiwaratkun et al., 2020).
As such, the formation of the output sequence
yfor an input xis critical for the performance
of the PLM-based methods. Existing works tend
to customize such output sequences for speciﬁc
NLP tasks to better capture the nature of the tasks.
Therefore, in the rest of this section, we group
18