Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing via Large Pre-Trained
Language Models: A Survey
Bonan Min*1, Hayley Ross*2, Elior Sulem*3, Amir Pouran Ben Veyseh*4,
Thien Huu Nguyen4, Oscar Sainz5, Eneko Agirre5, Ilana Heinz1, and Dan Roth3
1Raytheon BBN Technologies
fbonan.min, ilana.Heintz g@raytheon.com
2Harvard University
hayleyross@g.harvard.edu
3University of Pennsylvania
feliors, danroth g@seas.upenn.edu
4University of Oregon
fapouran, thien g@cs.uoregon.edu
5University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU)
foscar.sainz, e.agirre g@ehu.eus
* indicate equal contribution
Abstract
Large, pre-trained transformer-based language
models such as BERT have drastically
changed the Natural Language Processing
(NLP) ﬁeld. We present a survey of re-
cent work that uses these large language mod-
els to solve NLP tasks via pre-training then
ﬁne-tuning, prompting, or text generation ap-
proaches. We also present approaches that use
pre-trained language models to generate data
for training augmentation or other purposes.
We conclude with discussions on limitations
and suggested directions for future research.
1 Introduction
In recent years, large pre-trained transformer-based
language models (PLMs), such as the BERT (De-
vlin et al., 2019) and GPT (Radford et al., 2018)
families of models, have taken Natural Language
Processing (NLP) by storm, achieving state-of-the-
art performance on many tasks.
These large PLMs have fueled a paradigm shift
in NLP. Take a classiﬁcation task p(yjx)(classi-
fying textual input xinto a label y) as an exam-
ple: traditional statistical NLP approaches often
design hand-crafted features to represent x, and
then apply a machine learning model (e.g. SVM
(Cortes and Vapnik, 1995), logistic regression) to
learn the classiﬁcation function. Deep learning
models learn the latent feature representation viaa deep neural network (LeCun et al., 2015) in ad-
dition to the classiﬁcation function. Note that the
latent representation needs to be learned afresh for
each new NLP task, and that, in many cases, the
size of the training data limits the quality of the
latent feature representation. Given that the nu-
ances of language are common to all NLP tasks,
one could posit that we could learn a generic la-
tent feature representations from some generic task
once, and then share it across all NLP tasks. Lan-
guage modeling, where the model needs to learn
how to predict the next word given previous words,
is such a generic task with abundant naturally oc-
curring text to pre-train such a model (hence the
name pre-trained language models). In fact, the lat-
est, ongoing paradigm shift begins when PLMs are
introduced: for numerous NLP tasks, researchers
now leverage existing PLMs via ﬁne-tuning for the
task of interest, prompting the PLMs to perform the
desired task, or reformulating the task as a text gen-
eration problem with application of PLMs to solve
it accordingly. Advances in these three PLM-based
paradigms have continuously established new state-
of-the-art performances.
This paper surveys recent works that leverage
PLMs for NLP. We organize these works into the
following three paradigms:
•Pre-train then ﬁne-tune ( §2): perform general-
purpose pre-training with a large unlabeled
1arXiv:2111.01243v1  [cs.CL]  1 Nov 2021