corpus, and then perform a small amount of
task-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning for the task of inter-
est.
•Prompt-based learning ( §3): prompt a PLM
such that solving an NLP task is reduced to
a task similar to the PLM’s pre-training task
(e.g. predicting a missing word), or a simpler
proxy task (e.g. textual entailment). Prompt-
ing can usually more effectively leverage the
knowledge encoded in the PLMs, leading to
few-shot approaches.
•NLP as text generation ( §4): Reformulate
NLP tasks as text generation, to fully leverage
knowledge encoded in a generative language
model such as GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019)
and T5 (Raffel et al., 2020).
Generative PLMs can be also used for text gen-
eration tasks. We refer readers to the excellent
surveys on text generation such as Li et al. (2021b)
and Yu et al. (2021b). This paper, unless otherwise
speciﬁed, focuses on tasks that are not generative
in nature (e.g. classiﬁcation, sequence labeling and
structure prediction) that still cover a broad range
of NLP tasks including syntactic or semantic pars-
ing of text, Information Extraction (IE), Question
Answering (QA), Textual Entailment (TE), senti-
ment analysis, and so on.
In addition to the three paradigms, there is an-
other, complementary method: to indirectly use any
of the PLM paradigms above to improve results of
target NLP tasks:
•Data generation ( §5): run PLMs to automat-
ically generate data for NLP tasks. The gen-
erated data can be silver labeled data, where
typically the generative PLM is ﬁne-tuned for
the task, or some auxiliary data, such as coun-
terexamples, clariﬁcations, contexts, or other.
In the ﬁrst case, the silver labeled data can be
added to existing labeled data. In the second
case, the auxiliary data supports the target task
in some way.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2
provides background on the PLMs and describes
the ﬁrst paradigm, pre-train then ﬁne-tune . Sec-
tion 3 discusses the second paradigm, prompt-
based learning . Section 4 summarizes works in
the third paradigm, NLP as text generation . In Sec-
tion 5, we describe approaches that generate datavia PLMs for a broad range of NLP tasks. We dis-
cuss limitations and provide directions for future
research in Section 6 and conclude in Section 7.
2 Paradigm 1: Pre-Train then Fine-Tune
While work in traditional statistical NLP focused
on training task-speciﬁc models on labeled datasets,
this paradigm shifts to training one large model
on a shared, “fundamental” pre-training task and
then adapting (“ﬁne-tuning”) it to a variety of tasks
in a second step. The pre-training task is almost
invariably a type of language modeling task1that
can leverage a massive quantity of unlabelled data
to learn representations that beneﬁt a range of NLP
tasks (Rogers et al., 2020).
In this section, we ﬁrst provide a primer on
pre-trained large language models (PLMs), then
describe approaches that use frozen or ﬁne-tuned
PLMs for NLP tasks.
2.1 The Beginnings of the Paradigm Shift
While pre-training in machine learning and, in par-
ticular, computer vision has been studied since at
least 2010 (Erhan et al., 2010; Yosinski et al., 2014;
Huh et al., 2016), the technique did not gain trac-
tion in NLP until later in the decade, with the publi-
cation of Vaswani et al. (2017). The delay in uptake
is partly due to the later arrival of deep neural mod-
els to NLP compared to computer vision, partly due
to the difﬁculty of choosing a self-supervised task2
suitable for pre-training, and above all, due to the
need for drastically larger model sizes and corpora
in order to be effective for NLP tasks. We explore
these aspects further in the discussion below.
The idea of pre-training on a language model-
ing task is quite old. Collobert and Weston (2008)
ﬁrst suggested pre-training a model on a number
of tasks to learn features instead of hand-crafting
them (the predominant approach at the time). Their
version of language model pre-training, however,
differed signiﬁcantly from the methods we see to-
day. They used language modeling as only one of
many tasks in a multitask learning setting, along
with other supervised tasks such as part-of-speech
(POS) tagging, named entity recognition (NER)
1The exact formulation varies from the classic unidirec-
tional language modeling (next word prediction) to cloze-style
ﬁll-in-the-blank, uncorrupting spans, and other variants (see
Section 2.3).
2In self-supervised learning, the ground truth (e.g. the
missing word) comes from the unlabeled text itself. This al-
lows the pre-training to scale up with the near-inﬁnite amount
of text available on the web.
2