place.hsi h=siDOCTEXTh=si
y= Elliott bought, sold or
traded truck to McVeigh in
exchange for 280:32for the
benefit ofhargiat body shop
place.
4.5 Generating Structure-Linearized Texts
Structure prediction problems in NLP typically re-
quire multiple prediction outputs for an input text
xthat are interconnected to form a single struc-
ture that represents the input. To cast structure
prediction tasks as text generation problems, one
approach involves linearizing the output structure
to serve as the output sequence y. For example, tak-
ingxas input, TEXT2EVENT (Lu et al., 2021b)
directly generates the event structures y:
x=The man returned to Los
Angeles from Mexico following
his capture Tuesday by bounty
hunters.
y =((Transport returned
(Artifact The man)
(Destination Los Angeles)
(Origin Mexico)) (Arrest-Jail
capture (Person The man)
(Time Tuesday) (Agent bounty
hunters))
Graph traversal algorithms are often used to ac-
complish the linearization in this approach. Ren
et al. (2021) study structure-linearization for joint
entity and relation extraction (Li et al., 2014; Miwa
and Bansal, 2016). The main idea is to construct
an information graph for each input sentence to
capture entity mentions, their entity types, and
relations. Depth or breath ﬁrst traversal can be
used for graph linearization for y. To solve the
sequence-to-sequence problem for pairs of hx;yi,
Ren et al. (2021) linearize the information graph
to an alternating sequence of nodes and edge types
(given depth/breath ﬁrst traversal), and directly gen-
erate such sequences via a hybrid span decoder that
decodes both the spans and the types recurrently.
For event extraction with joint extraction of event
triggers and arguments (Li et al., 2014; Nguyen
et al., 2016), a structure-linearization and text gen-
eration approach comes from Lu et al. (2021b).
The authors ﬁrst build a labeled tree to capture
the event types and argument roles in the sentence
(i.e. event schema), with trigger and argument textspans as leaves. The labeled tree is transformed
into the output sequence yby depth-ﬁrst traver-
sal where T5 is used to perform the conditional
generation of yfromx. To improve the model, a
trie-based constrained decoding procedure (Chen
et al., 2020a; De Cao et al., 2021) is introduced to
ensure the generation of valid event structures. A
trie (preﬁx-tree) determines possible candidates for
the next generation step given the previously gen-
erated tokens to guarantee valid output sequences.
Lu et al. (2021b) also report the effectiveness of
the generation-based model for extending models
to extract new event types.
4.6 Ranking Input-Output Pairs
Some NLP tasks require choosing the best response
from among many: answer selection in multiple
choice-sytle QA, information retrieval, and certain
kinds of entity retrieval all provide a set of can-
didate answers to a posed query from which the
system selects the best one. Typically, a system will
rank the candidates in relation to the input query,
a task at which PLMs can excel. The idea has its
roots in the classical literature on probabilistic mod-
els for information retrieval that rank documents
using language models (Ponte and Croft, 1998; Laf-
ferty and Zhai, 2001). Given an input query, a can-
didate document is scored in two steps: (i) training
a language model on the candidate document, and
(ii) computing the likelihood of generating the in-
put query from that language model, which serves
as the candidate’s ranking score.
We now see the use of PLMs to per-
form generation-based ranking for selection.
Nogueira dos Santos et al. (2020) apply the idea for
answer selection by ﬁne-tuning generative models
(GPT-2 or BART) over hanswer, questionipairs,
thus learning to generate questions given correct
answer passages. The simplest approach is to
ﬁne-tune the models over only the positive pairs.
Nogueira dos Santos et al. (2020) also explore ﬁne-
tuning with negative pairs using an unlikelihood
objective or ranking-based objective (e.g. the hinge
loss). At inference time, the ranking score for an
input passage is obtained via the likelihood of the
ﬁne-tuned PLM over the input question condition-
ing on that passage.
Nogueira et al. (2020) approach the document
relevance ranking problem in a similar way. The pa-
per concatenates the input query and each candidate
document and feeds them as an input/condition for
22