templates are used in Petroni et al. (2019) to probe
the knowledge of the model, as well as in Schick
and Sch ¨utze (2020), Schick et al. (2020) and Schick
and Sch ¨utze (2021a) for text classiﬁcation in a few-
shot setting. Manually designed preﬁx prompts are
leveraged in Brown et al. (2020) for QA, transla-
tion, and probing tasks for commonsense reason-
ing. The quality of the prompts impacts perfor-
mance. Indeed, Zhao et al. (2021) showed that
different prompts can cause accuracy to vary from
near chance to near state-of-the-art.
Automatically-generated Discrete Templates.
Discrete templates, which usually correspond to
natural language phrases, are described in a discrete
space. To search for such templates given a set of
inputs and outputs, Jiang et al. (2021) proposed a
mining-based approach called MINE that aims to
ﬁnd either the middle words or dependency paths
between the inputs and outputs. A second approach
(Jiang et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2021) consists of
paraphrasing an existing template prompt using
back and forth machine translation, and then se-
lecting the best prompt among the new paraphrases
with guidance from a thesaurus. Prompt paraphras-
ing is also used by Haviv et al. (2021) who used a
neural prompt rewriter that optimizes the accuracy
of systems using the prompt. In that case, a differ-
ent paraphrase is generated for each input. A third
approach uses gradient-based search to ﬁnd short
sequences that can serve as prompt (Wallace et al.,
2019; Shin et al., 2020). Gao et al. (2021a) and
Ben-David et al. (2021) further generate prompts
using standard generation models such as T5 (Raf-
fel et al., 2020). In the latter, the authors proposed
a domain adaptation algorithm that trains T5 to
generate unique domain relevant features that can
be concatenated with the input to form a template
for downstream tasks.
Automatically-generated Continuous Tem-
plates. Continuous prompts, which perform
prompting directly in the embedding space
of the model, allow us to abstract away from
natural language prompts (i.e. the prompts do
not correspond to actual words) and from the
parameters of the LM (Liu et al., 2021b). These
continuous prompts often require tuning on
task-speciﬁc data. Li and Liang (2021) propose
preﬁx tuning, which prepends a sequence of
continuous, task-speciﬁc vectors to the input while
keeping the LM parameters frozen. This allowsthem to ﬁne-tune just 0.1% of the total model
parameters. A similar method is used by Lester
et al. (2021), who differ from Li and Liang (2021)
by adding special tokens to form a template and
tuning the embeddings of these tokens directly,
without introducing additional tunable parameters
within each network layer. Continuous preﬁx
tuning is also used by Tsimpoukelli et al. (2021)
in the context of multimodal learning (language
and vision) but in that case the preﬁx is sample
dependent. Tuning can be initialized with discrete
prompts as in Zhong et al. (2021b), Qin and
Eisner (2021) and Hambardzumyan et al. (2021).
It can also be done by inserting some tunable
embeddings into a hard prompt template as in
Liu et al. (2021c) and Han et al. (2021b), who
propose prompt tuning with rules (PTR). This
uses manually crafted sub-templates to compose a
complete template using logic rules (see Section
3.2.5 for its application to relation extraction).
It is worth noting that Logan IV et al. (2021)
showed that ﬁne-tuning PLMs in the few-shot set-
ting can avoid prompt engineering, and that one can
use prompts that contain neither task-speciﬁc tem-
plates nor training examples, and even null prompts
that are simple concatenations of the inputs and the
[MASK] token and still achieve competitive accu-
racy on NLU tasks.
Multi-Prompt Learning A number of ap-
proaches use prompt ensembling, augmentation,
and decomposition/composition for a more ﬂexible
task design. We describe them below.
First, multiple prompts can be used for an in-
put (dubbed prompt ensembling ) at inference time.
The prompts can be combined using a uniform
average (Jiang et al., 2021; Schick and Sch ¨utze,
2021a; Yuan et al., 2021) or a weighted average
(Jiang et al., 2021; Qin and Eisner, 2021; Schick
and Sch ¨utze, 2021a,b). Another way to combine
the prompts is majority voting to combine the re-
sults of the different prompts as in Lester et al.
(2021) and Hambardzumyan et al. (2021). Knowl-
edge distillation (Allen-Zhu and Li, 2021), where
the idea is that the knowledge present in an ensem-
ble of models can be distilled into a single model,
has been borrowed to the context of prompt com-
bination by Schick and Sch ¨utze (2021a,b); Schick
and Sch ¨utze (2020) and Gao et al. (2021a) where
for each template-answer pair a separate model
is trained, before ensembling them to annotate an
unlabeled dataset. Then, the authors train a new
12