network layers inserted between the feed-forward
portion of the Transformer architecture (see Sec-
tion 2.4.4); (ii) BitFit (Zaken et al., 2021), where
only the bias terms inside the Transformer are up-
dated; (iii) PLM head tuning, where the embed-
dings in the MLM output layer that are associated
with the tokens of the verbalizer are updated; and
(iv) Calibration (Zhao et al., 2021), where an afﬁne
transformation on top of the logits associated with
the verbalizer tokens is learned. They found that
the best results are achieved using BitFit.
The second approach is joint tuning of the
prompt and the PLM. Here, prompt-relevant pa-
rameters are ﬁne-tuned together with the all or
some of the parameters of the PLM, as in PADA
(Ben-David et al., 2021), where the prompts are
properties of source domains, generated based on
their relatedness to the input example (from a new
domain), and P-Tuning (Liu et al., 2021c), which
makes use of trainable continuous prompt embed-
dings when applying GPT models on NLU tasks.
Finetuning both the model and the prompt-relevant
parameters makes this approach very expressive.
On the other hand, it requires the storage of all the
parameters, with makes it less applicable to small
datasets (Liu et al., 2021b).
It is worth noting that task-speciﬁc training can
also be used earlier during the construction and val-
idation of the prompts. Indeed, as pointed out by
Perez et al. (2021), previous PLM-based few-shot
learning approaches used many held-out examples
to tune various aspects of learning, such as hyperpa-
rameters, training objectives, and natural language
templates (“prompts”). Perez et al. (2021) propose
instead to evaluate the few-shot ability of PLMs in
atrue few-shot learning setting, where such held-
out examples are unavailable.
3.2.5 Applications of Template-based
Methods
Template-based prompting methods are currently
applied to a growing list of NLP tasks. We provide
a survey of how recent studies have addressed a
varied set of NLP applications.
Text Classiﬁcation. In Puri and Catanzaro
(2019), natural language descriptions of classiﬁ-
cation tasks were given as input. Then, the model
was trained to generate the correct answer in natural
language via a language modeling objective, aim-
ing to generalize to new classiﬁcation tasks without
task-speciﬁc tuning.Information Extraction (IE). Cui et al. (2021)
considered the NER task as a language model
ranking problem in a sequence-to-sequence frame-
work where the source sequence corresponds to
the original sentence and the target sequence corre-
sponds to the template prompt, ﬁlled by candidate
spans. For the relation extraction task, Han et al.
(2021b) proposed a model called Prompt Tuning
with Rules (PTR), which applies logic rules to con-
struct prompts with several sub-prompts. Chen
et al. (2021d), instead of using rules, constructed
the prompts by leveraging learnable virtual tem-
plate words and virtual answer words. Their repre-
sentation is synergistically optimized with knowl-
edge constraints. For the event extraction task in a
cross-lingual setting, Fincke et al. (2021) proposed
using the event type and an integer representing the
argument type as preﬁxes.
Knowledge Probing. Factual probing has been
explored in particular by Petroni et al. (2019) and
Jiang et al. (2020) to quantify the amount of factual
knowledge already present in the PLMs, providing
the LAMA and X-FACTR datasets, respectively.
Other works that investigated model knowledge
with discrete template search include Petroni et al.
(2020), Jiang et al. (2021), Haviv et al. (2021),
Shin et al. (2020) and Perez et al. (2021). Continu-
ous template learning was used in Qin and Eisner
(2021), Liu et al. (2021c) and Zhong et al. (2021b).
Prompt ensemble learning was applied to knowl-
edge probing by Jiang et al. (2021) and Qin and
Eisner (2021).
In addition to factual knowledge, additional
types of knowledge that have been probed using
the cloze test include commonsense (Trinh and
Le, 2019), relational knowledge (Petroni et al.,
2019), reasoning (Talmor et al., 2020) and under-
standing rare words (Schick and Sch ¨utze, 2019).
For commonsense reasoning, Winograd Schemas
(Levesque et al., 2012) require the model to iden-
tify the antecedent of an ambiguous pronoun within
context, or involve completing a sentence given
multiple choices. For commonsense knowledge
mining, Feldman et al. (2019) construct a candi-
date piece of knowledge as a sentence, then use a
language model to approximate the likelihood of
the text as a proxy for its truthfulness.
Prompts can also be used to explore the linguistic
knowledge of PLMs, focusing on different phenom-
ena such as analogies (Brown et al., 2020), nega-
tion (Ettinger, 2020) or semantic similarity (Sun
14