asking the models to complete the prompt. Specif-
ically, pre-deﬁned templates can be designed and
ﬁlled with partial knowledge (e.g. the two entities
involved in a relation) and the generative PLMs can
predict the missing words in the templates (e.g. the
relation type between the two entities.) The tem-
plates can be ﬁxed (Goswami et al., 2020) or they
can be dynamically constructed by a pre-trained
model (Shin et al., 2020) (further details are in Sec-
tion 3.2). The second category instead proposes
to prompt the PLMs with full knowledge and ask
the models to generate a natural language text to
describe that knowledge. This task is known as
Data-to-Text (Kukich, 1983), and the goal is to
obtain a textual description of existing knowledge
bases. The generated textual descriptions can be
used by downstream applications such as knowl-
edge probing (Petroni et al., 2019) or QA (Agarwal
et al., 2021), among others. Agarwal et al. (2021)
introduce a model based on T5 to convert Wiki-
data knowledge graphs (with triples of relations be-
tween two entities) into textual data. The proposed
approach consists of three stages. First, create a
large but noisy training dataset using distant super-
vision for relation extraction by aligning knowl-
edge base (KB) triples to Wikipedia texts. Next,
ﬁne-tune T5 in stages, starting with the distantly
supervised dataset for better coverage, then moving
on to a small clean dataset for less hallucination.
The model learns to generate descriptive sentences
from KB triples. Last, build a ﬁlter for the gener-
ated texts based on semantic quality with respect
to the KB triples by scoring the concatenation of
input and output with BERT.
5.2.3 Question Generation
While PLMs can be directly used for generating
answers for questions, they might be also help-
ful to support existing QA systems. Speciﬁcally,
PLMs can be employed to provide clariﬁcation for
downstream QA systems. The clariﬁcation can be
realized in terms of question clariﬁcation when the
question is ambiguous or it can be fulﬁlled by pro-
viding more context. For instance, in Gao et al.
(2021b) and Min et al. (2020), multi-step question
generation approaches are proposed for ambiguous
QA in which the BART model is prompted with an
ambiguous question and the top similar passages
retrieved in a document to generate candidate an-
swers. If multiple answers are generated, another
BART model is employed to generate a disambigua-
tion question for each answer. The newly generatedquestions are later used to extract other candidate
answers. Finally, the generated answer-question
pairs are ranked to select the top one for the am-
biguous QA problem. Min et al. (2020) show that
the process of generating auxiliary disambiguation
questions could further help the models to encode
the interactions between the original input question
and the candidate answers.
In another line of work, Mao et al. (2021) seek
to generate clariﬁcation texts for input questions
to improve the retrieval quality in open-domain
QA (answering factoid questions without a pre-
speciﬁed domain). The most common approach
for this problem involves a retriever-reader archi-
tecture (Chen et al., 2017), which ﬁrst retrieves a
small subset of documents in the pool using the
input question as the query and then analyzes the
retrieved documents to extract (or generate) an an-
swer. To generate augmented texts for the input
question in the ﬁrst retrieval component, Mao et al.
(2021) ﬁne-tune BART to consume the input ques-
tion and attempt to produce the answer and the sen-
tence or title of the paragraph containing the answer.
This method demonstrates superior performance
for both retrieval and end-to-end QA performance.
In addition to clariﬁcation information, PLMs
can also be used to paraphrase questions to support
QA models. Mass et al. (2020) explore the problem
of FAQ retrieval, retrieving the top QA pair given
a user query. Based on the returned QA pairs (q;a)
from a retrieval system, this work proposes an un-
supervised method to re-rank the pairs to improve
the performance. One of the ranking scores is a
matching score between the question pin the pair
(q;a)with respect to the user question. A triple
network is trained over the tuples (p;q;q0), where
qis a paraphrase of the question pwhileq0is ran-
domly selected questions from other QA pairs. To
this end, Mass et al. (2020) ﬁne-tune GPT-2 over
the concatenations of the corresponding answers
and questions in the FAQ. The ﬁne-tuned GPT-2
is then prompted with the answer ato produce a
paraphraseq0forqin the ranking network.
5.2.4 Inference Rule Generation
For some applications, it is important to understand
the process by which the ﬁnal predictions of the
models are obtained. These intermediate inference
rules provide are another form of model explana-
tion and provide insights for improving model per-
formance.
27