Paul and Frank (2021) exploit GPT-2 to perform
narrative story completion: given a few sentences
of a story, the goal is to complete the story us-
ing sentences that logically follow the narrative
in the given incomplete story. In an incremental
generation method, each step seeks to generate a
contextualized inference rule conditioned on the
current incomplete story. To accomplish this, GPT-
2 is ﬁne-tuned on human annotation of story line
inferences. Next, given the current story and gener-
ated inference rule, a new sentence for the story is
generated (using another ﬁne-tuned GPT-2 model).
By interspersing the inference rules, the storyline
generations should create a coherent story that fol-
lows logical connections and causal relationships
between events.
Madaan et al. (2021a) employ T5 to generate in-
ference graphs for defeasible inference (Rudinger
et al., 2020). In this mode of reasoning, given a
premise, a hypothesis may be weakened or over-
turned in light of new evidence. As training in-
ference graphs for this problem requires a large
amount of human-annotated inference graphs, they
propose to exploit reasoning graphs in related tasks
to ﬁne-tune T5. In particular, this work leverages
the inﬂuence graphs in the WIQA dataset that in-
cludes a set of procedural passages, each accompa-
nied by a human-curated inﬂuence graph. The in-
ﬂuence graphs are linearized to ﬁt into the seq2seq
framework for ﬁne-tuning T5 and producing infer-
ence graphs for defeasible inference afterward. It
has been shown that the generated inference graphs
can improve human accuracy on defeasible infer-
ence (which is originally challenging for humans).
6 Discussion
Mix of paradigms or PLMs. The three
paradigms presented in this paper are by no means
mutually exclusive. Instead, it is not rare to see
approaches that use two or three paradigms to-
gether: ﬁne-tuning techniques are often used as part
of prompt-based methods; NLP-as-text-generation
approaches often use carefully crafted templates
(prompts); and prompt-based learning often lever-
ages the text generation capabilities of PLMs to
generate words, phrases, or sentences.
A representative example is Khashabi et al.
(2020), which combined three paradigms: appro-
priate prompts from the context and questions help
to formulate several QA tasks into a uniﬁed text
generation problem with seq2seq-based pre-trainedmodels such as T5, with model ﬁne-tuning to im-
prove performance in several QA tasks.
As independently trained models, PLMs are also
by no means mutually exclusive. For example,
ACE (Wang et al., 2021c) shows that combining
multiple PLMs (e.g ELMo, BERT, mBERT, XLM-
R) yields further improvements over using a single
PLM for a range of NLP tasks. Investigation of
the complementarity of different PLMs is a future
research direction.
From another perspective, the design of the train-
ing for MLMs has been driven by the results on the
ﬁne-tuning paradigm, but it is not clear whether an
exploration of different training objectives could
lead to PLMs that are more effective when used
with prompting or generation to solve NLP tasks.
How much unlabeled data is needed? While
PLMs are usually trained on billions of words,
some works have investigated what can be learned
with less pre-training data. Zhang et al. (2021b),
experimenting on RoBERTa models trained on 1M,
10M, 100M and 1B words (Warstadt et al., 2020b,
MiniBERTas), showed that 10M to 100M words
are sufﬁcient to acquire many syntactic and se-
mantic features. Huebner et al. (2021) presented
BabyBERTa, a RoBERTa-based model trained on
language acquisition data that acquires grammat-
ical knowledge comparable to that of pre-trained
RoBERTa-base – and does so with approximately
15x fewer parameters and 6,000x fewer words. On
the other hand, Zhang et al. (2021b), using the pre-
train then ﬁne-tune paradigm for NLU tasks, found
that millions of words are not sufﬁcient for key
NLU skills, which instead may require billions of
words and continue improvements with additional
pre-training data.
How much labeled data is still needed? While
Le Scao and Rush (2021) present experiments to
quantify the impact of prompts, there has been little
work in designing rigorous experiments to study
how many labeled examples are required by PLMs
to achieve various levels of performance for a range
of NLP tasks, and using each of the three paradigms
outlined in this survey. Such studies will provide a
better understanding of the pros and cons of each
formulation, including cost-beneﬁt analyses weigh-
ing the impact of more labeled data, helping devel-
opers design NLP systems that achieve the desired
goal while minimizing human labeling effort.
28