model to distill the knowledge from the annotated
dataset. In the case of generation tasks, Schick and
Sch¨utze (2020) trained a separate model for each
prompt. Then the model outputs were scored by
averaging their generation probability across all
models.
Second, prompts can be decomposed or com-
posed to more effectively solve an NLP task. De-
composition involves ﬁnding sub-problems for
which prompts can be generated separately. For
example, Cui et al. (2021) proposed an approach
for named entity recognition, where the different
prompts for each candidate span were created and
predicted separately.
Third, augmentation methods such as demon-
stration learning (Gao et al., 2021a) create more
descriptive prompts, as in a multiple-choice prob-
lem. Lu et al. (2021a) showed that both the choice
of examples in the prompts and the order of the
prompts can considerably affect the results. To se-
lect the examples from which the PLM must choose
the correct response ( example sampling ), Gao et al.
(2021a) and Liu et al. (2021a) used sentence em-
beddings to ﬁnd examples semantically close to
the input. Mishra et al. (2021) used both positive
and negative examples, teaching the PLM types of
items to avoid in performing new tasks with only
instructions. As for the order of the selected exam-
ples ( sample ordering ), Kumar and Talukdar (2021)
searched for the best permutation of prompts and
also learned a segmentation token to separate be-
tween the prompts. They showed the usefulness
of this method for few-shot learning on the task of
sentiment classiﬁcation.
3.2.3 Answer Generation
There are two main types of answers to prompts:
those that map to a classiﬁcation label (e.g. Yin
et al., 2019; Cui et al., 2021), and those intended
as the ﬁnal answer (e.g. Petroni et al., 2019; Jiang
et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2019). For classiﬁ-
cation tasks, typically addressed with cloze-style
prompts, the developers identify a subset of words
and phrases from which the PLM may choose, and
that choice is easily mapped to the class of inter-
est. For instance, in a sentiment detection task, the
PLM may answer a prompt with “good,” “great,” or
“excellent,” all of which are mapped to a “positive”
sentiment label. The second type of answer, free
text, prevails for text generation tasks. Examples
of both types are shown in Table 3.
In either case, the deﬁnition of the answer spacemay be optimized to produce ideal prompt re-
sponses. Jiang et al. (2021) used paraphrasing
to extend the search space with back translation
(translating to another language, then back to the
original). Another approach, explored by Schick
and Sch ¨utze (2021a), Schick et al. (2020), Shin
et al. (2020) and Gao et al. (2021a), is prune-then-
search , a two-step method where the answer space
is pruned, for example by only selecting a subset
of words according to their zero-shot accuracy on
the training data (Gao et al., 2021a) and then an an-
swer is searched in the pruned space. An approach
called label decomposition optimizes the search
space by modeling the label names for comparison
to the answer tokens; for instance, in Chen et al.
(2021d) the decomposed relation labels (their indi-
vidual tokens) represent the answer space. Lastly,
Hambardzumyan et al. (2021) add a virtual token
for each class label and optimize its embedding
together with the token embeddings of the prompts,
using gradient descent. This gradient descent op-
timization approach allows direct optimization of
the answers instead of using a discrete search.
3.2.4 Task-speciﬁc Tuning
While prompts can be directly used in a zero-shot,
unsupervised setting, prompts have also been used
in fully supervised or few-shot settings where ei-
ther all or part of the speciﬁc-task training data is
available. Two main approaches currently prevail
for tuning a PLM with prompts.
The ﬁrst approach uses a ﬁxed template-style
prompt to perform tuning of the PLM. Here, a
ﬁxed template is usually applied to every training
and test example as in the PET-TC (Schick and
Sch¨utze, 2021a), PET-Gen (Schick and Sch ¨utze,
2020) and LM-BFF (Gao et al., 2021a) models.
Le Scao and Rush (2021) quantiﬁed the beneﬁt of
using prompts in classiﬁcation tasks by ﬁne-tuning
in equal conditions across many tasks and data
sizes. They showed that prompting consistently
improves the results across tasks over just ﬁne-
tuning, that it is most robust to the choice of pattern,
and that it can be learned without an informative
verbalizer (a function that maps each label to a
single vocabulary token). Logan IV et al. (2021)
showed that only tuning 0.1% of the parameters in
the prompt-based few-shot setting can achieve com-
parable or better accuracy than standard ﬁne-tuning.
For this purpose, they explored different ways to
perform memory-efﬁcient ﬁne-tuning, including (i)
Adapters (Houlsby et al., 2019), which are neural
13