Figure 3: The three main prompt-based approaches. On the instruction based learning (left box) the instructions are
marked in purple, the in-context examples in blue and the prompt in cyan. On the prompt based learning (middle
box), the text to classify is marked on light cyan and the prompt on dark cyan; the label verbalizations are shown
in small boxes. On the proxy task based learning (right box), prompts are marked with dark cyan, the context is on
light cyan and the answers generated by the model are in blue.
To address this task, Schick and Sch ¨utze (2021)
use a generative PLM (GPT2-XL) that generates
Sentence 2, replacing the token. Impressively,
even mathematical reasoning can be handled (Ta-
ble 2(2)): Reynolds and McDonell (2021) show
that by inserting a natural language prompt (“Let’s
solve . . . steps.”) after the math problem statement,
GPT-3 can generate a procedure that solves the
math problem.
Recently, Wei et al. (2021) showed that teaching
a very large PLM to follow instructions with su-
pervised data improves the zero and few-shot abili-
ties of these PLMs. They carried out a large scale
multi-task experiment over more than 60 datasets
grouped into 12 task different tasks, and showed
that a PLM trained via natural language instruc-
tions on other tasks outperforms a standard lan-
guage model on the test task. Mishra et al. (2021)
ﬁne-tuned BART (Lewis et al., 2020) to perform a
similar task using instructions and few-shot exam-
ples for a variety of crowd-sourced NLP tasks. The
crowdsourcing process of each task consists of sev-
eral steps that are natural and intuitive for human
annotators. The instructions to the PLM match the
step-by-step crowdsourcing instructions, decom-
posed into self-contained, separate tasks, leading to
improved performance on unseen tasks, in contrast
to an earlier work (Efrat and Levy, 2020) that re-
ported negative performance when using the crowd-
sourcing instructions as-is.
Scaling limitations may affect the broad appli-
cability of this approach: Wei et al. (2021) show
that instruction tuning achieves signiﬁcant improve-
ments on held-out tasks in the zero-shot setting
when using very large PLMs (e.g. with 68B or137B parameters), but hurts performance when ap-
plied to PLMs with 10B parameters or less. In a
similar setting, Sanh et al. (2021) showed that it is
possible for a model with 11B parameters to bene-
ﬁt from instruction tuning, and identiﬁed three key
differences compared to Wei et al. (2021). (1) They
use a encoder-decoder model trained ﬁrst with the
MLM objective, then as a standard LM, and ﬁnally
ﬁne-tuned on a multitask objective, rather than a
decoder-only autoregressive LM. (2) They argue
that their prompts are qualitatively more diverse in
terms of length and creativity. (3) They hold out
multiple tasks at once, rather than only one at a
time.
We note that the descriptions in instruction learn-
ing can be very detailed. For example, the crowd-
sourcing instructions in Mishra et al. (2021) contain
the task deﬁnition, things to avoid, emphasis and
caution (i.e. required properties for the output), and
positive and negative examples.
3.2 Template-based Learning
A more widely used approach, template-based
learning, reformulates NLP tasks into tasks that
are closer to language models’ pre-training tasks
via template-based prompts. This better lever-
ages the knowledge captured in the pre-training
tasks, leading to a signiﬁcant reduction in the
number of task-speciﬁc training examples required
to achieve a similar performance to previous ap-
proaches(Le Scao and Rush, 2021), or even elim-
inating the need for training data. To achieve this
goal, template-based learning reformulates various
NLP tasks into language modeling tasks via care-
fully designed templates with open slots. In this
10