Input Output
(1) Topic/sentiment classiﬁcation (Schick and Sch ¨utze, 2021a)
Best pizza ever!. It was .great!Positive
(2) Textual entailment (Schick and Sch ¨utze, 2021a)
Mia likes pie? , Mia hates
pie.No!Contradiction
(3) Event argument extraction (Chen et al., 2020c)
Americans sought to bring
calm to Mosul, where U.S.
troops killed 17 people
in clashes earlier in the
week. someone killed
someone with something in
some place at some time .U.S. troops killed 17 people
with something inMosul at
earlier in the week .
(4) Probing for relations/facts (Petroni et al., 2019)
Dante was born in . Florence
(5) Probing for commonsense (Trinh and Le, 2019)
The trophy doesn’t ﬁt in the
suitcase because itis too bigit!trophy :0.9
it!suitcase :0.2
(6) Probing for reasoning (Talmor et al., 2020)
The size of an airplane is
than the size of a house . A.
larger B. smallerlarger
Table 3: Example prompt designs for template-based
methods. great!Positive means that the answer great
will be converted to label Positive . For Chen et al.
(2020c), each of the underlined words (e.g. someone )
will be replaced with the underlined phrase on the out-
put side by a PLM. “ it!trophy : 0.9” means by replac-
ing the underlined pronoun itwith trophy , the modiﬁed
sentence has a likelihood score of 0.9 according to the
PLM.
way, solving the tasks is reduced to ﬁlling the slots
with words or phrases using PLMs, and then pro-
jecting these outputs into the task-speciﬁc labels.
Template-based learning differs from instruction
learning (Section 3.1) in that templates are less
detailed and do not explicitly describe the task.
3.2.1 Template Design
Using a cloze-style prompt design, inputs to a PLM
are converted into a format such that solving the
NLP task only requires the PLM to predict missing
word(s). Table 3 (1) shows the most straightfor-
ward example of this approach, as applied in the
sentiment detection domain.
For classiﬁcation tasks, each predicted word or
phrase is converted into a class label of interest.
For example, we can design a cloze-style prompt
for a textual entailment task in which the goal is to
predict the entail/contradict relation between a pair
of input sentences hX1;X2i. Pattern-Exploiting
Training (PET) (Schick and Sch ¨utze, 2021a) (Ta-
ble 3 (2)) converts a pair of inputs hX1;X2iinto
“X1?;X2” and asks a masked language model to
predict the missing word. The prediction (here yesorno) is directly mapped to one of the textual entail-
ment class labels. This template design allows PET
to reformulate the text entailment problem into the
same masked language modeling problem that was
used to pre-train the PLM. Therefore, it is popular
among classiﬁcation tasks that may be reformu-
lated as predicting a masked word or short phrase
(e.g. topic classiﬁcation, textual entailment, and
knowledge probing). Chen et al. (2020c) reformu-
lates the event argument extraction challenge as a
cloze-style problem (Table 3 (3)), predicting ﬁllers
for the underlined positions, and then apply greedy
decoding to ﬁll in the position incrementally.
Petroni et al. (2019) similarly use the cloze-style
task for relation/fact probing (Table 3 (4))
Amultiple-choice style prompt proves useful
for probing for commonsense knowledge. This
kind of template provides a selection of hypotheses
for the PLM, which selects its preferred answer.
For example, in Table 3 (5), Trinh and Le (2019)’s
model selects trophy instead of suitcase to replace it
in the original sentence. Table 3 (6) shows work by
Talmor et al. (2020), expressing similar reasoning
through a hypothesis-driven approach.
Preﬁx prompts (Li and Liang, 2021; Ham-
bardzumyan et al., 2021; Lester et al., 2021) are
another common type of template. Preﬁxes are
task-speciﬁc vectors prepended to the input. They
do not correspond to actual words but consist of
free parameters. Preﬁx prompts are usually the
best choice for tasks that require generating text
or predicting a next word or phrase, because the
preﬁx-based prompt design is consistent with the
left-to-right nature of the autoregresive model (Liu
et al., 2021b).
Prompts can be further augmented via adding
demonstrations ( demonstration learning ) (Gao
et al., 2021a). In that case, a few labeled exam-
ples are appended to the template to make it more
informative, allowing the PLMs to better predicting
the answer.
3.2.2 Template Construction
Templates can be either manually crafted or au-
tomatically generated. We here survey the differ-
ent methods for generating them as well as ways
to combine and manipulate the template-based
prompts (multi-prompt learning).
Manually-crafted Templates. Most early work
in prompt-based learning uses some form of manu-
ally crafted templates. For example, manual cloze
11