Can we reduce the amount and cost of compu-
tation? The development of deep learning in gen-
eral and the use of PLMs in particular have dramat-
ically increased the amount of computation used
in NLP, leading to a high environmental footprint.
Schwartz et al. (2020) argue for Green AI, suggest-
ing that we should consider efﬁciency, measured
by the number of ﬂoating-point operations used to
generate a result, as a main evaluation criterion, to-
gether with accuracy. Green AI also aims to reduce
the ﬁnancial cost of the computation. In line with
this approach, Izsak et al. (2021) propose software
optimization and design choices for pre-training
BERT in 24 hours using a single low-end deep
learning server.
Do PLMs excel at semantic understanding or
memorization? Another interesting avenue to
explore is separating extraction or text under-
standing from memorization. To what extent can
PLMs memorize facts and extract an answer from
a passage provided (understanding a text), for
knowledge-intensive tasks such as Questions An-
swering (QA) and Information Retrieval (IR)? This
is motivated by the observation by Wang et al.
(2021a) that PLMs are terrible at remembering
training facts with high precision and that it is also
challenging for them to answer closed-book ques-
tions even if relevant knowledge is retained.
Is explicit linguistic information needed? A re-
lated debate is whether a symbolic annotation cov-
ering syntax or semantics should be integrated to
improve the performance of a PLM-based system,
or whether this information is already present in the
model. Below we list some successes in leverag-
ing syntax or semantics, though there is no def-
inite answer yet. In terms of syntax, Xu et al.
(2021) utilize automatically produced syntax in
both the pre-training and ﬁne-tuning stages, and
show improved performance on several benchmark
datasets. Nguyen et al. (2020b) and Sachan et al.
(2021) inject syntax only in the ﬁne-tuning stage.
Regarding semantics, Zhang et al. (2020d) incor-
porate Semantic Role Labeling predictions into
the pre-training procedure of BERT, improving the
performance on textual entailment and QA tasks.
Wu et al. (2021b) integrate semantic information
into the task-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning stage, focusing on
the DELPHIN dependencies formalism or “DM”
(Ivanova et al., 2012). Experimenting on RoBERTa,
they obtained improvements on the GLUE bench-mark. Syntax and semantics can also be jointly in-
tegrated, as in Zhou et al. (2020a), where multi-task
learning was used to combine BERT pre-training
with both semantic and syntactic parsing tasks, im-
proving the performance on the GLUE benchmark.
Can we integrate implicit semantic information
using QA? Instead of enriching PLMs with sym-
bolic annotations, a possible alternative for a su-
pervision signal is QA data, as it is easier to an-
swer questions relative to a sentence than to an-
notate linguistic phenomena in it (Roth, 2017; He
et al., 2020). In the s-QuASE PLM presented in He
et al. (2020), further pre-training of BERT on QA
datasets is done while restricting the interaction be-
tween the question and context inputs. s-QuASE is
particularly useful in single-sentence tasks such as
Semantic Role Labeling and NER. A similar direc-
tion was pursued by Jia et al. (2021) who leveraged
question generation and knowledge distillation to
build a QA-based pre-training objective.
Do PLMs need meaningful prompts? The suc-
cess of prompts in zero- and few-shot learning has
been attributed to the prompts serving as instruc-
tions that allow the PLM to learn with fewer exam-
ples, much the way humans would (Mishra et al.,
2021; Schick and Sch ¨utze, 2021a; Brown et al.,
2020). In fact, the excellent results may instead be
attributable to the mere exploitation of patterns in
the training data of PLMs, and not to PLMs’ per-
ceived ability to interpret and follow meaningful
instructions. Webson and Pavlick (2021) show,
for instance, that irrelevant templates match the
performance of meaningful ones in few-shot en-
tailment experiments, adding that some of the tem-
plates discovered by automatic generation of dis-
crete prompts are also unnatural (Shin et al., 2020).
In this sense, the results of continuous prompts also
show that PLMs do not need meaningful instruc-
tions for improving few-shot performance.
Theoretical and empirical analysis The theo-
retical understanding of the paradigms presented
in this survey is preliminary. Apart from the issues
mentioned above, there is a lack of understanding
of what actually makes these paradigms so suc-
cessful, and whether their success can be general-
ized across models and languages. For instance,
prompts may be PLM-dependent, or they may be
transferable across models as indicated in (Perez
et al., 2021). There is very little work on study-
ing the generalization of prompting and generation
29