aspect-based SA in the unsupervised domain adap-
tation setting, aiming to transform labeled datasets
in a source domain to a new target domain. The
main approach involves two steps. In the ﬁrst step
of domain generalization, domain-speciﬁc words
and phrases in the labeled source data and un-
labeled target data are identiﬁed and masked in
the inputs. Opinion words for the source domain
and target-speciﬁc terms and opinion words are
retrieved via sentiment lexicon and bootstrapping
methods using relations in dependency trees. The
target-speciﬁc terms in the unlabeled data will be
masked to ﬁne-tune BERT. In the second step of
domain speciﬁcation , the source-speciﬁc terms in
the source data are masked (thus producing domain-
independent texts) and sent into the ﬁne-tuned
BERT to produce labeled sentences in the target do-
main. Here, some constraints based on dictionaries
are necessary to ensure that the inﬁlled words are
terms or opinion words with the same sentiment
polarity. The generated data can be used indepen-
dently or combined with original source training
data to train a SA model for the target domain.
Li et al. (2020b) use PLMs to generate synthetic
data for aspect term extraction (cast as a sequence
labeling problem). To ﬁne-tune PLMs with the
sequence-to-sequence framework for this purpose,
the input includes a masked sentence from a train-
ing dataset and the corresponding label sequence
while the output are the masked tokens in the input.
The ﬁne-tuned PLMs are then exploited to generate
new possibilities for the masked tokens that can be
injected into the masked input, using the original
label sequence to obtain synthetic labeled data to
train models.
5.1.4 Fact Veriﬁcation
Fact veriﬁcation aims to predict whether a given
claim is supported, denied, or unresolved based on
the given evidence. Automatically generated texts
can be used to generate claim-evidence pairs for
each label category. To this end, Pan et al. (2021a)
employ a two-step approach to generate synthetic
data for fact veriﬁcation. In the ﬁrst step of ques-
tion generation, given the evidence and an answer,
a BART model, ﬁne-tuned on the SQuAD dataset
using the similar input-output format, generates a
question for that answer. Next, a question-to-claim
model is employed to take the question and answer
as inputs and generate a claim (also using a BART
model ﬁne-tuned on SQuAD). To produce hclaim,
evidenceipairs with the “support” relation, an en-tity is selected in the original evidence in the ﬁrst
step of the process. To produce a “refute” claim,
the work replaces the original answer with another
entity in the generation process. Finally, to create a
“not-enough-evidence” claim, the paper expands the
original evidence to include other paragraphs in the
same document and produce claims for some en-
tity in the extended paragraph. Experiments show
competitive results when the augmented data is
combined with few or even no human-labeled ex-
amples for model training.
5.1.5 Document Classiﬁcation
A typical approach to generating synthetic data
for text classiﬁcation is to build a conditional gen-
erative model for each class by ﬁne-tuning with
labeled data from that class. While these models
can be ﬁne-tuned with the next word prediction ob-
jective with generative PLMs such as GPT-2, Liu
et al. (2020b) use reinforcement learning to train
generative models to augment text classiﬁcation
labeled data. The rewards for training are based on
the similarity between the generated tokens and a
salient lexicon of the target class computed via top
frequency-based salient words, and the divergence
between the conditional and unconditional models.
Liu et al. (2020b) demonstrate the effectiveness of
using the automatically generated data in multiple
text classiﬁcation problems and datasets, including
sentiment analysis and offense detection.
5.2 Generating Auxiliary Data to Improve
Different Aspects of NLP Models
The following sections, again arranged by task, dis-
cuss ways of using PLM-generated text to aid in
auxiliary tasks, helping developers or users under-
stand model strengths and weaknesses or decision-
making characteristics.
5.2.1 Explaining Models’ Decisions
Despite the impressive performance of deep learn-
ing models for various NLP tasks, a remaining
challenge to widespread adoption is the lack of
explanations for the models’ decisions. This hin-
ders the development and debugging process, as
well as user trust. This is especially true for appli-
cation domains such as healthcare, security, and
online education. As such, a considerable number
of approaches have been proposed for explaining
deep learning models’ behavior, including model-
intrinsic (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Lundberg and Lee,
2017; Chen et al., 2018) and model-agnostic ap-
25