a ﬁne-tuned T5 model. To ﬁne-tune T5, the model
is asked to generate “True” or “False” as the output
sequence, indicating the document’s relevance to
the query. The probability of generating “True” is
used as the ranking score for the candidate.
De Cao et al. (2021) address the entity retrieval
problem: given a set of Wikipedia articles repre-
senting entities, return the entity that is most rel-
evant to a textual input source x. Each entity is
represented by its textual representation (e.g. the
title of its Wikipedia article), which will be used
as the output sequence yfor the generative models.
BART is ﬁne-tuned to rank the entities using the
generation likelihood P(yjx). Cui et al. (2021) ex-
plore generation-based ranking for NER, especially
in few-shot and cross-domain few-shot settings.
Given an input sentence and a text span, a template
is formed by concatenating the words in the span
and an expression of type “is a entity type entity”.
The original sentence and the template serve as an
input-output pair in sequence-to-sequence models.
BART is then employed to score this pair (using the
probability of the template output produced by the
decoder of BART). For each span, the entity type
corresponding to the template with highest score
is selected. Original NER training data is used to
create gold standard templates to ﬁne-tune BART.
In addition to question answering, other genera-
tive tasks have been shown to beneﬁt from PLMs.
For instance, semantic parsing, generating a struc-
ture representing the semantics of the sentence, is
explored in a recent work by Shin et al. (2021).
Authors show that by reformulating the output of
PLMs the generated natural language can be used
to recover the semantic structure of the input text.
They use GPT-3 in the experiments.
5 Data Generation via PLM
In addition to using PLMs to perform NLP tasks
directly, PLMs can be used to generate data that
can be used to enhance the performance of NLP
systems in two ways. Note that these data gener-
ation approaches are complementary to the three
paradigms of PLM-for-NLP discussed in previous
sections.
First, data generated by PLMs can be combined
with original training data to improve NLP mod-
els where training data is too sparse. Typically,
this is applied to create new labeled data to in-
crease diversity, enrich the models, and otherwise
alleviate common limitations of hand-labeled data.The studies presented below discuss, for various
downstream NLP tasks: approaches for ﬁne-tuning
PLMs to ensure they capture the key characteristics
of the task when performing data generation; ap-
propriate reformulation of the original training data
for PLM ﬁne-tuning and generation; and ﬁltering
the new data for noise introduced by the generation
process.
Second, we discuss the use of auxiliary data
generated by PLMs to shed light on interesting
aspects of NLP models. This approach plays a role
in machine learning explainability by providing
generations such as counterexamples, clarifying
questions, context for answers, inference rules, and
other insight-rich sequences.
5.1 Augmenting NLP Models with
Automatically Generated Data
Traditional approaches to data augmentation, in-
cluding generation via semi-supervised learning on
large unlabeled data sets and synthesis with back-
translation or synonymous word replacement (Feng
et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021a) were shown to be ef-
fective for increasing NLP models’ accuracy and/or
coverage. Newer studies show that PLMs can be
also used as an effective method for data augmen-
tation (Zhang et al., 2020a; Yang et al., 2020; Peng
et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2020; Anaby-Tavor et al.,
2020), requiring no signiﬁcant change to the model
architecture. The ﬂuency of PLM text generations
stand in contrast to the outcomes of traditional ap-
proaches that may produce less natural samples. As
discussed in previous sections, the massive amount
of linguistic knowledge accumulated by the PLM
allows for adaptation to many domains and tasks,
including those with very limited labeled data. The
vast knowledge may also produce a greater vari-
ety of new examples, further improving the NLP
models trained on them.
We organize the discussion of data augmentation
methods according to the NLP tasks they support.
5.1.1 Information Extraction (IE)
Prior works explored synthetic data generation with
PLMs (Madaan et al., 2020; Bosselut et al., 2019)
for a variety of IE tasks.
Veyseh et al. (2021a) and Veyseh et al. (2021b)
use GPT-2 to produce synthetic labeled data for
event detection. Sentences in existing training
datasets are augmented with markers to indicate
positions of event trigger words. The resulting la-
beled sentences are used to ﬁne-tune GPT-2 us-
23