et al., 2021). Linguistic evaluation of language
models (Linzen et al.; Gulordava et al., 2018; Gold-
berg, 2019; Tran et al., 2018; Bacon and Regier,
2019; McCoy et al., 2020; Linzen, 2020) usually
considers minimal pairs of grammatical and non-
grammatical sentences addressing a speciﬁc phe-
nomenon that differs in a single place in the sen-
tence. To succeed, a model must score the grammat-
ical sentence higher than its ungrammatical coun-
terpart. A main resource in this context is BLiMP
(Benchmark of Linguistic Minimal Pairs, Warstadt
et al., 2020a) which provides minimal pairs for var-
ious grammatical phenomena. Recently, the use of
this benchmark was adapted for language acquisi-
tion research (Huebner et al., 2021): the authors
probe a RoBERTa-based model pre-trained on tran-
scriptions of child-directed speech (MacWhinney,
2000) to complete the benchmark task. The pref-
erence score can be calculated either holistically ,
summing the cross-entropy errors at each position
in the sentence (Zaczynska et al., 2020; Huebner
et al., 2021), or in an MLM-based way, where each
candidate sentence is masked by a language model
multiple times with the mask changing position.
The score is computed by summing the log-losses
at the different masked positions (Salazar et al.,
2020).
Other tasks. The PET procedure (Schick and
Sch¨utze, 2021a) was also applied to the Textual
Entailment task. QA is addressed in Khashabi et al.
(2020) with appropriate prompts from the context
and questions, formulating several QA tasks into
a uniﬁed text generation problem with encoder-
decoder pre-trained models such as T5.
Prompts have also been used for the evalua-
tion of text generation. Yuan et al. (2021) used
prompts in the BARTSCORE-PROMPT variant of
the BARTSCORE measure they propose that treats
the evaluation of various text generation tasks as a
generation problem. In BARTSCORE-PROMPT,
prompts are either appended to the source text or
prepended to the target text and are shown to be
useful. For example, adding the phrase “such as” to
the translated text when using pre-trained models
signiﬁcantly improves the correlation with human
evaluation on German-English machine translation
evaluation.
Schick et al. (2021) showed that PLMs are able
to recognize the toxicity of the text they produce
(self-diagnosis). Then they proposed an algorithm
that permits the language model to produce lessproblematic text (self-debiasing), using a textual
description of the undesired behavior.
Shin et al. (2021) explore the use of PLMs as
few-shot semantic parsers. The authors use GPT-3
to convert text into a canonical text (in a controlled
sub-language) satisfying a grammar, that is then
automatically mapped to the target structured mean-
ing representation.
3.3 Learning from Proxy Tasks
Templates and prompts play a role again in an indi-
rect approach to NLP tasks called “proxy tasks”.
Examples for the use of this approach are emo-
tion classiﬁcation or event and argument extraction,
both shown in Figure 3 (right box) with prompt-
based proxy tasks. See Table 4 for additional ex-
amples of proxy tasks and prompt design.
The key distinction between learning from proxy
tasks and previous methods is the use of supervised
Natural Language Understanding (NLU) tasks as
a proxy instead of self-supervised language mod-
eling for the target task. Indeed, taking advantage
of large NLU datasets for extra supervision results
in better zero and few-shot performance in the tar-
get task with relatively small PLMs (Wang et al.,
2021b), commonly RoBERTa largeat 345M param-
eters. Knowledge-rich classiﬁcation tasks in par-
ticular beneﬁt from PLM proxy tasks, because the
latter can reformulate the class label as a prompt,
taking advantage of the meaning of class labels
instead of treating them as indices. In this section,
we describe the main proxy-task-based learning
approaches using QA (Section 3.3.1) and Textual
Entailment (Section 3.3.2).
3.3.1 Question Answering as Proxy Task
In a strong move away from traditional informa-
tion extraction, recent studies replace modeling of
explicit entity, relation, and event classes with nat-
ural language questions that get at the exact item
of interest. Questions can be used to probe for the
required information in the text.
The choice of using QA as a proxy task is mo-
tivated by the relative ease of answering simple
questions, as compared to performing expert anno-
tation for complex linguistic phenomena.
In information extraction tasks, question
prompts typically address identiﬁcation and clas-
siﬁcation jointly, by constructing the question to
identify a particular type. For example, the ques-
tion “Who bought something?” will produce an
answer speciﬁc to the Buyer argument role in an
15