of the spans of interest for variations of the aspect-
based sentiment analysis (ABSA) task, including
aspect term extraction, opinion term extraction,
aspect-level sentiment classiﬁcation and aspect-
oriented opinion extraction. Finally, casting a prob-
lem into an index generation task is also proposed
for semantic parsing (i.e. ﬁlling slots) (Rongali
et al., 2020). The output sequence in this work
starts with the intent, followed by slot names and
the index sequences of the words in the input for
the slots. At decoding time, each step produces
a distribution over the word indexes in the input
sentence (as a pointer network) and the vocabulary
for slots and intents in the datasets.
4.3 Generating Answers
This strategy is designed mainly for the QA task.
The basic idea is to ﬁne-tune PLMs to generate an-
swers for the QA problems of interest. Wang et al.
(2021a) use BART for closed-book QA that aims to
directly provide answers for input questions. They
show that BART struggles on a version of SQuAD
for closed-book QA where the test and training
data do not have much question and answer over-
lap. It also shows that BART cannot remember
knowledge from the ﬁne-tuning data if there are
many training passages for ﬁne-tuning. Sugges-
tions to address those issues include decoupling the
knowledge memorization and QA ﬁne-tuning, and
forcing the model to recall relevant knowledge in
the answer generation step.
Hsu et al. (2021) applies answer generation to
the problem of answer selection, in which the sys-
tem must choose the correct answer from a pro-
vided candidate set (it is also provided the question).
Instead of training an answer selector (Han et al.,
2021a), Hsu et al. (2021) uses answer generation
through ﬁne-tuning PLMs such as T5 and BART,
which consume the input question and the top an-
swer candidates, then generate an answer for the
question. To prepare training data for ﬁne-tuning,
the output answers might come from human anno-
tators or be directly inherited from the provided
correct answer (i.e. the correct answer will be re-
moved from the input for the generative models
and maybe replaced by another answer candidate).
4.4 Filling templates
For many extraction tasks, the output are spans or-
ganized into one or several templates. For example,
event extraction tasks require a system to extracttemplates in the form of who did what to whom
where and when .
A template deﬁnes the appropriate relationship
and order for the spans and labels for generation,
forming the output sequence y. Du et al. (2021b)
explores the template ﬁlling idea for an IE task:
given a document, a model must identify event
templates/types (via trigger words) and entity men-
tion ﬁllers for the argument roles. A sequence-
to-sequence model for template ﬁlling takes the
possible event types concatenated with words in
the input document xas the input, and outputs a
sequence of tuples. Each tuple corresponds to a
detected event template, starting with an event type
and followed by the text span ﬁllers for the roles in
the input document (following an order). The roles
with no ﬁllers are associated with null. (Zhang
et al., 2021a) also examines a similar approach of
tuple generation for ABSA.
The template ﬁlling methods can also introduce
additional information into the templates to aid the
label generation process, such as natural descrip-
tions or deﬁnitions of the labels. In particular, Li
et al. (2021c) pursue a general template ﬁlling ap-
proach for document-level event argument extrac-
tion: given an event trigger in an input document,
ﬁnd entity mentions to ﬁll in the roles for the event.
A conditional generative model (e.g. BART) is
employed for argument extraction where the input
(the condition) to the model is created by combin-
ing an unﬁlled template and the document context.
The template is essentially a sentence describing
the event type augmented with placeholders for
argument role ﬁllers. The output sequence yis a
ﬁlled template where placeholders are replaced by
concrete arguments (entity mentions). To avoid
entity type mismatch for arguments, the templates
in the inputs are also appended with sentences to
indicate entity types for arguments (e.g. arg 1is a
person) that can be used to re-rank the output se-
quences to follow the type constraints. Below is an
example input xin which a template over a list of
event arguments arg 1;:::;arg 6and the document
text DOC TEXT are concatenated, and output y,
in which the underlined text spans are ﬁllers from
DOC TEXT) from Li et al. (2021c):
x=hsi harg 1ibought, sold,
or tradedharg 3itoharg 2iin
exchange for harg 4ifor the
benefit ofharg 5iatharg 6i
21