Application Work Task design Prompt design
Relation Extrac-
tionLi et al. (2019a) Use question-answering to iden-
tify the most appropriate entity
span, given an incomplete text
and an indication of the class
typeInput: The armory is north of the music center. Prompt: Find a
facility near E1?E1, physical, facility
Sainz et al.
(2021)Use textual entailment to deter-
mine the likelihood of a can-
didate relation (such as Place-
OfDeath(X,Y) given an input
sentence.Input: Gary’s car crash occurred in Houston; Prompt: Gary died
in Houston
Event Extrac-
tionDu and Cardie
(2020)Use a series of ordered ques-
tions, each leveraging the out-
put of the previous answer, to
ﬁnd event triggers and appropri-
ate arguments(1) Input: Donna purchased a new laptop; Prompt: What is the
trigger? purchased (2) Prompt: What was purchased? laptop
Topic and Senti-
ment Classiﬁca-
tionYin et al. (2019) Use textual entailment to deter-
mine whether a topic name Tis
suitable for a text.Input: Dinosaurs and humans never coexisted. Prompt: This
text is about T.
Puri and Catan-
zaro (2019)Use question answering to
probe for a topic or sentiment
name from among a closed set
of responses.Input: Dinosaurs and humans never coexisted. Prompt: How is
the text best described? T1,T2, orT3
Coreference
ResolutionWu et al.
(2020b)Use question-answering to ﬁnd
a coreferent mention of a
marked mention from within
the same text.Input: I arrived at the party with my tux on, and introduced
myself as George. I told them that <mention>I</mention>
was hired to do some Christmas music; Prompt: Who does it I
refer to?
Table 4: Examples of task design and example prompts for four different applications of prompt-based proxy tasks.
event of type Exchange-Ownership (see Figure 3,
right box).
Li et al. (2020c) formulates Named Entity
Recognition (NER) as a QA problem. For ex-
ample, the prompt “which person is mentioned
in the text?” will identify a mention classiﬁed as a
PERSON. The proposed BERT-based system per-
forms detection of multiple spans through the use
of separate binary classiﬁers identifying start and
end tokens. The authors incorporate synonyms and
examples into the queries.
Wu et al. (2020b) formulated coreference reso-
lution as a span prediction task via QA, where a
query is generated for each candidate mention us-
ing its surrounding context, and a span prediction
module uses the query to extract the coreference
spans in the document.
Levy et al. (2017) ﬁrst formulated relation ex-
traction as a QA task. This approach has been
pursued in the context of PLMs by Li et al. (2019a)
and Zhao et al. (2020b). Han et al. (2021b) ad-
dresses relation extraction with sub-prompts for en-
tity recognition andrelation classiﬁcation , com-
posing them into a complete prompt using logic
rules. Both types of questions are used to probe a
QA system in a supervised setting to perform the
two sub-tasks. Task decomposition is also used in
the work of Zhou et al. (2021) for event extractionwhere natural questions for argument identiﬁca-
tion (“What plays the role?”) and argument clas-
siﬁcation (“What is the role?”) mutually improve
each other.
Chen et al. (2020c) reformulated event extrac-
tion as a cloze task with QA model based on BERT
and the SQuAD 2.0 dataset (Rajpurkar et al., 2018).
Question answering is used directly, preserving
the QA format, in Du and Cardie (2020), Feng
et al. (2020a), Li et al. (2020a), Zhou et al. (2021)
and Liu et al. (2020a) for argument extraction, in-
cluding the argument identiﬁcation and classiﬁca-
tion sub-tasks. In these cases the event extraction
training data is converted to the QA format, where
the questions are derived from the ontology. Liu
et al. (2020a) also experimented in a zero-shot set-
ting where no task-speciﬁc data is used for train-
ing, only using prompts for probing. The zero-
shot setting for the full event extraction pipeline
has been explored in Lyu et al. (2021) where QA-
based prompts are used for argument extraction and
prompts based on Textual Entailment (Dagan et al.,
2013) are used for trigger classiﬁcation (see Sec-
tion 3.3.1 below). Several ablation experiments an-
alyzed the different components of the system such
as the choice of PLM, the choice of QA dataset and
the way to generate the questions (ﬁxed vs. contex-
tualized). It was shown in particular that RoBERTA
16