DSANet: Dual Self-Attention Network for Multivariate Time
Series Forecasting
Siteng Huang
Westlake University
huangsiteng@westlake.edu.cnDonglin Wang∗
Westlake University
wangdonglin@westlake.edu.cn
Xuehan Wu
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
wuxuehan2@huawei.comAo Tang
WeCar Technology Co., Ltd.
ao.tang@weicheche.cn
ABSTRACT
Multivariate time series forecasting has attracted wide attention
in areas, such as system, traffic, and finance. The difficulty of the
task lies in that traditional methods fail to capture complicated non-
linear dependencies between time steps and between multiple time
series. Recently, recurrent neural network and attention mechanism
have been used to model periodic temporal patterns across multiple
time steps. However, these models fit not well for time series with
dynamic-period patterns or nonperiodic patterns. In this paper, we
propose a dual self-attention network (DSANet) for highly efficient
multivariate time series forecasting, especially for dynamic-period
or nonperiodic series. DSANet completely dispenses with recur-
rence and utilizes two parallel convolutional components, called
global temporal convolution and local temporal convolution, to
capture complex mixtures of global and local temporal patterns.
Moreover, DSANet employs a self-attention module to model depen-
dencies between multiple series. To further improve the robustness,
DSANet also integrates a traditional autoregressive linear model
in parallel to the non-linear neural network. Experiments on real-
world multivariate time series data show that the proposed model
is effective and outperforms baselines.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Mathematics of computing →Time series analysis;
KEYWORDS
Time Series Forecasting, Deep Learning, Self-Attention
ACM Reference Format:
Siteng Huang, Donglin Wang, Xuehan Wu, and Ao Tang. 2019. DSANet:
Dual Self-Attention Network for Multivariate Time Series Forecasting. In
The 28th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Man-
agement (CIKM ’19), November 3–7, 2019, Beijing, China. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3357384.3358132
∗Corresponding author.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CIKM ’19, November 3–7, 2019, Beijing, China
©2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6976-3/19/11. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3357384.33581321 INTRODUCTION
As multivariate time series are ubiquitous in our daily life, research
on multivariate time series forecasting has been carried out in many
areas, such as sensor networks [ 11], road occupancy rates forecast-
ing [ 10], and financial market prediction [ 16]. However, complex
and non-linear dependencies exist not only between time steps but
also in a variety of variables. Furthermore, the dependencies may
change dynamically with time, which significantly increases the
difficulty of analysis. Therefore, a major challenge of multivariate
time series forecasting is how to capture dynamic dependencies
between time steps and multiple variables.
Advanced statistical methods have been proposed for time series
forecasting, such as vector autoregression (VAR) [ 4] and Gaussian
process (GP) [ 11]. However, they usually assume certain distribu-
tion or function form of time series, which makes them unable to
capture complicated underlying non-linear relationships and reflect
reality. In addition, most of them ignore the dependencies between
variables when addressing multivariate time series, which reduces
the accuracy of forecasting. Recently, deep neural networks have
drawn great attention in related domains due to their flexibility
in capturing nonlinearity. In particular, recurrent neural network
(RNN) [ 12] has been considered as the default starting point for
sequence modeling. However, traditional RNNs have difficulty in
capturing long-range dependencies due to gradient vanishing [ 3].
As its variants, long short-term memory (LSTM) [ 7] and gated recur-
rent unit (GRU) [ 5], have overcome the limitation. Attention mech-
anism [ 2] also helps RNN to model temporal patterns, which allows
modeling on dependencies of the input and output by focusing on
the selective parts of the input sequence. Models based on LSTM or
GRU with attention mechanism have been proposed for time series
forecasting and show good performances in exploiting long-term
dependencies and handling non-linear dynamics [ 10,13]. However,
due to the unsatisfactory performance, the structure might not be
suitable for those data with dynamic-period patterns or nonperiodic
patterns, which is common in a complex environment.
To enable accurate and robust forecasting for multivariate time
series, we propose a dual self-attention network (DSANet) for highly
efficient multivariate time series forecasting without exogenous
information. In DSANet, we first feed each of the univariate time
series independently into two parallel convolutional components,
called global temporal convolution and local temporal convolution,
to model complex mixtures of global and local temporal patterns.
Next, the learned time series representations from each convolu-
tional component are fed into an individual self-attention module,
Session: Short - Time Sequences & Dynamics
CIKM ’19, November 3–7, 2019, Beijing, China
2129