with the aim of learning the dependencies among different series.
To further improve the robustness, an autoregressive linear model
is integrated in parallel to the non-linear attention network of
DSANet. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to
apply self-attention mechanism in time series forecasting with the
help of well-designed dual branches architecture. Experiments on
a real-world time series data set demonstrate the accuracy and
robustness of the proposed method.
2 RELATED WORK
We first consider statistical linear methods for multivariate time
series. Here, the vector autoregression (VAR) [ 4] model is widely
considered as a baseline method, which generalizes the univariate
autoregressive (AR) model by allowing for more than one evolving
variable. To model non-linear relationships, some variants of the
autoregressive model are used, such as LRidge [ 8], LSVR [ 14] and
Gaussian process (GP) [ 11]. However, they assume certain distri-
bution or function form of time series and fail to capture different
forms of nonlinearity.
Due to the ability to flexibly model various non-linear relation-
ships, neural networks are often applied to enable non-linear fore-
casting models. For example, recurrent neural network models
using LSTM or GRU are often used to provide non-linear time se-
ries forecasting. To predict more accurately, complex structures
such as recurrent-skip layer (LSTNet-S), temporal attention layer
(LSTNet-A) [ 10], and a novel temporal pattern attention mecha-
nism (TPA) [ 13] have been proposed. However, when working on
data with dynamic-period patterns or nonperiodic patterns, their
performance drops significantly.
3 PRELIMINARIES
Atime series X(i)=⟨x(i)
1,x(i)
2, . . . , x(i)
T⟩is a fully observed time-
ordered sequence of measurements, where measurement x(i)
Tis
recorded at time stamp T. Usually, the time interval between two
consecutive measurements is constant. A multivariate time series
is denoted as X=⟨X(1),X(2), . . . , X(D)⟩, where time series in X
are correlated with each other, and measurements XT∈RDare
recorded at time stamp T.
Problem Statement: Given a set of multivariate time series X=
⟨X(1),X(2), . . . , X(D)⟩, where Dis the number of univariate time
series and X(D)∈RTwith Tbeing the length of the input window
size, we aim at predicting in a rolling forecasting fashion. That being
said, we predict XT+hbased on the known ⟨X1,X2, . . . , XT⟩, where
his the desirable horizon ahead of the current time stamp. Likewise,
we predict the future value of XT+h+kbased on⟨X1+k,X2+k,···,
XT+k⟩,k∈R+, with an assumption that the information within the
window is sufficient for prediction and the window size is fixed. We
hence formulate that for the the forecasting target XT+h∈RD, the
input matrix at time stamp TisX=⟨X(1),X(2), . . . , X(D)⟩∈RD×T.
4 METHODOLOGY
Figure 1 presents an overview of our proposed DSANet. DSANet
utilizes two convolutional structures, namely global temporal con-
volution and local temporal convolution, to embed each univariate
series in Xinto two representation vectors with temporal informa-
tion of different scale. Each vector forms a matrix and then enteran elaborate self-attention module to capture the dependencies
between multiple series. In the end, the model generates the final
prediction by summing up the output of both self-attentional net-
work and the AR component. The details of the building blocks are
introduced in the following paragraphs.
Global Temporal Convolution: Deep learning methods in previ-
ous work mainly use RNNs to capture temporal patterns. However,
due to the inherently sequential nature, it is difficult for RNNs to
model long sequences and compute in parallel, which ultimately
damages the computing speed and forecasting effect. As convolu-
tional structure has demonstrated its power in capturing features
as well as parallel computing, we use it together with multiple T×1
filters, called global temporal convolution, to extract time-invariant
patterns of all time steps for univariate time series.
Each filter of global temporal convolution module sweeps through
the input matrix Xand produces a vector with size of D×1, where
the activation function is the ReLU function. Merged by the vectors,
The convolutional structure finally obtains an output matrix HGof
sizeD×nG, where nGis the number of filters in global temporal
convolution. Note that each row of the matrix can be considered as
a learned representation of a univariate series.
Local Temporal Convolution: Considering that time steps with a
shorter relative distance have a larger impact on each other, DSANet
also utilizes a convolutional structure in parallel to global tempo-
ral convolution, which is called local temporal convolution. While
global temporal convolution captures long-term dependencies be-
tween time steps, local temporal convolution focuses on modeling
local temporal patterns, which can be more helpful for forecasting.
Different from global temporal convolution, the length of filters
used in local temporal convolution is l, where l<Tis a hyper-
parameter. The k-th filter of local temporal convolution slides along
the time dimension and produces a matrix ML
k. In order to map
local temporal relations in each univariate time series to a vector
representation, DSANet uses a 1-D max-pooling layer over each
column of the matrix ML
kto capture the most representative fea-
tures. Thus, we obtain an output matrix HLof size D×nL, where
nLis the number of filters in local temporal convolution.
Self-Attention Module: Due to the strong feature-extraction ca-
pability of self-attentional networks, we apply a self-attention mod-
ule inspired by the Transformer [ 15] to capture the dependencies
between different series. For each learned representation of a uni-
variate series, the self-attention module learns its relationship with
other learned representations including itself. As shown in Figure 1,
the self-attention module is composed of a stack of Nidentical
layers, and each layer has two sub-layers: a self-attention layer and
a position-wise feed-forward layer.
In general, an attention function can be described as mapping a
query and a set of key-value pairs to an output, where the query,
keys, values, and the output are all vectors. The output is computed
as a weighted sum of the values, where the weight for each position
is computed as the inner product between the query and keys at
every other position in time series. In the self-attention module
following the global temporal convolution, a set of queries, keys, and
values are packed together into matrices QG,KG, and VG, obtained
by applying projections to the input HG.
Session: Short - Time Sequences & Dynamics
CIKM ’19, November 3–7, 2019, Beijing, China
2130