Toward an AI Physicist for Unsupervised Learning
Tailin Wu, Max Tegmark
Dept. of Physics & Center for Brains, Minds & Machines,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139; tailin@mit.edu
(Dated: September 4, 2019)
We investigate opportunities and challenges for improving unsupervised machine learning using
four common strategies with a long history in physics: divide-and-conquer, Occam's razor, uni-
cation and lifelong learning. Instead of using one model to learn everything, we propose a novel
paradigm centered around the learning and manipulation of theories , which parsimoniously predict
both aspects of the future (from past observations) and the domain in which these predictions are
accurate. Specically, we propose a novel generalized-mean-loss to encourage each theory to spe-
cialize in its comparatively advantageous domain, and a dierentiable description length objective
to downweight bad data and \snap" learned theories into simple symbolic formulas. Theories are
stored in a \theory hub", which continuously unies learned theories and can propose theories when
encountering new environments. We test our implementation, the toy \AI Physicist" learning agent,
on a suite of increasingly complex physics environments. From unsupervised observation of trajecto-
ries through worlds involving random combinations of gravity, electromagnetism, harmonic motion
and elastic bounces, our agent typically learns faster and produces mean-squared prediction errors
about a billion times smaller than a standard feedforward neural net of comparable complexity, typ-
ically recovering integer and rational theory parameters exactly. Our agent successfully identies
domains with dierent laws of motion also for a nonlinear chaotic double pendulum in a piecewise
constant force eld.
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Motivation
The ability to predict, analyze and parsimoniously model
observations is not only central to physics, but also a
goal of unsupervised machine learning, which is a key
frontier in articial intelligence (AI) research [1]. Despite
impressive recent progress with articial neural nets, they
still get frequently outmatched by human researchers at
such modeling, suering from two drawbacks:
1. Dierent parts of the data are often generated by
dierent mechanisms in dierent contexts. A big
model that tries to t all the data in one environ-
ment may therefore underperform in a new envi-
ronment where some mechanisms are replaced by
new ones, being in
exible and inecient at combi-
natorial generalization [2].
2. Big models are generally hard to interpret, and may
not reveal succinct and universal knowledge such as
Newton's law of gravitation that explains only some
aspects of the data. The pursuit of \intelligible in-
telligence" in place of inscrutable black-box neural
nets is important and timely, given the growing in-
terest in AI interpretability from AI users and poli-
cymakers, especially for AI components involved in
decisions and infrastructure where trust is impor-
tant [3{6].
To address these challenges, we will borrow from physics
the core idea of a theory , which parsimoniously pre-Strategy Denition
Divide-and- Learn multiple theories each of which
conquer specializes to t partof the data very well
Occam's Avoid overtting by minimizing description
Razor length, which can include replacing tted con-
stants by simple integers or fractions.
Unication Try unifying learned theories by introducing
parameters
Lifelong Remember learned solutions and try them
Learning on future problems
TABLE I: AI Physicist strategies tested.
dicts both aspects of the future (from past observa-
tions) and also the domain in which these predictions
are accurate. This suggests an alternative to the stan-
dard machine-learning paradigm of tting a single big
model to all the data: instead, learning small theories
one by one, and gradually accumulating and organiz-
ing them. This paradigm suggests the four specic ap-
proaches summarized in Table I, which we combine into
a toy \AI Physicist" learning agent: To nd individual
theories from complex observations, we use the divide-
and-conquer strategy with multiple theories and a novel
generalized-mean loss that encourages each theory to spe-
cialize in its own domain by giving larger gradients for
better-performing theories. To nd simple theories that
avoid overtting and generalize well, we use the strat-
egy known as Occam's razor, favoring simple theories
that explain a lot, using a computationally ecient ap-
proximation of the minimum-description-length (MDL)
formalism. To unify similar theories found in dierent
environments, we use the description length for cluster-arXiv:1810.10525v4  [physics.comp-ph]  2 Sep 2019