8
FIG. 5: In this mystery, a charged double pendulum moves
through two dierent electric elds E1andE2, with a do-
main boundary corresponding to cos 1+ cos2= 1:05 (the
black curve above left, where the lower charge crosses the E-
eld boundary). The color of each dot represents the domain
into which it is classied by a Newborn agent, and its area
represents the description length of the error with which its
position is predicted, for a precision 
oor 0:006. In this
world, the Newborn agent has a domain prediction accuracy
of 96.5%.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
We have presented a toy \AI Physicist" unsupervised
learning agent centered around the learning and manip-
ulation of theories, which in polynomial time learns to
parsimoniously predict both aspects of the future (from
past observations) and the domain in which these predic-
tions are accurate.
A. Key ndings
Testing it on a suite of mystery worlds involving random
combinations of gravity, electromagnetism, harmonic mo-
tion and elastic bounces, we found that its divide-and-
conquer and Occam's razor strategies eectively identi-
ed domains with dierent laws of motion and reduced
the mean-squared prediction error billionfold, typically
recovering integer and rational theory parameters ex-
actly. These two strategies both encouraged prediction
functions to specialize: the former on the domains they
handled best, and the latter on the data points within
their domain that they handled best. Adding the lifelong
learning strategy greatly accelerated learning in novel en-
vironments.B. What has been learned?
Returning to the broader context of unsupervised learn-
ing from Section I raises two important questions: what
is the diculty of the problems that our AI physicist
solved, and what is the generality of our paradigm?
In terms of diculty , our solved physics problems are
clearly on the easier part of the spectrum, so if we were
to have faced the supervised learning problem where the
dierent domains were pre-labeled, the domain learning
would have been a straightforward classication task and
the forecasting task could have been easily solved by a
standard feedforward neural network. Because the real
world is generally unlabeled, we instead tackled the more
dicult problem where boundaries of multiple domains
had to be learned concurrently with the dynamical evolu-
tion rules in a fully unsupervised fashion. The dramatic
performance improvement over a traditional neural net-
work seen in Table III re
ects the power of the divide-
and-conquer and Occam's razor strategies, and their ro-
bustness is indicated by the the fact that unsupervised
domain discovery worked well even for the two-eld non-
linear double-pendulum system whose dynamic is notori-
ously chaotic and whose domain boundary is the curved
rhomboid cos 1+ cos2= 1:05.
In terms of generality , our core contribution lies in the AI
physicist paradigm we propose (combining divide-and-
conquer, Occams razor, unication and lifelong learning),
not in the specic implementation details. Here we draw
inspiration from the history of the Turing Machine: Tur-
ing's initial implementation of a universal computer was
very inecient for all but toy problems, but his frame-
work laid out the essential architectural components that
subsequent researchers developed into today's powerful
computers. What has been learned is that our AI physi-
cist paradigm outperforms traditional deep learning on
a test suite of problems even though it is a fully gen-
eral paradigm that is was not designed specically for
these problems. For example, it is dened to work for
an arbitrary number of input spatial dimensions, spatial
domains, past time steps used, boundaries of arbitrary
shapes, and evolution laws of arbitrary complexity.
From the above-mentioned successes and failures of our
paradigm, we have also learned about promising oppor-
tunities for improvement of the implementation which we
will now discuss. First of all, the more modest success in
the double-pendulum experiments illustrated the value
of learned theories being simple : if they are highly com-
plex, they are less likely to unify or generalize to future
environments, and the correspondingly complex baseline
model will have less incentive to specialize because it has
enough expressive power to approximate the motion in all
domains at once. It will therefore be valuable to improve
techniques for simplifying complex learned neural nets.
The specic implementation details for the Occam's Ra-
zor toolkit would then change, but the principle and nu-