Proposition 4.7 (Constrained Lower-Bound Optimization Problem ).We reduce the issue of ﬁnd-
ing a non-negative Cto the following constrained optimization problem. Here, πiis still the sub-
optimal policy under model Mi. The minimal objective in E.q. 4.7leads to the maximum of C. Then
the overall optimization problem can be formalized as,
min
M2∈M
π2∈ΠE
s,a∼dπ2hX
s′∈S|P(s′|s, a)−PM2(s′|s, a)|i
,
s.t. sup
s∈S,a∈ADTV(PM1(·|s, a)∥PM2(·|s, a))≤σM1,M2.(4.7)
4.3 A feasible example for constrained optimization problem
We ﬁrst remark that, Proposition 4.7provides a useful guide for acquiring performance improvement
through restricting the upcoming model shift into a safe zone. In this section, we give an instance
for a feasible solution of the constrained optimization problem under the generative model setting [ 1,
31]. Speciﬁcally, we construct an empirical model M1from the N samples per state-action pair that
stems from the generative model. Upon encountering another ksamples on each state-action pair,
we segue into the model updating stage, which outputs M2given these newly collected samples as
input. Towards obtaining a non-decreasing performance, we yield the following feasible solution
for model training interval through satisfying requirements R1andR2.
Corollary 4.8. Here, vol(S)denotes the volume of the state coverage simplex. For simplicity, we
denote δMi(·|s, a) =|P(·|s, a)−PMi(·|s, a)|for each model Mi∈ M . Under the generative model
setting, with a probability larger than 1−ξ, we can provide a non-negative Cwhen given,
k=2
ϵ2log2vol(S)−2
ξ−N. (4.8)
Here, ϵ=δM1(·|s, a)−(1−γ)L
R·(2σM1,M2)−(1−γ)2
Rγ·ϵoptandξ∈(0,1)is a constant.
Proof. See Appendix B, Corollary B.4.
One can deduce from Corollary 4.8that dynamically adjusting the model training interval according
to the model bias and the model shifts constraints threshold does beneﬁt monotonicity. Along with
the model bias δM1(·|s, a)decaying, the model training interval krequires to be scaled up to obtain
adequate newly encountered samples for training M2. Besides, once gathering excessive samples,
we risk violating the model shifts constraint, thus impairing performance. This instance supports
the insight that determining “when to update your model” is vital for performance improvement and
motivates a smarter scheme to choose different numbers of explorations at different times instead of
the unchanged setting in current methods.
5 CMLO framework
It is nontrivial to tackle the proposed constrained optimization problem in Proposition 4.7, since
one cannot directly assign a value to the optimization variable M2. We decouple the optimization
objective and the constraint as “how to train the model” and “when to train the model” through an
event-triggered mechanism towards dynamic alternation.
Objective minimization. Minimizing the objective function involves improving the model accu-
racy. Speciﬁcally, we adopt the model-ensemble technique to reduce model bias. For practical
implementation, the probabilistic models {ˆfϕ1,ˆfϕ2, . . . , ˆfϕK}are ﬁtted on shared but differently
shufﬂed replay buffer De, and the target is to optimize the Negative Log Likelihood (NLL).
Constraint estimation. The unobserved model M2makes the constraint function incalculable,
and here we seek to design an estimator for it. Recall that DTV(PM1(·|s, a)∥PM2(·|s, a)) =
1
2P
s′∈S|PM1(s′|s, a)−PM2(s′|s, a)|, then we can ﬁnd that the distance arises from two parts,
the state space coverage, and the models’ disagreement. We estimate the policy coverage (state-
space coverage) by computing the volume vol(SD)of the convex closure SD=P
si∈DλiSi:
6