When to Update Your Model: Constrained
Model-based Reinforcement Learning
Tianying Ji1, Yu Luo1, Fuchun Sun∗,1, Mingxuan Jing2, Fengxiang He3, Wenbing Huang4,5
1Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2Science & Technology on Integrated Information System Laboratory,
Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences
3JD Explore Academy, JD.com Inc
4Gaoling School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
5Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China
{jity20, luoyu19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; fcsun@tsinghua.edu.cn;
jingmingxuan@iscas.ac.cn; fengxiang.f.he@gmail.com; hwenbing@126.com
Abstract
Designing and analyzing model-based RL (MBRL) algorithms with guaranteed
monotonic improvement has been challenging, mainly due to the interdependence
between policy optimization and model learning. Existing discrepancy bounds
generally ignore the impacts of model shifts, and their corresponding algorithms
are prone to degrade performance by drastic model updating. In this work, we
ﬁrst propose a novel and general theoretical scheme for a non-decreasing perfor-
mance guarantee of MBRL. Our follow-up derived bounds reveal the relationship
between model shifts and performance improvement. These discoveries encour-
age us to formulate a constrained lower-bound optimization problem to permit
the monotonicity of MBRL. A further example demonstrates that learning models
from a dynamically-varying number of explorations beneﬁt the eventual returns.
Motivated by these analyses, we design a simple but effective algorithm CMLO
(Constrained Model-shift Lower-bound Optimization), by introducing an event-
triggered mechanism that ﬂexibly determines when to update the model. Experi-
ments show that CMLO surpasses other state-of-the-art methods and produces a
boost when various policy optimization methods are employed.
1 Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has driven impressive advances in many complex decision-making
problems in recent years [ 36,48]. Many of these advances are obtained by model-free (MFRL) meth-
ods, whose desirable asymptotic performance yet comes at the cost of sample efﬁciency. Hence their
applications are mostly limited to simulation scenarios [ 45,33,35]. In contrast, Model-Based RL
(MBRL) methods, which learn a transition model directly from orders-of-magnitude fewer samples
and then derive the optimal policy from the learned model, have become an appealing alternative in
small-data and more practical cases [ 37,9,41,18].
In general, MBRL methods alternate between the two stages: model learning and policy optimiza-
tion ( e.g.the general Dyna-style [ 50,51]). A more accurate model will lead to a better policy. Vari-
ous attempts have been proposed to improve model accuracy by investigating high-capacity models
(the model ensemble technique [ 27,8] and better function approximators [ 15,38]) or amending the
policy optimization stage based on model bias [ 24,39,28,20,7,57]. Even so, their resultant models
∗Corresponding authors: Fuchun Sun.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).