λi≥0,P
iλi= 1	
constructed on the replay buffer D. We exploit the average prediction error
on these new samples data to estimate the disagreement on newly encountered data ( ∆D) and get
L(∆D) =E(s,a,s′)∈∆D1
KPK
i=1∥s′−ˆfϕi(s, a)∥
. Combining these two components, we can ob-
tain an estimation for the model shift, i.e.,vol(SD)· L(∆D). This practical overestimation for the
model shifts makes the constraint stay satisﬁed during objective optimization.
Event-triggered mechanism. We design an event-triggered mechanism to determine the occasion
to pause collecting and turn to solve the optimization objective. Remark that although diverting to
train models as long as not to violate the constraint is theoretically reasonable, we refrain from doing
so in practice because performing an update on data with a minor shift in coverage and distribution
is wasteful and may risk overﬁtting. Therefore, we trigger when the constraint boundary is touched
to reduce computational cost and escape overﬁtting. The event-triggering mechanism is based on
the following condition:
vol(SD∪∆D(τ))
vol(SD)· L(∆D(τ))≥α. (5.1)
Here, τis the event-triggering time, and αis a given constant.
Policy optimization oracle. Clearly, we can leverage many model-free RL methods (SAC [ 16],
TRPO [ 44], PPO [ 46]etc.) as our policy optimization oracle. Besides, we adopt a truncated short
model rollouts technique to mitigate compounding error while encouraging model usage. Based on
the fresh model rollouts, we perform the policy optimization oracle, employing SAC as an example.
Algorithm Overview. We brieﬂy give an overview of our proposed CMLO in algorithm 1. No-
tably, the event-triggered mechanism subtly determines the occasion to perform model updating,
promoting performance monotonicity and reducing computation load.
Algorithm 1: CMLO
initialize : policy πθ, ensemble models ˆfϕ1,ˆfϕ2, . . . , ˆfϕK, environment buffer Deand model
buffer Dm
repeat
Sample ∆De∼πθfrom real environment; add to De
Estimate model shifts by vol(SDe)L(∆De)
ifEvent-triggered condition ( E.3) is reached then
Train all models ˆfϕ1,ˆfϕ2, . . . , ˆfϕKonDe
Perform h-step model rollouts using policy πθ; add to Dm
Update πθonDmthrough SAC [ 16]
until the policy performs well in the environment ;
6 Experiments
Our experimental evaluation aims to investigate the following questions: (1) How well does our
algorithm perform on standard reinforcement learning benchmarks compared to prior state-of-the-
art model-based and model-free algorithms? (2) Does the performance with or without the constraint
consistent with previous theoretical analyses?
6.1 Comparative evaluation
To illustrate the effectiveness of our method, we contrast several popular model-based and model-
free baselines. Model-free counterparts include: (1) SAC [ 16], the state-of-the-art in terms of
asymptotic performance. (2) PPO [ 46] that explores monotonic improvement as well. Model-based
baselines include: (3) PETS [ 8], which employs models directly for planning, different from the
Dyna-style. (4) SLBO [ 34], that explores monotonicity under the discrepancy bound scheme. (5)
MBPO [ 20], that employs a similar design of model ensemble technique (ensemble of probabilistic
dynamics networks) and policy optimization oracle (SAC) as we do. (6) AutoMBPO [ 28], a variant
of MBPO, that uses an automatic hyperparameter controller to tune the model-training frequency
but suffers from high pre-training cost and lacks theoretical analysis on parameters rationality.
7