are just accurate in a local and relative sense, since the learning is conditional on a ﬁxed number of
state-action tuples explored by the policy at the current step, other than the full transition dynamics
of the environment. Indeed, it is tricky to determine how much we should explore. Insufﬁcient
exploration would trap the model and the following policy optimization, whereas excessive newly-
encountered state-action pairs would confuse the model and later cause policy chattering. To derive
a “truly” accurate model, we need a smarter scheme to choose different numbers of explorations at
different times, instead of the unchanged setting in current methods.
From an optimization point of view, the thinking of how to derive an accurate model for MBRL in
a global sense also motivates us to investigate the monotonicity of the optimization target ( i.e.the
return of the learned model and policy in MBRL), which, unfortunately, is less explored and not
well guaranteed in current works. However, discussing the monotonicity guarantee for MBRL is
challenging by any means, arising from the coupling of the model learning and policy optimization
processes. Although there has been recent interest in related subjects, most of the theoretical works
seek to characterize the monotonicity in terms of a ﬁxed model of interest [ 49,34,20,12,28], which
does not naturally ﬁt our case when the model is dynamically shifted.
In this paper, we study how to guarantee the optimization monotonicity theoretically, upon which
we then develop an event-triggered strategy that learns the model from a dynamically-varying num-
ber of explorations. In particular, we interestingly ﬁnd that the lower bound of the performance
improvement between two adjacent alternation steps in MBRL is dependent on the one-step model
accuracy plus the constraint of the model shifts under certain mild assumptions. This discovery
encourages us to formulate a constrained optimization problem, in order to permit positive perfor-
mance improvement and thus the optimization monotonicity for MBRL. We also give a feasible
solution example to show that dynamical alternation between model learning and policy exploration
does beneﬁt performance monotonicity. To resolve the constrained optimization problem, we de-
sign a simple but effective algorithm CMLO (Constrained Model-shift Lower-bound) equipped with
an event-triggered mechanism. This mechanism ﬁrst estimates whether the model shifts meet the
constraint and then decides when to train the model.
We evaluate CMLO on several continuous control benchmark tasks. The results show that CMLO
learns much faster than other state-of-the-art MBRL methods and yields promising asymptotic per-
formance compared with the model-free counterparts. Note that our optimization framework is
general and can be applied to different backbones of policy optimization algorithms, which is also
ablated in our experiments.
2 Related works
Model-based reinforcement learning methods have shown great potential for sequential decision-
making both in simulation and in the real world due to their sample efﬁciency [ 9,21]. Generally,
these MBRL algorithms can be grouped into several categories to highlight the range of uses of
predictive models [ 55]. And our work falls into the Dyna-style category. In Dyna-style algorithms,
training alternates between model learning under policy iterations with the real environments, and
policy optimization using the model rollouts [ 50–52,13]. Many attempts have been devoted to
improving these two stages.
For model learning stage, previous main concerns are function approximators and training objectives.
The dynamics approximator has advanced from Gaussian processes [ 26,9], time-varying linear
dynamics [ 29,30] to neural network predictive models [ 15,38]. And training objectives vary from
Mean Square Error (MSE) [ 38,34], Negative Log Likelihood (NLL) [ 8,20],etc. Moreover, the deep
ensemble technique is appealing for improving the robustness to model error. Our method adopts an
ensemble of probabilistic networks similarly as in [ 8,20].
The policy optimization stage allows Dyna-style algorithms to leverage various off-the-shelf model-
free methods, such as SAC [ 16], TRPO [ 44], and TD3 [ 14]. Much owing to the progress of model-
free methods, our method is to invoke any reasonable optimization oracle for the empirical models,
rather than entangle a particular policy optimization algorithm.
A consensus of MBRL is that a smart policy requires an accurate model. However, model bias cannot
be eliminated because the state-action distribution of the samples in the model learning stage and
policy optimization stage is quite different. Many prior works attend to this distribution mismatch
2