4.1 Monotonic improvement with policy optimization oracle
Our goal is to construct a general recipe for a monotonicity guarantee. Naturally, we seek to build a
performance difference scheme for model-based algorithms.
Deﬁnition 4.1 (Performance Difference Bound Scheme ).Vπi|Mi(µ)denotes the return of the
policy πi∈Πin the real environment, whereas πiis derived from the dynamical model Mi∈ M .
Then, the lower bound on the true return gap of π1andπ2can be stated in the form,
Vπ2|M2(µ)−Vπ1|M1(µ)≥C. (4.1)
Such a statement guarantees that the policy allows non-decreasing performance in the real environ-
ment when Cis non-negative.
Although there has been interest in non-decreasing performance guarantee, previous works [ 34,20]
commonly derive under a "discrepancy bound" scheme disregarding the model shifts ( i.e.M1=
M2). Their results imply that once a policy update π1→π2increases the returns under the same
model ( Vπ2
M1> Vπ1
M1), the lower bound on the policy performance evaluated in the real environment
improves accordingly, inf{Vπ2|M1}>inf{Vπ1|M1}.
When the model shift is introduced, establishing the performance difference bound turns out to
be rather difﬁcult, mainly due to the coupling of the policy optimization and model learning: the
estimated model is generated from the policy explorations, while the policy derives from the model
rollouts. Hence, we need to consider the performance gap arising from the integration of the two
stages, which, unfortunately, has never been explored before. Since the performance of the policy
with a ﬁxed model is already well guaranteed, it is natural to make the following assumptions.
Assumption 4.2 (Policy Optimization Oracle ).The policy optimization oracle is deﬁned as the
one that takes as input a model Mand returns a ϵopt-optimal policy πsatisfying: V∗
M(µ)−ϵopt≤
Vπ
M(µ)≤V∗
M(µ). We assume that our policy optimization stage always meets the policy optimiza-
tion oracle given its corresponding estimated model M.
Such assumption usually holds in practice when we explore existing off-the-shelf model-free algo-
rithms [ 43,1,16,44]. With this assumption, we can focus directly on the eventual performance
difference under the real environment encountering the model updating.
The bound Cwe seek can be expressed in terms of two kinds of gaps: the inconsistency gap between
the model and the environment, and the optimal returns gap between the two models. When a
policy πksamples in a model Mi, it will encounter states not consistent with those generated by the
real environment. We denote this inconsistency by ϵπk
Mi=Es,a∼dπk[DTV(P(·|s, a)∥PMi(·|s, a))].
Besides, for each model Mi∈ M , a remarkable property is that there always exists a policy that
maximizes the value function Vπ
Mi(µ)[53]. Hence, we deﬁne the ceiling performance of model
MasV∗
Mi(µ) = supπ∈ΠVπ
Mi(µ). We will omit µhenceforth for simplicity unless confusion exists.
With these two terms well-deﬁned, we now present our bound.
Theorem 4.3 (Performance Difference Bound for Model-based RL ).LetMi∈ M be the esti-
mated models and πibe the ϵopt-optimal policy for Mi. Recalling κ=2Rγ
(1−γ)2where Ris the bound
of the reward function, we have the performance difference of π1andπ2evaluated under the real
environment be bounded as below,
Vπ2|M2−Vπ1|M1≥κ·(ϵπ1
M1−ϵπ2
M2) +V∗
M2−V∗
M1−ϵopt. (4.2)
Proof. See Appendix B, Theorem B.1.
This bound implies that if the model update M1→M2can (1) shorten the divergence between the
estimated dynamics and the true dynamics and (2) improve the ceiling performance on the model, it
may guarantee overall performance improvement under the true dynamics.
4.2 Lower-bound optimization with model shift constraints
Theorem 4.3provides a general performance difference bound that suggests models with higher
ceiling performance and lower bias would raise the overall performance. However, ﬁnding a non-
negative lower bound may face several issues regarding a drastic model shift in practice. On the one
4