7 Conclusion
We have investigated the role of the decision on "when to update the model" in joint optimization
procedures through theoretical and empirical lens. We devise a general novel scheme for exploring
the monotonicity of MBRL methods, distinguished from the existing discrepancy bound scheme.
We then derive lower bounds under the scheme, suggesting that models with higher ceiling perfor-
mance and lower bias guarantee a non-decreasing performance evaluated in the real environment.
An effective constrained optimization problem comes from the follow-up reﬁned bound to seek a
non-negative lower bound. Further, the instance under the generative model setting further veriﬁes
the effectiveness of learning models from a dynamically varying number of explorations. The algo-
rithm CMLO, stemming from these analyses, has asymptotic performance rivaling the best model-
free algorithms and boasts better monotonicity. Further ablation studies reveal that the proposed
mechanism scales to various policy optimization oracles and beneﬁts computation cost reduction.
Currently, we observed empirically that the event-triggered condition is usually related to speciﬁc
environments, which will cost a little time for tuning. Thus, one direction that merits further investi-
gation is to construct the dual problem of our constrained optimization problem for better exploring
optimality and monotonicity.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
This work was jointly supported by the Sino-German Collaborative Research Project "Crossmodal
Learning" (NSFC 62061136001/ DFG TRR169), the CAS Project for Young Scientists in Basic
Research (Grant No.YSBR-040), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.62006137)
and Beijing Outstanding Young Scientist Program (No.BJJWZYJH012019100020098). The authors
would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their careful reading and their many insightful
comments.
References
[1]Alekh Agarwal, Sham Kakade, and Lin F Yang. Model-based reinforcement learning with a
generative model is minimax optimal. In Conference on Learning Theory , 2020.
[2]Michael Ahn, Henry Zhu, Kristian Hartikainen, Hugo Ponte, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine,
and Vikash Kumar. Robel: Robotics benchmarks for learning with low-cost robots. In Confer-
ence on robot learning , 2020.
[3]Brandon Amos, Ivan Jimenez, Jacob Sacks, Byron Boots, and J Zico Kolter. Differentiable mpc
for end-to-end planning and control. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
2018.
[4]Kavosh Asadi, Dipendra Misra, and Michael Littman. Lipschitz continuity in model-based
reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2018.
[5]Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Rémi Munos, and Hilbert Kappen. Minimax pac bounds on the
sample complexity of reinforcement learning with a generative model. Machine Learning , 91
(3):325–349, 2013.
[6]Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang,
and Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540 , 2016.
[7]Jacob Buckman, Danijar Hafner, George Tucker, Eugene Brevdo, and Honglak Lee. Sample-
efﬁcient reinforcement learning with stochastic ensemble value expansion. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems .
[8]Kurtland Chua, Roberto Calandra, Rowan McAllister, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement
learning in a handful of trials using probabilistic dynamics models. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems .
[9]Marc Peter Deisenroth, Carl Edward Rasmussen, and Dieter Fox. Learning to control a low-
cost manipulator using data-efﬁcient reinforcement learning. Robotics: Science and Systems
VII, 7:57–64, 2011.
10