IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 2
Fig. 1: Concept, Motivations & Proposed Taxonomy for Personalized Federated learning. a. Centralized machine learning
(CML) which pools data together to train a central ML model. b. Federated learning (FL) which trains a global model
under the orchestration of a central parameter server. Data resides in different data silos. c. Personalized federated learning
(PFL) which addresses the limitations of FL through global model personalization and personalized models learning. 1–4Four
categories of PFL approaches: 1) data-based, 2) model-based 3) architecture-based, 4) similarity-based.
local models, they are motivated to join the FL process to
obtain a better performing model. FL enables collaborative
model training on data silos in a privacy-preserving manner,
which sets it apart from the CML setting. Additionally, FL is
communication-efﬁcient as it only transfers model parameters
which are a fraction in size compared to transferring raw
data. By considering privacy and communication constraints,
FL is applicable to support a wide range of application
scenarios such as Internet of Things (IoT), that entails privacy,
connectivity, bandwidth and latency challenges in varying edge
computing environments [11].
However, the general FL approach faces several fundamen-
tal challenges: (i) poor convergence on highly heterogeneous
data, and (ii) lack of solution personalization. These issues
deteriorate the performance of the global FL model on in-
dividual clients in the presence of heterogeneous local data
distributions, and may even disincentivize affected clients from
joining the FL process. Compared to traditional FL, PFL
research seeks to address these two challenges.
1) Poor Convergence on Heterogeneous Data: When learn-
ing on non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID)
data, the accuracy of FedAvg is signiﬁcantly reduced. This
performance degradation is attributed to the phenomenon of
client drift [12], as a result of the rounds of local training and
synchronization on local data distributions that are non-IID.Fig. 2 illustrates the effect of client drift on IID and non-IID
data. In FedAvg, the server updates move toward the average
of client optima. When data are IID, the averaged model is
close to the global optimum was it is equidistant to both
local optima w
1andw
2. However, when data are non-IID,
the global optimum wis not equidistant to the local optima.
In this illustration, wis closer to w
2. The averaged model
wt+1will therefore be far from the global optimum w, and
the global model does not converge to its true global optimum.
As the FedAvg algorithm experiences convergence issues on
non-IID data, careful tuning of hyperparameters (e.g., learning
rate decay) is required to improve learning stability [13].
2) Lack of Solution Personalization: In the vanilla FL
setting, a single globally-shared model is trained to ﬁt the
“average client”. As a result, the global model will not
generalize well for a local distribution that is very different
from the global distribution. Having a single model is often
insufﬁcient for practical applications which often face non-IID
local datasets. Taking the example of applying FL to develop
language models for mobile keyboards, users from different
demographics are likely to have divergent usage patterns due
to diverse generational, linguistic and cultural nuances. Certain
words or emojis are likely be used predominantly by speciﬁc
groups of users. For such a scenario, a more tailored prediction
pattern is needed for each individual user in order for the word