IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 4
all clients using the global model without any personalization.
In the presence of data heterogeneity (i.e., the underlying
data distributions across the clients are not identical), simply
minimizing the average local loss with no personalization will
result in poor performance.
At the opposite end of the spectrum, we consider a local
learning setting where each client ctrains its own model c
locally without any communication with other clients. The
objective is given as
min
1;:::;c2RdF() :=1
CCX
c=1fc(c); (3)
wherec2Rdencodes the parameters of the local model of
clientc. In this setting, the resulting models may not achieve
good generalization performance as the number of training
examples that the local models are exposed to are limited.
Stronger generalization guarantees can be obtained with more
collaboration amongst clients to exploit the pool of knowledge
for model training.
Comparing the formulations of the standard FL and local
learning settings, standard FL facilitates collaboration and
knowledge sharing amongst clients but does not entail per-
sonalized outputs as it relies on a shared global model for
client inference. On the other hand, local learning entails a
fully personalized model for each client, but fails to leverage
potential performance gains from inter-client collaboration.
Given the need to achieve a balance between generalization
and personalization performance, PFL approaches fall between
the standard FL setting and the local learning setting.
III. S TRATEGY I: G LOBAL MODEL PERSONALIZATION
In this section, we survey PFL approaches following the
global model personalization strategy. The main setup and
conﬁgurations for these approaches are illustrated in Fig. 3.
Based on our proposed taxonomy, they are divided into Data-
based Approaches andModel-based Approaches as follows.
A. Data-based Approaches
Motivated by the client drift problem arising from federated
training on heterogeneous data, data-based approaches aim to
reduce the statistical heterogeneity of client data distributions.
This helps to improve the generalization performance of the
global FL model.
Data Augmentation
As the IID property of training data is a fundamental as-
sumption in statistical learning theory, data augmentation
methods to enhance the statistical homogeneity of the data
have been extensively studied in the ﬁeld of machine learning.
Over-sampling techniques involving synthetic data generation
(e.g., SMOTE [18] and ADASYN [19]), and under-sampling
techniques (e.g., Tomek links [20]) have been proposed to
reduce data imbalance. These techniques, however, cannot be
directly applied under the FL setting, where data residing at
the clients in the federation are distributed and private.
Data augmentation in FL (Fig. 3a) is highly challenging
as it often requires some form of data sharing or relies onthe availability of a proxy dataset that is representative of the
overall data distribution. In [21], the authors proposed a data
sharing strategy that distributes a small amount of global data
balanced by classes to each client. Their experiments show that
there is potential for signiﬁcant accuracy gains ( 30%) with
the addition of a small amount of data. In [22], the authors pro-
posed FAug, a federated augmentation approach that involves
training a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) model in
the FL server. Some data samples of the minority classes are
uploaded to the server to train the GAN model. The trained
GAN model is then distributed to each client to generate
additional data to augment its local data to produce an IID
dataset. In [23], the authors proposed Astraea, a self-balancing
FL framework to handle class imbalance by using Z-score
based data augmentation and down-sampling of local data.
The FL server requires statistical information about clients’
local data distributions (e.g., class sizes, mean and standard
deviation values). In [24], the authors proposed the FedHome
algorithm that trains a Generative Convolutional Autoencoder
(GCAE) model using FL. At the end of the FL procedure, each
client performs further personalization on a locally augmented
class-balanced dataset. This dataset is generated by executing
the SMOTE algorithm on the low dimensional features of the
encoder network based on the local data.
Client Selection
Another line of work focuses on designing FL client selection
mechanisms to enable sampling from a more homogeneous
data distribution, with the aim of improving model general-
ization performance (Fig. 3b). In [25], the authors proposed
FA VOR which selects a subset of participating clients for each
training round in order to mitigate the bias introduced by non-
IID data. A deep Q-learning formulation for client selection
was designed with the objective of maximizing accuracy, while
minimizing the number of communication rounds. In a similar
approach, a client selection algorithm based on the Multi-
Armed Bandit formulation was proposed in [26] to select
the subset of clients with minimal class imbalance. The local
class distributions are estimated by comparing the similarity
between the local gradient updates submitted to the FL server
with the gradients inferred from a balanced proxy dataset
residing on the server.
Recently, there is an emerging line of work that focuses
on developing client selection strategies to tackle data and
resource heterogeneity challenges that are prevalent in edge
computing applications. For cross-device FL, there is often
signiﬁcant variability in hardware capabilities in terms of com-
putation and communication capacities. Heterogeneity also
exists in data, whereby the quantity and distribution of data
differ among clients. Such diversity exacerbates challenges
such as communication costs, stragglers and model accuracy.
In [27], the authors proposed a tier-based FL system (TiFL)
that groups clients into tiers based on training performance.
The algorithm adaptively selects participating clients from the
same tier for each training round by optimizing both accuracy
and training time. This helps alleviate the performance issues
caused by data and resource heterogeneity. In [28], the authors
proposed FedSAE, a self-adaptive FL system that adaptively