IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 9
also seeks to tackle communication and computation capacity
challenges by reducing resource requirement.
Knowledge Distillation (KD) for neural networks was intro-
duced by [54] as a paradigm for transferring the knowledge
from an ensemble of teacher models to a lightweight student
model. Knowledge is commonly represented as class scores or
logit outputs in existing FL distillation approaches. In general,
there are four main types for distillation-based FL architec-
tures: (i) distillation of knowledge to each FL client to learn
stronger personalized models, (ii) distillation of knowledge
to the FL server to learn stronger server models, (iii) bi-
directional distillation to both the FL clients and the FL server,
and (iv) distillation amongst clients (Fig. 4b).
In [42], the authors proposed FedMD, a distillation-based
FL framework which allows clients to design diverse models
using their own private data via KD. Learning occurs through a
consensus computed using the average class scores on a public
dataset. For every communication round, each client trains its
model using the public dataset based on the updated consen-
sus, and ﬁne-tunes its model on its private dataset thereafter.
This enables each client to obtain its own personalized model
while leveraging knowledge from other clients. In [55], the
authors proposed FedGen, a data-free distillation framework
that distills knowledge to the FL clients. A generative model
is trained in the FL server and broadcast to the clients.
Each client then generates augmented representations over the
feature space using the learned knowledge as the inductive
bias to regulate its local learning.
In [56], the authors proposed the FedDF algorithm. It
assumes a setting in which the edge clients require different
model architectures due to diverse computational capabilities.
The FL server constructs pdistinct prototype models, each
representing clients with identical model architectures (e.g.,
ResNet, MobileNet). For each communication round, FedAvg
is ﬁrst performed among clients from the same prototype group
to initialize a student model. Cross-architecture learning is
then performed via ensemble distillation, in which the client
(teacher) model parameters are evaluated on an unlabelled
public dataset to generate logit outputs that are used to train
each student model in the FL server.
Knowledge may also be distilled in a bi-directional man-
ner between the FL client and FL server within the same
FL training procedure. In [57], the authors proposed Group
Knowledge Transfer (FedGKT) to improve model personal-
ization performance for resource-constrained edge devices.
It uses alternating minimization to train small edge models
and a large server model through a bi-directional distillation
approach. The large server model takes extracted features
from the local models as inputs, and uses the KL-divergence
loss to minimize the difference between the ground truth
and soft labels predicted by the local models. By doing so,
the server model absorbs the knowledge transferred from the
local models. Similarly, each local model calculates the KL-
divergence loss using its private dataset and the predicted soft
labels transferred from the server. This facilitates knowledge
transfer from the server model to the local models. Using this
bi-directional distillation framework, computation burden is
shifted from the edge clients to the more powerful FL server.However, there is potential privacy risk as the ground truth
labels from each client are uploaded to the FL server.
KD-based PFL may also be carried out in distributed
settings where knowledge is transferred amongst neighboring
clients in a network. In [58], the authors proposed an archi-
tecture agnostic distributed algorithm for on-device learning –
D-Distillation. It assumes an IoT edge FL setting in which
every edge device is connected to only a few neighboring
devices. Only connected devices can communicate with each
other. The learning algorithm is semi-supervised, with local
training performed on private data and federated training on an
unlabeled public dataset. For each communication round, each
client broadcasts its soft decisions to its neighbors, while re-
ceiving their soft decision broadcasts. Each client then updates
its soft decisions based on its neighbors’ soft decisions via a
consensus algorithm. The updated soft decisions are then used
to update the client’s model weights by regularizing its local
loss. This procedure facilitates model learning via knowledge
transfer amongst neighboring FL clients in a network.
B. Similarity-based Approaches
Similarity-based approaches aim to achieve personalization
by modeling client relationships. A personalized model is
learned for each client, with related clients learning similar
models. Different types of client relationships have been
studied in PFL. Multi-task learning and model interpolation
consider pairwise client relationships, while clustering
considers group level client relationships.
Multi-task Learning (MTL)
The goal of multi-task learning (MTL) is to train a model
that jointly performs several related tasks. This improves gen-
eralization by leveraging domain-speciﬁc knowledge across
the learning tasks. By treating each FL client as a task in
MTL, there is potential to learn and capture relationships
among the clients exhibited by their heterogeneous local data
(Fig. 4c). The MOCHA algorithm [59] has been proposed to
extend distributed MTL into the FL settings. MOCHA uses a
primal-dual formulation to optimize the learned models. The
algorithm addresses communication and system challenges
prevalent in FL which are not considered in the ﬁeld of
MTL. Unlike the conventional FL design which learns a
single global model, MOCHA learns a personalized model
for each FL client. While MOCHA improves personalization,
it is not suitable for cross-device FL applications as all
clients are required to participate in every round of FL model
training. Another drawback of MOCHA is that it is only
applicable to convex models, and is thus unsuitable for deep
learning implementations. This motivated [60] to propose the
VIRTUAL federated MTL algorithm that performs variational
inference using a Bayesian approach. Although it can handle
non-convex models, it is computationally expensive for large-
scale FL networks.
In [61], the authors proposed FedAMP, an attention-based
mechanism that enforces stronger pair-wise collaboration
amongst FL clients with similar data distributions. In contrast
to the standard FL framework in which a single global model