IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 8
Fig. 4: The setup & conﬁgurations of approaches that fall under Strategy II: Learning Personalized Models .a–b Architecture-
based approaches: ( a) parameter decoupling; parameter privatization designs include 1) personalized layers, 2) personalized
feature representations, ( b) knowledge distillation; knowledge can be distilled 1) towards clients, 2) towards server, 3) towards
both clients & server, 4) amongst clients. c–eSimilarity-based approaches: ( c) multi-task learning, ( d) model interpolation, ( e)
clustering.
representations, while the base layers are shared with the FL
server to learn low-level generic features.
The second design considers personalized feature represen-
tations for each client. In [47], a document classiﬁcation model
using a Bidirectional LSTM architecture is trained via FL
by treating user embeddings as the private model parameters,
and character embeddings (i.e., LSTM and MLP layers) as
the FL model parameters. In [48], Local Global Federated
Averaging (LG-FedAvg) has been proposed to combine local
representation learning and global federated training. Learning
lower dimensional local representations improves communica-
tion and computational efﬁciency for federated global model
training. It also offers ﬂexibility as specialized encoders can
be designed based on the source data modality (e.g., images,
texts). The authors also demonstrated how fair and unbiased
representations that are invariant to protected attributes (e.g.,
race, gender) can be learned by incorporating adversarial
learning into FL model training.
As the idea of parameter decoupling has some similarities to
split learning (SL) [49], [50], a distributed and private machine
learning paradigm, we brieﬂy discuss their differences in this
section. In SL, the deep network is split layer-wise between
the server and the clients. Unlike parameter decoupling, theserver model in SL is not transferred to the client for model
training. Instead, only the weights of the split layer of the
client model are shared during forward propagation and the
gradients from the split layer are shared with the client during
backpropagation. SL therefore has a privacy advantage over
FL as the server and clients do not have full access to the
global and local models [51]. However, training is less efﬁcient
due to the sequential client training process. SL also performs
worse than FL on non-IID data and has higher communication
overheads [52].
Knowledge Distillation
In server-based horizontal federated learning (HFL) [53], the
same model architecture is adopted by both the FL server
and the FL clients. The underlying assumption is that there is
sufﬁcient communication bandwidth and computation capacity
at the clients. However for practical applications with a large
number of edge devices as FL clients, they are often resource-
constrained. Clients may also choose to have different model
architectures due to different training objectives. The key
motivation for knowledge distillation in FL is to enable a
greater degree of ﬂexibility to accommodate personalized
model architectures for the clients. At the same time, it