IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 11
TABLE II: Summary of personalization techniques in Learning Personalized Models .
Method Advantages Disadvantages
Parameter Decoupling
Simple formulation
Layer-wise ﬂexibility in architecture design for each
clientDifﬁcult to determine the optimal privatization strat-
egy
Knowledge Distillation
High degree of architecture design personalization for
each client
Communication-efﬁcient
Supports resource heterogeneityDifﬁcult to determine the optimal architecture design
May require a representative proxy dataset
Multi-Task Learning
Leverages pairwise client relationships to learn similar
models for related clientsSensitive to poor data quality of clients
Model Interpolation
Simple formulation using a mixture of global and local
modelsUses a single global model as a basis for personaliza-
tion
Clustering
Good for applications where there are inherent parti-
tions among clientsHigh computation and communication costs
Additional system infrastructure for cluster manage-
ment and deployment
In [70], the authors proposed FedGroup, an FL clustering
framework that implements a static client clustering strat-
egy and a newcomer client cold start mechanism. FedGroup
performs clustering on the local client updates using the K-
means++ algorithm [71] based on the Euclidean distance of
the Decomposed Cosine similarity (EDC).
In [72], the authors proposed a multi-center formulation that
learns multiple global models. It introduces a new distance-
based multi-center loss function:
`=1
CKX
k=1CX
c=1r(k)
cDist(c;w(k)); (7)
wherer(k)
cmeans that client cis assigned to cluster k,
andw(k)is the model parameters of cluster k. Expecta-
tion Maximization is used to solve the distance-based ob-
jective clustering problem and derive the optimal matching
of clients to each cluster center. In the E-step, the cluster
assignment r(k)
cis updated by ﬁxing wc.r(k)
cis set to 1
ifk= arg minjDist(c;w(j)). Otherwise, it is set to 0.
In the M-step, the cluster centers w(k)are updated with
w(k)=1PC
c=1r(k)
cPC
c=1r(k)
cwc. Finally,w(k)is sent to all
clients in cluster kto perform ﬁne-tuning of the local model
parameterscon its private training data. The above steps are
repeated until convergence.
Summary
In this section, we have discussed Architecture-based Ap-
proaches andSimilarity-based Approaches forLearning Per-
sonalized Models . We now summarize and compare the
personalization techniques in terms of their advantages and
disadvantages (as shown in Table II).
Architecture-based Approaches aim to achieve personal-
ization through a customized model design that is tailored
to each client. As parameter decoupling methods have a
simple formulation that implement personalized layers for
each client [46], [47], it is limited in its ability to support
a high degree of model design personalization. In contrast,
KD-based PFL methods provide clients with a greater degree
of ﬂexibility to accommodate personalized model architecturesfor clients. They are also advantageous in communication and
computation constrained edge FL settings [56], [57]. However,
a representative proxy dataset is often required in the KD pro-
cess [42], [56]. For both methods, there are some challenges
in model building. In parameter decoupling, the classiﬁcation
of private and federated parameters is an architectural design
decision which controls the balance between generalization
and personalization performance [46]. Determining the op-
timal privatization strategy is a research challenge. In KD,
the effectiveness of knowledge transfer depends not only on
model parameters, but also on model architecture. As it may
be difﬁcult for the student model to learn well if there is a
huge capacity gap between the large teacher model and the
small student model [73], [74], it is imperative to determine
an optimal design for both the server and client models.
Similarity-based approaches aim to achieve personaliza-
tion by modeling client relationships. MTL methods such as
FedAMP [61] excel in capturing pairwise client relationships
to learn similar models for related clients. As a result, it may
be sensitive to poor data quality which result in the segregation
of clients based on their data quality. Model interpolation
methods have a simple formulation that learn personalized
models using a mixture of global and local models. However,
it is likely to experience a degradation in performance in
highly non-IID scenarios as it uses a single global model as
a basis for personalization [64], [65]. Clustering methods are
advantageous when there are inherent partitions among clients.
However, they incur high computation and communication
costs that limit practical feasibility for large-scale settings [66],
[67]. Additional architectural components for the management
and deployment of the clustering mechanism are also required
[67].
V. PFL B ENCHMARK & E VALUATION METRICS
Another important factor for the long-term advancement of
the PFL research ﬁeld is performance benchmarking. In this
section, we review and discuss the benchmarks and evaluation
metrics used by existing PFL literature.