IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 5
Fig. 3: The setup & conﬁgurations of approaches that fall under Strategy I: Global Model Personalization .a–b Data-based
approaches: ( a) data augmentation, ( b) client selection. c–eModel-based approaches: ( c) regularized local loss; regularization
can be performed 1) between global and local models, 2) between historical local model snapshots, ( d) meta-learning, ( e)
transfer learning.
selects clients with larger local training loss in each training
round to accelerate the convergence of the global model. A
prediction mechanism of the affordable workload of each
client is also proposed to enable the dynamic adjustment of
the number of local training epochs for each client in order to
improve device reliability.
B. Model-based Approaches
Although data-based approaches improve the convergence
of the global FL model by mitigating the client drift problem,
they generally need to modify the local data distributions. This
may result in loss of valuable information associated with
the inherent diversity of client behaviors. Such information
can be useful for personalizing the global model for each
client. In this section, we cover model-based global model
personalization FL approaches. The objective is either to learn
a strong global FL model for future personalization on each
individual client, or to improve the adaptation performance of
the local model.
Regularized Local Loss
Model regularization is a common strategy for preventing
overﬁtting and improving convergence when training machine
learning models. In FL, regularization techniques can beapplied to limit the impact of local updates. This improves con-
vergence stability and the generalization of the global model,
which in turn, can be used to produce better personalized
models. Instead of just minimizing the local function fc(),
each clientcminimizes the following objective:
min
2Rdhc(;w) :=fc() +lreg(;w); (4)
wherelreg(;w)is the regularization loss, which is generally
formulated as a function of the global model wand the local
modelcof clientc. Regularization can be applied in the
following ways as illustrated in Fig. 3c:
1) Between Global and Local Models: Several works im-
plement regularization between the global and local models
to tackle the client drift problem that is prevalent in FL due
to statistical data heterogeneity. FedProx [29] introduced a
proximal term to the local sub-problem which considers the
dissimilarity between the global FL model and local models
to adjust the impact of local updates. Along with model dis-
similarity, FedCL [30] further considers parameter importance
in the regularized local loss function using Elastic Weight
Consolidation (EWC) [31] from the ﬁeld of continual learning.
The importance of the weights to the global model is estimated
on a proxy dataset in the FL server. They are then transferred to
the clients where penalization steps are carried out to prevent
important parameters of the global model from being changed