IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 7
TABLE I: Summary of personalization techniques in Global Model Personalization .
Method Advantages Disadvantages
Data Augmentation
Easy to implement, can be built on the general FL
training procedurePossibility of privacy leakage
May require a representative proxy dataset
Client Selection
Only modiﬁes the client selection strategy of the
general FL training procedureIncreased computational overhead from client subset
optimization
May require a representative proxy dataset
Regularization
Easy to implement, slight modiﬁcation to the FedAvg
algorithmSingle global model setup
Meta-learning
Optimizes the global model for fast personalization Single global model setup
Computationally expensive to compute second-order
gradients
Transfer Learning
Improves personalization by reducing the domain dis-
crepancy between the global and local modelsSingle global model setup
reused directly in the local models as low level generic features
are learned. Other layers of the local model are ﬁne-tuned with
the local data to learn task-speciﬁc features for personalization.
Summary
In this section, we have discussed Data-based Approaches
andModel-based Approaches forGlobal Model Personaliza-
tion. We now summarize and compare the personalization
techniques in terms of their advantages and disadvantages (as
shown in Table I).
Data-based approaches aim to reduce the statistical hetero-
geneity of client data distributions to tackle the problem of
client drift. Data augmentation methods are easy to implement
in the general FL training procedure. However, the applicabil-
ity of these data augmentation methods is limited to some
extent as the possibility of privacy leakage from data sharing
has not been adequately addressed in existing designs. Data
samples [21], [22] or data statistics about the clients’ data
distributions [23] are often shared during the training process.
Client selection methods improve the model generalization
performance by optimizing the subset of participating clients
for each FL communication round. As this requires compu-
tationally intensive algorithms such as deep Q-learning [25]
and Multi-Armed Bandits [26], it incurs higher computational
overhead than FedAvg. Additionally, many of these data-based
approaches assume the availability of a proxy dataset that is
representative of the global data distribution [21], [22], [26].
In order to construct such a proxy dataset, it is necessary to
understand the global data distribution, which is challenging
under FL settings due to privacy-preservation concerns.
Model-based approaches closely follow the general FL
training procedure in which a single global model is trained.
Regularization methods such as FedProx [29] and MOON [32]
are easy to implement and they only require a slight mod-
iﬁcation to the FedAvg algorithm. Meta-learning optimizes
the global model for fast personalization. However, gradient
approximations are needed as it is expensive to compute
second-order gradients [34], [37]. Transfer learning improves
personalization by reducing the domain discrepancy betweenthe global and local models. As the above approaches assume a
single global model setup where a single global model is learnt
over heterogeneous data silos, they are not well-suited for
solution personalization when there are signiﬁcant differences
among the client data distributions. Additionally, model-based
approaches generally assume that all clients and the FL server
share a common model architecture. This assumption requires
all clients to have sufﬁcient computation and communication
resources. However, edge computing FL clients are often
resource-constrained [11], making such approaches unsuitable.
IV. S TRATEGY II: L EARNING PERSONALIZED MODELS
In this section, we survey PFL approaches following the
strategy of learning personalized models. The main setup
and conﬁgurations for these approaches are illustrated in
Fig. 4. Based on our proposed taxonomy, they are divided
into Architecture-based Approaches andSimilarity-based Ap-
proaches as follows.
A. Architecture-based Approaches
Architecture-based PFL approaches aim to achieve
personalization through a customized model design that
is tailored to each client. Parameter decoupling methods
implement personalization layers for each client, while
knowledge distillation methods support personalized model
architectures for each client.
Parameter Decoupling
Parameter decoupling aims to achieve PFL by decoupling the
local private model parameters from the global FL model pa-
rameters. Private parameters are trained locally on the clients,
and not shared with the FL server. This enables task speciﬁc
representations to be learned for enhanced personalization.
The division between private and federated model parame-
ters is an architectural design decision. There are generally
two conﬁgurations used in parameter decoupling for deep
feed-forward neural networks (Fig. 4a). The ﬁrst is a “base
layers + personalized layers” design proposed by [46]. In
this setting, personalized deep layers are kept private by the
clients for local training to learn personalized task-speciﬁc