IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 3
Fig. 2: Illustration of client drift in FedAvg for 2 clients with
2 local steps. aIID data setting. bNon-IID data setting.
suggestions to be meaningful.
C. Contributions
There are several surveys on the general concepts, methods
and applications of FL [7], [14]. Others review FL from the
perspectives of privacy [15] and robustness [16]. Our survey
focuses on PFL, which studies the problem of learning person-
alized models to handle statistical heterogeneity under the FL
setting. There is a shortage of a comprehensive survey on PFL
that provides a systematic perspective on this important topic
for new researchers. In this paper, we bridge this gap in the
current FL literature. Our main contributions are summarized
as follows:
We provide a succinct overview of FL and its categoriza-
tion. A detailed analysis of the key motivations for PFL
in the current FL settings is also included.
We identify personalization strategies to address key
FL challenges, and offer a unique data-based, model-
based, architecture-based and similarity-based perspective
for guiding the review of the PFL literature. Based on
this perspective, we propose a hierarchical taxonomy to
present existing works on PFL, highlighting the chal-
lenges they face, their main ideas and assumptions they
made which could introduce potential limitations.
We discuss commonly adopted public datasets and evalu-
ation metrics in the current literature for PFL benchmark-
ing, and offer suggestions on enhancing PFL experimen-
tal evaluation techniques.
We envision promising future trajectories of research
towards new architectural design, realistic benchmarking,
and trustworthy approaches towards building personalized
federated learning systems.
II. S TRATEGIES FOR PERSONALIZED FEDERATED
LEARNING
In this section, we provide an overview of the PFL strategies
which are the basis for our systematic and comprehensive
review of existing PFL approaches. We organize the literature
around the proposed taxonomy (Fig. 1c) that divides PFL
methods according to the key challenges and personalization
strategies involved.Strategy I: Global Model Personalization
The ﬁrst strategy addresses the performance issues in
training a globally-shared FL model on heterogeneous data.
When learning on non-IID data, the accuracy of FedAvg-
based approaches is signiﬁcantly reduced due to client drift.
Under global model personalization, the PFL setup closely
follows the general FL training procedure where a single
global FL model is trained. The trained global FL model is
then personalized for each FL client through a local adaptation
step that involves additional training on each local dataset.
This two-step “FL training + local adaptation” approach is
commonly regarded as an FL personalization strategy by the
FL community [8], [17]. As personalization performance di-
rectly depends on the generalization performance of the global
model, many PFL approaches aim to improve the performance
of the global model under data heterogeneity in order to
improve the performance of subsequent personalization on
local data. Personalization techniques for this category are
classiﬁed into data-based and model-based approaches. Data-
based approaches aim to mitigate the client drift problem
by reducing the statistical heterogeneity among the clients’
datasets, while model-based approaches aim to learn a strong
global model for future personalization on individual clients
or improve the adaptation performance of the local model.
Strategy II: Learning Personalized Models
The second strategy addresses the challenge of solution per-
sonalization. In contrast to the global model personalization
strategy which trains a single global model, approaches in
this category train individual personalized FL models. The
goal is to build personalized models by modifying the FL
model aggregation process. This is achieved through applying
different learning paradigms in the FL setting. Personalization
techniques are classiﬁed into architecture-based and similarity-
based approaches. Architecture-based approaches aim to pro-
vide a personalized model architecture tailored to each client,
while similarity-based approaches aim to leverage client rela-
tionships to improve personalized model performance where
similar personalized models are built for related clients.
In personalized FL model training, the optimization objec-
tive is formulated differently from the vanilla FL setting, as
an individual personalized model is learned for each client.
Here, we provide formulations of the optimization objectives
under the FL setting and the local learning setting in order to
highlight the positioning of PFL approaches. The standard FL
objective is given as
min
w2RdF(w) :=1
CCX
c=1fc(w); (1)
whereCis the number of participating clients, w2Rd
encodes the parameters of the global model and
fc(w) :=E(x;y)Dc[fc(w;x;y)] (2)
represents the expected loss over the data distribution Dc
of clientc. The prevailing FL formulation minimizes the
aggregation of local functions and entails a common output for