IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 14
Spatial Adaptability: It refers to the ability of PFL systems
to handle variations across client datasets as a result of (i)
the addition of new clients, and/or (ii) dropouts and strag-
glers. These are practical issues prevalent in complex edge
computing-based FL environments, where there is signiﬁcant
variability in hardware capabilities in terms of computation,
memory, power and network connectivity [94].
(i) Existing PFL approaches commonly assume a ﬁxed
client pool at the start of an FL training cycle, and that new
clients cannot join the training process midway [22], [67].
Other approaches involve a pre-training step [42] that require
time for local computation. Besides meta-learning approaches
[37] that encourage fast learning on a new client, there is
limited work addressing the cold-start problem in PFL. Current
deep FL techniques are also prone to catastrophic forgetting
of previously learned knowledge when new clients join, due
to the stability-plasticity dilemma in neural networks [95].
As a result, existing clients may experience a degradation in
performance. A promising direction is to incorporate continual
learning [96] into FL to mitigate catastrophic forgetting.
(ii) With the prevalence of dropouts and stragglers in
large-scale federated systems due to network, communication
and computation constraints, it is necessary to design for
robustness in FL systems. Developing communication-efﬁcient
algorithms to mitigate the problem of stragglers is an ongo-
ing research direction, where gradient compression [97] and
asynchronous model updates [98] are common strategies for
addressing FL communication bottlenecks. These issues re-
quire further study in PFL to formalize the trade-offs between
overhead and performance.
Temporal Adaptability: It refers to the ability of a PFL
system to learn from non-stationary data. In dynamic real-
world systems, we may expect changes in the underlying data
distributions over time. This phenomenon is known as concept
drift. Learning in the presence of concept drift often involve
three steps: (i) drift detection (whether drift has occurred); (ii)
drift understanding (when, how and where the drift occurs);
and (iii) drift adaptation (response to drift) [99]. Casado et
al. [100] is one of the few works that study the problem
of concept drift in FL. It extends FedAvg with the Change
Detection Technique (CDT) for drift detection. It remains
an open direction to leverage existing drift detection and
adaptation algorithms to improve learning on dynamic real-
world data in PFL systems.
B. Opportunities for PFL Benchmarking
Realistic datasets: Realistic datasets are important for the
development of a ﬁeld. To facilitate PFL research, datasets that
include more modalities like audio, video and sensor signals,
and involve a broader range of machine learning tasks from
real-world applications are required.
Realistic non-IID settings: In most existing studies, the
evaluation of PFL algorithms is limited to a single type of non-
IID setting. Experiments are performed by either leveraging
an existing pre-partitioned public dataset (e.g., LEAF) or
prepared by partitioning a public dataset to ﬁt the target non-
IID setting. For fairer comparison, it is imperative for theresearch community to develop a deeper understanding of the
different non-IID settings in real-world federated learning in
order to simulate realistic non-IID settings. Possible scenarios
include: (i) temporal skew (changes in the data distributions
over time) and (ii) the presence of adversarial attackers. Such
an effort requires wider collaboration among researchers and
industry practitioners, and will be beneﬁcial for building a
healthy PFL research ecosystem.
Holistic evaluation metrics: The establishment of system-
atic evaluation methodologies and metrics is important for PFL
research. Model performance, system performance and Trust-
worthy AI attributes are important aspects to consider when
evaluating the performance of an FL system. Methodologies
that can provide a holistic cost-beneﬁt analysis on a given
PFL approach are needed for potential adopters to gain deeper
insight into its real-world impact.
C. Opportunities for Trustworthy PFL
Open Collaboration: Besides algorithmic challenges, fu-
ture PFL research can explore promoting collaboration among
self-interested data owners. For instance, data owners with
personalized FL models may need to collaborate by sharing
their models with other suitable data owners in order to adapt
to changes in the learning task over time in dynamic real-
world applications [101]. Incentive mechanism design is a
promising research direction towards this vision. Game theory,
pricing and auction mechanisms [102] may be applied to build
suitable incentive schemes to support the emergence of open
collaborative PFL systems.
Fairness: As machine learning technologies become more
widely adopted by businesses to support decision-making,
there has been a growing interest in developing methods
to ensure fairness in order to avoid undesirable ethical and
social implications [103], [104]. Current approaches do not
adequately address the unique set of fairness related chal-
lenges presented in PFL. These include new sources of bias
introduced by the diversity of participating FL clients due
to unequal local data sizes, activity patterns, location, and
connection quality, etc. [8]. The study of fairness in PFL is
still in its infancy and the framing of fairness in PFL has
not yet been well-deﬁned. The study of fairness in FL is
mostly focused on the prevailing server-based FL paradigm
[105]–[107], although new work on fairness in alternative FL
paradigms is emerging [108]. As FL approaches maturity,
advances in improving fairness for PFL in particular will
become increasingly important in order for FL to be adopted
at scale.
Explainability: Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI)
[109] is an active research area that has attracted signiﬁcant
interest recently, driven by pressure from government agencies
and the general public for interpretable models [110]. It
is important for models in high stake applications such as
healthcare to be explainable, where there is a strong need to
justify decisions made [111]. Explainability has not yet been
systematically explored in the FL literature. There are complex
challenges unique to achieving explainability in PFL due to
the scale and heterogeneity of distributed datasets. Striving for