IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 1
Towards Personalized Federated Learning
Alysa Ziying Tan, Han Yu, Lizhen Cui, and Qiang Yang,Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —In parallel with the rapid adoption of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI) empowered by advances in AI research, there
have been growing awareness and concerns of data privacy.
Recent signiﬁcant developments in the data regulation landscape
have prompted a seismic shift in interest towards privacy-
preserving AI. This has contributed to the popularity of Fed-
erated Learning (FL), the leading paradigm for the training of
machine learning models on data silos in a privacy-preserving
manner. In this survey, we explore the domain of Personalized
FL (PFL) to address the fundamental challenges of FL on
heterogeneous data, a universal characteristic inherent in all
real-world datasets. We analyze the key motivations for PFL
and present a unique taxonomy of PFL techniques categorized
according to the key challenges and personalization strategies in
PFL. We highlight their key ideas, challenges and opportunities
and envision promising future trajectories of research towards
new PFL architectural design, realistic PFL benchmarking, and
trustworthy PFL approaches.
Index Terms —federated learning, personalized federated learn-
ing, non-IID data, statistical heterogeneity, privacy preservation,
edge computing.
I. I NTRODUCTION
THE pervasiveness of edge devices in modern society,
such as mobile phones and wearable devices, has led to
the rapid growth of private data originating from distributed
sources. In this digital age, organizations are using big data
and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) to optimize their processes and
performance. While the wealth of data offers tremendous
opportunities for AI applications, most of these data are
highly-sensitive in nature and they exist in the form of isolated
islands. This is especially relevant in the healthcare industry
where medical data are highly-sensitive and they are often
collected and reside across different healthcare institutions [1]–
[4]. Such circumstances pose huge challenges for AI adoption
as data privacy issues are not well addressed by conventional
AI approaches. With the recent introduction of data privacy
preservation laws such as the General Data Protection Regu-
lation (GDPR) [5], there is an increasing demand for privacy-
preserving AI [6] in order to meet regulatory compliance.
In view of these data privacy challenges, Federated Learning
(FL) [7], [8] has seen growing popularity in recent years. FL
Alysa Ziying Tan is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore; Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint
Research Institute, NTU, Singapore; and Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China.
Han Yu is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore.
Lizhen Cui is with the School of Software, Shandong University (SDU),
Jinan, China; and the Joint SDU-NTU Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Research (C-FAIR), SDU, Jinan, China.
Qiang Yang is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong; and WeBank,
Shenzhen, China.
Corresponding authors: Han Yu (han.yu@ntu.edu.sg), Lizhen Cui
(clz@sdu.edu.cn) and Qiang Yang (qyang@cse.ust.hk)is a learning paradigm that enables collaborative training of
machine learning models involving multiple data silos in a
privacy-preserving manner. The prevailing FL setting assumes
a federation of data owners (a.k.a. clients), which may be
as small as individual mobile devices to as large as entire
organizations, that collaboratively train a model under the
orchestration of a central parameter server (a.k.a. the FL
server) [7], [8]. The training data are stored locally and are
not directly shared during the training process. Most of the
existing FL training approaches are derived from the Federated
Averaging (FedAvg) algorithm introduced in [9]. The goal is
to train a global model that performs well on most FL clients.
A. Categorization of Federated Learning
FL can be categorized into horizontal FL (HFL), vertical
FL (VFL) and federated transfer learning (FTL), according
to how data are distributed in terms of feature and sample
spaces among participating entities [7]. HFL refers to scenarios
whereby participants share the same feature space but have
different data samples. It is the most commonly adopted FL
setting popularized by Google, which applied HFL to train
language models in mobile devices [9]. In VFL, participants
have overlapping data samples, but differ in the feature space.
A typical application scenario would involve the collaboration
of multiple organizations from different industry sectors (e.g.,
a bank and an e-commerce company) which have different
data features but may have a large number of shared users.
FTL is applicable when participants have little overlap in
both the feature space and the sample space. For example,
organizations from different industry sectors serving markets
in different regions can leverage FTL to collaboratively build
models. Existing PFL works mainly focus on the HFL setting
which makes up the majority of the FL application scenarios
[8]. The HFL setting is the focus of this paper. For brevity,
we use the terms HFL and FL interchangeably in the rest of
this survey.
B. Motivations for Personalized Federated Learning
Fig. 1 illustrates the key concepts and motivations for
centralized machine learning (CML) [10], FL and PFL. We
consider a cloud-based CML setting where data are pooled
together in the cloud server to train an ML model. In this
setting, the CML model achieves good generalization from
the rich amount of data. However, CML faces bandwidth and
latency challenges due to the sheer amount of data transferred
to the cloud. It also does not preserve data privacy or not
personalize well.
The FL setting assumes a federation of distributed clients,
each with its own private local dataset. As these clients
face data scarcity that limit their capacities to train effectivearXiv:2103.00710v3  [cs.LG]  17 Mar 2022