37 has proved higher performance than YOLOv4 under certain circumstances and partly gained 
confidence in the computer vision community besides YOL Ov4.  
4.2 Notable differences  – Adaptive anchor boxes  
As mentioned above, the YOLOv5 architecture has integrated the latest innovations similar to the 
YOLOv4 architecture, thus there are not many brilliant differences in theory. The author did not 
publish a det ailed paper, but only launche d a repository on Github and updates improvements 
there. By dissecting its structure code in file .yaml , the YOLOv5 model can be summarized as 
follows  (Jocher, 2020) : 
- Backbone: Focus structure, CSP  network  
- Neck: SPP  block , PAN et 
- Head: YOLOv3  head using GIoU -loss 
 
The remarkable point mentioned by the YOLOv5 author is an engineering difference.  Joseph 
Redmon  introduced the anchor box structure in YOLOv2 and a procedure for selecting anchor 
boxes of size and shape that closely resemble the ground truth bounding boxes in the training set. 
By using the k -mean clustering algorithm with different 𝑘 values, the aut hors picked the 5 best -fit 
anchor boxes for the COCO dataset  (containing 80 classes)  and use them as the default.  That 
reduces training time and increases the accuracy of the network.  
 
However, when applying these 5 anchor boxes to a unique dataset (contai ning a class not belonged 
to 80 classes in the COCO dataset), these anchor boxes cannot quickly adapt to the ground truth 
bounding boxes of this unique dataset. For example, a giraffe dataset prefers the anchor boxes 
with the shape thin and higher than a s quare box. To address this problem, computer vision 
engineers usually run the k -mean clustering algorithm on the unique dataset to get the best -fit 
anchor boxes for the data first. Then, these parameters will be configurated manually in the YOLO 
architectu re.  
 
Glenn Jocher proposed integrating the anchor box selection process into YOLOv5. As a result, the 
network has not to consider any of the datasets to be used as input, it will automatically "learning" 
the best anchor boxes for that dataset and use them during training . (Solawetz, 2020)