36 4 5TH GENERATION OF YOLO  
A month after YOLOv4 was released, researcher Glenn and his team published a new version of 
the YOLO family, called YOLOv5  (Jocher, 2020) . Glenn Jocher  is a researcher and CEO of 
Ultralystic s LLC. YOLO models were developed on a custom framework Darknet which is written 
mainly in C by Alexey Bochkovsky . Ultralystic is the company that converts previous versions of 
YOLO on one of the most famo us frameworks in the field of deep learning, PyTorch which is written 
in the Python language.  
4.1 Overview of YOLOv5  
Besides, Glenn Jocher is also the inventor of the Mosaic data augmentation and acknowledged by 
Alexey Bochkovsky  in the YOLOv4 paper  (Bochkovskiy, et al., 2020) . However, his YOLOv5 model 
caused lots of controversy in the computer vision community because of its name and 
improvements.  
 
Despite being released a month after YOLOv4, the start of research for YOLOv4 and YOLOv5 was 
quite close  (March – April 2020) . For avoiding collision, Glenn decided to name his version of 
YOLO, YOLOv5. Thus, basically, both researchers applied the state -of-the-art innovations in the 
field of computer vision at that time. That makes the architecture of YOLOv4 and YOLOv5 very 
similar and it makes many people dissatisfied with the name YOLOv5 (5th generation of YOLO) 
when it does not contain multiple outstanding improvements compared to the previous version 
YOLOv4. Besides, Glenn did not pu blish any paper for YOLOv5, causing more suspicions about 
YOLOv5.  
 
However, YOLOv5 possessed the advantages in engineering. YOLOv5 is written in Python 
programming language instead of C as in previous versions. That makes installation and integration 
on Io T devices easier. In addition, the PyTorch community is also larger than the Darknet 
community, which means that PyTorch will receive more contributions and growth potential in the 
future.  Due to being written in 2 different languages on 2 different framew orks, comparing the 
performance between YOLOv4 and YOLOv5 is difficult to be accurate. But after a while, YOLOv5