52 vision researchers agreed that the size 416 ×416 is the ideal size to use as input without 
losing much detail.  
 
o batch : determine the batch size. The forwarding of thousand images into the neural 
network at the same time makes the number of weights that the model learns in one time 
(one epoch) to increas e a lot. Thus, the dataset is usually divided into multiple batches of 
𝑛 images and training batch by batch. The results of each batch are then saved to RAM 
and aggregated after the training for all batches is completed.  Because the weights learned 
from t he batches are stored in RAM, so the larger the number of batches, the more memory 
consumption will be consumed . 
 
The training set  contains 2738  images, with 𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑐 ℎ 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒  = 32, the number of batches 
will be  2738 ÷32=86 𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑐 ℎ𝑒𝑠. 
 
o epochs : define the number of training epochs.  An epoch is responsible for learning all 
input images, in other words, training all input. Since the dataset is split into multiple 
batches, one epoch will be responsible for training all the batches. The number of epo chs 
represents the number of times the model trains all the inputs and updates the weights to 
get closer to the ground truth labels. Often chosen based on experience and intuition. The 
number of epochs more than 3000 is normal.  
 
o data: the path to data.yaml  file containing the summary of the dataset.  The model 
evaluation process is executed immediately after each epoch, so the model will also 
access the validation directory via the path in data.yam l file and use its contents for 
evaluation at that moment.  
 
o cfg: specify our model configuration  path. Based on the architecture defined in the model 
yaml file previously, this command line allows the train.py file to compile and build this 
architecture for training input images.  
 
o weight s: specify a path to weights . A pretrained weight can be used for saving training 
time. If it is left blank, the model will automatically initialize random weights for training.