8 2 YOLO – YOU ONLY LOOK ONC E 
YOLO came on the computer vision scene with a paper  released in 2015  by Joseph Redmon et al. 
“You Only Look Once: Unified, Real -Time Object Detection,”  and immediately got a lot of attention 
from fellow computer vision researchers. Convolutional Neural N etworks (CNN) such as Region -
Convolutional Network (R -CNN) used Regions Proposal Networks (RPNs) before YOLO was 
invented, it produce s proposal bounding boxes on the input image  first, then run s a classifier on 
the bounding boxes and then apply post -proces sing to remove duplicate detections and refine the 
bounding boxes. It was not suitable for training individual stages of the R -CNN network separately.  
The R -CNN network was both difficult and sluggish to optimize.  
 
The author's motivation is to build a unified model of all phases on a neural network. With the input 
image containing (or not) the objects, after passing forward through a single neural network of 
multiple convolutional networks, the system produces predictive vectors corresponding to each 
object appearing in the image. Instead of iterating the process of classifying different regions on 
the image, the YOLO system computes all the features of the image and makes predictions for all 
objects at the same time. That is the idea of "You Only Look O nce". (Redmon, et al., 2016)  
2.1 Concept s 
The main idea of YOLOv1 is to apply a grid cell with the size  of 𝑆×𝑆 (7×7 default)  into an 
image . If the center of an object falls into a grid cell, that grid cell is responsible for detec ting that 
object  (Figure 1 ). Therefore, all other cells disregard even that appearance  of object  revealed in 
multiple cells.  
 
In order to implement object detection, each grid cell predicts 𝐵 bounding boxes with their param-
eters and confidence scores for those boxes  (Figure 1 ) (V Thatte, 2020) . These confidence  score  
reflects the presence or absence of an object  in bounding box . The confidence score is  defined as:  
𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑓𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒  𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = 𝑝(𝑂𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡 )∗ 𝐼𝑂𝑈𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑡 ℎ 
with 𝑝(𝑂𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡 ) is the probability that there is an object inside the cell and 𝐼𝑂𝑈𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑡 ℎ is intersec-
tion over union of prediction box and ground truth box. 𝑝(𝑂𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡 ) is in range 0 -1, so the confi-
dence score is close to 0 if no object exists in that cell. Otherwise, the score equal to  𝐼𝑂𝑈𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑡 ℎ.