6 1 INTRODUCTION  
People glanc ing at an image, can instantly recognize what the objects are and where they are 
located within the image. The ability to detect objects fast combined with the knowledge of a person 
helps to make an accurate judgment about the nature of the object. A system t hat simulates the 
ability of the human visual system to detect objects is something that scientists are researching on. 
Fast and accurate are the two prerequisites for which an object detection algorithm is examined . 
 
Object detection is one of the classic al problems in computer vision . It not only classifies  the object 
in image but also localize s that object. In previous decades, the methods used to address this 
problem consisted of two stages : (1) extract different areas in the image using sliding windows  of 
different sizes and  (2) apply the classification problem to determine what class the objects belong 
to. These approaches have the disadvantage of demanding a large amount of computation and 
being broken down into multiple stages. That makes the system difficult to be optimized in terms of 
speed.  
 
In 2015, researcher Joseph Redmon and colleagues introduced a n object detection system that 
performs all the essential stages to detect an object using a single neural network  for the  first time , 
YOLO  algorithm  (the term as You Only Look Once ). It reframe s the object detection as a single 
regression problem, straigh t from image pixels to bounding box coordinates and class probabilities.  
This unified model predicts  simultaneously  multiple bounding boxes and class probabilities for 
those objects covered by boxe s. At the time of its release, the YOLO algorithm has produ ced 
impressive specifications that outstand the premier algorithms in terms of both speed and accuracy 
for detecting and determining object coordinates  (Redmon, et al., 2016) . 
 
Over the next 5 years, the YOLO algorithm was upgraded to five versions (including the original 
version) with many of the most innovative ideas coming out of the computer vision research com-
munity. The first three versions are researched and developed by the author of the YOLO algorithm, 
Joseph Redmo n. However, he announced to discontinue  his research in the computer vision field 
after the release of YOLOv3. In early 2020, the official YOLO Github account released the YOLO 
update version 4, YOLOv4, published by Alexey Bochkovskiy, the Russian develope r who built the 
first 3 versions of YOLO based on Joseph Redmon's Darknet framework . A month after the launch 
of YOLOv4, researcher Glenn Jocher and his Ultralytics LLC research department, who built YOLO