notes a temperature parameter. The ﬁnal loss is computed
by summing the contrastive loss of all pairs of the same im-
age in a mini-batch.
Besides SimCLR, there are also other contrastive learn-
ing frameworks such as CPC [ 36], CMC [ 39] and MoCo
[12]. We choose SimCLR for its simplicity and effective-
ness in many computer vision tasks. Still, the basic idea of
contrastive learning is similar among these studies: the rep-
resentations obtained from different images should be far
from each other and the representations obtained from the
same image should be related to each other. The idea is
intuitive and has been shown to be effective.
There is one recent study [ 46] that combines federated
learning with contrastive learning. They focus on the un-
supervised learning setting. Like SimCLR, they use con-
trastive loss to compare the representations of different im-
ages. In this paper, we focus on the supervised learning
setting and propose model-contrastive learning to compare
representations learned by different models.
3. Model-Contrastive Federated Learning
3.1. Problem Statement
Suppose there are Nparties, denoted P1,...,PN. Party
Pihas a local dataset Di. Our goal is to learn a machine
learning model wover the datasetD/defines/uniontext
i∈[N]Diwith
the help of a central server, while the raw data are not ex-
changed. The objective is to solve
argmin
wL(w) =N/summationdisplay
i=1|Di|
|D|Li(w), (2)
whereLi(w) =E(x,y)∼Di[ℓi(w;(x,y))]is the empirical
loss ofPi.
3.2. Motivation
MOON is based on an intuitive idea: the model trained
on the whole dataset is able to extract a better feature rep-
resentation than the model trained on a skewed subset. For
example, given a model trained on dog and cat images, we
cannot expect the features learned by the model to distin-
guish birds and frogs which never exist during training.
To further verify this intuition, we conduct a simple ex-
periment on CIFAR-10. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst train a CNN
model (see Section 4.1for the detailed structure) on CIFAR-
10. We use t-SNE [ 33] to visualize the hidden vectors of
images from the test dataset as shown in Figure 2a. Then,
we partition the dataset into 10 subsets in an unbalanced
way (see Section 4.1for the partition strategy) and train a
CNN model on each subset. Figure 2bshows the t-SNE
visualization of a randomly selected model. Apparently,
the model trained on the subset learns poor features. The
feature representations of most classes are even mixed and
(a) global model
 (b) local model
(c) FedAvg global model
 (d) FedAvg local model
Figure 2. T-SNE visualizations of hidden vectors on CIFAR-10.
cannot be distinguished. Then, we run FedAvg algorithm
on 10 subsets and show the representation learned by the
global model in Figure 2cand the representation learned by
a selected local model (trained based on the global model)
in Figure 2d. We can observe that the points with the same
class are more divergent in Figure 2dcompared with Figure
2c(e.g., see class 9). The local training phase even leads
the model to learn a worse representation due to the skewed
local data distribution. This further veriﬁes that the global
model should be able to learn a better feature representation
than the local model, and there is a drift in the local up-
dates. Therefore, under non-IID data scenarios, we should
control the drift and bridge the gap between the representa-
tions learned by the local model and the global model.
3.3. Method
Based on the above intuition, we propose MOON.
MOON is designed as a simple and effective approach
based on FedAvg, only introducing lightweight but novel
modiﬁcations in the local training phase. Since there is al-
ways drift in local training and the global model learns a
better representation than the local model, MOON aims to
decrease the distance between the representation learned by
the local model and the representation learned by the global
model, and increase the distance between the representation
learned by the local model and the representation learned by
the previous local model. We achieve this from the inspira-
tion of contrastive learning, which is now mainly used to
learn visual representations. In the following, we present
the network architecture, the local learning objective and
the learning procedure. At last, we discuss the relation to
contrastive learning.
10715