Figure 4. The comparison between SimCLR and MOON. Here x
denotes an image, wdenotes a model, and Rdenotes the function
to compute representation. SimCLR maximizes the agreement be-
tween representations of different views of the same image, while
MOON maximizes the agreement between representations of the
local model and the global model on the mini-batches.
learning each round. Like FedAvg, each party maintains its
local model, which will be replaced by the global model and
updated only if the party is selected to participate in a round.
MOON only needs the latest local model that the party has,
even though it may not be updated in round (t−1)(e.g.,
wt−1
i=wt−2
i).
An notable thing is that considering an ideal case where
the local model is good enough and learns (almost) the same
representation as the global model (i.e., zglob=zprev),
the model-contrastive loss will be a constant (i.e., −log1
2).
Thus, MOON will produce the same result as FedAvg, since
there is no heterogeneity issue. In this sense, our approach
is robust regardless of different amount of drifts.
3.4. Comparisons with Contrastive Learning
A comparison between MOON and SimCLR is shown
in Figure 4. The model-contrastive loss compares represen-
tations learned by different models, while the contrastive
loss compares representations of different images. We also
highlight the key difference between MOON and traditional
contrastive learning: MOON is currently for supervised
learning in a federated setting while contrastive learning is
for unsupervised learning in a centralized setting. Draw-
ing the inspirations from contrastive learning, MOON is a
new learning methodology in handling non-IID data distri-
butions among parties in federated learning.
4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental Setup
We compare MOON with three state-of-the-art ap-
proaches including (1) FedAvg [ 34], (2) FedProx [ 28], and
(3) SCAFFOLD [ 22]. We also compare a baseline approach
named SOLO, where each party trains a model with its lo-
cal data without federated learning. We conduct experi-
ments on three datasets including CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100,and Tiny-Imagenet1(100,000 images with 200 classes).
Moreover, we try two different network architectures. For
CIFAR-10, we use a CNN network as the base encoder,
which has two 5x5 convolution layers followed by 2x2 max
pooling (the ﬁrst with 6 channels and the second with 16
channels) and two fully connected layers with ReLU activa-
tion (the ﬁrst with 120 units and the second with 84 units).
For CIFAR-100 and Tiny-Imagenet, we use ResNet-50 [ 13]
as the base encoder. For all datasets, like [ 3], we use a 2-
layer MLP as the projection head. The output dimension
of the projection head is set to 256 by default. Note that
all baselines use the same network architecture as MOON
(including the projection head) for fair comparison.
We use PyTorch [ 37] to implement MOON and the other
baselines. The code is publicly available2. We use the SGD
optimizer with a learning rate 0.01 for all approaches. The
SGD weight decay is set to 0.00001 and the SGD momen-
tum is set to 0.9. The batch size is set to 64. The num-
ber of local epochs is set to 300 for SOLO. The number
of local epochs is set to 10 for all federated learning ap-
proaches unless explicitly speciﬁed. The number of com-
munication rounds is set to 100 for CIFAR-10/100 and 20
for Tiny-ImageNet, where all federated learning approaches
have little or no accuracy gain with more communications.
For MOON, we set the temperature parameter to 0.5 by de-
fault like [ 3].
Like previous studies [ 45,41], we use Dirichlet distri-
bution to generate the non-IID data partition among par-
ties. Speciﬁcally, we sample pk∼DirN(β)and allocate a
pk,jproportion of the instances of class kto partyj, where
Dir(β)is the Dirichlet distribution with a concentration
parameter β(0.5 by default). With the above partitioning
strategy, each party can have relatively few (even no) data
samples in some classes. We set the number of parties to
10 by default. The data distributions among parties in de-
fault settings are shown in Figure 5. For more experimental
results, please refer to Appendix.
4.2. Accuracy Comparison
For MOON, we tune µfrom{0.1,1,5,10}and report the
best result. The best µof MOON for CIFAR-10, CIFAR-
100, and Tiny-Imagenet are 5, 1, and 1, respectively. Note
that FedProx also has a hyper-parameter µto control the
weight of its proximal term (i.e., LFedProx=ℓFedAvg+
µℓprox). For FedProx, we tune µfrom{0.001,0.01,0.1,1}
(the range is also used in the previous paper [ 28]) and re-
port the best result. The best µof FedProx for CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100, and Tiny-Imagenet are 0.01,0.001, and0.001,
respectively. Unless explicitly speciﬁed, we use these µset-
tings for all the remaining experiments.
Table 1shows the top-1 test accuracy of all approaches
1https://www.kaggle.com/c/tiny-imagenet
2https://github.com/QinbinLi/MOON
10717