Model-Contrastive Federated Learning
Qinbin Li
National University of Singapore
qinbin@comp.nus.edu.sgBingsheng He
National University of Singapore
hebs@comp.nus.edu.sgDawn Song
UC Berkeley
dawnsong@berkeley.edu
Abstract
Federated learning enables multiple parties to collab-
oratively train a machine learning model without commu-
nicating their local data. A key challenge in federated
learning is to handle the heterogeneity of local data dis-
tribution across parties. Although many studies have been
proposed to address this challenge, we ﬁnd that they fail
to achieve high performance in image datasets with deep
learning models. In this paper, we propose MOON: model-
contrastive federated learning. MOON is a simple and
effective federated learning framework. The key idea of
MOON is to utilize the similarity between model represen-
tations to correct the local training of individual parties,
i.e., conducting contrastive learning in model-level. Our
extensive experiments show that MOON signiﬁcantly out-
performs the other state-of-the-art federated learning algo-
rithms on various image classiﬁcation tasks.
1. Introduction
Deep learning is data hungry. Model training can beneﬁt
a lot from a large and representative dataset ( e.g., ImageNet
[6] and COCO [ 31]). However, data are usually dispersed
among different parties in practice ( e.g., mobile devices and
companies). Due to the increasing privacy concerns and
data protection regulations [ 40], parties cannot send their
private data to a centralized server to train a model.
To address the above challenge, federated learning [ 20,
44,27,26] enables multiple parties to jointly learn a ma-
chine learning model without exchanging their local data.
A popular federated learning algorithm is FedAvg [ 34]. In
each round of FedAvg, the updated local models of the par-
ties are transferred to the server, which further aggregates
the local models to update the global model. The raw data is
not exchanged during the learning process. Federated learn-
ing has emerged as an important machine learning area and
attracted many research interests [ 34,28,22,25,41,5,16,
2,11]. Moreover, it has been applied in many applications
such as medical imaging [ 21,23], object detection [ 32], and
landmark classiﬁcation [ 15].A key challenge in federated learning is the hetero-
geneity of data distribution on different parties [ 20]. The
data can be non-identically distributed among the parties in
many real-world applications, which can degrade the per-
formance of federated learning [ 22,29,24]. When each
party updates its local model, its local objective may be
far from the global objective. Thus, the averaged global
model is away from the global optima. There have been
some studies trying to address the non-IID issue in the lo-
cal training phase [ 28,22]. FedProx [ 28] directly limits
the local updates by ℓ2-norm distance, while SCAFFOLD
[22] corrects the local updates via variance reduction [ 19].
However, as we show in the experiments (see Section 4),
these approaches fail to achieve good performance on im-
age datasets with deep learning models, which can be as
bad as FedAvg.
In this work, we address the non-IID issue from a novel
perspective based on an intuitive observation: the global
model trained on a whole dataset is able to learn a bet-
ter representation than the local model trained on a skewed
subset . Speciﬁcally, we propose model-c ontrastive learn-
ing (MOON), which corrects the local updates by max-
imizing the agreement of representation learned by the
current local model and the representation learned by the
global model. Unlike the traditional contrastive learning
approaches [ 3,4,12,35], which achieve state-of-the-art re-
sults on learning visual representations by comparing the
representations of different images, MOON conducts con-
trastive learning in model-level by comparing the represen-
tations learned by different models. Overall, MOON is
a simple and effective federated learning framework, and
addresses the non-IID data issue with the novel design of
model-based contrastive learning.
We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the ef-
fectiveness of MOON. MOON signiﬁcantly outperforms
the other state-of-the-art federated learning algorithms [ 34,
28,22] on various image classiﬁcation datasets including
CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and Tiny-Imagenet. With only
lightweight modiﬁcations to FedAvg, MOON outperforms
existing approaches by at least 2% accuracy in most cases.
Moreover, the improvement of MOON is very signiﬁcant
10713