Figure 1. The FedAvg framework. In this paper, we focus on the
second step, i.e., the local training phase.
on some settings. For example, on CIFAR-100 dataset with
100 parties, MOON achieves 61.8% top-1 accuracy, while
the best top-1 accuracy of existing studies is 55%.
2. Background and Related Work
2.1. Federated Learning
FedAvg [ 34] has been a de facto approach for federated
learning. The framework of FedAvg is shown in Figure 1.
There are four steps in each round of FedAvg. First, the
server sends a global model to the parties. Second, the par-
ties perform stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to update
their models locally. Third, the local models are sent to a
central server. Last, the server averages the model weights
to produce a global model for the training of the next round.
There have been quite some studies trying to improve
FedAvg on non-IID data. Those studies can be divided into
two categories: improvement on local training (i.e., step 2
of Figure 1) and on aggregation (i.e., step 4 of Figure 1).
This study belongs to the ﬁrst category.
As for studies on improving local training, FedProx [ 28]
introduces a proximal term into the objective during local
training. The proximal term is computed based on the ℓ2-
norm distance between the current global model and the
local model. Thus, the local model update is limited by
the proximal term during the local training. SCAFFOLD
[22] corrects the local updates by introducing control vari-
ates. Like the training model, the control variates are also
updated by each party during local training. The differ-
ence between the local control variate and the global con-
trol variate is used to correct the gradients in local train-
ing. However, FedProx shows experiments on MNIST and
EMNIST only with multinomial logistic regression, whileSCAFFOLD only shows experiments on EMNIST with lo-
gistic regression and 2-layer fully connected layer. The ef-
fectiveness of FedProx and SCAFFOLD on image datasets
with deep learning models has not been well explored. As
shown in our experiments, those studies have little or even
no advantage over FedAvg, which motivates this study for
a new approach of handling non-IID image datasets with
deep learning models. We also notice that there are other
related contemporary work [ 1,30,43] when preparing this
paper. We leave the comparison between MOON and these
contemporary work as future studies.
As for studies on improving the aggregation phase,
FedMA [ 41] utilizes Bayesian non-parametric methods to
match and average weights in a layer-wise manner. Fe-
dAvgM [ 14] applies momentum when updating the global
model on the server. Another recent study, FedNova [ 42],
normalizes the local updates before averaging. Our study
is orthogonal to them and potentially can be combined with
these techniques as we work on the local training phase.
Another research direction is personalized federated
learning [ 8,7,10,47,17], which tries to learn personal-
ized local models for each party. In this paper, we study
the typical federated learning, which tries to learn a single
global model for all parties.
2.2. Contrastive Learning
Self-supervised learning [ 18,9,3,4,12,35] is a recent
hot research direction, which tries to learn good data repre-
sentations from unlabeled data. Among those studies, con-
trastive learning approaches [ 3,4,12,35] achieve state-of-
the-art results on learning visual representations. The key
idea of contrastive learning is to reduce the distance be-
tween the representations of different augmented views of
the same image (i.e., positive pairs ), and increase the dis-
tance between the representations of augmented views of
different images (i.e., negative pairs ).
A typical contrastive learning framework is SimCLR [ 3].
Given an image x, SimCLR ﬁrst creates two correlated
views of this image using different data augmentation op-
erators, denoted xiandxj. A base encoder f(·)and a pro-
jection head g(·)are trained to extract the representation
vectors and map the representations to a latent space, re-
spectively. Then, a contrastive loss (i.e., NT-Xent [ 38]) is
applied on the projected vector g(f(·)), which tries to max-
imize agreement between differently augmented views of
the same image. Speciﬁcally, given 2Naugmented views
and a pair of view xiandxjof same image, the contrastive
loss for this pair is deﬁned as
li,j=−logexp( sim(xi,xj)/τ)/summationtext2N
k=1I[k/negationslash=i]exp( sim(xi,xk)/τ)(1)
where sim (·,·)is a cosine similarity function and τde-
10714