7
Vol.:(0123456789) Scientific Reports  |         (2021) 11:1860  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-81044-7
www.nature.com/scientificreports/Generation of ground truth data. In the absence of manually obtained registration data, it is hard to 
determine the accuracy of the ground truth generation process using objective measures. Therefore, we con-
ducted a manual assessment by a radiologist to evaluate the accuracy of the proposed ground truth generation 
process. To this end, we randomly selected 200 image pairs from the 1600 image pairs of our augmented dataset. 
We then displayed the axial, sagittal, and coronal slices of the registered image pairs obtained with and without 
the proposed modifications as methods A and B. The allocation of the method to A or B was randomised to 
remove bias. The assessor was asked to identify the best registration and given 3 options to choose from: A, B, or 
Both. The results of this assessment showed that 39.50% of the time, the 2 processes were similar, 28.00% of the 
time mathematical optimisation without symmetry alignment was better, and 32.50% of the time, mathematical 
optimisation with symmetry alignment was better. We show some visual results of this process in Fig.  7. Note 
from these results that in some cases (especially when the orientations of the fixed and moving images were 
close) the mathematical optimisation process performs well with or without symmetry alignment. However, in 
other instances (for example, where the orientations of the input images were vastly different), using symmetry 
alignment provided better registration results.
Multi‑modal image registration. Selection of regression model.  In order to select the best regression 
model for our application, we compared the performance of several models. First, we used the full 3D DCNN 
discussed above that was trained to predict registration parameters. Then, we used this DCNN as a feature 
extractor and combined it with several other regression models: Support vector machines (SVM), Gaussian pro-
cess regression (GPR), and ANN. As SVM and GPR models were designed to predict one response at a time, we 
combined 6 prediction models to predict the 6 registration parameters. The resulting R2 values for the regression 
models were: 0.958, 0.985, 0.990, and 0.998 for DCNN, SVM, GPR, and ANN respectively. We selected ANN 
as the proposed regression model as it gave the best R2 value. Figure  8 shows the histograms of errors for the 
different regression models.
Complete registration process.  We compared the performance of the proposed method with similar existing 
methods (Chee and  Wu20, Zheng et al.37, Miao et al.26, Sloan et al.33, (CNN) Sloan et al.33, (FCN) Liu et al.29, and 
Zou et al.27) To this end, we generated the registration parameters from the trained networks, applied them to the 
moving image to get the registered image and then compared that to the ground truth (generated as discussed 
above). The metrics of comparison (for ground truth image x and predicted image y) were: Dice Similarity 
Coefficient (DSC), Jaccard Similarity Coefficient (JSC), Registration Precision ( Rp ), Registration Sensitivity ( Rs ), 
Contour Matching Score (CMS), and Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM)65,66. Equations  1 to 6 show the 
how these metrics were calculated. µx and µy represent the averages of the images, σ2
x and σ2
y are the variances, 
and σxy is the cross-covariance. C1 and C2 are regularization constants for the luminance and contrast respec-
tively. In addition, we considered the elapsed time ( Et(s) ), the total processing time (in seconds), as a comparison 
metric.
(1) DSC (x,y)=2/vextendsingle/vextendsinglex∩y/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
|x|+/vextendsingle/vextendsingley/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
Figure 7.  Example of registration without and with symmetry alignment. The rows show: (a ) the fixed and 
moving images, (b ) the results of the mathematical optimisation process without symmetry alignment, and (c ) 
the results of the registration with symmetry alignment.