1
Vol.:(0123456789) Scientific Reports  |         (2021) 11:1860  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-81044-7
www.nature.com/scientificreportsA deep learning based framework 
for the registration of three 
dimensional multi‑modal medical 
images of the head
Kh Tohidul Islam*, Sudanthi Wijewickrema & Stephen O’Leary
Image registration is a fundamental task in image analysis in which the transform that moves the 
coordinate system of one image to another is calculated. Registration of multi‑modal medical images 
has important implications for clinical diagnosis, treatment planning, and image‑guided surgery 
as it provides the means of bringing together complimentary information obtained from different 
image modalities. However, since different image modalities have different properties due to their 
different acquisition methods, it remains a challenging task to find a fast and accurate match between 
multi‑modal images. Furthermore, due to reasons such as ethical issues and need for human expert 
intervention, it is difficult to collect a large database of labelled multi‑modal medical images. In 
addition, manual input is required to determine the fixed and moving images as input to registration 
algorithms. In this paper, we address these issues and introduce a registration framework that (1) 
creates synthetic data to augment existing datasets, (2) generates ground truth data to be used 
in the training and testing of algorithms, (3) registers (using a combination of deep learning and 
conventional machine learning methods) multi‑modal images in an accurate and fast manner, and (4) 
automatically classifies the image modality so that the process of registration can be fully automated. 
We validate the performance of the proposed framework on CT and MRI images of the head obtained 
from a publicly available registration database.
Image registration is a spatial transformation process which brings different images into a single coordinate sys-
tem. This enables direct comparison and integration of data obtained from multiple sources. Image registration 
has wide application in numerous fields, such as remote sensing, agriculture, infrared physics, and biomedical 
image  analysis1–3. In the field of medical image analysis, it enables the integration of information from different 
temporal points and/or imaging modalities. For example, MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) scans of a patient 
at different times can show details of the growth of a tumor, comparison of pre- and post-operative scans can 
indicate the effects of a surgery, and using images from different imaging modalities (for example CT (computer -
ized tomography), MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), and PET (positron emission tomography)) can provide 
additional information that can be used to improve the diagnosis of diseases. Figure  1 illustrates the process of 
3D medical image registration.
Image registration methods can be broadly classified into intensity-based and feature-based methods depend-
ing on the matching technique  used4,5. Assuming one of the images is fixed and the other is moving, both types 
of methods rely on determining the transform that minimises a cost function that defines the dissimilarity 
between the fixed image and the transformed moving  image6. In intensity-based registration, the (dis)similarity 
of the two images is defined in terms of the correlation between pixel/voxel intensities. In contrast, in feature-
based registration methods, image features (for example, edges, lines, contours, and point-based features) are 
extracted prior to the registration process and the correspondence between these features is used to define the 
(dis)similarity5. Feature-based image registration has the advantage of lower processing time, as only a smaller 
number of features are used in the (dis)similarity calculation when compared to each pixel (or voxel) used in 
intensity-based  registration7.
Based on the nature of the transformation, registration methods can be classified into rigid-body and non-
rigid registration. Rigid-body registration involves a combination of rotation and translation in order to bring 
the images into the same coordinate  system8. However, if the images have geometric differences that cannot OPEN
Department of Surgery (Otolaryngology), Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health Sciences, University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia. *email: kh.tohidulislam@gmail.com