2
Vol:.(1234567890) Scientific Reports  |         (2021) 11:1860  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-81044-7
www.nature.com/scientificreports/be accounted for by using rotation and translation, rigid-body registration may not be sufficient. In such situ -
ations non-rigid (non-linear, deformable, or elastic) registration is  used9. Demons  registration10, viscous fluid 
 registration11, B-spline  registration12, and finite element model (FEM)  registration13 are some common methods 
used in non-rigid image registration. The anatomical differences present in inter-patient (between different 
patients) medical images necessitate the use of non-rigid  registration14. In contrast, rigid-body registration has 
been found to be adequate for intra-patient image registration (where the images are of the same patient taken 
at different times and/or using different imaging techniques)15,16.
Over the last few decades, many methods have been introduced for medical image registration that typically 
use different cost functions and techniques. Mathematical optimisation as well as machine learning (both con-
ventional methods and deep learning techniques) have been used for this  purpose17. While the former is typically 
unsupervised, the latter can be either unsupervised or supervised. Optimization procedures minimise a distance 
function (or maximise a function that denotes similarity) between the fixed image and the moving image with 
respect to the registration (or transformation) parameters in an iterative process. Unsupervised machine learning 
techniques can also be used to optimise an objective function iteratively to find the registration  parameters18. A 
limitation of these approaches is that the process has to be run from scratch for each new image pair. They are 
also computationally expensive and time-consuming19,20. In supervised machine learning, the model learns how a 
registration is performed through a training process involving pre-registered fixed and moving images. Although 
the training process could be resource intensive, once a model has been trained, the time taken for a registra -
tion is typically lower than that required for mathematical optimisation and unsupervised machine  learning21.
When employing traditional Machine learning methods for feature-based registration, features are required 
to be extracted prior to the registration process. The decision of which features to be used in the registration 
typically depend on the application/user. In contrast, deep learning techniques are able to learn the ideal features 
for the registration directly from the input data as part of the training  process6. As such, many deep learning 
techniques have been introduced for medical image registration  tasks22–24.
Here, we explore the use of feature-based deep learning for 3D rigid-body registration of intra-patient, 
multi-modal (CT and MRI) images of the head. To this end, we first discuss a method of generating synthetic 
data to augment an existing registration dataset. Second, we describe a technique for ground truth generation 
for registration databases. Third, we introduce a registration method that incorporates the advantages of both 
conventional machine learning and deep learning. Fourth, we discuss a method to identify image modality in 
order to avoid manual intervention in selecting fixed and moving images. We validate the performance of our 
algorithms through experimental analyses on CT and MRI images of the head obtained from a publicly available 
medical image registration database.
Related work
There are several ways in which deep learning has been employed in feature-based supervised registration of 3D 
multi-modal images. Predominantly, researchers have trained deep regression models to predict the registration 
 parameters18,25,26. Deep learning has also been used as a method of pre-processing, for example, to determine 
control points, which were then used to determine the registration  parameters27. Another method that has 
utilised deep learning for this purpose was to train a model to predict the image of one modality given that of 
another modality of the same individual and registering this image with the original image of the corresponding 
modality, thereby reducing the problem to a single mode  registration28,29.
Chee and  Wu20 designed a deep learning model called AIRNet (affine image registration network) to predict 
the affine transformation parameters to register two 3D images. A twelve-element vector (a flattened version 
of the affine transformation matrix) was used as the output. First, they used an encoder (adapted from 2D 
DenseNet)30 to extract features from the image pair. Then they concatenated these features and used them as 
input to several fully connected layers that performed the registration task in the form of regression. Other works, 
Figure 1.  The process of 3D medical image registration.