3
Vol.:(0123456789) Scientific Reports  |         (2021) 11:1860  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-81044-7
www.nature.com/scientificreports/such as Chee and  Wu20 and Kori and  Krishnamurthi31 used a similar approach to predict affine transformation 
parameters by adapting a 2D VGG-19  network32.
Sloan et al.33 introduced a deep learning regression model to predict rigid-body transformation parameters 
of intra-patient T1 and T2 MRI images of the head. Initially, they trained their network using a series of syn-
thetic mono-modal images, where the fixed and moving images were identical but for some changes in rotation 
and translation. Later on they re-trained their method to register multi-modal images. They used two different 
networks to predict the transformation parameters as two different pipelines using a CNN and a full convolu -
tion network (FCN). In these methods, they first extracted features from the fixed and moving images using 
the feature extraction layers of the networks and then concatenated these features before sending them through 
several convolutional and fully connected layers. They showed experimentally that their method performed 
well compared to other similar methods they considered. However, it remains to be seen how it performs when 
registering images of modalities with larger intensity differences such as MRI and CT.
Liu et al.29 proposed a synthetic image generation based approach using deep learning for multi-modal medi-
cal image registration. They established that if an input image of one modality could be predicted from that of 
another modality, and this predicted image is then registered with the input image of the same modality, the reg-
istration process can be simplified into a mono-modal one. To this end, they used a CNN with 10 convolutional 
layers combined with ReLU and batch normalization layers in order to learn the complex feature mapping of an 
image of the input modality to its corresponding output modality in an image-to-image regression  approach34. 
They used T1, T2 and PD (proton density) weighted MRI images to train their CNN model by using the sum of 
squared differences (SSD) as the cost function. Once this image was generated, they performed a mono-modal 
registration on that and the original image of the same modality using mathematical optimization. Liu et al.29 
compared their image generation method with other methods and stated that their method can produce more 
detailed synthetic images than others, which in turn can make the conventional registration task easier. Since 
their method was only tested on MRI images of different types, it is not clear how it will perform in registration 
between images of modalities with larger differences.
Zou et al.27 implemented interest/control point and feature extraction based deep learning models for rigid-
body medical image registration. First, they used a FCN to perform a pixel-level interest/control point calcula-
tion. Then, they used a CNN for feature detection and matching. Next, they used the random sample consensus 
(RANSAC) algorithm to filter outliers and determined the transformation matrix with the most inliers by itera-
tively fitting  transforms35. They compared their performance with a traditional feature-based registration method: 
scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) for MRI and CT images and showed their method performed  well36.
Miao et al.26 used a CNN regression model to predict rigid body transformations. Their model was trained 
on synthetic images generated using a manual transformation. They showed experimentally that their model 
outperformed traditional intensity-based registration methods with respect to accuracy and computational effi -
ciency. Similarly, Zheng et al.37 also used a pre-trained VGG-type CNN  architecture32 to perform multi-modal 
medical image registration. They used their CNN as a regression model to predict parameters for rigid-body 
transformations. Initially, their model was trained on a large number of synthetic images and then fine-tuned 
using a small number of image sets. Their model outperformed similar existing state-of-the-art methods in terms 
of both accuracy and computational efficiency.
Proposed method
We consider four different aspects related to multi-modal 3D medical image registration and introduce methods 
for each. First, we discuss how to augment an existing registration database with synthetic images, as obtaining 
large databases for medical image registration is often impractical. Second, we address the problem of ground 
truth generation. In the absence of ground truth data generated by human experts, which may require con-
siderable time commitments from them, researchers have used alternative methods such as using a validated 
 algorithm38,39. Here, we introduce a method of increasing the accuracy of such validated algorithms when gener -
ating ground truth data for multi-modal medical image registration. Third, we introduce a registration method 
that comprises two steps: learning of image features best suited for the registration task (using deep learning) and 
determination of the registration parameters (using regression). Fourth, we discuss a method of identifying the 
image modality. This is an important task because the type of image determines whether it is used as the fixed 
or moving image, which is typically done manually. Identifying the image modality prior to registration enables 
the process to be fully automated. An overview of the proposed framework is shown in Fig.  2.
Data augmentation. Data augmentation is a common practice in machine learning performed in order 
to increase the size of existing databases. It is typically done by generating synthetic data from the original data 
available in the database. The method used in generating synthetic images from the original dataset and the 
number of synthetic images to be generated are two important concerns in data augmentation. Many methods 
have been introduced in response to the former question, such as, random  cropping40, mixing  images41, genera-
tive adversarial  networks42, neural style  transfer43, and geometric  transformations44,45. In our application, our 
focus is rigid body registration. As such, we generated synthetic images by rotating each image by a random 
angle (in the range of [−150150] ) around a random axis and translating it by a random distance (in the range of 
[−55 ] ) along the coordinate axes. Not as much focus has been garnered by how many synthetic images should 
be generated for optimal training, and typically researchers have used arbitrary numbers that have performed 
well for their  applications40,45,46. We employed an iterative training and testing procedure to identify the amount 
of synthetic data required to achieve best results. To this end, we generated an increasing number of synthetic 
data per original image (from 4 to 124 in steps of 5) and selected the number that provided best performance 
results.