4
Vol:.(1234567890) Scientific Reports  |         (2021) 11:1860  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-81044-7
www.nature.com/scientificreports/Generation of ground truth data. The accuracy of a model generated using supervised learning is largely 
dependent on the quality of the ground truth data used in its training. As such, ground truth generation is an 
essential part of any supervised learning problem. In medical image processing, this is typically done manually 
by human experts such as  radiologists47. However, this is a time consuming, expensive, and cumbersome pro-
cess. To avoid human involvement, some researchers have used validated algorithms to generate ground truth 
 data20,48. In registration problems, this typically takes the form of mathematical  optimisation38. However, one of 
the issues in mathematical optimisation in registration is that if the orientations of the two images are not rea-
sonably similar, it is possible that the process would result in a local (and not global) minimum.
To reduce the impact of this issue, we introduce a method that realigns the fixed and moving images of 
the head so that their orientations are closer together at the start of the optimisation. To this end, we use a 
characteristic inherent to most medical images of the human body:  symmetry49. As the human head is roughly 
ellipsoidal, principal component analysis (PCA)50 can be used as a simple, yet effective method of calculating 
symmetry. For images that have symmetry but are not ellipsoidal in nature, more complex symmetry calculation 
 methods51–53 can be used.
In order to calculate the PCA axes, we first resampled each image (fixed and moving) so that the scale of all 
three dimensions of the image were the same. This was done in order to preserve the real-world shape of the 
head. We then used Otsu’s two-level global  thresholding54 method to remove the background points and extract 
a point cloud representing the head. We then calculated the principal components for the point cloud. Next, we 
reoriented the image so that its main axes were aligned along the principal components and the center of the 
image was at the mean location of the point cloud. This rigid body transformation can be represented by /bracketleftbigg
Rt
01/bracketrightbigg
 , 
where R is the rotation matrix and t  is the vector of translation parameters. Once the fixed and moving images 
were brought to their ‘symmetry’ orientations using the transformations TFix and TMov respectively, we registered 
these two images using One Plus One Evolutionary (intensity-based)  optimisation55. In the optimisation process, 
we used a growth factor of 1.05×1000 , epsilon of 1.5×10−06 , initial radius of 6.25×10−03 , maximum iterations 
of 100, number of spatial samples of 500, and number of histogram bins of 50. We considered all pixel values in 
the calculations. We then calculated the complete transformation that registered the original moving and fixed 
images as TComp=T−1
FixTRegTMov , where TReg is the rigid body transformation resulting from registration of the 
symmetry aligned images. Figure  3 illustrates the process of ground truth generation.
Registration of multi‑modal images. We trained a CNN for the registration of multi-modal images and 
used it to extract the features best suited for our task. Then, we trained a regression model on these features to 
predict the registration parameters. The architecture of the CNN used here is shown in Fig.  4. The image input 
layer used was 256×256×26×1 . To speed up the training process and to reduce the sensitivity to network 
initialization, we used batch normalization layers after every convolution  layer56. A Leaky Rectified Linear Unit 
(ReLU) layer was used after every batch normalization layer as a threshold operation to each element of the 
input, where any value less than zero was multiplied by a fixed scalar of 0.157. Max pooling (3D) layers were used 
to perform down-sampling by dividing the 3D input into 3D pooling regions and computing the maximum of 
each region. A global average pooling layer was used before a fully connected layer to perform down-sampling 
by computing the mean of the height, width, and depth dimensions of the input and reduce the size of the 
activation without sacrificing performance. The final layer of the network was a regression output layer which 
computed the half-mean-squared-error loss. The output parameters were the three Euler angles representing the 
rotations around the three coordinate axes and the translations along the same. To train the network, we sepa-
rated 30% of the data for validation and used stochastic gradient descent with a momentum (SGDM) optimizer 
of 0.9 and Max Epochs of  3058. We set the initial learning rate to 0.001 and dropped it to 0.0001 after 20 epochs.
Once the 3D DCNN was trained for registration, we used it to extract the features from the MRI and CT 
images. To this end, we activated the last convolution layer of the 3D DCNN (chosen using trial-and-error) 
Figure 2.  Overview of the proposed registration framework.