wheretis the time at which the update is computed and kis the time at which the observation was
stored. In the case of Q(), the parameter tis also stored in the buffer. Overall, each entry in
the buffer is of the form (Sk;Ak;Rk;Ik;k(AkjSk);k), whereRk,k, andkare set to zero if k
corresponds to the ﬁrst time step of an episode and Ikis a boolean indicating if Skis a terminal state.
4 Empirical Evaluations
In our empirical evaluations, we study the effect of the off-policy correction, the parameter n, and the
target network update frequency on the performance of the algorithms introduced in the previous
sections. The results of this systematic study facilitate an in-depth understanding of these algorithmic
details which could inform the design of new deep reinforcement learning agents.
In order to test the performance of all these algorithms and to allow for enough samples to obtain
statistical signiﬁcance, we used the mountain car environment as described in Sutton and Barto
(2018). To prevent algorithms from running for too long, we enforced a timeout of 5,000 time steps
after which an episode was stopped. Note that timing out is not treated the same as termination.
In the case of termination, all the subsequent rewards and action-values are considered zero when
computing the target. On the other hand, in the case of a time out, the n-step target is truncated at
the last available time step effectively making the n-step return shorter. We found in preliminary
experiments that treating time outs the same way as terminations can have catastrophic effects in
learning. All the agents were trained for 500episodes.
The network architecture remained constant for all the experiments. It consisted of an input layer,
a fully-connected hidden layer, and a fully-connected output layer. The input layer consisted of a
two-dimensional vector with the position and velocity of the car; the fully-connected hidden layer
consisted of 1;000rectiﬁed linear units; and the output layer was a fully-connected linear layer that
returned the action-value for each action. To minimize the loss, we used the RMSprop optimizer
(Tieleman & Hinton, 2012) with gradient momentum and squared gradient momentum of 0.95, and a
minimum squared gradient of 0.01 — the same values used in the original DQN. For the learning rate
parameterwe used a value of 0:00025 as in the original DQN architecture.
The replay memory size of the architecture was 20;000with a replay start size of 1;000random
actions and a mini-batch size of 32. The default value for the target network update frequency was
1;000; however, for one of the experiments we investigated the effect of this hyper-parameter on the
performance of each algorithm. We will make special emphasis when using a different value for the
target network update frequency.
All the agents behaved and estimated the action-values corresponding to an -greedy policy with
= 0:1. Note that even when the behaviour and target policy are the same, the agent needs to
compute the importance sampling ratio if it is to correct for the discrepancy between the policy
at the time of storing and the policy at the time of sampling. We used a discount factor 
of 1 to
encourage agents to ﬁnd the terminal state before episodes timed out. We did not anneal for any of
our experiments since we found in preliminary results that it did not result in a signiﬁcant difference
in performance.
4.1 Off-Policy vs On-Policy
Our ﬁrst experiment was motivated by the results obtained with n-stepQ-learning without off-policy
corrections in the Ape-X architecture (Horgan et al., 2018). In light of those results, we investigated
how other algorithms would perform without any off-policy correction. We hypothesized that similar
ton-stepQ-learning, Sarsa and Q()would not see an adverse effect in their performance if they did
not use off-policy correction.
We tested two versions of the one-step algorithms Sarsa, Q(= 0:5), and decaying : a version with
off-policy correction — called off-policy, and without off-policy correction — called on-policy. The
decayingagent is aQ()agent that has an initial value of of 1 which decreases by 0.002 at the
end of each episode. In the case of the off-policy agents, the importance sampling ratio is deﬁned as
t(AkjSk)
k(AkjSk), wheretis the policy at the time of the update and kis the policy at the time of storing
the observation in the buffer.
5