Understanding Multi-Step Deep Reinforcement
Learning: A Systematic Study of the DQN Target
J. Fernando Hernandez-Garcia
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB, T6G 2E8
jfhernan@ualberta.caRichard S. Sutton
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB, T6G 2E8
rsutton@ualberta.ca
Abstract
Multi-step methods such as Retrace( ) andn-stepQ-learning have become a
crucial component of modern deep reinforcement learning agents. These methods
are often evaluated as a part of bigger architectures and their evaluations rarely
include enough samples to draw statistically signiﬁcant conclusions about their
performance. This type of methodology makes it difﬁcult to understand how
particular algorithmic details of multi-step methods inﬂuence learning. In this
paper we combine the n-step action-value algorithms Retrace, Q-learning, Tree
Backup, Sarsa, and Q()with an architecture analogous to DQN. We test the
performance of all these algorithms in the mountain car environment; this choice
of environment allows for faster training times and larger sample sizes. We present
statistical analyses on the effects of the off-policy correction, the backup length
parametern, and the update frequency of the target network on the performance of
these algorithms. Our results show that (1) using off-policy correction can have an
adverse effect on the performance of Sarsa and Q(); (2) increasing the backup
lengthnconsistently improved performance across all the different algorithms;
and (3) the performance of Sarsa and Q-learning was more robust to the effect of
the target network update frequency than the performance of Tree Backup, Q(),
and Retrace in this particular task.
A crucial choice when designing reinforcement learning agents is the deﬁnition of the update target.
The choice of target heavily inﬂuences the bias and the variance of the algorithm, as well as the
convergence guarantees and convergence speed of the estimates of the value function. This choice
is particularly overwhelming given the large number of methods that have been proposed: should
one use Sarsa or Q-learning; should one use off-policy correction; if so, should one truncate the
importance sampling ratio. Systematic studies of all these algorithms are essential to be able to make
informed decisions when designing reinforcement learning agents.
A particular innovation with long lasting inﬂuence in reinforcement learning research is the TD( )
algorithm (Sutton, 1988). Through the introduction of the trace decay parameter , TD()uniﬁes
Monte Carlo estimation and one-step temporal difference methods. These type of methods are now
known as multi-step methods and they represent a large family of algorithms that one could choose
from when designing reinforcement learning agents.
Multi-step methods are often encountered in one of two formulations: n-step methods which use
trajectories of length nto compute the target, and eligibility trace methods which, like the TD( )
algorithm, combine the information of many n-step targets to create a compound target. These
types of methods have been exhaustively studied, both theoretically and empirically, in the tabular
and linear function approximation case. In deep reinforcement learning research, where the value
function is approximated using a neural network, multi-step methods have seen a resurgence in recent
years. Algorithms such as Retrace( ) (Munos, Stepleton, Harutyunyan, & Bellemare, 2016) are
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.arXiv:1901.07510v2  [cs.LG]  7 Feb 2019