Graph Convolutional Networks with EigenPooling
Yao Ma
Michigan State University
mayao4@msu.eduSuhang Wang
Pennsylvania State University
szw494@psu.edu
Charu C. Aggarwal
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
charu@us.ibm.comJiliang Tang
Michigan State University
tangjili@msu.edu
ABSTRACT
Graph neural networks, which generalize deep neural network
models to graph structured data, have attracted increasing atten-
tion in recent years. They usually learn node representations by
transforming, propagating and aggregating node features and have
been proven to improve the performance of many graph related
tasks such as node classification and link prediction. To apply graph
neural networks for the graph classification task, approaches to
generate the graph representation from node representations are
demanded. A common way is to globally combine the node rep-
resentations. However, rich structural information is overlooked.
Thus a hierarchical pooling procedure is desired to preserve the
graph structure during the graph representation learning. There are
some recent works on hierarchically learning graph representation
analogous to the pooling step in conventional convolutional neural
(CNN) networks. However, the local structural information is still
largely neglected during the pooling process. In this paper, we in-
troduce a pooling operator EigenPooling based on graph Fourier
transform, which can utilize the node features and local structures
during the pooling process. We then design pooling layers based
on the pooling operator, which are further combined with tradi-
tional GCN convolutional layers to form a graph neural network
framework EigenGCN for graph classification. Theoretical analysis
is provided to understand EigenPooling from both local and global
perspectives. Experimental results of the graph classification task
on6commonly used benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed framework.
ACM Reference Format:
Yao Ma, Suhang Wang, Charu C. Aggarwal, and Jiliang Tang. 2019. Graph
Convolutional Networks with EigenPooling. In The 25th ACM SIGKDD
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD ’19), August
4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 9 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3292500.3330982
1 INTRODUCTION
Recent years have witnessed increasing interests in generalizing
neural networks for graph structured data. The stream of research
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
©2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6201-6/19/08. . .$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3292500.3330982on this topic is usually under the name of “Graph Neural Net-
works” [ 34], which typically involves transforming, propagating
and aggregating node features across the graph. Among them, some
focus on node-level representation learning [ 18,22,35] while oth-
ers investigate learning graph-level representation [ 4,8,11,14,15,
19,25,48]. While standing from different perspectives, these meth-
ods have been proven to advance various graph related tasks. The
methods focusing on node representation learning have brought
improvement to tasks such as node classification [ 14–16,18,22,35]
and link prediction [ 35] and those methods working on graph-level
representation learning have mainly facilitated graph classification.
In this paper, we work on graph level representation learning with a
focus on the task of graph classification.
The task of graph classification is to predict the label of a given
graph utilizing its associated features and graph structure. Graph
Neural Networks can extract graph representation while using
all associated information. Majority of existing graph neural net-
works [ 7,11,17,25] have been designed to generate good node rep-
resentations, and then globally summarize the node representations
as the graph representation. These methods are inherently “flat”
since they treat all the nodes equivalently when generating graph
representation using the node representations. In other words, the
entire graph structure information is totally neglected during this
process. However, nodes are naturally of different statuses and
roles in a graph, and they should contribute differently to the graph
level representation. Furthermore, graphs often have different local
structures (or subgraphs), which contain vital graph characteristics.
For instance, in a graph of a protein, atoms (nodes) are connected
via bonds (edges); some local structures, which consist of groups
of atoms and their direct bonds, can represent some specific func-
tional units, which, in turn, are important to tell the functionality
of the entire protein [ 3,11,37]. These local structures are also not
captured during the global summarizing process. To generate the
graph representation which preserves the local and global graph
structures, a hierarchical pooling process, analogous to the pooling
process in conventional convolutional neural (CNN) networks [ 23],
is needed.
There are very recent works investigating the pooling procedure
for graph neural networks [ 8,13,39,48]. These methods group
nodes into subgraphs (supernodes), coarsen the graph based on
these subgraphs and then the entire graph information is reduced
to the coarsened graph by generating features of supernodes from
their corresponding nodes in subgraphs. However, when pooling
the features for supernodes, average pooling or max pooling have
been usually adopted where the structures of these group nodes
(the local structures) are still neglected. With the local structures,
Research Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
723