𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣%𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣&𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣'𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣(𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣)𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣*𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙%𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙&𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙'𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑒𝑙Figure 1: An illustrative example of the general framework
on the single node, which is a vector, can be viewed as the graph
representation. The graph representation then goes through several
fully connected layers and the prediction is made upon the output
of the last layer. Next, we introduce details of graph coarsening and
EigenPooling ofEigenGCN .
2.2 Graph Coarsening
In this subsection, we introduce how we perform the graph coars-
ening. As we mentioned in the previous subsection, the coarsening
process is based on subgraph partition. There are different ways to
separate a given graph to a set of subgraphs with no overlapping
nodes. In this paper, we adopt spectral clustering to obtain the sub-
graphs, so that we can control the number of the subgraphs, which,
in turn, determines the pooling ratio. We leave other options as
future work. Given a set of subgraphs, we treat them as supern-
odes and build the connections between them as similar in [ 40].
An example of the graph coarsening and supernodes is shown in
Figure 1, where a subgraph and its supernodes are denoted using
the same color. Next, we introduce how to mathematically describe
the subgraphs, supernodes, and their relations.
Letcbe a partition of a graph G, which consists of Kconnected
subgraphs{G(k)}K
k=1.For the graphG, we have the adjacency
matrix A∈RN×Nand the feature matrix X∈RN×d. Let Nk
denote the number of nodes in the subgraph G(k)andΓ(k)is the
list of nodes in subgraph G(k). Note that each of the subgraph can
be also viewed as a supernode. For each subgraph G(k), we can
define a sampling operator C(k)∈RN×Nkas follows:
C(k)[i,j]=1if and only if Γ(k)(j)=vi, (2)
where C(k)[i,j]denotes the element in the (i,j)-th position of
C(k)[i,j]andΓ(k)(j)is the j-th element in the node list Γ(k). This
operator provides a relation between nodes in the subgraph G(k)
and the nodes in the original graph. Given a single dimensional
graph signal x∈RN×1defined on the original entire graph, the
induced signal that is only defined on the subgraph G(k)can be
written as
x(k)=(C(k))Tx. (3)
On the other hand, we can also use C(k)to up-sample a graph signal
x(k)defined only on the subgraph G(k)to the entire graph Gby
¯x=C(k)x(k). (4)
It keeps the values of the nodes in the subgraph untouched while
setting the values of all the other nodes that do not belong to the
subgraph to 0. The operator can be applied to multi-dimensionalsignal X∈RN×din a similar way. The induced adjacency matrix
A(k)∈RNk×Nkof the subgraphG(k), which only describes the
connection within the subgraph G(k), can be obtained as
A(k)=(C(k))TAC(k). (5)
The intra-subgraph adjacency matrix of the graph G, which only
consists of the edges inside each subgraph, can be represented as
Aint=KÕ
k=1C(k)A(k)(C(k))T. (6)
Then the inter-subgraph adjacency matrix of graph G, which only
consists of the edges between subgraphs, can be represented as
Aext=A−Aint.
LetGcoar denote the coarsened graph, which consists of the
supernodes and their connections. We define the assignment matrix
S∈RN×K, which indicates whether a node belongs to a specific
subgraph as:
S[i,j]=1if and only if vi∈Γ(j).
Then, the adjacency matrix of the coarsened graph is given as
Acoar =STAextS. (7)
With Graph Coarsening, we can obtain the connectivity of Gcoar,
i.e.,Acoar. Obviously, Acoar encodes the network structure infor-
mation ofG. Next, we describe how to obtain the node features
Xcoar ofGcoar using EigenPooling . With Acoar andXcoar, we can
stack more layers of GCN-GraphCoarsening- EigenPooling to learn
higher level representations of the graph for classification.
2.3 Eigenvector-Based Pooling – EigenPooling
In this subsection, we introduce EigenPooling , aiming to obtain
Xcoar that encodes network structure information and node fea-
tures ofG. Globally, the pooling operation is to transform a graph
signal defined on a given graph to a corresponding graph signal de-
fined on the coarsened version of this graph. It is expected that the
important information of the original graph signal can be largely
preserved in the transformed graph signal. Locally, for each of
the subgraph, we summarize the features of the nodes in this sub-
graph to a single representation of the supernode. It is necessary
to consider the structure of the subgraph when we perform the
summarizing, as the subgraph structure also encodes important
information. However, common adopted pooling methods such
as max pooling [ 8,48] or average pooling [ 11] ignored the graph
structure. In some works [ 30], the subgraph structure is used to find
a canonical ordering of the nodes, which is, however, very difficult
and expensive. In this work, to use the structure of the subgraphs,
we design the pooling operator based on the graph spectral theory
by facilitating the eigenvectors of the Laplacian matrix of the sub-
graph. Next, we first briefly review the graph Fourier transform and
then introduce the design of EigenPooling based on graph Fourier
transform.
2.3.1 Graph Fourier Transform. Given a graphG={E,V}with
A∈RN×Nbeing the adjacency matrix and X∈RN×dbeing the
node feature matrix. Without loss of generality, for the following
description, we consider d=1, i.e., x∈RN×1, which can be viewed
as a single dimensional graph signal defined on the graph G[33].