This is the spatial view of a graph signal, which maps each node in
the graph to a scalar value (or a vector if the graph signal is multi-
dimensional). Analogous to the classical signal processing, we can
define graph Fourier transform [ 38] and spectral representation of
the graph signal in the spectral domain. To define the graph signal in
the spectral domain, we need to use the Laplacian matrix [ 6]L=D−
A, where Dis the diagonal degree matrix with D[i,i]=NÍ
j=1A[i,j].
The Laplacian matrix Lcan be used to define the “smoothness” of a
graph signal [38] as follows:
s(x)=xTLx=1
2NÕ
i,jA[i,j](x[i]−x[j])2. (8)
s(x)measures the smoothness of the graph signal x. The smooth-
ness of a graph signal depends on how dramatically the value of
connected nodes can change. The smaller s(x), the more smooth
it is. For example, for a connected graph, a graph signal with the
same value on all the nodes has a smoothness of 0, which means
“extremely smooth” with no change.
AsLis a real symmetric semi-positive definite matrix, it has a
completed set of orthonormal eigenvectors {ul}N
l=1. These eigen-
vectors are also known as the graph Fourier modes [ 38], which are
associated with the ordered real non-negative eigenvalues {λl}N
l.
Given a graph signal x, the graph Fourier transform can be obtained
as follows
ˆx=UTx, (9)
where U=[u1, . . . , uN]∈RN×Nis the matrix consists of the
eigenvectors of L. The vector ˆxobtained after the transform is the
representation of the graph signal in the spectral domain. Corre-
spondingly, the inverse graph Fourier transform, which transfers
the spectral representation back to the spatial representation, can
be denoted as:
x=Uˆx. (10)
Note that we can also view each the eigenvector ulof the Lapla-
cian matrix Las a graph signal, and its corresponding eigenvalue
λlcan measure its “smoothness”. For any of the eigenvector ul, we
have:
s(ul)=uT
lLul=uT
lλlul=λl. (11)
The eigenvectors (or Fourier modes) are a set of base signals with
different “smoothness” defined on the graph G. Thus, the graph
Fourier transform of a graph signal xcan be also viewed as linearly
decomposing the signal xinto the set of base signals. ˆxcan be
viewed as the coefficients of the linear combination of the base
signals to obtain the original signal x.
2.3.2 The Design of Pooling Operators. Since graph Fourier trans-
form can transform graph signal to spectral domain which takes
into consideration both graph structure and graph signal informa-
tion, we adopt graph Fourier transform to design pooling operators,
which pool the graph signal defined on a given graph Gto a signal
defined on its coarsened version Gcoar. The design of the pooling
operator is based on graph Fourier transform of the subgraphs
{Gk}K
k=1. Let L(k)denote the Laplacian matrix of the subgraph
G(k). We denote the eigenvectors of the Laplacian matrix L(k)asu(k)
1, . . . , u(k)
Nk. We then use the up-sampling operator C(k)to up-
sample these eigenvectors (base signals on this subgraph) into the
entire graph and get the up-sampled version as:
¯u(k)
l=C(k)u(k)
l,l=1. . .Nk. (12)
With the up-sampled eigenvectors, we organize them into matrices
to form pooling operators. Let Θl∈RN×Kdenote the pooling op-
erator consisting of all the l-th eigenvectors from all the subgraphs
Θl=[¯u(1)
l, . . . , ¯u(K)
l] (13)
Note that the subgraphs are not necessary all with the same
number of nodes, which means that the number of eigenvectors
can be different. Let Nmax =max
k=1, . . .,KNkbe the largest number of
nodes among all the subgraphs. Then, for a subgraph G(k)with Nk
nodes, we set u(k)
lforNk<l≤Nmax as0∈RNk×1. The pooling
process with l-th pooling operator Θlcan be described as
Xl=ΘT
lX (14)
where Xl∈RK×dis the pooled result using the l-th pooling opera-
tor. The k-th row of Xlcontains the information pooled from the
k-th subgraph, which is the representation of the k-th supernode.
Following this construction, we build a set of Nmax pooling
operators. To combine the information pooled by different pool
operators, we can concatenate them together as follows:
Xpooled =[X0, . . . , XNmax]. (15)
where Xpooled∈RK×d·Nmax is the final pooled results. For effi-
cient computation, instead of using the results pooled by all the
pooling operators, we can choose to only use the first Hof them as
follows:
Xcoar =Xpooled =[X0, . . . , XH]. (16)
In Section 3.1 and Section 3.2, we will show that with H≪Nmax,
we can still preserve most of the information. We will further em-
pirically investigate the effect of choice of Hin Section 4
3 THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF EigenPooling
In this section, we provide a theoretical analysis of EigenPooling by
understanding it from local and global perspectives. We prove that
the pooling operation can preserve useful information to be pro-
cessed by the following GCN layers. We also verify that EigenGCN
is permutation invariant, which lays the foundation for graph clas-
sification with EigenGCN.
3.1 A Local View of EigenPooling
In this subsection, we analyze the pooling operator from a local
perspective focusing on a specific subgraph G(k). For the subgraph
G(k), the pooling operator tries to summarize the nodes’ features
and form a representation for the corresponding supernode of the
subgraph. For a pooling operator Θl, the part that is effective on
the subgraphG(k), is only the up-sampled eigenvector ¯u(k)
las the
other eigenvectors have 0values on the subgraph G(k). Without the
loss of generality, let’s consider a single dimensional graph signal
Research Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
726