the nodes in the subgraphs are of different statuses and roles when
they contribute to the supernode representations. It is challenging
to design a general pooling operator while incorporating the local
structure information as 1) the subgraphs may contain different
numbers of nodes, thus a fixed size pooling operator cannot work
for all subgraphs; and 2) the subgraphs could have very different
structures, which may require different approaches to summarize
the information for the supernode representation. To address the
aforementioned challenges, we design a novel pooling operator
EigenPooling based on the eigenvectors of the subgraphs, which
naturally have the same size of each subgraph and can effectively
capture the local structures when summarizing node features for
supernodes. EigenPooling can be used as pooling layers to stack
with any graph neural network layers to form a novel framework
EigenGCN for graph classification. Our major contributions can be
summarized as follows:
•We introduce a novel pooling operator EigenPooling , which
can naturally summarize the subgraph information while
utilizing the subgraph structure;
•We provide theoretical understandings on EigenPooling from
both local and global perspectives;
•We incorporate pooling layers based on EigenPooling into ex-
isting graph neural networks as a novel framework EigenGCN
for representation learning for graph classification; and
•We conduct comprehensive experiments on numerous real-
world graph classification benchmarks to demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed pooling operator.
2 THE PROPOSED FRAMEWORK – EigenGCN
In this paper, we aim to develop a Graph Neural Networks (GNN)
model, which consists of convolutional layers and pooling layers,
to learn graph representations such that graph level classification
can be applied. Before going to the details, we first introduced some
notations and the problem setting.
Problem Setting: A graph can be represented as G={E,V},
whereV={v1, . . . ,vN}is the set of Nnodes andEis the set of
edges. The graph structure information can also be represented
by an adjacency matrix A∈RN×N. Furthermore, each node in
the graph is associated with node features and we use X∈RN×d
to denote the node feature matrix, where dis the dimension of
features. Note that this node feature matrix can also be viewed as a d-
dimensional graph signal [ 38] defined on the graph G. In the graph
classification setting, we have a set of graphs {Gi}, each graphGi
is associated with a label yi. The task of the graph classification is
to take the graph (structure information and node features) as input
and predict its corresponding label. To make the prediction, it is
important to extract useful information from both graph structure
and node features. We aim to design graph convolution layers
andEigenPooling to hierarchically extract graph features, which
finally learns a vector representation of the input graph for graph
classification.
2.1 An Overview of EigenGCN
In this work, we build our model based on Graph Convolutional
Networks (GCN) [ 22], which has been demonstrated to be effective
in node-level representation learning. While the GCN model isoriginally designed for semi-supervised node classification, we
only discuss the part for node representation learning but ignoring
the classification part. The GCN is stacked by several convolutional
layers and a single convolutional layer can be written as:
Fi+1=ReLU(˜D−1
2˜A˜D−1
2FiWi) (1)
where Fi+1∈RN×di+1is the output of the i-th convolutional layer
fori>0andF0=Xdenotes the input node features. A total
number of Iconvolutional layers are stacked to learn node repre-
sentations and the output matrix FIcan be viewed as the final node
representations learned by the GCN model.
As we described above, the GCN model has been designed for
learning node representations. In the end, the output of the GCN
model is a matrix instead of a vector. The procedure of the GCN is
rather “flat”, as it can only “pass message” between nodes through
edges but cannot summarize the node information into the higher
level graph representation. A simple way to summarize the node
information to generate graph level representation is global pooling.
For example, we could use the average of the node representations
as the graph representation. However, in this way, a lot of key infor-
mation is ignored and the graph structure is also totally overlooked
during the pooling process.
To address this challenge, we propose eigenvector based pooling
layers EigenPooling to hierarchically summarize node informa-
tion and generate graph representation. An illustrative example
is demonstrated in Figure 1. In particular, several pooling layers
are added between convolutional layers. Each of the pooling lay-
ers pools the graph signal defined on a graph into a graph signal
defined on a coarsened version of the input graph, which consists
of fewer nodes. Thus, the design of the pooling layers consists of
two components: 1) graph coarsening, which divides the graph into
a set of subgraphs and form a coarsened graph by treating sub-
graphs as supernodes; and 2) transform the original graph signal
information into the graph signal defined on the coarsened graph
with EigenPooling . We coarsen the graph based on a subgraph
partition. Given a subgraph partition with no overlaps between
subgraphs, we treat each of the subgraphs as a supernode. To form a
coarsened graph of the supernodes, we determine the connectivity
between the supernodes by the edges across the subgraphs. During
the pooling process, for each of the subgraphs, we summarize the
information of the graph signal on the subgraph to the supernode.
With graph coarsening, we utilize the graph structure information
to form coarsened graphs, which makes it possible to learn repre-
sentations level by level in a hierarchical way. With EigenPooling ,
we can learn node features of the coarsened graph that exploits the
subgraph structure as well as the node features of the input graph.
Figure 1 shows an illustrative example, where a binary graph
classification is performed. In this illustrative example, the graph
is coarsened three times and finally becomes a single supernode.
The input is a graph signal (the node features), which can be multi-
dimensional. For the ease of illustration, we do not show the node
features on the graph. Two convolutional layers are applied to the
graph signal. Then, the graph signal is pooled to a signal defined on
the coarsened graph. This procedure (two convolution layers and
one pooling layer) is repeated two more times and the graph signal
is finally pooled to a signal on a single node. This pooled signal
Research Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
724