Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 1504–1519
Florence, Italy, July 28 - August 2, 2019. c
2019 Association for Computational Linguistics1504Sparse Sequence-to-Sequence Models
Ben Peters†Vlad Niculae†and Andr ´e F. T. Martins†‡
†Instituto de Telecomunicac ¸ ˜oes, Lisbon, Portugal
‡Unbabel, Lisbon, Portugal
benzurdopeters@gmail.com ,vlad@vene.ro ,andre.martins@unbabel.com
Abstract
Sequence-to-sequence models are a powerful
workhorse of NLP. Most variants employ a
softmax transformation in both their attention
mechanism and output layer, leading to dense
alignments and strictly positive output proba-
bilities. This density is wasteful, making mod-
els less interpretable and assigning probability
mass to many implausible outputs. In this pa-
per, we propose sparse sequence-to-sequence
models, rooted in a new family of α-entmax
transformations, which includes softmax and
sparsemax as particular cases, and is sparse
for anyα >1. We provide fast algorithms
to evaluate these transformations and their gra-
dients, which scale well for large vocabulary
sizes. Our models are able to produce sparse
alignments and to assign nonzero probability
to a short list of plausible outputs, sometimes
rendering beam search exact. Experiments on
morphological inﬂection and machine transla-
tion reveal consistent gains over dense models.
1 Introduction
Attention-based sequence-to-sequence ( seq2seq )
models have proven useful for a variety of NLP
applications, including machine translation ( Bah-
danau et al. ,2015 ;Vaswani et al. ,2017 ), speech
recognition ( Chorowski et al. ,2015 ), abstractive
summarization ( Chopra et al. ,2016 ), and morpho-
logical inﬂection generation ( Kann and Sch ¨utze,
2016 ), among others. In part, their strength comes
from their ﬂexibility: many tasks can be formu-
lated as transducing a source sequence into a target
sequence of possibly different length.
However, conventional seq2seq models are
dense : they compute both attention weights and
output probabilities with the softmax function
(Bridle ,1990 ), which always returns positive val-
ues. This results in dense attention alignments , in
which each source position is attended to at eachdrawed</s>
n</s>
</s>66.4%
32.2%
1.4%
Figure 1: The full beam search of our best perform-
ing morphological inﬂection model when generating
the past participle of the verb “draw”. The model gives
nonzero probability to exactly three hypotheses, includ-
ing the correct form (“drawn”) and the form that would
be correct if “draw” were regular (“drawed”).
target position, and in dense output probabilities ,
in which each vocabulary type always has nonzero
probability of being generated. This contrasts with
traditional statistical machine translation systems,
which are based on sparse, hard alignments, and
decode by navigating through a sparse lattice of
phrase hypotheses. Can we transfer such notions
of sparsity to modern neural architectures? And if
so, do they improve performance?
In this paper, we provide an afﬁrmative an-
swer to both questions by proposing neural sparse
seq2seq models that replace the softmax trans-
formations (both in the attention and output) by
sparse transformations . Our innovations are
rooted in the recently proposed sparsemax transfor-
mation ( Martins and Astudillo ,2016 ) and Fenchel-
Young losses ( Blondel et al. ,2019 ). Concretely,
we consider a family of transformations (dubbed
α-entmax ), parametrized by a scalar α, based on
the Tsallis entropies ( Tsallis ,1988 ). This family
includes softmax ( α= 1) and sparsemax ( α= 2)
as particular cases. Crucially, entmax transforms
are sparse for all α >1.
Our models are able to produce both sparse at-
tention , a form of inductive bias that increases
focus on relevant source words and makes align-
ments more interpretable, and sparse output prob-
abilities , which together with auto-regressive mod-