(e.g., augmented views from different images), have been
outstandingly successful in practice (Chen et al. 2020a,b; He
et al. 2020; Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018). However, their suc-
cesses highly rely on their abundant data for representation
training, for example, contrastive learning methods need a
large number of negative samples for training (Chen et al.
2020a; Sohn 2016). Moreover, few of these unsupervised
methods take the problem of data distribution shift into ac-
count, which is a common practical problem in federated
learning. Hence, it’s no easy task to combine federated learn-
ing with unsupervised approaches for the problem of FURL .
In federated learning applications, however, the collected
data of each client is limited and the data distribution of
client might be different from each other (Jeong et al. 2018;
Kairouz et al. 2019; Sattler et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2019a;
Zhao et al. 2018). Hence, we face the following challenges
to combine federated learning and with unsupervised ap-
proaches for FURL :
•Inconsistency of representation spaces. In federated
learning, limited data of each client would lead to the
variation of data distribution from client to client, result-
ing in the inconsistency of representation spaces encoded
by different local models. For example, as shown in Fig-
ure 1(a), client 1 is with only images of cats and dogs,
and client 2 is with only images of cars and planes. Then,
the locally trained model on client 1 only encodes a fea-
ture space of cats and dogs, failing to map cars or planes
to the appropriate representations, and the same goes for
trained model on client 2. Intuitively, the performance of
the global model aggregated by these inconsistent local
models may fall short of expectations.
•Misalignment of representations. Even if the training
data of clients are IID and the representation spaces en-
coded by different local models are consistent, there may
be misalignment between representations by the reason
of randomness in the training process. For instance, for a
given input set, the representations generated by a model
are equivalent to the representations generated by another
model when rotated by a certain angle, as shown in Fig-
ure 1(b). It should be noted that the misalignment between
local models may have drastic detrimental effects on the
performance of the aggregated model.
To address these challenges, we propose a contrastive
loss-based federated unsupervised representation learning
algorithm called FedCA, which consists of two main novel
modules: dictionary module for addressing the inconsis-
tency of representation spaces and alignment module for
aligning the representations across clients. Speciﬁcally, the
dictionary module, which is maintained by server, aggre-
gates abundant representations of samples from clients and
can be shared to each client for local model optimization.
In the alignment module, we ﬁrst train a base model based
on a small public data (e.g., a subset of STL-10 dataset)
(Coates, Ng, and Lee 2011), then require all local models
to mimic the base model such that the representations gen-
erated by different local models can be aligned. Overall, in
each round, FedCA involves two stages: (i) clients train lo-
cal representation models on their own unlabeled data viacontrastive learning with two modules above, and then gen-
erate local dictionaries, and (ii) server aggregates the trained
local models to obtain a shared global model and integrates
local dictionaries into a global dictionary.
To the best of our knowledge, FedCA is the ﬁrst algorithm
designed for the FURL problem. Our experiments show that
FedCA has better performance than those naive methods
which solely combine federated learning with unsupervised
approaches. We believe that FedCA will serve as a critical
foundation in this novel and challenging problem.
Related Work
Federated Learning
Federated learning enables distributed clients to train a
shared model collaboratively while keep private data on de-
vices (McMahan et al. 2017). Li et al. add a proximal term
to the loss function to keep local models close to the global
model (Li et al. 2018). Wang et al. propose a layers-wise
federated learning algorithm to deal with permutation invari-
ance of neural network parameters (Wang et al. 2020). How-
ever, the existing works only focus on the consistency of pa-
rameters, while we emphasize the consistency of represen-
tations in this paper. Some works also focus on reducing the
communication of federated learning (Kone ˇcn`y et al. 2016).
To further protect data privacy of clients, cryptography tech-
nologies are applied to federated learning (Bonawitz et al.
2017).
Unsupervised Representation Learning
There are two main types of unsupervised learning methods:
generative and discriminative. Generative approaches learn
representations by generating pixels in the input space (Hin-
ton and Salakhutdinov 2006; Kingma and Welling 2013;
Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2015). Discriminative ap-
proaches train representation model by performing pretext
tasks where the labels are generated for free from unlabelled
data (Gidaris, Singh, and Komodakis 2018; Pathak et al.
2017). Among them, contrastive learning methods achieve
excellent performance (Chen et al. 2020a,b; He et al. 2020;
Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018). The contrastive loss is pro-
posed by Hadsell et al. (Hadsell, Chopra, and LeCun 2006).
Wu et al. propose an unsupervised contrastive learning ap-
proach based on a memory bank to learn visual represen-
tations (Wu et al. 2018). Recently, Wang et al. point two
key properties, closeness and uniformity, related to the con-
trastive loss. (Wang and Isola 2020). Other works also apply
contrastive learning to video (Sermanet et al. 2018; Tian,
Krishnan, and Isola 2019), NLP (Logeswaran and Lee 2018;
Mikolov et al. 2013; Yang et al. 2019b), audio (Baevski et al.
2020) and graph (Hassani and Khasahmadi 2020; Qiu et al.
2020).
Federated Unsupervised Learning
Some concurrent works (Jin et al. 2020; van Berlo, Saeed,
and Ozcelebi 2020) also focus on federated learning from
unlabeled data. Different from these works that all simply