Federated Unsupervised Representation Learning
Fengda Zhang1, Kun Kuang1, Zhaoyang You1, Tao Shen1, Jun Xiao1,
Yin Zhang1, Chao Wu2*, Yueting Zhuang1, Xiaolin Li3
1College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2School of Public Affairs, Zhejiang University
3Tongdun Technology
ffdzhang, kunkuang, zhaoyangyou, tao.shen g@zju.edu.cn, junx@cs.zju.edu.cn,
fzhangyin98, yzhuang, chao.wu g@zju.edu.cn, xiaolin.li@tongdun.net
Abstract
To leverage enormous unlabeled data on distributed
edge devices, we formulate a new problem in fed-
erated learning called Federated Unsupervised Repre-
sentation Learning (FURL) to learn a common repre-
sentation model without supervision while preserving
data privacy. FURL poses two new challenges: (1) data
distribution shift (Non-IID distribution) among clients
would make local models focus on different categories,
leading to the inconsistency of representation spaces.
(2) without the uniﬁed information among clients in
FURL , the representations across clients would be mis-
aligned. To address these challenges, we propose Feder-
ated Constrastive Averaging with dictionary and align-
ment (FedCA) algorithm. FedCA is composed of two
key modules: (1) dictionary module to aggregate the
representations of samples from each client and share
with all clients for consistency of representation space;
and (2) alignment module to align the representation of
each client on a base model trained on a public data.
We adopt the contrastive loss for local model training.
Through extensive experiments with three evaluation
protocols in IID and Non-IID settings, we demonstrate
that FedCA outperforms all baselines with signiﬁcant
margins.
Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is proposed as a paradigm that
enables distributed clients to collaboratively train a shared
model while preserving data privacy (McMahan et al. 2017).
Speciﬁcally, in each round of federated learning, clients ob-
tain the global model and update it on their own private data
to generate the local models, and then the central server ag-
gregates these local models into a new global model. Most
of the existing works focus on supervised federated learn-
ing in which clients train their local models with supervi-
sion. However, the data generated in edge devices are typ-
ically unlabeled. Therefore, learning a common representa-
tion model for various downstream tasks from decentralized
and unlabeled data while keeping private data on devices, i.e.
Federated Unsupervised Representation Learning (FURL) ,
remains still an open problem.
*Corresponding Author
catdog
carplane
(a) Inconsistency of representation spaces.
(b) Misalignment of representations.
Figure 1: Illustration of challenges in FURL : (a) inconsis-
tency of representation spaces : data distribution shift among
clients causes local models to focus on different categories;
and (b) misalignment of representations : without uniﬁed in-
formation, the representation across clients would be mis-
alignment (e.g., rotated by a certain angle). The hyper-
spheres are representation spaces encoded by different local
models in federated learning.
It’s a natural idea that we can combine federated learning
with unsupervised approaches, which means that clients can
train their local models via unsupervised methods. There are
a lot of highly successful works on unsupervised representa-
tion learning. Particularly, contrastive learning methods train
models by reducing the distance between representations of
positive pairs (e.g., different augmented views of the same
image) and increasing the distance between negative pairsarXiv:2010.08982v1  [cs.LG]  18 Oct 2020