IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANAL YSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE 8
PruningRate0.90.1
PruningRate0.90.1
Fig. 5. Performance and latency comparison between our 1 N (N=4) pruning against weight pruning and ﬁlter pruning. The experiment is conducted
using MobileNet-V2 on the mobile platform of Pixel2 equipped with a Snapdragon 835 CPU (left), and the embedded platform of Zeropi equipped
with a Cortex-a7 CPU (right). Best viewed in colors.
also presented for weight pruning and ﬁlter pruning. After
model compiling, we respectively deploy the sparse models
to obtain network latencies on the mobile platform of Pixel2
equipped with a Snapdragon 835 CPU and the embedded
platform of Zeropi equipped with a Cortex-a7 CPU.
From Fig. 5, we observe no speedup from weight prun-
ing, despite its ability to preserve good performance. As
analyzed in Sec. 1, weight pruning leads to irregular sparsity
that hardly utilizes the vector processing architectures and
memory buses. Thus, weight pruning often results in little
acceleration and even speed deterioration. Filter pruning
leads to the most signiﬁcant speedups since it does not
modify the network structure, so that the pruned network
can be well ﬁtted by regular hardware to achieve accelera-
tion. Nevertheless, the severe performance degradation dis-
ables the using of ﬁlter pruning in the model deployment.
In contrast, our 1 N (N=4) pruning achieves noticeable
latency reductions across various pruning rates such as
56:04ms inference savings on Cortex-A7 CPU over weight
pruning when p= 50% , while maintaining comparable top-
1 accuracy performance. Compared with weight pruning
and ﬁlter pruning, our 1 N pruning shows a better capacity
of keeping a trade-off between latency and performance.
5 L IMITATIONS
First, our ﬁlter rearrangement using `1norms of ﬁlters does
not always guarantee maximizing magnitude. Though it
does not seem to have happened in the experiments, op-
portunity exists that lower-magnitude kernels are retained.
The approach to cluster large values as in [42] has no this
issue. However, we observe a similar performance of the
cluster against our rearrangement. We adopt the `1norm
based rearrangement since it is much easier to implement.
Second, though our 1 N is originally proposed for
CNNs, we observe rare speedups on recurrent neural net-
works (RNNs) compared to these RNNs acceleration [43],
[44]. Nevertheless, we are making efforts to break this
limitation and expecting that our method can be well gen-
eralized to a wider variety of networks in the near future.
Third, this paper misses comparisons to many studies
that also explore an intermediate pruning granularity [18],
[42], [45], [46], most of which only report the theoreticalacceleration in their papers. In our deployment, we ﬁnd
most of them fail to obtain practical acceleration, or only
reach few CPU speedups in a pruning rate of over 90% [45].
Currently, we are not sure if something is wrong in our im-
plementation of these methods. Our future work will focus
on this topic to show that our method is worth building on.
Fourth, we do not introduce a new pruning criterion but
use the `1norm as our measure to reﬂect the importance
of these consecutive kernels. This is because we ﬁnd that
existing pruning criteria show similar performance if fair
training settings are given, which is also discussed in [16],
[17]. Thus, we focus on designing a new pruning pattern.
However, it is unclear if a specialized pruning criterion
exists in our 1N pattern. We will continue excavating this
issue.
6 C ONCLUSION
We introduce a novel 1 N pruning pattern to simulta-
neously maintain model accuracy and achieve signiﬁcant
speedups on general CPUs. Unlike previous approaches that
prune the individual weights or the whole ﬁlters, we design
a pruning pattern that supports network pruning by remov-
ing consecutive N output kernels with the same input chan-
nel index. To preserve more inﬂuential kernels, we propose a
workﬂow of ﬁlter rearrangement that rearranges the weight
matrix in the output channel dimension and applies similar
rearrangement to the next-layer weight matrix in the input
channel dimension. Our pruning pattern leads to a sparse
matrix with constant-sized blocks enabling the computa-
tion outputs by using a parallelized block-wise vectorized
operation. The experiments on the MobileNets/ResNet-50
and CPUs embedded hardware platforms demonstrate the
efﬁcacy of our approach.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Science Fund
for Distinguished Young Scholars (No. 62025603), the Na-
tional Natural Science Foundation of China (No. U21B2037,
No. 62176222, No. 62176223, No. 62176226, No. 62072386,
No. 62072387, No. 62072389, and No. 62002305), Guang-
dong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (No.