Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3464 13 of 20
for the training phase of proposed system. The rest of the data (25%) are used for the testing phase
of a developed system as the testing data should be di erent from the training data. The number of
epochs for training the system is 4. The validation has been done to check whether the given system is
able to classify the patients of renal cancer and non-renal cancer in a correct class or not. The training
error after the training phase is shown in Figure 14.
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 20 
not. The training error after the training phase is shown in Figure 14. 
 
Figure 14. Training error at 4 epochs. 
4. Results 
After the development of these models by us ing the fuzzy and neuro-fuzzy techniques, a 
comparative study has been done to evaluate whic h model is better. The performance parameters are 
calculated for both systems. The main evaluation for these models is to check whether the developed 
models are able to classify all the inputs given to  the system, even if the inputs are unseen by the 
system or new to the system. The model, which clas sifies the given inputs in correct and accurate 
classes, is said to be the best one among the developed systems. The error or accuracy can be calculated by comparing the observed output from the system with the target  output, which is given 
by the professional of renal cancers. If these two values are the same, then the model is said to be 
completely accurate. However, there is no practical model that has 100% accuracy for the classification. 
4.1. Calculation of Performance Parameters for Fuzzy Expert System 
Fifty different tests have been carried out to examine the expert system for renal cancer closely. 
The result displayed by the multi-layered fuzzy expe rt system is compared with the result given by 
the physician. By contrasting these tests, it is noticed th at out of 50 test cases, 48  test cases are classified 
into the correct and exact class. 
The confusion matrix for the fold 1 of these test ca ses is drawn in Table 8. In this table, there are 
four column of class names with their test cases. Fo r example, in the column 1, 15 cases of minor class 
have been classified correctly in the minor class. Simi larly, in column 2, there are 13 cases of moderate 
class, but 12 test cases are classified into moderate clas s, 1 test case is classified into the false class i.e., 
in serious class. Similarly, Tables 9–11 show the confusion matrix for the fold 2, fold 3 and fold 4 respectively. 
  
Figure 14. Training error at 4 epochs.
4. Results
After the development of these models by using the fuzzy and neuro-fuzzy techniques,
a comparative study has been done to evaluate which model is better. The performance parameters are
calculated for both systems. The main evaluation for these models is to check whether the developed
models are able to classify all the inputs given to the system, even if the inputs are unseen by the
system or new to the system. The model, which classiﬁes the given inputs in correct and accurate
classes, is said to be the best one among the developed systems. The error or accuracy can be calculated
by comparing the observed output from the system with the target output, which is given by the
professional of renal cancers. If these two values are the same, then the model is said to be completely
accurate. However, there is no practical model that has 100% accuracy for the classiﬁcation.
4.1. Calculation of Performance Parameters for Fuzzy Expert System
Fifty di erent tests have been carried out to examine the expert system for renal cancer closely.
The result displayed by the multi-layered fuzzy expert system is compared with the result given by the
physician. By contrasting these tests, it is noticed that out of 50 test cases, 48 test cases are classiﬁed
into the correct and exact class.
The confusion matrix for the fold 1 of these test cases is drawn in Table 8. In this table, there are
four column of class names with their test cases. For example, in the column 1, 15 cases of minor class
have been classiﬁed correctly in the minor class. Similarly, in column 2, there are 13 cases of moderate