Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3464 12 of 20
There are seven di erent input variables used for given inputs to the system that are from input 1
to input 7. Additionally, the output is used as a variable for output variables. Table 7 represents the
structure of ANFIS for renal cancer.
Table 7. Structure of ANFIS for renal cancer.
Structure
The number of Layers of ANFIS 5
Inputs 7
Number of Rules 864
Output 1
Type of membership functions for input variables Gaussian
3.2. Rules
The rules in this methodology are also generated automatically by the system during the training
phase by taking all the possible mixtures of the given input variables to diagnose renal cancer. Figure 13
shows the rules generated by the system by using a training dataset. The total number of rules used in
the proposed intelligent medical diagnostic system is 864. The number of rules can be calculated by
multiplying the number of membership functions used for every input variables of the system.
Therefore,
Total rules =4*3*3*2*2*2*3 =864 rules.
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 20 
Table 7. Structure of ANFIS for renal cancer. 
Structure  
The number of Layers of ANFIS 5 
Inputs 7 
Number of Rules 864 
Output 1 
Type of membership functions for input variables  Gaussian 
3.2. Rules 
The rules in this methodology are also generated automatically by the system during the training 
phase by taking all the possible mixtures of the given input variables to diagnose renal cancer. Figure 13 shows the rules generated by the system by usin g a training dataset. The total number of rules 
used in the proposed intelligent medical diagnost ic system is 864. The number of rules can be 
calculated by multiplying the number of membership  functions used for every input variables of the 
system. 
Therefore, 
Total rules = 4*3*3*2*2*2*3 = 864 rules. 
 
Figure 13. Rules in ANFIS for renal cancer. 
3.3. Training and Testing 
This phase of ANFIS is more essential in the development of a particular system. Initially, the 
dataset has been gathered from the experts of rena l cancer. After that, the partitioning process has 
been done on an acquired dataset. This partitioning  of the dataset has been done by using the k-fold 
cross validation. There are 200 different test cases in the acquired dataset. 
For the cross-validation k = 4, the process is known as 4-fold cross validation. Hence, the dataset has been divided into four eq ual parts, from which three parts are used as 
training data and one part is used as testing data. In each iteration, the training and testing data has 
been changed according to the partitioning. It can be  elaborated, like there are four parts of the dataset 
i.e., 1, 2, 3 and 4. For the first iteration, the first part  is used as testing and the rest of the parts are used 
for training data. Similarly, in the second iteration, the second part of the dataset has been used to test the system and the rest of the parts, 1, 3 and 4,  are used as the training data for the system and so 
on until the last iteration. 
As there are 200 tests cases in the dataset, 150 te st cases are used for the training data and 50 
used for testing that particular system. Therefore, 75% of the data from the entire dataset has been 
used for the training phase of proposed system. Th e rest of the data (25%) are used for the testing 
phase of a developed system as the testing data should be different from the training data. The 
number of epochs for training the system is 4. The validation has been done to check whether the 
given system is able to classify the patients of re nal cancer and non-renal cancer in a correct class or 
Figure 13. Rules in ANFIS for renal cancer.
3.3. Training and Testing
This phase of ANFIS is more essential in the development of a particular system. Initially,
the dataset has been gathered from the experts of renal cancer. After that, the partitioning process has
been done on an acquired dataset. This partitioning of the dataset has been done by using the k-fold
cross validation. There are 200 di erent test cases in the acquired dataset.
For the cross-validation k =4, the process is known as 4-fold cross validation.
Hence, the dataset has been divided into four equal parts, from which three parts are used as
training data and one part is used as testing data. In each iteration, the training and testing data has
been changed according to the partitioning. It can be elaborated, like there are four parts of the dataset
i.e., 1, 2, 3 and 4. For the ﬁrst iteration, the ﬁrst part is used as testing and the rest of the parts are used
for training data. Similarly, in the second iteration, the second part of the dataset has been used to test
the system and the rest of the parts, 1, 3 and 4, are used as the training data for the system and so on
until the last iteration.
As there are 200 tests cases in the dataset, 150 test cases are used for the training data and 50 used
for testing that particular system. Therefore, 75% of the data from the entire dataset has been used