Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3464 18 of 20
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 20 
inference system. The accuracy, sensitivity, specific ity and precision parameters are calculated for the 
performance evaluation of the system. The system achieved 96%, 95.5%, 96.1% and 95.8% accuracy, 
sensitivity, specificity and precision, respectively. 
After comparing the performances of Nikita et al. [27] with the proposed system, it is observed 
that the adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system developed in this research work is better than the 
existing system. Hence, the ANFIS is more accura te than FIS. The performance of both developed 
systems is shown in Table 26. 
Table 26. Calculated parameters from the developed systems. 
Models / 
Parameters Classification 
Accuracy Sensitivity Specificity Precision 
Fuzzy 96% 95.44% 96.48% 95.45% 
ANFIS 98% 97.61% 98.27% 97.67% 
The calculated estimation of both proposed system s is also represented by using a bar chart. In 
the bar chart, the two axes are there. One is the X-axis which is horizontal, and it will represent the 
proposed models that are fuzzy and ANFIS. Another axis is the Y-axis which is vertical and presents 
the percentages. The bar height views the obtained percentage of performance parameters of models. 
Figure 15 depicts a bar chart for the comparison of two models. 
From the bar chart, it is evaluated that an intelligent medical diagnostic system for renal cancer 
using the adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system is  more accurate, and precise as compared to the 
fuzzy inference system for the detection of patients suffering from renal cancer. 
 
Figure 15. Bar chart for comparison of FIS and ANFIS. 
5. Conclusions 
The proposed intelligent system using neuro-fuzz y helps the fresher doctor s for the detection of 
renal cancer. It is helpful for those physicians who do  not have much experience to detect renal cancer 
and to evaluate its stage. Hence, this system has th e capability to act as a training and supporting tool 
for doctors. It can be used in those areas where th e resources are not equivalent to requirements. The 
various parameters are calculated to find the perf ormance of the proposed systems. These parameters 
are precision, classification accuracy, sensitivity and specificity. According to the comparison study 
Figure 15. Bar chart for comparison of FIS and ANFIS.
5. Conclusions
The proposed intelligent system using neuro-fuzzy helps the fresher doctors for the detection
of renal cancer. It is helpful for those physicians who do not have much experience to detect renal
cancer and to evaluate its stage. Hence, this system has the capability to act as a training and
supporting tool for doctors. It can be used in those areas where the resources are not equivalent
to requirements. The various parameters are calculated to ﬁnd the performance of the proposed
systems. These parameters are precision, classiﬁcation accuracy, sensitivity and speciﬁcity. According
to the comparison study on the performance of both models, the medical intelligent system using
the neuro-fuzzy technique is more suitable, accurate and precise. A computer system with MATLAB
software is the only requirement to implement this proposed work.
The developed systems for the diagnosis of renal cancer is more accurate than other used methods
as the fuzzy logic can deal with the imprecise data, as all technologies used in related work deal with
a crisp dataset. The system can also work with the dataset that contains missing values of test cases.
The fuzzy logic has the limitation that it cannot train the system from the examples and is not capable
of adapting itself according to the environment or by considering the new unseen data. This limitation
of fuzzy logic has been overcome by merging it with the neural network and making a hybrid system
known as Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS).
For future work in the detection of renal cancer, researchers can take more performance parameters
for the evaluation. The input variables or risk factors can also be enhanced for accurate classiﬁcation
and to obtain a correct result for the diagnosis of renal cancer.
Author Contributions: Investigation, J.S.; Methodology, N.J., J.S., B.K., H.S., D.P ., S.J., C.S. and G.P .J.; Project
administration, B.K., H.S., D.P ., S.J., C.S. and G.P .J.; Resources, B.K., H.S., D.P ., C.S. and G.P .J.; Software, N.J.;
Validation, B.K., H.S., S.J., C.S. and G.P .J.; Visualization, N.J.; Writing—original draft, H.S., D.P ., S.J., C.S. and
G.P .J.; Writing—review and editing, B.K., H.S., D.P ., S.J., C.S. and G.P .J. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by Institute of Information & Communications Technology Planning &
Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korean government (MSIT) (No.2017-0-01714).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.