Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3464 3 of 20
1.2. Fuzzy Inference System
The fuzzy inference system deals with imprecise and fuzzy data. It calculates the output by using
fuzzy logic. Fuzzy logic will return output between the range of 0 to 1 [ 21]. Principally, it is used in the
development of expert systems for classiﬁcation and makes the decision on it as the human brain does.
The decision depends on the rules stored in the knowledge base of the inference system. The rules are
in the IF-THEN manner [22].
There are four main elements used in the fuzzy inference system. These elements are given below:
 Fuzziﬁer: It transforms given inputs into fuzzy values.
 Fuzzy Knowledge Base: Facts and rules are stored into the knowledge base
 Inference Engine: It maps the rules corresponding to fed inputs and gives results.
 Defuzziﬁer: It transforms the result of the inference engine into crisp values.
These elements are combined with each other, as elaborated in Figure 2.
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 20 
1.2. Fuzzy Inference System 
The fuzzy inference system deals with imprecise an d fuzzy data. It calculates the output by using 
fuzzy logic. Fuzzy logic will return output between the range of 0 to 1 [21]. Principally, it is used in the development of expert systems for classification  and makes the decision on it as the human brain 
does. The decision depends on the rules stored in the knowledge base of the inference system. The 
rules are in the IF-THEN manner [22]. 
There are four main elements used in the fu zzy inference system. These elements are given 
below: 
● Fuzzifier: It transforms given inputs into fuzzy values. 
● Fuzzy Knowledge Base: Facts and rules are stored into the knowledge base 
● Inference Engine: It maps the rules corresp onding to fed inputs and gives results. 
● Defuzzifier: It transforms the result of the inference engine into crisp values. 
These elements are combined with each other, as elaborated in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Architecture of the Fuzzy inference system. 
1.3. Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS) 
An adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system is a type of neural network which is based on the 
fuzzy inference system [23]. The Sugeno fuzzy inferenc e system is used in ANFIS [2]. It is basically 
used in the identification of parameters. It is a hy brid system that combines the back propagation and 
LMS method to calculate the error [24]. This system merges the capabilities of a neural network with 
fuzzy logic to solve the problems [25,26]. It automatically generates rules and linguistic values of membership function during the training phase. Th e rules are constructed in the form of IF-THEN. 
The synaptic weights are not used in this system. The error is calculated by doing the differences 
between the target value and the observed value from the trained system. The developed ANFIS is 
able to give accurate results for unseen data also. This is evaluated in the testing phase of the 
developed system. This leads to better performance of the system as compared to other systems. 
There are five layers in the ANFIS [16]. These layers are as follows: 
● Fuzzification Layer 
● Rule Layer 
● Normalization Layer or membership function layer 
● Defuzzification Layer 
● Summation Layer. 
The structure of an adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system is given in Figure 3. 
Figure 2. Architecture of the Fuzzy inference system.
1.3. Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS)
An adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system is a type of neural network which is based on the
fuzzy inference system [ 23]. The Sugeno fuzzy inference system is used in ANFIS [ 2]. It is basically
used in the identiﬁcation of parameters. It is a hybrid system that combines the back propagation
and LMS method to calculate the error [ 24]. This system merges the capabilities of a neural network
with fuzzy logic to solve the problems [ 25,26]. It automatically generates rules and linguistic values of
membership function during the training phase. The rules are constructed in the form of IF-THEN.
The synaptic weights are not used in this system. The error is calculated by doing the di erences
between the target value and the observed value from the trained system. The developed ANFIS is able
to give accurate results for unseen data also. This is evaluated in the testing phase of the developed
system. This leads to better performance of the system as compared to other systems. There are ﬁve
layers in the ANFIS [16]. These layers are as follows:
 Fuzziﬁcation Layer
 Rule Layer
 Normalization Layer or membership function layer
 Defuzziﬁcation Layer
 Summation Layer.
The structure of an adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system is given in Figure 3.