Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3464 2 of 20
also re-occur after a number of years has passed after diagnosis [ 12]. Therefore, it is essential to take
care of a patient of renal cancer even after diagnosis and treatment. Regular check-ups should be there
so that the risk of re-occurrence of renal cancer will be decreased.
There are a number of techniques used for the detection and diagnosis of renal cancer.
The often-used technique by researchers is image processing [ 13,14]. Various image processing
techniques have been applied on the image of the kidney to identify the biomarkers and stage of renal
cancer [ 15]. The classiﬁcation has been done according to the features extracted from the acquired
picture of the kidney of a particular patient [ 16,17]. There are also many tools developed by researchers
to identify and monitor the growth of a tumor [17,18].
The input variables that help medical intelligent system to diagnose the renal cancer [ 1] are
as follows:
 Haematuria
 Red blood cell count
 Flank pain
 Tumor size
 Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome
 High blood pressure
 Trichloroethylene exposure
1.1. Artiﬁcial Neural Network
The artiﬁcial neural network is a model which is trained to do a particular task as the brain of the
human can do. It is essentially a simulation of the human brain. It can do various tasks or operations
in a distributed and parallel manner. The neuron in this network helps to complete complex and
sophisticated jobs in less time. There are many types of neural networks that are used to resolve any
problems. The main applications of an artiﬁcial neural network are in the medical ﬁeld, agriculture
and many more domains [19].
The ﬂow of doing work by the neural network is the input given to the neurons of an input layer.
These inputs are combined with the weights given to every link between the input layer to the next
layer. There is an external force fed to the network, known as bias. All the inputs, weights and given
bias are summed up with each other by the function known as summation function. An activation
function is also used which gives the ﬁnal output generated by the neural network [ 20]. The basic
model of the artiﬁcial neural network is illustrated in Figure 1.
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 20 
to the observations, 3 to 5 percent of patients figh t with renal cancer due to their family background. 
There are 12 different genes that cause cancer in th e kidney due to inheritance [12]. This cancer may 
also re-occur after a number of years has passed after diagnosis [12]. Therefore, it is essential to take 
care of a patient of renal cancer even after diag nosis and treatment. Regular check-ups should be 
there so that the risk of re-occurrence of renal cancer will be decreased. 
There are a number of techniques used for the detection and diagnosis of renal cancer. The often-
used technique by researchers is image processing [13,14]. Various image proc essing techniques have 
been applied on the image of the kidney to identify  the biomarkers and stage of renal cancer [15]. The 
classification has been done according to the feat ures extracted from the acquired picture of the 
kidney of a particular patient [16,17]. There are al so many tools developed by researchers to identify 
and monitor the growth of a tumor [17,18]. 
The input variables that help medical intelligent system to diagnose the renal cancer [1] are as 
follows: 
● Haematuria 
● Red blood cell count 
● Flank pain 
● Tumor size 
● Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome 
● High blood pressure 
● Trichloroethylene exposure 
1.1. Artificial Neural Network 
The artificial neural network is a model which is trained to do a particular task as the brain of 
the human can do. It is essentiall y a simulation of the human brai n. It can do various tasks or 
operations in a distributed and parallel manner. The neuron in this network helps to complete complex and sophisticated jobs in less time. There ar e many types of neural networks that are used 
to resolve any problems. The main applications of an artificial neural network are in the medical field, 
agriculture and many more domains [19]. 
The flow of doing work by the neural network is the input given to the neurons of an input layer. 
These inputs are combined with the weights given to  every link between the input layer to the next 
layer. There is an external force fed to the networ k, known as bias. All the inputs, weights and given 
bias are summed up with each other by the function known as summation function. An activation function is also used which gives the final output  generated by the neural  network [20]. The basic 
model of the artificial neural network is illustrated in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. Artificial neural network. 
Figure 1. Artiﬁcial neural network.