batch size of 64 for discriminator and a batch size of 128 for
generator. The spectral normalization is only enforced on
the discriminator. We train our controller using Adam [28],
with learning rate of 3.5e−4. We also add the entropy of
the controller’s output probability to the reward, weighted
by1e−4, in order to encourage the exploration.
AutoGAN is searched for 90 iterations. For each itera-
tion, the shared GAN will be trained for 15 epochs, and the
controller will be trained for 30 steps. We set the dynamic-
resetting variance threshold at 1e−3. We train the discov-
ered architectures, using the same training setting as the
shared GAN, for 50,000 generator iterations.
4.1. Results on CIFAR 10
cell’s cells’ Pre-activation
ConvBlock 
with no normalizationNearest Upsample
Pre-activation
ConvBlock 
with no normalization
Pre-activation
ConvBlock 
with no normalizationBilinear Upsample
Pre-activation
ConvBlock 
with no normalization
Pre-activation
ConvBlock 
with no normalizationNearest Upsample
Pre-activation
ConvBlock 
with no normalizationLinear
toRGB
z
Figure 3: The AutoGAN (generator) architecture discov-
ered by AutoGAN on CIFAR-10.The generator architecture discovered by AutoGAN on
the CIFAR-10 training set is displayed in Fig. 3. For the
task of unconditional CIFAR-10 image generation (no class
labels used), a number of notable observations could be
summarized:
•The discovered architecture has 3 convolution blocks.
AutoGAN clearly prefers pre-activation convolution
block, than post-activation convolution block.
•AutoGAN highly prefers nearest neighbour upsample
(also bilinear upsample) to deconvolution. That seems
to coincide with previous experience [45] that decon-
volution might give rise to checkboard artifacts and
nearest neighbour might thus be more favored.
•Interestingly enough, AutoGAN seems to prefer not
using any normalization.
•AutoGAN is clearly in favor of (denser) skipping con-
nections. Especially, it is able to discover medium
and long skips (skipping 2 - 4 convolutional layers),
achieving multi-scale feature fusion.
We compare AutoGAN with recently published results
by hand-crafted GANs on the CIFAR-10 dataset, in Table 2.
All results are collected from those original papers: there-
fore, they are obtained under their hand-tuned, best possible
training settings. In terms of inception score, AutoGAN is
slightly next to Progressive GAN [26], and surpasses many
latest strong competitors such as SN-GAN [42], improv-
ing MMD-GAN [56], Dist-GAN [54], MGAN [19], and
WGAN-GP [13]. In terms of FID, AutoGAN outperforms
all current state-of-the-art models. The visual examples of
CIFAR-10 generated results are shown in Fig. 4.
Note that the current search space of AutoGAN can only
cover SN-GAN, but not the others; for example, WGAN-
GP used the Wasserstein loss (with gradient clipping), and
MGAN adopts a multi-discriminator structure (while our
discriminator is very plain and not searched). By using the
same group of building blocks, AutoGAN is able to out-
perform the hand-crafted SN-GAN: that fair comparison
presents direct evidence for both the importance of genera-
tor structure, and the effectiveness of our search algorithm.
Although not equipped with any explicit model complex-
ity regularization yet, AutoGAN demonstrates the expected
model parameter efﬁciency from NAS. The top discovered
architecture in Fig. 3 has 2.16G FLOPs, while its perfor-
mance is clearly better than SN-GAN (1.69G FLOPs) and
comparable to Progressive GAN (6.39G FLOPs).
We also report the Inception score and FID score of the
candidate top 2 and top 3 discovered architectures in the
bottom of Tab. 2. Their corresponding architectures are
shown in Fig. 5. We can see all of our top 3 discovered
architecture achieves competitive performance with current
state-of-the-art models.
3228