0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Training hours
1
2
3
4
5
6Inception score
with dynamic-resetting
without dynamic-resettingFigure 9: Comparing AutoGAN with (blue) and without
(red) dynamic-resetting. Dynamic-resetting can boost train-
ing efﬁciency while achieving comparable performace.
the training with MLAS. We can see that SLAS obtain
high Inception score at the beginning, but the Inception
score of MLAS grows progressively and ﬁnally outperforms
SLAS. Besides, Training SLAS is much slower than train-
ing MLAS, as the generator output image will always be of
the ﬁnal resolution. Figure 10 demonstrates the evident and
consistent advantages of MLAS.
0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
Training iterations
1
2
3
4
5
6Inception score
MLAS
SLAS
Figure 10: Comparison of AutoGAN with MLAS (blue
line) and SLAS (red line) training chemes.
4.3.5 Comparison to random search
We implemented the two random search algorithms in [34]:
one with weight sharing and the other without weight shar-
ing (early stopping). We re-searched AutoGAN with these
two algorithms on CIFAR-10 and constrained the searching
time for 48 hours. As a result, the discovered architecture
with weight sharing achieves IS = 8.09 and FID = 17.34,
while the other achieves IS = 7.97 and FID = 21.39. Both
are inferior to our proposed search algorithm and endorse
its effectiveness.5. Conclusions, Limitations and Discussions
AutoGAN presents the ﬁrst effort on bringing NAS into
GANs. It is able to identify highly effective architectures
on both CIFAR-10 and STL-10 datasets, achieving compet-
itive image generation results against current state-of-the-
art, hand-crafted GAN models. The ablation study further
reveals the beneﬁt of each component.
AutoGAN appears to be more challenging than NAS for
image classiﬁcation, due to the high instability and hyperpa-
rameter sensitivity of GAN training itself. Recall that at the
initial stage of AutoML, it can only design small neural net-
works that perform on par with neural networks designed by
human experts, and these results were constrained to small
academic datasets such as CIFAR-10 and Penn Treebank
[71]. Likewise, despite its preliminary success and promise,
there is undoubtedly a large room for AutoGAN to improve.
In order to make AutoGAN further more competitive
than state-of-the-art hand-designed GANs, we point out a
few speciﬁc items that call for continuing efforts:
•The current search space of AutoGAN is limited, and
some powerful GANs are excluded from the search-
able range. It needs to be enlarged with more build-
ing blocks, that prove to be effective in the GAN lit-
erature. Referring to recent GAN benchmark studies
[39, 32], we consider extending our search space with
the attention/self-attention [64], the style-based gener-
ator [27], the relativistic discriminator [25] and various
losses such as the Wasserstein loss [3], among others.
•We have not yet tested AutoGAN on higher-resolution
image synthesis so far, e.g. ImageNet. While the same
algorithm is directly applicable in principle, the com-
putational cost would become prohibitively high. For
example, the search on CIFAR-10 already takes 43
hours. The key challenge lies in how to further im-
prove the search algorithm efﬁciency.
As one possible strategy, NAS in image classiﬁcation
typically applies transfer learning from low-resolution
images to higher resolutions [72]. It may be inter-
esting, though challenging, to see how the similar
idea will be applied to the image generation task of
GANs, since it will be more demanding in preserv-
ing/synthesizing details than classiﬁcation.
•We have not unleashed the potential of searching for
better discriminators. We might formulate an alternat-
ing search between the generator and the discriminator,
which can turn AutoGAN even far more challenging.
•Eventually, AutoGAN will need the capability to in-
corporate labels, such as conditional GANs [41] and
semi-supervised GANs [50].
3231