AutoGAN: Neural Architecture Search for Generative Adversarial Networks
Xinyu Gong1Shiyu Chang2Yifan Jiang1Zhangyang Wang1
1Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas A&M University
2MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
{xygong, yifanjiang97, atlaswang }@tamu.edu shiyu.chang@ibm.com
Abstract
Neural architecture search (NAS) has witnessed prevail-
ing success in image classiﬁcation and (very recently) seg-
mentation tasks. In this paper, we present the ﬁrst prelimi-
nary study on introducing the NAS algorithm to generative
adversarial networks (GANs), dubbed AutoGAN . The mar-
riage of NAS and GANs faces its unique challenges. We
deﬁne the search space for the generator architectural vari-
ations and use an RNN controller to guide the search, with
parameter sharing and dynamic-resetting to accelerate the
process. Inception score is adopted as the reward, and a
multi-level search strategy is introduced to perform NAS
in a progressive way. Experiments validate the effective-
ness of AutoGAN on the task of unconditional image gen-
eration. Speciﬁcally, our discovered architectures achieve
highly competitive performance compared to current state-
of-the-art hand-crafted GANs, e.g., setting new state-of-the-
art FID scores of 12.42 on CIFAR-10, and 31.01 on STL-10,
respectively. We also conclude with a discussion of the cur-
rent limitations and future potential of AutoGAN. The code
is avaliable at https://github.com/TAMU-VITA/
AutoGAN .
1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have been pre-
vailing since its origin [11]. One of their most notable suc-
cesses lies in generating realistic natural images with vari-
ous convolutional architectures [47, 5, 61, 26, 13, 67]. In
order to improve the quality of generated images, many
efforts have been proposed, including modifying discrim-
inator loss functions [3, 68], enforcing regularization terms
[6, 13, 42, 5], introducing attention mechanism [61, 64], and
adopting progressive training [26].
However, the backbone architecture design of GANs
has received relatively less attention, and was often con-
sidered a less signiﬁcant factor accounting for GAN per-
formance [39, 32]. Most earlier GANs stick to relatively
shallow generator and discriminator architectures, mostlyowing to the notorious instability in GAN training. Lately,
several state-of-the-art GANs [13, 42, 64, 5] adopted deep
residual network generator backbones for better generat-
ing high-resolution images. In most other computer vision
tasks, a lot of the progress arises from the improved de-
sign of network architectures, such as image classiﬁcation
[15, 16, 52, 51, 35], segmentation [8, 9, 49], and pose esti-
mation [43]. Hereby, we advocate that enhanced backbone
designs are also important for improving GANs further.
In recent years, there are surging interests in designing
sophisticated neural network architectures automatically.
Neural architecture search (NAS) has been successfully de-
veloped and evaluated on the task of image classiﬁcation
[71, 46], and lately on image segmentation as well [7, 36].
The discovered architectures outperform human-designed
models. However, naively porting existing NAS ideas from
image classiﬁcation/segmentation to GAN would not suf-
ﬁce. First and foremost, even given hand-designed archi-
tectures, the training of GANs is notoriously unstable and
prone to collapse [50]. Mingling NAS into the training pro-
cess will undoubtedly amplify the difﬁculty. As another
important challenge, while the validation accuracy makes a
natural reward option for NAS in image classiﬁcation, it is
less straightforward to choose a good metric for evaluating
and guiding the GAN search process.
This paper presents an architecture search scheme
speciﬁcally tailored for GANs, dubbed AutoGAN . Up to
our best knowledge, AutoGAN describes the ﬁrst attempt
to incorporate NAS with GANs, and belongs to one of the
ﬁrst attempts to extend NAS beyond image classiﬁcation
too. Our technical innovations are summarized as follows:
•We deﬁne the search space to capture the GAN archi-
tectural variations. On top of that, we use an RNN con-
troller [71] to guide the architecture search. Based on
the parameter sharing strategy in [46], we further in-
troduce a parameter dynamic-resetting strategy in our
search progress, to boost the training speed.
•We use Inception score (IS) [50] as the reward, in
the reinforcement-learning-based optimization of Au-
toGAN. The discovered models are found also to show
3224