…ConvBlock norm upsampleShortcut
connection
Cell 0ConvBlock norm upsampleController 
0Controller 
0Controller 
0Controller 
0Top 
KConvBlocknormupsampleShortcut
connection
Cell 1ConvBlock norm upsampleController 
1Controller 
1Controller 
1Controller 
1Top 
KController 
1
Shortcut
connectionSkip
connection
Skip
connectionFigure 1: The running scheme of the RNN controller. At each time step, the controller outputs a hidden vector to be decoded
into an operation, with its corresponding softmax classiﬁer. Note that, using MLAS, we use a different controller for the
search of each cell. Once the search process for one cell is done, the controller samples Mcandidate architectures and then
picks the top Kfrom them. The top Karchitectures’ controller outputs will fed as the input of the next cell’s controller.
wheresis the cell index starting at 0 (0-th cell doesn’t have
skip0connection):
•skipiis a binary value indicating whether the current
s-th cell takes a skip connection from the (i−1)-th cell
as its input, i= 1,...,s . Note that each cell could take
multiple skip connections from other preceding cells.
•Cis the basic convolution block type, including pre-
activation [16] and post-activation convolution block.
•Nstands for the normalization type of this block, in-
cluding three options: batch normalization[21], in-
stance normalization[55], and no normalization.
•Ustands for the upsampling operation which was stan-
dard in current image generation GANs, including bi-
linear upsampling, nearest neighbour upsampling, and
stride 2 deconvolution.
•SCis a binary value indicating the in-cell shortcut.
Fig. 2 illustrates the AutoGAN generator search space. The
upsampling operation Uwill also determine the upsample
method of the skip-in feature map.
ConvBlock 
w/o normalizationUpsample
ConvBlock 
w/o normalizationLast 
cell’s 
outputPrevious 
cells’ 
skip outs
U CSC N
skip
Figure 2: The search space of a generator cell in AutoGAN.3.2. Proxy Task
Inception score (IS) [50] and FID score [18] are two
main evaluation metrics for GANs. Since FID score is much
more time-consuming to calculate, we choose the IS of each
derived child model, as the reward to update controller via
reinforcement learning.
Parameter sharing [40, 73] shows to effectively boost the
efﬁciency of NAS [46]. Based on the parameter-sharing
in [46], we further bring in a parameter dynamic-resetting
strategy to AutoGAN. It has been observed that the training
of GANs becomes unstable and undergoes mode collapse
after long time training [5]. It could be a waste of time to
continue training the shared collapsed model. Empirically,
we observe the variance of the training loss (hinge loss) usu-
ally becomes very small when mode collapse happens.
Based on this observation, we set a moving window to
store the most recent training loss values, for both genera-
tor and discriminator. Once the standard deviation of those
stored training losses is smaller than a pre-deﬁned thresh-
old, the training of the shared GAN of current iteration will
be terminated. The parameters of the shared-GAN model
will be re-initialized after updating the controller at the cur-
rent iteration. Notice that we do NOT re-initialize the pa-
rameters of the RNN controller, thus it could continue to
guide the architecture search with inheriting the historic
knowledge. With dynamic-resetting, the searching process
becomes much more efﬁcient.
3.3. Optimization Method
There are two sets of parameters in the AutoGAN: the
RNN controller’s parameters (denoted as θ); and the shared
GAN parameters in the searched generator and the corre-
sponding discriminator (denoted as ω). The training pro-
cess is brieﬂy outlined in Algo. 1, as an alternating process
between two phases.
The ﬁrst phase will train ωof the shared GAN for sev-
eral epochs, with θﬁxed. For each training iteration of
3226