Drones 2023 ,7, 211 18 of 37
2.7.3. Quadratic Programming
Quadratic programming is used to solve nonlinear programming problems. The
objective function is quadratic. The constraint conditions are the same as those of the linear
programming problem, that is, linear or linear inequalities. As UAVs need to operate safely
at high speeds in unknown environments, yet the realization of this operation usually
leads to a slow and conservative trajectory, a fast and safe trajectory planner was proposed
in [102] to solve these problems. The fast–safe trajectory planner obtains a high-speed
trajectory by optimizing the local planner in known and unknown space and proposes a
mixed integer quadratic programming formula. Finally, in the simulation ﬂight experiment
and an actual ﬂight experiment, it was determined that the UAV successfully reached
3.6 m/s. In [ 103], an autonomous motion planning framework, including path planning
and path generation, was proposed. In this framework, the PRM algorithm was used to ﬁrst
plan a safe path, and then the problem of minimizing the differential thrust and positioning
clearance polynomial path was converted into unconstrained quadratic programming,
which was solved in a two-step optimization. Compared with other methods, this method
achieves higher computational efﬁciency and plans a safe trajectory.
2.7.4. Soft-Constrained Programming
The soft constraint generates a force on the robot to keep it away from obstacles.
The most intuitive representation is the distance description. The Euclidean symbolic
distance ﬁeld (ESDF) is very important for evaluating the gradient size and direction in
the gradient planner of a four-rotor UAV . However, it only covers a very limited subspace
during trajectory optimization. In [ 104], a gradient-free programming framework based
on ESDF was proposed. The collision term in the penalty function is established by
comparing the collision trajectories and collision-free guidance paths. We introduce an
anisotropic curve-ﬁtting algorithm to change the high-order derivative of the trajectory
without changing its shape. Experiments in the real world have veriﬁed its robustness
and efﬁciency. In [ 105], a four-rotor UAV motion-planning system for rapid ﬂight in a
complex three-dimensional environment was proposed. The dynamic path search method
was used to ﬁnd a safe, dynamic, feasible, and minimum-time initial trajectory in the
discrete control space. We improve the smoothness and clearance of the trajectory through
B-spline optimization, which combines the gradient information and dynamic constraints
of the Euclidean distance ﬁeld and effectively utilizes the convex hull characteristics of the
B-spline. Finally, by representing the ﬁnal trajectory as a nonuniform B-spline, the iterative
time adjustment method was adopted to ensure a dynamic, feasible, and nonconservative
trajectory. This method was veriﬁed for real, complex scenes.
2.8. Other Algorithms
2.8.1. Differential Evolutionary Algorithm
Differential evolution (DE) is an effective global optimization approach. In addition, it
uses a population-based heuristic search technique in which each member of the population
represents a solution vector. This is similar to genetic algorithms. DE is another global
optimization technique that comprises operations for selection, crossover, and compilation.
DE also differs from genetic algorithms in that the variance vectors in the different evolution
are generated from the variance vectors of the parents. Additionally, it directly chooses
from the parent individuals and intersects the parent’s vectors to create a new individual
vector. A new prediction-based path evaluator was designed to assess the ﬁtness of
possible paths by introducing a differential evolution algorithm as an optimizer [ 106].
The experimental results demonstrate that this method helps autonomous underwater
robots make full use of ocean currents and effectively avoid collisions. Additionally, the
control points produced by the B-spline were optimized using a differential evolutionary
method [ 107]. This enables the autonomous underwater robot to successfully navigate
a variety of obstacles in 3D space. The cost function used for methodology in this study
accounted for the kinematic restrictions placed on the autonomous underwater robots’