Drones 2023 ,7, 211 6 of 37
relatively complex, and it is necessary to select appropriate parameters. If inappropriate
parameters are selected, the performance of the algorithm may deteriorate. Improvements
can be made to its genetics. The future direction of improvement is still related to machine
learning and other technologies to further improve the adaptive ability and intelligence
level of the algorithm.
2.2.2. Ant Colony Algorithm
The ant colony algorithm (ACO) is a positive feedback mechanism algorithm proposed
by the Italian scholar Dorigol in 1992, in which a pheromone-focused path has a heuristic
inﬂuence on the search for the next node. Each ant produces a secretion as a reference
along its walking path and senses the secretions generated by other ants when they are
seeking food. This is the underlying concept behind the ACO algorithm. The mechanism
of the ant colony algorithm is shown in Figure 3. The ants can communicate and make
decisions based on this secretion, often referred to as pheromone. The colony migrates to a
path where there are more pheromones than on other paths and releases more secretions
as it moves, increasing the concentration of the pheromone and drawing more ants to the
path, generating a positive feedback process. The pheromone concentration on the short
road steadily increases over time, leading to an increase in the number of ants choosing
it, whereas the pheromone concentration on other paths gradually diminishes until it
disappears. The entire colony eventually focuses on the best route. The act of foraging by
the ants is comparable to that of robotic path planning. The ants will choose the quickest
route to the food if there are a sufﬁcient number of them in the nest to overcome the barriers.
Drones  2023 , 7, 211 7 of 40 
 
 
Figure 3. The mechanism of the ant colony algorithm. 
An ant colony technique with particle swarm optimization was proposed [31] for the 
autonomous underwater robot to discover the ideal path through a complicated sea ﬂoor. 
To enhance the pheromone update rule, the particle swarm optimization technique was 
added to the path-length heuristic function. Th e strategy also restricts the initialization 
range of particular populations, considerably enhancing the search e ﬃciency and 
preventing a series of super ﬂuous pitches and undulations, considering how challenging 
it is for autonomous underwater robots to lo cate pathways in a three-dimensional space. 
Unlike the conventional “ant colony” algorithm, path optimization is signi ﬁcantly 
reduced. For the problem of autonomous underwater robots needing to traverse complex 
environments with dense obstacles, an AC O-A* algorithm was proposed by combining 
the ACO algorithm with the A* search algori thm [32]. Here, the ACO is responsible for 
determining the target travel order based on th e cost map, and A* performs pairwise path 
planning based on the se arch map obtained from ﬁne-grained modeling. Simulation 
results demonstrate that the time e ﬃciency of the ACO-A* is veri ﬁed. 
An improved multi-objective swarm intelligence method was used to plan an 
accurate unmanned aerial robot 3D path (APPMS) [33]. The path planning problem is 
transformed in the APPMS approach into a multi-objective optimization task with 
numerous restrictions. In addition, a precis e swarm intelligence search technique based 
on enhanced ant colony optimization was introduced to ﬁnd the best unmanned aerial 
robot 3D ﬂight path. This technique uses preferenti al search directions and a stochastic 
neighborhood search mechanism to enhance both global and local search capabilities. The 
simulation results demonstrate that the superi ority of the proposed approach is supported 
by three sets of digital terrain (three, four , and eight threats) and genuine DEM data for 
the simulated disaster response missions.  Another study suggested using [34] a 2-
OptACO approach that builds on the 2-op t algorithm to enhance the ant colony 
optimization algorithm and is used to optimize the unmanned aerial robot path for search 
and rescue missions. According to the simulation ﬁndings, the 2-OptACO approach 
converges more quickly than the GA and ACO approaches. Be tter global optimal solutions 
are attained. Reference [35] presented a method  based on ant colony optimization to 
determine the minimum time search path for multiple unmanned aerial robots (minimum 
time search-ant colony optimization MTS-ACO). Two di ﬀerent pheromone table 
encodings were proposed for MTS-ACO. A mini mum–time search heuristic function was 
designed that enables the ant colony optimi zation algorithm to generate high-quality 
solutions at the initial stage and accelerate the convergence of the algorithm. 
The ant colony algorithm can ﬁnd the optimal path in a known static large-scale 
environment and is also suitable for multi-objective optimization problems. However, it 
easily falls into the local optimal solution, resulting in a slow convergence speed of the 
algorithm. Scholars have also improved its convergence speed. Nonetheless, its 
convergence speed and global searchability can be improved further. 
Figure 3. The mechanism of the ant colony algorithm.
A new pheromone updating technique was proposed in a dynamic environment to
avoid unnecessary loops and achieve faster convergence [ 28]. An improved algorithm with
an adaptive search step size and pheromone waving strategy was proposed to address the
problem of the ACO algorithm being prone to a local optimum and inefﬁcient search [ 29].
For the path conﬂict problem caused by the over-concentration of multiple robot paths, a
load-balancing strategy to avoid path conﬂict is proposed. Simulation results demonstrate
that the proposed strategy is feasible and efﬁcient. A hybrid approach based on the regres-
sion analysis-adaptive ant colony optimization (RA-AACO) humanoid robot navigation
method was proposed [ 30], and a Petri net controller was designed to prevent multiple
robots from colliding with one another in a re-simulation. The controller successfully
implemented single and multi-robot navigation. This process can be applied as a reliable
solution for humanoid robot navigation and other robotic applications.
An ant colony technique with particle swarm optimization was proposed [ 31] for the
autonomous underwater robot to discover the ideal path through a complicated seaﬂoor. To
enhance the pheromone update rule, the particle swarm optimization technique was added
to the path-length heuristic function. The strategy also restricts the initialization range