Drones 2023 ,7, 211 17 of 37
in automatic driving. An objective function that took into account the path’s deviation and
the vehicle’s kinematic constraints was also added to create the right path. The research
in this paper shows that, compared with traditional methods, the CHOMP algorithm has
obvious advantages in terms of time and cost when used for path planning in automatic
driving.
2.6.2. Trajectory Optimization for Motion Planning
Trajectory optimization (TrajOpt) is a sequential convex optimization algorithm for
motion-planning problems. It relaxes non-convex, non-radial equality, and inequality
constraints and uses approximate linearization and convexity to create an objective function.
In [97], a new navigation framework was proposed that uses an enhanced version of TrajOpt
for rapid 3D path planning of autonomous underwater vehicles. This study was also the
ﬁrst to apply TrajOpt to the 3D path planning of mobile robots.
2.7. Constraint Satisfaction Problem-Based Algorithms
2.7.1. Chance Constrained Programming
Chance–constrained programming is a method that achieves the best performance
with a certain sense of probability. This is a random programming method that is suitable
for a problem in which constraint conditions contain random variables and the decision
must be made before the realization of the random variables is observed. In [ 98], a general
chance–constrained trajectory planning formula was proposed that can deal with the non-
Gaussian mixture distribution of the agent position. To strengthen the chance–constraint, a
framework is proposed to generate an expression using a symbolic function. Based on the
statistical moment of the basic distribution, the generated expression sets the upper limit
of the polynomial chance–constraint. However, this study produced overly conservative
results. In [ 99], a real-time method was proposed to solve a chance–constrained motion-
planning problem with dynamic obstacles. The obstacles were considered to have uncertain
locations, models, and interference in the form of additive Gaussian noise. In addition,
this study developed a closed-form differentiable bound on the set probability to safely
approximate the disjunction chance–constrained optimization problem to a nonlinear
program. Experimental results revealed that, compared with other real-time methods, it
reduces the degree of conservatism relatively and can still effectively control a mobile robot
when considering multiple obstacles.
2.7.2. Model Predictive Control
Model predictive control is an advanced control method of the control process in
process control that is mainly used for tracking the lane line in automatic driving to keep
the vehicle track relatively stable when speciﬁc constraints are met. The MPC reconstructs
the task of lane tracking into the problem of ﬁnding the optimal solution. The optimal
solution to the optimization problem is the optimal trajectory. Every step we take will
solve an optimal trajectory based on the current state, then the trajectory, and then the
optimal trajectory will be solved again based on the new value from the sensor. This is
performed to make sure that the trajectory and the lane line we want to track ﬁt together
as well as possible. Because autonomous vehicles exhibit poor performance in emergency
obstacle avoidance, in [100], a new model predictive controller combined with a potential
function was proposed to deal with complex trafﬁc scenarios. To improve the security of
the potential function, a sigmoid-based secure channel (SPMPC) was embedded in the
MPC constraint, and a speciﬁc trigger analysis algorithm for monitoring trafﬁc emergencies
was designed. In two-lane and three-lane simulation experiments, the methods proposed in
this study can successfully avoid obstacles that suddenly change lanes. In [ 101], an optimal
guidance method based on MPC considering the current disturbance was proposed, and
a path-tracking controller was designed by combining it with adaptive dynamic sliding
mode control technology. This method can be applied not only to autonomous underwater
vehicles but also to the path planning of other unmanned vehicles.