Drones 2023 ,7, 211 8 of 37
Drones  2023 , 7, 211 8 of 40 
 
2.2.3. Particle Swarm Optimization 
The particle swarm optimization (PSO) algo rithm mimics the behavior of birds in 
their search for food, sharing information regarding their current location as the ﬂock 
forages. The entire ﬂock can reach its ﬁnal food source through proper communication 
between the individuals and group members. Th e basic principle is that individuals and 
groups collaborate and share information to ob tain optimal solutions. This algorithm was 
proposed by Eberhart and Kennedy [36] in 1995 to determine the global optimum in terms 
of the current search for the optimum. It has the advantages of easy implementation, high 
accuracy, and quick convergence, and is not only suitable for multi-robot path planning but also capable of single-rob ot route planning. Figure 4 sh ows a schematic that mimics 
the behavior of birds seeking food. By communicating with the group, ﬁnd the closest 
bird to the food and travel with it to ﬁnd the ultimate largest food source. The circle 
represents the bird. The green vegetation represents food; most food is in the grove, and 
most food is in the forest. 
 
Figure 4. The bird’s swarm searching for the optimal f ood source represents the particle swarm 
optimization process. 
The performance of the proposed partic le swarm algorithm depends on how its 
parameters are adjusted, managed, and chan ged. A robot path smoothing strategy was 
proposed to address the problem of unne cessary turns caused by unsmoothed paths 
generated by the PSO algorithm [37]. The stra tegy is based on the PSO algorithm, which 
introduces adaptive fractional-order velocities to improve the ability to search the space 
and increase the “smoothness” of the mobile  robot path by using higher-order Bessel 
curves. Experiments show that the modi ﬁed PSO algorithm is be tter than several existing 
PSO algorithms on several benchmark function s. The superiority of the new approach is 
supported by numerous thorough  simulations of smooth path planning for mobile robots. 
A study [38] presented a new method for dete rmining the optimal path of a multi-robot 
in a clu ttered environment using a combination of the improved particle swarm 
optimization algorithm (IPSO) and the improv ed gravitational search algorithm (IGSA). 
The simulation results demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms other 
algorithms used for the navigation of multiple mobile robots. 
To reduce energy usage for autonomous underwater robot path planning, a distance 
evolutionary nonlinear particle swarm optimization (DENPSO) algorithm was suggested 
[39]. The approach uses penalty functions to set the energy optimization goals under obstacles and in the ocean. It also changes linear inertial weight factors and learning 
factors into nonlinear ones so that the partic les can fully explore the 3D underwater world 
during the evolution process. In the 3D  simulated underwater environment, the 
simulation results demonstrate that DENPSO uses signi ﬁcantly less energy than the linear Forest
Grove
Bird Food
The most food in the grove The most food in the forest
Figure 4. The bird’s swarm searching for the optimal food source represents the particle swarm
optimization process.
The performance of the proposed particle swarm algorithm depends on how its
parameters are adjusted, managed, and changed. A robot path smoothing strategy was
proposed to address the problem of unnecessary turns caused by unsmoothed paths
generated by the PSO algorithm [ 37]. The strategy is based on the PSO algorithm, which
introduces adaptive fractional-order velocities to improve the ability to search the space
and increase the “smoothness” of the mobile robot path by using higher-order Bessel
curves. Experiments show that the modiﬁed PSO algorithm is better than several existing
PSO algorithms on several benchmark functions. The superiority of the new approach is
supported by numerous thorough simulations of smooth path planning for mobile robots.
A study [ 38] presented a new method for determining the optimal path of a multi-robot in
a cluttered environment using a combination of the improved particle swarm optimization
algorithm (IPSO) and the improved gravitational search algorithm (IGSA). The simulation
results demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms other algorithms used for the
navigation of multiple mobile robots.
To reduce energy usage for autonomous underwater robot path planning, a dis-
tance evolutionary nonlinear particle swarm optimization (DENPSO) algorithm was sug-
gested [ 39]. The approach uses penalty functions to set the energy optimization goals under
obstacles and in the ocean. It also changes linear inertial weight factors and learning factors
into nonlinear ones so that the particles can fully explore the 3D underwater world during
the evolution process. In the 3D simulated underwater environment, the simulation results
demonstrate that DENPSO uses signiﬁcantly less energy than the linear PSO algorithm.
An evolutionary-based docking-path optimization technique was suggested [ 40]. The ﬁrst
step is the analysis and modeling of the ocean environment and its restrictions. The second
design goal of the control points was to satisfy the model constraints. To accomplish global
time optimization, adaptive rules, and quantum behavior were included in PSO. Finally,
the proposed technique was assessed using Monte Carlo simulations. The experimental
ﬁndings revealed considerable improvements to this approach.
A 3D path planning method based on adaptive sensitivity decision operators and
particle swarm optimization was presented [ 41], where an adaptive sensitivity decision area
was built to address the drawbacks of local optimality and slow convergence. To increase
computational efﬁciency, alternative possibilities are eliminated, and prospective particle
sites with a high probability are found by employing this deﬁned region. In addition,
the relative particle directionality obtained from the current position enhances the search
accuracy. In terms of the path cost and path generation, the simulation results demonstrate
that the upgraded PSO algorithm performs better than the GA and PSO approaches. For
modern warfare, the ability of unmanned aerial robots to avoid enemy radar reconnaissance