Drones 2023 ,7, 211 15 of 37
coded in the temporal dimension, and multiple neurons can achieve the ability to represent
a two-dimensional space in time–space. Most of the connections of SNN-based brain-like
spatial cognition models are predeﬁned by brain structures, and less parameter learning
is required to better model clusters of brain navigation cells, such as position cells, grid
cells, and head orientation cells, which encode navigation information to map the envi-
ronment [ 80]. The Google DeepMind team’s [ 81] dual-path deep reinforcement learning
navigation architecture uses a two-path deep circulation neural network to remember the
kernel of common navigation pathﬁnding strategies in different environments and present
positions in different environments. Convolutional neural networks are then used to get
visual input in real-time. The destination was successfully reached in an ofﬂine street view
without reference to a map library and with only a few points (mission reward).
2.5. Sampling-Based Algorithms
2.5.1. Rapidly-Exploring Random Tree
The rapid-exploration random tree algorithm is built by randomly generating a tree
starting from a starting point and connecting the generated tree to the trunk of the starting
point to form a search tree. This continues until all of the branches of the tree lead to the
target point. This algorithm is commonly used in the static path planning of mobile robots.
In [82], based on the RRT* algorithm, a motion planning algorithm called Smooth RRT* that
provided a smoother solution for robots with nonlinear dynamic constraints and could be
used to reconnect two nodes in a given state was proposed. Compared with the traditional
RRT algorithm and the Kinedynamic-RRT (Kino-RRT) [ 83] algorithm, the Smooth RRT*
algorithm in this study is based on the number of nodes, and its path length and path
smoothness are better than those of the previous two algorithms. In [ 84], the neural RRT*
(NRRT*) algorithm, which is based on a convolutional neural network, was proposed as
a new way to plan the best path. In this study, the optimal path and map information
generated by the A* algorithm were used as datasets, and a large number of optimal paths
generated by the A* algorithm were used to train the CNN model. Compared with the
traditional RRT* algorithm and the informed RRT* [ 85] algorithm, the algorithm proposed
in this paper is more effective with regard to path generation time and memory usage. As
some path planning algorithms cannot guarantee the optimization memory and smoothness
of the trajectory when a mobile robot completes a complex task, a bidirectional RRT (KB-
RRT) algorithm based on kinematic constraints is proposed [ 86]. This algorithm limits the
number of generated nodes without affecting its accuracy and uses kinematic constraints to
generate a smoother trajectory. Compared to the bidirectional RRT [ 54] algorithm in three
highly cluttered environments, the KB-RRT algorithm reduces the number of nodes and
the running time and signiﬁcantly improves memory utilization.
A Q-RRT* algorithm was suggested [ 87], which may be used with a sampling tech-
nique to further enhance the performance and demonstrates superior initial solution and
convergence speed than the RRT* algorithm. A dual-tree expansion approach called Bi-RRT
has been suggested [ 88] as being more effective than single-tree expansion. The initial
and target points serve as the starting points for the expansion of the random tree by the
algorithm. After choosing a random node, two trees are chosen one at a time, randomly
extended on top of that, and their expansion orders are exchanged in the following iteration.
A closed-loop stochastic dynamic path planning algorithm based on incremental sampling
techniques was described in [ 89] as a closed-loop rapid exploration random tree (CL-RRT)
algorithm. Here, in the autonomous underwater robot model, three fuzzy controllers were
used to assess the scope of the search tree and whether the vertices satisfy the incomplete
dynamic constraints of the autonomous underwater robot. The ability of CL-RRT to locate
collision-free pathways in 3D environments with crowded obstacles was demonstrated
using an Extended PC (xPC) target generator. According to the experimental results on
terrain barriers and ﬂoating objects, AUVs can approach the ideal path considerably more
quickly, and a study [ 90] suggests that a concentrated search employing heuristic ellipsoidal
subset sampling improves the RRT* method.