Drones 2023 ,7, 211 20 of 37
2.8.5. Fuzzy Logic Method
By mimicking the ability of the human brain to evaluate uncertainty and make deci-
sions based on environmental data and fuzzy rules, fuzzy logic can solve the path planning
problem. To solve the problem of autonomous underwater robots being prone to receive
sea-current interference when performing underwater path planning, a fuzzy optimization
technique based on auto-disturbance rejection control (ADRC) was suggested to increase
the adaptation of autonomous underwater robots to the marine environment by including
ADRC to manage sea-current interference [ 118]. The ﬁndings of this trial demonstrate
that the autonomous underwater robot can exert superior control in a challenging marine
environment. An optimized fuzzy control algorithm was proposed for the autonomous
underwater robot 3D path planning problem [ 119]. Horizontal and vertical sonar planes
were used to collect the environmental data. A fuzzy system with an acceleration module
was used to calculate the acceleration values, and an optimal fuzzy set was created by
contrasting the two optimization techniques to determine the best course of action. The
results of the experiments demonstrate that the method can complete the path planning
of a 3D autonomous underwater robot. The change in distance between the autonomous
underwater robot and obstacles was employed as an extra input to the fuzzy afﬁliation
function [ 120] because it is challenging to determine the speed of obstacles moving in the
actual world. When obstacles move quickly, the results demonstrate that the proposed
method performs noticeably better than the conventional fuzzy logic algorithm.
The biggest advantage of the fuzzy logic algorithm is that it does not require an
accurate mathematical model, and its operation principle is basically similar to human
cognition. However, its deﬁnition of fuzzy rules depends on people’s experiences, and
it cannot adapt to complex environments. Future research needs to focus on developing
more intelligent path planning algorithms so that robots can adjust their paths intelligently
according to environmental changes and user needs.
2.9. Discussion
Table 1 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of each path planning algo-
rithm. Both the A* and Dijkstra algorithms are classic algorithms based on graph search that
are used to solve the shortest path problem. They can deal with path planning problems
in a static environment, but the A* algorithm can ﬁnd the optimal solution faster with
the introduction of a heuristic function. Their disadvantage is that they cannot effectively
address the path planning problem in a dynamic environment. Genetic algorithms typically
perform many evolutionary operations. Therefore, they take up a considerable amount of
storage space, and there are more parameters to be adjusted, resulting in a slower conver-
gence speed. The advantage of the genetic algorithm is that it has a strong global search
ability and can overcome the suboptimal solution of the A* algorithm. Similar to genetic
algorithms, differential evolution algorithms also have genetic operators such as selective
crossover mutations, which can be deﬁned in different ways. The excellent robustness of
differential evolution algorithms in a wide range of path planning applications has been
proven in practice.