Drones 2023 ,7, 211 11 of 37
poor dynamic obstacle avoidance performance in the autonomous path of an underwater
3D autonomous underwater robot, a local obstacle avoidance technique based on the
vectorial artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method was proposed [ 52], and the space vector method
was employed to enhance the calculation of the direction of the combined force and the
computational effectiveness of the algorithm. Eventually, by using the vector artiﬁcial
potential ﬁeld approach, the key path points were employed as local target locations to
avoid nearby obstacles. The ﬁndings of the simulation demonstrate that the strategy can
help the autonomous underwater robot efﬁciently avoid different obstacles and lower
the cost.
Reference [ 53] provides a technique for avoiding local minima in an artiﬁcial potential
ﬁeld and maneuvering around the closest obstacle, allowing an unmanned aerial vehicle
to successfully escape from the local minima without hitting any obstacles. The study
suggests a parallel search technique that requires the unmanned aerial robot to navigate
around the nearest obstacle to approach the target while detecting the obstacle between
the current location and the target being too far away and having too many obstacles to
reach it. Simulation results show that the path planning algorithm and controller that
were suggested are useful. Reference [ 54] addresses the problem that most unmanned
aerial robot path planning techniques do not consider, which is wind interference. A new
3D online APF path planning technique that enhances the sensitivity of the unmanned
aerial robot to wind speed and direction was proposed. This is performed by presenting
a new, improved attractor with a modiﬁed wind resistance gravitational function that
considers any small changes in the relative displacement caused by the wind. This causes
the unmanned aerial robot to drift in a certain direction. The proposed path planning
technique is evaluated for various simulation scenarios. Its performance is superior in
handling wind disturbances. Reference [ 55] describes an enhanced artiﬁcial potential
ﬁeld method incorporating the chaotic bat algorithm. It uses an artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld
to accelerate the convergence of bat position updates. It proposes an optimal success rate
strategy with adaptive inertia weights and a chaotic strategy to prevent hitting a local
optimum. The method is particularly robust for dealing with path planning issues, and the
simulation results demonstrate that it considerably improves the success rate of discovering
suitable planning paths and reduces the convergence time.
The artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method has great advantages in avoiding unknown obsta-
cles. However, it can easily fall into the local minimum in complex environments, and it is
also sensitive to noise interference. In the future, a complex artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld could
be designed to improve the adaptability of the algorithm.
2.3.3. Time Elastic Banding Algorithm
The timed elastic band algorithm (TEB) [ 56] is a classical local obstacle avoidance
algorithm for two-wheeled differential robots. The method explicitly augments the “elastic
band” with temporal information, thus allowing the dynamic constraints of the robot to
be considered and the trajectory to be modiﬁed directly, transforming the traditional path
planning problem into a graph optimization problem [57].
An active trajectory planning technique has been proposed for autonomous mobile
robots operating in dynamic situations [ 58]. The proactive timed elastic band (PTEB) model,
as suggested in this method, focuses on integrating the hybrid reciprocal velocity obstacle
model (HRVO) into the goal function of the TEB algorithm. According to the simulation
ﬁndings, the proposed motion planning model can control the mobile robot to actively
avoid dynamic impediments and provide safe navigation. An improved TEB algorithm was
proposed to address the anomalous behavior of the conventional TEB algorithm in cluttered
scenarios where planning is prone to backward and large steering. Here, a hazard penalty
factor constraint that can plan a safer motion trajectory, an acceleration jump suppression
constraint to reduce large shocks in motion, and an end-smoothing constraint to reduce end
shocks were added; the improved TEB achieved a smooth and accurate arrival of the target
points [ 59]. The simulation ﬁndings demonstrate that the enhanced TEB algorithm may