Drones 2023 ,7, 211 19 of 37
sway, yaw, and pitch components. The results of the experiments were reported. The
projected trend can be fully utilized for autonomous underwater robot path planning based
on a differential evolutionary algorithm to address unforeseen perturbations.
The differential evolution algorithm has a strong global optimization ability and can
ﬁnd the global optimal solution or a solution close to the optimal solution. However,
compared with those of other algorithms, its convergence speed is low. In the future, we
need to focus on improving its efﬁciency and accuracy.
2.8.2. Biogeography Optimization Algorithm
Dan Simon proposed the Biogeography-Based Optimization (BBO) algorithm in
2008 [ 108], which has the same characteristics as other biology-based optimization methods
(genetic algorithms and particle swarm optimization). Therefore, BBO can be used to solve
many of the same problems that GA and PSO can, including high-dimensional problems
with multiple local optima. A two-stage recursive task planning system for autonomous
underwater robots based on the BBO algorithm was designed, and simulation experiments
were conducted for three scenarios, which demonstrated that the algorithm is signiﬁcantly
effective in real-time [109].
2.8.3. Level Set Approach
The level set method (LSM) is a numerical technique for interface tracing and shape
modeling [ 110]. The beneﬁts of using the LSM are that evolving curved surfaces can be
numerically calculated on a cartesian grid without the need to parameterize the surfaces,
and the topological changes of an object can be easily tracked. Therefore, this approach
can be utilized to address issues caused by underwater dynamics. LSM was used in
studies [ 111,112] to reconcile the ocean-current problem with the planning time. A time-
optimized LSM and a 3D ocean modeling optimization technique were combined [ 113]. This
plan makes it possible to predict ocean currents and makes it easier to quickly coordinate
autonomous underwater robot dynamic control plans. Stochastic dynamic orthogonal
level set equations that can be used in dynamically varying current ﬁelds were derived,
and a simpliﬁed form for numerical implementation was obtained [ 114]. The results
demonstrate that the new algorithm is accurate and efﬁcient. To address the problems
of low computational efﬁciency and long planning times in autonomous underwater
robot multiterminal route planning, the traditional level set function was localized, and
a polynomial distance regularized (P-DRE) term was introduced to derive a new discrete
iterative equation that improves the computational efﬁciency of the level set algorithm.
2.8.4. Fast Marching Method
The fast marching (FM) algorithm [ 115] is comparable to Dijkstra’s algorithm, except
that Dijkstra’s algorithm updates with the Euclidean distance between two nodes, whereas
the FM method updates a rough partial differential equation simpliﬁed by a non-linear
Eikonal equation. The FM algorithm is applied in a large 3D environment for autonomous
underwater robots and solves the pathﬁnding problems of autonomous underwater robots
in terms of navigation, safety, and energy consumption. A hybrid search fast marching
method (HSFM) based on the FM algorithm has been proposed [ 116]. The algorithm takes
into account underwater undercurrents based on the relationship between the gradient
lines and feature lines in a velocity proﬁle. It also takes into account several constraints
and decision criteria, such as currents, shoals, reefs, dynamic obstacles, and navigation
rules, while reducing the paths and time. Thus, autonomous underwater robots are now
more competitive in dynamic underwater obstacle avoidance. A novel FM method paired
with the A* algorithm has been suggested [ 117] as a way to improve search precision and
produce a ﬁnite curvature that can be used by autonomous underwater robots of all sizes.