Drones 2023 ,7, 211 9 of 37
and artillery ﬁre at the lowest cost has become an important research problem in unmanned
aerial robot path planning. An algorithm (SHOPSO) combining a selﬁsh herd optimizer
(SHO) and a particle swarm optimizer (PSO) was proposed [ 42]. By combining SHO
and PSO, the structure of SHO is simpliﬁed, and the SHO search capability is improved.
In the simulation experiments, ﬁve two-dimensional complex battleﬁeld environments
and ﬁve three-dimensional complex battleﬁeld environments were designed, and the
proposed algorithm was compared with other algorithms that have better optimization
performance. The results of the experiments demonstrate that this strategy offers the best
path for unmanned aerial robots. For the 3D path planning issue of unmanned aerial
robots in complex environments, an improved particle swarm optimization algorithm
(called DCA*PSO) was proposed [ 43]. It is based on the dynamic divide-and-conquer
(DC) strategy and the improved A* algorithm, and divides the entire path into multiple
segments and evolves the paths of these segments using the DC strategy. The intricate,
high-dimensional challenge is divided into numerous parallel, low-dimensional issues.
According to the experimental results, the proposed DCA*PSO method can ﬁnd workable
pathways in complex landscapes with several waypoints.
Particle swarm optimization has no crossover or mutation operations and only requires
the adjustment of some parameters. Additionally, it has a memory function that can ﬁnd
the best path in a short time. However, because of its randomness, a globally optimal
solution cannot be guaranteed. Scholars have also improved their search abilities. Particle
swarm optimization can be combined with a machine-learning algorithm to improve its
performance and accuracy.
2.3. Algorithm Based on Local Obstacle-Avoidance
2.3.1. Dynamic Window Approach
The dynamic window approach (DWA) [ 44] is a technique that immediately samples
the environment and determines the state of activity of the robot at the following instant.
This approach permits quick access to the desired location while preventing robot collisions
with objects in the search area. As shown in Figure 5, the surrounding circles represent
walls, the inner circles represent dynamic obstacles, and the small circle represents a robot.
Drones  2023 , 7, 211 10 of 40 
 
 
Figure 5. Schematic diagram of the path pla nning algorithm based on the DWA. 
An improved DWA algorithm based on Q-le arning was proposed  [45]. The method 
modi ﬁed and extended the original evaluation function of the DWA, added two new 
evaluation functions, enhanc ed its global navigation capability, and adaptively de-
adjusted the weights of the evaluation func tion through Q-learning. The experimental 
results demonstrate that the method has a high navigation e ﬃciency and success rate in 
complex and unknown environments. A dynamic collision model that can predict future 
collisions with the environment by simultaneously considering the motion of other objects was designed [46]. According to experimental ﬁndings, this approach reduces the 
likelihood of robot collisions in dynamic environments. A global dynamic window 
navigation scheme ba sed on model predictive control with unweighted objective 
functions was proposed in [47]  to address the problem of most planning methods treating 
the robot as a single point, which leads to the inability of passing through narrow bands. 
The dynamic window method is suitable for real-time path planning because of its 
speed, and it can also optimize the algorithm’s performance by adjusting the window 
parameters. However, it is sensitive to changes in the environment and requires frequent updates of obstacle information around the mobile robot. Therefore, in the future, it can 
be combined with a machine learning algorithm to predict the distribution of obstacles in 
an environment and optimize the accuracy and e ﬃciency of path planning. 
2.3.2. Arti ﬁcial Potential Field Method 
The physical concept of a potential ﬁeld, which considers the motion of an object as 
the product of two forces, is the source of the idea of an arti ﬁcial potential ﬁeld [48]. As 
shown in Figure 6, the gravitational pull of a goal point pulls on a robot in the planning 
space, and an obstacle repels it. Under the combined in ﬂuence of these two forces, the 
robot advances in the direction of the goal point and can successfully navigate around any 
obstacle in its path to reach its destination without incident. The black box represents the starting point, the red circle represents the ending point, and the green circle represents 
the obstacle. 
Figure 5. Schematic diagram of the path planning algorithm based on the DWA.
An improved DWA algorithm based on Q-learning was proposed [ 45]. The method
modiﬁed and extended the original evaluation function of the DWA, added two new
evaluation functions, enhanced its global navigation capability, and adaptively de-adjusted
the weights of the evaluation function through Q-learning. The experimental results
demonstrate that the method has a high navigation efﬁciency and success rate in complex
and unknown environments. A dynamic collision model that can predict future collisions
with the environment by simultaneously considering the motion of other objects was
designed [ 46]. According to experimental ﬁndings, this approach reduces the likelihood of
robot collisions in dynamic environments. A global dynamic window navigation scheme