Drones 2023 ,7, 211 5 of 37
Drones  2023 , 7, 211 5 of 40 
 
2.2. Heuristic Intelligent Search Algorithm 
2.2.1. Genetic Algorithm 
The genetic algorithm (GA), also known as th e evolutionary algorithm, is a heuristic 
search algorithm. It generates an optimal solution to a problem by simulating the 
evolution of organisms using the principle of survival of the ﬁttest. A population consists 
of a certain number of indivi duals, each carrying a certain number of coded genes, and 
the population is equivalent to a set of solu tions to the problem. A diagram of the genetic 
algorithm is shown in Figure 2. It includes initializing the population randomly, selecting 
suitable individuals, carrying out the selection, crossover, and mutation genetic operations, and constantly updating the population. 
 
Figure 2. Flow chart of genetic al gorithm evolution [21]. 
Genetic algorithms have a low computatio nal rate and consume a large number of 
computer resources in the process, which is also a major constraint to their development. 
A static global path planning method usin g a genetic algorithm was proposed, followed 
by dynamic obstacle avoidance using a Q-learning algorithm [21]. The entire method is 
an “oﬄine” and then “online” hierarchical path planning method that successfully 
achieved the path planning of mobile  robots. In [22], a new genetic modi ﬁcation operator 
was proposed to address the shortcomings  of the GA algorithm, which has poor 
convergence and neglects inter-population  cooperation. The improved algorithm can 
better avoid the local optimum problem and has a faster convergence speed. To address 
the multi-robot cooperation problem, a co-evolutionary mechanism is proposed to achieve collision-free obstacle avoidance planning for multiple robots. The e ﬃciency of 
the algorithm is demonstrated by the experimental ﬁndings.  
The GA was used [23] to generate o ﬄine optimal 3D paths, and the degree of path 
optimization was considered to provide a planning approach appropriate for 3D 
underwater environments. In [24], a path planner combining a GA and dynamic planning was proposed. In this algorithm, the random  crossover operator from the traditional 
genetic algorithm is replaced by a crossover operator that is always the same and is based 
on dynamic planning. The path planner simultaneously optimized the path length, minimized the turning angle, and maximized the elevation rate. Compared to traditional 
genetic algorithms, this path planner is more adaptable and has a faster rate of 
convergence. 
Reference [25] combined mixed integer li near programming (MILP) with genetic 
algorithms to propose a new method for improving unmanned aerial robot path planning in complex environments, and the e ﬀectiveness of the proposed method was validated 
using two, ﬁve, and seven unmanned aerial robots in urban and mountainous areas, 
respectively. The experimental ﬁndings demonstrate that in terms of cost-e ﬀectiveness 
Figure 2. Flow chart of genetic algorithm evolution [21].
Genetic algorithms have a low computational rate and consume a large number of
computer resources in the process, which is also a major constraint to their development. A
static global path planning method using a genetic algorithm was proposed, followed by
dynamic obstacle avoidance using a Q-learning algorithm [ 21]. The entire method is an
“ofﬂine” and then “online” hierarchical path planning method that successfully achieved
the path planning of mobile robots. In [ 22], a new genetic modiﬁcation operator was
proposed to address the shortcomings of the GA algorithm, which has poor convergence
and neglects inter-population cooperation. The improved algorithm can better avoid
the local optimum problem and has a faster convergence speed. To address the multi-
robot cooperation problem, a co-evolutionary mechanism is proposed to achieve collision-
free obstacle avoidance planning for multiple robots. The efﬁciency of the algorithm is
demonstrated by the experimental ﬁndings.
The GA was used [ 23] to generate ofﬂine optimal 3D paths, and the degree of path
optimization was considered to provide a planning approach appropriate for 3D under-
water environments. In [ 24], a path planner combining a GA and dynamic planning was
proposed. In this algorithm, the random crossover operator from the traditional genetic
algorithm is replaced by a crossover operator that is always the same and is based on
dynamic planning. The path planner simultaneously optimized the path length, minimized
the turning angle, and maximized the elevation rate. Compared to traditional genetic
algorithms, this path planner is more adaptable and has a faster rate of convergence.
Reference [ 25] combined mixed integer linear programming (MILP) with genetic
algorithms to propose a new method for improving unmanned aerial robot path planning
in complex environments, and the effectiveness of the proposed method was validated
using two, ﬁve, and seven unmanned aerial robots in urban and mountainous areas,
respectively. The experimental ﬁndings demonstrate that in terms of cost-effectiveness and
energy optimization environments, the proposed method outperforms the ant colony and
genetic algorithms. Reference [ 26] proposed a dynamic genetic algorithm by optimizing
the crossover and variation operators of the genetic algorithm to automatically adjust the
crossover and variation probabilities using individual ﬁtness. To quickly and effectively
reject maladapted individuals and increase the search efﬁciency in the early phases of the
algorithm, these operators are dynamically changed in real-time using individual ﬁtness
values. According to the experimental results, the GA optimization method can signiﬁcantly
increase search speed. Genetic algorithms and fuzzy logic have been combined [ 27] to
increase path planning accuracy. This study interprets the path planning problem as a
multi-traveler problem, solving the problem of returning each unmanned aerial robot to its
starting point at the end of its action.
A GA can obtain multiple solutions through multiple runs. These solutions can be
compared, and the best solutions can be selected. However, the operation process of GA is