Drones 2023 ,7, 211 2 of 37
planning [ 6]. According to a given robotic machine’s working environment, a mobile robot
searches for an optimal or suboptimal path from the starting state to the goal state based on
speciﬁc performance criteria. This is known as the path planning problem [ 7]. For mobile
robots, effective path planning strategies can save signiﬁcant time and minimize wear, tear,
and capital expenditure. Therefore, the correct choice of a navigation technique is the most
important step in robot path planning.
It is necessary to conduct a comprehensive investigation of mobile robot path planning
owing to the recent technological progress and breakthroughs in the ﬁeld. The purpose
of this review is to summarize the path planning work of mobile robots and the technical
details of some representative algorithms and discuss some open problems to be solved
in this ﬁeld. Articles on the path planning of the mobile robot were retrieved from the
databases of Engineering Village and the Web of Science. The search terms during the
data retrieval process were “path planning” and “mobile robot.” We selected well-known
publications and articles from conferences in the ﬁeld of robotics, with a focus on the path
planning algorithms of mobile robots. In addition, we provide an in-depth discussion and
comparison of path planning algorithms. Finally, we hope that this paper will provide a
preliminary understanding of mobile robots and path planning for researchers who have
just entered this ﬁeld.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the path
planning algorithms for mobile robots. Section 3 introduces the path planning algorithms
for multiple robots. Section 4 introduces a path planning algorithm for the cooperation
of different robots. Section 5 discusses and summarizes the study. The conclusions are
presented in Section 6.
2. Path Planning Algorithm
We will introduce the following different types of path planning algorithms: graph-
based search, heuristic intelligence, local obstacle detection, artiﬁcial intelligence, sampling,
path planners, constraint problem satisfaction algorithms, and other algorithms. For the
classiﬁcation of the above path planning algorithms, we consider that some traditional
path planning algorithms can be applied to ground, underwater, and aerial robots. The
following path planning algorithms [8] are then categorized based on how they work.
2.1. Algorithms Based on Graph Search
2.1.1. A* Algorithm
The A* algorithm, which is typically used for static global planning, is an efﬁcient
search method for obtaining the shortest paths and is also a typical heuristic algorithm.
The effect of the A* algorithm is shown in Figure 1. The yellow box represents the starting
point, the black box represents the obstacle, the pink box represents the end-point, and the
blue polyline represents the path. The A* algorithm is used to realize the path planning
from the starting point (yellow grid) to the ending point (pink grid) in an environment
with obstacles.
Drones  2023 , 7, 211 3 of 40 
 
 
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the path pla nning algorithm based on the A*. 
However, there are issues associated with the A* algorithm that limit its use. The 
system path planning has an excessive number of in ﬂection points and turns, which 
makes it di ﬃcult for the robot to move in its actual surroundings. In [9], the T * algorithm, 
which combines the A* search algorithm with li near time logic path planning and uses the 
search process of the A* algorithm to generate  the optimal path satisfying the time logic 
search, was proposed. The ﬁnal experimental results reveal that the T * algorithm reduces 
the number of nodes and the generation time  of the path compared with the existing 
algorithms when solving the temporal logical path planning problem in two- and three-
dimensional spaces in a large workspace. In [1 0], the concept of optimality was introduced 
on a weighted color graph, which expresses the geometric and semantic information in 
the search space. On this basis, the class-ordered A (COA*) algorithm that ﬁnds the 
globally optimal path in the weighted color gr aph by heuristic construction of the optimal 
search tree was proposed. Compared with the tr aditional A* algorithm, this algorithm is 
better at ﬁnding uncertain paths. As the A* algorithm faces challenges in real-time path 
planning and collision-free path planning in a large-scale dynamic environment, in [11], 
the calculation of the distance cost of the risk cost function was simpli ﬁed, key path points 
were extracted, and the number of nodes was reduced. Finally, combined with the 
adaptive window method, path tracking, and obstacle avoidance were achieved. The 
simulation results reveal that the algorithm ca n meet the real-time re quirements of mobile 
robots in large–scale environments.  
Owing to the low accuracy of existing terr ain matching methods in areas with small 
eigenvalues, this study [12] proposed a se abed terrain matching navigation algorithm 
based on the A* algorithm, which mainly uses terrain information to analyze the area 
matching performance. It also proposed a search length and a dynamic matching 
algorithm to reduce time consumption. The simulations showed that this method can 
avoid obstacles with less-than-perfect matching and shorten the length of the path. As the 
traditional A* algorithm does not consider th e turning cost and redundant path points, it 
cannot guarantee the safety of the mobile robo t. The turning cost function was added in 
[13] to avoid the detour and frequent turning of  the mobile robot. Additionally, the search 
points near the obstacles were reduced to ensure a safe distance, determine whether the 
point is redundant by judging whether there are obstacles around each path point, and 
optimize the generated trajectory. Compared to the traditional A* algorithm, it reduces the path length, search time, and several nodes. 
To address the problem of global navigati on satellite systems (GNSS) positioning 
map errors for unmanned aerial robots, an im proved path planning  algorithm based on 
the GNSS error distribution fusion A* was proposed [14]. The e ﬀectiveness of the 
improved A* algorithm was tested at di ﬀerent altitudes using a quadcopter in an actual 
urban environment. The experimental ﬁndings demonstrate that, compared to the 
traditional A* and arti ﬁcial potential ﬁeld (APF) algorithms, the revised A* algorithm 
oﬀers safe pathways based on position erro r prediction at a low cost. The RiskA* 
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the path planning algorithm based on the A*.