Drones 2023 ,7, 211 14 of 37
distributed deep reinforcement learning framework that divides the unmanned aerial robot
navigation task into two simple subtasks, each solved by a designed LSTM-based deep
reinforcement learning network, was developed [ 74]. The simulation results demonstrate
that the unmanned aerial robot performance of this method outperforms other state-of-the-
art deep reinforcement learning methods in highly dynamic and uncertain environments.
In [75], an interpretable deep neural network path planner was proposed for the automatic
navigation problem of small unmanned aerial robots in unknown environments. The
method models the navigation problem as a Markovian decision process that uses deep
reinforcement learning to train the path planner in a simulation environment and proposes
a feature attribute-based model interpretation method to better train the model. Based
on experimental results in a genuine setting, the path planner can be directly used in a
real environment. In reference [ 76], a 3D coverage map was ﬁrst created, which stores the
estimated disruption probability at each point to solve the communication interference
from overhead buildings in unmanned aerial robot 3D path planning. Using the created
coverage map, an approach based on multi-step dueling DDQN (multi-step D3QN) is
suggested to build locally optimal unmanned aerial robot pathways. The unmanned aerial
robot functions act as an agent in this algorithm, learning the proper course of action to
perform the ﬂight task.
Reinforcement learning can be used to learn the optimal strategy independently in
a complex environment and can adaptively adjust the path planning scheme. However,
reinforcement learning requires many calculations and also requires the adjustment of
many parameters, which may have a signiﬁcant impact on the ﬁnal path. In the future,
we will consider introducing this model to reinforcement learning. Additionally, to meet
the interpretability of the reinforcement learning algorithm for path planning, we can
investigate interpretable path planning.
2.4.3. Brain-like Navigation
As one of the research directions of artiﬁcial intelligence technology, brain-like navi-
gation involves several interdisciplinary aspects such as brain science and control science.
Brain-like navigation is a new navigation technology that mimics biological cognitive
characteristics by sensing environmental information through multiple sensors and us-
ing intelligent and exogenous technologies to achieve navigation information fusion and
cognitive map construction with knowledge memory, learning, and reasoning character-
istics, as well as real-time intelligent path planning with cognitive characteristics [ 77].
Current studies regarding brain-like navigation have been conducted considering various
aspects, including brain-like environmental perception, brain-like spatial cognition, and
goal-oriented brain-like navigation. An integrated research system for modeling, simula-
tions, and experimental validation has been initially formed. However, it remains in the
exploration and improvement stage. Brain-like environmental perception mainly focuses
on the extraction of multidimensional features from the navigation information of the
carrier and the surrounding environment, drawing on the rich biological structures of the
auditory, visual, olfactory, and sensory information processing mechanisms of animals. The
University of California, Berkeley [ 78] designed an insect-like lightweight micro-unmanned
aerial robot hardware platform for the US Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DAPPA) research. It also integrated multimodal bionic sensors such as compound eyes,
insect balance bar gyroscopes, optical ﬂow sensors, and U-shaped magnetometers. It has
various advantages, such as retrieving rich environmental perception information, strong
adaptation to the dynamic ﬂight environment, accurate measurements, and energy savings.
In 1948, Tolman [ 79] proposed a cognitive map by studying rats walking in a maze. In 1948,
Tolman proposed the concept of a cognitive map by studying rats walking in mazes and
suggested that rats use a certain spatial representation formed inside the brain to guide
themselves in path planning, obstacle avoidance, and other navigational behaviors. The
brain-inspired spiking neural network (SNN) is closer to the actual biological structure than
other artiﬁcial neural network models. The output of its neurons has a pulse sequence en-