Drones 2023 ,7, 211 12 of 37
produce a more logical robot motion and create a safe and smooth course in challenging
situations.
The time-elastic band algorithm considers the continuity of time, making the path
smoother, but it cannot deal with complex scenes, such as large-scale scenes and high-
dimensional space. In the future, it could be combined with a machine learning algorithm
to improve the accuracy of path planning.
2.4. Algorithm Based on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
2.4.1. Neural Networks
An artiﬁcial neural network is an information processing system that mimics the
structure and operation of a neural network in the brain. It is a complex network structure
comprising several interconnected processing units (neurons) [ 60]. A typical artiﬁcial
neural network has the following three components: input, hidden input, and hidden
output. The input, hidden, and output layers are the ﬁrst, intermediate, and last layers,
respectively. The number of neurons in the input layer is determined by the input data,
and the number of neurons in the other layers is altered to reﬂect the current condition.
The concealed layers may have any number of layers, occasionally having multiple layers.
A guided autowave pulse coupled neural network (GAPCNN) was proposed to ad-
dress the fact that most fast collision-free path planning algorithms cannot guarantee the
superiority of paths, and it signiﬁcantly improves the path query time by introducing a
directed automatic wave control and accelerated discharge of neurons based on dynamic
thresholding techniques [ 61]. The temporal effects of the algorithm demonstrate that it
may be utilized for route planning in static as well as dynamic contexts. The simulation
and testing ﬁndings demonstrate that the GAPCNN is a reliable and quick path planning
technique. A multi-robot path planning algorithm based on a combination of Q-learning
and convolutional neural network (CNN) algorithms was proposed for the problem of
conﬂict-free path planning for multiple robots caused by practical tasks [ 62]. This technol-
ogy enables many mobile robots to quickly design courses in various surroundings while
successfully accomplishing the mission, according to experimental data. A new Fast Simul-
taneous Localization and Mapping (FastSLAM) algorithm based on the Jacobi-free neural
network was proposed [ 63], which utilizes a multilayer neural network to compensate for
the measurement error online and train the neural network online during Simultaneous
Localization and Mapping (SLAM). The third integration rule of the Gaussian weight-
ing method is also utilized to calculate the nonlinear leap density before the Gaussian
third-order nonlinearity, estimate the state of the SLAM state (robot path and environment
map), and train the neural network compensator online. According to simulation data, the
mobile robot’s ability to navigate in unfamiliar areas and avoid collisions with objects was
improved; SLAM performance was also improved.
An approach that combines a bio-inspired neural network and the potential ﬁeld
was suggested [ 64] to address the safety issue of autonomous underwater robot path
planning in dynamic and uncertain situations. A bio-inspired neural network uses the
environment to determine the best course for an autonomous underwater robot. The path
of the bio-inspired neural network is modiﬁed by the potential ﬁeld function such that
the autonomous underwater robot can avoid obstructions. The experimental ﬁndings
demonstrate that the strategy strikes a balance between autonomous underwater robot
safety and path logic. The intended routes can accommodate the need for navigation in
dynamic and unpredictable surroundings. Based on the excellent performance of deep
learning, a hybrid recurrent neural network framework was proposed to estimate the
position of an autonomous underwater robot [ 65]. In this approach, the raw sensor readings
are processed in a single computational cycle using unidirectional and bidirectional long
short-term memory networks (LSTM) with numerous memory units. The completely
linked layer can then determine the displacement of the autonomous underwater robot
using the output of the LSTM and the time interval of the previous cycle. The simulation