Drones 2023 ,7, 211 30 of 37
tic segmentation, extracts information regarding ground obstacles, presents the obstacles
in a circular approximation, and proposes an algorithm to derive the optimal collision
avoidance trajectory for unattended ground robots using strict concave-convex planning
techniques. According to the simulation ﬁndings, the path developed by the suggested
path planning algorithm can successfully minimize ground robot collisions while attaining
good energy efﬁciency. To decouple their routing based on air-ground cooperation, a
two-step technique combining ant colony optimization and evolutionary algorithms was
demonstrated [ 135] for the path planning problem of heterogeneous robotic systems used
to deliver parcels in urban environments. ACO is utilized in the initial stage to identify
the routes for the ground robots. Once the ground robot route has been predetermined in
the ﬁrst stage, the unmanned aerial robot route is solved using a genetic algorithm in the
second stage. The simulation ﬁndings demonstrate the ability of the method to successfully
address the issue of unmanned aerial robot heterogeneous distribution and choose the
best course for unmanned aerial robots. A collaborative unmanned aerial robot-ground
robot path planning method for dynamic environments was proposed by performing a
semantic segmentation of images acquired from the perspective of an unmanned aerial
robot through deep neural networks [ 136]. The method was evaluated in a car parking
scenario to provide path planning for ground robots leading to empty parking spaces. For
heterogeneous ground air robots, a tightly connected perception and navigation paradigm
was suggested [ 137]. The primary contributions of this study are the derivation of high-level
coordination methods and low-level goal-directed navigation in a completely integrated
manner, as well as the provision of a uniﬁed framework for formulating collaborative navi-
gation issues. The ability of the system to execute collaborative mapping and navigation in
both structured and unstructured domains was demonstrated by the experimental ﬁndings.
5. Discussion
Path planning is an important research branch for improving the autonomy of mobile
robots and has attracted the attention of researchers all over the world in recent decades.
Although many path planning algorithms have been proposed and implemented in mobile
robots, they have several drawbacks and limitations that need to be further explored.
(1) Although a variety of classical algorithms are widely used for traditional path
planning, they have several shortcomings. Their adaptability to complex environments
is unsatisfactory, and their ability to model and process an environment is limited to a
certain extent. This is especially true in complex environments, which are hard to adapt
to and process, which makes path planning less efﬁcient and accurate. For example, in
practical applications such as human–machine cooperation, multi-robot cooperation, and
other scenarios, often involving a complex environment and a variety of different robots,
the traditional A* and Dijkstra algorithms are not appropriate. Some traditional algorithms
have problems such as endless cycles and perform repeated searches in the process of path
search. This leads to low efﬁciency of the algorithm and affects its practical application.
Traditional algorithms are often based on static environment modeling and path search.
This means that they cannot be adaptively adjusted based on the actual environment and
robot behavior, resulting in insufﬁcient robustness and adaptability in path planning.
(2) Most of the current algorithms are based on improving their characteristics and
demonstrating good results. However, the results are better when used with different
algorithms as opposed to individual algorithm improvements. No single path planning
algorithm can solve all the path planning problems in practical applications, especially in
complex environments. Moreover, it is difﬁcult to research new algorithms, so it is expected
that more combined path planning algorithms will appear in the future to make up for
each other’s deﬁciencies.
(3) The development of path planning techniques based on reinforcement learning
and the derived deep reinforcement learning has important implications. Based on the
current state of development and the needs for future development, the following are
some possible directions for future research on path planning techniques based on rein-