Drones 2023 ,7, 211 16 of 37
An informed RRT* (IRRT*) algorithm was developed [ 91], which integrates the skewed
cylindrical subset integration method into the RRT* algorithm for optimal unmanned
aerial robot path planning. According to the experimental ﬁndings, the IRRT* algorithm
is superior to the traditional RRT* method in terms of optimizing the path length and
ensuring safe ﬂying over a larger search region. A study [ 92] proposes a biased sampling
potentially guided intelligent bidirectional RRT* (BPIB-RRT*) algorithm, which combines
the bidirectional artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method with the idea of bi-directional biased
sampling. This technique adapts the sample space with ﬂexibility, considerably minimizing
incorrect spatial sampling, and accelerating convergence. The advantage of the BPIB-RRT*
algorithm suggested in this study is demonstrated by the simulation results.
The fast search random tree algorithm can efﬁciently explore the path and ﬁnd the
optimal solution in a complex environment, but its path quality is unstable, and there may
be jitters. In the future, it can be combined with fuzzy control and machine learning to
improve path stability.
2.5.2. Probabilistic Roadmap Method
The probabilistic roadmap method (PRM) algorithm is based on state–space sampling.
It ﬁrst uses random sampling to build a path network graph in the environment, converts
continuous space into discrete space, and then performs path planning on the path network
graph to solve the problem of low search efﬁciency in high-dimensional space. As it is
difﬁcult to use ofﬂine path planning to plan available paths in a dynamic and complex
environment with narrow corridors when mobile robots perform tasks, a probabilistic
path map algorithm based on obstacle potential ﬁeld sampling strategy called the obstacle
potential ﬁeld probabilistic path map algorithm (OP-PRM) has been proposed [ 93]. The
speciﬁc area of the obstacle is determined by introducing the potential ﬁeld of the obstacle.
The area of a certain range near the obstacle is taken as the target sampling area, and the
number of sampling points in the narrow area is increased. After constructing the random
road map, the incremental heuristic D* Lite algorithm is used to search for the shortest
path between the starting point and target point on the road map. The simulation results
reveal that this method can enable a robot to pass through a narrow corridor in a dynamic
and complex environment. In [ 94], a hierarchical planning method for remote navigation
tasks was proposed by combining PRM with reinforcement learning (PRM-RL). PRM-RL
uses reinforcement learning to build a road map to ensure its connectivity instead of using
collision-free linear interpolation in the C space of ships, and the road map built by PRM-RL
follows robot dynamics and task constraints. This method can complete a planning task in
a large environment.
Compared to the RRT algorithm, the PRM algorithm has a path that is less likely to
jump around and is more stable. However, it takes a long time to calculate, so it is not good
for real-time applications. In the future, we plan to develop methods that can quickly build
a road map to reduce calculation time.
2.6. Planner-Based Algorithms
2.6.1. Covariant Hamilton Optimization Motion Planning
The covariance Hamiltonian optimal motion planning (CHOMP) is a gradient-based
trajectory optimization program that makes many daily motion planning problems simple
and trainable. Although most high-dimensional motion planners divide trajectory genera-
tion into different planning and optimization stages, the algorithm uses covariant gradient
and functional gradient methods to design a motion planning algorithm that is completely
based on trajectory optimization in the optimization stage. In [ 95], several methods for
adapting CHOMP to vehicles with incomplete constraints were presented. These included
using a separate objective function to constrain the curvature, integrating CHOMP with
a smooth target, and introducing sliding and rolling constraints on the trajectory. In this
study, experiments were carried out in real-world scenarios to help trucks with trailers
avoid obstacles. In [ 96], an improved CHOMP algorithm was used for local path planning