Drones 2023 ,7, 211 13 of 37
results demonstrate that the approach presents signiﬁcant navigational usefulness and high
accuracy while minimizing sensor bias interference.
2.4.2. Reinforcement Learning
The basic principle of reinforcement learning [ 66] is that intelligence is continuously
learned under the stimulus of environmental feedback rewards or punishments and contin-
uously adjusts its strategy based on the feedback to eventually reach reward maximization
or a speciﬁc goal. A deep Q-learning algorithm for experience replay and heuristic knowl-
edge was proposed [ 67]. In this algorithm, neural networks are used to solve the problem of
the dimensional catastrophe of Q-tables in reinforcement learning. This makes the most of
the robot’s ability to collect data based on its experience as it moves. Heuristic knowledge
helps avoid blind exploration by the robot and provides more efﬁcient data for training
the neural net for faster convergence on the optimal action strategy. Considering the local
path planning problem in complicated dynamic environments, a fast extended random
tree path planning method based on reinforcement learning SARSA( ) optimization has
been suggested [ 68]. This method increases the selection of expansion points, introduces
the concept of biased goals, uses task return functions, goal distance functions, and an-
gle constraints to improve the performance of the rapidly-exploring random tree (RRT)
algorithm, decreases the number of invalid nodes, and ensures the randomness of the RRT
algorithm. Reinforcement learning aims to train the intelligence to take action to maximize
its reward with strong decision-making capabilities. Deep learning can extract high-level
features from the raw mass of data and has a strong perceptual capability. Deep reinforce-
ment learning [ 69] is an artiﬁcial intelligence program that combines the perceptual and
decision-making abilities of reinforcement learning to make a more accurate model of the
human mind. A learning-based map-free motion planner is proposed for obstacle-free
maps and sparse distance information by considering the sparse ten-dimensional range
results and the position of the target relative to the coordinate system of the mobile robot as
the input and a continuous steering command as the output [ 70]. An asynchronous deep
reinforcement learning technique can be used to train a mapless motion planner from one
end to the other. This methodology is more reliable in excessively complex contexts.
For autonomous underwater robots to ﬁnd a feasible collision-free path in complex
underwater environments, the use of deep reinforcement learning algorithms to learn
processed sonar data for autonomous underwater robot navigation in complicated situa-
tions has been proposed as an active sonar technique [ 71]. The process of switching the
trajectory is accelerated by the addition of line-of-sight guidance. The performance of this
approach was compared with that of genetic algorithms and deep learning algorithms in
three environments: random static, hybrid static, and complicated dynamic, and it was
found that the algorithm surpassed the other algorithms in terms of success rate, obstacle
avoidance performance, and generalization capability. An enhanced deep deterministic
policy gradient (DDPG) algorithm for real-time obstacle avoidance and 3D path tracking
has also been suggested [ 72]. To address the problem of DDPG requiring a large training
set to explore the strategy, a line-of-sight guidance-based approach is used to generate the
target angle for path tracking and the error relative to the carrier coordinate system, which
facilitates the ﬁltering of irrelevant environmental information and generates the corre-
sponding strategy. The method provides a more accurate approximation of the approach
than the original DDPG algorithm, according to the simulation ﬁndings.
A deep reinforcement learning method for unmanned aerial robot path planning
based on global situational information was proposed [ 73]. In this method, a situational
evaluation model was developed based on the simulation environment provided by the
Stage Scenario software. In this model, the probability of an unmanned aerial robot’s
survival under enemy radar detection and missile attack was considered. Using a com-
peting dual-depth Q network, the algorithm obtains a set of situational maps as input to
approximate the Q values corresponding to all the candidate operations, which results in
higher cumulative rewards and success rates compared to the dual-depth Q network. A