Drones 2023 ,7, 211 7 of 37
of particular populations, considerably enhancing the search efﬁciency and preventing
a series of superﬂuous pitches and undulations, considering how challenging it is for
autonomous underwater robots to locate pathways in a three-dimensional space. Unlike
the conventional “ant colony” algorithm, path optimization is signiﬁcantly reduced. For the
problem of autonomous underwater robots needing to traverse complex environments with
dense obstacles, an ACO-A* algorithm was proposed by combining the ACO algorithm
with the A* search algorithm [ 32]. Here, the ACO is responsible for determining the target
travel order based on the cost map, and A* performs pairwise path planning based on the
search map obtained from ﬁne-grained modeling. Simulation results demonstrate that the
time efﬁciency of the ACO-A* is veriﬁed.
An improved multi-objective swarm intelligence method was used to plan an accurate
unmanned aerial robot 3D path (APPMS) [ 33]. The path planning problem is transformed
in the APPMS approach into a multi-objective optimization task with numerous restric-
tions. In addition, a precise swarm intelligence search technique based on enhanced ant
colony optimization was introduced to ﬁnd the best unmanned aerial robot 3D ﬂight path.
This technique uses preferential search directions and a stochastic neighborhood search
mechanism to enhance both global and local search capabilities. The simulation results
demonstrate that the superiority of the proposed approach is supported by three sets of
digital terrain (three, four, and eight threats) and genuine DEM data for the simulated
disaster response missions. Another study suggested using [ 34] a 2-OptACO approach that
builds on the 2-opt algorithm to enhance the ant colony optimization algorithm and is used
to optimize the unmanned aerial robot path for search and rescue missions. According
to the simulation ﬁndings, the 2-OptACO approach converges more quickly than the GA
and ACO approaches. Better global optimal solutions are attained. Reference [ 35] pre-
sented a method based on ant colony optimization to determine the minimum time search
path for multiple unmanned aerial robots (minimum time search-ant colony optimization
MTS-ACO). Two different pheromone table encodings were proposed for MTS-ACO. A
minimum–time search heuristic function was designed that enables the ant colony opti-
mization algorithm to generate high-quality solutions at the initial stage and accelerate the
convergence of the algorithm.
The ant colony algorithm can ﬁnd the optimal path in a known static large-scale
environment and is also suitable for multi-objective optimization problems. However,
it easily falls into the local optimal solution, resulting in a slow convergence speed of
the algorithm. Scholars have also improved its convergence speed. Nonetheless, its
convergence speed and global searchability can be improved further.
2.2.3. Particle Swarm Optimization
The particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm mimics the behavior of birds in
their search for food, sharing information regarding their current location as the ﬂock
forages. The entire ﬂock can reach its ﬁnal food source through proper communication
between the individuals and group members. The basic principle is that individuals and
groups collaborate and share information to obtain optimal solutions. This algorithm was
proposed by Eberhart and Kennedy [ 36] in 1995 to determine the global optimum in terms
of the current search for the optimum. It has the advantages of easy implementation, high
accuracy, and quick convergence, and is not only suitable for multi-robot path planning
but also capable of single-robot route planning. Figure 4 shows a schematic that mimics the
behavior of birds seeking food. By communicating with the group, ﬁnd the closest bird to
the food and travel with it to ﬁnd the ultimate largest food source. The circle represents the
bird. The green vegetation represents food; most food is in the grove, and most food is in
the forest.