Citation: Qin, H.; Shao, S.; Wang, T.;
Yu, X.; Jiang, Y.; Cao, Z. Review of
Autonomous Path Planning
Algorithms for Mobile Robots.
Drones 2023 ,7, 211. https://doi.org/
10.3390/drones7030211
Academic Editor: Mostafa
Hassanalian
Received: 13 February 2023
Revised: 15 March 2023
Accepted: 17 March 2023
Published: 18 March 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
drones
Review
Review of Autonomous Path Planning Algorithms for
Mobile Robots
Hongwei Qin1,2,3, Shiliang Shao2,3,*
, Ting Wang2,3,*, Xiaotian Yu2,3,4, Yi Jiang2,3,4and Zonghan Cao1,2,3
1School of Software, Shenyang University of Technology, Shenyang 110870, China
2State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shenyang 110016, China
3Institutes for Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang 110169, China
4University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
*Correspondence: shaoshiliang@sia.cn (S.S.); wangting@sia.cn (T.W.)
Abstract: Mobile robots, including ground robots, underwater robots, and unmanned aerial vehicles,
play an increasingly important role in people’s work and lives. Path planning and obstacle avoidance
are the core technologies for achieving autonomy in mobile robots, and they will determine the
application prospects of mobile robots. This paper introduces path planning and obstacle avoid-
ance methods for mobile robots to provide a reference for researchers in this ﬁeld. In addition, it
comprehensively summarizes the recent progress and breakthroughs of mobile robots in the ﬁeld
of path planning and discusses future directions worthy of research in this ﬁeld. We focus on the
path planning algorithm of a mobile robot. We divide the path planning methods of mobile robots
into the following categories: graph-based search, heuristic intelligence, local obstacle avoidance,
artiﬁcial intelligence, sampling-based, planner-based, constraint problem satisfaction-based, and
other algorithms. In addition, we review a path planning algorithm for multi-robot systems and
different robots. We describe the basic principles of each method and highlight the most relevant
studies. We also provide an in-depth discussion and comparison of path planning algorithms. Finally,
we propose potential research directions in this ﬁeld that are worth studying in the future.
Keywords: mobile robot; autonomous underwater robot; unmanned aerial robot; path planning;
multi-robot cooperative
1. Introduction
Mobile robots have been effectively used in various ﬁelds over the past few decades,
including the military, industry, and security settings, to carry out important unmanned
duties [ 1,2]. In recent years, robots have been given increasingly more applications, which
can improve production efﬁciency, reduce manpower, and improve the working environ-
ment [ 3]. Ground robots are usually used to automate tasks, such as materials handling in
warehouses, luggage picking up in airports, and mobile security inspection robots. Under-
water robots are usually used to take samples, carry out testing, installation, maintenance,
and overhaul of underground water environments, marine environments, and lake and
river water environments. Aerial robots are usually used to conduct airborne search and
rescue, search terrain data collection, aerial remote sensing, and other tasks [ 4,5]. The
development of robot applications is bringing more and more innovations. The practicality
of robots is dependent on their autonomous navigation planning capability. Hence, they
need to not only understand the environment they face but also autonomously navigate
and plan paths in given areas to meet task requirements. The capability of autonomous
navigation and path planning is critical for robot applications, which can not only speed up
the running speed of robots but also effectively avoid their blind spots and achieve more
efﬁcient task completion. One of the most fundamental issues that need to be resolved
before mobile robots can move and explore on their own in complex surroundings is path
Drones 2023 ,7, 211. https://doi.org/10.3390/drones7030211 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/drones