Drones 2023 ,7, 211 26 of 37
Table 1. Cont.
Algorithms Mechanism References Year Improvements Advantages Limitations
Other
Algorithms[114] 2020A new discrete iterative
equation is derived by
localizing the traditional level
set function and introducing a
polynomial distance
regularisation (P-DRE) termImproved
computational
efﬁciency of the level
set algorithmThe simulation
does not provide
performance
results in the case
of obstacle
avoidance
[116] 2015Introduction of multiple
constraints and decision
criteria to process water ﬂows
according to velocity proﬁlesReduces path search
time and generates
3D smooth paths/
[118] 2019Introduction of ADRC to
manage current disturbancesImproved
adaptability of
autonomous
underwater robots to
the marine
environmentIf the initial
values are not set
correctly, the
control system
will be unstable
[119] 2018Optimizing the value of the
afﬁliation function for fuzzy
logic using the quantum
particle swarm algorithmPresents a certain
resistance to
interference and does
not require an
accurate
mathematical modelInsufﬁcient
steady-state
accuracy in
practical
applications
The ant colony and particle swarm algorithms are bionic methods inspired by the
behavior mechanisms of natural biological groups. They can adapt to the environment
in a short time with the cooperation of individual organisms. The ant colony algorithm
guides the search process by simulating the behavior of ants when searching for food
through the role of pheromones and the process of pheromone volatilization, ﬁnally ﬁnding
the optimal solution. The particle swarm algorithm simulates the collective behavior
of birds and ﬁsh and ﬁnds the optimal solution by constantly adjusting the position of
the particles. However, both the ant colony and particle swarm algorithms have their
limitations, resulting in slow convergence. The RRT and PRM algorithms are sampling-
based random algorithms that can be used to solve path planning problems in spaces with a
lot of dimensions and complex shapes. Among them, the RRT algorithm leverages random
sampling and can obtain feasible paths in a short time, but it is difﬁcult to guarantee the
quality of the paths. However, it can obtain better paths by building a road network;
however, it requires a longer calculation time to achieve this.
The artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method is a path planning method based on a physical
model that is suitable for path planning in a dynamic environment. It describes the
environment and target location by deﬁning the physical potential ﬁeld to avoid obstacles
and determine the optimal path. However, they can easily fall into a locally optimal
solution in a complex environment. The dynamic window method is a path planning
method based on control theory that can quickly give path planning results. It combines
the motion model of the robot with the environment model and uses the window model to
describe the motion state of the robot to evaluate the feasible motion trajectory. However,
the calculation time increases with an increase in the dimensions of the robot’s state space.
The TEB algorithm is based on time-space path planning and can deal with the motion and
obstacle avoidance of robots in complex environments. Using the time expansion method,
it changes the robot’s movement path into a time-space manifold. This makes it easier to
optimize the path and avoid obstacles. However, this requires considerable computing
resources and time. Reinforcement learning has a strong decision-making ability and can
be used to plan an optimal path without any prior knowledge. Additionally, reinforcement
learning exhibits strong adaptability and ﬂexibility in complex and uncertain environments.
Compared with other traditional path planning algorithms, such as the A* and Dijkstra
algorithms, reinforcement learning does not require speciﬁc forms of objective functions.
In addition, reinforcement learning can learn and adjust adaptively to optimize path
planning. Traditional algorithms, such as swarm intelligence algorithms, typically need