Drones 2023 ,7, 211 31 of 37
forcement learning methods: designing reward functions, studying combinations with
conventional path planning methods, and applying reinforcement learning to collaborative
path planning for multiple intelligences. However, reinforcement learning, which involves
trial-and-error learning and state generalization, consumes a lot of resources. Recently,
brain science and brain-like intelligence have become hot spots for research and compe-
tition all around the world. Brain-like intelligence is capable of intelligent information
acquisition, intelligent information processing and communication, and intelligent human–
computer interaction. This meets the needs of intelligent path planning. By mimicking
and interacting with the environment to carry out actions and plan, brain-like intelligence
has the ability of autonomous development and can learn with a small number of samples,
thus solving the defect of resource waste in reinforcement learning and making robots have
the developmental capacity, gradually improving the intelligence level of path planning.
(4) Research on multi-robot cooperative path planning is gaining more attention
as the robotic working environment is being extended, task complexity is increasing,
and the application area is being enlarged. The system must efﬁciently, rapidly, and
precisely coordinate several robots to cooperate and execute multiple tasks in tandem. This
system entails not only path planning but also communication between each robot and the
cooperative control, on the basis that members exchange messages.
(5) The possible future research directions and hotspots for mobile robot path plan-
ning are as follows: (1) Multi-robot cooperative path planning. With an increase in the
number of robots, multi-robot cooperative path planning has become an important re-
search direction. Future research will focus on cooperative actions among multiple robots,
such as collaboration on industrial production lines and search and rescue missions in the
wild; (2) performance improvement of path planning algorithms. Presently, many path
planning algorithms take a long time to ﬁnd the global optimal solution; thus, improving
the efﬁciency of the algorithm has become a research hotspot. Future research will focus
on improving the efﬁciency of the algorithm, reducing computation time, and adopting a
new algorithm framework to solve this problem; (3) path planning based on reinforcement
learning. Reinforcement learning has achieved great success in many ﬁelds and has great
potential for use in mobile robot path planning. Future research will focus on how to use
deep learning to plan routes and move from lab experiments to real-world applications;
(4) planning routes by combining data from multiple sensors. The continuous development
of sensor technology provides more information sources for robot path planning. Future
research will pay more attention to how to fuse information from multiple sensors for path
planning and verify its effect in practical applications.
6. Conclusions
With the development of intelligent techniques and industrial automation, path plan-
ning for mobile robots is one of the hot research topics in the ﬁeld of robotics both do-
mestically and internationally. This paper reviews the application ﬁelds of the current
path planning algorithms and their improvement/optimization of them in four aspects,
including ground robots, underwater robots, aerial robots, and collaborative robots. For
each aspect, the path planning algorithms are analyzed, and their improvement measures,
advantages, and disadvantages are discussed. Finally, a summary discussion is made to
provide a reference for path planning for mobile robots.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.S.; methodology, S.S. and H.Q.; investigation, H.Q.;
resources, S.S. and T.W.; writing—original draft preparation, H.Q.; writing—review and editing,
H.Q., S.S. and X.Y.; supervision, Y.J.; project administration, Z.C.; funding acquisition, S.S. All authors
have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant
number U20A20201), the Natural Science Foundation of Liaoning Province (grant number 2021-MS-
032), the Independent Project of the State Key Laboratory of Robotics (grant number 2022-Z02 and
2022-Z19).