Drones 2023 ,7, 211 4 of 37
Therefore, in recent years, scholars have mostly chosen to improve the cost function or re-
duce the number of nodes in its path. Moreover, it can meet the needs of different scenarios
through different cost functions. However, in large environments, the A* algorithm still
exhibits slow path planning. In [ 10,11], scholars also provided solutions to this problem.
Therefore, in future research on the A* algorithm, enabling the A* algorithm to plan the
optimal path in real-time in large environments is a possible direction.
2.1.2. Dijkstra’s Algorithm
Dijkstra’s algorithm was proposed by E.W. Dijkstra in 1959 [ 17]. It is a typical algorithm
for solving the shortest-path problem in directed graphs. The algorithm sets the point
where the mobile robot is located as the initial node and traverses the remaining nodes. It
then adds the node with the closest distance to the initial node to the set of nodes, which
spreads outward from the initial node in layers until all the nodes in the graph are traversed.
Subsequently, it ﬁnds the shortest path from the initial node to the target node according to
the magnitude of the path weight.
Owing to the uncertainty of odometer positioning, which offsets the path planning
of a mobile robot [ 18], a path planning algorithm considering the minimum cumulative
error of the sensor offset is proposed. Through statistical, qualitative, and quantitative
analyses of the accumulated error of odometer positioning, the planning path with the
minimum accumulated error is generated. Through simulations and comparative analysis,
this method effectively reduces the cumulative error under complex conditions. Similarly,
an improved Dijkstra algorithm was proposed for Dijkstra’s non-adaptation to complex
environments. This introduces the concept of equivalent paths, analyzes the inﬂuencing
factors and weights of equivalent paths, and ﬁnally obtains the conversion formula between
equivalent paths and actual paths [ 19]. Combined with engineering examples, the shortest
water avoidance path for a mine was calculated.
For dynamic obstacles in the ocean, the Dijkstra algorithm was improved by adding
additional functions [ 20]. Furthermore, the algorithm alters the course according to the
current dynamics.
The Dijkstra algorithm is a classic algorithm for ﬁnding the shortest path of a single
source and is mainly used to ﬁnd the optimal path of a geographic information system.
However, with the massive growth of data, the operational efﬁciency of the classic Dijkstra
algorithm has been unable to meet people’s needs, and it needs to be optimized from all
aspects.
2.2. Heuristic Intelligent Search Algorithm
2.2.1. Genetic Algorithm
The genetic algorithm (GA), also known as the evolutionary algorithm, is a heuristic
search algorithm. It generates an optimal solution to a problem by simulating the evolution
of organisms using the principle of survival of the ﬁttest. A population consists of a certain
number of individuals, each carrying a certain number of coded genes, and the population
is equivalent to a set of solutions to the problem. A diagram of the genetic algorithm
is shown in Figure 2. It includes initializing the population randomly, selecting suitable
individuals, carrying out the selection, crossover, and mutation genetic operations, and
constantly updating the population.