Drones 2023 ,7, 211 3 of 37
However, there are issues associated with the A* algorithm that limit its use. The
system path planning has an excessive number of inﬂection points and turns, which makes
it difﬁcult for the robot to move in its actual surroundings. In [ 9], the T * algorithm, which
combines the A* search algorithm with linear time logic path planning and uses the search
process of the A* algorithm to generate the optimal path satisfying the time logic search, was
proposed. The ﬁnal experimental results reveal that the T * algorithm reduces the number
of nodes and the generation time of the path compared with the existing algorithms when
solving the temporal logical path planning problem in two- and three-dimensional spaces
in a large workspace. In [ 10], the concept of optimality was introduced on a weighted color
graph, which expresses the geometric and semantic information in the search space. On
this basis, the class-ordered A (COA*) algorithm that ﬁnds the globally optimal path in the
weighted color graph by heuristic construction of the optimal search tree was proposed.
Compared with the traditional A* algorithm, this algorithm is better at ﬁnding uncertain
paths. As the A* algorithm faces challenges in real-time path planning and collision-free
path planning in a large-scale dynamic environment, in [ 11], the calculation of the distance
cost of the risk cost function was simpliﬁed, key path points were extracted, and the number
of nodes was reduced. Finally, combined with the adaptive window method, path tracking,
and obstacle avoidance were achieved. The simulation results reveal that the algorithm can
meet the real-time requirements of mobile robots in large–scale environments.
Owing to the low accuracy of existing terrain matching methods in areas with small
eigenvalues, this study [ 12] proposed a seabed terrain matching navigation algorithm
based on the A* algorithm, which mainly uses terrain information to analyze the area
matching performance. It also proposed a search length and a dynamic matching algorithm
to reduce time consumption. The simulations showed that this method can avoid obstacles
with less-than-perfect matching and shorten the length of the path. As the traditional
A* algorithm does not consider the turning cost and redundant path points, it cannot
guarantee the safety of the mobile robot. The turning cost function was added in [ 13] to
avoid the detour and frequent turning of the mobile robot. Additionally, the search points
near the obstacles were reduced to ensure a safe distance, determine whether the point is
redundant by judging whether there are obstacles around each path point, and optimize
the generated trajectory. Compared to the traditional A* algorithm, it reduces the path
length, search time, and several nodes.
To address the problem of global navigation satellite systems (GNSS) positioning map
errors for unmanned aerial robots, an improved path planning algorithm based on the
GNSS error distribution fusion A* was proposed [ 14]. The effectiveness of the improved
A* algorithm was tested at different altitudes using a quadcopter in an actual urban
environment. The experimental ﬁndings demonstrate that, compared to the traditional A*
and artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld (APF) algorithms, the revised A* algorithm offers safe pathways
based on position error prediction at a low cost. The RiskA* algorithm was presented for
unmanned aerial robot path planning optimization in urban environments [ 15]. The
path length and risk cost are both considered while designing the cost function, and the
ﬁnal path minimizes the sum of these two costs. According to the simulation ﬁndings,
the RiskA* algorithm performs well and can account for the risk posed by the ground
population, a crucial element in urban areas, to determine the best solution. For rotary-wing
unmanned aerial robots performing low-altitude missions in three-dimensional complex
mountain environments, a fusion algorithm of the sparse A* algorithm and bio-inspired
neurodynamic model was proposed [ 16]. This improved the A* algorithm in terms of
the process structure and evaluation function. It also mitigated the computationally large
problem of the A* algorithm in the three-dimensional (3D) trajectory planning process.
Based on experimental ﬁndings, the fusion algorithm enables a rotary-wing unmanned
aerial robot to design a safe, quick, and economical course in challenging mountainous
terrain by reducing the complexity and time requirements of the A* algorithm.
In short, the A* algorithm is the most effective search algorithm in a static environment.
However, it has many disadvantages, such as an excessive number of redundant nodes.