Drones 2023 ,7, 211 10 of 37
based on model predictive control with unweighted objective functions was proposed
in [47] to address the problem of most planning methods treating the robot as a single point,
which leads to the inability of passing through narrow bands.
The dynamic window method is suitable for real-time path planning because of its
speed, and it can also optimize the algorithm’s performance by adjusting the window
parameters. However, it is sensitive to changes in the environment and requires frequent
updates of obstacle information around the mobile robot. Therefore, in the future, it can be
combined with a machine learning algorithm to predict the distribution of obstacles in an
environment and optimize the accuracy and efﬁciency of path planning.
2.3.2. Artiﬁcial Potential Field Method
The physical concept of a potential ﬁeld, which considers the motion of an object as
the product of two forces, is the source of the idea of an artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld [ 48]. As
shown in Figure 6, the gravitational pull of a goal point pulls on a robot in the planning
space, and an obstacle repels it. Under the combined inﬂuence of these two forces, the
robot advances in the direction of the goal point and can successfully navigate around any
obstacle in its path to reach its destination without incident. The black box represents the
starting point, the red circle represents the ending point, and the green circle represents the
obstacle.
Drones  2023 , 7, 211 11 of 40 
 
 
Figure 6. Schematic diagram of the path planning algorithm based on APF. 
Another study [49] presents a bacterial potential ﬁeld method that ensures a feasible, 
optimal, and safe path for a robot in both static and dynamic environments. The bacterial 
potential ﬁeld method combines an arti ﬁcial potential ﬁeld method with a bacterial 
evolutionary algorithm, thereby fully utilizing the APF method. According to experimental results, the bacterial potential ﬁeld approach exhibits signi ﬁcant local and 
global controllability in dynamic and complex situations. To solve the problem of optimal 
motion planning, a continuous, deterministic, provable, and safe solution based on a 
parametric arti ﬁcial potential ﬁeld has been proposed [50]. Reinforcement learning was 
used to properly adjust the parameters of the arti ﬁcial potential ﬁeld to minimize the 
Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman (HJB) error. In the simulation experiment, the cost function 
value and running time were be tter than with the fast search random tree algorithm
. 
A real-time path planning algorithm with an upgraded APF algorithm was proposed 
to solve the path planning problem for static and dynamic environments with unidenti ﬁed obstacles (static and dynamic) [51]. This technique augm ents the repulsive 
potential ﬁeld function with a distance adjustment factor to address the target 
unreachability issue based on the conventional  APF. The relative velocity technique, 
which not only considers the relative distance but also the relative velocity between the 
autonomous underwater robot and moving  objects, addresses the local minimum 
problem by combining the positive hexagonal guidance method and the APF. The 
experimental results demonstrate that this method reduces the computational e ﬀort 
required for navigation. To resolve the poor  dynamic obstacle avoidance performance in 
the autonomous path of an underwater 3D autonomous underwater robot, a local obstacle 
avoidance techni que based on the vectorial arti ﬁcial potential ﬁeld method was proposed 
[52], and the space vector method was empl oyed to enhance the calculation of the 
direction of the combined force and the computational e ﬀectiveness of the algorithm. 
Eventually, by using the vector arti ﬁcial potential ﬁeld approach, the key path points were 
employed as local target location s to avoid nearby obstacles. The ﬁndings of the 
simulation demonstrate that the strategy can help the autonomous underwater robot 
eﬃciently avoid di ﬀerent obstacles and lower the cost. 
Reference [53] provides a technique for avoiding local minima in an arti ﬁcial 
potential ﬁeld and maneuvering around the closest obstacle, allowing an unmanned aerial 
vehicle to successfully escape from the local minima without hi tting any obstacles. The 
study suggests a parallel search technique th at requires the unmanned aerial robot to 
navigate around the nearest obstacle to appr oach the target while detecting the obstacle 
between the current location and the target being too far away and having too many 
obstacles to reach it. Simulation results show that the path planning algorithm and 
controller that were suggested are useful. Refe rence [54] addresses the problem that most 
unmanned aerial robot path planning tec hniques do not consider, which is wind 
interference. A new 3D online APF path planni ng technique that enhances the sensitivity Goal
StartObstacle
Figure 6. Schematic diagram of the path planning algorithm based on APF.
Another study [ 49] presents a bacterial potential ﬁeld method that ensures a feasible,
optimal, and safe path for a robot in both static and dynamic environments. The bacterial
potential ﬁeld method combines an artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method with a bacterial evo-
lutionary algorithm, thereby fully utilizing the APF method. According to experimental
results, the bacterial potential ﬁeld approach exhibits signiﬁcant local and global controlla-
bility in dynamic and complex situations. To solve the problem of optimal motion planning,
a continuous, deterministic, provable, and safe solution based on a parametric artiﬁcial
potential ﬁeld has been proposed [ 50]. Reinforcement learning was used to properly adjust
the parameters of the artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld to minimize the Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman
(HJB) error. In the simulation experiment, the cost function value and running time were
better than with the fast search random tree algorithm.
A real-time path planning algorithm with an upgraded APF algorithm was proposed
to solve the path planning problem for static and dynamic environments with unidentiﬁed
obstacles (static and dynamic) [ 51]. This technique augments the repulsive potential ﬁeld
function with a distance adjustment factor to address the target unreachability issue based
on the conventional APF. The relative velocity technique, which not only considers the
relative distance but also the relative velocity between the autonomous underwater robot
and moving objects, addresses the local minimum problem by combining the positive
hexagonal guidance method and the APF. The experimental results demonstrate that
this method reduces the computational effort required for navigation. To resolve the