Drones 2023 ,7, 211 27 of 37
to set parameters manually and lack self-adaptability. However, reinforcement learning
requires considerable training data, computing resources, and long training times.
3. Multi-Robot
Multi-robot collaboration technology remains of signiﬁcant interest in robotics. When
multiple robots share the same environment, collisions between them must be considered.
To solve the problems of obstacle avoidance and collisions between the robots in multi-
robot systems during formation, a method for obstacle avoidance and consistent formation
control based on the improved artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method (IAPF) was proposed [ 121].
To solve the local minimum and target unreachability problems in the artiﬁcial potential
ﬁeld method, a rotating potential ﬁeld was established. To avoid the collision problem
between multi-robot systems, a repulsive potential function, and a robot priority model
are set, and the consistency-based formation principle is used to design a stable topology
for multi-robot formation control. The simulation results demonstrate that the method
can effectively solve the obstacle avoidance problem of a multi-robot system during the
formation process. To solve the control problem during multi-robot navigation, a shortest
distance algorithm was proposed [ 122], which uses the current positions and directions of
other robots to calculate collision-free trajectories and is based on the concept of relative
orientation to ensure smooth and collision-free trajectories. To address the poor robustness
and low exploration efﬁciency of traditional robotic collaborative exploration algorithms, a
multi-robot collaborative spatial exploration method based on a rapidly expanding random
tree-greedy frontier search (RRT-GFE) was proposed in [ 123]. The boundary points in the
environment map were reﬁned by proposing an improved boundary exploration algorithm
to improve the maximum gain of exploring the target points. The exploration target
points are dynamically assigned by introducing an improved task assignment algorithm,
thus reducing the time required and improving the efﬁciency of multi-robot exploration.
Simulations and prototype experiments were used to prove that the proposed method
works and is reliable.
An elite group-based evolutionary algorithm (EGEA) that combines the key beneﬁts
of both approaches while integrating a group-based framework and an elite selection
method for evolutionary path planning was proposed [ 124]. Due to the group-based
architecture, each descendant of the evolutionary algorithm is allowed to provide its own
set of novel solutions with a speciﬁed probability. The PSO and SA approaches are also
presented to address the adaptive ocean sampling issue. According to the simulation
results, the EGEA-based planner was superior and more reliable. A non-stop collision-free
path planning system was proposed [ 125], which consists of a combination of a novel
B-spline data frame and a particle swarm optimization-based solution engine. Using the
unique B-spline data frame structure, candidate points can be intelligently sampled without
having to suspend the sampling job. For several unmanned surface vehicles (USVs) to
complete the sampling task from the starting point to the rendezvous point, the PSO-based
solution engine creates optimal, smooth, constraint-aware path proﬁles. The applicability
and reliability of the proposed path planning system for non-stop ocean sampling jobs are
conﬁrmed by simulation results.
A distributed velocity-aware algorithm and a method for avoiding collisions between
multiple unmanned aerial robots have been proposed [ 126]. These are used to plan the
paths of many unmanned aerial robots and prevent them from running into each other. The
acceleration vectors on the pathways created by the velocity-aware algorithm converged at
a preset location. When path conﬂicts are anticipated, the collision avoidance algorithm is
activated to safeguard unmanned aerial robots from collisions. Compared to the hierarchi-
cal control model and the Lyapunov control method, this method improves the success rate
of unmanned aerial robot mission execution and shortens the path. In [ 127], a time-stamped
partitioning model was used to make it easier to process coordination costs between un-
manned aerial robots. This was conducted to solve the problem of planning an optimal
path for multiple unmanned aerial robots in a limited mission environment. A novel hybrid