Drones 2023 ,7, 211 28 of 37
method (called HIPSO-MSOS) was subsequently proposed by fusing the improved particle
swarm algorithm (IPSO) and modiﬁed symbiotic organisms research (MSOS). The experi-
mental results demonstrate that the HIPSO-MSOS algorithm has considerable advantages
in terms of accuracy, convergence speed, and stability and can successfully construct feasi-
ble and efﬁcient pathways for each unmanned aerial robot. For the collaborative detection
problem of avoiding collisions in three-dimensional space, a method based on adaptive DE
and distributed model predictive control was proposed [ 128]. The control scheme incorpo-
rates an adaptive improvement of the DE algorithm and introduces an adaptive selection
of the prediction range. In addition, the asymptotic convergence of the rolling optimization
is analyzed. The simulation results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed control
strategy. For the problem of path planning and formation control of multiple unmanned
aerial robots in three-dimensional space, a multi-unmanned aerial robot path planning
method based on an improved artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method [ 129] was proposed, which
can effectively avoid local minima by introducing a rotating potential ﬁeld. Using the
leader-follower model, a formation controller based on the potential ﬁeld function method
is designed to ensure that the expected angle and distance between the follower unmanned
aerial robot and the leader unmanned aerial robot are maintained. The simulation results
demonstrate that the method is signiﬁcantly effective in achieving path planning and for-
mation control for multi-unmanned aerial robot systems. A multi-unmanned aerial robot
path planning model with an energy constraint (MUPPEC) has been suggested [ 130] as a
solution to the problem of multi-unmanned aerial robot energy consumption constraints
when conducting monitoring activities. To reduce the monitoring time, MUPPEC primarily
considers the unmanned aerial robot in various energy-consuming modes, such as accelerat-
ing and hovering. For the MUPPEC issue, a hybrid discrete grey wolf optimizer (HDGWO)
based on grey wolf optimization is suggested. In HDGWO, a discrete grey wolf update op-
erator is implemented, and the discrete problem space and grey wolf space are transformed
using integer encoding and the greedy method. According to the experimental results,
HDGWO can successfully solve the MUPPEC problem. In reference [ 131], a multi-objective
optimization algorithm, called the angle-coded particle swarm optimization ( -PSO), is
proposed for multi-unmanned aerial robots performing infrastructure surface inspection
tasks to ﬁnd feasible obstacle-free paths for the entire formation by minimizing a cost
function that combines multiple constraints on the shortest path and safe unmanned aerial
robot operations. The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness and feasibility of
the method. A study [ 132] suggests a two-stage reinforcement-learning-based algorithm
for collision-free path planning for many unmanned aerial robots. The policy is optimized
using supervised training with a loss function that encourages the intelligence to follow a
shared collision-free policy in the ﬁrst stage. In the second stage, a policy gradient was used
to hone the policy. The technique may produce time-effective and collision-free pathways
in environments that are aware of uncertainty, according to the simulation data.
Table 2 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of multi-robot cooperative
path planning. In the ﬁeld of robot technology, multi-robot cooperative path planning is
an important area of research. In the future, multi-robot cooperative path planning may
develop in the following aspects: Given the problems of high computational complexity
and long running time in multi-robot cooperative path planning, it is necessary to study
how to improve efﬁciency and real-time path planning in the future. Dynamic changes
often occur in the working environment of robots, such as the emergence of new obstacles
and the actions of other robots. Therefore, future multi-robot cooperative path planning
needs to consider the dynamic changes of the environment and be able to respond and
adapt in time. In addition to path planning, cooperation between robots is also a very
important part of a multi-robot cooperation system. In the future, cooperation strategies
among robots will need to be studied to achieve more efﬁcient and intelligent multi-robot
cooperation.