920 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
reward function. They proposed the individualized controlled continuous communication 
model (IC3Net), where agents learn when to exchange information using a gating mecha-
nism that blocks incoming communication requests if necessary.
Networked communication Another form of communication is a networked communica-
tion protocol where agents can exchange information with their neighborhood (Nedic and 
Ozdaglar 2009; Zhang et al. 2018). Agents act decentralized based on local observations 
and received messages from network neighbors. Zhang et al. (2018) used an actor-critic 
framework where agents share their critic information with their network neighbors to pro-
mote global optimality. Chu et al. (2020) introduced the neural communication protocol 
(NeurComm) to enhance communication efficiency by reducing queue length and intersec-
tion delay. Further, they showed that a spatial discount factor could stabilize training when 
only the local vicinity is regarded to perform policy updates. For theoretical contributions, 
one may consider the works of Qu et al. (2020), Zhang et al. (2018) and Zhang et al. (2019) 
whereas the paper of Chu et al. (2020) provides an application perspective in the domain of 
traffic light control.
Extensions Further methods approach the improvement of coordination skills by apply -
ing intrinsic motivation (Jaques et al. 2018, 2019), by making the communication protocol 
more robust or scalable (Kim et al. 2019; Singh et al. 2019), and maximizing the utility of 
the communication through efficient encoding (Celikyilmaz et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019b; 
Wang et al. 2020c).
The above-reviewed papers focus on new methodologies about communication proto-
cols. Besides that, a bulk of literature considers the analysis of emergent language and the 
occurrence of agent behavior, which we discuss in Sect. 4.2.
5.3  Coordination
Successful coordination in multi-agent systems requires agents to agree on a consensus 
(Wei Ren et  al. 2005). In particular, accomplishing a joint goal in cooperative settings 
demands a coherent action selection such that the joint action optimizes the mutual task 
performance. Cooperation among agents is complicated when stochasticity is present in 
system transitions and rewards or when agents observe only partial information of the envi-
ronment’s state. Mis-coordination may arise in the form of action shadowing when explor -
atory behavior influences the other agents’ search space during learning and, as a result, 
sub-optimal solutions are found.
Therefore, the agreement upon a mutual consensus necessitates the sharing and collec-
tion of information about other agents to derive optimal decisions. Finding such a consen-
sus in the decision-making may happen explicitly through communication or implicitly by 
constructing models of other agents. The former requires skills to communicate with others 
so that agents can express their purpose and align their coordination. For the latter, agents 
need the ability to observe other agents’ behavior and reason about their strategies to build 
a model. If the prediction model is accurate, an agent can learn the other agents’ behavioral 
patterns and direct actions towards a consensus, leading to coordinated behavior. Besides 
explicit communication and constructing agent models, the CTDE scheme can be lever -
aged to build different levels of abstraction, which are applied to learn high-level coordina-
tion while independent skills are trained at low-level.
In the remainder of this section, we focus on methods that solve coordination issues 
without establishing communication protocols between agents. Although communication 
may ease coordination, we discuss this topic separately in Sect. 5.2.