905 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
Definition 10  Distributed training decentralized execution (DTDE) Each agent i has an 
associated policy /u1D70Bi∶Oi→P(Ui) which maps local observations to a distribution over 
individual actions. No information is shared between agents such that each agent learns 
independently.
The fundamental drawback of the DTDE paradigm is that the environment appears 
non-stationary from a single agent’s viewpoint because agents neither have access to 
the knowledge of others, nor do they perceive the joint action. The first approaches in 
this training scheme were studied in tabular worlds. The work by Tan (1993) investi-
gated the question if independently learning agents can match with cooperating agents. 
The results showed that independent learners learn slower in tabular and deterministic 
worlds. Based on that, Claus and Boutilier (1998) examined both independent and joint-
action learners in cooperative stochastic-form games and empirically showed that both 
types of learning can converge to an equilibrium in deterministic games. Subsequent 
works elaborated on the DTDE scheme in discretized worlds (Hu and Wellman 1998; 
Lauer and Riedmiller 2000).
More recent works report that distributed training schemes  scale poorly with the 
number of agents due to the extra sample complexity, which is added to the learning 
problem. Gupta et al. (2017) showed that distributed methods have inferior performance 
compared to policies that are trained with a centralized training paradigm. Similarly, 
Foerster et  al. (2018b) showed that the speed of independently learning actor-critic 
methods is slower than using  centralized training. In further works, DTDE has been 
applied to cooperative navigation tasks (Chen et al. 2016; Strouse et al. 2018), to par -
tially observable  domains (Dobbe et  al. 2017; Nguyen et  al. 2017b; Srinivasan et  al. 
2018), and to social dilemmas (Leibo et al. 2017).
Due to limited information in the distributed setting, independent learners are con-
fronted with several pathologies (Matignon et al. 2012b). Besides non-stationarity, envi-
ronments may exhibit stochastic transitions or stochastic rewards, which further compli-
cates learning. In addition to that, the search for an optimal policy influences the other 
agents’ decision-making, which may lead to action shadowing and impacts the balance 
between exploration and knowledge exploitation.
A line of recent works expands independent learners with techniques to cope with 
the aforementioned MARL pathologies in cooperative domains. First, Omidshafiei et al. 
(2017) introduced a decentralized experience replay extension called Concurrent Experi-
ence Replay Trajectories (CERT) that enables independent learners to face a cooperative Env Env Env
Agent 1 Agent N Agent 1 Agent N Agent 1 Agent NInformation
Update
UpdateUpdate Update Update
Fig. 2  Training schemes in the multi-agent setting. (Left) CTCE holds a joint policy for all agents. (Middle) 
Each agent updates its own individual policy in DTDE. (Right) CTDE enables agents to exchange addi-
tional information during training which is then discarded at test time