921 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
Independent learners The naïve approach to handle multi-agent problems is to regard 
each agent individually such that other agents are perceived as part of the environment and, 
thus, are neglected during learning. Opposed to joint action learners, where agents expe-
rience the selected actions of others a-posteriori, independently learning agents face the 
main difficulty of coherently choosing actions such that the joint action becomes optimal 
concerning the mutual goal (Matignon et al. 2012b). During the learning of good policies, 
agents influence each other’s search space, which can lead to action shadowing. The notion 
of coordination among several autonomously and independently acting agents enjoys a 
long record, and a bulk of research was conducted in settings with non-communicative 
agents (Fulda and Ventura 2007; Matignon et al. 2012b). Early works investigated the con-
vergence of independent learners and showed that the convergence to solutions is feasi-
ble under certain conditions in deterministic games but fails in stochastic environments 
(Claus and Boutilier 1998; Lauer and Riedmiller 2000). Stochasticity, relative over-gener -
alization, and other pathologies such as non-stationarity and the alter-exploration problem 
led to new branches of research including hysteretic learning (Matignon et al. 2007) and 
leniency (Potter and De  Jong 1994). Hysteretic Q-learning was introduced to encounter 
the over-estimation of the value function evoked by stochasticity. Two learning rates are 
used to increase and decrease the value function updates while relying on an optimistic 
form of learning. A modern approach to hysteretic learning can be seen in Palmer et al. 
(2018) and Omidshafiei et al. (2017). An alternative method to adjust the degree of applied 
optimism during learning is leniency (Panait et al. 2006; Wei and Luke 2016). Leniency 
associates selected actions with decaying temperature values that govern the amount of 
applied leniency. Agents are optimistic during the early phase when exploration is still high 
but become less lenient for frequently visited state-action pairs over the training so that 
value estimations become more accurate towards the end of learning.
Further works expanded independent learners with enhanced techniques to cope with 
the MARL pathologies mentioned above. Extensions to the deep Q-network can be seen in 
additional mechanisms used for the experience replay (Palmer et al. 2019), the utilization 
of specialized estimators (Zheng et  al. 2018a) and the use of implicit quantile networks 
(Lyu and Amato 2020). Further literature investigated independent learners as benchmark 
reference but reported limited success in cooperative tasks of various domains when no 
other techniques are applied to alleviate the issue of independent learners (Foerster et al. 
2018b; Sunehag et al. 2018).
Constructing models An implicit way to achieve coordination among agents is to cap-
ture the behavior of others by constructing models. Models are functions that take past 
interaction data as input and output predictions about the agents of interest. This can be 
very important to render the learning process robust against the decision-making of other 
agents in the environment (Hu and Wellman 1998). The constructed models and the pre-
dicted behavior vary widely depending on the approaches and the assumptions being made 
(Albrecht and Stone 2018).
One of the first works based on deep learning methods was conducted by He et  al. 
(2016) in an adversarial setting. They proposed an architecture that utilizes two neural 
networks. One neural network captures the opponents’ strategies, and the second network 
estimates the opponents’ Q-values. These networks jointly learn models of opponents by 
encoding observations into a deep Q-network. Another work by Foerster et  al. (2018a) 
introduced a learning method where the policy updates rely on the impact on other agents. 
The opponent’s policy parameters can be inferred from the observed trajectory by using a 
maximum likelihood technique. The arising non-stationarity is tackled by accounting only 
recent data. An additional possibility is to address the information gain about other agents