911 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
4.1  Reward structure
The primary factor that influences the emergence of agent behavior is the reward struc-
ture. If the reward for mutual cooperation is larger than individual reward maximization, 
agents tend to learn policies that seek to collaboratively solve the task. In particular, Leibo 
et al. (2017) compared the magnitude of the team reward in relation to the individual agent 
reward. They showed that the higher the numerical team reward is compared to the indi-
vidual reward, the greater is the willingness to collaborate with other agents. The work by 
Tampuu et al. (2017) demonstrated that punishing the whole team of agents for the failure 
of a single agent can also cause cooperation. Agents learn policies to avoid the malfunction 
of an individual, support other agents to prevent failure, and improve the performance of 
the whole team. Similarly, Diallo et al. (2017) used the Pong video game to investigate the 
coordination between agents and examined how developed behaviors change regarding the 
reward function. For a comprehensive review of learning in cooperative settings, one can 
consider the article by Panait and Luke (2005) for classical MARL and Oroojlooyjadid and 
Hajinezhad (2019) for recent MADRL.
In contrast to the cooperative scenario, one can value individual performance greater 
than the collaboration among agents. A competitive setting motivates agents to outperform 
their adversary counterparts. Tampuu et al. (2017) used the video game Pong and manipu-
lated the rewarding structure to examine the emergence of agent behavior. They showed 
that the higher the reward for competition, the more likely an agent tries to outplay its 
opponents by using techniques such as wall bouncing or faster ball speed. Employing such 
high-level strategies to overwhelm the adversary maximizes the individual reward. Simi-
larly, Bansal et al. (2018) investigated competitive scenarios, where agents competed in a 
3D world with simulated physics to learn locomotion skills such as running, blocking, or 
tackling other agents with arms and legs. They argued that adversarial training could help 
to learn more complex agent behaviors than the environment can exhibit. Likewise, the 
works of Leibo et al. (2017) and Liu et al. (2019) investigated the emergence of behaviors 
due to the reward structure in competitive scenarios.
If the rewards appear in sparse frequency, agents can be equipped with intrinsic reward 
functions that provide denser feedback signals and, thus, can overcome the sparsity or even 
the absence of external rewards. One way to realize this is with intrinsic motivation, which 
is based on the concept of maximizing an internal reinforcement signal by actively dis-
covering novel or surprising patterns (Chentanez et al. 2005; Oudeyer and Kaplan 2007; 
Schmidhuber 2010). Intrinsic motivation encourages agents to explore states that have been 
scarcely or never visited and to perform novel actions in those states. Most approaches of 
intrinsic motivation can be broadly divided into two categories (Pathak et al. 2017). First, 
agents are encouraged to explore unknown states where the novelty of states is measured by 
a model that captures the distribution of visited environment states (Bellemare et al. 2016). 
Second, agents can be motivated to reduce the uncertainty about the consequences of their 
own actions. The agent builds a model that learns the dynamics of the environment by 
lowering the prediction error of the follow-up states with respect to the taken actions. The 
uncertainty indicates the novelty of new experience since the model can only be accurate in 
states which it has already encountered or can generalize from previous knowledge (Hout-
hooft et al. 2016; Pathak et al. 2017). For a recent survey on intrinsic motivation in RL, 
one can regard the paper by Aubret et al. (2019). The concept of intrinsic motivation was 
transferred to the multi-agent domain by Sequeira et al. (2011), who studied the motiva-
tional impact on multiple agents. Investigations on the emergence of agent behavior based