918 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
transferred this approach to the multi-agent domain and developed a meta-learning based 
method to tackle the consecutive adaptation of agents in non-stationary environments. 
Regarding non-stationarity as a sequence of stationary tasks, agents learn to exploit 
dependencies between successive tasks and generalize over co-adapting agents at test time. 
They evaluated the resulting behaviors in a competitive multi-agent setting where agents 
fight in a simulated physics environment. Meta-learning can also be utilized to construct 
agent models (Rabinowitz et al. 2018). By learning how to model other agents and make 
inferences on them, agents learn to predict the other agent’s future action sequences. They 
embedded this principle into how one agent learns to capture the behavioral patterns of 
other agents efficiently.
5.2  Learning communication
Agents capable of developing communication and language corpora pose one of the vital 
challenges in machine intelligence (Kirby 2002). Intelligent agents must not only decide 
on what to communicate but also when and with whom. It is indispensable that the devel-
oped language is grounded on a common consensus such that all agents understand the 
spoken language, including its semantics. The research efforts in learning to communicate 
have intensified because many pathologies can be overcome by incorporating communi-
cation skills into agents, including non-stationarity, coherent coordination among agents, 
and partial observability. For instance, when an agent knows the actions taken by others, 
the learning problem becomes stationary again from a single agent’s perspective in a fully 
observable environment. Even partial observability can be loosened by messaging local 
observations to other participants through communication, which helps compensate for 
limited knowledge (Goldman and Zilberstein 2004).
The common framework to investigate communication is the dec-POMDP (Oliehoek 
and Amato 2016) which is a fully cooperative setting where agents perceive partial obser -
vations of the environment and try to improve upon an equally-shared reward. In such dis-
tributed systems, agents must not only learn how to cooperate but also how to communicate 
in order to optimize the mutual objective. Early MARL works investigated communication 
rooted in tabular worlds with limited observability (Kasai et al. 2008). Since the spring of 
deep learning methods, the research of learning communication has witnessed great atten-
tion because advanced computational methods provide new opportunities to study highly 
complex data.
In the following, we categorize the surveyed literature according to the message 
addressing. First, we describe the broadcasting scenario where sent messages are received 
by all agents. Second, we look into works that use targeted messages to decide on the 
recipients by using an attention mechanism. Third and last, we review communication in 
networked settings where agents communicate only with their local neighborhood instead 
of the whole population. Figure  3 shows a schematic illustration of this categorization. 
Another taxonomy may be based on the discrete or continuous nature of messages and the 
frequency of passed messages.
Broadcasting Messages are addressed to all participants of the communication channel. 
Foerster et al. (2016) studied how agents learn discrete communication protocols in dec-
POMDPs in order to accomplish a fully-cooperative task. Being in a CTDE setting, the 
communication is not restricted during the training but bandwidth-limited at test time. To 
discover meaningful communication protocols, they proposed two methods. The first, rein-
forced inter-agent learning (RIAL), is based on deep recurrent Q-networks combined with