903 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
or can get stuck between different solutions (Wiegand 2004). Fulda and Ventura (2007) 
investigated such convergence to solutions and described a Pareto-selection problem called 
shadowed equilibrium.
Definition 7  Shadowed equilibrium A joint policy ̄/u1D745 is shadowed by another joint policy 
̂/u1D745 in a state x if and only if
An equilibrium is shadowed by another when at least one agent exists who, when uni-
laterally deviating from ̄/u1D745 , will see no better improvement than for deviating from ̂/u1D745 (Mat-
ignon et al. 2012b). As a form of shadowed equilibrium, the pathology of relative over-
generalization describes that a sub-optimal Nash equilibrium in the joint action space is 
preferred over an optimal solution. This phenomenon arises since each agent’s policy per -
forms relatively well when paired with arbitrary actions from other agents (Panait et al. 
2006; Wei and Luke 2016; Wiegand 2004).
In a Markov Game, we assumed that each agent observes a state x, which encodes all 
necessary information about the world. However for complex systems, complete infor -
mation might not be perceivable. In such partially observable settings, the agents do not 
observe  the whole state space but merely a subset Oi⊂X . Hence, the agents are con-
fronted to deal with sequential decision-making under uncertainty. The partially observable 
Markov Game (Hansen et al. 2004) is the generalization of both MG and MDP.
Definition 8  Partially observable Markov Games (POMG) The POMG is mathemati-
cally denoted by the tuple /parenleft.s1N,X,{Ui},{Oi},P ,{Ri},/u1D6FE/parenright.s1 , where N={ 1,…,N} denotes 
the set of N>1 interacting agents, X is the set of global but unobserved system states, and 
U is the set of individual action spaces Ui . The observation space O denotes the collection 
of individual observation spaces Oi . The transition probability function is denoted by P , 
the reward function associated with agent i by Ri , and the discount factor is /u1D6FE.
When agents face a cooperative task with a shared reward function, the POMG is then 
known as decentralized Partially Observable Markov decision process (dec-POMDP) 
(Bernstein et al. 2002; Oliehoek and Amato 2016). In partially observable domains, the 
inference of good policies is extended in complexity since the history of interactions 
becomes meaningful. Hence, the agents usually incorporate history-dependent policies 
𝜋i
t∶{Oi}t>0→P(Ui) , which map from a history of observations to a distribution over 
actions.
Definition 9  Credit assignment problem In the fully-cooperative setting with joint reward 
signals, an individual agent cannot conclude the impact of its own action towards the 
team’s success and, thus, faces a credit assignment problem.
In cooperative games, agents are encouraged to maximize a common goal through a 
joint reward signal. However, agents cannot ascertain their contribution to the eventual 
reward when they do not experience the taken joint action or deal with partial observa-
tions. Associating rewards to agents is known as the credit assignment problem (Chang 
et al. 2004; Weiß 1995; Wolpert and Tumer 1999).(5)V𝜋i,̄/u1D745−i(x)<min
j,𝜋jV𝜋j,̂/u1D745−j(x)∃ i,𝜋i.