928 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
no consistent benchmark yet exists that provides a unified interface and allows a fair com-
parison between different kinds of algorithms grounded on a great variety of tasks like the 
OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al. 2016) for single-agent problems.
6.1  Trends
Over  the last years, approaches in the multi-agent domain achieved successes based on 
recurring patterns of good practice. We have identified four trends in state-of-the-art litera-
ture that have been frequently applied to address current challenges (Table 4).
As the first trend, we observe curriculum learning as an approach to divide the learning 
process into stages to deal with scalability issues. By starting with a small quantity, the 
number of agents is gradually enlarged over the learning course so that large-scale train-
ing becomes feasible (Gupta et al. 2017; Long et al. 2020; Narvekar et al. 2016). Alterna-
tively, curricula can also be employed to create different stages of difficulty, where agents 
face relatively easy tasks at the beginning and gradually more complex tasks as their skills 
increase (Vinyals et al. 2019). Besides that, curriculum training is used to investigate the 
emergence of agent behavior. Curricula describe engineered changes in the dynamics of the 
environment. Agents adapt their behaviors over time in response to the strategic changes of 
others, which can yield arms races between agents. This process of continual adaption is 
referred to autocurricula (Leibo et al. 2019), which have been reported in several works 
(Baker et al. 2020; Sukhbaatar et al. 2017; Svetlik et al. 2017).
Second, we recognize a trend towards deep neural networks embedded with recurrent 
units to memorize experience. By having the ability to track the history of state transitions 
and the decisions of other agents, the non-stationarity of the environment due to multiple 
decision-makers and partially observable states can be addressed in small problems (Omid-
shafiei et al. 2017), and can be managed sufficiently well in complex problems (Baker et al. 
2020; Berner et al. 2019; Jaderberg et al. 2019).
Third, an active line of research is exploring the development of communication skills. 
Due to the rise of deep learning methods, new computational approaches are available to 
investigate the emergence of language between interactive agents (Lazaridou and Baroni 
2020). Despite the plethora of works that analyze emergent behaviors and semantics, 
many works propose methods that endow agents with communication skills. By express-
ing their intension, agents can align their coordination and find a consensus (Foerster et al. 
2016). The non-stationarity from the perspective of a single learner can be eluded when 
agents disclose their history. Moreover, agents can share their local information with others 
to alleviate partial observability (Foerster et al. 2018b; Omidshafiei et al. 2017).Table 4  Our identified trends in MADRL and the addressed challenges
Trend Addressed challenge(s)
Curriculum learning Scalability
Memory Non-stationarity, partial observability
Communication Non-stationarity, coordination, partial observability
CTDE Non-stationarity, coordination, partial observabil-
ity, credit assignment, scalability