922 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
through Bayesian methods. Raileanu et al. (2018) employed a model where agents estimate 
the other agents’ hidden states and embed these estimations into their own policy. Inferring 
other agents’ hidden states from their behavior allows them to choose appropriate actions 
and promotes eventual coordination. Foerster et  al. (2019) used all publicly available 
observations in the environment to calculate a public belief over agents’ local information. 
Another work by Yang et al. (2018a) used Bayesian techniques to detect opponent strate-
gies in competitive games. A particular challenge is to learn agent models in the presence 
of fast adapting agents, which amplifies the problem of non-stationarity. As a countermeas-
ure, Everett and Roberts (2018) proposed the switching agent model (SAM), which learns 
a set of opponent models and a switching mechanism between models. By tracking and 
detecting the behavioral adaption of other agents, the switching mechanism learns to select 
the best response from the learned set of opponent models and, thus, showed superior per -
formance over single model learners.
Further works on constructing models can be found in cooperative tasks (Barde et al. 
2019; Tacchetti et al. 2019; Zheng et al. 2018b) with imitation learning (Grover et al. 2018; 
Le et al. 2017), in social dilemmas (Jaques et al. 2019; Letcher et al. 2019), and by pre-
dicting behaviors from observations (Hong et al. 2017; Hoshen 2017). For a comprehen-
sive survey on constructing models in multi-agent systems, one may consider the work of 
Albrecht and Stone (2018).
Besides resolving the coordination problem, building models of other agents can cope 
with the non-stationarity in the environment. As soon as one agent has knowledge about 
others’ behavior, previously unexplainable transition dynamics can be attributed to the 
responsible agents, and the environment becomes stationary again from the viewpoint of 
an individual agent.
Hierarchical methods Learning to coordinate can be challenging if multiple decision-
makers are involved due to the increasing complexity (Bernstein et al. 2002). An approach 
to deal with the coordination problem is by abstracting low-level coordination to higher 
levels. The idea originated in the single-agent domain where hierarchies for temporal 
abstraction are employed to ease long-term reward assignments (Dayan and Hinton 1993; 
Sutton et  al. 1999). Lower levels entail only partial information of the higher levels so 
that the learning task becomes simpler the lower the level of abstraction. First attempts for 
hierarchical multi-agent RL can be found in the tabular case (Ghavamzadeh et al. 2006; 
Makar et al. 2001). A deep approach was proposed by Kumar et al. (2017), where a higher-
level controller guides the information exchange between decentralized agents. Grounded 
on the high-level controller, the agents communicate with only one other agent at each 
time step, which allows the exploration of distributed policies. Another work by Han et al. 
(2019) is built upon the options framework (Sutton et al. 1999) where they embedded a 
dynamic termination criterion for Q-learning. By adding a termination criterion, agents 
could flexibly quit the option execution and react to the behavioral changes of other agents. 
Related to the idea of feudal networks (Dayan and Hinton 1993), Ahilan and Dayan (2019) 
applied a two-level abstraction of agents to a cooperative multi-agent setting where, in con-
trast to other methods, the hierarchy relied on rewards instead of state goals. They showed 
that this approach could be well suited for decentralized control problems. Jaderberg et al. 
(2019) used hierarchical representations that allowed agents to reason at different time 
scales. The authors demonstrated that agents are capable of solving mixed cooperative and 
competitive tasks in simulated physics environments. Another work by Lee et al. (2020) 
proposed a hierarchical method to coordinate two agents on robotic manipulation and loco-
motion tasks to accomplish collaboration such as object pick and placement. They learned 
primitive skills on the low-level, which are guided by a higher-level policy. Further works