897 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
of independent learners that arise in fully cooperative Markov Games such as non-station-
arity, stochasticity, and shadowed equilibria. Further, they analyzed conditions under which 
algorithms can address such coordination issues. Another work by Tuyls and Weiss (2012) 
accounted for the historical developments of MARL and evoked non-technical challenges. 
They criticized that the intersection of RL techniques and game theory dominates multi-
agent learning, which may render the scope of the field too narrow and investigations are 
limited to simplistic problems such as grid worlds. They claimed that the scalability to 
high numbers of agents and large and continuous spaces are the holy grail of this research 
domain.
Since the advent of deep learning methods and the breakthrough of deep RL, the field 
of MARL has attained new interest and a plethora of literature has emerged during the last 
years. Nguyen et al. (2020) presented five technical challenges including nonstationarity, 
partial observability, continuous spaces, training schemes, and transfer learning. They dis-
cussed possible solution approaches alongside their practical applications. Hernandez-Leal 
et al. (2019) concentrated on four categories including the analysis of emergent behaviors, 
learning communication, learning cooperation, and agent modeling. Further survey litera-
ture focuses on one particular sub-field of MADRL. Oroojlooyjadid and Hajinezhad (2019) 
reviewed recent works in the cooperative setting while Da  Silva and Costa (2019) and 
Da Silva et al. (2019) focused on knowledge reuse. Lazaridou and Baroni (2020) reviewed 
the emergence of language and connected two perspectives, which comprise the conditions 
under which language evolves in communities and the ability to solve problems through 
dynamic communication. Based on theoretical analysis, Zhang et  al. (2019) focused on 
MARL algorithms and presented challenges from a mathematical perspective.
1.2  Contribution and survey structure
The contribution of this paper is to present a comprehensive survey of the recent research 
directions pursued in the field of MADRL. We depict a holistic overview of current chal-
lenges that arise exclusively in the multi-agent domain of deep RL and discuss state-of-the-
art solutions that were proposed to address these challenges. In contrast to the surveys of 
Hernandez-Leal et al. (2019) and Nguyen et al. (2020), which focus on a subset of topics, 
we aim to provide a widened and more comprehensive overview of the current investiga-
tions conducted in the field of MADRL while recapitulating what has already been accom-
plished. We identify contemporary challenges and discuss literature that addresses such. 
We see our work complementary to the theoretical survey of Zhang et al. (2019).
We dedicate this paper to an audience who wants an excursion to the realm of MADRL. 
Readers shall gain insights about the historical roots of this still young field and its current 
developments, but also understand the open problems to be faced by future research. The 
contents of this paper are organized as follows. We begin with a formal introduction to 
both single-agent and multi-agent RL and reveal pathologies that are present in MARL in 
Sect.  2. We then continue with the main contents, which are categorized according to the 
three-fold taxonomy as illustrated in Fig. 1.
We analyze training architectures in Sect.  3, where we categorize approaches accord-
ing to a centralized or distributed training paradigm and additionally differentiate into 
execution schemes. Thereafter, we review literature that investigates emergent pat-
terns of agent behavior in Sect.  4. We classify works in terms of the reward structure 
(Sect.  4.1), the language between multiple agents (Sect.  4.2), and the social context 
(Sect.  4.3). In Sect.  5, we enumerate current challenges of the multi-agent domain,