909 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
information about every agent’s policy, whereas the actors perceive only local observa-
tions. As a result, the agents do not depend on explicit communication and can overcome 
the non-stationarity in the environment. Likewise, Bono et  al. (2019) trained multiple 
agents with individual policies that share information with a centralized critic and demon-
strated that such setup might improve results on standard benchmarks. Besides the utiliza-
tion of one critic for each agent, Foerster et al. (2018b) applied one centralized critic for all 
agents to estimate a counterfactual baseline function that marginalizes out a single agent’s 
action. The critic is conditioned on the history of all agents’ observations or, if available, 
on the true global state. Typically, actor-critic methods underlie a variance in the critic 
estimation that is further exacerbated by the number of agents. Therefore, Wu et al. (2018) 
proposed an action-dependent baseline which includes  information from other agents to 
reduce the variance in the critic estimation function. Further works that incorporate one 
centralized critic for distributed policies can be found in Das et al. (2019), Iqbal and Sha 
(2019) and Wei et al. (2018).
Another way to perform decentralized execution is by employing a master-slave archi-
tecture, which can resolve coordination conflicts between multiple agents. Kong et  al. 
(2017) applied a centralized master executor which shares information with decentralized 
slaves. In each time step, the master receives local information from the slaves and shares 
its internal state in return. The slaves compute actions conditioned on their local obser -
vation and the master’s internal state. Similar approaches that make use of different lev -
els of abstraction are hierarchical methods (Kumar et  al. 2017) that  operate at different 
time scales or levels of abstraction. We elaborate on hierarchical methods in more detail in 
Sect. 5.3.
4  Emergent patterns of agent behavior
Agents adjust their policy to maximize the task success and react to the behavioral changes 
of other agents. The dynamic interaction between multiple decision-makers, which simul-
taneously affects the state of the environment, can cause the emergence of specific behavio-
ral patterns. An obvious way to influence the development of agent behavior is through the 
designed reward structure. By promoting incentives for cooperation, agents can learn team 
strategies where they try to collaborate and optimize upon a mutual goal. Agents support 
other agents since the cumulative reward for cooperation is greater than acting selfishly. 
On the contrary, if the appeals for maximizing the individual performance are larger than 
being cooperative, agents can learn greedy strategies and maximize their individual reward. 
Such competitive attitudes can yield high-level strategies like manipulating adversaries to 
gain an advantage. However, the boundaries between competition and cooperation can be 
blurred in the multi-agent setting. For instance, if one agent competes with other agents, it 
is sometimes useful to cooperate temporarily in order to receive a higher reward in the long 
run.
In this section, we review the literature that is interested in developed agent behaviors. 
We differentiate occurring behaviors according to the reward structure (Sect.  4.1), the lan-
guage between agents (Sect.  4.2), and the social context (Sect.  4.3). Table  2 summarizes 
the reviewed literature based on this classification. Note that we focus in this section not 
on works that introduce new methodologies but on literature that analyzes the emergent 
behavioral patterns.