899 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
2  Background
In this section, we provide a formal introduction into the concepts of RL. We start with 
the Markov decision process as a framework for single-agent learning in Sect.  2.1. We 
continue with the multi-agent case and introduce the Markov Game in Sect.  2.2. Finally, 
we pose pathologies that arise in the multi-agent domain such as the non-stationarity of 
the environment from the perspective of a single learner, relative over-generalization, and 
the credit assignment problem in Sect.  2.3. We provide the formal concepts behind these 
MARL pathologies in order to drive our discussion about the state-of-the-art approaches in 
Sect.  5. The scope of this background section is deliberately focusing on classical MARL 
works to reveal the roots of the domain and to give the reader insights into the early works 
on which modern MADRL approaches rest.
2.1  Single‑agent reinforcement learning
The traditional reinforcement learning problem (Sutton and Barto 1998) is concerned 
with learning a control policy that optimizes a numerical performance by making deci-
sions in stages. The decision-maker called agent interacts with an environment of unknown 
dynamics in a trial-and-error fashion and occasionally receives feedback upon which the 
agent wants to improve. The standard formulation for such sequential decision-making is 
the Markov decision process, which is defined as follows (Bellman 1957; Bertsekas 2012, 
2017; Kaelbling et al. 1996).
Definition 1  Markov decision process (MDP) A Markov decision process is formalized 
by the tuple (X ,U,P,R,/u1D6FE) where X and U are the state and action space, respectively, 
P∶X×U→P(X ) is the transition function describing the probability of a state transi-
tion, R∶X×U×X→ℝ is the reward function providing an immediate feedback to the 
agent, and /u1D6FE∈[0, 1) describes the discount factor.
The agent’s goal is to act in such a way as to maximize the expected performance on 
a long-term perspective with regard to an unknown transition function P . Therefore, the 
agent learns a behavior policy /u1D70B∶X→P(U)  that optimizes the expected performance 
J throughout learning. The performance is defined as the expected value of discounted 
rewards
 over the initial state distribution /u1D70C0 while selected actions are governed by the policy /u1D70B . 
Here, we regard the infinite-horizon problem where the interaction between agent and 
environment does not terminate after a countable number of steps. Note that the learning 
objective can also be formalized for finite-horizon problems (Bertsekas 2012, 2017). As an 
alternative to the policy performance, which describes the expected performance as a func-
tion of the policy, one can define the utility of being in a particular state in terms of a value 
function. The state-value function V/u1D70B∶X→ℝ describes the utility under policy /u1D70B when 
starting from state x, i.e.(1) J=/u1D53Cx0∼/u1D70C0,xt+1∼P,ut∼/u1D70B/bracketleft.s4∞/uni2211.s1
t=0/u1D6FEtR(xt,ut,xt+1)/bracketright.s4