908 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
Although CTCE regards the learning problem as a single-agent case, we include the 
paradigm in this paper because the training schemes presented in the subsequent sec-
tions occasionally use CTCE as performance baseline and conduct comparisons.
Definition 12  Centralized training decentralized execution (CTDE) Each agent i holds 
an individual policy /u1D70Bi∶Oi→P(Ui) which maps local observations to a distribution over 
individual actions. During training, agents are endowed with additional information, which 
is then discarded at test time.
The CTDE paradigm presents the state-of-the-art practice for learning with multiple 
agents (Kraemer and Banerjee 2016; Oliehoek et al. 2008). In classical MARL, such set-
ting was utilized as joint action learners which has the advantage that perceiving joint 
actions a-posteriori discards the non-stationarity in the environment (Claus and Boutilier 
1998). As of late, CTDE has been successful in MADRL approaches (Foerster et al. 2016; 
Jorge et al. 2016). Agents utilize shared computational facilities or other forms of com-
munication to exchange information during training. By sharing mutual information, the 
training process can be eased and the learning speed can become superior when matched 
against independently trained agents (Foerster et al. 2018b). Moreover, agents can bypass 
non-stationarity when extra information about the selected actions is available to all agents 
during training such that the consequences of actions can be attributed to the respective 
agents. In what follows, we classify the CTDE literature according to the agent structure.
Homogeneous agents exhibit a common structure or the same set of skills, e.g. the same 
learning model or share common goals. Owning the same structure, agents can share parts 
of their learning model or experience with other agents. These approaches can scale well 
with the number of agents and may allow an efficient learning of behaviors. Gupta et al. 
(2017) showed that policies based on parameter sharing can be trained more efficiently 
and, thus, can outperform independently learned ones. Although agents own the same 
policy network, different agent behaviors can emerge because each agent perceives differ -
ent observations at test time. It has been thoroughly demonstrated that parameter sharing 
can help to accelerate the learning progress (Ahilan and Dayan 2019; Chu and Ye 2017; 
Peng et  al. 2017; Sukhbaatar et  al. 2016; Sunehag et  al. 2018). Next to parameter shar -
ing, homogeneous agents can employ value-based methods where an approximation of the 
value function is learned based on mutual information. Agents profit from the joint actions 
and other agents’ policies that are available during training and incorporate this extra infor -
mation into centralized value functions (Foerster et al. 2016; Jorge et al. 2016). Such infor -
mation is then discarded at test time. Many approaches consider the decomposition of a 
joint value function into combinations of individual value functions (Castellini et al. 2019; 
Rashid et al. 2018; Son et al. 2019; Sunehag et al. 2018). Through decomposition, each 
agent faces a simplified sub-problem of the original problem. Sunehag et al. (2018) showed 
that agents learning on local sub-problems scale better with the number of agents than 
CTCE or independent learners. We elaborate on value function-based factorization more 
detailed in Sect. 5.4 as an effective approach to tackle credit assignment problems.
Heterogeneous agents, on the contrary, differ in structure and skill. An instance for het-
erogeneous policies can be seen in the extension of an actor-critic approach with a cen-
tralized critic, which allows information sharing to amplify the performance of individual 
agent policies. These methods can be distinguished from each other based on the repre-
sentation of the critic. Lowe et al. (2017) utilized one centralized critic for each agent that 
is augmented with additional information during training. The critics are provided with