926 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
First, regularization techniques can be used to prevent over-fitting to other agents’ 
behavior. Examples can be seen in policies ensembles (Lowe et al. 2017), where a collec-
tion of different sub-policies is trained for each agent, or can be found in best responses to 
policy mixtures (Lanctot et al. 2017).
Second, adversarial training can be applied to mitigate the vulnerability of polices 
towards perturbations. Pinto et al. (2017) added an adversarial agent to the environment 
that applied targeted disturbances to the learning process. By hampering the training, the 
agents were compelled to encounter these disturbances and develop robust policies. Simi-
larly, Li et al. (2019a) used an adversarial setting to reduce the sensitivity of agents towards 
the environment. Bansal et  al. (2018) demonstrated that policies, which are trained in a 
competitive setting, could yield behaviors that are far more complex than the environment 
itself. From an application perspective, Spooner and Savani (2020) studied robust decision-
making in market making.
The observations from above are in accordance with the findings of related studies 
about the impact of self-play (Raghu et  al. 2018; Sukhbaatar et  al. 2017). Heinrich and 
Silver (2016) used self-play to learn approximate Nash equilibria of imperfect-information 
games and showed that self-play could be used to obtain better robustness in the learned 
policies. Similarly, self-play was used to compete with older versions of policies to ren-
der the learned behaviors more robust (Baker et al. 2020; Berner et al. 2019; Silver et al. 
2018). Silver et  al. (2016) adapted self-play as a regularization technique to prevent the 
policy network from over-fitting by playing against older versions of itself. However, 
Gleave et al. (2020) studied the existence of adversarial policies in competitive games and 
showed that complex policies could be fooled by comparably easy strategies. Although 
agents trained through self-play proved to be more robust, allegedly random and uncoordi-
nated strategies caused agents to fail at the task. They argued that the vulnerability towards 
adversarial attacks increases with the dimensionality of the observation space. A further 
research direction for addressing robustness is to render the learning representation invari-
ant towards permutations, as shown in Liu et al. (2020).
5.6  Partial observability
Outside an idealized setting, agents neither can observe  the global state of the environ-
ment, nor do they have access to the internal knowledge of other agents. By perceiving 
only partial observations, a single observation does not capture all relevant information 
about the environment and its history. Hence, the Markov property is not fulfilled, and the 
environment appears non-Markovian. An additional difficulty elicited by partial observ -
ability is the lazy agent problem which can occur in cooperative settings (Sunehag et al. 
2018). As introduced in Sect.  2.2, the common frameworks that deal with partial observ -
ability are POMPDs for general settings and dec-POMDPs for cooperative settings with 
a shared reward function. Dec-POMDPs are computationally challenging (Bernstein et al. 
2002) and still intractable when solving problems with real-world complexity (Amato et al. 
2015). However, recent work accomplished promising results in video games with imper -
fect information (Baker et al. 2020; Berner et al. 2019; Jaderberg et al. 2019; Vinyals et al. 
2019).
A natural way to deal with non-Markovian environments is through information 
exchange between the decision-makers (Goldman and Zilberstein 2004). Agents that are 
able to communicate can compensate for their limited knowledge by propagating informa-
tion and fill the lack of knowledge about other agents or the environment (Foerster et al.