923 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
cover hierarchical methods in cooperation tasks (Cai et al. 2013; Ma and Wu 2020; Tang 
et al. 2018) or social dilemmas (Vezhnevets et al. 2019). An open challenge for hierarchi-
cal methods is the autonomous creation and discovery of abstract goals from data (Schaul 
et al. 2015; Vezhnevets et al. 2017).
5.4  Credit assignment problem
In the fully-cooperative setting, agents are encouraged to maximize an equally-shared 
reward signal. Even in a fully-observable state space, it is difficult to determine which 
agents and actions contributed to the eventual reward outcome when agents do not have 
access to the joint action. Claus and Boutilier (1998) showed that independent learners 
could not differentiate between the teammate’s exploration and the stochasticity in the 
environment even in a simple bi-matrix game. This can render the learning problem dif-
ficult because agents should be ideally provided with feedback corresponding to the task 
performance to enable sufficient learning. Associating rewards to agents is known as the 
credit assignment problem (Weiß 1995; Wolpert and Tumer 1999). This problem is intensi-
fied by the sequential nature of reinforcement learning where agents must understand not 
only the impact of single actions but also the entire action sequences that eventually lead 
to the reward outcome (Sen and Weiss 1999). An additional challenge arises when agents 
have only access to local observations of the environment, which we discuss in Sect.  5.6. In 
the remainder of this section, we consider three actively investigated approaches that deal 
with how to determine the contribution of agents jointly-shared reward settings.
Decomposition Early works approached the credit assignment problem by applying fil-
ters (Chang et al. 2004) or modifying the reward function such as reward shaping (Ng et al. 
1999). Recent approaches focus on exploiting dependencies between agents to decompose 
the reward among the agents with respect to their actual contribution towards the global 
reward (Kok and Vlassis 2006). The learning problem is simplified by dividing the task 
into smaller and, hence, easier sub-problems through decomposition. Sunehag et al. (2018) 
introduced the value decomposition network (VDN) which factorizes the joint action-value 
function into a linear combination of individual action-value functions. The VDN learns 
how to optimally assign an individual reward according to the agent’s performance. The 
neural network helps to disambiguate the joint reward signal concerning the impact of the 
agent. Rashid et al. (2018) proposed QMIX as an improvement over VDN. QMIX learns 
a centralized action-value function that is decomposed into agent individual action-value 
functions through non-linear combinations. Under the assumption of monotonic relation-
ships between the  centralized Q-function and the  individual Q-functions, decentralized 
policies can be extracted by individual argmax operations. As an advancement over both 
VDN and QMIX, Son et al. (2019) proposed QTRAN, which discards the assumption of 
linearity and monotonicity in the factorization and allows any non-linear combination of 
value functions. Further approaches about the factorization of value functions can be found 
in Castellini et al. (2019), Chen et al. (2018), Nguyen et al. (2017b), Wang et al. (2020a), 
Wang et al. (2020c) and Yang et al. (2018b).
Marginalization Next to the decomposition into simpler sub-problems, one can apply 
an extra function that marginalizes out the effect of agent individual actions. Nguyen 
et al. (2018) introduced a mean collective actor-critic framework which marginalizes out 
the actions of agents by using an approximation of the critic and reduces the variance of 
the gradient estimation. Similarly, Foerster et  al. (2018b) marginalized out the individ-
ual actions of agents by applying a counterfactual baseline function. The counterfactual