912 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
on intrinsic rewards have been abundantly conducted in Baker et al. (2020), Hughes et al. 
(2018), Jaderberg et al. (2019), Jaques et al. (2018), Jaques et al. (2019), Peysakhovich and 
Lerer (2018), Sukhbaatar et al. (2017), Wang et al. (2019) and Wang et al. (2020b).
4.2  Language
The development of language corpora and communication skills of autonomous agents 
attracts great attention within the community. For one, the behavior that emerges during the 
deployment of abstract language as well as the learned composition of multiple words to 
form meaningful contexts is of interest (Kirby 2002). Deep learning methods have widened 
the scope of computational methodologies for investigating the development of language 
between dynamic agents (Lazaridou and Baroni 2020). For building rich behaviors and 
complex reasoning, communication based on high-dimensional data like visual perception 
is a widespread practice (Antol et al. 2015). In the following, we focus on works that inves-
tigate the emergence of language and analyze behavior. Papers that propose new method-
ologies for developing communication protocols are discussed in Sect.  5.2. We classify the 
learning of language according to the performed task and the type of interaction the agents 
pursue. In particular, we differentiate between referential games and dialogues.
The former, referential games, describe cooperative games where the speaking agent 
communicates an objective via messages to another listening agent. Lazaridou et al. (2017) 
showed that agents could learn communication protocols solely through interaction. For 
a meaningful information exchange, agents evolved semantic properties in their language. 
A key element of the study was to analyze if the agents’ interactions are interpretable for 
humans, showing limited yet encouraging results. Likewise, Mordatch and Abbeel (2018) 
investigated the emergence of abstract language that arises through the interaction between 
agents in a physical environment. In their experiments, the agents should learn a discrete 
set of vocabulary by solving navigation tasks through communication. By involving more 
than three agents in the conversation and by penalizing an arbitrary size of vocabulary, 
agents agreed on a coherent set of vocabulary and discouraged ambiguous words. They 
also observed that agents learned a syntax structure in the communication protocol that 
is consistent in vocabulary usage. Another work by Li and Bowling (2019) found out that 
compositional languages are easier to communicate with other agents than languages with 
less structure. In addition, changing listening agents during the learning can promote the 
emergence of language grounded on a higher degree of structure. Many studies are con-
cerned with the development of communication in referential games grounded on visual 
perception as it can be found in Choi et al. (2018), Evtimova et al. (2018), Havrylov and 
Titov (2017), Jorge et  al. (2016), Lazaridou et  al. (2018) and Lee et  al. (2017). Further 
works consider the development of communication in social dilemmas (Jaques et al. 2018, 
2019).
As the second category, we describe the emergence of behavioral patterns in com-
munication while conducting dialogues. One type of dialogue are negotiations in which 
agents pursue to agree on decisions. In a study about negotiations with natural language, 
Lewis et  al. (2017) showed that agents could master linguistic and reasoning problems. 
Two agents were both shown a collection of items and were instructed to negotiate about 
how to divide the objects among both agents. Each agent was expected to maximize the 
value of the bargained objects. Eventually, the agents learned to use high-level strategies 
such as deception to accomplish higher rewards over their opponents. Similar studies con-
cerned with negotiations are covered in Cao et al. (2018) and He et al. (2018). Another