913 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
type of dialogue are scenarios where the emergence of communication is investigated in 
a question-answering style as shown by Das et al. (2017). One agent received an image as 
input and was instructed to ask questions about the shown image while the second agent 
responded, both in natural language.
Many of the above-mentioned papers report that utilizing a communication channel can 
increase task performance in terms of the cumulative reward. However, numerical perfor -
mance measurements provide evidence but do not give insights about the communication 
abilities learned by the agents. Therefore, Lowe et al. (2019) surveyed metrics which are 
applied to assess the quality of learned communication protocols and provided recommen-
dations about the usage of such metrics. Based on that, Eccles et al. (2019) proposed to 
incorporate inductive bias into the learning objective of agents, which could promote the 
emergence of a meaningful communication. They showed that inductive bias could lead to 
improved results in terms of interpretability.
4.3  Social context
Next to the reward structure and language, the research community actively investigates the 
emerging agent behaviors in social contexts. Akin to humans, artificial agents can develop 
strategies that exploit patterns in complex problems and adapt behaviors in response to oth-
ers (Baker et al. 2020; Jaderberg et al. 2019). We differentiate the following literature along 
different dimensions, such as the type of social dilemma and the examined psychological 
variables.
Social dilemmas have long been studied as conflict scenario in which agents gauge 
between individualistic and collective profits (Crandall and Goodrich 2011; De Cote et al. 
2006). The tension between cooperation and defection is evaluated as an atomic decision 
according to the numerical values of a pay-off matrix. This pay-off matrix satisfies inequal-
ities in the reward function such that agents must decide between cooperation, to benefit as 
a whole team, or defection, to maximize selfish performance. To temporally extend matrix 
games, sequential social dilemmas have been introduced to investigate long-term strategic 
decisions of agent policies rather than short-term actions (Leibo et al. 2017). The arising 
behaviors in these dilemmas can be classified along psychological variables known from 
human interaction (Lange et al. 2013) such as the gain of individual benefits (Lerer and 
Peysakhovich 2017), the fear of future consequences (Pérolat et al. 2017), the assessment 
of the impact on another agent’s behavior (Jaques et  al. 2018, 2019), the trust between 
agents (Pinyol and Sabater-Mir 2013; Ramchurn et  al. 2004; Yu et  al. 2013), and the 
impact of emotions on the decision-making (Moerland et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2013).
Kollock (1998) divided social dilemmas into commons dilemmas and public goods 
dilemmas. The former, commons dilemmas describe the trade-off between individualistic 
short-term benefits and long-term common interests on a task that is shared by all agents. 
Recent works on the commons dilemma can be found in Foerster et  al. (2018a), Leibo 
et al. (2017) and Lerer and Peysakhovich (2017). In public goods dilemmas, agents face 
a scenario where common-pool resources are constrained and oblige a sustainable use of 
resources. The phenomenon called the tragedy of commons predicts that self-interested 
agents fail to find socially positive equilibria, which eventually results in the over-exploita-
tion of the common resources (Hardin 1968). Investigations on the trial-and-error learning 
in common-pool resource scenarios with multiple decision-makers are covered in Hughes 
et al. (2018), Pérolat et al. (2017) and Zhu and Kirley (2019).