904 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
Some of the above-introduced pathologies occur in all cooperative, competitive, and 
mixed tasks, whereas some pathologies like relative over-generalization, credit assign-
ment, and miss-coordination are predominant issues in cooperative settings. To cope with 
these pathologies, still commonly studied settings are tabular worlds such as variations of 
the climbing game where solutions are not yet found, e.g. when the environment exhib-
its reward stochasticity (Claus and Boutilier 1998). Thus, simple worlds remain a fertile 
ground for further research, especially for problems like shadowed equilibria, non-sta-
tionarity or alter-exploration problems3 and continue to matter for modern deep learning 
approaches.
3  Analysis of training schemes
The training of multiple agents has long been a computational challenge (Becker et  al. 
2004; Nair et al. 2003). Since the complexity in the state and action space grows exponen-
tially with the number of agents, even modern deep learning approaches may reach their 
limits. In this section, we describe training schemes that are used in practice for learning 
agent policies in the multi-agent setting similar to the ones described in Bono et al. (2019). 
We denote training as the process during which agents acquire data to build up experience 
and optimize their behavior with respect to the received reward signals. In contrast, we 
refer test time4 to the step after the training when the learned policy is evaluated but is no 
further refined. The training of agents can be broadly divided into two paradigms, namely 
centralized and distributed (Weiß 1995). If the training of agents is applied in a centralized 
manner, policies are updated based on the mutual exchange of information during the train-
ing. This additional information is then usually removed at test time. In contrast to the cen-
tralized scheme, the training can also be handled in a distributed fashion where each agent 
performs updates on its own and develops an individual policy without utilizing foreign 
information.
In addition to the training paradigm, agents may deviate in the way of how they select 
actions. We recognize two execution schemes. Centralized execution describes that agents 
are guided from a centralized unit, which computes the joint actions for all agents. On 
the contrary, agents determine actions according to their individual policy for decentralized 
execution. An overview of the training schemes is depicted in Fig.  2 while Table  1 lists the 
reviewed literature of this section.
3.1  Distributed training
In distributed training schemes, agents learn independently of other agents and do not 
rely on explicit information exchange.
4 Note that test and execution time are often used interchangeably in recent literature. For clarity, we use 
the term test for the post-training evaluation and the term execution for the action selection with respect to 
some policy.3 The alter-exploration dilemma, also known as the exploration-exploitation problem, describes the trade-
off an agent faces to decide whether to choose actions that extend experience or take decisions that are 
already optimal according to the current knowledge.