907 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
and partially observable setting by rendering samples more stable and efficient. Similarly, 
Palmer et al. (2018) extended the experience replay of Deep Q-Networks with leniency, 
which associates stored state-action pairs with decaying temperature values that govern 
the amount of applied leniency. They showed that this induces optimism in value func-
tion updates and can overcome relative over-generalization. Another work by Palmer et al. 
(2019) proposed negative update intervals double-DQN as an mechanism that identifies 
and removes generated data from the replay buffer that leads to mis-coordination. Alike, 
Lyu and Amato 2020 proposed decentralized quantile estimators which identify non-sta-
tionary transition samples based on the likelihood of returns. Another work that aims to 
improve upon independent learners can be found in Zheng et  al. (2018a) who used two 
auxiliary mechanisms, including a lenient reward approximation and a prioritized replay 
strategy.
A different research direction can be seen in  distributed population-based training 
schemes where agents are optimized through an online evolutionary process such that 
under-performing agents are substituted by mutated versions of better agents (Jaderberg 
et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019).
3.2  Centralized training
The centralized training paradigm describes agent policies that are updated based on 
mutual information. While the sharing of mutual information between agents is enabled 
during the training, this additional information is then discarded at test time. The central-
ized training can be further differentiated into the centralized and decentralized execution 
scheme.
Definition 11  Centralized training centralized execution (CTCE) The CTCE scheme 
describes a centralized executor /u1D70B∶O→P(U) modeling the joint policy that maps the 
collection of distributed observations to a set of distributions over individual actions.
Some applications assume an unconstrained and instantaneous information exchange 
between agents. In such a setting, a centralized executor can be leveraged to learn the 
joint policy for all agents. The CTCE paradigm allows the straightforward employment 
of single-agent training methods such as actor-critics (Mnih et al. 2016) or policy gradi-
ent algorithms (Schulman et  al. 2017) to multi-agent problems. An obvious flaw is that 
state-action spaces grow exponentially by the number of agents. To address the so-called 
curse of dimensionality, the joint model can be factored into individual policies for each 
agent. Gupta et al. (2017) represented the centralized executor as a set of independent sub-
policies such that agents’ individual action distributions are captured rather than the joint 
action distribution of all agents, i.e. the joint action distribution P(U)=∏
iP(Ui) is fac-
tored into independent action distributions. Next to the policy, the value function can be 
factored so that the joint value is decomposed into a sum of local value functions, e.g. the 
joint action-value function can be expressed by Q/u1D70B(o1,…,oN,u1,…,un)=∑
iQi
/u1D70B(oi,ui) as 
shown in Russell and Zimdars (2003). A recent approach for the value function factoriza-
tion is investigated in Sunehag et al. (2018). However, a phenomenon called lazy agents 
may occur in the CTCE setting when one agent learns a good policy but a second agent has 
less incentive to learn a good policy, as his actions may hinder the first agent, resulting in a 
lower reward (Sunehag et al. 2018).