914 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
5  Current challenges
In this section, we depict several challenges that arise in the multi-agent RL domain and, 
thus, are currently under active research. We approach the problem of non-stationarity 
(Sect.  5.1) due to the presence of multiple learners in a shared environment and review 
literature regarding the development of communication skills (Sect.  5.2). We further inves-
tigate the challenge of learning coordination (Sect.  5.3). Then, we survey the difficulty 
of attributing rewards to specific agents as the credit assignment problem (Sect.  5.4) and 
examine scalability issues (Sect.  5.5), which increase with the number of agents. Finally, 
we consider environments where states are only partially observable (Sect.  5.6). While 
some challenges are omnipresent in the MARL domain, such as non-stationarity or scal-
ability, others like the credit assignment problem or the learning of coordination and com-
munication are prevailing in the cooperative setting.
We aim to provide a holistic overview of the contemporary challenges that constitute 
the landscape in reinforcement learning with multiple agents and survey treatments that 
were suggested in recent works. In particular, we focus on those challenges which are cur -
rently under active research and where progress has been accomplished recently. There are 
still open problems that have not been or partially addressed so far. Such problems are dis-
cussed in Sect.  6. Deliberately, we do not regard challenges that also persist in the single-
agent domain, such as sparse rewards or the exploration-exploitation dilemma. We refer 
the interested reader for an overview of those topics to the articles of Arulkumaran et al. 
(2017) and Li (2018). Much of the surveyed literature cannot be assigned to one particular 
but rather to several of the proposed challenges. Hence, we associate the subsequent litera-
ture to the one challenge which we believe best addresses it (Table 3).
5.1  Non‑stationarity
One major problem resides in the presence of multiple agents that interact within a shared 
environment and learn simultaneously. Due to the co-adaption, the environment dynamics 
appear non-stationary from the perspective of a single agent. Thus, agents face a moving 
target problem if they are not provided with additional knowledge about other agents. As 
a result, the Markov assumption is violated, and the learning constitutes an inherently dif-
ficult problem (Hernandez-Leal et al. 2017; Laurent et al. 2011). The naïve approach is to 
neglect the adaptive behavior of agents. One can either ignore the existence of other agents 
(Matignon et al. 2012b) or discount the adaptive behavior by assuming the others’ behav -
ior to be static or optimal (Lauer and Riedmiller 2000). By making such assumptions, the 
agents are considered as independent learners, and traditional single-agent reinforcement 
algorithms can be applied. First attempts have been studied in Claus and Boutilier (1998) 
and Tan (1993), which showed that independent learners could perform well in simple 
deterministic environments. However, in complex or stochastic environments, independent 
learners often result in poor performance (Lowe et al. 2017; Matignon et al. 2012b). More-
over, Lanctot et al. (2017) argued that independent learners could over-fit to other agents’ 
policies during the training and, thus, may fail to generalize at test time.
In the following, we review literature, which addresses the non-stationarity in a multi-
agent environment, and categorize the approaches into those with experience replay, cen-
tralized units, and meta-learning. A similar categorization proposed Papoudakis et  al. 
(2019). We identify further approaches which cope with non-stationarity by establishing