925 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
process (Gupta et al. 2017). Parameter sharing has proven to be useful in various appli-
cations such as learning to communicate (Foerster et al. 2016; Jiang and Lu 2018; Peng 
et al. 2017; Sukhbaatar et al. 2016), modeling agents (Hernandez-Leal et al. 2019), and in 
partially observable cooperative games (Sunehag et al. 2018). For a discussion on different 
parameter sharing strategies, one may consider the paper by Chu and Ye (2017).
As the second approach, knowledge reuse can be applied in form of transfer learning 
(Da Silva et al. 2019; Da Silva and Costa 2019). Experience obtained in learning to per -
form one task may also improve the performance in a related but different task (Taylor and 
Stone 2009). Da Silva and Costa (2017) used a knowledge database from which an agent 
can extract previous solutions of related tasks and embed such information into the cur -
rent task’s training. Likewise, Da Silva et al. (2017) applied expert demonstrations where 
the agents take the role of students that ask a teacher for advice. They demonstrated that 
simultaneously learning agents could advise each other through knowledge transfer. Fur -
ther works on transfer learning can be found in the cooperative multi-agent setting (Omid-
shafiei et al. 2019) and in natural language applications (Luketina et al. 2019). In general 
multi-agent systems, the works of (Boutsioukis et al. 2012; Taylor et al. 2013) substantiate 
that transfer learning can speed up the learning process.
Besides parameter sharing and transfer learning, curriculum learning may be applied 
for the scaling to many agents. Since tasks become more challenging to master and more 
time consuming to train as the number of agents increases, it is often challenging to learn 
from scratch. Curriculum learning starts with a small number of agents and then gradually 
enlarges the number of agents over the training course. Through the steady increase within 
the curriculum, trained policies can perform better than without a curriculum (Gupta et al. 
2017; Long et al. 2020; Narvekar et al. 2016). Curriculum learning schemes can also cause 
improved generalization and faster convergence of agent policies (Bengio et  al. 2009). 
Further works show that agents can generate learning curricula automatically (Sukhbaatar 
et al. 2017; Svetlik et al. 2017) or can create arms races in competitive settings (Baker et al. 
2020).
Complexity reduction Many real-world applications naturally encompass large numbers 
of simultaneously interacting agents (Nguyen et al. 2017a, b). As the quantity of agents 
increases, the requirement to contain the curse of dimensionality becomes inevitable. Yang 
et al. (2018b) addressed the issue of scalability with a mean-field method. The interactions 
between large numbers of agents are estimated by the impact of a single agent compared 
to the mean impact of the whole or local agent population. The complexity reduces as the 
problem is broken down into pairwise interactions between an agent and its neighborhood. 
Regarding the average effect to its neighbors, each agent learns the best response towards 
its proximity. Another approach to constrain the explosion in complexity is by factorizing 
the problem into smaller sub-problems (Guestrin et al. 2002). Chen et al. (2018) decom-
posed the joint action-value function into independent components and used pairwise inter -
actions between agents to render large-scale problems computationally tractable. Further 
works studied large-scale MADRL problems with graphical models (Nguyen et al. 2017a) 
and the CTDE paradigm (Lin et al. 2018).
Robustness Another desired property is the robustness of learned policies to perturba-
tions in the environment caused by other agents. Perturbations are fortified by the number 
of agents and the resulting growth of the state-action space. In supervised learning, a com-
mon problem is that models can over-fit to the data set. Similarly, over-fitting can occur 
in RL frameworks if environments provide little or no deviation (Bansal et al. 2018). To 
maintain robustness over the training process and to the other agents’ adaption, several 
methods have been proposed.