Vol.:(0123456789)Artificial Intelligence Review (2022) 55:895–943
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-021-09996-w
1 3
Multi‑agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey
Sven Gronauer1  · Klaus Diepold1
Published online: 15 April 2021 
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
The advances in reinforcement learning have recorded sublime success in various domains. 
Although the multi-agent domain has been overshadowed by its single-agent counterpart 
during this progress, multi-agent reinforcement learning gains rapid traction, and the latest 
accomplishments address problems with real-world complexity. This article provides an 
overview of the current developments in the field of multi-agent deep reinforcement learn-
ing. We focus primarily on literature from recent years that combines deep reinforcement 
learning methods with a multi-agent scenario. To survey the works that constitute the con-
temporary landscape, the main contents are divided into three parts. First, we analyze the 
structure of training schemes that are applied to train multiple agents. Second, we consider 
the emergent patterns of agent behavior in cooperative, competitive and mixed scenarios. 
Third, we systematically enumerate challenges that exclusively arise in the multi-agent 
domain and review methods that are leveraged to cope with these challenges. To conclude 
this survey, we discuss advances, identify trends, and outline possible directions for future 
work in this research area.
Keywords Multi-agent systems · Multi-agent learning · Machine learning · Reinforcement 
learning · Deep learning · Survey
1 Introduction
A multi-agent system describes multiple distributed entities—so-called agents—which 
take decisions autonomously and interact within a shared environment (Weiss 1999). Each 
agent seeks to accomplish an assigned goal for which a broad set of skills might be required 
to build intelligent behavior. Depending on the task, an intricate interplay between agents 
can occur such that agents start to collaborate or act competitively to excel opponents. 
Specifying intelligent behavior a-priori through programming is a tough, if not impossible, 
task for complex systems. Therefore, agents require the ability to adapt and learn over time 
 * Sven Gronauer 
 sven.gronauer@tum.de
 Klaus Diepold 
 kldi@tum.de
1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technical University of Munich (TUM), 
Arcisstr. 21, 80333 Munich, Germany