896 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
by themselves. The most common framework to address learning in an interactive environ-
ment is reinforcement learning (RL), which describes the change of behavior through a 
trial-and-error approach.
The field of reinforcement learning is currently thriving. Since the breakthrough of 
deep learning methods, works have been successful at mastering complex control tasks, 
e.g. in robotics (Levine et al. 2016; Lillicrap et al. 2016) and game playing (Mnih et al. 
2015; Silver et  al. 2016). The key to these results is based on learning techniques that 
employ neural networks as function approximators (Arulkumaran et  al. 2017). Despite 
these achievements, the majority of works investigated single-agent settings only, although 
many real-world applications naturally comprise multiple decision-makers that interact at 
the same time. The areas of application encompass the coordination of distributed systems 
(Cao et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2016b) such as autonomous vehicles (Shalev-Shwartz et al. 
2016) and multi-robot control (Matignon et  al. 2012a), the networking of communica-
tion packages (Luong et al. 2019), or the trading on financial markets (Lux and Marchesi 
1999). In these systems, each agent discovers a strategy alongside other entities in a com-
mon environment and adapts its policy in response to the behavioral changes of others. 
Carried by the advances of single-agent deep RL, the multi-agent reinforcement learning 
(MARL) community has been surged with new interest and a plethora of literature has 
emerged lately (Hernandez-Leal et al. 2019; Nguyen et al. 2020). The use of deep learning 
methods enabled the community to exceed the historically investigated tabular problems 
to challenging problems with real-world complexity (Baker et al. 2020; Berner et al. 2019; 
Jaderberg et al. 2019; Vinyals et al. 2019).
In this paper, we provide an extensive review of the recent advances in the area of multi-
agent deep reinforcement learning (MADRL). Although multi-agent systems enjoy a rich 
history (Busoniu et al. 2008; Shoham et al. 2003; Stone and Veloso 2000; Tuyls and Weiss 
2012), this survey aims to shed light on the contemporary landscape of the literature in 
MADRL.
1.1  Related work
The intersection of multi-agent systems and reinforcement learning holds a long record of 
active research. As one of the first surveys in the field, Stone and Veloso (2000) analyzed 
multi-agent systems from a machine learning perspective and classified the reviewed lit-
erature according to heterogeneous and homogeneous agent structures as well as commu-
nication skills. The authors discussed issues associated with each classification. Shoham 
et al. (2003) criticized the ill-posed problem statement of MARL which is in the authors’ 
opinion unclear and called for more grounded research. They proposed a coherent research 
agenda which includes four directions for future research. Yang and Gu (2004) reviewed 
algorithms and pointed out that the main difficulty lies in the generalization to continuous 
action and state spaces and in the scaling to many agents. Similarly, Busoniu et al. (2008) 
presented selected algorithms and discussed benefits as well as challenges of MARL. Ben-
efits include computational speed-ups and the possibility of experience sharing between 
agents. In contrast, drawbacks are the specification of meaningful goals, the non-station-
arity of the environment, and the need for coherent coordination in cooperative games. In 
addition to that, they posed challenges such as the exponential increase of computational 
complexity with the number of agents and the alter-exploration problem where agents must 
gauge between the acquisition of new knowledge and the exploitation of current knowl-
edge. More specifically, Matignon et al. (2012b) identified challenges for the coordination