927 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
2016). As we already discussed in Sect.  5.2, there are several ways to incorporate commu-
nication capabilities into agents. A primary example is Jiang and Lu (2018) who used an 
attention mechanism to establish communication under partial observations. Rather than 
having a fixed frequency for the information exchange, they learned to communicate on-
demand. Further approaches under partial observability have been investigated in coopera-
tive tasks (Das et al. 2019; Sukhbaatar et al. 2016) or mixed settings (Singh et al. 2019).
In the following, we review papers that cope with partial observability by incorporating 
a memory mechanism. Agents, which have the capability of memorizing past experiences, 
can compensate for the lack of information.
Memory mechanism A common way to tackle partial observability is the usage of deep 
recurrent neural networks, which equip agents with a memory mechanism to store informa-
tion that can be relevant in the future (Hausknecht and Stone 2015). However, long-term 
dependencies render the decision-making difficult since experiences that were observed in 
the further past may have been forgotten (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997). Approaches 
involving recurrent neural networks to deal with partial observability can be realized with 
value-based approaches (Omidshafiei et al. 2017) or actor-critic methods (Dibangoye and 
Buffet 2018; Foerster et al. 2018b; Gupta et al. 2017). Foerster et al. (2019) used a Bayes-
ian method to tackle partial observability in cooperative settings. They used all publicly 
available features of the environment and agents to determine a public belief over the 
agents’ internal states. A severe concern in MADRL is that the memorization of past infor -
mation is exacerbated by the number of agents involved during the learning process.
6  Discussion
In this section, we discuss findings from previous sections. We enumerate trends that we 
have  identified in recent literature.  Since these  trends are useful for addressing current 
challenges, they may also be an avenue for upcoming research. To the end of our discus-
sion, we point out possible future work. We elaborate on problems where only a minority 
of research has been conducted and pose two problems which we find the toughest ones to 
overcome.
Despite the recent advances in many directions, many pathologies such as relative over-
generalization combined with reward stochasticity are not yet solved, even in allegedly 
simple tabular worlds. MADRL has taken profit from the history of MARL by scaling up 
the insights to more complex problems. Approaches where strong solutions exist in sim-
plified MARL settings may be transferable to the MADRL domain. Thus by enhancing 
older methods with new deep learning approaches, unsolved problems and concepts from 
MARL continue to matter in MADRL. An essential point for MADRL is that reproduc-
ibility is taken conscientiously. Well-known papers from the single-agent domain underline 
the significance of hyper-parameters, the number of independent random seeds, and cho-
sen code-base towards the eventual task performance (Henderson et al. 2018; Islam et al. 
2017). To maintain steady progress, the reporting of all used hyper-parameters and a trans-
parent conduction of experiments is crucial. We want to make the community aware that 
these findings may also be valid for the multi-agent domain. Therefore, it is inevitable that 
standardized frameworks are created in which different algorithms can be compared along 
with their merits and demerits. Many individual environments have been proposed which 
exhibit intricate structure and real-world complexity (Baker et al. 2020; Beattie et al. 2016; 
Johnson et al. 2016; Juliani et al. 2018; Song et al. 2019; Vinyals et al. 2017). However,