919 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
independent Q-learning where each agent learns an action-value function conditioned on 
the observation history as well as messages from other agents. Additionally, they applied 
parameter sharing so that all agents share and update common features from only one 
Q-network. The second method, differentiable inter-agent learning (DIAL), combines the 
centralized learning paradigm with deep Q-networks. Messages are delivered over discrete 
connections, which are based on a relaxation to become differentiable. In contrast, Sukh-
baatar et al. (2016) proposed CommNet as an architecture that allows the learning of com-
munication between agents purely based on continuous protocols. They showed that each 
agent learns the joint-action and a sparse communication protocol that encodes meaning-
ful information. The authors emphasized that the decreased observability of vicious states 
encourages the importance of communication between agents. To foster scalable commu-
nication protocols that also facilitate heterogeneous agents, Peng et al. (2017) introduced 
the bidirectionally-coordinated network (BiCNet) where agents learn in a vectorized actor-
critic framework to communicate. Through communication, they were able to coordinate 
heterogeneous agents in a combat game of StarCraft.
Targeted communication When agents are endowed with targeted communication pro-
tocols, they utilize an attention mechanism to determine when, what and with whom to 
communicate. Jiang and Lu (2018) introduced ATOC as an attentional communication 
model that enables agents to send messages dynamically and selectively so that commu-
nication takes place among a group of agents only when required. They argued that atten-
tion is essential for large-scale settings because agents learn to decide which information 
is most useful for decision-making. Selective communication is the reason why ATOC 
outperforms CommNet and BiCNet on the conducted navigation tasks. A similar conclu-
sion was drawn by Hoshen (2017) who introduced the vertex attention interaction network 
(VAIN) as an extension to the CommNet. The baseline approach is extended with an atten-
tion mechanism that increases performance due to the focus on only relevant agents. The 
work by Das et al. (2019) introduced targeted multi-agent communication (TarMAC) that 
uses attention to decide with whom and what to communicate by actively addressing other 
agents for message passing. Jain et al. (2019) proposed TBONE for visual navigation in 
cooperative tasks. In contrast to former works, which are limited to the fully-cooperative 
setting, Singh et al. (2019) considered mixed settings where each agent owns an individual Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of communication types. Unilateral arrows represent unidirectional messages, 
while bilateral arrows symbolize bidirectional message passing. (Left) In broadcasting, messages are sent to 
all participants of the communication channel. For better visualization, the broadcasting of only one agent 
is illustrated but each agent can broadcast messages to all other agents. (Middle) Agents can target the com-
munication through an attention mechanism that determines when, what and with whom to communicate. 
(Right) Networked communication describes the local connection to neighborhood agents