917 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
communication between agents (Sect.  5.2) or building models (Sect.  5.3). However, we 
discuss these topics separately in the respective sections.
Experience replay mechanism Recent successes with reinforcement learning methods 
such as deep Q-networks (Mnih et al. 2015) rest upon an experience replay mechanism. 
However, it is not straightforward to employ experience replays to the multi-agent setting 
because past experience becomes obsolete with the adaption of agent policies over time. To 
encounter this, Foerster et al. (2017) proposed two approaches. First, they decay outdated 
transition samples from the replay memory to stabilize targets and then use importance 
sampling to incorporate off-policy samples. Since the agents’ policies are known during 
the training, off-policy updates can be corrected with importance-weighted policy likeli-
hoods. Second, the state space of each agent is enhanced with estimates of the other agents’ 
policies, so-called fingerprints5, to prevent non-stationarity. The value functions can then 
be conditioned on a fingerprint, which clears the age of data sampled from the replay mem-
ory. Another extension for experience replays was proposed by Palmer et al. (2018) who 
applied leniency to every stored transition sample. Leniency associates each sample of the 
experience memory with a temperature value, which gradually decays by the number of 
state-action pair visits. Further utilization of the experience replay mechanism to cope with 
non-stationarity can be found in Tang et al. (2018) and Zheng et al. (2018a). Nevertheless, 
if the contemporary dynamics of the learners are neglected, algorithms can utilize short-
term buffers as applied in Baker et al. (2020) and Leibo et al. (2017).
Centralized Training Scheme As already discussed in Sect.  3.2, the CTDE paradigm can 
be leveraged to share mutual information between learners to ease training. The availability 
of information during the training can loosen the non-stationarity of the environment since 
agents are augmented with information about others. One approach is to enhance actor-
critic methods with centralized critics over which mutual information is shared between 
agents during the training (Bono et al. 2019; Iqbal and Sha 2019; Wei et al. 2018). Lowe 
et al. (2017) embedded each agent with one centralized critic that is augmented with all 
agents’ observations and actions. Based on this additional information, agents face a sta-
tionary environment during the training while acting decentralized on local observations at 
test time. Next to the equipment of one critic per agent, all agents can share one global cen-
tralized critic. Foerster et al. (2018b) applied one centralized critic conditioned on the joint 
action and observations of all agents. The critic computes an agent’s individual advantage 
through estimating the value of the joint action based on a counterfactual baseline, which 
marginalizes out single agents’ influence. Another approach to the CTDE scheme can be 
seen in value-based methods. Rashid et  al. (2018) learned a joint action-value function 
conditioned on the joint observation-action history. The joint action-value function is then 
divided into agent individual value functions based on monotonic non-linear composition. 
Foerster et al. (2016) used action-value functions that share information through a com-
munication channel during the training but then discarded it at test time. Similarly, Jorge 
et al. (2016) employed communication during training to promote information exchange 
for optimizing action-value functions.
Meta-Learning Sometimes, it can be useful to learn how to adapt to the behavioral 
changes of others. This learning-to-learn approach is known as meta-learning (Finn and 
Levine 2018; Schmidhuber et  al. 1996). Recent works in the single-agent domain have 
shown promising results (Duan et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2016a). Al-Shedivat et al. (2018) 
5 Fingerprints draw their inspiration from Tesauro (2004) who eluded non-stationarity by conditioning each 
agent’s policy on estimates of other agents’ policies.