924 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
baseline function uses a centralized critic, which calculates the advantage of a single agent 
by comparing the estimated return of the current joint-action to the counterfactual baseline. 
The impact of a single agent’s action is determined and can be attributed to the agent itself. 
Another work by Wu et al. (2018) used a marginalized action-value function as a base-
line to reduce the variance of critic estimates. The marginalization approaches are closely 
related to the difference rewards proposed by Tumer and Wolpert (2004) who determine 
the impact of an agent’s individual action compared to the average reward of all agents.
Inverse reinforcement learning Credit assignment problems can be evoked by a bad 
design of the reinforcement learning problem. Misinterpretations of the agents can lead to 
failure because unintentional strategies are explored, e.g. if the reward function does not 
capture all important aspects of the underlying task (Amodei et al. 2016). Therefore, an 
important step in the problem design is the reward function. However, designing a reward 
function can be challenging for complex problems (Hadfield-Menell et  al. 2017) and 
becomes even more complicated for multi-agent systems since different agents may accom-
plish different goals. Another approach to address the credit assignment problem is by 
inverse reinforcement learning (Ng and Russell 2000) that describes how an agent learns a 
reward function that explains the demonstrated behavior of an expert without having access 
to the reward signal. The learned reward function can then be used to build strategies. The 
work of Lin et  al. (2018) applied the principle of inverse reinforcement learning to the 
multi-agent setting. They showed that multiple agents could recover reward functions that 
are correlated with the ground truths. Related to inverse RL, imitation learning can be used 
to learn from expert knowledge. Yu et al. (2019) imitated expert behaviors to learn high-
dimensional policies in both cooperative and competitive environments. They were able to 
recover the expert policies for each individual agent from the provided expert demonstra-
tions. Further works on imitation learning consider the fully cooperative setting (Barrett 
et al. 2017; Le et al. 2017) and Markov Games with mixed settings (Song et al. 2018).
5.5  Scalability
Training a large number of agents is inherently difficult. Every agent involved in the envi-
ronment adds extra complexity to the learning problem such that the computational effort 
grows exponentially by the number of agents. Besides complexity concerns, sufficient scal-
ing also demands agents to be robust towards the behavioral adaption of other agents. How -
ever, agents can leverage the benefit of distributed knowledge shared and reused between 
agents to accelerate the learning process. In the following, we review approaches that 
address the handling of many agents and discuss possible solutions. We broadly classify 
the surveyed works into those that apply some form of knowledge reuse, reduce the com-
plexity of the learning problem, and develop robustness against the policy adaptions of 
other agents.
Knowledge reuse The training of individual learning models does scale poorly with the 
increasing number of agents because the computational effort increases due to the combi-
natorial possibilities. Knowledge reuse strategies are employed to ease the learning pro-
cess and scale RL to complex problems by reutilizing previous knowledge into new tasks. 
Knowledge reuse can be applied in many facets (Silva et al. 2018).
First, agents can make use of a parameter sharing technique if they exhibit homogene-
ous structures, e.g. the weights in a neural network for sharing parts or the whole learn-
ing model with others. Sharing the parameters of a policy enables an efficient training pro-
cess that can scale up to an arbitrary number of agents and, thus, can boost the learning