929 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
Fourth and last, we note a clear trend towards the CTDE paradigm that enables the sha-
ing of information during the training. Local information such as the observation-action 
history, function values, or policies can be made available to all agents during the train-
ing, which renders the environment stationary from the viewpoint of an individual agent 
and may diminish partial observability (Lowe et al. 2017). Further, the credit assignment 
problem can be addressed when information is available about all agents, and a centralized 
mechanism can attribute the individual contribution to the respective agent (Foerster et al. 
2018b). Further challenges that can be loosened are coordination and scalability when 
the lack of information of an individual agent is compensated, and the learning process is 
accelerated (Gupta et al. 2017).
6.2  Future work
Next to our identified trends, which are already under active research, we recognize areas 
that have not been sufficiently explored yet. One such area is multi-goal learning where 
each agent has an individually associated goal that needs to be optimized. However, global 
optimality can only be accomplished if agents also allow others to be successful in their 
task (Yang et al. 2020). Typical scenarios are cooperative tasks such as public good dilem-
mas, where agents are obliged to the sustainable use of limited resources, or autonomous 
driving, where agents have individual destinations and are supposed to coordinate the 
path-finding to avoid crashes. A similar direction is multi-task learning where agents are 
expected to perform well not only  on one single but  also on related  other tasks (Omid-
shafiei et  al. 2017; Taylor and Stone 2009). Besides multi-goal and multi-task learning, 
another avenue for future work is present in safe MADRL. Safety is a highly desired prop-
erty because autonomously acting agents are expected to ensure system performance while 
holding to safety guarantees during learning and employment (García et al. 2015). Several 
works in single-agent RL are concerned with safety concepts, but its applicability to mul-
tiple agents is limited and still in its infancy (Zhang and Bastani 2019; Zhu et al. 2020). 
Akin to the growing interest in learning to communicate, a similar effect may happen in 
the multi-agent domain, where deep learning methods open new paths. For an application 
perspective on safe autonomous driving, one can consider the article by Shalev-Shwartz 
et al. (2016). Another possible direction for future research offers the intersection between 
MADRL and evolutionary methodologies. Evolutionary algorithms have been used in ver -
satile contexts of multi-agent RL, e.g. for building intrinsic motivation (Wang et al. 2019), 
shaping rewards (Jaderberg et al. 2019), generating curricula (Long et al. 2020) and analyz-
ing dynamics (Bloembergen et al. 2015). Since evolution requires many entities to adapt, 
multi-agent RL is a natural playground for such algorithms.
Beyond the current challenges and reviewed literature of Sect.  5, we identify two prob-
lems that we regard as the most challenging problems to overcome by future work. We 
primarily choose these two problems since they are the ones that matter the most when 
it comes to the applicability of algorithms to real-world scenarios. Most research focuses 
on learning within homogeneous settings where agents share common interests and opti-
mize a mutual goal. For instance, the learning of communication is mainly studied in dec-
POMDPs, where agents are expected to optimize upon a joint reward signal. When agents 
share common interests, the CTDE paradigm is usually a beneficial choice to exchange 
information between agents, and problems like non-stationarity, partial observability, and 
coordination can be diminished. However, heterogeneity implies that agents may have 
their own interests and goals, individual experience and knowledge, or different skills and