Figure 3: Illustration of the limitations of CapsNets: The transformation matrix WWWijcan only transform uuuito high-level
capsules, while WWWkjcan only make meaningful transformations on uuuk. When an input is transformed (e.g., rotated), the
receptive ﬁeld corresponding to uuuiis notxxxiany more. For the novel uuui, the transformation process using WWWijcan fail.
4.2. Robust Afﬁne Capsule Networks
To overcome the limitation above, we propose a very
simple but efﬁcient solution. Concretely, we propose
to use the same transformation function for all primary
capsules (i.e., ensuring tj|i(·)≡tj|k(·)). We implement
a robust afﬁne capsule network (Aff-CapsNet) by sharing
a transformation matrix. Formally, for Aff-CapsNets, we
have
WWWij=WWWkj,∀i,k∈ {1,2,···,N} (10)
whereNis the number of primary capsules. In Aff-
CapsNets, the transformation matrix can make a meaningful
transformation for all primary capsules since it learns how
to transform all low-level capsules to high-level capsules
during training. The transformation matrix sharing has also
been explored in a previous publication [21]. The difference
is that they aim to save parameters, while our goal is to make
CapsNets more robust to afﬁne transformations.
From another perspective, primary capsules and high-
level capsules correspond to local coordinate systems and
global ones, respectively. A transformation matrix is
supposed to map a local coordinate system to the global
one. One might be wondering that the transformation from
each local coordinate system to a global one requires a
speciﬁc transformation matrix. In existing architectures,
the coordinate system is high-dimensional. Hence, a single
shared transformation matrix is able to make successful
transformations for all local coordinate systems.
5. Experiments and Analysis
The experiments include two parts: 1) We train CapsNets
with different routing mechanisms (including no routing) on
popular standard datasets and compare their properties from
many perspectives; 2) We show that Aff-CapsNets out-
perform CapsNets on the benchmark dataset and achieves
state-of-the-art performance. For all the experiments of thissection, we train models with 5 random seeds and report
their averages and variances.
5.1. Effectiveness of the Dynamic Routing
In Section 3, we show that the routing mechanism can be
learned implicitly in CapsNets without routing procedure.
Our experiments in this section aim to investigate if the
advantages of CapsNets disappear when trained with no
routing. We consider the following routing procedures in
our training routines:
1.Dynamic-R : with standard dynamic routing in [23];
2.Rolled-R : with a rolled routing procedure by treating
coupling coefﬁcients as constants during Gradient
Backpropagation, as analyzed in Section 3.1;
3.Trainable-R : one-step routing with trainable coupling
coefﬁcients, as in [4];
4.No-R : without routing procedure, which is equivalent
to the uniform routing in [19, 5].
We train CapsNets with different routing procedures de-
scribed above on four standard datasets, namely, MNIST
[15], FMNIST [26], SVHN [18] and CIFAR10 [13]. The
performance is reported in Table 1.
Given the performance variance for each model, the
performance between different models is relatively small.
The reason behind this is that coupling coefﬁcients can
be learned in transformation matrices implicitly, and all
the models possess a similar transformation process. The
models trained with No-R do not prevent the learning
of coupling coefﬁcients. We can also observe that the
models with Trainable-R orNo-R show a slightly better
performance than the other two. To our understanding, the
reason is that they do not suffer the polarization problem of
coupling coefﬁcients [17].
7289