Improving the Robustness of Capsule Networks to Image Afﬁne Transformations
Jindong Gu
University of Munich
Siemens AG, Corporate Technology
jindong.gu@siemens.comV olker Tresp
University of Munich
Siemens AG, Corporate Technology
volker.tresp@siemens.com
Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) achieve transla-
tional invariance by using pooling operations. However, the
operations do not preserve the spatial relationships in the
learned representations. Hence, CNNs cannot extrapolate
to various geometric transformations of inputs. Recently,
Capsule Networks (CapsNets) have been proposed to tackle
this problem. In CapsNets, each entity is represented by
a vector and routed to high-level entity representations by
a dynamic routing algorithm. CapsNets have been shown
to be more robust than CNNs to afﬁne transformations
of inputs. However, there is still a huge gap between
their performance on transformed inputs compared to un-
transformed versions. In this work, we ﬁrst revisit the
routing procedure by (un)rolling its forward and backward
passes. Our investigation reveals that the routing procedure
contributes neither to the generalization ability nor to the
afﬁne robustness of the CapsNets. Furthermore, we explore
the limitations of capsule transformations and propose
afﬁne CapsNets (Aff-CapsNets), which are more robust to
afﬁne transformations. On our benchmark task, where
models are trained on the MNIST dataset and tested on the
AffNIST dataset, our Aff-CapsNets improve the benchmark
performance by a large margin (from 79% to 93.21%),
without using any routing mechanism.
1. Introduction
Human visual recognition is quite insensitive to afﬁne
transformations. For example, entities in an image, and
a rotated version of the entities in the image, can both
be recognized by the human visual system, as long as the
rotation is not too large. Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs), the currently leading approach to image analysis,
achieve afﬁne robustness by training on a large amount of
data that contain different transformations of target objects.
Given limited training data, a common issue in many
real-world tasks, the robustness of CNNs to novel afﬁne
transformations is limited [23].With the goal of learning image features that are more
aligned with human perception, Capsule Networks (Cap-
sNets) have recently been proposed [23]. The proposed
CapsNets differ from CNNs mainly in two aspects: ﬁrst,
they represent each entity by an activation vector, the
magnitude of which represents the probability of its ex-
istence in the image; second, they assign low-level entity
representations to high-level ones using an iterative routing
mechanism (a dynamic routing procedure). Hereby, Cap-
sNets aim to keep two important features: equivariance of
output-pose vectors and invariance of output activations.
The general assumption is that the disentanglement of
variation factors makes CapsNets more robust than CNNs
to afﬁne transformations.
The currently used benchmark task to evaluate the afﬁne
robustness of a model is to train the model on the stan-
dard MNIST dataset and test it on the AffNIST1dataset.
CapsNets achieve 79% accuracy on AffNIST, while CNNs
with similar network size only achieve 66% [23]. Although
CapsNets have demonstrated their superiority on this task,
there is still a huge performance gap since CapsNets achieve
more than 99% on the untransformed MNIST test dataset.
In our paper, we ﬁrst investigate the effectiveness of
components that make CapsNets robust to input afﬁne trans-
formations, with a focus on the routing algorithm. Many
heuristic routing algorithms have been proposed [10, 25, 16]
since [23] was published. However, recent work [19] shows
that all routing algorithms proposed so far perform even
worse than a uniform/random routing procedure.
From both numerical analysis and empirical experi-
ments, our investigation reveals that the dynamic routing
procedure contributes neither to the generalization ability
nor to the afﬁne robustness of CapsNets. Therefore, it is
infeasible to improve the afﬁne robustness by modifying the
routing procedure. Instead, we investigate the limitations of
the CapsNet architectures and propose a simple solution.
Namely, we propose to apply an identical transformation
function for all primary capsules and replace the routing by
a simple averaging procedure (noted as No Routing).
1Each example is an MNIST digit with a small afﬁne transformation.
7285