Our contributions of this work can be summarized as
follows: 1) We revisit the dynamic routing procedure of
CapsNets; 2) We investigate the limitations of the current
CapsNet architecture and propose a more robust afﬁne
Capsule Networks (Aff-CapsNet); 3) Based on extensive
experiments, we investigate the properties of CapsNets
trained without routing. Besides, we demonstrate the
superiority of Aff-CapsNet.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section
2 ﬁrst reviews CapsNets and related work. Section 3
investigates the effectiveness of the routing procedure by
(un)rolling the forward and backward passes of the iterative
routing iterations. Section 4 shows the limitations of current
CapsNets on the afﬁne transformations and proposes a
robust afﬁne CapsNet (Aff-CapsNet). Section 4 conducts
extensive experiments to verify our ﬁndings and proposed
modiﬁcations. The last two sections discuss and conclude
our work.
2. Background and Related Work
In this section, we ﬁrst describe the CapsNets with
dynamic routing and then review related work.
2.1. Fundamentals of Capsule Networks
CapsNets [23] encode entities with capsules. Each cap-
sule is represented by an activity vector (e.g., the activation
of a group of neurons), and elements of each vector encode
the properties of the corresponding entity. The length of
the activation vector indicates the conﬁdence of the entity’s
existence. The output classes are represented as high-level
capsules.
A CapsNet ﬁrst maps the raw input features to low-level
capsules and then routes the low-level capsules to high-level
ones. For instance, in image classiﬁcation tasks, a CapsNet
starts with one (or more) convolutional layer(s) that convert
the pixel intensities into low-level visual entities. A fol-
lowing capsule layer of the CapsNet routs low-level visual
entities to high-level visual entities. A CapsNet can have
one or more capsule layers with routing procedures.
Given a low-level capsule uuuiof theL-th layer with N
capsules, a high-level capsule sssjof the(L+1)-th layer with
Mcapsules, and a transformation matrix WWWij, the routing
process is
ˆuˆuˆuj|i=WWWijuuui, sssj=N/summationdisplay
icijˆuˆuˆuj|i (1)
wherecijis a coupling coefﬁcient that models the degree
with which ˆuˆuˆuj|iis able to predict sssj. The capsule sssj
is shrunk to a length in (0, 1) by a non-linear squashing
functiong(·), which is deﬁned as
vvvj=g(sssj) =/bardblsssj/bardbl2
1+/bardblsssj/bardbl2sssj
/bardblsssj/bardbl(2)The coupling coefﬁcients {cij}are computed by an
iterative routing procedure. They are updated so that high
agreement ( aij=vvvT
jˆuˆuˆuj|i) corresponds to a high value of
cij.
cij=exp(bij)/summationtext
kexp(bik)(3)
where initial logits bikare the log prior probabilities and
updated with bik=bik+aijin each routing iteration.
The coupling coefﬁcients between a i-th capsule of the L-
th layer and all capsules of the (L+ 1) -th layer sum to 1,
i.e.,/summationtextM
j=1cij= 1. The steps in Equations 1, 2, and 3 are
repeatedKtimes in the routing process, where sssjandcij
depend on each other.
2.2. Related Work
Routing Algorithms: Many papers have improved the
routing-by-agreement algorithm. [27] generalizes existing
routing methods within the framework of weighted kernel
density estimation and proposes two fast routing methods
with different optimization strategies. [6] proposes an
attention-based routing procedure with an attention module,
which only requires a fast forward-pass. The agreement
aijcan also be calculated based on a Gaussian distribution
assumption [10, 2] or distance measures [16] instead of the
simple inner product.
Since the routing procedure is computationally expen-
sive, several works propose solutions reducing the com-
plexity of the iterative routing process. [25] formulates the
routing strategy as an optimization problem that minimizes
a combination of clustering-like loss and a KL distance
between the current coupling distribution and its last states.
[17] approximates the expensive routing process with two
branches: a master branch that collects primary information
from its direct contact in the lower layer and an aide branch
that replenishes the master branch based on pattern variants
encoded in other lower capsules.
Understanding the Routing Procedure: [4] incorpo-
rates the routing procedure into the training process by
making coupling coefﬁcients trainable, which are supposed
to be determined by an iterative routing process. The
coupling coefﬁcients are independent of examples, which
stay unchanged in the testing phase. What they proposed is
simply to reduce the iterative updates to a single forward
pass with prior coupling coefﬁcients. [5] removes the
routing procedure completely and modiﬁes the CapsNet
architectures. Their pure CapsNets achieve competitive
performance. However, it has not been investigated how
the properties of their CapsNets, e.g., the robustness to
afﬁne transformation, will be affected by the removal of
the routing procedure. Furthermore, [19] shows that many
routing procedures [23, 10, 25, 16] are heuristic, and
perform even worse than a random routing assignment.
7286