Figure 2: The green lines correspond to the model with
dynamic routing, while the magenta ones to the model
without routing procedure. For both models, the agreement
on the target class increases with training time, and the
agreement on the non-ground-truth classes decreases. The
values are averaged over the whole training or test dataset.
Many routing algorithms differ only in how they approx-
imateCCC∗. For instance, the original work [23] approximates
CCC∗with an iterative routing procedure. Without requiring
iterative routing steps, [4] makes {bij}trainable to approx-
imate{c∗
ij}. Their proposal can be understood as only one-
step routing with learned prior coupling coefﬁcients. By
further reformulation, we show that the optimal sss∗
jcan be
learned, without a need for coupling coefﬁcients, as
sss∗
j=N/summationdisplay
ic∗
ijˆuˆuˆuj|i=N/summationdisplay
ic∗
ijWWW∗
ijuuui=N/summationdisplay
iWWW′
ijuuui. (8)
In the training process, the transformation matrix WWWij
is updated via Gradient Decent Method. The coupling
coefﬁcients cijare determined by the agreement between
low-level capsules and the corresponding high-level cap-
sules. The training process ends up with parameter values
sss∗
j,WWW∗
ij,c∗
ij. As shown in Equation 8, the CapsNet can
achieve the same results by simply learning a transforma-
tion matrix WWW′
ijwithoutc∗
ij. In other words, the connection
strengths c∗
ijbetween low-level capsules and high-level
capsules can be learned implicitly in the transformation
matrixWWW′
ij. Therefore, we can conclude that different ways
to approximate CCC∗do not make a signiﬁcant difference
since the coupling coefﬁcients will be learned implicitly.
We visualize the implicit learning process of the cou-
pling coefﬁcients. In our experiments, we introduce the
no-routing approach, where we remove the iterative rout-
ing procedure by setting all coupling coefﬁcient cijas a
constant1
M. In each training epoch, the agreement on
the target class and on the non-ground-truth classes is
visualized in Figure 2. As a comparison, we also visualizethe corresponding agreement values of CapNets with the
dynamic routing process. We can observe that, during the
training process, the agreement on the target class increases
(in the left plot) for both cases, and the agreement on the
non-ground-truth classes decreases (in the right plot). In
other words, f(ˆuˆuˆu)increases in both CapNets with/without
routing procedure, meaning that the coupling coefﬁcients
can be learned implicitly.
In summary, the afﬁne robustness of CapsNet can not be
contributed to the routing procedure. We conclude that it
is not infeasible to improve the robustness of CapsNet by
modifying the current routing-by-agreement algorithm.
4. Afﬁne Robustness of Capsule Networks
Besides the dynamic routing process, the other dif-
ference between CapsNets and traditional CNNs is the
CapsNet architecture. CapsNets represent each entity with
a capsule and transform it to high-level entities employing
transformation matrices. In this section, we investigate the
limitation of the transformation process in terms of afﬁne
robustness and propose robust afﬁne capsule networks.
4.1. The Limitation of CapsNets
The CapsNet starts with two convolutional layers, which
converts the pixel intensities to form primary (low-level)
capsules (e.g., the red cuboid in Figure 3 is a capsule uuui).
Each primary capsule has a certain receptive ﬁeld (e.g., the
image patch xxximarked with the yellow rectangle). For all
inputs, the coordinates of the receptive ﬁeld of uuuiare the
same. In other words, a primary capsule can only see a
speciﬁc area in input images. We denote the corresponding
converting process by uuui=pi(xxxi).
Each primary capsule is transformed to high-level cap-
sules with the corresponding transformation matrix. Each
transformation matrix WWWijlearns how to transform the i-
th low-level capsule to the j-th high-level one, i.e., ˆuˆuˆuj|i=
tj|i(uuui). The transformation process corresponding to the
input patch xxxican be described as
ˆuˆuˆuj|i=WWWijuuui=tj|i(uuui) =tj|i(pi(xxxi)). (9)
The transformation matrix WWWijcan only make meaningful
transformations for the entities that have, at some point,
appeared in the position of xxxi. The input domain of the
transformation function tj|i(·)isUi.
In the testing phase, if novel afﬁne transformations are
conducted on the input, the corresponding transformation
processtj|i(pi(xxx′
i))are not meaningful since pi(xxx′
i)is not
in the input domain Ui. In other words, the transformation
matrixWWWijdoes not describe a meaningful transformation
since the entities of xxx′
ihave never appeared in the position of
the patch xxxiduring training. Hence, the CapsNet is limited
in its generalization ability to novel afﬁne transformations
of inputs.
7288