ORIGINAL ARTICLEInternational Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13042-022-01647-y
impact on human life [ 1–3]. As great progress has been 
made in AI technology in recent years, various application 
fields have stepped into intelligence [ 4, 5]. On the road of AI 
development, models, computing power, chip performance, 
and other technical issues have been the focus of academic 
research, so that AI technology can continue to evolve. For 
machines to truly approach the level of human thought, 
they need to be trained with vast amounts of real data [ 6, 
7]. However, cloud computing power, data security, data 
silos and other risks will inevitably become constraints for 
AI to win user trust, collect private data, and achieve large-
scale implementation [ 8]. Therefore, it is an urgent need for 
a practical and effective technique to alleviate the above 
problems and make the AI full of vitality again. Under this 
background, the concept of “federated learning (FL) " came 
into being.
The notion of FL is first proposed by Google in 2016, 
mainly to make android mobile phone users update mod -
els locally without revealing private personal data [ 9]. After 
then, Google implemented an application-oriented FL sys -
tem. The designed FL system, which focused on running 
federated average (FedAvg) algorithms on mobile phones, 
can perform federated analytics and be applied to monitor 
statistics for large-scale cluster equipment without record -
ing raw device data to the cloud server. FL is one of the most 1 Introduction
Since the concept of artificial intelligence (AI) was put for -
ward in 1956, AI technology has more and more profound 
 
Zhihua Cui
cuizhihua@tyust.edu.cn
Jie Wen
wj_110926@163.com
Zhixia Zhang
15634969919@163.com
Yang Lan
lanyangvip1020@163.com
Jianghui Cai
jianghui@tyust.edu.cn
Wensheng Zhang
wensheng.zhang@ia.ac.cn
1 School of Electronic Information Engineering, Taiyuan 
University of Science and Technology, Taiyuan, China
2 School of Computer Science and Technology, Taiyuan 
University of Science and Technology, Taiyuan, China
3 The State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Control and 
Management of Complex Systems, Institute of Automation 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, ChinaAbstract
Federated learning (FL) is a secure distributed machine learning paradigm that addresses the issue of data silos in building 
a joint model. Its unique distributed training mode and the advantages of security aggregation mechanism are very suit -
able for various practical applications with strict privacy requirements. However, with the deployment of FL mode into 
practical application, some bottlenecks appear in the FL training process, which affects the performance and efficiency 
of the FL model in practical applications. Therefore, more researchers have paid attention to the challenges of FL and 
sought for various effective research methods to solve these current bottlenecks. And various research achievements of 
FL have been made to promote the intelligent development of all application areas with privacy restriction. This paper 
systematically introduces the current researches in FL from five aspects: the basics knowledge of FL, privacy and security 
protection mechanisms in FL, communication overhead challenges and heterogeneity problems of FL. Furthermore, we 
make a comprehensive summary of the research in practical applications and prospect the future research directions of FL.
Keywords  Federated learning · Machine learning · Privacy protection · Personalized federated learningReceived: 16 May 2022 / Accepted: 29 August 2022 / Published online: 11 November 2022
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2022A survey on federated learning: challenges and applications
Jie Wen1 · Zhixia Zhang1 · Yang Lan2 · Zhihua Cui2 · Jianghui Cai2 · Wensheng Zhang3
1 3