International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535concerned technologies in the field of privacy computing. 
With its advantages of lightweight technology pathway and 
deployment scheme, FL has become the mainstream solu -
tion and product choice in many privacy computing applica -
tion scenarios. And as the development and perfection of FL 
applications, a large quantity of research achievements of 
FL field has emerged.
FL is a secure distributed machine learning technique 
that cooperatively performs FL algorithms on multiple 
scattered edge devices or servers under the condition that 
the private information is not leave local [ 10]. FL transfers 
the task of data training to each local client, and the com -
munication between client and server is through parameter 
interaction rather than direct data interaction. The server 
only participates in simple parameter aggregation to update 
the global model. Such FL scheme can realize the protec -
tion of local user data on the basis of saving the computing 
and storage resources of the server. FL can obtain a global 
model with superior performance through the communica -
tion between client and server. This approach is contrasts 
with traditional centralized training, where all separate local 
datasets are gathered to a center server for training model 
[11]. Compared to the traditional centralized machine learn -
ing methods [ 12], FL techniques can realize multiple fed -
erated agencies to build a unified model between the safe, 
efficient, and compliance of multi-source data applications 
of the ecological system [ 13–15]. Meanwhile, the perfor -
mance of federated model is similar to that of the model 
trained through data integration. FL realizes the interagency 
sharing of data fusion, through the system expansion of 
sample size and increase the data dimension for high-pre -
cision model building for big data and application support, 
which can provide high-quality big data services and create 
more value for social development.
However, with the explosion of privacy computing plat -
forms and products, the number of FL products put into 
practical application gradually increases, and some chal -
lenges have also raised. At present, the research on FL tech -
nology is still in continuous improvement. By combing the 
existing literature, we concluded that research on current FL 
mainly faces three bottlenecks: privacy and security threats, 
heterogeneity challenges, and huge communication over -
head of FL [ 16]. Compared with traditional privacy-protect -
ing computing technologies, FL is essentially characterized 
by exposing certain parameter data and assuming that these 
data do not reveal sensitive information. However, a grow -
ing body of research has found that this hypothesis is not 
necessarily objective. In FL, there are still hidden dangers of 
parameters leakage and attack by malicious operations [ 17]. 
The research for effective privacy protection techniques and 
attack mitigation method remains a focus of FL. At the same 
time, when large quantities of clients participate in FL, the problem that communication overhead of FL is far greater 
than the computational overhead cannot be ignored. There -
fore, communication efficiency problem is also the main 
challenges in FL. Additionally, any locally available data 
point distribution is not representing the overall data distri -
bution because the data distribution varies widely between 
clients. The heterogeneity of client data distribution leads 
to global model drift. Also, each client is constrained by 
device resources and their tasks, and the models trained by 
clients participating in federated tasks are often different. 
All of these show the challenges of current FL techniques in 
practical applications.
FL continues to develop multiple practical applications 
while overcoming challenges. FL techniques have been 
deeply applied in many fields, such as: intelligent medical 
[18], recommendation systems, smart city [ 19], finance and 
insurance, edge of computing [ 20], intrusion detection et al. 
To meet the needs of practical applications, more efficient 
FL algorithms are sought to strike a balance between secu -
rity and efficiency. Different institutions realize the applica -
tion of FL through the secure connection of platforms so that 
the data cooperation model based on FL will develop in a 
legal and compliant direction. The motivation for this paper 
is to survey the existing literatures and summarize advanced 
methods and techniques in the FL field. We outlined the 
basic definition and categorization of FL, and reviewed the 
latest FL research, including different strategies for solving 
the challenges of privacy security, communication costs, 
and heterogeneity. Then we discussed how the FL frame -
work can be applied to various application scenarios suc -
cessfully, and the research achievements are introduced for 
several current application directions of FL. Additionally, 
we analyzed the current research status and prospect for the 
development of FL in the future.
The contributions of this paper to the FL research are as 
follows:
(1) It provides an in-depth survey and analysis of the latest 
papers on FL.
(2) It concerns the practical application prospects of FL and 
the challenges faced in the process of practical applica -
tions, and has unique views on the current development 
and future prospects of FL.
The rest of paper is organized as follows. The basics knowl -
edge of FL is introduced in Sect. 2. Sect. 3 depicts privacy 
and security threats to FL and surveys and empirically 
evaluates mitigation methods.  Sect. 4 surveys communi -
cation problem of FL and reviews various communication-
efficient mechanisms. Sect. 5 discusses the solutions for the 
problem of heterogeneity in FL. Sect.6 introduces the cur -
rent research status of FL in many fields. And in Sect. 7, 
1 3514