International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535method to dynamically enhance the detection performance 
of Byzantine attacks with non-IID data. Different from the 
above methods of selecting trusted participants, Li et al. 
[69] focused on detecting the Byzantine model and identify 
the attacker in FL, puts forward a Byzantine resistant secure 
blockchained FL framework. the framework by introducing 
the validator to parallel execution of heavy validation work -
flow, improve the efficiency of the model validation, and 
through the Byzantine consistency validation to detect Byz -
antine attack resistance. The framework introduces valida -
tors to perform heavy validation workflows in parallel and 
detects Byzantine attacks through Byzantine anti-confor -
mance validation, which greatly improves the efficiency of 
model verification. Based on the in-depth study of specific 
attack behavior of Byzantine attackers, various protection 
mechanisms and strategies provide a strong guarantee for 
the detection and defense methods of Byzantine attacks.
Furthermore, the differences of several attack and defense 
strategies are listed in Table 2.
4 Communication challenge in federated 
learning
Communication overhead is also a major bottleneck for 
FL, because the communication cost is far greater than the 
computation cost when numerous edge devices are send -
ing their model parameters to central server. The commu -
nication cost is too large in the training process, resulting 
in low training efficiency of FL, which is not conducive to 
the application of FL in practical engineering field. There -
fore, for an efficient FL algorithm, it is necessary to enhance 
the communication efficiency. In the existing research for 
reducing communication cost of FL, the respond solution 
strategies from three aspects are often considered: federated 
learning optimization algorithm, client selection, and model 
compression. In this section, we summarize the researchers’ 
efforts to mitigate the communication cost challenge of FL 
in these three perspectives.
4.1 Federated Learning optimization algorithm
In the FL training process, the clients generate the local 
model after optimization processing steps such as gradient 
descent (GD) algorithm, and then transmit the trained model 
to the center server for aggregation. The performance of the 
local training model directly determines the performance of 
the federated model. Researchers have studied the influence 
of global communication iteration times between client and 
server and the local training times of client on FL perfor -
mance [ 70]. And it is verified that increasing local iteration 
times and decreasing the global communication round can framework, clients and server cooperate to analyze model 
exceptions and ensure the security and validity of the global 
model. Based on the characteristics of distributed learning 
mechanism for FL, the attack range of FL is larger than that 
of centralized learning, and the concealment is stronger. 
During the training and testing phases, any internal dishon -
est participant or external malicious attacker can have a very 
serious impact on the final performance of the federated 
global model. It is necessary to better understand the poten -
tial attacks of FL to improve the effectiveness and robust -
ness of detection and defense methods.
3.2.2 Byzantine attack
Many FL usually encourages as many clients as possible 
with good data quality to participate in FL training by incen -
tive mechanism, but does not consider the malicious clients 
attack problem in FL training process. In recent years, more 
individuals pay attention to the security of distributed learn -
ing, among which the Byzantine threat problem is the most 
important. Poisoning attack mainly considers the attack on 
a single user or a server, while Byzantine attack mainly con -
siders the collusion of multiple users in distributed learning 
environment. In FL, a malicious attacker may control mul -
tiple clients, known as Byzantine users. Byzantine users can 
upload fake data due to unreliable communication channels, 
corrupted hardware, or even malicious attacks, lead to the 
global model is manipulated by attackers and cannot be con -
verged. As an active internal attack pattern, Byzantine attack 
can easily harm the normal communication between client 
and server in FL. So, the defense and detection of Byzantine 
attack has been the hot issues in FL security research [ 65].
To better detect and defend attacks, researchers have 
conducted various research work on Byzantine attacks from 
different technologies and strategies. Ma et al. [ 66] put for -
ward a credibility-based approach to defend against Byz -
antine attacks. For Byzantine attacks with non-independent 
and identical distributed (non-IID) datasets, reliability indi -
cators were designed to evaluate the reliability of knowl -
edge transmitted by clients, and the reliability was updated 
according to the knowledge information shared by clients 
each round. At the same time, in the basic of secure two-
party computing protocol, an effective privacy protection 
parameter aggregation protocol is put forwarded. The pro -
posed method can identify Byzantine attackers accurately 
and update global model securely. Similarly, Zhai et al. 
[67] designed a Byzantine robust model for FL by evalu -
ating the reliability of non-IID data. However, the specific 
difference is that the reliability assessment method in this 
paper combines the adaptive anomaly detection model and 
data verification, in which adaptive mechanism and trans -
fer learning [ 68] are introduced into the anomaly detection 
1 3520