International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535local parameters. The proposed algorithm allows each cli -
ent to use different HE private keys in the same FL-based 
distributed cryptosystem, ensuring the privacy of param -
eters. These privacy-protected schemes effectively pre -
vent privacy disclosure of shared parameters in FL and is 
robust to collusion between clients and servers. Meanwhile, 
the development of HE technology is limited by the large 
amount of time cost during encryption operation. In the 
light of this issue, Zhang et al. [ 54] optimized previous HE 
by scaling gradients in advance and then cutting and post-
quantization encryption, which successfully decreases the 
encryption cost and the total number of ciphertext, as well 
as saving costs.
For clarity, we list the characteristic of three kinds of pri -
vacy protection techniques in Table 1.
3.2 Security attack and solutions in federated 
learning
In addition to improving the necessary data protection 
mechanism, it is also necessary to prevent malicious attacks 
from causing security risks of the federated system [ 55]. 
People often intuitively equate security and privacy, but 
there is actually a difference between the two. Security can 
guarantee the confidentiality and integrity of data, while 
privacy can further refine the privacy of personal informa -
tion. Privacy prevails when dealing with private data, while 
security means protecting data from unauthorized access. In 
FL, there are various types of attacks that can against the 
FL system to compromise the security of federated model 
and local participants’ model. In this segment, we intro -
duce the two most common types of attacks that FL studies: 
poisoning attacks and Byzantine attacks. And the existing 
research works of each attack method are introduced to 
understand the current development of FL security protec -
tion mechanism.
3.2.1 Poisoning attack
In the FL mechanism, poisoning attack tends to tamper, 
destroy or pollute the client’s local training dataset or model 
generated in the FL training process by means of poisoning, 
so as to affect the security of FL system [ 56]. The existing 
data poisoning types in FL are usually subdivided into data 
poisoning and model poisoning categories, which posed 
great threats to the security of FL.
Data poisoning attackers maliciously tamper with local 
client data’s source tags or characteristics to influence the 
training result of federated models [ 57]. Because of the 
distributed nature of FL deployment, it is difficult to deter -
mine whether a client is participating in FL in good faith, 
so detecting data poisoning is a challenging task. Data this affected the availability of model. To alleviate this prob -
lem, Sun et al. [ 45] combined DP with functional encryp -
tion, proposed a hybrid privacy protection scheme for FL, 
and used an interactive key generation method, which 
avoided the collusion problem and obtained a good balance 
between privacy protection and model accuracy. Fan et al. 
[46] constructed an adaptive DP method to increase noise 
adaptively according to the importance of features during 
model training. And a multi-objective optimization model 
is established, which can balance the conflicting indexes 
of accuracy and privacy protection effectively by adopting 
multi-objective optimization algorithm [ 47–49].
3.1.3 Homomorphic encryption
Homomorphic encryption (HE) is an encryption algo -
rithm which meets the homomorphic operation nature of 
the ciphertext. That is, it allows users to perform specific 
algebraic operations on ciphertext directly, and the result of 
ciphertext calculation is the same as that of plaintext encryp -
tion after the same operation. The design of an efficient HE 
algorithm involves some cryptography knowledge based on 
the complexity theory of mathematical computation. If a HE 
algorithm supports any form of ciphertext calculation, it is 
called fully homomorphic encryption (FHE) [ 50]. If par -
tial ciphertext computation is supported, for example, only 
addition, multiplication, or a limited number of additions 
is supported, it is called semi-homomorphic encryption or 
partially homomorphic encryption (PHE). It is worth not -
ing that when operating on an encrypted model using HE 
technique, all participants of these operations are required to 
share the same encryption key and the same decryption key.
In FL, HE allows the center server to carry out alge -
braic operations directly on encrypted parameters without 
decryption. Zhang et al. [ 51] proposed a privacy-protection 
and verifiable FL scheme. The scheme combines the chi -
nese residual theorem and Paillier homomorphic encryp -
tion technology to deal with shared gradients, which can 
realize privacy-protected FL with low computational and 
communication costs. However, once participants who hold 
the same secret key collude with each other, the FL scheme 
will unable to guarantee user privacy security. In addition, 
in FL, the server can extract the information of the training 
dataset from the shared gradient by using the public key, 
which may maliciously tamper with the calculation results, 
thus influencing the accuracy of the federated global model. 
To solve above issues, Ma et al. [ 52] made a multi-key HE 
protocol, in which model updates are encrypted through 
aggregated public keys and decryption requires cooperation 
among all participating devices. Park et al. [ 53] used HE 
technique to design a privacy-protected FL algorithm that 
enables centralized servers to directly aggregate encrypted 
1 3518