International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535which can deal with problems beyond the capabilities of 
existing HFL and VFL. FTL models can learn from source 
domain to target domain based on the similarity of data or 
models among participants [ 30]. In most applications, tags 
in the source domain are used to predict the accuracy of tags 
in the target domain [ 31].
3 Privacy and security challenges in 
federated learning
Before the FL was put forward, machine learning privacy 
protection problem has been always been a hot research 
topic [ 8]. As an innovative technology, the research direc -
tion of FL is also closely related to previous privacy pro -
tection techniques. FL provides a security mechanism to 
protect data privacy, which can secure the transmission of 
model while protecting local sensitive data. However, even 
under the protection of the FL security mechanism, there 
are still various types of attacks that can be against the FL 
system, thereby destroying the reliability of the FL system 
and threatening the data privacy of the participants [ 32]. In 
this section, we will briefly review three different privacy-
protection technologies, identify the potential attacks and 
look for specific ways to prevent malicious hazards.sample union between participants, thereby improving the 
accuracy and generalization ability of model [ 25].
Vertical federated learning  Unlike HFL, the dataset char -
acteristics of VFL are largely different between clients. For 
dataset of clients, the overlap of users is greater than that 
of data features, that is, each client dataset has more of the 
same users, and the data features are hardly duplicated [ 26]. 
HFL is a kind of FL based on feature dimensions, which is 
segmented according to feature dimensions. HFL takes com -
mon users as data alignment orientation and takes out the 
parts of participants with the same users but not completely 
the same characteristics for joint training [ 27]. Therefore, 
during the joint training, sample alignment of each partici -
pant’s data is required first to obtain repeated data of users, 
and then training on selected data sets.
Federated transfer learning  HFL and VFL require all par -
ticipants to have the same feature space or sample space to 
build an efficient shared machine learning model. However, 
in more real scenarios, the datasets owned by each partici -
pant may be highly different [ 28, 29]. At the same time, it 
can help build an effective and accurate global model with 
only a small amount of data (samples and features do not 
overlap) and with less labels, while complying with data pri -
vacy and security regulations. This has given rise to a new 
category of FL, called federated transfer learning (FTL), 
Fig. 2  The categories of FL 
1 3516