International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535coal [ 167], power dispatching [ 168] and other fields. For 
example, in the education field, a multi-data source stu -
dent information sharing platform can be build due to the 
accumulation of a large amount of data in students’ physi -
cal and mental health research, and the data value sharing 
is realized under the condition of guaranteeing the privacy 
of data source, so security FL becomes a worthy solution. 
And in the process of dealing with government data, many 
government departments are reluctant to share personal data 
because the lack of credible data asset right confirmation 
scheme. Under such circumstances, FL can be integrated 
with big data development components to solve the data 
island of government departments and achieve secure cross-
departmental sharing and sharing of government and social 
data, effectively reducing the risk of data leakage.
At the moment, the FL has a promising application pros -
pect. But the FL technique applied to more fields is very 
much a blank area, which need to be explore to make FL 
applied to all aspects of people daily lives and lower the risk 
of privacy information disclosure in the big data era [ 169].
In recent years, the amount of literature on FL has grown 
exponentially, which show that people have paid more atten -
tion to the importance of privacy protection. As a solution of 
traditional machine learning in security protection, FL can 
fully release the productivity of big data and solve the prob -
lem of privacy protection. However, in the face of various 
application requirements in the actual complex environment 
and the deficiency of FL, it is necessary to dynamically opti -
mize FL training according to objectives and constraints. FL 
is not only the union of models, but also the union of knowl -
edge and non-sensitive information. The idea of federated 
learning can provide a feasible solution for other areas of 
research that are not only machine learning area.
8 Conclusion
FL technique, as one of the important solutions of privacy 
protection, has gained rapid development and enough atten -
tion in recent years. From the basic knowledge and frame -
work of FL to the methods and strategies for solving above 
challenges, researchers have carried out careful research on 
the various branches of FL, and have done a lot of research 
work in each branch. Researchers have a more in-depth 
understanding of FL, and based on this to achieve a perfect 
combination of FL with various applications.
This paper summarized the current research achieve -
ments of FL, systematically introduced the concept of FL, 
the challenges faced by the development of FL, and the 
research direction of FL combined with various applica -
tions. On the basis of these, we made a deep thinking and 
analysis on the development of FL in the future and the a large number of clients to optimize the global model and 
enhance the robustness of FL. In the future development of 
FL, the problem of client selection is bound to develop in 
large scale and complexity, and it is gradually important to 
efficiently select the client suitable for FL in the changing 
environment.
(4) Research on new model fusion method in multi-
modal FL. Due to the diversity and heterogeneity of data of 
enterprise devices in different fields, clients participating in 
FL can provide different forms of data, including pictures, 
voice, text, and etc., this is the multi-modal data. Different 
data types make it necessary for clients to train different 
local models to perform locally personalized tasks. When 
the clients carry out FL, it is very difficult for the server 
to directly aggregate the different modal models uploaded 
by the client. This heterogeneity mentioned here is differ -
ent from the model heterogeneity challenge in Sect. 5.2. 
The heterogeneity here refers to the different structures and 
types of models due to different data forms, not just dif -
ferent structures. For example, one client trains text data, 
another client trains image data, and the types and struc -
tures of network models suitable for processing local tasks 
are different. Therefore, how to mine the huge value hidden 
in different modal data, establish the relationship between 
different modal models, realize the fusion of multi-modal 
models, and improve the performance of local models, is 
the current research focus of multi-modal FL. In this case, 
when updating the global model, the server needs to design 
a new model fusion method to deal with the model uploaded 
by the client before the update, in order to better update the 
global model, and enable FL to provide personalized ser -
vices for the different clients.
(5) Deepen the research and application of FL in vari -
ous fields. The development of FL has experienced three 
stages: traditional privacy protection, FL and security FL. 
Basically, all kinds of commonly used machine learning 
algorithms can adopt FL method for model training, sup -
port structured, text, image and other types of data sources, 
and can be applied in sample classification, path program -
ming [ 164], regression prediction, image recognition [ 165, 
166], gene analysis, natural language and other tasks. In 
recent years, FL has played an important role in health care, 
finance, Internet of things, urban services and other fields 
where there is a strictly requirement for privacy protection. 
Based on the characteristics of distributed learning approach 
in FL, it also plays a prominent part in relieving the storage 
pressure and computing pressure of central server, adjusting 
data distribution structure and optimizing federated train -
ing mode. Besides to promote cooperation between different 
regions and different fields and further promote commer -
cial development, scholars should pay some attention to the 
application of FL in education, e-government, meteorology, 
1 3530