International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535the privacy of PM2.5 prediction data, but also reduces trans -
mission consumption in smart city sensing applications. Li 
et al. [ 69] proposed a spatio-temporal prediction technology 
to protect privacy through combining FL, which ensured 
spatio-temporal prediction accurate under the premise of 
protecting data privacy in construction of smart cities. Yuan 
et al. [ 134] proposed a federated deep learning algorithm 
based on spatio-temporal long-term and short-term net -
work, which used observed historical traffic data to predict 
traffic flow, ensuring data privacy and effectively alleviating 
traffic congestion in smart cities.
The emergence of FL provides a new paradigm for build -
ing smart city. This effectively protects the data privacy, 
promotes the sharing and fusion of data at all levels of city, 
taps the potential value of urban data, and further promoting 
the process of urban intelligent construction, so that citizens 
could fully enjoy high-quality urban services.
6.4 Federated learning in finance and insurance
In order to fully analyze and utilize big data, cooperation 
among financial institutions has gradually become the trans -
formation trend of financial and insurance industry [ 135]. 
In recent years, some financial institutions have carried out 
FL applications, mainly focusing on risk control, marketing, 
anti-money laundering and other aspects. The application of 
FL in financial scenarios, including HFL helps many banks 
train credit of depositor forecasting models, and VFL helps 
different financial institutions predict loan repayment abil -
ity. No matter which kind of FL is used, it will help financial 
scenarios to better understand investment ability of custom -
ers and credit rating scores. Similarly, participants in FL 
in the financial field will be different financial institutions, 
which keep investment information of user, and will train 
different global models for different financial tasks under 
the assumption that the data are not exposed [ 136]. The 
combination of FL and finance application is shown in the 
Fig. 7.
However, most of the combinations of FL and finance 
application are still in the early research stage and have not 
been put into large-scale application. At present, there is a 
classic application of FL in the financial field is WeBank 
institution used FL in the risk management of small and 
micro business credit and personal loans, which helps bank 
solve third-party data for risk control modeling. And then 
better predict and score the credit information of enter -
prises, as well as the insurance claims of users. Based on the 
credit risk assessment applications, Cheng et al. [ 137] pro -
posed an efficient privacy-protection boosting tree frame -
work based on VFL, which implements privacy-preserving 
joint machine learning training on vertically segmented cli -
ent credit score data.and recommendation system aims to provide users with 
accurate and feasible recommend services on the premise 
of protecting privacy and trade secrets user, which promot -
ing the progress of recommendation technology in various 
commerce institutions.
6.3 Federated learning in smart city
The development of the city is inseparable from the joint 
efforts of government agencies, private enterprises and indi -
viduals [ 125, 126], and the improvement of data privacy 
requirements leads to the data center can not provide data 
for third parties at will [ 127, 128]. This limits the exchange 
of data at different levels. The emergence of FL effectively 
solves the problem of data isolated island and integrates 
data at all levels of the city in order to provide better urban 
applications and transportation services for citizens [ 129, 
130]. When FL is applied to smart city construction, govern -
ment agencies and private enterprises will act as data own -
ers, that is, clients. And the urban data management center 
will become the service. In order to solve various problems 
in the construction of smart cities, the service will unite with 
different levels of institutions in the city to train a global 
model, it will deal with different tasks, so as to provide more 
convenient urban services for citizens [ 131]. The combina -
tion of FL and smart city application is shown in the Fig. 6.
In view of this, many researchers have conducted a series 
of studies on the application of FL in urban development. 
Jiang et al. [ 132] made an in-depth description on the fea -
sibility of FL in smart city perception, and summarized the 
open problems and challenges in applications, so as to pro -
vide guidance for scholars on this topic. Putra et al. [ 133] 
proposed federated compression learning, which ensures 
Fig. 6  Federated learning in smart city 
1 3526