International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535because the number of parameters is typically several orders 
of magnitude smaller than the size of the data, the computa -
tional overhead of the encryption process is greatly reduced. 
Therefore, under the low safety requirements, using SMC 
technology to build a security model can be exchanged for 
improved efficiency.
3.1.2 Differential privacy
After user data is encrypted and uploaded to the center 
server, malicious server can use the encrypted data to infer 
the characteristics of the user group, but cannot parse the 
information of an individual. This attack method is called 
differential attack. Aiming at this threaten, differential pri -
vacy (DP) technology can use random noise to drown the 
original data, making it impossible for attackers to reverse 
the original data from the database. The main way to imple -
ment DP is to add noise to the result set to solve the privacy 
protection problem of a single query. DP has rigorous data 
theory, and its essence is the protection of computational 
results rather than computational process. The advantage of 
DP is that it has a privacy protection model that is strictly 
independent of background knowledge and can theoreti -
cally resist any attack.
In view of the advantages of DP in data privacy pro -
tection, researchers migrated it to the FL system, and by 
combining DP with other technologies, many models of 
privacy protection were generated. In the federated optimi -
zation process, certain malicious participants may launch 
the differential attack to affect the federated model security. 
For solving this issue, Geyer et al. [ 40] designed a feder -
ated optimization algorithm with DP protection strategy. 
The goal is to achieve a balance between privacy loss and 
model performance while hiding customer contributions 
and private data during training. Huang et al. [ 41] designed 
an asynchronous FL privacy protection computing model. 
It protects data privacy while reducing noise to be added 
by using an adaptive DP mechanism. Xiong et al. [ 42] con -
ducted an in-depth analysis for privacy leakage problem in 
FL. Based on in-depth analysis, a new FL algorithm with 
differential privacy, 2DP-FL, is proposed to implement pri -
vacy protection by adding noise when training local models 
and distributed global models.
Most of the existing FL models train the deep neural net -
works, and the number of parameters transmitted during FL 
is often large [ 43, 44], so the communication cost of SMC 
cannot be ignored. Therefore, FL based on DP technology 
is often adopted in consideration of communication costs. 
The principle of FL based on DP is mainly to add noise to 
parameter information for data safe transmission, which will 
not generate a high communication cost or computing cost. 
However, since DP technique added noise to the parameters, 3.1 Privacy protection technique in federated 
learning
As a secure machine learning technology with privacy pro -
tection, the degree of protection of information privacy by 
FL is largely guaranteed by security encryption technol -
ogy [ 33]. Since the advent of encryption technology, it has 
become the focus of many scholars, which greatly pro -
tects privacy information from disclosure. At present, the 
traditional encryption techniques accepted by most schol -
ars include secure multi-party computing, differential pri -
vacy, and homomorphic encryption. These three privacy 
encryption methods provide basic guarantee for the secure 
transmission of parameters or gradients in FL. Next, these 
encryption techniques used in FL will be briefly introduced 
as follows.
3.1.1 Secure multi-party computing
Secure multi-party computing (SMC) was originated in 
1982 with Yao’s Millionaire problem [ 34], mainly used to 
protect the input data of each party participating in coopera -
tion. In this process, sensitive data is protected by encryp -
tion between parties. The SMC security model typically 
involves multiparty and provides security guarantee in a 
zero-knowledge simulation framework. And the parties 
know nothing but inputs and outputs. Throughout the cal -
culation process, parties always have absolute control over 
the data they own. In the related studies on SMC, one of 
the most advanced SMC frameworks is Sharemind [ 35], 
which is a secure multi-party computing system that allows 
user to process data without seeing it. With various research 
on private computing, SMC technology is becoming more 
mature. Xiong et al. [ 36] proposed a robust reversible image 
watermarking scheme using SMC technology based on 
lightweight encryption. And the proposed scheme based on 
bit prediction error extension (PEE) is guaranteed by SMC. 
An et al. [ 37] proposed a privacy-aware indoor location 
algorithm based on SMC to protect the private information 
of specific location. These efforts require users’ data to be 
secretly shared between non-colluding client.
With the development of FL, SMC has been improved 
and migrated to federated system to protect sensitive data 
by encrypting parameters. Bonawitz et al. [ 38] built a pri -
vacy-preserving FL framework, where SMC can securely 
aggregate the clients’ parameters, and be robust to clients’ 
exit. Xu et al. [ 39] proposed a non-interactive and verifiable 
privacy protection FL model, and proposed a novel privacy 
gradient aggregation scheme using random matrix coding 
and secure two-party computation. These SMC models lead 
to huge communication cost because of multiple interac -
tions involving in the learning process. However, in FL, 
1 3517