International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535al. [102] against the current challenges of federated edge 
learning (FEEL) with limited communication bandwidth, 
scarce energy, and heterogeneous data distribution, and 
proposed a device scheduling algorithm considering data 
quality, which prioritizes devices with high quality data 
while minimizing FEEL completion time and energy con -
sumption of participating devices. It greatly improves the 
effectiveness and efficiency of FL training while alleviat -
ing the challenge of data heterogeneity. Furthermore, on the 
basis of considering this challenge, Li et al. [ 69] proposed a 
meta-learning-based personalized FL method which consid -
ering the non-IID characteristics of spatiotemporal data for 
solving he spatiotemporal prediction problem of urban con -
struction. The global spatial-temporal schema diagram is 
automatically constructed through data federation, and each 
client customizes its own personalized model by evaluating 
the differences between the global schema diagram and the 
local schema diagram. For non-IID data with noisy, Hu et al. 
[103] proposed a FL framework based on federated Kalman 
filter (FKF) confidence. It used a convolutional adversarial 
generative network with advanced auxiliary classifiers as 
feature extraction to pre-train the data, and then the confi -
dence parameters to each client are generated by the FKF, 
which overcomes the challenge of data heterogeneity and 
realizes efficient aggregation of FL. These methods greatly 
alleviate the heterogeneity of data between clients in FL, 
but it is obvious that the actual optimization focus of these 
methods is different, so they adopted different methods. 
Data heterogeneity problem will affect different stages of 
FL training process, such as client selection stage, model 
transmission stage and aggregation stage. Therefore, in the 
study of data heterogeneity, the influence of heterogeneity 
challenge on the training and application of FL model needs 
to be deeply analyzed when the data heterogeneity problem 
is studied.
5.2 Model heterogeneity
In the process of parameters aggregation in FL, the local 
model structure of each client is typically required to be 
uniform. However, such assumptions are not realistic in 
the actual scenario of FL. As each client is not necessarily 
the same and located in different spaces, and the resource 
profiles of mobile devices participating in FL tasks are not 
always the same. The communication volume, computing 
power and data possessed by each client are very different 
and these factors will strictly limit the model structure of 
each client’s local training, resulting in structural differ -
ences among the client models. When the computing power 
and storage capacity of a client are small, only a simple 
model can be trained locally on the client, rather than overly 
complex models as required by the server. Meanwhile, in objectives [ 92, 93], researchers began to try to use multi-
objective evolutionary algorithm (MOEA) to get the opti -
mal solution [ 94–96]. Zhu et al. [ 97] tried to use MOEA to 
optimize the structure of neural network model in FL, and 
achieved optimal compression of network model param -
eters, thus achieving small communication cost and good 
global model performance synchronously. On the basis of 
the study of this problem, Lan et al. [ 98] applied FL to skin 
cancer detection applications to ensure efficient skin can -
cer detection while protecting patient data privacy. In the 
designed strategy, the communication cost of FL is reduced 
by sparse the global model, and an MOEA is used to bal -
ance the conflict between the communication overhead, 
accuracy, loss and AUC of global federated model.
5 Heterogeneity challenge in federated 
learning
Traditional FL usually aggregates all selected client-side 
model parameters or gradients to construct a common feder -
ated global model. In the process of aggregation, researchers 
gradually discovered the federated heterogeneity problems 
in practical applications, such as the data heterogeneity 
problem attribute to the non-IID of data for each client, and 
model heterogeneity problem with different size of each cli -
ent model structure caused by different device resource con -
straints and personalized task, these heterogeneity problems 
may reduce the performance of the global model or makes it 
difficult to get convergence to some extent [ 99].
5.1 Data heterogeneity
In a real FL scenario, clients participating in FL are often 
scattered in different areas with different user activity, result -
ing in inconsistent data volume collected by each client and 
data distribution of each client. Therefore, the amount of 
data and data distribution of different clients participating 
in practical FL application are usually heterogeneous. For 
different clients with heterogeneous data, traditional direct 
average aggregation approach will lead to model drift prob -
lem and affect the convergence and precision of the global 
model [ 100]. As such, an effective FL method should be 
found according to the specific distribution of client data and 
the specific situation in the actual application environment.
To solve the statistical heterogeneity, scholars also have 
done lots of studies. Wang et al. [ 101] proposed an effective 
polynomial time algorithm to schedule workloads on dif -
ferent clients. For the problem of heterogeneous data, they 
converted it into an average cost minimization optimization 
problem and used a greedy algorithm to seek for balance 
between calculation time and calculation accuracy. Taik et 
1 3523