International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535information fusion. In the shallow feature layer of each cli -
ent model, FL can be used to achieve multi-features fusion, 
while the deep layer is specially designed to achieve local 
personalized tasks. On the other hand, when the client mod -
els are of the same type but have different model structures 
with personalized task requirements, the problem of model 
heterogeneity is also called parameter heterogeneity. In this 
case, each client can transform different model structures 
into the same structure through some mappings approach 
for federation. While in the local model training, each cli -
ent can selectively learn the federated model to help guide 
the training of the local model [ 110], so as to build the local 
personalized model.
In Fig.3 below, we briefly summary the solutions pro -
posed by these relevant literatures for the two heteroge -
neous challenges.
6 The application of federated learning
In the big data environment, users’ personal information and 
behavioral data can be recorded in mobile smart devices or 
edge servers. So, data privacy protection provides a nec -
essary guarantee for intelligent development, and various 
fields pay more attention to the security and privacy of pri -
vate information. With the joint efforts of many scholars, FL 
has acted important role in the fields of various industries. 
And the current mainstream FL application areas are health 
care, finance, industry and urban services. In this section, 
we describe in detail the application of FL in these classic 
scenarios.
6.1 Federated learning in intelligent medical
In the medical field, individuals usually pay more attention 
to the privacy information of patients can not be disclosed, 
at the same time, various hospitals cannot exchange patient 
information privately, so it is quite suitable to use FL tech -
nique for protecting pathological information [ 111]. When 
applying FL to health care applications, each hospital rep -
resents the individual client, and the server can be the data 
center of the government agency. In this way, each hospi -
tal downloads the initial common model from the server 
and trains it with local data. After completion, the model 
information is encrypted and uploaded to the server, and the 
global model is updated through the federation algorithm. In 
this way, the data center will get a disease detection model 
with superior performance. The combination of FL and 
intelligent medicine application is shown in the Fig. 4.
FL has been used to build various disease detection mod -
els. Under the current severe epidemic situation, it solved 
COVID-19 detection, DNA sequencing and other problems, traditional FL, the common federated model is constructed 
through collaborative training of clients, while the model 
obtained by local training of clients essentially serves local 
tasks, and unified model type can limit the performance of 
local task execution, so the local model of clients is usu -
ally heterogeneous under the guidance of personalized tasks 
and local resources constrict [ 104]. The heterogeneity of the 
model allows different clients to design local models of dif -
ferent types and structural sizes based on their computational 
power. And overcoming the problem of inability to directly 
integrate models caused by heterogeneity while maintaining 
the personalization of the local model is the current chal -
lenge for FL. Aiming at above practical challenges caused 
by model heterogeneity in aggregation mechanism of FL, 
researchers have conducted many extensive studies.
In order to alleviate model heterogeneity problem and 
obtain high-quality personalized model for each client, 
some scholars have focused on personalized FL methods. 
Mills et al. [ 105] used the idea of multitasking to develop 
a multi-task FL algorithm for personalized federated model 
training, which introduced a non-federated batch normaliza -
tion layer in federated deep neural network. The proposed 
algorithm allows users to personalize the training model 
according to their own local data, thus facilitating the per -
formance and convergence speed of the local client model. 
Ni et al. [ 106] proposed a federated codistillation algorithm, 
which added a distillation term to the local objective func -
tion so that the local model could be trained based on the 
output of global model. In addition, the proposed algorithm 
was further extended to federated two-way codistillation 
to personalize the local model for each device. Yang et 
al. [107] designed a new FL framework, which trains the 
secure and personalized distributed model through FTL to 
implement the application of secure image steganography. 
Liu et al. [ 108] considered task individualization in the 
framework of federated random forest. It used locally sensi -
tive hash method to calculate the similarity of users, carried 
out collaborative training for similar users, and made use 
of the characteristics of ensemble learning to incrementally 
select models, so as to carry out personalized training for 
the models.
Summarize the above research work on personalization 
of FL, we can see that the heterogeneity of model in FL can 
be roughly divided into the heterogeneity of model types 
and the heterogeneity of model structures. The model types 
(e.g. different neural networks, random tree, etc.) and the 
structures of model (e.g. different neural network depths 
etc.) used by different clients are different due to the limi -
tation of client device resources or the influence of local 
task individuation [ 109]. When the local model types of 
each client are different, some feature extraction methods 
can be used to extract data features abstractly to achieve 
1 3524