International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535efficient. Du et al. [ 82] adopted an efficient client selection 
scheme based on the shortest upload time to minimize the 
total training time of the FL, and designed a scheduling 
mechanism based on the maximum remaining bandwidth, 
which greatly reducing the upload time of each iteration and 
affecting the number of iterations. Nowadays, most of FL 
technology has been applied to the edge wireless network 
environment. With the complexity of the network environ -
ment of client devices and information of clients participat -
ing in practical federated tasks, the client selection problem 
has gradually become a complex optimization problem [ 83, 
84] that needs to be studied urgently.
4.3 Model compression
In addition to reducing the communication rounds by opti -
mizing the FL training algorithm and selecting the best cli -
ent, model compression can also significantly reduce the 
scale of parameter transmission, which is a direct and useful 
strategy to improve the algorithm communication efficiency 
[85]. Especially in federated neural network, the parameters 
of deep neural network model are often millions, and the 
communication cost of transmission parameters is very big 
[86]. Li et al. [ 87] analyzed data redundancy in data set and 
propose a coreset-based FL framework. The novel frame -
work used a smaller network model on the coreset instead 
of training the model on the whole dataset using the regular 
network model, thus achieving similar accuracy to training 
using the full data set while indirectly reducing the amount 
of data transferred by each client. Lu et al. [ 88] proposed 
an efficient asynchronous FL mechanism in edge network 
computing environment. In this mechanism, the client node 
adaptively calculates the threshold according to the parame -
ter changes in each round during model training to compress 
and reduce parameter. Li et al. [ 89] proposed two communi -
cation-efficient FL frameworks based on CS method, which 
are called CS-FL and 1-bit CS-FL. In the CS-FL, local 
updates are compressed into analog compression measure -
ments, which are then uploaded to the server by participants. 
Another 1-bit CS-FL method is to sparse local updates and 
compress them into 1-bit compressed measurements. Both 
of these methods can efficiently compress the uplink and 
downlink data during FL training.
Researchers have designed a variety of data compression 
methods to achieve efficient communication FL algorithm, 
but there is a general problem that the conflict between com -
munication resources and computing resources, communi -
cation resources and model training performance needs to 
be paid attention [ 90]. Most data compression methods are 
lossy, and the improvement of communication efficiency 
is at the cost of model accuracy [ 91]. Aiming at this kind 
of optimization problem with conflict among multiple contribution of client is first evaluated by the angle between 
local gradient vector and global gradient vector, and then 
quantified into weight coefficients by a nonlinear mapping 
function. These studies on federated learning optimization 
algorithms focus on accelerating the convergence time of 
global models by improving the training efficiency of local 
models and optimizing the aggregation mechanism, so as to 
achieve efficient communication.
4.2 Client selection
The classic FedAvg algorithm adopts the strategy of ran -
domly selecting clients [ 9], which may slow down the train -
ing efficiency and performance of global model. Because in 
a synchronous FL environment, the server needs to wait for 
model updates from all clients selected to participate in the 
FL task until the last client completes uploading the local 
model. Meanwhile, the clients in FL have some differences 
in computing capacity and communication resources, which 
leads to the instability of participants and makes the high 
communication cost become one of the efficiency bottle -
necks of FL. In practical FL applications, the client selec -
tion scheme participating in federated directly affects the 
efficiency and performance of federated model [ 74, 75].
Considering from this perspective, Liu et al. [ 76] studied 
an orthogonal method to identify irrelevant updates made 
by clients by detecting whether local model updates are 
consistent with the trend of global model updates, so as to 
avoid transmitting those irrelevant parameters to the server 
and reduce the occupation of network resources. Deng et al. 
[77] proposed an automated-quality-awareness based client 
selection framework, which taken into account various fac -
tors affecting learning performance, adopted reinforcement 
learning method [ 78, 79]. And it automatically evaluated 
the model quality of clients, and automatically selects high-
quality clients for the federated task within a limited budget, 
which significantly improves learning efficiency. Lai et al. 
[80] proposed a framework that prioritized client partici -
pation in FL training using existing data that provided the 
greatest utility in improving model accuracy and the ability 
to run training quickly.
Additionally, in practical scenarios, some clients have 
limited computing resources or are in poor wireless chan -
nel conditions, which will lead to long global training delay 
of federated model. Therefore, the problem of client selec -
tion under resource constraints is also the focus of current 
research. For responding to this issue, Nishio [ 81] et al. 
proposed a new FL protocol, Fedcs, where the deadline for 
downloading, updating and uploading local models was pre -
set. Then, greedy selection was adopted to enable the server 
to aggregate as many clients’ update as possible during 
the restricted time, which made the whole training process 
1 3522