International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–5356.5 Federated learning in edge computing
As the information technology rapid evolves, the functions 
of personal mobile devices have gradually become intelli -
gent, which provides an effective guarantee for processing 
distributed edge data safely in FL [ 138]. The combination of 
edge computing and FL enables edge devices to train a com -
mon machine learning model with superior performance 
without sending source data to cloud devices [ 139]. And the 
Fig. 8 provides a diagram of this combination.
To effectively combine marginal computing with FL, 
scholars have carried out research from different angles. Ye 
et al. [ 140] proposed an edge FL framework, which sepa -
rates the local model update process that should be imple -
mented independently by mobile devices. Then the outputs 
of the mobile device are aggregated to the server, which 
improves the training efficiency and reduces the interac -
tion frequency. Jiang et al. [ 141] proposed a novel FL algo -
rithm with adaptive learning rate to meet different precision 
requirements and speed up the local training process. And 
a fair aggregation strategy is designed to minimize the pre -
cision difference between terminal devices. For improving 
the communication efficiency of federated edge computing, 
the network resources and training rate of the edge side is 
considered in practical learning, and an asynchronous fed -
eration learning is designed in edge computing. Wang et 
al. [142] proposed an efficient asynchronous joint learning 
method to alleviate the inefficiency caused by the hetero -
geneity and autonomy of edge nodes. This method allows 
edge clients to choose some models from cloud to update 
asynchronously according to the local data distribution, so 
as to decrease the amount of computation and communica -
tion and promote the efficiency of FL. To further protect 
the data privacy at the edge, Liu et al. [ 143] considered the 
asynchronous convergence FL of obsolete coefficients and 
uses blockchain networks to aggregate and generate global 
model. It not only protects privacy, but also avoids com -
munication interruption caused by abnormal training fail -
ure of local equipment, special attacks and etc. At the same 
time, Chen et al. [ 144] proposed a FL parameter aggregation 
method based on mutual information, which can resist mali -
cious node attacks and maintain the robustness of FL.
With the progress of the Internet of things, FL also pro -
vides the possibility for the secure interconnection of edge 
computing data [ 145]. On the other hand, with the deep -
ening of the concept of privacy protection, federated edge 
computing has more and more potential and potential value. 
further make edge computing towards the direction of 
integration.As a field with strong demand for privacy protection, 
the combination of financial industry with FL effectively 
provides a very superior paradigm for breaking down the 
barriers of financial data and promoting the intelligent 
application of financial and insurance enterprises.
Fig. 9  Federated intrusion detection 
Fig. 8  Federated learning in edge computing 
Fig. 7  Federated learning applications in financial 
1 3527