International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535the vision of the future of FL is pointed out. Finally, Sect.  8 
gathers concluding remarks.
2 The basics knowledge of federated 
learning
For making a better overview of FL research, the basic 
concepts, training framework, and classification of FL are 
detailed introduced in this section.
2.1 Overview of federated learning
FL is a secure distributed learning framework in which a 
virtual model can be constructed to address the matter of 
dispersive clients collaborating needless to expose raw infor -
mation [ 21]. The virtual model is an optimal global model 
for aggregating data from all participants and each partici -
pant serves the local objective using the obtained model. 
FL can achieve that the results of this modeling be much of 
similar to the traditional centralized training model [ 22], in 
which data from multiple clients are brought together in a 
same center server for modeling. In a federated mechanism, 
it is generally assumed that participants have the same iden -
tity and support the establishment of shared data policies. 
Because the data is not directly transferred, it does not affect 
data specifications or compromises user privacy.
First, we define the basic concept of FL: Define N 
participants in FL, all of whom want to merge their data 
{P1,P2,···,PN} to train a global model. A frequently 
used approach is to gather all the data together and use 
total data P=P1∪P2∪···∪PN to train a model Msum 
with a performance of Vsum. FL is a learning framework 
where participants co-training a common model Mfed with 
a performance of Vfed, in which no participant exposes its 
private data to others. Let ε be non-negative, then the per -
formance loss of FL model is expressed as:
 |Vfed−Vsum|<ε ((1))
The learning process of FL is achieved by minimizing a loss 
function, which is calculated on each client using a weighted 
aggregration method. And the goal of FL is to minimize the 
following objective function (2).
 minf(w)=N/summationdisplay
k=1nk
nFk(w) ((2))Where, N represents the number of clients, nk is the amount 
of data on the k−thclient, Fk(w) is the local objective 
function of the k−th client.
FL allows a small range of performance deviation 
between the trained global federated model and the cen -
tralized training model. After several rounds of efficient 
federated global training, the performance of global model 
will continue to enhance and the convergence approaches 
to the performance of the centralized model [ 23]. In this 
basis, the basic framework of FL is introduced in Fig.  1. 
And the overall process of FL is as follows: Firstly, each 
client downloads the initial common model from the center 
server; Secondly, each client trains the model through their 
own local data until the local model converges; Thirdly, the 
client encrypts the model parameters and uploads them to 
the server; Finally, the server aggregates the uploaded gradi -
ents or parameters through the FL algorithm and updates the 
global model for next training. Looping through the above 
process, the client and the server communicate continuously 
until the global federated model converges.
2.2 The categorization of federated learning
In the light of the degree of overlap of data features in the 
client dataset, FL methods are usually subdivided into hori -
zontal federated learning (HFL), vertical federated learning 
(VFL) and federated transfer learning (FTL), which are suit -
able for solving different practical problems. The specific 
categorization illustration is shown in Fig.  2. Then, each 
category is briefly introduced.
Horizontal federated learning  For the dataset of each client, 
if the overlap of data features is larger than that of users, 
that is, there are more of the same data features and fewer of 
the same users, this is called horizontal federated learning 
(HFL) [ 24]. HFL is guided by the feature dimension of the 
data, and takes out the parts with the same characteristics of 
the participants but different users for joint training. In the 
process of HFL, the training sample space is enlarged by the 
Fig. 1  The basic framework of FL 
1 3515