International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535communication ability between devices. In the traditional 
federated algorithm, researchers often focused on the con -
vergence of global federated model. While the convergence 
of the global model often requires many communications 
between the client and the server, which undoubtedly results 
in a lot of communication costs [ 158]. And due to the influ -
ence of regional economy, network bandwidth and other 
factors, different enterprises participating in FL have differ -
ent communication resource restriction. At the same time, 
the fairness of cooperation in FL is also a problem to be 
considered in the design of federated learning algorithm. 
The traditional FL mechanism makes the clients obtain the 
same global model, ignores the different contributions of 
participants and the incentive mechanism in the cooperative 
system, which is not conducive to the participation of more 
participants in the FL system, thus hindering the sustainable 
development of the FL system. These considerations have 
gradually led to the design of FL algorithms more efficient 
and comprehensive. At present, there is still no a universal 
FL algorithm can solve all the challenges in practical appli -
cation. With the implementation of the practical application 
platform of FL, the optimization objectives and training 
methods of FL under different requirements and resource 
constraints should also be appropriately readjusted, and the 
FL algorithm also needs to be combined with specific train -
ing methods and aggregation mechanisms. Therefore, it is 
still particularly important to optimize FL framework and 
design efficient FL algorithm to improve the overall effi -
ciency of FL, reduce the communications cost between cli -
ents and servers, ensure the model fairness, and encourage 
enterprises to invest more awards for enhancing the training 
performance of global model.
(3) Develop the selection strategy of large-scale clients 
in FL. In the training of FL global model, the global perfor -
mance is greatly affected by client data quality, client reputa -
tion and credibility, training resources, energy consumption 
and other factors [ 159]. Meanwhile, because many of the 
clients participating in FL are intelligent user devices, they 
are in the mobile geographical location and dynamic net -
work environment, which result in unstable training effi -
ciency. With the popularization and large-scale applications 
of FL, the number of mobile clients participating in FL is 
increasing exponentially. Subsequently, it is necessary to 
consider both scheduling strategy efficiency and how to 
select high-quality [ 160, 161], stable performance clients in 
a complex FL environment to balance more selection targets 
[162]. On the other hand, as a key step in FL algorithm, cli -
ent selection is performed for each communication round, 
which makes client selection a dynamic scheduling problem 
[163]. Therefore, it has become the focus and difficulty of 
many scholars to study an efficient client dynamic selection 
scheme, which dynamically select high-quality clients from 7 Prospect for federated learning
Nowadays, the rapid development of AI accelerates the 
process of intelligent digitization in various industries, 
which brings the problems of data fragmentation and data 
island [ 153, 154], it hinders the data sharing among vari -
ous fields and can not fully tap the potential value of data. 
The emergence of FL has alleviated the above issues to a 
certain degree and became the focus of many scholars. The 
development of FL is faced with multiple challenges, and no 
single strategy can comprehensively solve these bottlenecks 
in the practical application of FL technology. Although 
scholars have conducted some research on all aspects of FL 
which being as a kind of new-developed privacy-protection 
machine learning technique, there are still some aspects 
worth paying attention for scholars to studying and explor -
ing in depth.
(1) Research on more efficient encryption algorithms and 
defensive attack methods to improve the security of FL. 
With the continuous breakthrough of information technol -
ogy, the means of lawbreakers to steal user information are 
increasing [ 155]. The emergence of new DOS and DDOS 
attacks and new computer viruses increases the disclosure 
risk of user private information [ 156]. This hinders the data 
sharing among the enterprises participating in FL, and can -
not fully tap the potential value of the data, resulting in huge 
economic losses. It is necessary to design more superior 
encryption method and attack detection method to enhance 
the security of FL and defend more kinds of attack dangers 
[157]. To ensure data security and improve encryption effi -
ciency, some hardware-based encryption techniques should 
also be focused on. Some researchers also are considering 
the combination of emerging protection technologies such 
as block chain and FL to ensure the cross-domain learning 
security of FL. Meanwhile, due to the increasing scale of 
current FL deployments involving servers and a large num -
ber of client nodes, the types and number of attacks that 
may be attacked are far greater than centralized training 
methods. In the future, whether large-scale client participa -
tion can effectively continue to ensure the security of FL 
is debatable. Since the client uploads parameters instead 
of local data in FL, it is difficult for the server to identify 
malicious clients directly. Therefore, in addition to the exist -
ing client-side statistical information, it is necessary to use 
external source information that can be obtained in practical 
applications. External source information largely can help 
service providers find safe and efficient defense methods 
and accurately identify attacks and intrusions that are not 
easy to detect.
(2) Research on more efficient federated learning algo -
rithms. In the period of big data, more requirements have 
been raised for the computing power of equipment and the 
1 3529