International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535DP approach with noise-adding mechanism is applied in the 
FL framework [ 61].
Another type of poisoning attack is caused by model poi -
soning. Some malicious attackers in FL can bring in hidden 
backdoor functionality to the local client model or global 
federated model, causing the model produce a specific error 
output. Model poisoning can take advantage of the fact 
that malicious participants in FL can directly influence the 
performance of federated global model, making the attack 
effect more powerful than training data poisoning attacks. In 
order to defense and reduce poisoning attack in FL, Zhao et 
al. [62] put forward a poisoning attack defense mechanism, 
which generates audit data through generative adversarial 
network during training [ 63], and then eliminates adversar -
ies who upload malicious models through the accuracy of 
audit models. Observing the effect of local model poison -
ing on the global model of FL, Shi et al. [ 64] designed a 
federated exception analysis enhanced distributed learn -
ing framework to implement active defense in FL. In this poisoning is a more covert type of attack than model poi -
soning. While the principle of ensuring participants’ privacy 
security, the central server is not clear about participants’ 
personal data and local training process. When the attacker 
can only affect the data collection process of the client of 
FL system, but cannot directly destroy the model trained by 
FL, such attacks are often difficult to detect. In recent years, 
some defense schemes have been studied to against data 
poison attack that can delete outliers by calculating the sim -
ilarity between data information [ 58]. In the aspect of this 
way, Tian et al. [ 59] proposed a strategy for detecting and 
suppressing potential outliers to defend against data poison -
ing attacks in FL. In the FL scenario of traffic flow predic -
tion, Qi et al. [ 60] came up with a FL framework which 
using consortium blockchain technique. The model trained 
from distributed vehicles need be verified and then stored on 
the blockchain to effectively prevent data poisoning attacks. 
In addition, to further protect data security on blockchain, a Privacy 
mechanismReference Contribution Advantage Disadvantage
Secure 
multi-party 
computing[35] Allow users to process data without seeing it Throughout 
the calcula -
tion process, 
parties always 
have absolute 
control over 
the data they 
ownCause huge 
communica -
tion cost in 
multi-party 
interaction[36] Use SMC technology to achieve a robust 
reversible image watermarking scheme
[37] Protect the private information of specific 
location in privacy-aware indoor location 
application
[38] Can securely aggregate the clients’ parameters 
in FL
[39] Propose a novel privacy gradient aggrega -
tion scheme using random matrix coding and 
secure two-party computation
Differential 
privacy[40] Achieve a balance between privacy loss and 
model performance while hiding customer 
contributions and private data during training.Has a privacy 
protection 
model that is 
strictly inde -
pendent of 
background 
knowledge 
and can theo -
retically resist 
any attackNumerous 
noises will 
affect the avail -
ability of model [41] Protect data privacy while reducing noise to 
be added by using an adaptive DP mechanism
[42] 2DP-FL is proposed to implement privacy 
protection by adding noise when training 
local models and distributed global models
[45] Combine DP with functional encryption, 
which avoided the collusion problem and 
obtained a good balance between privacy 
protection and model accuracy.
[46] Build a multi-objective optimization model 
to balance the conflicting indexes of accuracy 
and privacy protection effectively
Homo -
morphic 
encryption[51] Realize privacy-protected FL with low com -
putational and communication costs.Allow the 
center server to 
carry out alge -
braic opera -
tions directly 
on encrypted 
param -
eters without 
decryptionLarge amount 
of time cost dur -
ing encryption 
operation[52] Model updates are encrypted through aggre -
gated public keys and decryption requires 
cooperation among all participating devices
[53] Enables centralized servers to directly aggre -
gate encrypted local parameters
[54] Optimize previous HE by scaling gradients in 
advance and then cutting and post-quantization 
encryptionTable 1  The difference of several 
privacy protection techniques 
1 3519