International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535authorized by users. The emergence of FL provides a good 
paradigm to solve this problem, especially in cross-domain 
recommendation, including short video recommendation, 
social platform, online shopping platform and etc. The fed -
erated recommendation system typically includes federal -
ization of recommendation algorithm based on collaborative 
filtering [ 118], federalization of recommendation algorithm 
based on deep learning and federation of recommendation 
algorithm based on meta-learning. In the vertical federated 
recommendation framework, the server is not limited to the 
data generated by users in this field, at the same time, we 
can also refer to the data of users in other areas, so as to 
provide users with high-quality content. The combination 
of FL and recommendation system is shown in the Fig. 5.
To further enhance the accuracy of the recommenda -
tion system and strengthen the deep integration of FL and 
recommendation system, many scholars have done carious 
research [ 119, 120]. Du et al. [ 121] proposed a user-level 
distributed matrix decomposition framework. Inspired by 
federation learning, the framework can learn the global 
model by collecting gradient information of client. Duan et 
al. [122] proposed a federated recommendation algorithm 
that allows each cloud to share weights and cooperatively 
train the global model, while combining matrix factorization 
with 8-bit quantization to reduce communication overhead 
and network bandwidth. Caballero et al. [ 123] proposed an 
activity recommendation model based on secure federated 
network Eduroam. The system can provide personalized 
information in the campus environment according to per -
sonal data of user. Muhammad et al. [ 124] proposed a FL-
based recommendation algorithm: FedFast, which improves 
the classical FedAvg algorithm and accelerates the training 
of distributed recommendation model.
Under the premise that the user data is not local, the 
encrypted parameter information is transmitted between cli -
ents and server to train a federated recommendation model 
with good performance. Moreover, the combination of FL and showed good detection performance. For example, 
Ouyang et al. [ 112] proposed a COVID-19 collaborative 
early warning framework based on blockchain and intelli -
gent contract to predict the detection results of new cases. 
This framework crowdsourced the task to medical establish -
ments, social institutions and individuals to collaborate for 
early warning. And Dayan et al. [ 113] proposed a FL model, 
which predicts the future oxygen demand of patients with 
COVID-19 symptoms by inputting vital signs, laboratory 
data and chest x-rays, and better predicts the clinical out -
come of patients with COVID-19, which lays a foundation 
for the wider application of FL in health care. Furthermore, 
an auxiliary diagnosis model for cancer patients based on 
FL is proposed by Ma et al. [ 114]. With the help of federated 
diagnostic model, doctors can provide personalized nutri -
tional plans and treatment options for patients, and prolong 
the life of patients. This model has a certain guiding signifi -
cance in the field of cancer rehabilitation medicine.
In the medical field, patient data is sensitive data, and 
many patients are reluctant to share their private data for 
intelligent testing services. In this situation, the security and 
effectiveness of FL technology provide feasible suggestions 
for the application of intelligent services in the medical 
field. The combination of FL and medical industry can build 
a disease detection model with good performance without 
harming private information of patient, which promotes the 
process of intelligence of medical industry [ 115].
6.2 Federated learning in recommended system
Traditional recommender systems need to collect and ana -
lyze large amounts of user data to recommend content or 
services [ 116, 117], but due to the concern of privacy secu -
rity and data island problem, this operation is often not 
Fig. 5  Federated recommendation system 
Fig. 4  Federated intelligent medicine 
1 3525