Figure 6: Class-averaged output probabilities for the MNIST and CIFAR10 test datasets calculated
using Softmax ((a) and (c)) and Max-Min ((b) and (d)) normalizations. The shape similarities in the
tuning curves between the Softmax and Max-Min trained networks suggests that both models are
trained in a similar fashion.
5 Results
We compared the network’s performance with Max-Min and Softmax normalizations on ﬁve datasets:
MNIST [ 11], Background MNIST (bMNIST) and Rotated MNIST (rMNIST) [ 12], Fashion MNIST
(fMNIST) [ 18], and CIFAR10 [ 8]. In addition, we also evaluated the performance of the networks as
a function of the number of routing iterations. All sessions were trained using the same three-layer
model shown in Fig. 1 and hyperparameters as in [ 14]. For the results in this section, no data
augmentations were used for the datasets with the exception of CIFAR10, where random 2424
croppings were conducted for the training images and a centered 2424cropping conducted for
the test images. For variations of the MNIST dataset, the PrimaryCaps layer has 32capsules. For
CIFAR10, the PrimaryCaps layer has 64capsules. Three routing iterations were used for all sessions.
Unlike [14], we did not introduce a “none-of-the-above” category for the network classiﬁer.
Table 1 lists the mean of the maximum test accuracies and their standard deviations for the ﬁve
datasets, and shows that Max-Min normalization provides a consistent improvement in test accuracy
compared with Softmax.1In particular, the improvement is most signiﬁcant for datasets that have a
non-zero background (i.e., bMNIST and CIFAR10). Max-Min also allows more routing iterations
to be conducted without decreasing the test accuracy. As shown in Fig. 7, an improvement in test
accuracy is obtained when the number of routing iterations is increased. With Softmax, the test
accuracy decreases for all ﬁve datasets.
Max-Min also prevents the network from overﬁtting to the training data, especially as the number
of routing iterations is increased. As shown in Fig. 8, the differences between the mean of the
maximum training and test accuracies are lower for CapsNets trained using Max-Min compared with
1Experiments using Softmax normalization and routing coefﬁcients initialized to 1:0produced test accuracies
of99:300:03% for the MNIST dataset.
7