Capsule Networks with Max-Min Normalization
Zhen Zhao, Ashley Kleinhans, Gursharan Sandhu, Ishan Patel,
and K. P. Unnikrishnan
Global Data Insight & Analytics
Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, MI 48120
{zzhao30, akleinh4, gsandh16, ipatel17, kunnikr1}@ford.com
Abstract
Capsule Networks (CapsNet) use the Softmax function to convert the logits of
the routing coefﬁcients into a set of normalized values that signify the assignment
probabilities between capsules in adjacent layers. We show that the use of Softmax
prevents capsule layers from forming optimal couplings between lower and higher-
level capsules. Softmax constrains the dynamic range of the routing coefﬁcients and
leads to probabilities that remain mostly uniform after several routing iterations.
Instead, we propose the use of Max-Min normalization. Max-Min performs a
scale-invariant normalization of the logits that allows each lower-level capsule to
take on an independent value, constrained only by the bounds of normalization.
Max-Min provides consistent improvement in test accuracy across ﬁve datasets
and allows more routing iterations without a decrease in network performance. A
single CapsNet trained using Max-Min achieves an improved test error of 0:20%
on the MNIST dataset. With a simple 3-model majority vote, we achieve a test
error of 0:17% on MNIST.
1 Introduction
Deep learning systems are powerful tools for recognition, prediction and strategy in ﬁelds such as
vision, speech, language and games [ 10,15]. The mammalian visual system extracts features from
objects in cluttered scenes and then combines them for robust recognition. Inversion of sensory
processing, using the ubiquitous feedback pathways present throughout sensory systems, is a major
component of object recognition [ 5]. Learning systems that utilize compositionality of objects
[9], along with dynamic binding of parts (or features) to wholes (or objects) can become power
architectures. Capsule Networks (CapsNets) have the potential to perform object recognition in a
natural and systematic fashion.
Capsule Networks [ 14], [6] use a dynamic routing algorithm to calculate a set of routing coefﬁcients
that link lower and higher-level capsules between adjacent layers in the network. Each routing
coefﬁcient represents the probability that an individual lower-level capsule should be assigned to a
higher-level capsule. These routing coefﬁcients are not learned during training, as is the case for the
rest of the network parameters. For each input presented to the network, the routing coefﬁcients are
calculated at run-time (during both training and inference) from a set of initial values.
The Softmax function, given by Eq. 1, has been widely used for object recognition tasks due to
its ability to reduce the impact of outlier values in the dataset while still allowing those values
to have an effect on the network’s learning ability during training. In CapsNets, Softmax is used
to convert the log priors between capsules iin layer land capsules jin layer l + 1 into a set of
assignment probabilities between the capsules. While dampening the effects of outliers can be
beneﬁcial when training typical network parameters (following the Maximum Likelihood Estimation
principle), outliers in the routing coefﬁcients can provide optimal separation between features in
adjacent capsule layers. Since these coefﬁcients are not learned in the conventional sense (i.e.,
1arXiv:1903.09662v1  [cs.CV]  22 Mar 2019