Max-Min Routing Procedure
1: Input to Routing Procedure: ( ^ujji,r,l)
2: for all capsules iin layer land capsule jin layer ( l+ 1):cij 1.0
3: forriterations:
4: for all capsule jin layer ( l+ 1):sj P
icij^ujji
5: for all capsule jin layer ( l+ 1):vj Squash( sj)
6: for all capsule iin layer land capsule jin layer ( l+ 1):bij bij+ ^ujjivj
7: for all capsule iin layer l:ci Max-Min ( bij)=)Given in Eq :2
return vj
3 Evolution of Logits and Routing Coefﬁcients
In the CapsNet architecture presented in Fig. 1, the capsules in the PrimaryCaps layer can represent
features useful for recognizing objects (e.g., hand-written digits). The convolutional layer before
PrimaryCaps allow efﬁcient learning of these features. The dynamic binding of parts (i.e., features)
to wholes (i.e., objects) are then carried out through the routing coefﬁcients.
In such CapsNets, the ability to create optimal separation between competing features in adjacent
capsule layers is a crucial feature for efﬁcient object recognition. The evolution of the logits and
routing coefﬁcients in the routing layer of a CapsNet offer insights into how two adjacent capsule
layers assign object features to their wholes. When using Softmax, a zero initialization for the logits
sets the routing coefﬁcients to be 0:1(assuming 10parent-level output capsules) for the ﬁrst iteration.
With Max-Min normalization, the routing coefﬁcients are initialized to 1:0for the ﬁrst iteration; thus,
for the ﬁrst iteration, the parent-level capsules, vj, are simply the (non-scaled) squashed summation
of the prediction vectors. The top rows of Figs. 2 and 3 show the initial values of the logits and
routing coefﬁcients for MNIST and CIFAR10, each for the same training image in their respective
datasets. The middle and bottom rows show the evolution of the logits and coefﬁcients throughout the
routing procedure. For both the Softmax and Max-Min cases, the logits and coefﬁcients are extracted
from the network after their respective sessions have ﬁnished training under the same conditions.
Figure 2: Evolution of logits and routing coefﬁcients for the same training image from the MNIST
dataset for networks trained using (a) Softmax and (b) Max-Min. Y-axes are displayed in log-scale.
Note: For clarity, only the routing coefﬁcients associated with the ground-truth (GT) column are
shown here. The histograms of all routing coefﬁcients exhibit the same behavior.
As the routing progresses, the logits form a tight cluster around zero, with the majority of the values
remaining at 0:0(y-axes are log-scale for Figs. 2 and 3). Due to the tight clustering and the non-linear
behavior of Softmax, the routing coefﬁcients from a Softmax trained network evolves in a manner
similar to their corresponding logits (c.f. Figs. 2 (a) and 3 (a)); i.e., the majority of the routing
coefﬁcients remain at their initial value of 0:1, with only a few that evolve to signiﬁcantly different
values. As a result, the routing coefﬁcients just barely separate each lower-level capsule among the
higher-level capsules. With Max-Min normalization, the majority of the logits also have a value of
0:0. However, due to the scale-invariant nature of the Max-Min normalization, the tight grouping of
logits can be better separated to form the routing coefﬁcients (c.f. Figs. 2 (b) and 3 (b)).
4