4 DigitCaps Outputs
It is also instructive to examine the outputs of the DigitCaps layer (i.e., the parent-level capsules,
vj). During inference, the output capsule with the largest vector length (i.e., highest probability)
is used to classify the input image. For each input to the network, an ideal CapsNet would have a
single output capsule with probability near 1:0corresponding to the GT class and all other classes
with probabilities near 0:0. The outputs can be examined on an input-by-input basis (for each image,
there is a corresponding 1016DigitCaps matrix from which the classiﬁcation is made) or on a
class-by-class basis (for each class, there is a corresponding 1016matrix that is the average of
the individual matrices for that class).
Figures 5 (a) and (b) show the output capsule probabilities for the same set of test images from
the MNIST dataset and Figs. 5 (c) and (d) show the output capsule probabilities for the same set
of test images from the CIFAR10 dataset. For MNIST, the network is properly trained and both
normalizations provide digit class probabilities that are highly-peaked for their corresponding GT
classes and vice versa for the other classes. For CIFAR10, the network does better at separating the
classes when Max-Min normalization is used (i.e., higher GT probability and lower non-ground-truth
probabilities). However, both normalizations produce output capsules that have multiple high peaks,
signifying that the networks are not able to adequately differentiate between the object classes. This
issue with CapsNets was addressed in [ 14] by including a “none-of-the-above” category for the
routing Softmax—our network does not have this category.
Figure 5: Output class probabilities for the same set of test images from the MNIST and CIFAR10
datasets calculated using Softmax ((a) and (c)) and Max-Min ((b) and (d)) normalizations.
If we view the capsules in the DigitCaps layer to be “grandmother cells” [ 4], then how well-tuned
they are to the objects they recognize provides a picture about the robustness of the system. Figures 6
(a) and (b) show the class-averaged output capsule probabilities for the test images for the MNIST
dataset. These can be viewed as the tuning curves of the recognition units and demonstrate the ability
of the network to adequately distinguish between each of the digit classes. The similarity between
the tuning curves of the respective digits when trained with Softmax (Fig. 6 (a)) and Max-Min (Fig.
6 (b)) show that Max-Min normalization does not degrade the network’s ability to discriminate the
ten digits. In contrast, the tuning curves for CIFAR10 (Figs. 6 (c) and (d)) show that, for certain
object classes, the discriminability is not as good as those for MNIST. This is also reﬂected in the
accuracies given in Table 1.
6