Few-shot
imagesCategory-
agnostic
parametersCategory-
specific
parameters
Large-
sample
imagesCategory-
agnostic
parametersCategory-
specific
parameters
Meta-trainingonbase classesWeightprediction
meta-model!
Meta-testingonnovel classesFew-shot
imagesCategory-
agnostic
parametersCategory-
specific
parameters
Category-
specific
parametersWeightprediction
meta-model!Meta-Knowledge
TransferDetectionmodel
Trainingimages
Learnedor
predicted
parameters
Figure 2: Our meta-learning based few-shot detection approach “MetaDet”. We use different meta-strategies to disentangle the learning of
category-agnostic and category-speciﬁc parameters in a CNN based detector ( e.g., Faster R-CNN). Learning base detector and meta-model
during meta-training (left): we train the large-sample base detector and obtain the category-agnostic parameters; we sample few-shot base
detection tasks, and learn a weight prediction meta-model Tthat transforms from few-shot to large-sample category-speciﬁc parameters.
Learning novel detector during meta-testing (right): we initialize the category-agnostic parameters from the base detector and use Tto
predict category-speciﬁc parameters. Light color denotes few-shot parameters; dark color denotes large-sample or predicted parameters.
ﬁcation and localization. (2) The existing work [ 6,54,29]
either transfers knowledge from large-sample base set or
meta-knowledge from few-shot base detection tasks, but not
both. By contrast, we leverage both of them and show they
are all useful for few-shot detection. (3) We systematically
benchmark modern approaches for few-shot detection and
we signiﬁcantly outperform the prior work by large mar-
gins. There are other settings of detection with limited su-
pervision, such as weakly-supervised detection [ 59,5,11],
semi-supervised detection [ 69,39,12], and zero-shot detec-
tion [ 2,41,73], which are different from ours.
3. Meta-Learning based Object Detection
Figure 2illustrates the framework of our meta-learning
based few-shot object detection approach “MetaDet”.
Through learning to learn from a large set of few-shot detec-
tion tasks, which are simulated on base classes with abun-
dant annotated data, MetaDet allows us to rapidly generate a
detector for novel classes using just a few labeled examples.
3.1. Meta­Learning Setup for Few­Shot Detection
We extend the widely-used setup for few-shot classiﬁca-
tion [ 67,17] to establish few-shot detection. Speciﬁcally,
we have a base category set Cbase and a novel category
setCnovel, in which Cbase∩ Cnovel=∅. Correspondingly,
we have a large-sample base dataset Sbase={(Ii,yi)},
where{Ii}are input images, and {yi}are the correspond-
ing annotations indicating labels and bounding boxes for
objects of base classes. In k-shot detection, we have a novel
datasetSnovel={(Ii,yi)}, in which each novel class has
kbounding box annotations. We aim to learn a detection
algorithm on Sbasethat is able to generalize to unseen cate-
goriesCnovel. Here, we focus on the detection performance
onCnovel, which is evaluated on a held-out test set.
Through meta-learning, we are interested in training a
learning procedure (i.e., meta-learner) that guides the gen-eration of a detector ( i.e., learner) for a k-shot detection
task. Meta-learning algorithms achieves this by explicitly
mimicking the few-shot learning scenario and learning from
a collection of k-shot detection tasks sampled from Sbase.
Each of these sampled tasks is termed as an episode . Meta-
learning algorithms thus have two stages: meta-training on
Sbaseand meta-testing on Snovel. During meta-training, we
randomly sample kbounding box annotations per class on
Sbase, and train the corresponding detector. The meta-level
knowledge regarding learning detectors across various de-
tection tasks is at the same time aggregated into the meta-
learner. During meta-testing, the base detector is adapted
onSnovel for novel classes via the meta-learner.
3.2. Basic Detector and Meta­Strategies
The goal here is to estimate the parameters θof a de-
tector desired for Cnovel based on both Sbase andSnovel.
For modern deep CNN based detectors, θare composed of
class-agnostic and class-speciﬁc components [ 72,46,44].
Our framework thus exploits meta-level knowledge about
parameter generation of a detection model and leverages
specialized meta-strategies for these different types of com-
ponents. This parameter-oriented perspective also allows us
to jointly address few-shot classiﬁcation and few-shot local-
ization in a uniﬁed, consistent manner.
Our meta-learning framework applies to a variety of
CNN based detectors. Here we instantiate the framework
with Faster R-CNN [ 46], because it is a simple detection
model which achieves impressive performance and upon
which the most recent detectors are built. Faster R-CNN
consists of a region proposal network (RPN) for gener-
ating region proposals and a detection network (Fast R-
CNN) [ 18] which uses these proposals to detect objects. A
backbone convolutional network is shared by these two net-
works and provides convolutional feature maps. RPN iden-
tiﬁes region proposals on the feature maps by predicting
9927