the probability of an anchor ( i.e., reference box) being fore-
ground or background and reﬁning the anchor. These region
proposals are then reshaped using a RoI pooling layer, fed
into the detection network for predicting the object class via
a softmax classiﬁer and producing the bounding box offsets
via per-class bounding box regressors.
Meta-strategy for category-agnostic components. We
treat the convolutional network, RPN, and the bottom lay-
ers of the detection network as category-agnostic compo-
nents, whose parameters are shared by both base and novel
classes. In fact, in the design of Faster R-CNN [ 46], RPN is
category-agnostic: its box-classiﬁcation layer only assigns a
binary class label (of being an object or not) to each anchor
without differentiating the speciﬁc object classes, and its
box-regression layer regresses from an anchor to a nearby
ground-truth box without considering the class label of the
ground-truth. Such a shared property enables us to transfer
the category-agnostic parameters from the base to the novel
detector or use them as initialization for ﬁne-tuning.
Meta-strategy for category-speciﬁc components.
However, we are still faced with the difﬁculty of learning
the parameters of the category-speciﬁc components from
few examples. In Faster R-CNN, the top layer of the
detection network contains category-speciﬁc parameters
that are used to perform bounding box classiﬁcation and
regression for each class. While these parameters are
not directly transferable between base and novel classes,
inspired by [ 70], the dynamics pattern of how they change
from the parameters trained on a small dataset to those
trained on a large dataset can be characterized by a
generic, category-agnostic transformation . We introduce
a parametrized weight prediction meta-model Tto learn
such a transformation through meta-training process.
3.3. Weight Prediction Meta­Model
For a given category c, letwc,∗
detdenote the class-speciﬁc
object detection weights in the last layer of the detection
network learned from the large-sample base dataset Sbase.
Letwc
detdenote the corresponding weights learned from the
k-shot episode dataset sampled from Sbase. The weight pre-
diction meta-model T(·)regresses from wc
dettowc,∗
detin the
model parameter space: wc,∗
det≈ T(wc
det;φ), whereφare
category-agnostic, learned parameters.
Loss function. ThesameT(·)is applied to any class c.
The meta-objective function for each class in an episode is:
||T(wc
det;φ)−wc,∗
det||2+λ/summationdisplay
(x,y)∈RoIcloss/parenleftBig
D/parenleftbig
x;T(wc
det;φ)/parenrightbig
,y/parenrightBig
.(1)
The ﬁnal loss is minimized with respect to φ, which is av-
eraged over all c∈ Cbase and over wc
detgenerated in all
the episodes. ‘loss’ refers to the standard performance loss
used to train the detection network D(e.g., multi-task loss
consisting of bounding box classiﬁcation and regression
losses), and RoIcdenotes the training RoIs labeled withclassc.λ >0is the regularization hyper-parameter used
to control the trade-off between the two terms.
Note that the bounding box detection branch contains
two types of detection weights: the RoI classiﬁcation
weightswc
clsand the bounding box regression weights wc
loc.
Here we use the concatenation of the two types of weights,
i.e.,wc
dec= [wc
cls,wc
loc]. We thus simultaneously address
few-shot classiﬁcation and few-shot localization in a uni-
ﬁed way, extending the sole classiﬁcation in [ 70].T(·)can
be implemented as a small fully-connected neural network
and jointly trained with the detector, as shown in Fig. 2.
3.4. Meta­Learning Procedure
The meta-learning procedure consists of two phases:
meta-training on Strain and meta-testing on Snovel.
Stage-wise meta-training. We split the meta-training
procedure into two stages for category-agnostic and
category-speciﬁc components, respectively. During the ﬁrst
stage, we train a large-sample base detector D(·;θ∗)on the
entire dataset Strain in the normal way [ 46]. This provides
us with the basic detector which will be used for novel
classes and the large-sample parameters wc,∗
detof the class-
speciﬁc components.
During the second stage, we perform few-shot episode
detection. In each episode, we randomly sample kbound-
ing box annotations per class on Strain. We leverage the
large-sample base detector D(·;θ∗)trained in the ﬁrst stage
to generate the k-shot detector as D/parenleftbig
·;/braceleftbig
θ∗\wc,∗
det,wc
det/bracerightbig/parenrightbig
.
That is, we freeze the category-agnostic parameters as those
learned in the large-sample setting θ∗\wc,∗
detand retrain the
category-speciﬁc parameters wc
detfrom scratch. We use/braceleftbig
wc
det,wc,∗
det/bracerightbig
together with the k-shot examples to train the
meta-model T(·;φ)based on the meta-objective in Eqn. ( 1).
Everything is trained end-to-end.
Meta-testing. To train the k-shot novel detector on
Snovel, we initialize its category-agnostic parameters from
the base detector as θ∗\wc,∗
det, and we randomly initialize its
category-speciﬁc parameters wc
det. Following [ 70], we use
the meta-model T(·;φ)to predict the desired wc
detas biased
regularization while ﬁne-tuning the detector. During infer-
ence time, the meta-model is detached, and our detector is
the standard (Faster R-CNN) detector.
4. Experimental Evaluation
We explore the use of our meta-learning based approach
“MetaDet” for few-shot detection tasks. We begin with ex-
tensive evaluation on the PASCAL VOC dataset [ 14,13],
benchmarking the performance of CNN based detectors in
the small-sample size regime and addressing variants and
different design choices of MetaDet. We then evaluate on
challenging, large-scale MS-COCO [ 36], ImageNet [ 47],
and iNaturalist [ 65] datasets and compare with state-of-the-
art approaches. We use Faster R-CNN [ 46] as the detec-
9928