Meta-Learning to Detect Rare Objects
Yu-Xiong Wang Deva Ramanan Martial Hebert
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{yuxiongw,deva,hebert }@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
Few-shot learning, i.e., learning novel concepts from few
examples, is fundamental to practical visual recognition
systems. While most of existing work has focused on few-
shot classiﬁcation, we make a step towards few-shot object
detection, a more challenging yet under-explored task. We
develop a conceptually simple but powerful meta-learning
based framework that simultaneously tackles few-shot clas-
siﬁcation and few-shot localization in a uniﬁed, coher-
ent way. This framework leverages meta-level knowledge
about “model parameter generation” from base classes
with abundant data to facilitate the generation of a de-
tector for novel classes. Our key insight is to disentan-
gle the learning of category-agnostic and category-speciﬁc
components in a CNN based detection model. In partic-
ular, we introduce a weight prediction meta-model that en-
ables predicting the parameters of category-speciﬁc compo-
nents from few examples. We systematically benchmark the
performance of modern detectors in the small-sample size
regime. Experiments in a variety of realistic scenarios, in-
cluding within-domain, cross-domain, and long-tailed set-
tings, demonstrate the effectiveness and generality of our
approach under different notions of novel classes.
1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have rev-
olutionized the landscape of large-scale visual recogni-
tion [ 31,26]. A key driving factor is human supervision in
the form of large amounts of annotated images. However,
in many practical applications such as self-driving vehicles,
recognition systems need to rapidly recognize some never-
before-seen objects from a very limited number of exam-
ples [ 16,49,3]. Simply collecting more data does not scale
and quickly becomes expensive [ 74,66,71,21,38].
This challenge of learning novel concepts from few la-
beled examples is commonly addressed in few-shot orlow-
shot learning . Much of its recent progress comes from
framing few-shot learning as a meta-learning problem [ 62].
By simulating and solving a variety of few-shot learningMeta-Knowledge
Transfer
…
…
…
…
…
BaseClasses NovelClasses
Figure 1: Few-shot object detection: learning an object detector
for novel classes when only a few examples with annotated bound-
ing boxes are available. Our meta-learning based framework lever-
ages meta-level knowledge about “model parameter generation”
from base classes with a large amount of annotated bounding box
examples. Such knowledge is then transferred to guide the detec-
tor learning for novel classes in a sample-efﬁcient way.
tasks from base categories with abundant labeled examples,
meta-learning approaches acquire meta-level knowledge
about learning to learn and then transfer such knowledge
to tackle few-shot learning of novel categories. Despite no-
table successes, most of existing work has focused on sim-
ple image classiﬁcation tasks with artiﬁcial settings, such as
evaluating on small-scale datasets like mini-ImageNet and
for contrived tasks like 5-way classiﬁcation [ 67,58].
In this paper, we make a step towards few-shot object
detection , a more challenging task of practical importance
that learns an object detector when only a few examples
with annotated bounding boxes are available. Unlike im-
age classiﬁcation, detection requires not only classifying
but also localizing (multiple) objects within an image, as
well as dealing with distracting background regions [ 19].
Hence, prior few-shot learning approaches, developed with
image classiﬁcation in mind, are not readily applicable to
our task. While there is some initial attempt in this direction
as in [ 69,6,12,29,54], they simply introduce a few-shot
classiﬁer into a detection model without truly addressing
few-shot localization, leading to suboptimal performance.
To address this limitation, we propose a meta-learning
based framework that simultaneously tackles few-shot clas-
9925