tor in the most of the experiments. We evaluate in a va-
riety of scenarios, including within-domain, cross-domain,
and long-tailed settings, and investigate different notions of
novel classes, demonstrating the generality of our approach.
4.1. Within­Domain Few­Shot Detection
Following the setting commonly used in few-shot clas-
siﬁcation [ 67,58], we ﬁrst consider few-shot detection in
the within-domain scenario. Here we treat each dataset as
a domain. In this setting, a dataset is randomly split into
twonon-overlapping portions: one set of base classes with
hundreds or thousands of examples per class and an addi-
tional set of novel classes with a small number of examples
(k) per class. Here, we focus on the performance of novel
classes. We construct similar settings for few-shot detec-
tion on the heavily benchmarked PASCAL VOC [ 14,13]
and MS-COCO [ 36] object detection datasets.
4.1.1 Evaluation and Analysis on PASCAL VOC
Dataset and task. PASCAL VOC [ 14,13] contains 20ob-
ject categories. Following the standard protocol in [ 18,46],
training is performed on the union of VOC 2007 and 2012
trainval with a total of 16.5k images and evaluation is on
5k VOC 2007 test images. Consistent with [ 29], we di-
vide the20categories randomly into 15base classes and 5
novel classes. Our k-shot detection task is to learn a de-
tector for the 5novel classes from kannotated bounding
box examples per class, where kis set to be 1,2,3,5, and
10. During meta-training, we learn the base detector and
the weight prediction meta-model using the trainval set of
only the base classes. To do so, we sample randomly a col-
lection of k-shot detection tasks on the base classes. Dur-
ing meta-testing, we adapt our base detector guided by the
meta-model to generate the novel detector. We produce ran-
domly3different sets of class splits. For each split, we run 5
trials and report the average detection performance (mAP).
Implementation details. Our detector is the standard
Faster R-CNN [ 46], with VGG16 [ 56] as the backbone
architecture pre-trained on the ImageNet- 1k classiﬁcation
dataset [ 47]. The ﬁnal bounding box detection parame-
ters consist of a 4,096-d RoI classiﬁcation parameter vector
wc
clsand a4,096-d bounding box regression parameter vec-
torwc
locfor each class. We use a 3-layer fully-connected
network with Leaky ReLU nonlinearity as our weight pre-
diction meta-model T, taking as input the concatenation of
wc
clsandwc
locand predicting their estimated values. λis
cross-validated. Following [ 46], each mini-batch has one
random training image. We train the detector and meta-
model using SGD with a momentum of 0.9and a weight
decay of 0.0005 . During meta-training, we ﬁrst train the
large-sample base detector on the full set of base classes for
6epochs, with a learning rate of 0.001which is decreasedby 10 at5epochs. We then sample 5,000few-shot base de-
tection tasks, and for each task we train the corresponding
bounding box detection parameters with the remaining pa-
rameters frozen to those in the already-trained large-sample
base detector. The meta-model is trained at the same time
for10,000iterations, with a meta-learning rate of 0.0005 .
Baselines. We compare against different types of
deep CNN based detection models, including Faster R-
CNN [ 46], YOLOv2 [ 44], and SSD [ 37]. In particular, we
evaluate their variants in the small-sample size regime in
the following scenarios. (1) Training from scratch: we di-
rectly learn a k-shot detector for the 5novel classes with-
out leveraging the base class examples. (We still pre-train
the feature backbone on ImageNet.) (2) Joint learning: we
learn a detector for all the 20classes from large amounts of
base training examples and few novel examples. (3) Fine-
tuning transfer: after learning the large-sample detector for
the15base classes, we ﬁne-tune it to be a k-shot detector
for the5novel classes. The latter two baselines have ac-
cess to the same amount of training data as ours, but are not
meta-learned . In addition, we compare with a recent meta-
learning based few-shot detection approach that reweights
the feature maps from a pre-trained base YOLOv2 detec-
tor [29]. For a fair comparison, we also introduce our meta-
model for the last layer of the YOLOv2 detection network.
Table 1summarizes the main results on the 5novel
classes under the 3different dataset splits. While CNN
based detectors have achieved impressive performance with
a large amount of annotated examples (for example, the
mAP of Faster R-CNN trained on the original full PASCAL
VOC is73.2%[46]), their performance signiﬁcantly de-
grades in the few-shot scenario. As expected, directly
training the novel detector from scratch using few exam-
ples leads to very poor performance ( e.g., with the mAP
∼1%) due to severe over-ﬁtting. Simply joint training
with the base classes cannot mitigate this issue, since the
detectors are largely dominated by those data-rich base
classes. Fine-tuning transfers knowledge from base classes
in a more principled manner and leads to improved perfor-
mance. However, such an improvement is limited, showing
the general difﬁculty of our few-shot detection task.
By contrast, our MetaDet, regardless of being built
upon Faster R-CNN or YOLO, consistently and signiﬁ-
cantly outperforms all the baselines across different sam-
ple sizes and dataset splits, especially for extremely lim-
ited data. This veriﬁes the effectiveness and generality of
our meta-learning mechanism. Unlike [ 29] which is also
meta-learned, our approach is able to extract and leverage
parameter-level meta-knowledge that is shared both across
multiple few-shot detection tasks and between few-shot and
large-sample detectors , thus outperforming [ 29] by a large
margin. In addition, ‘Faster R-CNN + MetaDet’ outper-
forms ‘YOLOv2 + MetaDet’, indicating that the meta-
9929