embryos increases, the chance of multiple pregnancies (twins or
even triplets) and associated complications also increase. Forexample, let ’s simply assume we transfer three embryos each with
an independent success probability of 1/4. The chance of a
pregnancy can be, thus, calculated as p=1−(3/4)3≈0.58. How-
ever, in this scenario, the chance of twin and triplets pregnancywould be 3 × (1/4)2(3/4)≈0.14 and (1/4)3≈0.02, respectively. The
chance of a single pregnancy would be 3 × (1/4)(3/4)2≈0.42.
Given a list of potential embryos for transfer and their predicted
success rate using our decision tree analysis, we can calculate theprobability of no pregnancy, single pregnancy, and multiple
pregnancies, for any selection of embryos from the list. In general,
ifkembryos are transferred with indicated success probabilities of
p
1,…,pk(where pishows the success probability of embryo i, for
any index ibetween 1 and k) then the chance of a single
pregnancy can be calculated as P=∑ipi∏j≠i(1−pj). Given the
success rate of any individual embryo transfer, we showed how tocalculate the probability of a single successful pregnancy when k
embryos ( k> 1) are transferred. This will help embryologists to
select those embryos (for example two or three), which maximize
the chance of a single pregnancy when transferred together.DISCUSSION
Studies on human embryo evaluation are still very limited and
mostly based on morphological features. They often involve lownumbers of embryos from single centers, and they lack validationsin independent cohorts. Furthermore, publications to date haverelied on single static images. However, time-lapse images havethe advantage of being consistent in terms of size, lighting,contrast, quality, and in terms of capturing the timing of embryodevelopment, which is particularly important when quantifyingblastocyst expansion. Currently, no robust and fully automaticmethod exists to analyze human embryo data by TLI.
Recently, there have been several studies utilizing classical
machine learning approaches, such as support vector machine(SVM) and RF, and deep learning methods, such as CNN-basic,
15,16,38for outcome prediction or grade classi ﬁcation. To
date, several AI methods have been used to assess blastocysts.39
Image segmentation and advanced image analysis techniquesusing neural networks with textured descriptors, level set, phasecongruency, and ﬁtting of ellipse methods have been demon-
strated in mouse,
40bovine,15and human blastocysts.4,17STORK
Embryologist-V
Embryologist-IVMajority vote
Embryologist-III
Embryologist-II
Embryologist-IGood
Poor
Fair
Uncertain
Fig. 5 Assessment comparison of STORK with ﬁve embryologists: This circular heatmap demonstrates the prediction of STORK and ﬁve
embryologists in the labeling of the same images from 394 embryos. STORK outputs good and poor grades. The heatmap compares STORK ’s
result with the majority vote results from all of the embryologists for 239 embryos in which the majority (i.e., at least three out of ﬁve
embryologists) gives good or poor. The embryologists assess the embryos quality using Gardner grading system. Then, they convert the
grades to the three different quality scores as good-quality (orange), fair-quality (gray), and poor-quality (navy) based on the pregnancy rate.
Also, for a few embryos, the embryologist uses “?”signs (e.g. 3A?), which refer to the low certainty (red) as they are not sure about the exact
label. The heatmap illustrates the result of STORK, Majority vote, Embryologist-V, Embryologist-IV, Embryologist-III, Embryologist-II, andEmbryologist-I from the outer circle to the inner ones. Orange: embryos with good-quality; navy: embryos with poor-quality; gray: embryoswith fair-quality; red: embryos that are not labeled due to uncertaintyP. Khosravi et al.
6
npj Digital Medicine (2019) 21 Scripps Research Translational Institute