that STORK ﬁnds suf ﬁcient structure within embryos classi ﬁed as
fair-quality to make clinically relevant predictions (Fig. 4).
STORK is robust when applied to datasets from other clinics
To evaluate STORK ’s robustness, we tested its performance by
using additional datasets of embryo images obtained from two
other IVF centers, Universidad de Valencia and IRDB-IC, comprising
127 (74 good-quality, 53 poor-quality) and 87 (61 good-quality, 26
poor-quality) embryos, respectively (Supplementary Table 2). Our
experimental results (See Fig. 3a) demonstrate that although the
scoring systems used for these centers are different from the
system used to train our model, STORK can successfully identify
and register score variations and robustly discriminate between
them, with an AUC of 0.90 and 0.76 for the IRDB-IC and
Universidad de Valencia and (Fig. 3a), respectively. Lower
concordance of the classi ﬁcation results (by STORK) for the
Universidad de Valencia dataset could be related to different
grading systems used by that clinic. The images of Universidad de
Valencia dataset are labeled using Asebir26while IRDB-IC is labeled
using the Gardner system.27The Veeck and Zaninovic grading
system is a slightly modi ﬁed version of the Gardner system
(Supplementary Table 4).
STORK outperforms individual embryologists for embryo selection
It is well known that embryo scoring frequently varies among
embryologists,28mainly due to the subjectivity of the scoring
process and different interpretations of embryo quality. We,
therefore, sought to create a small but robust benchmark embryo
dataset that would represent the consensus of several embryol-
ogists. We asked ﬁve embryologists from three different clinics to
provide scores for each of 394 embryos generated in different labs
(Supplementary Table 6). Note that these images were not used in
the training phase of our algorithm. The embryo images were
scored using the Gardner scoring system27and then mapped onto
our simpli ﬁed three groups (good-quality, fair-quality, and poor-
quality; see Supplementary Table 4 for the mapping method).
As expected, we found a low level of agreement among the
embryologists (Supplementary Fig. 1b), with only 89 embryos out
of the 394 classi ﬁed as the same quality by all ﬁve embryologists
(Supplementary Fig. 1a). Therefore, to create a larger and moreaccurate gold standard dataset, we used an embryologist majority
voting procedure (i.e., the quality of each image was determined
by the score given by at least three out of the ﬁve embryologists)
to classify 239 images (32 good-quality and 207 poor-quality).When we applied STORK to these 239 images, we found that it
predicted the embryologist majority vote with precision of 95.7%
(Cohen ’s kappa =0.63). In comparison, STORK agreed with each
individual embryologist as follows: 0.69, 0.54, 0.25, 0.62, and 0.54Cohen ’s kappa score. These results indicate that STORK may
outperform individual embryologists when assessing embryoimage quality (Fig. 5).
A decision tree predicts likelihood of successful pregnancy based
on embryo quality and clinical parameters
It is known that other factors, besides embryo quality, such as
patient age, the patient ’s genetic background, clinical diagnosis,
and treatment-related characteristics, can affect pregnancy out-
come.
29,30As embryo quality is one of the most important of these
factors, the ultimate aim of any embryo assessment approach is toidentify embryos that have the highest implantation potentialresulting in live birth.
27,31,32However, embryo quality alone is not
enough to accurately determine the pregnancy probability (seeSupplementary Method 1, Supplementary Method 2 and Supple-
mentary Fig. 2).
Therefore, in this section we present an alternative method for
predicting successful pregnancy probability based on a state-of-the-art decision tree method that integrates clinical informationand embryo quality. We wondered if we could assess thesuccessful pregnancy rate by using a combination of embryo
quality and patient age, as age is one of the most important
clinical variables. For this purpose, we used a hierarchical decisiontree method known as chi-squared automatic interaction detec-tion (CHAID) algorithm.
33
We designed a CHAID34,35decision tree using 2182 embryos
from the WCM-NY database (Supplementary Table 6) withavailable clinical information and pregnancy outcome results
(Fig. 6). We then investigated the interaction between patient age
(consisting of seven classes: ≤30, 31 –32, 33 –34, 35 –36, 37 –38,
39–40, and ≥41) (Supplementary Fig. 3a) and embryo quality
(consisting of two classes: good-quality and poor-quality). The fullyde-identi ﬁed data consists of a very diverse population of patients
(Supplementary Fig. 3b). The effect on live birth outcome isdemonstrated in (Supplementary Fig. 3c). The CHAID algorithm
can project interactions between variables and non-linear effects,
which are generally missed by traditional statistical techniques.CHAID builds a tree to determine how variables can explain anoutcome in a statistically meaningful way.
34,35CHAID uses chi-
squared statistics for identi ﬁcation of optimal multi-way splits, and
Fig. 3 Deep neural network results: aInception-V1 ( ﬁne-tuning the parameters for all layers) results for three datasets. bInception-V1 via two
different training methods ( ﬁne-tuning the parameters for all layers and training from scratch) in good-quality and poor-quality embryo
quality discrimination dataset. WCM-NY: data from the Center for Reproductive Medicine and Infertility at Weill Cornell Medicine of New York;
IRDB-IC: data from the Institute of Reproduction and Developmental Biology of Imperial College; Universidad de Valencia: data from the
Institute Valenciano de Infertilidad, Universidad de ValenciaP. Khosravi et al.
4
npj Digital Medicine (2019) 21 Scripps Research Translational Institute