set=56 embryos) accuracy for discretization of bovine embryo
grades and mammalian oocyte grades, respectively. Further-more, a few previously publishe d approaches have focused on
classifying human blastocyst quality based on speci ﬁcf e a t u r e s ,
such as the inner cell mass (ICM) area, trophectoderm (TE) area,zona pellucida (ZP) thickness, and blastocyst area and radius
separately.
9,17In particular, Filho et al.17presented a semi-
automatic grading system of human embryos. The authorsshowed that classi ﬁers can have different accuracies for each
embryo component (blastocyst extension, ICM, and TE). Theirresults indicated various accuracy ranges from 67 to 92% for theembryo extension, from 67 to 82% for the ICM, and from 53 to92% for TE detection; 92% was the highest accuracy achievedacross a 73-embryo test set.
17Although these methods achieved
reasonable accuracy in assessi ng human embryo quality, they
require advanced embryological expertize and several prepro-
cessing steps, and do not scale to large datasets.
Deep learning algorithms, in par ticular convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), have recently been used to address a number
of medical-imaging problems, such as detection of diabeticretinopathy,
18skin lesions,19and diagnosing disease.20They
have become the technique of choice in computer vision and
they are the most successful type of models for image analysis.
Unlike regular neural networks, CNNs contain neurons arrangedin three dimensions (i.e., width, height, depth). Recently, deepa r c h i t e c t u r e so fC N N ss u c ha sI n c e p t i o n
21and ResNet22have
dramatically increased the progress rate of deep learning
methods in image classi ﬁcation.23In this paper, we sought to
use deep learning to accurately predict the quality of human
blastocysts and help select the best single embryo for transfer
(Fig. 1).RESULTS
Deep neural network achieves a highly accurate classi ﬁcation of
embryo images
We used time-lapse images from 10,148 human embryos,
obtained from the Center for Reproductive Medicine at Weill
Cornell Medicine to train and validate our DNN. The 10,148embryos (WCM-NY dataset) were classi ﬁed into three major
quality groups, good-quality ( n=1345 embryos), fair-quality
(n=4062 embryos), and poor-quality ( n=4741 embryos) (Fig.
2a, b) based on their assigned grades (see Methods). We obtained
time-lapse images from each of the embryos, each consisting ofseveral time points, seven focal depths per time point (Fig. 2a, b)
and 500 × 500 pixels black and white images per focal depth ( +45,
+30,+15, 0, −15,−30, and −45). Upon preprocessing and
removal of images with readability issues (e.g., those with a darkbackground) and random selection of a balanced set of images(see Methods), we were left with a total of 12,001 images from upto seven focal depths: 6000 images in 877 good-quality embryos,
and 6001 images in 887 poor-quality embryos.
We then trained an Inception-V1 DNN –based algorithm using the
two quality groups at both ends of the spectrum, i.e., good-qualityand poor-quality. The Inception-V1 architecture is a transfer learning
algorithm, where we initially performed ﬁne-tuning of the
parameters for all of the layers. We used 50,000 steps for trainingthe DNN and subsequently evaluated the performance of our DNN(called STORK) using a randomly selected independent test set with964 good-quality images from 141 embryos and 966 poor-quality
images from 142 embryos. Our results showed that the trained
algorithm was able to identify good-quality and poor-quality imageswith 96.94% accuracy (1871 correct predictions out of 1930 images).
To measure the accuracy of STORK for individual embryos, we
used a simple voting system across multiple image focal depths. If
Fig. 1 The STORK ﬂowchart: This ﬂowchart illustrates the design and assessment of STORK. First, Human embryo images are provided from
the embryology lab and labeled by embryologists as good-quality or poor-quality based on their pregnancy likelihood. Then, the labels andclinical information from the extracted images are integrated, and the Inception-V1 algorithm is trained for good-quality and poor-qualityclasses. Furthermore, STORK is evaluated by a blind test set to assess its performance in predicting embryo quality. Finally, the CHAID decision
tree is used to investigate the interaction between patient age and embryo qualityP. Khosravi et al.
2
npj Digital Medicine (2019) 21 Scripps Research Translational Institute1234567890():,;