the majority of images from the same embryo were predicted to
be of good-quality, then the ﬁnal quality of the embryo was
considered good. For a small number of cases in which
the number of good-quality and poor-quality images was equal(e.g., three good-quality and three poor-quality for six focaldepths), we used STORK ’s output probability scores to break the
tie. At the embryo level, we obtained 97.53% accuracy with 276
correct predictions out of 283 embryos.
At the image level, we observed an average area under the
curve (AUC) of 0.987 (Fig. 3a) on the blind test set. We also found
that training an Inception-V1 model without parameter ﬁne-
tuning did not affect performance (accuracy; Fig. 3b). This
observation is in agreement with previous studies using these
deep learning techniques.
20,24,25
We also found that STORK classi ﬁed the fair-quality embryo
(intermediate group, Figs. 2and4) images (4480 images from 640
embryos) as 82% good-quality (526 embryos) and 18% poor-
quality (114 embryos), respectively. As Inception-V1 was trained
for good-quality and poor-quality classes with different pregnancyprobabilities (an ~58% and 35% chance of pregnancy for good-
quality and poor-quality classes, respectively), we wondered ifSTORK nonetheless produced relevant predictions (association
between embryo quality and pregnancy rate) within the fair-
quality class. A closer look showed that embryos with fair-qualityimages that were classi ﬁed as poor-quality by STORK had a lower
likelihood of positive live birth (50.9%) as compared to those
classi ﬁed as good-quality (61.4% positive live birth; p< 0.05 by the
two-tailed Fisher ’s test). Note that STORK alone cannot estimate
the pregnancy rate. However, it can detect the association
between embryo quality and pregnancy rate based on morpho-
logical classi ﬁcation.
In addition, we found that fair-quality embryos predicted to be
good-quality by STORK came from younger patients (33.9 yearsold on average) than those predicted to be poor-quality (34.25years old on average). Interestingly, these numbers are similar to
the age of patients with good-quality and poor-quality embryos:
33.86 and 34.72 years old on average, respectively. This suggests
Fig. 2 Embryologists ’evaluation: aThis ﬁgure shows three examples of Veeck and Zaninovich grades and their corresponding quality labels
across seven focal depths. bEmbryologists evaluate embryo quality using an internal scoring system and subsequently classify them into
three major groups (good-quality, fair-quality, poor-quality) based on the pregnancy rateP. Khosravi et al.
3
Scripps Research Translational Institute npj Digital Medicine (2019) 21