ARTICLE OPEN
Deep learning enables robust assessment and selection of
human blastocysts after in vitro fertilization
Pegah Khosravi1,2, Ehsan Kazemi3, Qiansheng Zhan4, Jonas E. Malmsten4, Marco Toschi4, Pantelis Zisimopoulos1,2,
Alexandros Sigaras1,2, Stuart Lavery5, Lee A. D. Cooper6, Cristina Hickman5, Marcos Meseguer7, Zev Rosenwaks4,
Olivier Elemento1,2,8, Nikica Zaninovic4and Iman Hajirasouliha1,2
Visual morphology assessment is routinely used for evaluating of embryo quality and selecting human blastocysts for transfer afterin vitro fertilization (IVF). However, the assessment produces different results between embryologists and as a result, the success
rate of IVF remains low. To overcome uncertainties in embryo quality, multiple embryos are often implanted resulting in undesired
multiple pregnancies and complications. Unlike in other imaging ﬁelds, human embryology and IVF have not yet leveraged arti ﬁcial
intelligence (AI) for unbiased, automated embryo assessment. We postulated that an AI approach trained on thousands of embryos
can reliably predict embryo quality without human intervention. We implemented an AI approach based on deep neural networks
(DNNs) to select highest quality embryos using a large collection of human embryo time-lapse images (about 50,000 images) from ahigh-volume fertility center in the United States. We developed a framework (STORK) based on Google ’s Inception model. STORK
predicts blastocyst quality with an AUC of >0.98 and generalizes well to images from other clinics outside the US and outperforms
individual embryologists. Using clinical data for 2182 embryos, we created a decision tree to integrate embryo quality and patient
age to identify scenarios associated with pregnancy likelihood. Our analysis shows that the chance of pregnancy based onindividual embryos varies from 13.8% (age ≥41 and poor-quality) to 66.3% (age <37 and good-quality) depending on automated
blastocyst quality assessment and patient age. In conclusion, our AI-driven approach provides a reproducible way to assess embryo
quality and uncovers new, potentially personalized strategies to select embryos.
npj Digital Medicine (2019)2:21 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-019-0096-y
INTRODUCTION
Infertility remains an unremitting reproductive issue that affects
about 186 million people worldwide.
1In the United States,
infertility affects ~8% of women of child-bearing age.2
In vitro fertilization (IVF) is one of the most common
treatments for infertility. IVF involves ovarian stimulation
followed by the retrieval of mult iple oocytes, fertilization, and
embryo culture for 1 –6 days in controlled environmental
conditions. Although IVF and embryo-transfer technologies
have improved considerably over the past 30 years, the ef ﬁcacy
of IVF remains relatively low.3
Conventional embryo evaluation involves manual grading of
human embryos at the blastocyst stage (embryo on day 5) basedon morphological analysis by skilled embryologists.4While this
selection method is used universally in clinical practice, theevaluation of an embryo based on a static image represents acrude, subjective evaluation of embryo quality, which is incom-plete as well as time-consuming.
5–7
Moreover, there continues to be a tendency for inconsistent
blastocyst classi ﬁcation, often associated with different grading
systems among medical centers. Indeed, attempts to establish auniversal grading and selection system have thus far failed to
catch on.8
Improving the ability to select the single best embryo with the
highest implantation potential would increase pregnancy rates as
well as minimize the chance of multiple pregnancies due to thetransfer of multiple embryos.9Time-lapse imaging (TLI)10is an
emerging technology that allows continuous observation ofembryo development without removing embryos from controlled
and stable incubator conditions.11However, even though TLI
represents a step toward more objective embryo evaluation, theinter- and intra-evaluator variation among embryologists usingconventional morphological grading and/or TLI annotations is welldocumented.
12–14
There are various ef ﬁcient machine learning methods, which
due to their relatively better performances in various ﬁelds of
research are utilized for embryo classi ﬁcation. Two recent
studies have attempted to use some of these approaches for
embryo quality analysis, with varying degrees of success15,16on
a limited bovine and mammalian oocytes data, using AI- and
random forest (RF)-based classi ﬁcation, respectively. Their
results showed 76.4% (test set =73 embryos) and 75% (test
Received: 2 November 2018 Accepted: 1 March 20191Institute for Computational Biomedicine, Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine of Cornell University, New York, NY, USA ;2Caryl and Israel Englander
Institute for Precision Medicine, The Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA;3Yale Institute for Network Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA;
4The Ronald O. Perelman and Claudia Cohen Center for Reproductive Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA;5Institute of Reproduction and Developmental
Biology, Imperial College, Hammersmith Campus, London, UK;6Department of Biomedical Informatics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA;7Instituto
Valenciano de Infertilidad, Universidad de Valencia, Valencia, Spain and8WorldQuant Initiative for Quantitative Prediction, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA
Correspondence: Nikica Zaninovic (nizanin@med.cornell.edu) or Iman Hajirasouliha (imh2003@med.cornell.edu)
These authors contributed equally: Zev Rosenwaks, Olivier Elemento, Nikica Zaninovic, Iman Hajirasoulihawww.nature.com/npjdigitalmed
Scripps Research Translational Institute