More recently, Segal et al.41have developed a random forest
classi ﬁer-based tool using 2744 embryos to predict which patients
should have extended culture with an accuracy of 76.4%. Also,
Matsumoto et al.42used time-lapse monitoring of 118 human
embryos to determine good-quality embryos using deep learning-
based method, which is based on the Keras neural network library.
They achieved 70 and 80% accuracy for the validation datasetthrough two different cell stages that are signi ﬁcantly lower than
the performance obtained from our framework. Besides, the
advantage of our method is that instead of only focusing on the
predetermined, segmented features that embryologists are
trained to analyze, the entire image of the embryo is assessed,
allowing for quanti ﬁcation of all the available data. Convolution,
therefore, allows the AI to identify patterns in morphological
features that we do not know how to assess.
We have demonstrated that deep learning approaches can
provide accurate quality assessments in various clinical conditions.
The STORK framework presented here provides a method that canbe easily implemented for a wide range of applications, including
embryo grading. Our method yields a cutting-edge sensitivity
when performing the challenging task of assessing embryo quality
using multi-focal embryo images. Notably, our STORK framework
is fully automated and does not require any manual augmenta-
tions or preprocessing on the input images. In fact, it provides
embryologists a straightforward platform to use without requiring
sophisticated computational knowledge. Furthermore, we
designed a decision tree based on the CHAID algorithm to
investigate the interaction between embryo quality and patient
characteristics (i.e., patient age) in a diverse population, and their
effect on the likelihood of live birth.
Finally, although STORK can run on traditional computer
microprocessors (CPUs), abundant system memory and graphics
processing units (GPUs) make the training process faster (at least
one order of magnitude) as training requires loading a signi ﬁcant
number of medical images for training and validation.
Nevertheless, our method still has limitations. For example, we
explored the possibility of directly predicting the likelihood of
pregnancy based on only embryo images that are labeled as
“positive live birth ”or “negative live birth ”(Supplementary
Method 2). The result showed that the trained algorithm cannotidentify positive live birth and negative live birth successfully
using embryo morphology alone.
METHODS
Images from human blastocysts
This study included 10,148 embryos from the Center for Reproductive
Medicine at Weill Cornell Medicine (2012/05 –2017/12). We referred to this
dataset as WCM-NY throughout this manuscript. This study usedretrospective and fully de-identi ﬁed data. The study was performed in
accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations and was approved by
the Institutional Review Board at Weill Cornell Medicine (IRB number:1401014735). The images were captured using the EmbryoScope ®time-
lapse system (Vitrolife, Sweden) with a built-in microscope. Images were
captured using single red LED (635 nm) every 20 min., with seven focaldepths ( +45,+30,+15, 0,−15,−30, and −45) of the embryo taken each
time, representing a total of 50,392 images (500 × 500 pixels) captured
precisely 110 h post-insemination (hpi) (Fig. 2a). The standardization of
images by the EmbryoScope software was consistent, and the images ofthe blastocysts were labeled using the Veeck and Zaninovic grading
system
43(Supplementary Table 1). For validation, we also used two
external datasets from the Universidad de Valencia, Valencia, Spain, andthe Institute of Reproduction and Developmental Biology of ImperialCollege, London, UK (IRDB-IC) (Supplementary Table 2).
Dataset preparation and the comprised images
This study presents a framework to classify different embryo images basedon blastocyst grading and map those grades to good- and poor-quality.
In machine learning, especially for classi ﬁcation, a high-quality training
dataset is important for training the classi ﬁcation model. Therefore, for the
ﬁrst step of selecting images, we manually eliminated the images with dark
background and uninformative images (Supplementary Fig. 4) from thetraining set. Moreover, the number of images with good-quality usually is
much less than that of poor-quality within the training sample. To avoid
unbalanced classes for training the algorithm, we randomly deletedimages from the class, which has suf ﬁcient observations (poor-quality) so
that the comparative ratio of two classes is equal in our data.
For the next step, the embryologists labeled the embryo images with
quality labels (good-quality, fair-quality, and poor-quality) to map certain
quantitative scores from the grading system of Veeck and Zaninovic (e.g.,3AA, 3BB, 1BB) to three quality grades based on the pregnancy outcomeobtained from statistical analysis of clinical data. In this regard, any grade
that contained B- or C and an extension rate equal to or less than three
was considered part of the poor-quality group with <35% pregnancy
Age
Quality
Age
13.8%41≤age
30.0%39≤age<41Poor
42.2%Good39≤age
Quality
25.5%Poor
58.5%Good
37 ≤ age < 39
Quality
49.8%Poor
66.3%Goodage<37p-value = 3.66e−25
p-value = 5.18e−5
p-value = 5.20e−3p-value = 1.22e−7 p-value = 2.90e−10
Fig. 6 Interactions between age and embryo quality: The decision tree shows the interactions between IVF patient age and embryo quality
using CHAIDP. Khosravi et al.
7
Scripps Research Translational Institute npj Digital Medicine (2019) 21