identi ﬁes a set of characteristics (e.g., patient age and embryo
quality) that best differentiates individuals based on a categoricaloutcome (here, live birth) and creates exhaustive and mutuallyexclusive subgroups of individuals. It chooses the best partition onthe basis of statistical signi ﬁcance and uses Bonferroni-adjusted p-
values to determine signi ﬁcance with a predetermined minimum
size of end nodes. We used a 1% Bonferroni-adjusted p-value, a
maximum depth of the tree ( n=5), and a minimum size of end
nodes ( n=20) as the stopping criteria. The application of a tree-
based algorithm on the embryo data would help to more precisely
deﬁne the effect of patient age and embryo quality (good-quality
or poor-quality) on live birth outcome, and to better understandany interactions between these two clinical variables (patient ageand embryo quality).
Note that while several other classi ﬁcation algorithms could
have been employed for the prediction, CHAID enabled a user-
friendly visualization of the resulting decision tree.
36,37
As Fig. 6shows, patients were automatically classi ﬁed into three
age groups: (i) ≤36, (ii) 37 and 38, and (iii) ≥39 years old due to age
data distribution. For each age group, embryos were classi ﬁed in
good- and poor-quality groups (Supplementary Fig. 3c).The results con ﬁrm the association between probability of
successful pregnancy and patient age. The live birth probability for
patients with good-quality embryos is signi ﬁcantly (1%
Bonferroni-adjusted p-value) higher than that for patients with
poor-quality embryos across different ages. Figure 6indicates that
patients ≤36 years old have a higher successful pregnancy rate
compared to patients in the other two age groups. The CHAID
decision tree analysis also indicates that the chance of favorable
outcome using IVF varies from 13.8% (e.g., when the embryo is of
poor-quality as assessed by STORK and the patient is ≥41 years
old) to 66.3% (e.g., when the embryo is of good-quality and the
patient is <37 years old) (Fig. 6).
Probability analysis optimizes embryo selection and maximizes
likelihood of single pregnancy
It is a common practice in IVF clinics to select and transfer more
than one embryo in order to increase the chance of a successful
pregnancy. As the success rate of individual embryos are typically<50% and transferring two or more embryos can increase the
success probability. However, when the number of transferred
Fair-NegativePoor = 0.9999
Good= 0.0001ab
cd
Poor = 1.0000
Good= 0.0000Poor = 0.0008 
Good= 0.9992
Poor = 0.0000
Good= 1.0000Fair-Negative Fair-PositiveFair-Positive
Fig. 4 STORK vs. embryologists classi ﬁcation: STORK classi ﬁes the fair-quality images into existing good-quality and poor-quality classes. For
example, panels “a”and “b”are labeled 3A-B (fair-quality) according to the Veeck and Zaninovic grading system, while STORK classi ﬁed them
as poor-quality and good-quality, respectively. Also, panels “c”and “d”are both labeled 3BB (fair-quality). However, the algorithm correctly
classi ﬁed panel “c”as poor-quality and panel “d”as good-quality. As the ﬁgure shows, the outcome in the embryos in “b”and “d”is positive
live birth, whereas it is negative live birth in “a”and “c”P. Khosravi et al.
5
Scripps Research Translational Institute npj Digital Medicine (2019) 21