4 Introduction
(Peeterset al.,2006). “Personality traits” is a label to describe a speciﬁc
set of characteristics that are believed to be the best predictors of an
individual’s behavior (Tasa et al.,2011). Personality is now considered
a core construct in understanding human behavior over and above many
other factors (Li et al.,2014). More important, personality explains the
way people respond to others in social settings (Thoresen et al.,2003).
This is why personality inﬂuences the quality of interactions between
individuals (Driskell et al.,2006; Peeters et al.,2006). The literature
on personality is rich in theory and spans disciplines such as sociology,
psychology, and political science as well as organizational behavior.
Although there are many types of personality traits, the Big Five
are held in particularly high regard. The Big Five personality traits are
the most widely used personality traits (Li et al., 2014). The acronym
OCEAN, representing openness to experience, conscientiousness, ex-
traversion, agreeableness and neuroticism, is often used to represent the
ﬁve personality traits. Openness to experience represents the degree
to which someone is imaginative, curious, and broadminded (McCrae
and Costa, 1997). Conscientiousness reﬂects the extent that someone is
careful, deliberative and self-aware of their actions (Tasa et al.,2011).
Extraversion is the extent to which an individual is assertive, outgoing,
talkative, and sociable (Rhee et al.,2013). Introversion is the degree
to which someone enjoys being alone and is the opposite of extraver-
sion (Driskell et al.,2006). Agreeableness reﬂects the extent to which
someone is cooperative and friendly (Peeters et al.,2006). Neuroti-
cism can be viewed as the degree to which someone is easily angered,
not well-adjusted, insecure, and lacks self-conﬁdence (Driskell et al.,
2006). Neuroticism is often viewed as the opposite of emotional stability,
which is the degree to which someone is calm, well-adjusted, secure,
and self-conﬁdent (Peeters et al.,2006). The Big Five are not only
the most popular set of personality traits in social sciences, but, as we
demonstrate here, they are also the most popular traits used in the
study of human–robot interaction (Robert, 2018).
Despite the importance of personality in the HRI literature, the
researchremainsfragmentedandlacksacoherentframework.Thismakes
it diﬃcult to understand what we know and identify what we do not.
As a result, our knowledge of personality in human–robot interactions
Full text available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2900000018