5
has not kept pace with the deployment of robots in organizations or in
our broader society. As robots become increasingly vital to our society,
there is a need to better comprehend factors such as personality that
facilitate better human–robot interaction (HRI).
To address this shortcoming, this paper reviews the literature on
personality and embodied physical action (EPA) robots. We focused on
EPA robots because their physical embodiment invokes strong emotional
reactions that can lead individuals to project personalities onto them
(Robert, 2018; You and Robert, 2018). Therefore, issues related to
personalityarelikelytobemorecentraltohuman–robotinteractionwith
regardtoEPArobots.Thispaperinvestigatesthecurrentstateofhuman–
robot personality research, discusses the unique role of personality in
human–robot research, and oﬀers guidance for future research.
This review oﬀers several contributions to the literature. First, it
presents a conceptual integrated model of the literature on personality
in human–robot literature. In doing so, this paper helps to organize the
literature on personality in human–robot literature. Two, it highlights
four thrust areas in the literature. These thrust areas include: (1) Hu-
man Personality and HRI, (2) Robot Personality and HRI, (3) Robot
Personality and HRI, and (4) Factors Impacting Robot Personality.
Three, it derives and presents major insights from the literature. Finally,
it identiﬁes gaps in the literature that need to be addressed.
The paper is organized as follows. Next, in Section 2, we present
the relevant literature including the inclusion and exclusion criteria
for articles. This includes a brief discussion of the publication venues,
personality measures, and outcome measures in the literature. Then, in
Section3we present and discuss Thrust Area 1: Human Personality and
HRI. In Sections 4,5, and6, a similar discussion takes place for Thrust
Area 2: Robot Personality and HRI, Thrust Area 3: Robot Personality
and HRI, and Thrust Area 4: Factors Impacting Robot Personality,
respectively. Section 7follows with a discussion on the way forward,
focusing on the opportunities for personality research in human–robot
interaction.
In summary, robots are being used to both replace and complement
humans across many settings. Personality has been identiﬁed as a vital
factor in the promotion of human–robot interaction. Unfortunately,
Full text available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2900000018