Human Activity Recognition Using LSTM -RNN 
Deep N eural Network Architecture  
Schalk Wilhelm Pienaar1, Reza Malekian1,2, Senior Member, IEEE,  
1Department of  Electrical, Electronic and Computer Engineering , University of Pretoria , Pretoria, 0002,  South Africa  
2Department of Computer Science and Media Technology, Malmö University, Malmö, 20506, Sweden/ Internet of Things and People Re search Center, 
Malmö Univers ity, Malmö, 20506, Sweden  
Reza.malekian@ieee.org  
Abstract—Using raw  sensor  data to model and train 
networks for  Human Activity Recognition can be used in many 
different applications , from fitness tracking to safety  monitoring  
applications.  These models can be easily extended to  be trained 
with  different data sources for increased accurac ies or an 
extension of classifications for different prediction classes.  This 
paper goes into the  discussion on  the available dataset provided  
by WISDM and the unique features of each class for the 
different axes. Furthermore, the  design of a Long Short Term 
Memory  (LSTM) architecture  model is outlined  for the 
application of human activity recognition . An accuracy of above 
94% and a loss of less  than 30% has been reached in the first 
500 epochs of training.  
Keywords — Activity Rec ognition, Acceleration Sensors , 
Long Short Term Memory architecture , Recurrent Neural 
Networks , Tensorflow  
I. INTRODUCTION  
With recent technology advances in mobile devices such 
as smart phones, many sensors, part of these devices, have also 
improved greatly over the past few years. These include 
motion sensors, light sensors, GPS, image -sensors (camera/s), 
sound sensors (micr ophone), etc. With the computing 
performance increases in these devices, the ability to perform 
tasks, that would have been considered too processing -
intensive in real -time a few years back, have been made 
possible,  without requiring the data to be transmi tted to a 
server for processing. Due to these advancements, there are 
exciting new areas of development that are opened up, which 
can assist in many areas of our daily lives. The goal of this 
paper is to investigate and build a solution to identify the 
activities by making use of an open -source dataset, released 
by the Wireless Sensor Data Mining (WISDM) Lab  [1]. The 
dataset includes labels for each of the six activities, each 
including the x, y and z axis values for the tri -axial 
accelerometer during the labelled activities. The activities 
available in the dataset includes standing, sitting, walking, 
jogging, ascending and descending stairs.  
Machine -learning can be performed with t his data using 
various methods; this paper will analyse Recurrent Neural 
Networks (RNN) with Long Short -Term Memory (LSTM) 
cells. LSTM has feedback connections, providing it with the 
ability to compute everything that a Turing machine can  
perform  [2]. It can also process both single data points, such 
as images, and sequences of data, such as speech, video, 
human activity, etc. LSTM units each consist of a cell, and 
three regulators/gates, namely an input and output gate, and a 
forget gate. Each cell r emembers values of arbitrary time -
intervals, while the gates regulate the information flow both 
from and to the cells. These networks are ideal for 
classification, processing and predicting time -series based data. LSTMs is proven to excel in learning, proc essing and 
classifying such types of data.  
In traditional RNNs, where the network is trained via 
backpropagation  through time, an issue known as exploding 
and vanishing gradients, are present [3], causi ng  an exploding 
gradient problem.  This is when large error gradients start 
accumulating, resulting in significant changes to the neural 
network model during training, which in effect prevents a 
model  from training with the available data, and causes the 
trained model to be unstable  [4]. Vanishing gradients is when  
the gradients of loss functions become too small  (approaches 
zero) , then the network becomes  increasingly  hard to train, as 
the weights and biases of the initial layers are not updated 
effectively with the training sessions  [5]. LSTM has been 
designed to overcome these issues that arise in RNN 
architectures. LSTM and RNNs  are very similar, with the 
difference being that hidden l ayers in LSTMs contain memory 
blocks with cells instead of non -linear units, which can store 
information over long time -spans. In other words , traditional 
RNN cells have a single internal layer that acts on the current 
state (h t-1) and input (x t), whereas an LSTM cell contains three 
such layers  [6]. 
II. MODEL  TRAINING  
A. Raw Data Activity analysis  
This study considers six activities, namely jogging, sitting, 
standing, walking, upstairs and downstairs. These activities 
are available in raw data, provided by WISDM, and is ideal to 
use as a base for our research. Most of these activities also 
involves repe titive motion making it easier to train and 
recognize. The activities have been  recorded using a tri -axial 
accelerometer. The x -axis represents the horizontal motion, 
which is towards the left and right sides of the phone. This is 
used to capture the horiz ontal motion of the leg. The y -axis 
detects the vertical motion which is the direction to the top and 
bottom of the phone, while the z -axis represents the motion 
into and out of the screen, which can be used to capture the 
leg’s backword and forward motion . 
In general, all the considered activi ties, excluding sitting 
and standing, can be described by the time between 
acceleration peaks and the magnitude of these values.  
Figure 1 to Figure 3, below, shows the training 
accelerometer data for the x, y and z axes for the j ogging class. 
The x -axis clearly distinguishes itself from the other classes x-
axis data, with the values fluctuating between -10 and 10, 
unlike the rest of the classes.  The duration between peaks, in 
general, is also shorter than activities such as walki ng.