Figure 1: jogging x -axis 
 
The y -axis data  shown in Error! Reference source not 
found.  is quite distinguishable compared to other classes, 
except for the comparison with the walking class, where both 
fluctuate around 0 to 20. Most of the y -axis data, where the 
user is in an upright position, has a value of about 9.8 m/s2 as 
a result of the earth’s gravitational pull.  
 
Figure 2: jogging y -axis 
 
The z -axis plot for jogging, in Figure 3, is also quite similar 
to the z -axis plot for walking, but with the values fluctuating 
more greatly into the negative range, which is expected with 
the type of activity, where the user uses more force in their 
motion.  
 
Figure 3: jogging z -axis 
 
For the sitting classes’ x -plot, the plot remains almost 
constantly stable, s imilar to the standing classes’ plot, 
however, the x -axis value for sitting is at 3 as opposed to 
almost zero for the sitting class. It should be noted that the 
differences between the sitting and standing activities is the 
relative magnitudes, due to the differences in the device 
orientation, and because of this, the network would be able to 
be trained to make a proper distinction.  
  
 
Figure 4: sitting x -axis 
 
In Figure 5, the y -axis data is plotted for sitting, which is 
barely distinguishable to  that of the standing graph, except 
that it slightly more stable.   
Figure 5: sitting y -axis 
 
Once again, Figure 6 indicates that comparing standing 
with sitting proves to be quite  difficult to distinguish, since in 
both states, the user does not exert a lot of motion on the 
mobile device.   
 
Figure 6: sitting z -axis 
 
Figure 7 - Figure 9 represent the plotted data for the x, y and z 
axes, respectively.  The x -axis is quite stable at approximately 
zero, due to almost no motion. The y -axis is quite stable at 
about 9.8m/s2, due to a constant gravitational pull, and the z -
axis is very similar to the walking graph, but without the 
constant peaks that are caused by the device moving back and 
forth  in a direction  perpendicular to  the screen.   
 
Figure 7: standing x -axis 
 
 
Figure 8: standing y -axis 
 
 
Figure 9: standing z -axis