1 Scientific  Repo Rts |          (2019) 9:1952  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-37769-z
www.nature.com/scientificreportspredicting Alzheimer’s disease 
progression using multi-modal 
deep learning approach
Garam  Lee1,2, Kwangsik  Nho3,4, Byungkon  Kang1, Kyung-Ah  sohn1, Dokyoon  Kim2,5 &  
for Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative *
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative condition marked by a decline in cognitive 
functions with no validated disease modifying treatment. It is critical for timely treatment to detect 
AD in its earlier stage before clinical manifestation. Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is an intermediate 
stage between cognitively normal older adults and AD. To predict conversion from MCI to probable 
AD, we applied a deep learning approach, multimodal recurrent neural network. We developed an 
integrative framework that combines not only cross-sectional neuroimaging biomarkers at baseline 
but also longitudinal cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and cognitive performance biomarkers obtained from 
the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative cohort (ADNI). The proposed framework integrated 
longitudinal multi-domain data. Our results showed that 1) our prediction model for MCI conversion 
to AD yielded up to 75% accuracy (area under the curve (AUC)  = 0.83) when using only single modality 
of data separately; and 2) our prediction model achieved the best performance with 81% accuracy 
(AUC  = 0.86) when incorporating longitudinal multi-domain data. A multi-modal deep learning 
approach has potential to identify persons at risk of developing AD who might benefit most from a 
clinical trial or as a stratification approach within clinical trials.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is an irreversible, progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by abnormal 
accumulation of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in the brain, causing problems with memory, think -
ing, and behavior. AD is the most common form of dementia with no validated disease modifying treatment. An 
estimated 5.7 million Americans are living with AD in 2018. By 2050, this number is projected to rise to nearly 
14 million1. Current available treatments decelerate only the progression of AD and no treatment developed so 
far can cure a patient who is already in AD. Thus, it is of fundamental importance for timely treatment and pro -
gression delay to develop strategies for detection of AD at early stages before clinical manifestation. As a result, 
the concept of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) was introduced. MCI, a prodromal form of AD, is defined to 
describe people who have mild symptoms of brain malfunction but can still perform everyday tasks. Patients 
in the phase of MCI have an increased risk of progressing to dementia1–4. Some patients in their MCI stages are 
converted to AD within a limit of the time window after baseline, while some are not. It has been reported that 
MCI patients progress to AD at a rate of 10% to 15% per year and 80% of these MCI patients will have converted 
to AD after approximately six years of follow-up5,6. It is an ongoing topic among AD-related researches to identify 
biomarkers that classify patients with MCI who later progress to AD (MCI converter) from those with MCI who 
do not progress to AD (MCI non-converter).
Various machine learning methods have been applied to identify biomarkers for MCI conversion prediction 
and improve their performances. Support vector machine (SVM) is one of methods frequently used for solving 
classification problem. A lot of studies applied SVM for MCI conversion prediction7–12. A multi-task learning along 
with SVM was used to identify AD-relevant features, showing 73.9% accuracy, 68.6% sensitivity, and 73.6% specific -
ity7. For the use of additional subjects, a domain transfer learning method to use auxiliary samples such as AD and 
1Department of Software and computer engineering, Ajou University, Suwon, South Korea. 2Biomedical & 
translational informatics institute, Geisinger, Danville, USA. 3center for computational Biology and Bioinformatics, 
indiana University School of Medicine, indianapolis, in, USA. 4center for neuroimaging, Department of Radiology 
and imaging Sciences, indiana University School of Medicine, indianapolis, in, USA. 5the Huck institute of the Life 
Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, USA. Garam Lee and Kwangsik nho contributed equally. 
*A comprehensive list of consortium members appears at the end of the paper. correspondence and requests for 
materials should be addressed to K.-A.S. (email: kasohn@ajou.ac.kr ) or D.K. (email: dkim@geisinger.edu )Received: 10 September 2018
Accepted: 12 December 2018
Published: xx xx xxxxope N
There are amendments to this paper