www.nature.com/scientificreports/7 Scientific  RepoRts  |          (2019) 9:1952  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-37769-z
Wh, Wx, and Wy are the weight matrices to extract task-specific features from the previous memory state ht−1, the 
t-th input xt and the current memory state ht, respectively. As can be seen from the equations, the memory states 
ht and the input xt are all represented as Euclidean vectors as well. Therefore, the dynamics of the entire RNN are 
captured by a sequence of matrix-vector multiplications, followed by elementwise non-linearity applications. The 
tanh  function is a non-linear activation function taking the form of =−
+− tanhx() 1
e2
1x2. The role of the 
non-linear activation function is to endow the RNN with higher representational power. ˆyt is the predicted output 
resulting from the computation of the network. This final result is computed by the function σ , which is known as 
the softmax function. The role of the softmax function is to turn an arbitrary vector into a probability vector via 
the following operation:
σ =
∑ue
e()iu
kui
k
where ui is the i-th element of the vector u. In equation (2), we abuse notation to express elementwise application 
of the above expression.
∑ =
∈ˆˆ Ly y
Nylogy (,)1
(3)T
nNnTn
= ˆ⁎⁎⁎WWW argmin Ly y ,, (,)
(4)hx y
WWWT
,,hx y
In our model, the last output sequence provided by the RNN is treated as the probability vector for classification, and the cross-entropy loss function (equation (3 )) is used to quantify how “far away” our n-th prediction is from the n-th 
ground truth label y
n. That is, we choose the optimal parameters ⁎⁎ ⁎W,W ,Whx y that minimize the cross-entropy loss 
of the given data (equation (4 )). The algorithm we use to optimize the parameters is Backpropagation Through Time 
(BPTT)32, which updates the weights in the RNN to minimize the given loss function.
However, when the task requires long sequences of input to be processed, training an RNN is difficult33. This 
is called the long-term dependency problem. Variants of RNN such as Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) have been developed and practically used to solve this problem
34,35. In the proposed 
model, we use GRU for each modality of data to process multiple time points of the input. The detailed structure 
of GRU is described in the supplementary.
Multi-modal GRU for MCI conversion prediction. Our problem can be considered as a sequential data 
classification. The classification objective is to predict whether an individual with MCI at baseline is converted to 
AD or not using sequence data, which consist of four modalities including cognitive performance, CSF, and MRI biomarkers as well as demographic information. Even though demographic data and MRI biomarkers are not longitudinal data we will consider them as length-one sequential data.
To apply a GRU-based classification algorithm to our problem, we need to design a model that can incorporate 
the four modalities of data. The main idea of our model is to separately build GRU feature extractors for each modality and integrate the extracted four feature vectors at the end. Our model is comprised of two training steps: (1) learning a single GRU for each modality of data, and (2) learning the integrative feature representation to make the final prediction. At the first training step, a single GRU is trained separately for each modality in which the classification objective is to predict conversion to AD from MCI. Using GRUs is essential to take longitudinal data and transform them into a fixed-size vector. This is quite similar to the approach proposed in
36 that maps 
the input sequence into fixed-length representation. In the second step, MCI conversion is predicted based on the four vectors produced from each GRU components. For merging four vectors, we select concatenation-based data integration, which is conceptually the simplest method to integrate multiple sources of data into a single 
Figure 5. Illustration of recurrent neural network. RNN is composed of input, memory state, and output, each 
of which has a weight parameter to be learned for a given task. The memory state (blue box) takes the input and computes the output based on the memory state from the previous step and the current input (left). Since the RNN has a feedback loop, variable-length input and output sequence can be represented as an “unfolded” sequence (right).