www.nature.com/scientificreports/3 Scientific  RepoRts  |          (2019) 9:1952  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-37769-z
We tested the classifier on MCI patients to predict the conversion after Δ t from baseline (6, 12, 18, and 24 
months) as shown in Fig.  1. Due to the nature of our data the sample size available for training varies over Δ t 
(Fig.  2). For example, if AD occurs early from the baseline visit, then we have relatively fewer training samples 
because we have a smaller data window to predict on. At each prediction time (Δ t), we ran 5-fold cross-validation 
10 times in which every fold has the same ratio of MCI-C and MCI-NC subjects. MCI samples were partitioned 
into 5 subsets, and one subset was selected for testing, while the remaining subsets were used for training.
Comparison of prediction of MCI to AD conversion using cross-sectional data at baseline and 
longitudinal data. To evaluate the advantage of using longitudinal data, we first compared the performances 
of two schemes: “baseline ” and “proposed ” (Figs  3 and 4 ). Intuitively, data from multiple time points has more 
information than data at a single time point. Thus, the GRU analyzes the temporal changes in cognitive perfor -
mance and CSF to extract features (which are not contained in baseline visit data) for the correct MCI conversion 
prediction. As shown in Table  4(a,b), the prediction model based on longitudinal data shows better performance 
than the model using only cross-sectional data at baseline. In particular, sensitivity is an important measure for the prediction task in which identifying true positive rate is crucial
25. In prediction of MCI conversion, a classifier 
with higher true positive rate is more applicable for timely treatment.#FeaturesHidden 
DimensionTime length (Average)Time length (sd)
Cognitive performance 2 3 3.7 1.32
Demographic Information 4 5 1 0
CSF 5 6 1.4 0.5
MRI 3 4 1 0
Table 3. Summary statistics for data and hyperparameters.
Figure 1. An example using longitudinal data for MCI conversion prediction. Contrary to the experiment 
with baseline visit data, longitudinal data of individuals in all stages (CN, MCI, and AD) was used for training a 
classifier. Then, portion of longitudinal data was taken to the classifier to predict AD progression after Δt.
Figure 2. The number of subjects available in demographic data, neuroimaging data, cognitive performance, 
and CSF biomarkers over ∆t.