Context Hypothesis Reason RoundLabelsAnnotationsorig. pred. valid.
Roberto Javier Mora Garc ´ıa (c. 1962 – 16
March 2004) was a Mexican journalist and ed-
itorial director of “El Ma ˜nana”, a newspaper
based in Nuevo Laredo, Tamaulipas, Mexico.
He worked for a number of media outlets in
Mexico, including the “El Norte” and “El Di-
ario de Monterrey”, prior to his assassination.Another individual
laid waste to Roberto
Javier Mora Garcia.The context states that Roberto
Javier Mora Garcia was assassi-
nated, so another person had to
have “laid waste to him.” The sys-
tem most likely had a hard time ﬁg-
uring this out due to it not recogniz-
ing the phrase “laid waste.”A1
(Wiki)E N E E Lexical (assassina-
tion, laid waste),
Tricky (Presupposi-
tion), Standard (Id-
iom)
A melee weapon is any weapon used in direct
hand-to-hand combat; by contrast with ranged
weapons which act at a distance. The term
“melee” originates in the 1640s from the French
word “m ˘el´ee”, which refers to hand-to-hand
combat, a close quarters battle, a brawl, a con-
fused ﬁght, etc. Melee weapons can be broadly
divided into three categoriesMelee weapons are
good for ranged and
hand-to-hand combat.Melee weapons are good for hand
to hand combat, but NOT ranged.A2
(Wiki)C E C N C Standard (Con-
junction), Tricky
(Exhaustiﬁcation),
Reasoning (Facts)
If you can dream it, you can achieve it—unless
you’re a goose trying to play a very human game
of rugby. In the video above, one bold bird took
a chance when it ran onto a rugby ﬁeld mid-play.
Things got dicey when it got into a tussle with
another player, but it shook it off and kept right
on running. After the play ended, the players
escorted the feisty goose off the pitch. It was
a risky move, but the crowd chanting its name
was well worth it.The crowd believed
they knew the name of
the goose running on
the ﬁeld.Because the crowd was chanting
its name, the crowd must have be-
lieved they knew the goose’s name.
The word “believe” may have made
the system think this was an am-
biguous statement.A3
(News)E N E E Reasoning (Facts),
Reference (Coref-
erence)
Table 1: Examples from development set. ‘A n’ refers to round number, ‘orig.’ is the original annotator’s gold label,
‘pred.’ is the model prediction, ‘valid.’ are the validator labels, ‘reason’ was provided by the original annotator,
‘Annotations’ are the tags determined by an linguist expert annotator.
rule the original target label of the writer.
Once data collection for the current round is ﬁn-
ished, we construct a new training set from the
collected data, with accompanying development
and test sets, which are constructed solely from
veriﬁed correct examples. The test set was further
restricted so as to: 1) include pairs from “exclusive”
annotators who are never included in the training
data; and 2) be balanced by label classes (and gen-
res, where applicable). We subsequently train a
new model on this and other existing data, and re-
peat the procedure.
2.2 Annotation details
We employed Mechanical Turk workers with quali-
ﬁcations and collected hypotheses via the ParlAI1
framework. Annotators are presented with a con-
text and a target label—either ‘entailment’, ‘con-
tradiction’, or ‘neutral’—and asked to write a hy-
pothesis that corresponds to the label. We phrase
the label classes as “deﬁnitely correct”, “deﬁnitely
incorrect”, or “neither deﬁnitely correct nor deﬁ-
nitely incorrect” given the context, to make the task
easier to grasp. Model predictions are obtained
for the context and submitted hypothesis pair. The
probability of each label is shown to the worker as
feedback. If the model prediction was incorrect,
the job is complete. If not, the worker continues
to write hypotheses for the given (context, target-
label) pair until the model predicts the label incor-
1https://parl.ai/rectly or the number of tries exceeds a threshold (5
tries in the ﬁrst round, 10 tries thereafter).
To encourage workers, payments increased as
rounds became harder. For hypotheses that the
model predicted incorrectly, and that were veriﬁed
by other humans, we paid an additional bonus on
top of the standard rate.
2.3 Round 1
For the ﬁrst round, we used a BERT-Large model
(Devlin et al., 2018) trained on a concatenation of
SNLI (Bowman et al., 2015) and MNLI (Williams
et al., 2017), and selected the best-performing
model we could train as the starting point for our
dataset collection procedure. For Round 1 contexts,
we randomly sampled short multi-sentence pas-
sages from Wikipedia (of 250-600 characters) from
the manually curated HotpotQA training set (Yang
et al., 2018). Contexts are either ground-truth con-
texts from that dataset, or they are Wikipedia pas-
sages retrieved using TF-IDF (Chen et al., 2017)
based on a HotpotQA question.
2.4 Round 2
For the second round, we used a more powerful
RoBERTa model (Liu et al., 2019b) trained on
SNLI, MNLI, an NLI-version2of FEVER (Thorne
et al., 2018), and the training data from the previ-
ous round (A1). After a hyperparameter search, we
2The NLI version of FEVER pairs claims with evidence
retrieved by Nie et al. (2019) as (context, hypothesis) inputs.