Adversarial NLI: A New Benchmark
for Natural Language Understanding
Yixin Nie, Adina Williamsy, Emily Dinany, Mohit Bansal, Jason Westony, Douwe Kielay
UNC Chapel Hill
yFacebook AI Research
Abstract
We introduce a new large-scale NLI bench-
mark dataset, collected via an iterative, ad-
versarial human-and-model-in-the-loop proce-
dure. We show that training models on this
new dataset leads to state-of-the-art perfor-
mance on a variety of popular NLI bench-
marks, while posing a more difﬁcult challenge
with its new test set. Our analysis sheds light
on the shortcomings of current state-of-the-
art models, and shows that non-expert annota-
tors are successful at ﬁnding their weaknesses.
The data collection method can be applied in
a never-ending learning scenario, becoming a
moving target for NLU, rather than a static
benchmark that will quickly saturate.
1 Introduction
Progress in AI has been driven by, among other
things, the development of challenging large-scale
benchmarks like ImageNet (Russakovsky et al.,
2015) in computer vision, and SNLI (Bowman
et al., 2015), SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), and
others in natural language processing (NLP). Re-
cently, for natural language understanding (NLU)
in particular, the focus has shifted to combined
benchmarks like SentEval (Conneau and Kiela,
2018) and GLUE (Wang et al., 2018), which track
model performance on multiple tasks and provide
a uniﬁed platform for analysis.
With the rapid pace of advancement in AI, how-
ever, NLU benchmarks struggle to keep up with
model improvement. Whereas it took around 15
years to achieve “near-human performance” on
MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998; Cire s ¸an et al., 2012;
Wan et al., 2013) and approximately 7 years to
surpass humans on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009;
Russakovsky et al., 2015; He et al., 2016), the
GLUE benchmark did not last as long as we would
have hoped after the advent of BERT (Devlin et al.,2018), and rapidly had to be extended into Super-
GLUE (Wang et al., 2019). This raises an important
question: Can we collect a large benchmark dataset
that can last longer?
The speed with which benchmarks become ob-
solete raises another important question: are cur-
rent NLU models genuinely as good as their high
performance on benchmarks suggests? A grow-
ing body of evidence shows that state-of-the-art
models learn to exploit spurious statistical patterns
in datasets (Gururangan et al., 2018; Poliak et al.,
2018; Tsuchiya, 2018; Glockner et al., 2018; Geva
et al., 2019; McCoy et al., 2019), instead of learn-
ingmeaning in the ﬂexible and generalizable way
that humans do. Given this, human annotators—be
they seasoned NLP researchers or non-experts—
might easily be able to construct examples that
expose model brittleness.
We propose an iterative, adversarial human-and-
model-in-the-loop solution for NLU dataset collec-
tion that addresses both benchmark longevity and
robustness issues. In the ﬁrst stage, human anno-
tators devise examples that our current best mod-
els cannot determine the correct label for. These
resulting hard examples—which should expose ad-
ditional model weaknesses—can be added to the
training set and used to train a stronger model.
We then subject the strengthened model to the
same procedure and collect weaknesses over sev-
eral rounds. After each round, we train a new
model and set aside a new test set. The process
can be iteratively repeated in a never-ending learn-
ing (Mitchell et al., 2018) setting, with the model
getting stronger and the test set getting harder in
each new round. Thus, not only is the resultant
dataset harder than existing benchmarks, but this
process also yields a “moving post” dynamic target
for NLU systems, rather than a static benchmark
that will eventually saturate.
Our approach draws inspiration from recent ef-arXiv:1910.14599v2  [cs.CL]  6 May 2020