S M MM A1 A2 A3
Evaluation Set01020304050607080AccuracyTraining Data
A1
A1D1+A2D1
A1D2+A2D2+A3D2Figure 2: RoBERTa performance on dev, with A1–
3 downsampled s.t. jA1D1j=jA2D1j=1
2jA1jand
jA1D2j=jA2D2j=jA3D2j=1
3jA1j.
Rounds become increasingly more difﬁcult.
As already foreshadowed by the dataset statistics,
round 3 is more difﬁcult (yields lower performance)
than round 2, and round 2 is more difﬁcult than
round 1. This is true for all model architectures.
Training on more rounds improves robustness.
Generally, our results indicate that training on more
rounds improves model performance. This is true
for all model architectures. Simply training on
more “normal NLI” data would not help a model be
robust to adversarial attacks, but our data actively
helps mitigate these.
RoBERTa achieves state-of-the-art perfor-
mance... We obtain state of the art performance
on both SNLI and MNLI with the RoBERTa
model ﬁnetuned on our new data. The RoBERTa
paper (Liu et al., 2019b) reports a score of 90:2for
both MNLI-matched and -mismatched dev, while
we obtain 91:0and90:7. The state of the art on
SNLI is currently held by MT-DNN (Liu et al.,
2019a), which reports 91:6compared to our 92:9.
...but is outperformed when it is base model.
However, the base (RoBERTa) models for rounds
2 and 3 are outperformed by both BERT and XL-
Net (rows 5, 6 and 10). This shows that annotators
found examples that RoBERTa generally struggles
with, which cannot be mitigated by more exam-
ples alone. It also implies that BERT, XLNet, and
RoBERTa all have different weaknesses, possibly
as a function of their training data (BERT, XLNet
and RoBERTa were trained on different data sets,
which might or might not have contained informa-
tion relevant to the weaknesses).
A1 A2 A3
Evaluation Set0102030405060Accuracy
Training Data
Verified
Verified+Unverified
UnverifiedFigure 3: Comparison of veriﬁed, unveriﬁed and com-
bined data, where data sets are downsampled to ensure
equal training sizes.
Continuously augmenting training data does
not downgrade performance. Even though
ANLI training data is different from SNLI and
MNLI, adding it to the training set does not harm
performance on those tasks. Our results (see also
rows 2-3 of Table 6) suggest the method could suc-
cessfully be applied for multiple additional rounds.
Exclusive test subset difference is small. We in-
cluded an exclusive test subset (ANLI-E) with ex-
amples from annotators never seen in training, and
ﬁnd negligible differences, indicating that our mod-
els do not over-rely on annotator’s writing styles.
4.1 The effectiveness of adversarial training
We examine the effectiveness of the adversarial
training data in two ways. First, we sample from
respective datasets to ensure exactly equal amounts
of training data. Table 5 shows that the adversarial
data improves performance, including on SNLI and
MNLI when we replace part of those datasets with
the adversarial data. This suggests that the adver-
sarial data is more data efﬁcient than “normally
collected” data. Figure 2 shows that adversarial
data collected in later rounds is of higher quality
and more data-efﬁcient.
Second, we compared veriﬁed correct examples
of model vulnerabilities (examples that the model
got wrong and were veriﬁed to be correct) to unver-
iﬁed ones. Figure 3 shows that the veriﬁed correct
examples are much more valuable than the unveri-
ﬁed examples, especially in the later rounds (where
the latter drops to random).
4.2 Stress Test Results
We also test models on two recent hard NLI test
sets: SNLI-Hard (Gururangan et al., 2018) and