Context Target Label
HypothesisWriter
ComparePrediction
Verifier
Disagree
Train
Dev
Test
AgreeStep 1: Write examples
Step 2: Get model feedback
Step 3: Verify examples and make splits
Step 4: Retrain model for next round
Training Phase
Collection PhaseFeedback
Model correct
Model wrongFigure 1: Adversarial NLI data collection via human-and-model-in-the-loop enabled training (HAMLET). The
four steps make up one round of data collection. In step 3, model-correct examples are included in the training set;
development and test sets are constructed solely from model-wrong veriﬁed-correct examples.
forts that gamify collaborative training of machine
learning agents over multiple rounds (Yang et al.,
2017) and pit “builders” against “breakers” to learn
better models (Ettinger et al., 2017). Recently, Di-
nan et al. (2019) showed that such an approach can
be used to make dialogue safety classiﬁers more ro-
bust. Here, we focus on natural language inference
(NLI), arguably the most canonical task in NLU.
We collected three rounds of data, and call our new
dataset Adversarial NLI (ANLI).
Our contributions are as follows: 1) We intro-
duce a novel human-and-model-in-the-loop dataset,
consisting of three rounds that progressively in-
crease in difﬁculty and complexity, that includes
annotator-provided explanations. 2) We show
that training models on this new dataset leads
to state-of-the-art performance on a variety of
popular NLI benchmarks. 3) We provide a de-
tailed analysis of the collected data that sheds light
on the shortcomings of current models, catego-
rizes the data by inference type to examine weak-
nesses, and demonstrates good performance on
NLI stress tests. The ANLI dataset is available
at github.com/facebookresearch/anli/. A demo is
available at adversarialnli.com.
2 Dataset collection
The primary aim of this work is to create a new
large-scale NLI benchmark on which current state-
of-the-art models fail. This constitutes a new target
for the ﬁeld to work towards, and can elucidate
model capabilities and limitations. As noted, how-
ever, static benchmarks do not last very long these
days. If continuously deployed, the data collectionprocedure we introduce here can pose a dynamic
challenge that allows for never-ending learning.
2.1 HAMLET
To paraphrase the great bard (Shakespeare, 1603),
there is something rotten in the state of the art . We
propose Human-And-Model-in-the-Loop Enabled
Training (HAMLET), a training procedure to au-
tomatically mitigate problems with current dataset
collection procedures (see Figure 1).
In our setup, our starting point is a base model ,
trained on NLI data. Rather than employing auto-
mated adversarial methods, here the model’s “ad-
versary” is a human annotator. Given a context
(also often called a “premise” in NLI), and a desired
target label , we ask the human writer to provide a
hypothesis that fools the model into misclassifying
the label. One can think of the writer as a “white
hat” hacker, trying to identify vulnerabilities in the
system. For each human-generated example that is
misclassiﬁed, we also ask the writer to provide a
reason why they believe it was misclassiﬁed.
For examples that the model misclassiﬁed, it is
necessary to verify that they are actually correct
—i.e., that the given context-hypothesis pairs gen-
uinely have their speciﬁed target label. The best
way to do this is to have them checked by another
human. Hence, we provide the example to human
veriﬁers . If two human veriﬁers agree with the
writer, the example is considered a good exam-
ple. If they disagree, we ask a third human veriﬁer
to break the tie. If there is still disagreement be-
tween the writer and the veriﬁers, the example is
discarded. If the veriﬁers disagree, they can over-