A Performance on challenge datasets
Recently, several hard test sets have been made
available for revealing the biases NLI models learn
from their training datasets (Nie and Bansal, 2017;
McCoy et al., 2019; Gururangan et al., 2018; Naik
et al., 2018). We examine model performance on
two of these: the SNLI-Hard (Gururangan et al.,
2018) test set, which consists of examples that
hypothesis-only models label incorrectly, and the
NLI stress tests (Naik et al., 2018), in which sen-
tences containing antonyms pairs, negations, high
word overlap, i.a., are heuristically constructed. We
test our models on these stress tests after tuning on
each test’s respective development set to account
for potential domain mismatches. For comparison,
we also report results from the original papers: for
SNLI-Hard from Gururangan et al.’s implementa-
tion of the hierarchical tensor-based Densely Inter-
active Inference Network (Gong et al., 2018, DIIN)
on MNLI, and for the NLI stress tests, Naik et al.’s
implementation of InferSent (Conneau et al., 2017)
trained on SNLI.
B Further linguistic analysis
We compare the incidence of linguistic phenomena
in ANLI with extant popular NLI datasets to get an
idea of what our dataset contains. We observe that
FEVER and SNLI datasets generally contain many
fewer hard linguistic phenomena than MultiNLI
and ANLI (see Table 8).
ANLI and MultiNLI have roughly the same per-
centage of hypotheses that exceeding twenty words
in length, and/or contain negation (e.g., ‘never’,
’no’), tokens of ‘or’, and modals (e.g., ‘must’,
‘can’). MultiNLI hypotheses generally contains
more pronouns, quantiﬁers (e.g., ‘many’, ‘every’),
WH-words (e.g., ‘who’, ‘why’), and tokens of ‘and’
than do their ANLI counterparts—although A3
reaches nearly the same percentage as MultiNLI
for negation, and modals. However, ANLI contains
more cardinal numerals and time terms (such as
‘before’, ‘month’, and ‘tomorrow’) than MultiNLI.
These differences might be due to the fact that the
two datasets are constructed from different gen-
res of text. Since A1 and A2 contexts are con-
structed from a single Wikipedia data source (i.e.,
HotPotQA data), and most Wikipedia articles in-
clude dates in the ﬁrst line, annotators appear to pre-
fer constructing hypotheses that highlight numerals
and time terms, leading to their high incidence.
Focusing on ANLI more speciﬁcally, A1 hasroughly the same incidence of most tags as A2 (i.e.,
within 2% of each other), which, again, accords
with the fact that we used the same Wikipedia data
source for A1 and A2 contexts. A3, however, has
the highest incidence of every tag (except for num-
bers and time) in the ANLI dataset. This could be
due to our sampling of A3 contexts from a wider
range of genres, which likely affected how anno-
tators chose to construct A3 hypotheses; this idea
is supported by the fact that A3 contexts differ in
tag percentage from A1 and A2 contexts as well.
The higher incidence of all tags in A3 is also inter-
esting, because it could be taken as providing yet
another piece of evidence that our HAMLET data
collection procedure generates increasingly more
difﬁcult data as rounds progress.
C Dataset properties
Table 9 shows the label distribution. Figure 4 shows
a histogram of the number of tries per good veri-
ﬁed example across for the three different rounds.
Figure 5 shows the time taken per good veriﬁed ex-
ample. Figure 6 shows a histogram of the number
of tokens for contexts and hypotheses across three
rounds. Figure 7 shows the proportion of different
types of collected examples across three rounds.
Inter-annotator agreement Table 10 reports the
inter-annotator agreement for veriﬁers on the dev
and test sets. For reference, the Fleiss’ kappa of
FEVER (Thorne et al., 2018) is 0:68and of SNLI
(Bowman et al., 2015) is 0:70. Table 11 shows
the percentage of agreement of veriﬁers with the
intended author label.
D Examples
We include more examples of collected data in
Table 12.
E User interface
Examples of the user interface are shown in Figures
8, 9 and 10.