Context Hypothesis Reason RoundLabelsAnnotationsorig. pred. valid.
Eduard Schulte (4 January 1891 in D ¨usseldorf
6 January 1966 in Z ¨urich) was a prominent Ger-
man industrialist. He was one of the ﬁrst to
warn the Allies and tell the world of the Holo-
caust and systematic exterminations of Jews in
Nazi Germany occupied Europe.Eduard Schulte is the
only person to warn
the Allies of the atroc-
ities of the Nazis.The context states that he is not
the only person to warn the Allies
about the atrocities committed by
the Nazis.A1
(Wiki)C N C C Tricky Presupposi-
tion, Numerical Or-
dinal
Kota Ramakrishna Karanth (born May 1, 1894)
was an Indian lawyer and politician who served
as the Minister of Land Revenue for the Madras
Presidency from March 1, 1946 to March 23,
1947. He was the elder brother of noted Kan-
nada novelist K. Shivarama Karanth.Kota Ramakrishna
Karanth has a brother
who was a novelist
and a politicianAlthough Kota Ramakrishna
Karanth’s brother is a novelist, we
do not know if the brother is also a
politicianA1
(Wiki)N E N E N Standard Conjunc-
tion, Reasoning
Plausibility Likely,
Tricky Syntactic
The Macquarie University Hospital (abbrevi-
ated MUH) is a private teaching hospital. Mac-
quarie University Hospital, together with the
Faculty of Medicine and Health Science, Mac-
quarie University, formerly known as ASAM,
Australian School of Advanced Medicine, will
integrate the three essential components of an
academic health science centre: clinical care,
education and research.The Macquarie Uni-
versity Hospital have
still not integrated the
three essential compo-
nents of an academic
health science centre:
clinical care, educa-
tion and researchthe statement says that the univer-
sities are getting together but have
not integrated the systems yetA1
(Wiki)E C E E Tricky Presuppo-
sition, Standard
Negation
Bernardo Provenzano (31 January 1933 – 13
July 2016) was a member of the Sicilian Maﬁa
(“Cosa Nostra”) and was suspected of having
been the head of the Corleonesi, a Maﬁa faction
that originated in the town of Corleone, and de
facto “capo di tutti capi” (boss of all bosses) of
the entire Sicilian Maﬁa until his arrest in 2006.It was never conﬁrmed
that Bernardo Proven-
zano was the leader of
the Corleonesi.Provenzano was only suspected as
the leader of the maﬁa. It wasn’t
conﬁrmed.A2
(Wiki)E N E E Tricky Presuppo-
sition, Standard
Negation
HMAS “Lonsdale” is a former Royal Aus-
tralian Navy (RAN) training base that was lo-
cated at Beach Street, Port Melbourne , Victo-
ria, Australia. Originally named “Cerberus III”,
the Naval Reserve Base was commissioned as
HMAS “Lonsdale” on 1 August 1940 during the
Second World War.Prior to being re-
named, Lonsdale
was located in Perth,
Australia.A naval base cannot be moved -
based on the information in the sce-
nario, the base has always been lo-
cated in Victoria.A2 C N C C Tricky Presuppo-
sition, Reasoning
Facts
Toolbox Murders is a 2004 horror ﬁlm directed
by Tobe Hooper, and written by Jace Anderson
and Adam Gierasch. It is a remake of the 1978
ﬁlm of the same name and was produced by the
same people behind the original. The ﬁlm cen-
tralizes on the occupants of an apartment who
are stalked and murdered by a masked killer.Toolbox Murders is
both 41 years old and
15 years old.Both ﬁlms are named Toolbox Mur-
ders one was made in 1978, one in
2004. Since it is 2019 that would
make the ﬁrst 41 years old and the
remake 15 years old.A2
(Wiki)E C E E Reasoning Facts,
Numerical Cardi-
nal Age, Tricky
Wordplay
A biker is critically ill in hospital after collid-
ing with a lamppost in Pete The incident hap-
pened at 1.50pm yesterday in Thorpe Road. The
23-year-old was riding a Lexmoto Arrow 125
when, for an unknown reason, he left the road
and collided with a lamppost. He was taken
to James Cook University Hospital, in Middles-
brough, where he remains in a critical condition.
Any witnesses to the collision are asked to call
Durham Police on 101, quoting incident number
288 of July 9.The Lamppost was sta-
tionary.Lampposts don’t typically move. A3
(News)E N E E Reasoning Facts,
Standard
“We had to make a decision between making
payroll or paying the debt,” Melton said Mon-
day. “If we are unable to make payroll Oct. 19,
we will deﬁnitely be able to make it next week
Oct. 26 based on the nature of our sales taxes
coming in at the end of the month. However we
will have payroll the following week again on
Nov. 2 and we are not sure we will be able to
make that payroll because of the lack of revenue
that is coming in.”The company will not
be able to make pay-
roll on October 19th
and will instead dis-
pense it on October
26thIt’s not deﬁnitely correct nor def-
initely incorrect because the com-
pany said “if” they can’t make it
on the 19ththey will do it on
the 26th, they didn’t deﬁnitely say
they won’t make it on the 19thA3
(News)N E N C N Reasoning Plau-
sibility Likely,
Tricky Presupposi-
tion
The Survey: Greg was answering questions. He
had been asked to take a survey about his liv-
ing arrangements. He gave all the information
he felt comfortable sharing. Greg hoped the sur-
vey would improve things around his apartment.
THe complex had really gone downhill lately.He gave some of the
information he felt
comfortable sharing.Greg gave all of the information he
felt comfortable, not some. It was
difﬁcult for the system because it
couldn’t tell a signiﬁcant difference
between to word “some” and “all.”A3 (Fic-
tion)C E C C Tricky (Scalar Im-
plicature)
Table 12: Extra examples from development sets. ‘A n’ refers to round number, ‘orig.’ is the original annotator’s
gold label, ‘pred.’ is the model prediction, ‘valid.’ is the validator labels, ‘reason’ was provided by the original
annotator, ‘Annotations’ is the tags determined by linguist expert annotator.