causal account of spurious patterns, and counterfac-
tually augment NLI datasets by editing examples
to break the model. That approach is human-in-
the-loop, using humans to ﬁnd problems with one
single model. In this work, we employ both hu-
man and model-based strategies iteratively, in a
form of human-and-model-in-the-loop training, to
create completely new examples, in a potentially
never-ending loop (Mitchell et al., 2018).
Human-and-model-in-the-loop training is not a
new idea. Mechanical Turker Descent proposes a
gamiﬁed environment for the collaborative training
of grounded language learning agents over multi-
ple rounds (Yang et al., 2017). The “Build it Break
it Fix it” strategy in the security domain (Ruef
et al., 2016) has been adapted to NLP (Ettinger
et al., 2017) as well as dialogue safety (Dinan et al.,
2019). The QApedia framework (Kratzwald and
Feuerriegel, 2019) continuously reﬁnes and up-
dates its content repository using humans in the
loop, while human feedback loops have been used
to improve image captioning systems (Ling and
Fidler, 2017). Wallace et al. (2019) leverage trivia
experts to create a model-driven adversarial ques-
tion writing procedure and generate a small set of
challenge questions that QA-models fail on. Re-
latedly, Lan et al. (2017) propose a method for
continuously growing a dataset of paraphrases.
There has been a ﬂurry of work in constructing
datasets with an adversarial component, such as
Swag (Zellers et al., 2018) and HellaSwag (Zellers
et al., 2019), CODAH (Chen et al., 2019), Ad-
versarial SQuAD (Jia and Liang, 2017), Lambada
(Paperno et al., 2016) and others. Our dataset is not
to be confused with abductive NLI (Bhagavatula
et al., 2019), which calls itself NLI, or ART.
7 Discussion & Conclusion
In this work, we used a human-and-model-in-the-
loop training method to collect a new benchmark
for natural language understanding. The bench-
mark is designed to be challenging to current state-
of-the-art models. Annotators were employed to
act as adversaries, and encouraged to ﬁnd vulner-
abilities that fool the model into misclassifying,
but that another person would correctly classify.
We found that non-expert annotators, in this gam-
iﬁed setting and with appropriate incentives, are
remarkably creative at ﬁnding and exploiting weak-
nesses. We collected three rounds, and as the
rounds progressed, the models became more ro-
bust and the test sets for each round became moredifﬁcult. Training on this new data yielded the state
of the art on existing NLI benchmarks.
The ANLI benchmark presents a new challenge
to the community. It was carefully constructed
to mitigate issues with previous datasets, and was
designed from ﬁrst principles to last longer. The
dataset also presents many opportunities for fur-
ther study. For instance, we collected annotator-
provided explanations for each example that the
model got wrong. We provided inference labels for
the development set, opening up possibilities for
interesting more ﬁne-grained studies of NLI model
performance. While we veriﬁed the development
and test examples, we did not verify the correct-
ness of each training example, which means there
is probably some room for improvement there.
A concern might be that the static approach is
probably cheaper, since dynamic adversarial data
collection requires a veriﬁcation step to ensure ex-
amples are correct. However, verifying examples is
probably also a good idea in the static case, and ad-
versarially collected examples can still prove useful
even if they didn’t fool the model and weren’t veri-
ﬁed. Moreover, annotators were better incentivized
to do a good job in the adversarial setting. Our
ﬁnding that adversarial data is more data-efﬁcient
corroborates this theory. Future work could ex-
plore a detailed cost and time trade-off between
adversarial and static collection.
It is important to note that our approach is model-
agnostic. HAMLET was applied against an ensem-
ble of models in rounds 2 and 3, and it would be
straightforward to put more diverse ensembles in
the loop to examine what happens when annotators
are confronted with a wider variety of architectures.
The proposed procedure can be extended to other
classiﬁcation tasks, as well as to ranking with hard
negatives either generated (by adversarial models)
or retrieved and veriﬁed by humans. It is less clear
how the method can be applied in generative cases.
Adversarial NLI is meant to be a challenge for
measuring NLU progress, even for as yet undis-
covered models and architectures. Luckily, if the
benchmark does turn out to saturate quickly, we
will always be able to collect a new round.
Acknowledgments
YN interned at Facebook. YN and MB were spon-
sored by DARPA MCS Grant #N66001-19-2-4031,
ONR Grant #N00014-18-1-2871, and DARPA
YFA17-D17AP00022. Special thanks to Sam Bow-
man for comments on an earlier draft.