Int J Artif Intell Educ (2024) 34:452–482 479
included in such models, as they can contribute towards biases and discrimination in
the educational system. It is essential to consider only factors that are directly related
to student academic performance and which are actionable for learners.
Ultimately, the proposed framework demonstrates how multiple data-driven reme-
dial advice options can be generated, and translated into natural language via AI
technologies like ChatGPT, which can then be processed by academic advisors whoare the human-in-the-middle, and they can then combine their experience and estab-
lished theory of how to select the most suitable feedback suggestions for the target
learners. Future work will involve evaluating the effectiveness of the proposed frame-work to improve student retention and qualiﬁcation completion rates.
Study Limitations
The proposed system and the underlying technologies currently have certain limita-
tions. Firstly, the use of counterfactual modelling can result in using underlying modelsthat have less accuracy due to having to work with only ’actionable’ features. In this
study, the model’s accuracy reduced from 92% to 90.5%. Counterfactuals are also
computationally intensive, with current implementations requiring up to a minute togenerate sets of plausible options for each student. Batch processing for large student
groups may be necessary. Moreover, fully automating the process of algorithmically
selecting the most ’optimal’ counterfactuals to display to learners is an open question.Calibrating the outputs of counterfactuals also requires some experimentation in order
to control how close the generated counterfactuals are to the original student proﬁle,
which can be achieved using the proximity_weight parameter.
Secondly, the interpretability of SHAP can be variable between different models,
as it is a model of a model, and not always an exact representation of the original’s
behaviour. Lastly, anchors can in some cases have low coverage which lowers their
validity across large portions of data points, which can reduce its generalisability.
Conclusion
It has been a consistent feature of predictive Learning Analytics (LA) research tar-getting at-risk students, to focus exclusively on merely the predictive component.
Predictive analytics is however much broader and it includes the unpacking of the
internals of the predictive models’ behaviour to stakeholders. It also encompasses
responsible use of these automated systems which assist decision-making affectinghumans. This includes the ability to interrogate the predictive models and seeks their
reasoning as to how they have arrived at particular conclusions. eXplainable AI is a
ﬁeld that offers a suite of mature tools which enable this form of transparency that islargely absent in the current body of LA literature.
What is more, predictions and their understanding while important, only address one
part of the challenge in improving retention rates and increasing successful learneroutcomes. Additional approaches are needed that can provide speciﬁc and tailored
123