Int J Artif Intell Educ (2024) 34:452–482 465
The z-score calculation Formula ( 1) denotes xas the value being converted, μandσ
represent the mean and the standard deviation of all the values of x:
z−score =x−μ
σ(1)
In essence, the value of the z-score communicates how many standard deviations
a given value is from the mean. For a z-score equal to 0, it implies that the value
is directly on the mean. A positive z-score signiﬁes that the raw xvalue is above
the mean and the opposite holds for negative z-scores. The z-score values possess
a greater descriptive power leading to more accurate machine learning models, but
this comes with the cost of lower interpretability. All features used in the study aresummarised and described in Table 1, with engineered features representing Step (2)
being identiﬁed with ⋆.
Predictive Machine Learning
Algorithms:
A wide variety of algorithms from a broad range of machine learning families of
techniques were used for the experiments to generate candidate models as part of
Step (3). These consisted of Scikit-learn (Scikit-Learn, 2021 ) Python implementations
of Random Forest (RF) (Breiman, 2001 ), K-Nearest Neighbour Regression (kNN)
(Cover and Hart, 1967 ), Naive Bayes (NB), Support Vector Machines (SVM), Gradient
Boosting (GB), Logistic Regression (LR), Decision Tree (DT) and CatBoost (CB)(Prokhorenkova et al., 2017 )
3. Two baseline models were used for demonstrating the
predictive value of the candidate models, namely, the stratiﬁed random guessing model
(Baseline 1) as well as the mode (Baseline 2). Feature selection was also conducted inStep (3) in conjunction with experimentation with various algorithms, and the feature
subset selection was based on feature importance outputs together with an evaluation
of their effects on the generalisability of the models.
Data Preparation:
In cases where there were missing values and the underlying algorithms required the
presence of all values, these were replaced with zero. For algorithms that required all
values to be numeric, Binary Encoding of categorical values was used which produced
more concise feature sets and reduced the likelihood of overﬁtting
4.
Training Approach and Hyperparameter Tuning:
Training was performed in such a way as to prevent data leakage from occurring
which would compromise the validity of the predictive modelling results. Given that
3This is a non-scikit-learn catboost 1.0.6 implementation found here: https://pypi.org/project/catboost/
4CatBoost was the only algorithm in the suite of techniques used which did not require the imputation of
missing values and the encoding of categorical values into numeric data types.
123