Int J Artif Intell Educ (2024) 34:452–482 459
approaches that speciﬁcally illuminate the inﬂuence and the behaviour of the models
in terms of the underlying features, are important. In one of the earliest studies into
methods of illuminating the predictions of black-box models for learners, Villagrá-Arnedo et al. ( 2017 ) developed a set of proprietary graphical tools to exploit the output
information and provide a meaningful guide to both learners and instructors. Dass
et al. ( 2021 ) develop dropout prediction models for students in a MOOC course and
did strive to gain a deeper understanding of the effectiveness of the various features to
support accurate predictions, as well as to predict the point in time when the students
were likely to drop out. Similarly, Jang et al. ( 2022 ) demonstrate the usage of some
limited aspects of XAI techniques to assist in interpreting the classiﬁcation results of
the models which were designed to identify at-risk students. The study paid particular
attention to selecting features that were relevant to stakeholders. Overall, however,no study has considered comprehensively addressing interpretations of models, their
individual predictions and converting their predictive reasoning into understandable
outputs.
Prescriptive LA Systems
Jenhani et al. ( 2016 ) developed one of the earliest automated remedial prescriptive
systems which leveraged machine learning. The system was designed in such a way
that a separate classiﬁcation model was trained on a remedial action dataset describinghistorical data based on experts’ and instructors’ actions to improve the low learning
outcomes. The types of predictive outputs that the system made as suggestions for
at-risk students were: revise a concept, attempt extra quizzes, solve speciﬁc practiceexamples, take extra assignments, etc. All these prescriptions were at a generic level.
Elhassan et al. ( 2018 ) extended this work further to enable the system to recommend
a set of remedial actions to address speciﬁc shortcomings rather than a single action
as previously.
Albreiki et al. ( 2021a ) developed predictive models for at-risk students which they
combined with a customised system that enabled the instructor to set various thresholds
and weights alongside the predictive models. Based on the conﬁguration and the
outputs of the predictive models, the system would then select from a predeﬁned listof remedial actions the most suitable one.
Most recently, Susnjak et al. ( 2022 ) proposed a student-oriented LA dashboard
which apart from using descriptive and predictive analytics, also demonstrated a pro-totype of how to integrate interpretability and explainability aspects of the predictive
models, as well as the automatic generation of feedback based on prescriptive analyt-
ics.
Summary and Research Aims
From this literature review, several conclusions can be drawn. The literature indicates
that the use of predictive analytics within the LA ﬁeld is widespread and on the rise. The
literature points to an acute gap in the current research concerning the use of predictiveanalytics tools which enable interpretability and explainability of the models. The bulk
123