Int J Artif Intell Educ (2024) 34:452–482 455
jurisdictions1that the mechanisms behind any automated decisions affecting humans
be clearly explained to those affected by them. Wachter et al. ( 2017 ) also point out
the necessity of being able to contest decisions made by automated systems by thoseconcerned and to also have the opportunity to be informed with respect to the current
decision-making model as to what it would need to see change in their data inputs
to produce an alternative or a more desirable decision. Indeed, new technologies likeCounterfactuals (Wachter et al., 2017 ) enable the generation of precise suggestions
regarding the smallest set of adjustments that would need to occur in order for predic-
tive models to produce an alternative prediction.
It is for these reasons that a relatively new research ﬁeld of eXplainable Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (XAI) (sometimes referred to as Interpretable Machine Learning) has
emerged. Some of the key aspirations of this ﬁeld are focused on developing techniquesthat address the high-level interpretability of opaque predictive models as well as on
devising tools that enable them to interrogate and extract explanations of how the
models arrive at given conclusions (Molnar et al., 2020 ). Meanwhile, there currently
exists a gathering research interest exploring prescriptive analytics where methods
are being developed that leverage data-driven approaches to generate evidence-based
actionable insights (Lepenioti et al., 2020 ).
From a technical point of view, model interpretability tends to pertain to the tasks
of making sense of a model’s internals generated post-training by a machine learningalgorithm. It usually concerns a level of clarity into the mechanics of a model at a
global-level , while explainability of models refers to extracting the reasoning behind
the model’s prediction for a speciﬁc learner in this context, which is referred to aslocal-level explainability. Both perspectives on model behaviour are important and
serve multiple overlapping purposes. Model interpretability affords an institution the
ability to communicate to all concerned stakeholders how a predictive model worksin general terms using broad brush strokes. While local-level explainability of models
enables the validation of speciﬁc predictions to take place by student support teams
before interventions are initiated, it also enables clear responses to be given to affectedstudents as to exactly how and why they have been identiﬁed as being at-risk. However,
clues can also be gleaned from the local-level explanations into possible remedial
actions that can be suggested to the learners.
Tools and techniques supporting the goals of model transparency are reaching matu-
rity. SHAP (Lundberg and Lee, 2017 ) is a visualisation technique that is currently
recognised as being state-of-the-art in the ﬁeld of XAI (Gramegna and Giudici, 2021 )
for realising both global and local-level model transparency. The Anchors (Ribeiro
et al., 2018 ) technique has also been developed recently as a tool that imparts a high
degree of local-level explainability. The beneﬁt of Anchors is that it produces human-
readable rule-based models which are succinct approximations of the behaviour of the
underlying complex models. However, a more advanced approach using Counterfac-tuals, enables the analytics processes to surpass predictive capabilities and enter into
the prescriptive where this technique can be used to provide concrete feedback to the
learners regarding the modiﬁcations they need to make in their learning behaviour foran alternative prediction to be generated. This study demonstrates the applicability of
1GDPR (Regulation, 2016 ) is one example.
123