458 Int J Artif Intell Educ (2024) 34:452–482
characteristics data such as psychological and social/behavioural features for develop-
ing student performance predictions and that future research should focus on including
these to address dropout rates. Finally, Hernández-de Menéndez et al. ( 2022 ) investi-
gated the practices of 16 HEIs that have deployed LA projects, reporting that the results
of using LA in education have been positive. The authors found that these institutions
have mostly used LA technologies for student retention. These tools largely supportedstrategies for identifying at-risk students through predictive analytics, which served as
a springboard for being proactive and initiating various types of interventions, which
some reported as resulting in improvements of up to 20%. The authors noted that theimplementation of LA in institutions requires consideration of beneﬁts and challenges,
as well as time and resources in money, time, and experience, while also highlighting
that the full potential of LA is yet to be realised, with understandability of the systemsbeing a critical challenge that needs to be addressed.
A vast majority of the predictive models identifying at-risk students have focused
on course-level outcomes rather than on programme-level completions (Namounand Alshanqiti, 2020 ). Since course-level predictive models have tended to only be
deployed across subsets of all courses on offer, the likelihood of at-risk students
evading detection is therefore high. Thus, there is high utility in pursuing programme-
level completion predictions. Though prior works in the prediction of programme
completions are very rare, those that exist have generally followed an outcomes-based approach, which breaks down all constituent parts of programme-level outcome
requirements into course outcomes ﬁrst, and subsequently proceeds to map them all
to programmes. These types of bottom-up predictive models then operate on the levelof course-level outcomes and these predictions are combined to generate programme-
level outcome predictions. Examples of this approach are (Dandin et al., 2018 ), as well
as (Bhatia et al., 2017 ) and (Bindra et al., 2017 ) who likewise developed programme-
completion prediction models and claimed to achieve accuracies in the upper ranges
between 90% and 95% using various techniques from the WEKA data mining toolkit.
More recently, Gupta and Ghosal ( 2021 ) followed a similar approach in ﬁrst deter-
mining course-level outcome predictions and mapping these to programmes, before
determining overall outcomes. Such systems embody a great deal of complexity and
appear to have been mostly research prototypes since productionisation and long-termmaintenance of these approaches in a dynamic setting are questionable with respect
to sustainability.
Model Interpretability in LA
Model interpretability is not only important for building trust, meeting compliance and
extracting maximal value from predictive systems, but it is also vital for developing
accurate predictive models. Feature engineering and selection tasks are more critical
to the success of machine learning models than the choice of algorithm or the sizeof the datasets used (Domingos, 2012 ). While a wide range of features for predicting
student performance have been used in literature, there is still a lack of clarity on which
speciﬁc features are most effective and how they interact to inﬂuence the attainment of
course and programme outcomes (Namoun and Alshanqiti, 2020 ). Therefore, tools and
123