454 Int J Artif Intell Educ (2024) 34:452–482
into interpretability and explainability of the predictive models where the focus should
more heavily focus on developing explanatory aspects of predictions rather than the
development of models that merely forecast student outcomes.
In the most ideal setting, the analytics technologies used in the educational contexts
need to even go beyond interpretability and explainability properties, and should in
fact embody prescriptive analytics capabilities which leverage data-driven techniques
to communicate to learners precisely what remedial actions are most likely to result
in improved outcomes (Susnjak et al., 2022 ). While descriptive analytics answers
‘what happened?’ and predictive analytics addresses ‘what will happen?’ , prescrip-
tive analytics tackles ‘how to make it happen?’ (Frazzetto et al., 2019 ). The power
of prescriptive analytics, therefore, lies in its ability to transform information into
implementable decisions. Liu and Koedinger ( 2017 ) highlight the importance of LA
tools which lead directly to actionability. Arguably, therefore, the most beneﬁcial and
insight-rich form of analytics is found in the prescriptive data-driven outputs which
generate the greatest intelligence and value (Lepenioti et al., 2020 ).
Prescriptive analytics frequently uses machine learning in order to suggest at the
existence of possible causal relationships within the features describing learners, and
consequently, recommendations can be constructed from these outputs which can be
used as advice concerning which behavioural adjustments are likely to result in more
desirable outcomes. By offering tailored and evidence-based recommendations thatventure beyond generic advice, and are instead customised to each learner with speciﬁc
and measurable goals, more effective advice can be provided to support interventions,
which Wong and Li ( 2020 ) conﬁrm in their recent review of learning analytics inter-
vention studies. Thereby, the prospects of positively affecting both retention rates and
student performances are consequently improved. Increasingly studies are emerging
that have highlighted the importance of LA tools which provide insights to learnerswith a prescriptive component that are in the form of recommendations for guiding
learners (Valle et al., 2021 ) and this is an emerging research frontier.
While tailored learner recommendations in the form of everyday natural language
can be automatically constructed from the numerical outputs of prescriptive analytics
using natural language processing (NLP) tools, this is not straightforward. NLP toolk-
its and signiﬁcant development efforts are required to develop reliable software whichproduces grammatically correct natural language outputs based on variable numeri-
cal outputs. Given the recent advances in transformer-based large language models
(LLMs) such as ChatGPT, these technologies provide the capability to bridge thisnon-trivial challenge.
eXplainable AI and LLMs
With the increased embedding of complex predictive models into contexts that were
previously dominated by human decision-making, the need has arisen for predictivemodels to display a greater degree of transparency behind their mechanisms of reason-
ing. This is the case not least for establishing trust in them, but also from the perspective
of compliance. It is increasingly becoming a legal requirement across international
123