Int J Artif Intell Educ (2024) 34:452–482 457
part of their ﬁndings, they urged the research community to conduct further work in
predictive modelling, and more speciﬁcally, to do so at the programme level which they
described presently to be in its infancy. Meanwhile, the authors called researchers torise above simply predicting outcomes, and to also incorporate model interpretability
and explainability into their studies.
Albreiki et al. ( 2021b ) likewise conducted an SLR consisting of 78 studies of rel-
evant EDM literature from 2009 to 2021 concerning predicting at-risk learners of
non-completion. The review indicated that only a handful of studies proposed means
for generating remedial solutions consisting of feedback that learners and educatorscan use to address the underlying obstacles. The authors noted that future research will
place greater emphasis on devising machine learning methods to predict students’ per-
formance in general and will also augment this with automatically generated remedialactions to assist learners as early as possible.
Another up-to-date survey by Xiao et al. ( 2022 ) examined almost 80 studies using
EDM to predict students’ performance and provided insights in line with previousstudies. The authors note that one of the deﬁciencies in this ﬁeld is that very few studies
have attended to explore model interpretability and have thus neglected explanations
of the mechanics of predictions and the role that different features play in the predicted
outputs. Indeed, the authors stress that the use of model interpretability tools ought to
be one of the chief pursuits and the direction of future research in this ﬁeld of study.
There were several other recently conducted reviews into LA and EDM studies.
Interestingly, these did not address the issue of model interpretability and explain-
ability, nor was there coverage of the use of prescriptive analytics tools indicatingthat these approaches are not yet in wide use. Fahd et al. ( 2021 ) carried out a broad
meta-analysis of literature of 89 studies from 2010 to 2020. Their survey analysed
the application of machine learning approaches in predicting student academic per-formance. Their primary focus was on considering what types of models were being
used in research at HEI, and their identiﬁcation of trends centred around speciﬁc mat-
ters of how to achieve better predictive accuracies using machine learning. Similarly,Batool et al. ( 2022 ) conducted a LA survey of some 260 studies over the last 20 years
on the topic of student outcome prediction. Similar to previous reviews, they focused
on highlighting the most effective features for this task and the types of algorithms andtechniques used, as well as data mining tools that are most frequently applied. How-
ever, the important issues of model interpretability and prescriptive analytics were not
raised.
Likewise, Shaﬁq et al. ( 2022 ) conducted an SLR covering 100 papers. Their focus
was again on predictive analytics, looking mostly at what was being predicted, what
kind of data was used, which sets of features were effective or otherwise, and what types
of algorithms were explored. The focus was essentially on ways to enhance the accu-
racy of predictive models but there was no coverage of techniques that extend beyondmere predictions Instead, the recommendations emphasised that more ensemble-based
and clustering methods should be explored to predict the performance of students and
enhance the prediction accuracy. In the same vein, Tjandra et al. ( 2022 ) conducted
a comprehensive review of recent studies based on student performance prediction.
The review considered features and algorithms used, accuracies attained, as well as
commonly used tools. The authors concluded that there is still limited use of personal
123