462 Int J Artif Intell Educ (2024) 34:452–482
In Step (4), the selected best-performing model is evaluated for interpretability.
This step has a two-fold purpose. First, during the development stage, it serves as
another means for achieving model validation by the researchers. However, moreimportant for the current context, is that in this step the global-level mechanics of the
model’s behaviour can be revealed. In this step, analytics tools are used that depict
which features are the key drivers of predicted outcomes, and how the various featurevalues positively or negatively impact the ﬁnal predicted outcomes. The outputs of
this step are communicated to key stakeholders so that trust in the black-box models
can be fostered and the predictions relied upon. If the interpretation of the modelsraises concerns about the validity of the models and the underlying features, then the
process returns to Step (2), and new features may need to be engineered.
In Step (5), we transition towards local-level explainability of the model by inter-
rogating it on how precisely it has reasoned to classify a speciﬁc learner with a
given outcome. The information in this step becomes particularly meaningful for
two reasons. First, the academic advisors who manage interventions are able to gatherinformation and gain a deeper understanding of which factors for each learner are
the contributing factors to their predicted negative outcome. This step is also critical
for legal compliance aspects where affected stakeholders have the right to understand
how the autonomous decision-making systems have arrived at particular conclusions
about them (Mathrani et al., 2021 ).
At this stage, the limits of what predictive modelling can offer are reached. Seeking
to understand what exactly can be done to maximise better outcomes belongs within
the scope of prescriptive analytics.
Prescriptive Analytics Phase
In prescriptive analytics, the aim is to leverage techniques like machine learning models
to perform counterfactual or what-if simulations. The end goal is to use the outputs
of the simulations as a basis for automatically generating evidence-based feedbackto learners concerning adjustments to their learning behaviour which may result in
improved outcomes. The simulations entail specifying an alternative outcome for a
given learner to the one that the predictive models have arrived at. In this study’scontext, we are seeking to deﬁne a new target outcome of a ’successful qualiﬁcation
completion’ for an at-risk learner. The counterfactual modelling in Step (6) takes the
predictive model and uses it to uncover a set of minimal changes that would need totake place in the learner’s feature values for the desired outcome to be predicted for a
speciﬁc learner. Naturally, for this to be useful counterfactual modelling needs to be
performed using features upon which actionable steps can be taken. This means that aset of target features need to be selected like: engagement levels with the VLE, average
assignment marks and the total number of on-time assignment submissions etc. The
counterfactual modelling step is ﬂexible. New models can be developed at this stagesolely for this task whereby more actionable features are used, and immutable features
like demographics (eg. learner age) are removed. Counterfactual outputs need to be
conﬁgured to model changes only in the selected features upon which advisors desire
to base their feedback. Additionally, each feature in this modelling process needs to
123