460 Int J Artif Intell Educ (2024) 34:452–482
of the research is still largely focused on devising means of more effectively predicting
various outcomes. On the whole, there is a lack of rigour in exploring how predictive
models work at a high-level and which features are the driving factors in predictiveoutcomes, as well as how models work at a granular level when making predictions on
individual cases. There is a general absence of XAI tools in usage which enable these
types of analyses. Much less is there any evidence that there exists the use of data-driven prescriptive analytics. Examples of human-initiated prescriptive systems exist,
but none which provide automated and tangible remedial advice to at-risk students that
is based on data-driven analyses. Thus the conversion of predictions into actionableinsights is broadly missing from the literature at this point.
There is therefore a need and an emerging requirement to begin to implement pre-
dictive analytics systems with responsible and accountable characteristics. These LAsystems ought to have embedded transparency that is enabled by an expressive set
of technologies, while venturing beyond the predictive realm and ideally being aug-
mented by prescriptive tools that assist learners in addressing their challenges. Unlessan effective predictive system can be matched with the reasoning behind its deci-
sions surrounding the underlying variables, and suggestions about concrete pathways
for moving forward, these systems will only ever have constrained capabilities and
limited uptake.
To that end, this work proposes a prescriptive learning analytics framework that
attempts to address the outlined gaps. This work deﬁnes a step-by-step process for
building predictive models and highlights ways for enhancing them with various levels
of interpretability, while ultimately showing how prescriptive analytics can com-plement the entire process. This work demonstrates the proposed framework using
programme/qualiﬁcation completion predictive models and maps each step of the
framework with speciﬁc technologies while showing the practicality of the frame-work with use case scenarios.
Proposed Framework
The proposed Prescriptive Learning Analytics Framework (PLAF) is outlined here
and depicted in Fig. 1. The ﬁgure portrays the two key components, namely predictive
and prescriptive phases, as well as the process ﬂow of the various steps comprising theframework. The framework assumes that the data identiﬁcation and acquisition steps
have already been completed. Each step in the framework is discussed in turn.
The initial Step (1) assumes that the raw data has been cleaned and preprocessed
to support subsequent analyses. Here, all relevant exploratory data analyses are per-
formed, and an investigation into the reliability of the data. This includes investigating
the prevalence of missing values, together with methods to impute them if neces-sary. Additionally, the ability of the existing data to support deeper analyses of the
subsequent phases is conducted here.
123