472 Int J Artif Intell Educ (2024) 34:452–482
In general, elevated assignment scores and submission counts are predictive of
positive outcomes. Learner engagement with the VLE conveys a more mixed picture.
VLE pages viewed and the number of online quizzes taken have a positive effect;however, forum post creation counts are ambivalent, while the reverse holds for the
number of forum posts read. As the number of qualiﬁcation credits increases, the
effect is stronger for negative outcomes, while the reverse holds for the learner’s age.Possessing previous studies (value 1) indeed has a more positive effect than otherwise
(value 0), while the on-campus study mode (value 1) is associated with more negative
qualiﬁcation outcomes than studying online (value 0).
By considering both the feature importance ranks and how the feature values affect
the ﬁnal prediction, it is possible to validate the model against an expected behaviour
and communicate its mechanics in a simpliﬁed form to all stakeholders. The behaviourof the examined model conﬁrms that it is reasonable and thus valid.
Model Explainability
Having achieved interpretation and validation of the predictive model, the next step is
to examine the model behaviour at an individual (or local) prediction level. SHAP aswell as Anchors
7are used in this step. To demonstrate this, two hypothetical students
are used - Student A and Student B. Both students have been predicted by the Cat-
Boost model with non-completion outcomes, with the probability of 97% and 90%respectively.
Figure 4(a) shows the top nine features and their values for Student A on the y-axis,
rank-ordered by inﬂuence on the ﬁnal prediction. Informally, the ﬁgure can be viewedand interpreted as a tug-of-war. The mid-line represented with the value of 1.823 is
the expected or the average SHAP value of all the predicted data points. A ﬁnal SHAP
value to the left of this line represents a non-completion prediction and alternatively,
the values on the right side denote positive outcome predictions. Blue bars represent
the forcing effects towards negative predictions, while red the opposite. The size of thebars represents the magnitude of the forcing of the corresponding features and their
values. These graphs are best interpreted from the bottom up. The topmost feature
represents the ﬁnal SHAP value that includes all feature contributions.
Figure 4(a) shows that the least signiﬁcant 11 features collectively have an inﬂu-
ence tending towards negative outcomes to the left of the 1.823 value mid-line. This
increases with each of the features except for the student’s learning behaviour foron-time assignment submissions, which has a positive effect.
Model reasoning is depicted in Fig. 4(b) for Student B. Similar patterns are observed
with the exception that this student is a returning learner (prior activity is ’universitystudent’) and that the student’s mean grade is 66%, which have a strong positive
inﬂuence on the ﬁnal prediction. However, in totality, the majority of the features are
forcing the prediction towards negative outcomes, and this is where they ultimatelysettle. The utility of the SHAP tool to visually explain its reasoning to academic
advisors pre-intervention as well as to other relevant stakeholders is demonstrable
through these examples.
7An alternative technology for this is LIME which has some additional advantages.
123