474 Int J Artif Intell Educ (2024) 34:452–482
Fig. 5 Proxy model explanation of predictions for Student A and B
academic year and is presently a part-time student, has created conditions for a non-
completion predicted outcome. These forms of model simpliﬁcations serve as effective
and suitable tools for communicating to affected learners how exactly they have cometo be identiﬁed as being at-risk, thus meeting the requirements of transparency and
responsible use of predictive analytics.
The generation of surrogate models as demonstrated above already hints at possible
prescriptive suggestions which can be constructed from them. Indeed, there is a poten-
tial to do this, however, a more data-driven and robust method ought to be pursued
which considers the interaction of the features and their effects in a more principledapproach. This is where prescriptive analytics tools make their contribution.
Prescriptive Modelling
Counterfactual modelling is used in this step to generate a set of possible pathways
for a speciﬁc learner that would lead them to a positive outcome prediction. In moreprecise terms, here we are looking at several possible sets of minimal adjustments
to selected feature values which would result in an alternate outcome for a student
who is predicted to be on track for non-completion. This type of what-if modelling is
demonstrated for Students A and B in Fig. 6.
Figure 6depicts both the most concise set of features and the smallest required
adjustments in their values which would be needed for the selected students to toggletheir predicted outcome to a successful completion. The ﬁrst column lists the selected
features by the counterfactual model, and the next column shows the actual values for
each of the hypothetical students, followed by three sets of counterfactuals from whichautomated and data-driven Prescriptive Feedback (PF) advice can be generated. In each
PF set, only three feature values have been varied. The dash represents no required
changes to the actual values.
In Fig. 6(a), it can be seen that modest increases to the grade average have been
identiﬁed as a pathway to completion for Student A, together with a switch to asmaller programme of study, as well as a mixture of adjustments to the online learning
engagement behaviours. In the case of Student B, Fig. 6(b) shows multiple pathways
towards completion if the study mode is changed to full-time as well as to online modeon another occasion. Pathways exist through some modiﬁcations in online learning
behaviours, while no adjustment is needed to be made for the grade average of 66%.
Interestingly, the qualiﬁcation percent completion feature has been identiﬁed in the
123