Int J Artif Intell Educ (2024) 34:452–482 453
Introduction
Higher Education Institutions (HEI) are operating in an ever-increasingly competitive
and dynamic environment. The recently accelerated transition to online learning by
many institutions has been one of the key drivers of these emerging pressures. Within
this context, student retention rates have also become a prominent issue at HEI, as wellas concerns around student performance in general due to the prevalence of low grades
(Namoun and Alshanqiti, 2020 ). Considerable research effort has been invested into
technological means to address these issues and the Learning Analytics (LA) ﬁeld, ingeneral, has been an important vehicle for supporting these endeavours (Wong and Li,
2020 ).
Within LA, it is widely appreciated that predictive analytics tools that identify at-
risk students hold considerable potential to address these challenges at least in part, by
providing the ability for timely interventions to be initiated with at-risk learners which
can result in corrective measures being undertaken by them (Namoun and Alshanqiti,2020 ). However, in their survey of LA applications, Hernández-de Menéndez et al.
(2022 ) conclude that LA technologies are generally not yet widely used in this sector
despite the evident potential they offer to HEI. Indeed, Jang et al. ( 2022 ) highlight
that despite the clear opportunities offered by the predictive analytics technologies,
the developed tools tend to persist only as research content. The authors posit thatto genuinely integrate the predictive analytics technologies into educational contexts,
barriers like educators’ general distrust in the tools, as well as the lack of interpretability
and visual representation of information accompanying them, need to be overcomeand are perceived as being some of the biggest obstacles. Rets et al. ( 2021 ) also point
out that learners will engage with a LA tools only if they can understand how the LA
system’s outputs regarding them are generated.
Predictive models themselves have over time become more complex and as a result,
they have assumed ‘black-box’ characteristics. Their complexity ensures that it is not
possible to apprehend how these models arrive at their predictions, and crucially, whataspects of the learners’ behaviours are key determinants of their prognosticated out-
comes. This absence of model interpretability (how a model works) and explainability
of their speciﬁc predictions in turn negatively affects their utility, and ultimately resultsin distrust by the stakeholders (Baneres et al., 2021 ).
According to Villagrá-Arnedo et al. ( 2017 ), for a prediction model to truly be useful,
it ought to also do more than merely classify learners into risk categories. The authorsargue that the models should in addition offer interpretative characteristics from which
learners can gain insights into possible causes of their learning obstacles. The model’s
outputs ought to be communicated alongside the most consequential variables and
their values responsible for the predictions not only to validate its accuracy, but to
also avoid over-reliance by engaging critical thinking and attention to context andsituational factors that may impact the predictions. Transparency of this kind facilitates
the development of trust by all stakeholders in general and thus increases the prospects
of adoption. The greater interpretability of the predictive models enhances the tool’scapabilities to support the dispensing of effective guidance towards resolution and
remediation to at-risk learners. In their recent systematic literature review of predictive
LA studies, Namoun and Alshanqiti ( 2020 ) also encouraged the pursuit of research
123