478 Int J Artif Intell Educ (2024) 34:452–482
Finally, the actual data used to generate the prescriptive feedback must be pro-
vided. Here, the data is structured in a JSON object format. This format is conducive
for automation via programming scripts and is understandable to ChatGPT for dataextraction. The combination of these three steps ensures that ChatGPT can generate
personalized and meaningful feedback based on the data provided without straying
beyond requirements. Once the CFs have been converted into natural language, theycan be more easily inspected and ﬁltered by student support teams and the most suit-
able suggestions can be selected for interventions with learners as outlined in Step
(8).
Discussion
The end goal of the proposed framework is the automated generation of evidence-based prescriptive feedback to learners who have been identiﬁed as being at-risk. The
framework is generic and therefore the deﬁnition of at-risk is ﬂexible and adaptable
to any context. This study has demonstrated how this framework can be applied tolearners who are at risk of programme non-completion.
In order to identify at-risk learners, the framework proposed how predictive ana-
lytics should be used to develop highly accurate predictive models, and how to usethese models responsibly and with accountability. Using the models responsibly means
exposing their internal mechanics and interpreting their behaviour to verify and val-
idate them, and to be able to communicate this as plainly as possible to relevantstakeholders. This builds conﬁdence and trust in the underlying black-box systems.
Responsible use also means interrogating the models as to how they arrive at predic-
tions for speciﬁc students which underscores accountability. The proposed frameworkoutlines these steps and provides a clear roadmap in terms of which technologies and
tools can be leveraged to support these tasks.
The proposed framework demonstrates how the leap from merely predicting out-
comes to prescribing actions can be bridged for the ﬁrst time in this domain using more
advanced analytics. The danger in using counterfactuals in this domain is in assumingthat causality is deﬁnitively established based on the fact that the prescriptive models
have identiﬁed pathways to a positive outcome. This is not the case. The underlying
prescriptive models rely on associations and cannot establish causality and this is alimitation.
It must be emphasised that many latent variables cannot be captured that have
a signiﬁcant bearing on eventual learner outcomes. The features used in this studyare largely proxies. We cannot capture variables describing a learner’s true level of
motivation, their sense of progress, and conﬁdence which all have a bearing on eventual
outcomes amongst many other variables. However, the possibility exists that if a learneris provided with actionable and achievable data-driven prescriptive feedback, and if it
is followed and attained, the possibility exists that it may have a cascading effect on
a learner’s sense of achievement and thus on their level of motivation, progress andoverall conﬁdence, which may then lead to positive outcomes.
The ethical use of counterfactuals and what-if modelling in the proposed system is
an important aspect to consider. Variables such as race, age, and gender should not be
123