464 Int J Artif Intell Educ (2024) 34:452–482
student would be represented in the dataset with three data points and each would be
designated the target variable of ’completed’. As a result, the total dataset consisted
of 14918 data points. The learners who completed their programme of study com-prised 72% (10736) of all data points since they enrolled in multiple academic years,
while non-completion learners comprised 28% (4182), thus making the ﬁnal dataset
relatively unbalanced.
Given the nature of the dataset with a learner’s educational journey represented
by multiple data points, the predictive problem, in this case, was both formative and
summative . In the formative approach to the prediction of learner outcomes, students’
outcomes are considered at various checkpoints of their studies of their journey towards
completion. However, in the summative prediction, the learner outcomes are predicted
at the end of the qualiﬁcation or semester when course-level predictive models are used.
Features:
The features used to describe each learner at a particular point in time can be grouped
into four broad categories. These categories are learner academic performance and
learning behaviours, as well as the more immutable learner characteristics data. Addi-
tionally, these features were augmented with the characteristics of the programmeinto which they enrolled. The distribution of the top 10 programmes by enrollment
volumes can be seen in Fig. 2.
Once the data was prepared (Step 1), raw feature values were engineered to extract
new derivative features to create more descriptive feature values - Step (2). In order to
draw out more value from the raw behavioural and academic performance features such
as a learner’s average grade or the number of online learning resources they accessed,these were transformed and relativised to the learner’s cohort. This conversion made the
feature values more generic, contextually meaningful and comparable across different
cohorts who study different courses/programmes that have different means and spreadsacross various features. To achieve this, each course-speciﬁc feature was transformed
into a normalised value using z-score standardisation. This conversion converted the
learner’s absolute and mean values for a given feature into a form that captures the
degree to which it deviates from the learner’s cohort. The utility of this approach
to creating course-agnostic features was underscored by Ramaswami et al. ( 2022 ).
Fig. 2 Distribution of students by ten most popular programmes
123