Int J Artif Intell Educ (2024) 34:452–482 463
be constrained within a range of values for them to be varied to generate feasible and
realistic pathways to a desirable predicted outcome. Several possible pathways towards
an alternative outcome for a learner can be generated and not all will be feasible. Theunrealistic pathways need to be ﬁltered and discarded.
Once the most realistic pathways have been selected, the next Step (7) entails
two parts. The ﬁrst requires that the engineered feature values be converted backinto raw values so that they become interpretable and actionable for the learner. This
step, therefore, has a dependency on Step (1) in the framework where the raw values
reside and enable the engineered values can be converted back to them. The secondpart converts the numeric values into natural language text which can be dispensed
to learners either directly via LA dashboards and emails or through conversations
with academic advisors. Converting the counterfactual outputs into a human-readableformat also makes the prescriptive feedback more usable for the academic advisors
for the task of ﬁltering and selecting the most suitable prescriptive feedback from
all the candidate options. This study proposes that the conversion is performed usingChatGPT and automated using available APIs. In order to prime the LLM to generate
appropriate text, it is ﬁrst necessary to devise an ideal template response and to extract
the feature names and their values into a structured formal, such as JSON, from
which prescriptive feedback text can be constructed. An example of ChatGPT prompt
engineering, a response template and the JSON object are provided in the case study.Once the prescriptive feedback has been generated and the most suitable selected, then
the intervention can be initiated - Step (8).
Methodology
Dataset
Setting:
The data was acquired from an Australasian HEI. The data was sourced from the insti-
tution’s Student Management System (SMS) and the Virtual Learning Environment(VLE) - Moodle. The dataset consisted of undergraduate students who commenced
studies from 2018 through 2022 and who either completed or abandoned their studies
during this period. The two categories of outcome represented an evenly balanced tar-get variable where the total number of completed learners accounted for 52% (3693),
and those who abandoned their studies comprised 48% (3415).
Predictive problem formulation:
The target prediction variable was programme/qualiﬁcation completion. Given the
nature of the underlying data, each student represents a data point at a given point in
time denoted by the academic year. Most students are enrolled over multiple academicyears of their programme, and therefore the dataset represents students as snapshots
across each of their years of enrollment. For example, if a student was enrolled in a
three-year bachelor’s qualiﬁcation with ultimately a successful completion, then the
123