456 Int J Artif Intell Educ (2024) 34:452–482
all three of these technologies for different steps of the proposed prescriptive analytics
framework.
Meanwhile, there have been signiﬁcant advances in the ﬁeld of AI and LLMs based
on transformers which are now approaching human-level capabilities for text genera-
tion and discourse. Driven largely by their ability to capture long-range dependencies
and contextual relationships in a text through the use of self-attention mechanisms,models such as Google’s BERT (Devlin et al., 2018 ) and the latest GPT-series from
OpenAI, have achieved state-of-the-art results in various natural language processing
tasks, including text generation (Brown et al., 2020 ). These advances continue and
have been demonstrated by OpenAI’s latest ChatGPT model, which has the poten-
tial to translate complex analytics outputs into human-readable and actionable natural
language for learners and student advisors.
Research Contribution
This study presents a novel prescriptive analytics framework for supporting LA aims of
identifying and initiating both timely and effective interventions with at-risk students.
The proposed framework demonstrates how both predictive and prescriptive analyticscan be more fully leveraged than has previously been done. This study illustrates how
effective models predicting qualiﬁcation completion outcomes can be developed using
machine learning and made transparent at both global and local levels to meet the needsof all stakeholders. Furthermore, this work goes on to illustrate through case study
examples how prescriptive analytics tools can subsequently be utilised to automatically
generate speciﬁc prescriptive feedback which is translated into natural language withthe assistance of ChatGPT, providing suggestions that are evidence-based as well as
actionable.
Background
In the last two years, there have been numerous systematic literature reviews (SLR) in
the ﬁeld of LA and Educational Data Mining (EDM) centring on predictive themes,casting multiple perspectives onto the state of this ﬁeld, and revealing where the focus
of the research efforts. Indeed, these works have identiﬁed current gaps, emerging
trends, and future aspirations which are brought out in the following sections.
Recent Survey Findings
An in-depth SLR was conducted by Namoun and Alshanqiti ( 2020 ), covering a total
of 62 relevant studies within predictive LA, in which they focused on three areas:
(1) ways in which academic performance was measured using learning outcomes and
subsequently predicted, (2) the types of algorithms used to forecast student learning
outcomes, and (3) which features are most impactful for predicting student outcomes.The authors found that 90% of the studies predicted course-level outcomes, while
only three studies considered predicting programme/qualiﬁcation-level outcomes. As
123