Int J Artif Intell Educ (2024) 34:452–482 469
erate counterfactuals for many machine learning models, approaching the task as an
optimisation problem. However, counterfactual modelling is a challenge and needs to
be conﬁgured in such a way that, ﬁrstly, the features used are relevant for a learner andrepresent learning behaviours that can be adjusted, and secondly, the suggested action
must be feasible and practical (Poyiadzi et al., 2020 ). To that end, a new underlying
machine learning model was generated using an alternative set of features comprisingpredominately mutable features which would support the development of actionable
feedback
5. These features can be seen in Table 1under the Prescriptive Modelling
column. However, the counterfactual modelling was further conﬁgured to exclusivelyrely on features upon which prescriptive advice was to be based. Table 1therefore
shows features that were used for creating a new prescriptive model as denoted by
/circlecopyrt
6, and features that were used for both modelling and for generating counterfactuals
⊕. Secondly, the features used for counterfactual modelling have been constrained to
fall within feasible and realistic ranges. Finally, once the candidate counterfactuals
were generated, these were then converted into human-readable text as indicated inStep (7).
Framework Evaluation
The quantitative component of the framework concerning predictive analytics is eval-
uated through empirical experiments that demonstrate the accuracy of the generatedmodels, which also validate the efﬁcacy of the engineered features (Steps 2 - 3).
The remaining parts of the framework are qualitative. Steps 4 and 5 are evaluated by
assessing the suitability of the tools to visually convey the mechanics of the underlyingmodel and to establish its reasonableness. A case study using two hypothetical students
is used to evaluate in detail the model behaviour in explaining its predictions for Step
5. The same case study examples are then carried through to the prescriptive analytics
component (Steps 6 - 7), where several prescriptive feedback suggestions are generated
for each student, and subsequently converted into human-readable text for assessmentof their feasibility.
Results
The efﬁcacy of the candidate predictive models to identify learners at risk of pro-
gramme/qualiﬁcation non-completion is evaluated initially, and the best algorithm for
this dataset is identiﬁed (Step 3). The characteristics of the best-performing predictivemodel are next examined to interpret its mechanics (Step 4). A case study involv-
ing two hypothetical students with non-completion predictions is then conducted to
demonstrate how model explainability can be leveraged to interrogate the modelsabout their reasoning for arriving at given predictions (Step 5) - two approaches to
achieve this are presented. The application of prescriptive analytics is subsequently
5Some compromise in the accuracy of the new model that is trained on a subset of features can be expected.
6Features like ‘Age Description’ were used because they help stabilise the accuracy of the model used for
counterfactuals. Use of only ‘actionable’ features tended to produce weaker models.
123