Sensors 2023 ,23, 634 9 of 19
4.6. Prototypes
A prototype operation can be used as a method to compare the similarity between the
target and a typical sample in a category. This sample is known as “prototype” of its class,
and it may be easy to understand and compare for users. For example, each unit in the layer
stores a weight vector representing an encoded input. The weight can be seen as the feature
part of the object. It is interpretable because it makes decisions based on the weighted
similarity score extracted from input and prototypes [ 73]. An example is the “ProtoPNet”
CNN model, which has an additional prototype layer used for image classiﬁcation. This
layer takes the output of the previous convolutional layer as input and learns the class
prototypes during the training process [ 38]. The interpretability of ProtoPNet is described
as, “this looks like that”, in image classiﬁcation tasks.
The explainable deep neural network (xDNN) is another prototype-based network
for image classiﬁcation [ 5]. Two out of ﬁve layers are prototypes: (1) prototype and (2)
MegaClouds layers. The prototype layer can extract the data distribution and then form
the linguistic logical rules if . . . then . . . for the explanations as follows.
if(IˆIP)then (class c ) (1)
where Iis the input image and ˆIPrepresents the prototype. The prototypes that have
the same class label are merged into a MegaCloud Min the MegaClouds layer. The ﬁnal
expression is as follows.
if(xM1)or(xM2)or . . . or (xMM)then (class c ) (2)
xDNN was evaluated using multiple datasets, including the COVID-CT dataset [ 10] and the
SARS-CoV-2 CT scan dataset [ 76]. xDNN achieved slightly lower performance metrics (ac-
curacy, sensitivity, and F1-score) compared to the neighboring aware graph neural network
(NAGNN), which uses the post hoc method Grad-CAM to interpret the predictions [53].
4.7. Trainable Attention
Trainable attention is deﬁned as a group of techniques that focus on important infor-
mation content in digital multimedia data (e.g., image, video, audio, and text). For example,
the combination of text and image information in a hidden layer may let clinicians focus on
the corresponding information between the ROI in an image and electronic health records
(EHR) [ 77]. In addition, a multilayer visual attention mechanism can be used to interpret
medical image analysis. For example, two attention layers, one close to the input and the
other close to the output, can be used for explaining the attention mechanism between both
input and output [ 78]. Despite the recent works related to this trainable attention, more
work using this technique is needed to provide a niche of visual information to clinicians.
4.8. Shapley Additive Explanations
The Shapley additive explanation (SHAP), which is also a model using Shapley
values [ 36,79],evaluates the importance of an input feature for the ﬁnal prediction. This
model requires much time to calculate the SHAP values. It may combine with other tech-
niques to accelerate the computation of SHAP values [ 80]. For example, deep explainer
(i.e., deep SHAP) is a fast explainability technique that is considered for models with a
neural network-based architecture. Generally, SHAP is used to provide explanations and
may be used for many clinical topics [ 61]. However, SHAP applications are still limited to
speciﬁc problems.
4.9. Local Interpretable Model-Agnostic Explanations
Local interpretable model-agnostic explanation (LIME) is a local model-agnostic
method that aims to provide an interpretation of the original model by approximating a
new simple model from the predictions of a black-box model locally. The new model is
used to interpret the results obtained [ 34]. This advantage allows LIME to be used with