Sensors 2023 ,23, 634 7 of 19
3.4.1. Feature Map
Feature-based explanations present the gradient or hidden feature map values as an
approximation of the input importance. They can show which part has the greatest impact
on the ﬁnal output. They are usually represented by the original image with an overlay of
a saliency map [28,30].
3.4.2. Textual Explanation
This is a human-comprehensible explanation generated in textual form. Semantic de-
scriptions are used to explain the decision of the model. In an example of image captioning,
textual explanations are generated in addition to visual interpretations [72].
3.4.3. Example-Based Explanation
This aims to explain a model by presenting one or more examples similar to the given
one. The prototypes consist of the features extracted during network training and are
designed as examples [38,73].
4. Introduction of the Explainable AI Method: A Brief Overview
As mentioned previously, XAI is widely used in many ﬁelds, in particular, medical
imaging. In this section, we focus on the importance of XAI in healthcare applications.
4.1. Saliency
Saliency directly uses the squared value of the gradient as the importance score of
different input features [ 28]. The input can be graph nodes, edges, or node features. It
assumes that the higher gradient value is related to the most important features. Although
it is simple and efﬁcient, it has several limitations. For example, it can only reﬂect the
sensitivity between the input and output, which cannot express the importance very
accurately. In addition, it has a saturation problem. For example, in regions where the
performance model reaches saturation, the change in its output relative to any input change
is very small, and the gradient can hardly reﬂect the degree of input contribution.
Guided backpropagation (BP), whose principle is similar to that of the saliency map,
modiﬁes the process of backpropagating the gradient [ 29]. Since the negative gradients are
hard to interpret, guided BP only back-propagates the positive gradients and shears the
negative gradients to zero. Therefore, guided BP has the same limitations as saliency maps.
One approach to avoid these limitations is to use layer-wise relevance propagation
(LRP) [ 31] and deep Taylor decomposition (DTD) [ 74]. LRP and DTD are capable of
improving a model’s interpretability. In DTD, neural networks use complex non-linear
functions that are represented by a series of simple functions. In LRP , the relevance of each
neuron in the network is propagated backward through the network, thereby allowing
it to quantify the contribution of each neuron to the ﬁnal output. There are several rules
designed with a speciﬁc type of layer in a neural network [ 31,74]. To combine LRP and
DTD, LRP can be thought of as providing the framework for propagating relevance through
a network, whereas DTD provides the means for approximating the complex non-linear
functions used by the network. LRP and DTD may lead to overcoming the limitations of
saliency maps and provide more accurate explanations [75].
4.2. Class Activation Mapping
Class activation mapping (CAM) is a visualization tool based on convolutional neural
networks [ 32]. It is capable of distinguishing the focus area of the network by obtaining
the weight Wc
kof the recognized feature image Fkin the network, where kis the unit of the
global average pooling layer and crepresents the class. The convolution between these
two parameters Fkand Wc
kprovides the feature map Mc(x,y), where xand yrepresent the
location (x,y)of the convolutional layer. All types of CAM deformation methods are based
on graph activation and weights. However, several methods can be used to obtain the
weight value. A good explanation of the CAM model is reported in Algorithm 1. Although