Sensors 2023 ,23, 634 3 of 19
Figure 2. Number of XAI publications added per year from 1976 to 2021. The xaxis represents the
publishing year, and the yaxis shows the number of publications added in a certain year. The number
of publications indexed on PubMed (accessed on 1 July 2022: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) that
matched the search queries related to explainable AI topics in this survey with a term searched of
(explainable AI OR explainable artiﬁcial intelligence) AND (medicine OR healthcare).
2. XAI Techniques Related to Medical Imaging
To trust AI models, the European Union has proposed seven key requirements, includ-
ing (1) human agency and oversight; (2) technical robustness and safety; (3) privacy and
data governance, (4) transparency; (5) diversity, non-discrimination, and fairness; (6) social
and environmental well-being; and (7) accountability [ 12]. These seven requirements are
summarized as follows.
2.1. Conﬁdentiality and Privacy
AI systems require updating data in real-time, which is a systemic risk. The black-box
nature of AI can cause many security problems, which can come from internal or external
sources. For example, these problems may be related to the algorithm itself or external,
such as improper use of users and the creation of false datasets by network attacks [ 13,14].
In [15], the authors identiﬁed three types of security risks related to black-box AI: network
attacks, system bias, and mismatch attacks. These threats can have serious consequences
for medical systems. For these reasons, several studies have investigated and proposed
solutions to XAI models in terms of data security [16,17].
2.2. Ethics and Responsibilities
The medical ﬁeld has put forward more requirements for the use of AI and how to
clarify the ethics and responsibility of AI has become a challenge. For example, irresponsible
AI may lead to a loss of medical staff and patients [ 18]. Furthermore, it involves the ethical
issues of data privacy used with AI models. At present, the inspection and accountability
of AI are in the early stages. More details about these problems and the interpretable
roles of AI can be found in [ 19,20]. In addition, the concept of responsible AI is discussed
and analyzed to develop notions of responsibility for technological domains [ 21]. Thus,
explainability may be an important condition for clarifying these AI responsibilities.
2.3. Bias and Fairness
An AI model is trained by datasets having their own inherent attributes, thereby
containing hidden bias. For example, in age and skin-color recognition applications using
collected portraits of all ages and races, the AI model showed a preference for light skin
and a 45-year-old person [ 22]. Furthermore, the potential risks in big data algorithms that
cannot be ignored allow for increased bias and replication or exacerbate human errors [ 23].
Notably, the bias may be derived from data, algorithms, and user interactions [ 24]. This will