Sensors 2023 ,23, 634 2 of 19
two words “explainable” and “interpretable” are associated with XAI terms, by which
the black-box models are considered “explainable” when the predictions are considered
post hoc methods. An “interpretable” model based on the model itself aims to provide
human-understandable outputs as steps [ 8]. It is also important to note that the deﬁnition
of explainability depends on the prediction task, as mentioned in [ 9]. Therefore, the term
explainable may be measured based on the target users rather than by uniform standards.
Black-box ModelInput ImagePredictionCOVID-19Infected
Users
Medical DatasetBlack-boxModelWithPost-hoc XAI
Intrinsic XAI ModelPredictionInput Image
Input Image
Users
Prediction
Users
Infected, because it looks likeThese part is more like infected
Black-boxAI
ExplainableAI
Confusion of Black-box AIØWhy is it infected?ØCan Itrustyou?Transparent of Explainable AIØI see how you make predictionØIunderstandwhyØIcantrustyou because I understand
Figure 1. Flowchart of visual comparison between black-box and explainable artiﬁcial intelligence,
and how the results affect the user. The top branch shows the process of a black-box model. Typically,
it provides only results such as classes (e.g., COVID or non-COVID). The other two branches (middle
and bottom) represent two XAI methods, referred to in Section 3.1. Speciﬁcally, the XAI model
(middle) shows the example of saliency map, and the second one (bottom) is the prototype method,
as explained in Sections 4.1 and 4.6, respectively. An example of a CT image obtained from the
COVID-19 CT scan dataset [10].
In recent years, research outputs of XAI have signiﬁcantly increased, especially in
medical ﬁelds, as illustrated in Figure 2. For example, the development of deep learning
(DL) models for healthcare has resulted in advanced performance, such as the U-Net model
in image segmentation [ 11]. Despite this progress, DL models still face challenges in clinical
practice. Reasons may be related to the inherent high risks in medical decisions. In this
context, patients and clinicians are interested to know more about AI-based decisions. In
other words, the AI black box is increasingly being used in a variety of high-risk ﬁelds
where potentially irrational decisions will lead to serious consequences. Therefore, more
investigation on XAI is recommended to provide answers to many clinical questions related
to accurate and fast diagnosis.
In short, the primary goal of the XAI model is related to people trusting the AI model.
For instance, AI users can be divided into two groups: (1) those who have AI “expertise”
and (2) those who do not. The ﬁrst group relates to experts, algorithm developers, and
researchers. They focus more on the AI model itself; they develop new methods to monitor
the information ﬂow of an algorithm, and explain and optimize the mechanism of an
algorithm. The second group of users is generally made up of domain experts, such as
radiologists, and the public at large. The expert clinicians require more explanations about
AI models to have a technical understanding. Collaborative work between academic and
clinical researchers is recommended.