Sensors 2023 ,23, 634 14 of 19
also provided. How to evaluate these methods and their explanations is still a popular
research challenge [111,114,115], and further research is needed in this context.
6.4. Future Directions of Interpretable Models
Most of the current XAI techniques are post hoc (see Table 2). The most likely reason is
their ease of use for target users (clinicians, researchers, etc.), who can adapt their methods
to post hoc techniques such as Grad-CAM and LIME. However, it is suggested to develop an
interpretable model for any high-risk medical situation [ 8]. In this context, more clinicians
are accepting LIME’s chart interpretation, and their satisfaction rate has reached 78%, but
most of the clinicians with low satisfaction gave low scores despite their recognition of
the explanations provided by LIME [ 99]. To obtain explanations from the model itself,
a general method aims to calculate the loss for the output feature map of each ﬁlter in
the convolutional layer [ 116]. This method leads to recognizing which of the ﬁlters are
activated during the network prediction. In [ 117], the authors aimed to obtain an abstract
structure of a causal model by training a neural network. In [ 118], the presented method is
self-explaining by its similarity to the prototypes, such as comparing speciﬁc cases in the
network. It is a new form of exploration to explain a GNN by prototype learning. So far,
global explainability is desirable in clinical tasks to achieve trust. More particularly, it is
necessary for the actual XAI application to take into account users without the necessary
AI training. Manual instructions and other further clariﬁcations are strongly recommended.
In addition, as reported in [ 119], an XAI method may be combined with other techniques
such as domain adaptation (DA) and federated learning (FL) to achieve better results.
7. Conclusions
This paper has presented several popular XAI methods in terms of their principles
and deployment in medical image applications, including their performances. The various
algorithms were ﬁrst classiﬁed into numerous distinct categories. In the case of the AI
currently applied in the medical imaging ﬁelds, a popular XAI related to medical image
classiﬁcations was discussed. A summary of the applications of the recently proposed
XAI approaches to increase the interpretability of their proposed models was also detailed.
Furthermore, the need for explainable models for radiomic analysis was also explained
and discussed. To conclude, discussion and analysis of the medical requirements of XAI,
including its prospects and challenges for further investigation, were also given.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.C.; methodology, A.C.; software, A.C., J.P . and J.X.;
validation, A.C. and A.B.; formal analysis, A.C.; investigation, A.C., J.P . and J.X.; resources, A.C.; data
curation, A.C., J.P . and J.X.; writing—original draft preparation, A.C., J.P . and J.X.; writing—review
and editing, A.C., J.P ., J.X. and A.B.; visualization, A.C., J.P . and J.X.; supervision, A.C.; project
administration, A.C.; funding acquisition, A.C. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by NATIONAL NATURAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION grant number
82260360 and the FOREIGN YOUNG TALENTS PROGRAM QN2021033002L.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
of the study.
References
1. Nazar, M.; Alam, M.M.; Yaﬁ, E.; Mazliham, M. A systematic review of human-computer interaction and explainable artiﬁcial
intelligence in healthcare with artiﬁcial intelligence techniques. IEEE Access 2021 ,9, 153316–153348. [CrossRef]
2. von Eschenbach, W.J. Transparency and the black box problem: Why we do not trust AI. Philos. Technol. 2021 ,34, 1607–1622.
[CrossRef]