Sensors 2023 ,23, 634 6 of 19
used post hoc analysis, its application in the medical ﬁeld requires more effort to become
more practical [ 68]. The intrinsic and post hoc explanations can be summarized as follows.
3.1.1. Intrinsic Explanation
This type of model is structured to be understandable. In this context, conventional
models, such as linear regression models, are relatively simple in structure, though capable
of being understandable. For example, a model provides the answer along with the
corresponding explanation of the linguistic interpreter [69].
3.1.2. Post Hoc Explanation
Post hoc explanation is related to the interpretable information obtained by external
methods when analyzing the model (e.g., a neural network after it has been trained). For
example, backpropagation [ 28], class activation mapping [ 32], and layer-wise relevance
propagation [31] are all post hoc interpretation techniques.
3.2. Model Speciﬁcity
XAI models can be grouped as model-speciﬁc and model-agnostic, depending on
whether the method can be used in multiple types of models.
3.2.1. Model-Speciﬁc Explanation
A model-speciﬁc approach is applied to a certain scope of application. For example,
the method needs to use a particular structure or property in the model. Furthermore,
all intrinsic models are model-speciﬁc because all of these methods require the use of the
structure of the model itself [70].
3.2.2. Model-Agnostic Explanation
A model-agnostic approach has no special requirements for the model. Rather, it
is used in most XAI models. For example, in perturbation-based methods such as local
interpretable model-agnostic explanations (LIME) [ 34], several outputs are obtained and
interpreted by perturbing the model inputs. This may be classiﬁed as post hoc type.
3.3. Explanation Scopes
XAI may be explained over the entire model or for speciﬁc inputs and outputs. In
this context, two types of explanation can exist: (1) global explanations and (2) local
explanations.
3.3.1. Local Explanation
This type considers the model as a black box, focusing on the local variables that
contribute to the decision. This leads to the determination of the features which contribute
to the decision-making process. Generally, a local explanation focuses on a single input
dataset and the characteristic variables associated with it [71].
3.3.2. Global Explanation
This explanation type is interpreted from the model itself. For example, it explains
the contribution that relates to the output by getting an understanding of the interaction
mechanism of the model variables. This can be formulated as “How does the model
predict?” Interpreting the model by a global method depends on the performance of
the model. One can generalize the local interpretation to provide an appropriate global
interpretation of the model [71].
3.4. Explanation Forms
Explanation forms generated by XAI methods can be divided into three main types:
feature-based, textual, and example-based. It is worth noting that some methods can
generate multiple types of explanations.