Citation: Chaddad, A.; Peng, J.; Xu,
J.; Bouridane, A. Survey of
Explainable AI Techniques in
Healthcare. Sensors 2023 ,23, 634.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s23020634
Academic Editors: Samaneh
Kouchaki, Xiao-Rong Ding and
Saeid Sanei
Received: 7 November 2022
Revised: 14 December 2022
Accepted: 29 December 2022
Published: 5 January 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sensors
Review
Survey of Explainable AI Techniques in Healthcare
Ahmad Chaddad1,2,*
, Jihao Peng1,†, Jian Xu1,†and Ahmed Bouridane3
1School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Jinji Road, Guilin 541004, China
2The Laboratory for Imagery Vision and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ecole de Technologie Superieure,
1100 Rue Notre Dame O, Montreal, QC H3C 1K3, Canada
3Centre for Data Analytics and Cybersecurity, University of Sharjah, Sharjah 27272, United Arab Emirates
*Correspondence: ahmadchaddad@guet.edu.cn
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract: Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) with deep learning models has been widely applied in numerous
domains, including medical imaging and healthcare tasks. In the medical ﬁeld, any judgment or
decision is fraught with risk. A doctor will carefully judge whether a patient is sick before forming a
reasonable explanation based on the patient’s symptoms and/or an examination. Therefore, to be a
viable and accepted tool, AI needs to mimic human judgment and interpretation skills. Speciﬁcally,
explainable AI (XAI) aims to explain the information behind the black-box model of deep learning that
reveals how the decisions are made. This paper provides a survey of the most recent XAI techniques
used in healthcare and related medical imaging applications. We summarize and categorize the XAI
types, and highlight the algorithms used to increase interpretability in medical imaging topics. In
addition, we focus on the challenging XAI problems in medical applications and provide guidelines
to develop better interpretations of deep learning models using XAI concepts in medical image
and text analysis. Furthermore, this survey provides future directions to guide developers and
researchers for future prospective investigations on clinical topics, particularly on applications with
medical imaging.
Keywords: explainable AI; medical imaging; deep learning; radiomics
1. Introduction
Currently, artiﬁcial intelligence, which is widely applied in several domains, can
perform well and quickly. This is the result of the continuous development and optimization
of machine learning algorithms to solve many problems, including in the healthcare ﬁeld,
making the use of AI in medical imaging one of the most important scientiﬁc interests [ 1].
However, AI based on deep learning algorithms is not transparent, making clinicians
uncertain about the signs of diagnosis. The key question then is how one can provide
convincing evidence of the responses. However, there exists a gap between AI models
and human understanding, currently known as “black-box” [ 2] transparency. For this
reason, many research works focus on simplifying the AI models for better understanding
by clinicians, in order to improve conﬁdence in the use of AI models [ 3]. For example, the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) of the United States developed
the explainable AI (XAI) model in 2015. Later, in 2021, a trust AI project showed that the
XAI can be used in interdisciplinary types of application problems, including psychology,
statistics, and computer science, and may provide explanations that increase the trust of
users [4].
Typically, XAI is an explainable model providing insights into how the predictions are
made to achieve trustworthiness, causality, transferability, conﬁdence, fairness, accessibility,
and interactivity [ 5,6]. For example, as shown in Figure 1, it is strongly recommended to
allow the AI model to be understandable for the public when the model outputs a decision.
It is noted that the deﬁnition of XAI is not clear enough according to [ 7]. In addition, the
Sensors 2023 ,23, 634. https://doi.org/10.3390/s23020634 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors