Sensors 2023 ,23, 634 13 of 19
provided by XAI do not meet the doctor’s expectations, these explanations will not be
taken into account or considered. It would be hard and not acceptable for patients to
be informed that they have been diagnosed using a computer-based tool. Providing an
incomprehensible explanation to the patient undoubtedly decreases the trustworthiness of
AI. To achieve this goal, many researchers are investigating the design of more sophisticated
interpretation methods; they may require more time to be partially trusted [99].
At present, the academic community is focused on the human-centered development
of interpretable technology [ 100–102]. Unfortunately, the human–XAI interaction tech-
niques face many challenges that need massive work to be solved [ 103,104]. In this context,
research on human-centered XAI may consider the following: (1) causality (e.g., providing
an understandable chain of causal explanations for users), (2) interactivity (e.g., offer expla-
nations from various perspectives, so that users have the option to choose explanations),
and (3) counterfactual explanations to enhance human–computer interactions and produces
personalized output with the AI model [105].
6.2. AI System Deployment
The use of XAI in clinical decision making gives the models more transparency. How-
ever, there are many practical problems related to the speed of operation and imple-
mentation [ 106]. For example, developing, deploying, and applying medical-related AI
algorithms involves designers, developers, AI product managers, clinicians, and many
other people. This will lead to the development of a new management framework for AI
models involving social decision making, and their interaction within the framework to
address the desired needs of clinicians and patients alike. The idea is that interpretation is a
signiﬁcant tool for communicating with people and AI models. To achieve this goal, many
researchers are looking to design more sophisticated interpretation methods to achieve
trustfulness [ 99]. Currently, the academic community is focused on the human-centered
development of interpretable technology [ 100–102]. Unfortunately, human–XAI interaction
techniques also face many challenges. We require signiﬁcant work to design tools and
methods to effectively and appropriately apply AI technology in medical and healthcare
care settings [ 103,104]. Currently, many institutions provide training steps to clinicians to
explain the basics of AI models. It is also strongly recommended to generate performance
metrics of bias and accuracy for the algorithms to increase the trust level; see Model Cards
from Google [ 107], AI Fact Sheets from IBM [ 108], and Datasheets for datasets from Mi-
crosoft [ 109]. So far, the most widely required criteria of the XAI model are: (1) easy to use
for users, (2) validity, (3) robustness, (4) computational cost, (5) the ability to ﬁne-tune, and
(6) open-source development [110].
6.3. Quality of Explanation
When reviewing and investigating papers using the above methods, it was noticed
that the XAI functionalities were not as expected when designed. Researchers will face
some problems when they use these XAI methods. An XAI model is evaluated by its
ability to provide accurate and understandable explanations for its decisions. One can
divide the evaluation methods of XAI into two categories: (1) human-centered and (2)
computer-centered [ 111]. In human-centered XAI, the system produces its explanation and
is evaluated by human participants. Their feedback is collected and analyzed. However,
it requires domain experts such as clinicians to evaluate the explanation performance,
making it is highly cost. In computer-centered XAI, the system uses an algorithm to assess
the explanation quality of XAI. Among the popular XAI methods, backpropagation has
a high rate of success in detecting and recovering from Trojan attacks, particularly for
models with large trigger sizes [ 112]. For example, CAM is effective in detecting the entire
trigger region, but may not always provide the accurate localization of the trigger [ 112].
LIME has a high rate of success in detecting small triggers [ 112]. In addition, the limited
number of examples shows unstable explanations using LIME and SHAP [ 113]. The pros
and cons of the XAI method are summarized in Table 3. The code for these algorithms is