Sensors 2023 ,23, 634 12 of 19
of the relative importance of speciﬁc regions of the input sequence, and they should not be
treated as justiﬁcations for the model’s decisions.
5. Making an Explainable Model through Radiomics
Radiomics is a method to extract features from medical images. These features, known
as radiomic features, have the ability to reveal tissue patterns. Radiomic features are used
as input into predictive models for clinical classiﬁcations [ 86–88]. Speciﬁcally, radiomics
can be seen as a multistep process to complete radiomic analysis: (a) image acquisition,
(b) image preprocessing, (c) segmentation/labeling leading to identifying regions of interest
(ROI), (d) feature extraction and selection, and (e) building predictive models using machine
learning [ 89]. It should be noted that traditional radiomic models consider manual labeling
to segment lesions (ROI); this process requires intensive computation and signiﬁcant effort
from radiologists and oncologists to complete the segmentation. With deep learning models,
radiomics, also known as deep radiomics, became more practical and was applied in many
medical ﬁelds, such as pneumonia recognition [ 54,90]), survival estimation [ 91–93], and
survival prediction [94].
The classiﬁcation of most medical images is a binary problem (e.g., cancer versus
non-cancer) focusing on limited and ﬁxed image features for diagnosis. Thus, it uses
saliency maps to highlight the important features. For more complex object classiﬁcation
problems, the network usually requires focusing on more local information. As is known,
the detection of disease markers is often expensive, and invasive biopsies require signiﬁcant
analysis and time. Therefore, radiomics is used with a variety of imaging modalities to
detect diseases by object detection. In this context, it is desired that the radiomic steps be
transparent and explainable. Likewise, DL models for use in medical data analysis should
be explainable, as described in [88,90,92,93].
Therefore, there is a need to consider increasing the interpretability of the radiomics di-
agnosis process. However, radiomics is sensitive to image sampling methods, and different
sampling methods affect the sampling characteristics [ 95]. Improving DL interpretability is
critical for the advancement of AI with radiomics. For example, a deep learning predictive
model is used for personalized medical treatment [ 89,92,96]. Despite the wide applications
of radiomics and DL models, developing a global explanation model is a massive need for
future radiomics with AI.
6. Discussion, Challenges, and Prospects
Most of the recently proposed medical imaging works use post-interpretation rather
than model-based interpretation (e.g., CAM and GCAM models are widely used). In fact,
these works focus on the application of algorithms, and the interpretable methods are
used as a supplement to the algorithms. In the absence of systematic development of XAI,
it is a trend to use local interpretation methods to explain the cases studied. In the case
of CNNs and their use in medical images, a saliency map is a simple tool for obtaining
an explanation of the areas of interest of the network [ 97]. Eight interpretable methods
of saliency maps (+ Grad-CAM, guided backpropagation, and guided Grad-CAM) were
evaluated [ 19]. However, the performance on the testing datasets was not competitive [ 19].
Therefore, several challenges still face the XAI technique. These are summarized as follows.
6.1. Human-Centered XAI
As AI models involve social decision making, interaction with these models is becom-
ing more important for many users, especially clinicians. The idea is that the interpretation
is accepted as an effective tool for communicating with users/persons and AI models.
In a clinical application scenario, XAI provides explanations for doctors and patients.
Radiologists also want to know the opinions of others when using AI tools for diagnosis [ 98].
Obviously, these interpretable methods are not explained to patients. This shows that
doctors cannot clearly diagnose diseases in terms of medical treatment. They need strong
evidence or more authoritative answers to verify the AI tools. In this case, if the explanations