Sensors 2023 ,23, 634 10 of 19
any black-box model to interpret only a single prediction. For example, the approximation
model is trained as follows. Given a black-box model and the input data, a perturbation is
added to the input data, either by overwriting parts of an image or by removing parts of
the words from the text. These new samples are then weighted according to their proximity
to the corresponding class, an interpretable model is trained on the obtained dataset, and
ﬁnally, an explanation is obtained by interpreting the model. The explanation produced by
the surrogate model can be expressed through Equation (3).
explain (x) =argmin g2GL(f,g,px) +W(g) (3)
where gis a surrogate model in all possible interpretable models and Gis used to explain
the instance x.Lis a ﬁdelity function that measures how close the explanation is to the
predictions of the original model. W(g)infers the complexity of the model g, since we want
the surrogate model to be interpretable by humans. It minimizes Lwhile keeping model
complexity, W(g), low.
For example, using the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (Lasso) as a
factor of an interpretable model gfor text classiﬁcation, LIME can be expressed by K-LASSO
with sparse linear explanations, as illustrated in Algorithm 2. Lasso can select features and
regularize the weights of features in a linear model. Kis the number of features selected
via Lasso.
Algorithm 2 Sparse linear explanation using LIME.
Require: Classiﬁer f; Features number K; Instance xto be explained; Similarity kernel px
Z=fg
XN=SAMPLE _AROUND (x0)
forxiinXNdo
Z=Z[ (xi,f(xi),px(xi))
end for
w= K-L ASSO (Z,K)
return w .Explanation for an individual predict
Another algorithm called “GraphLIME” can be used for graph neural networks for
classiﬁcation applications. It extends LIME to work in a non-linear environment by sam-
pling N-hop network neighbors and using the Hilbert–Schmidt independence criterion
Lasso (HSIC Lasso) as surrogate models [ 35]. The explanations for "GraphLIME" have the
same patterns as “LIME”, as expressed in Equation (4)
explain (v) =argmin g2GL(f,Xn) (4)
The difference is that Xnrepresents the sampling local information matrix of node vin
a graph.
4.10. Image Captioning
Image captioning is an intrinsic explanation method that ﬁnally provides interpre-
tations of natural languages [ 41]. Typically, this approach combines CNNs and long
short-term memory networks (LSTM) for encoding the image and text, respectively [ 81].
These techniques are useful to generate medical reports. For example, “TandemNet” can
generate visual interpretations in addition to textual explanation [ 72]. “TandemNet” is a
dual attention model that can effectively combine image and text information, extract use-
ful features, and focus attention for accurate image prediction. Medical Visual-Linguistic
BERT, Medical-VLBERT, is another algorithm that has been used to generate medical
reports of COVID-19 patients [ 67]. In this context, a curriculum learning framework,
competence-based multimodal curriculum learning (CMCL), was proposed to solve the
lack of generation of medical reports [ 82]. It is worth noting that CMCL mimics the learning
process of human doctors from an easy to hard approach by scoring the learning difﬁculty