‘[C]’
‘A painting of a girl reads a 
book in the style of [C]’
Target 
Style
CNN-Based
Style Transfer
Model
Style
Image
 Text-to-Image
Generative 
Model‘A painting of a girl reads a book 
in the style of Tony Toscani’
Text-to-Image
Generative 
Model
Text-to-Image
Generative 
Model
(a)
Text-to-Image
Generative 
ModelRandom 
NoiseRandom 
NoiseRandom 
Noise
Vit-Based
Style Transfer
Model
Style
Image
(b) (c)
(d) (e) (f)‘A painting of a girl reads a book 
in the style of Modernism’
’Figure 2. Concept differences between text-to-image synthesis [50], classical style transfer [7, 59] and our InST.
Diffusion-based methods [9,22,23,26,36,54] generate high-
quality and diverse artistic images on the basis of a text
prompt, with or without image examples. In addition to the
input image, a detailed auxiliary textual input is required to
guide the generation process if we want to reproduce some
vivid contents and styles. However, the creative idea of a
specific painting may still be difficult to reproduce in the
result.
In this paper, we propose a novel example-guided artis-
tic image generation framework (i.e., inversion-based style
transfer, InST) which related to style transfer and text-to-
image synthesis, to mitigate all the above problems. Given
only a single input painting image, our method can learn
and transfer its style to a natural image with a very simple
text prompt (see Figures 1 and 2(f)). The resulting image
exhibits very similar artistic attributes to those of the orig-
inal painting, including material, brushstrokes, colors, ob-
ject shapes and semantic elements, without losing diversity.
Furthermore, the content of the resulting image can also be
controlled by providing a text description (see Figure 2(c)).
To achieve this goal, we need to obtain the representa-
tion of the image style, which refers to the set of attributes
that appear in the high-level textual description of the im-
age. We define the textual descriptions as “new words” that
do not exist in the normal language and obtain the embed-
dings via inversion method. We exploit the recent success
of diffusion models [42,50] and inversion [2,15]. We adapt
diffusion models in our work as the backbone to be inverted
and as a generator in image-to-image and text-to-image syn-
thesis. Specifically, we propose an efficient and accurate
textual inversion based on the attention mechanism, which
can quickly learn key features from an image, and a stochas-
tic inversion to maintain the semantic of the content image.
We use CLIP [39] image encoder and learn key information
of the image through multi-layer cross-attention. Taking an
artistic image as a reference, the attention-based inversion
module is fed with its image embedding and then gives its
textual embedding. The diffusion models conditioning onthe textual embedding can produce new images with the
learned style of the reference.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of InST, we conduct
comprehensive experiments on numerous images of various
artists and styles. The experiments show that InST produces
outstanding results, generating artistic images that imitate
the style attributes to a high degree and with a content that
is consistent with that of the input natural images or text de-
scriptions. InST demonstrates much improved visual qual-
ity and artistic consistency compared with state-of-the-art
approaches. These outcomes indicate the generality, preci-
sion, and adaptability of the proposed method.
2. Related Work
Image style transfer Image style transfer has been
widely studied as a typical mechanism of example-guided
artistic image generation. Traditional style transfer meth-
ods use low-level handcrafted features to match the patches
between the content image and the style image [51, 57]. In
recent years pre-trained deep convolutional neural networks
have been used to extract the statistical distribution of fea-
tures, which can effectively capture style patterns [18, 19,
27, 33, 52, 60]. Arbitrary style transfer methods use unified
models to handle arbitrary inputs by building feed-forward
architectures [8, 24, 28, 30–32, 37, 49, 53, 55, 58]. Liu et
al. [34] learn the spatial attention score from both shallow
and deep features using an adaptive attention normalization
module (AdaAttN). An et al. [1] alleviate the content leak
using reversible neural flows and an unbiased feature trans-
fer module (ArtFlow). Chen et al. [3] apply an internal-
external scheme to learn feature statistics (mean and stan-
dard deviation) as style priors (IEST). Zhang et al. [59]
learn the style representation directly from image features
via contrastive learning to achieve domain enhanced ar-
bitrary style transfer (CAST). In addition to CNN, visual
transformer has also been used for style transfer tasks.
Wu et al. [55] perform content-guided global style com-
position by a transformer-driven style composition module
10147