identifier. Their inversion method is based on the fine-
tuning of diffusion models, which requires high computa-
tional resources. Both methods learn concepts from pictures
through textual inversion, and they need a small ( 3-5) im-
age set to depict the concept. The concept they aim to learn
is always an object. Our method can learn the correspond-
ing textual embedding from a single image and use it as a
condition to guide the generation of artistic images without
fine-tuning the generative model.
3. Method
3.1. Overview
In this work, we use inversion as the basis of the InST
framework and Stable Diffusion Models (SDMs) [42,50] as
the generative backbone. Our framework is not restricted
to a specific generative model. As shown in Figure 3, our
method involves the pixel, latent, and textual spaces. Dur-
ing training, image xis the same as image y. The image
embedding of image xis obtained by the CLIP image en-
coder and then sent to the attention-based inversion mod-
ule. The key information of the image embedding is learned
through multi-layer cross-attention. The inversion module
provides text embedding v, which is converted into the stan-
dard format of caption conditioning SDMs. Conditioned on
the input textual information, the generative model obtains a
series of latent codes ztthrough the sequence denoising pro-
cess from to the random noise zTand finally provides the
latent code zcorresponding to the artistic image. The inver-
sion module is optimized by the simple loss of LDMs [42]
computed on the “latent noise” of the forward process and
the reverse process (see Sec. 3.2). In the inference process,
xis the content image, and yis the reference image. The
textual embedding vof reference image yguides the gener-
ative model in generating a new artistic image.
3.2. Textual Inversion
We aim to obtain the intermediate representation of
a pre-trained text-to-image model for a specific painting.
SDMs utilize CLIP text embedding as the condition in text-
to-image generation. CLIP text encoding contains two pro-
cesses, namely, tokenization and parameterization. An in-
put text is first transformed into a token, which is an index in
a pre-defined dictionary, for each word or sub-word. Then,
each token is associated with a distinct embedding vector
that can be located using an index. We set the concept of
a picture as a placeholder “[C]”, and its corresponding tok-
enized text embedding as a learnable vector ˆv.[C]is in the
normal language domain, and ˆvis in the textual space. By
assuming a [C]that does not exist in real language, we cre-
ate a “new word” for a certain artistic image that cannot be
expressed in normal language. To obtain ˆv, we need to de-
sign constraints as supervision that relies on a single image.An instinctive way to learn ˆvis by direct optimization [15],
which minimizes the LDMs loss of a single image:
ˆv= arg min
vEz,x,y,th
∥ϵ−ϵθ(zt, t, vθ(y))∥2
2i
,(1)
where ydenotes the artistic image, vθ(y)is a learnable vec-
tor,z∼E(x), ϵ∼ N (0,1). However, this optimization-
based approach is inefficient, and accurate embeddings are
difficult to obtain without overfitting with a single image as
training data.
We propose a learning method based on multi-layer cross
attention. The artistic image input is first sent to the CLIP
image encoder and provides image embeddings. By per-
forming multi-layer attention on these image embeddings,
the key information of the image can be quickly obtained.
The image encoder τθprojects yto an image embedding
τθ(y). The multi-layer cross attention starts with v0=
τθ(y). Then each layer implements Attention( Q, K, V ) =
softmax
QKT
√
d
·Vas follows:
Qi=W(i)
Q·vi, K=W(i)
K·τθ(y), V=W(i)
V·τθ(y),
vi+1= Attention( Qi, K, V ).(2)
During training, the model is conditioned by the corre-
sponding text embedding only. To avoid overfitting, we ap-
ply a dropout strategy in each cross-attention layer, which
is set to 0.05.
Our optimization goal can finally be defined as follows:
ˆv= arg min
vEz,x,y,th
∥ϵ−ϵθ(zt, t,MultiAtt( τθ(y))∥2
2i
,
(3)
where z∼E(x), ϵ∼ N (0,1).τθandϵθare fixed during
training. In this manner, ˆvis efficiently optimized to the
target area. Note that, it is not strictly necessary to use CLIP
image embedding when the model is optimized on a single
image, we aim to utilize the high-quality feature space of
CLIP to pave the way for diverse tasks. The key of our
approach is the multi-layer attention mechanism.
3.3. Stochastic Inversion
In addition to the text description, the random noise con-
trolled by the random seed is also important for the rep-
resentation of the image. As demonstrated in [20], the
changes in random seed result in obvious changes in visual
differences. We divide pre-trained text-to-image diffusion
model-based image representation into two parts: holistic
representation and detail representation. Holistic represen-
tation involves text conditions, and the detail representation
is controlled by random noise. We define the process from
an image to noise maps as an inversion problem and propose
stochastic inversion to preserve the semantics of the content
image. We first add random noise to the content image and
10149