Inversion-based Style Transfer with Diffusion Models
Yuxin Zhang1,2Nisha Huang1,2Fan Tang3Haibin Huang4
Chongyang Ma4Weiming Dong1,2∗Changsheng Xu1,2
1MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences2School of AI, UCAS
3Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences4Kuaishou Technology
Figure 1. Style transfer results using the proposed method. Given only a single input painting, our method can accurately transfer the style
attributes such as semantics, material, object shape, brushstrokes and colors of the references to a natural image with a very simple learned
textual description “[C]”.
Abstract
The artistic style within a painting is the means of ex-
pression, which includes not only the painting material,
colors, and brushstrokes, but also the high-level attributes,
including semantic elements and object shapes. Previous
arbitrary example-guided artistic image generation meth-
ods often fail to control shape changes or convey elements.
Pre-trained text-to-image synthesis diffusion probabilistic
models have achieved remarkable quality but often require
extensive textual descriptions to accurately portray the at-
tributes of a particular painting. The uniqueness of an art-
work lies in the fact that it cannot be adequately explained
with normal language. Our key idea is to learn the artis-
tic style directly from a single painting and then guide the
synthesis without providing complex textual descriptions.
Specifically, we perceive style as a learnable textual de-
scription of a painting. We propose an inversion-based style
transfer method (InST), which can efficiently and accurately
learn the key information of an image, thus capturing and
transferring the artistic style of a painting. We demonstrate
the quality and efficiency of our method on numerous paint-
ings of various artists and styles. Codes are available at
https://github.com/zyxElsa/InST .
*Corresponding author: weiming.dong@ia.ac.cn1. Introduction
If a photo speaks 1000 words, then every painting tells
a story. A painting contains the engagement of an artist’s
own creation. The artistic style of a painting can be the per-
sonalized textures and brushstrokes, the portrayed beautiful
moment, or some particular semantic elements. All these
artistic factors are difficult to describe with words. There-
fore, when we wish to utilize a favorite painting to create
new digital artworks that can imitate the original idea of the
artist, the task turns into example-guided artistic image gen-
eration.
Generating artistic image(s) from given example(s) has
attracted great interest in recent years. A typical task is
style transfer [1, 6, 8, 17, 34, 55, 59], which can create a new
artistic image from an arbitrary input pair of natural images
and painting image, by combining the content of the nat-
ural image and the style of the painting image. However,
particular artistic factors such as object shape and semantic
elements are difficult to be transferred (see Figures 2(b) and
2(e)). Text guided stylization [14, 16, 29, 38] produces an
artistic image from a natural image and a text prompt, but
the text prompt for the target style can usually be a rough
description only of the material (e.g., “oil”, “watercolor”
or “sketch”), art movement(e.g. “Impressionism” or “Cu-
bism”), artist (e.g., “Vincent van Gogh” or “Claude Monet”)
or a famous artwork (e.g., “Starry Night” or “The Scream”).
This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
10146