Denoising U-Net
Q
KVQ
KV
CLIP
Enc
v)(y
Linear
Linear
Linear
Linear
Linear
Linear
Text
Enc
)(yc
result
Diffusion Process
add random noise
Denoising Process
predict noise
content 
imagenoisy
version Ipredicted
noise
Diffusion Process
add predicted noise
content 
image
noisy
version II
Conditioned
Synthesis Process
‘[C]’Stochastic InversionTextual Inversion
Linear
style
image
Tz
)1(T
z1Tz
Dy
xLDMs Latent SpaceFigure 3. Overview of our InST. We apply the Stable Diffusion Models (SDMs) [42, 50] as the generative backbone and propose an
attention-based textual inversion module. During image synthesis, the inversion module takes the CLIP [39] image embedding τθ(y)of
an artistic image y, and gives learned corresponding text embedding v, which is then encoded into the standard form of SDMs’s caption
conditioning cθ(y). Through these, the SDMs can generate new images with encoded latent or random noise zTconditioned on cθ(y).
(StyleFormer). Deng et al. [7] propose a transformer-based
method (StyTr2) to avoid the biased content representation
in style transfer by considering the long-range dependen-
cies of input images. Image style transfer methods mainly
focus on learning and transferring colors and brushstrokes
and have difficulty on other artistic factors such as object
shape and decorative elements.
Text-to-image synthesis Text-guided synthesis methods
can also be used to generate artistic images [11, 40, 41, 45,
56]. CLIPDraw [13] synthesizes artistic images from text
by using CLIP encoder [39] to maximize the similarity be-
tween the textual description and the generated drawing.
VQGAN-CLIP [5] uses the CLIP-guided VQGAN [12] to
generate artistic images of various styles from text prompts.
Rombach et al. [42] train diffusion models [21,47] in the la-
tent space to reduce the complexity and generate high qual-
ity artistic images from texts. These models only use text
guidance to generate an image, without fine-grained con-
tent or style control. Some methods add an image prompt
to the content of the generate image to increase controlla-
bility. CLIPstyler [29] transforms the input image to a de-
sired style with a text description by using CLIP loss and
PatchCLIP loss. StyleGAN-NADA [16] uses CLIP to adap-
tively train the generator, which can transfer a photo to the
artistic domain using the text description of the target style.
Huang et al. [22] a diffusion-based artistic image genera-
tion approach by utilizing multimodal prompts as a guide to
control the classifier-free diffusion model. Hertz et al. [20]
change an image to artistic style by using the text prompt
with style description and injecting the source attention
maps. Images with complex or special artistic character-
istics that cannot be described by normal texts are still diffi-
cult to generate using these methods. StyleCLIPDraw [46]jointly optimizes the text description and style image for
artistic image generation. Liu et al. [35] extract the style
description from CLIP model by a contrastive training strat-
egy, which enables the network to perform style transfer be-
tween a content image and a textual style description. These
methods utilize the aligned image and the text embedding
of CLIP to achieve style transfer via narrowing the distance
between the generated image and the style image whereas
we obtain the image representation straight from the artistic
image.
Inversion of diffusion models In the inversion of diffu-
sion models, a noise map and a conditioning vector corre-
sponding to a generated image are sought. This approach is
a potential way of improving the quality of example-guided
artistic image generation. However, naively adding noise to
an image and then denoising it may yield an image with a
significantly different content. Choi et al. [4] perform inver-
sion by using the noised low-pass filter data from the target
image as the basis for the denoising process. Dhariwal et
al. [10] invert the deterministic DDIM [48] sampling pro-
cess in closed form to obtain a latent noise map that will
produce a given real image. Ramesh [40] develop a text-
conditional image generator based on the diffusion mod-
els and the inverted CLIP. New instances of a given exam-
ple are difficult to generate while maintaining fidelity using
the above methods. Gal et al. [15] present a textual inver-
sion method to find a new pseudo-word to describe the vi-
sual concept of a specific object or artistic style in the em-
bedding space of a fixed text-to-image model. They use
optimization-based methods to directly optimize the em-
bedding of the concept. Ruiz et al. [44] implant a subject
into the output domain of a text-to-image diffusion model
so that it can be synthesized in novel views with a unique
10148