ciency of the proposed method, we compare it with seven dierent ap-
proaches. They are Dense Neural Network (DNN), Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN), Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM), Support Vector Ma-
chine (SVM), Logistic Regression (LR), k-Nearest Neighbors (kNN), and
Gradient Descent (GD).
All methods were tested over two dierent scenarios, both of them using
public datasets. The rst test scenario uses the CICDDoS 2019 dataset and
measures the methods over various types of DDoS attacks, where most of
the tested methods achieved similarly good results. The second one uses the
CICIDS 2018 dataset, providing dierent kinds of intrusion attacks for the
methods' testing. In this scenario, the results are more heterogeneous since
the emulated network is composed of more devices, and these attacks tend
to be stealthier than 
ooding ones. GRU achieved the best overall results
in both scenarios, presenting the most balanced outcomes regarding the ac-
curacy, precision, recall, and f-measure. We believe GRU fared better than
the other tested methods because of its ability to learn long-term dependen-
cies. Since GRU outperformed all other evaluated methods on classifying
legitimate 
ows, we conclude that this characteristic represents a signicant
advantage of the GRU compared to them.
Furthermore, we measured the number of 
ows per second each method
can analyze and classify since speed is an essential feature for the proposed
system. We compared the outcomes with real data collected from a large-
scale network and, added to the results obtained through both test scenarios,
concluded that GRU is a promising and feasible approach for anomaly de-
tection in real-world SDN environments.
Finally, we proposed a directed mitigation schema, a straightforward ap-
proach based on using the individualized 
ow information provided by the
Detection Module. By identifying the attacker IP, the system can gener-
ate an individual drop policy against it. Therefore, although this mitigation
schema proved to be ecient in the evaluated test scenarios, it is directly
in
uenced by the detection method's performance.
For future work, we intend to use the GRU method as a multi-label
classier, able not only to detect the occurrence of anomalies but also to
identify them. Moreover, we want to estimate and evaluate a drop time
window usage on the Mitigation Module, calculating the optimal time to
minimize the computational cost and improve the mitigation outcomes. We
believe that these modications can signicantly improve the performance of
the proposed system. Finally, we intend to compare the presented method
31