Keywords:
Gated Recurrent Units, SDN, Deep Learning, DDoS, Intrusion detection.
1. Introduction
The amount of data traveling on the Internet is rapidly increasing due to
the growth in popularity and complexity of connected devices and software
solutions. The usage of network resources by end users is rising through the
popularization of social networks, web banking applications, and e-commerce,
for instance. Thus, new cloud-based services are becoming essential to the op-
eration of this new network environment, which brings specic requirements,
such as dynamic trac allocation (Maenhaut et al., 2017). Furthermore,
the increasing popularity of Internet of Things (IoT) devices is gradually
changing the Internet scenario by increasing the heterogeneously of commu-
nication, since each device (thing) has specic network requirements and
processing capability (Yoon and Kim, 2017; Bera et al., 2018). In the face
of these changes, management and security are becoming impracticable in
traditional static network environments (da Costa et al., 2019; Hajiheidari
et al., 2019).
A networking paradigm that is gaining space on several recent pieces of
research and applications is the Software-dened Networking (SDN) (Zehra
and Shah, 2017; Farris et al., 2019). This network paradigm operates by
centralizing the network management into a single programmable controller,
able to communicate and control network devices such as switches and routers
regardless of their manufacturers, as \white-boxes". The SDN separates the
control and data planes so that the central controller is responsible for send-
ing, for instance, management and packet forwarding policies to the con-
trolled devices in a scalable and coordinated manner. This characteristic
is a valuable feature able to provide next-generation networks with the dy-
namic architecture they require (Zhang et al., 2019), in which changes can
be performed in a fast, programmable, and on-demand way.
However, while bringing essential improvements to the current network
architecture, the SDN, as any centralized service, has as a critical failure spot
its central controller. Malicious users may target this controller aiming to im-
pair the whole network operation through the usage of dierent approaches,
such as intrusions (Lopez-Martin et al., 2017) and denial of service (DoS)
attacks (Daneshgadeh C  akmak c et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Xu et al.,
2