As observed, the SDN controller export single IP 
ow records composed of
Ffeatures or dimensions. Most of these features are quantitative dimensions
that can be directly analyzed by the detection method. However, if the record
contains qualitative dimensions, such as the \protocol" element, this data
is submitted to an MD5 hashing process to convert them into quantitative
values. An essential part of this treatment is to not include the features source
IP address and port, and destination IP address on the anomaly detection
step. Their usage could compel the detection method to learn patterns that
decrease its generalization capacity, stating that, for instance, DDoS attacks
always aim at a specic IP address.
After this step, the IP 
ow record is submitted to the Detection module,
in which it will be presented to a binary classication performed by the
GRU method. If no anomaly is detected, then the analysis starts all over
again with the evaluation of the next 
ow record. Otherwise, an alarm is
triggered, and the Mitigation module is invoked to generate the optimal drop
policy against the detected attack. This policy is transmitted to the SDN
controller for logic implementation, which forwards the mitigation messages
to the network's routers and switches, securing the SDN environment. Fig.
3 summarizes the drop policy generation through the mitigation approach
proposed in this paper.
As presented by Fig. 3, the Mitigation Module receives the 
ow record in
which the attack was detected (1). After, it extracts relevant information to
generate the drop policy. Since this paper introduces individual 
ow records
analysis, it is possible to identify the attacker node's IP address directly.
Thus, this IP address is extracted (2), and a drop policy is generated. Finally,
this drop policy is sent to the SDN controller (3) for implementation.
It is essential to highlight that the defense system, unlike traditional ap-
proaches, operates autonomously, from the 
ow extraction to the attack's
detection and mitigation. This characteristic is a crucial feature to guaran-
tee a fast response regarding the mitigation process, aiming to minimize the
impact caused by the attack. When an attack is detected, an alarm is trig-
gered and automatically invokes the mitigation module. This alarm is also
received by the network administrator, but only as a warning notication, as
described in Fig. 1.
11