Table 1: Amount of 
ows available for testing regarding both datasets CICDDoS 2019
and CICIDS 2018.
Legitimate 
ows Attack 
ows Total
CICDDoS 2019 (testing day) 49,763 248,815 298,578
CICIDS 2018 (33%) 906,094 907,742 1,813,836
As observed, this dierence occurs due to the number of 
ows available
for testing, since the CICIDS 2018 testing set was six times bigger than the
CICDDoS 2019 one. Furthermore, intrusion attacks tend to be stealthier
than 
ooding ones, which elevates the complexity of detection. These values
were presented in an absolute form to illustrate how the network's size in
u-
ences the mitigation outcomes, especially regarding the impact on legitimate
users. Therefore, the larger the SDN network (regarding the throughput of
IP 
ows), the more evident is the dierence in detection of the evaluated
methods.
Since this mitigation approach directly depends on the detection method's
eciency, it represents a low cost, fast mitigation process. Although this
approach proved to be ecient, it may replicate misclassications through
time. The generation of a drop time window may improve the mitigation
outcomes, which should be implemented in future works.
5.4. Feasibility of implementation
Since the proposed SDN defense system aims to inspect the trac data
through individual 
ow analysis, the detection method should be both lightweight
and ecient. These characteristics are essential, since delays on the detec-
tion may impair the operation of the mitigation approach, as well as cause
more damage to the SDN.
To measure the eciency of the presented approach, we calculate the
average number of 
ows per second the tested anomaly detection methods
can analyze and classify. The rates were collected through 10 dierent ex-
ecutions, and the results are shown in Table 2. The standard deviation of
the calculated average was added to illustrate that, in the ten executions,
the results achieved showed little variation. Thus, it can be noted that there
was no bias in the results due to external interference, such as running other
programs, for example.
As observed, the LR and GD methods are by far the fastest, in comparison
to the other methods. However, their results regarding the classication
28