widely applied to detect anomalies in dierent network environments, such
as IoT systems for Smart Cities (Guo et al., 2020) and Industrial control
systems (Khan et al., 2020). In Kao and Jiang (2019), the authors proposed
an anomaly detection framework for univariate time series. To achieve this
goal, they rst divide data into three classes, which are stationary, periodic,
and non-stationary time series. Then, dierent statistical and Deep Learn-
ing methods, such as GRU, STL, SARIMA, LSTM, LSTM with STL, and
ADSaS, are applied over these separated data for performing anomaly detec-
tion. The results pointed out that the proposed framework obtained better
performance outcomes in comparison to related methods regarding precision,
recall, and f-measures. Similarly, in Qin et al. (2018), the authors proposed
the usage of Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) networks on the detection of
anomalies in IP networks. The outcomes achieved shows promising precision
and recall rates, demonstrating the eciency of the method in classica-
tion problems. In Xie et al. (2020), the authors present a network model
to predict sensor/controller parameters in industrial control systems using
1D-CNN and GRU. The proposed model was validated through the Secure
Water Treatment (SWaT) dataset and achieved promising results regarding
precision, recall, and f1-measure metrics. In Qu et al. (2018), the authors
proposed a modication of the traditional GRU applied to the identica-
tion of user anomalies by analyzing web Logs. The authors' unsupervised
approach presented better identication outcomes compared to conventional
LSTM and SVM models for anomaly detection. In Liu et al. (2019), the au-
thors present an anomaly detection approach in network logs, using GRU and
Support Vector Domain Description (SVDD). Initially, the authors apply the
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) method to reduce the databases' di-
mensionality and extract signicant attributes. Subsequently, the processed
databases are trained using the GRU-SVDD classication model. The exper-
iments in classical KDD Cup 99 databases showed that the proposed method
was more ecient than the classical GRU-MLP and LSTM algorithms.
In this paper, we propose an SDN defense system against DDoS and
intrusion attacks. This system, unlike several dierent approaches described
in this section, operates without sampling, acting directly into individual IP

ow data, which provides faster detection and, consequently, decreases the
impact caused by the attack through a mitigation process. The proposed
system performs a multidimensional (multiple 
ow feature) analysis using
GRU deep learning method for detecting attacks on the SDN controller.
7