performance evaluation of the mitigation approach; Finally, section 6 presents
the conclusions and future works.
2. Related Works
Software-dened Networking (SDN) is an emerging paradigm that sig-
nicantly improves the management procedures, providing the network ad-
ministrator with the 
exibility of dynamic trac allocation, as well as an
online, softwarized, and centralized conguration. Several authors have been
developing solutions through the usage of SDNs, such as Theodorou and
Mamatas (2017) that demonstrated the operation of CORAL-SDN, an SDN
based solution for the Internet of Things. The authors highlighted several
benets from the usage of this paradigm in Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN),
such as the centralized control and the elasticity support regarding WSNs
requirements.
Although centralized management is one of the main advantages of SDNs,
it also represents a weak spot, since the operation impairment of the con-
troller may lead to critical network issues. Thus, the security of this controller
is an essential matter to SDN implementation. In Tatang et al. (2017) the
authors proposed the SDN-GUARD, a system for detecting and mitigating
rootkits in SDN controllers. Their system performs a dual-view comparison
to detect malicious programming attempts, and the authors highlighted the
achievement of reasonable detection rates with a relatively small performance
overhead. In Nam and Kim (2018), the authors addressed the security en-
hancement of SDNs through the usage of open-source IDS software called
Suricata. The authors also described the usage of OpenFlow to implement
SDN security mechanisms. In Gkountis et al. (2017), the authors proposed
a lightweight DDoS defense algorithm, based on a simple set of rules, in the
protection of SDN environments. The authors highlighted that the proposed
approach achieved better results in comparison to other legacy protection
schemes regarding an SDN ecosystem of mobile users. In Sidki et al. (2016),
the authors proposed fault protection for SDN controllers, enabling the net-
work to maintain its regular operation through a redundancy-based approach
using a synchronized slave controller.
One of the main approaches for detecting attacks in SDN environments
is to characterize the network's normal behavior. Thus, when an abnormal
situation is detected, the system may take countermeasures to mitigate the
problem. This approach is called anomaly detection, and several dierent
5