3. SDN Defense system
In this section, we describe the operation of the proposed SDN defense
system. The management centralization provides many advantages in this
paradigm. Still, it is necessary to give the controller security resources to
guarantee its operation and, consequently, the quality of the services pro-
vided. Thus, in this paper, we propose an SDN security defense system able
to detect the occurrence of dierent intrusion and DDoS attacks on central
controllers through an analysis of multi-dimensional IP 
ows.
Unlike other techniques that analyze trac data through dierent time
windows (from seconds to minutes), the proposed defense system aims to an-
alyze and identify attacks in individual 
ows, providing a higher accuracy on
the detection and improving the response time for mitigation actions. The
main disadvantage of this approach is the amount of data analyzed by the
system, which needs to be able to provide fast and accurate classication out-
comes. However, it brings the advantages of rapid detection, decreasing the
impact caused by the attacks over end users, and users' identication, since
IP 
ow records stores qualitative information, such as source and destination
IP addresses and ports used on the communication.
Two dierent parts compose our SDN defense system, the Detection, and
Mitigation modules, which communicate with each other through the central
system logic, as observed in Fig. 1. Each module is composed of two other
sub-modules, and the SDN system operates within the SDN controller. All
data analysis is performed automatically, and the network administrator only
receives notications about detected attack events.
The Detection module is responsible for detecting the occurrence of in-
trusion and DDoS attacks, as well as generating an alarm that invokes the
operation of the mitigation module. In this module, we applied a recurrent
Deep Learning approach called Gated Recurrent Units (GRU), which will be
detailed in the next section. Since GRU is a supervised learning method,
the sub-module called \Training" is responsible for calibrating the classi-
cation outcomes through the usage of historical labeled data. The second
sub-module is accountable for analyzing 
ow records and generate a binary
result, classifying them as normal or abnormal trac.
It is essential to highlight that the investigation of dierent IP 
ow fea-
tures (or dimensions) enriches trac analysis by providing relevant infor-
mation about the communication and who is participating in it (Shuying
Chang et al., 2010). Several dierent approaches use this characteristic to
8