lems in which historical information is essential to the performance of clas-
sication tasks. In the proposed system, this method inspects individual IP

ows through a multidimensional analysis, operating as a binary 
ow classi-
er,i.e., classifying them as normal or abnormal.
The Mitigation Module generates ecient counter-measures against the
detected attacks. Since the system proposed in this paper individually ana-
lyzes IP 
ows, it can directly identify the attacking node address. Thus, a
directed mitigation approach is proposed, which aims to bring the SDN back
to its regular operation through a light and straightforward process.
To evaluate the eciency of GRU as a detection method, we tested it
against seven other shallow and deep learning detection approaches over two
dierent scenarios using public datasets. On the rst one, named CICDDoS
2019 (Sharafaldin et al., 2019), we tested the methods over several dier-
ent kinds of Distributed DoS (DDoS) attacks. The second scenario, called
CICIDS 2018 (Sharafaldin et al., 2018), was used to test the eciency of
the detection methods against dierent intrusion techniques. Furthermore,
these two datasets are used to measure the proposed mitigation approach's
eciency regarding each one of the evaluated detection methods. The choice
of these databases was motivated by their variety of attacks and the number
of available IP 
ow features, an essential characteristic for the application of
Deep Learning methods. Finally, we tested the number of 
ows per second
the tested anomaly detection approaches can process to prove the proposed
system's feasibility.
We can highlight the following as main contributions of this paper:
A system for SDN defense against intrusion and DDoS attacks;
A precise anomaly detection scheme based on isolated IP 
ow analy-
sis, enabling near real-time detection. This approach allows for faster
mitigation responses, minimizing the impact suered by the SDN;
The eciency evaluation and comparison of distinct shallow and deep
learning anomaly detection techniques applied in public datasets and
the eciency measurement of the proposed mitigation process.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents
state of the art through related work; Section 3 describes the organization of
the proposed system; Section 4 details the GRU method used for anomaly
detection at the Detection Module; Section 5 discusses the performance out-
comes achieved by GRU in comparison with seven other methods and the
4