As this process describes the operation of a single GRU cell, the depth of
this network is represented by the number of cells Cused to t the classi-
cation regarding the stated problem.
The conguration of the GRU implemented in this paper is described in
Fig. 5.
The architecture of the network is composed of a GRU layer ( C= 32),
followed by a Dropout layer (drop rate of 0 :5), added to save the system from
overtting, and a Fully-Connected layer ( h= 10 neurons) that performs a
global model classication. The output is given by a single neuron (Dense
layer) with a sigmoid activation function for binary classication, i.e., clas-
sifying the 
ow as legitimate or malicious. The parameter estimation of the
referred values was dened through extensive empirical testing.
Figs. 6 and 7 present the result of the tests that supported the choice of
GRU network parameters, which are the number of GRU cells and the num-
ber of neurons on the fully-connected layer. Fig. 6 tests dierent quantities
of GRU cells regarding the accuracy and number of analyzed 
ows per sec-
ond. This test was performed through the use of the CICDDoS 2019 dataset.
As observed, the more cells are added to the GRU layer, the better are the
classication results. However, it is essential to consider the number of 
ows
per second the model can classify since the proposed system aims to ana-
lyze individual records. As shown by this gure, GRU achieves a balanced
tradeo between accuracy and 
ow throughput with 32 cells, presenting an
ecient and feasible outcome.
Fig. 7 compares the usage of dierent amounts of neurons at the fully
connected layer, also examining the eciency of GRU regarding accuracy
and IP 
ow throughput. This test was performed using the CICIDS 2018
dataset, as the results achieved using the CICDDoS 2019 dataset are similar
to each other. This graph shows that this layer does not considerably in
u-
ence the number of analyzed 
ows/s that the neural network can analyze.
Furthermore, the lowest accuracy rate was achieved with 0 neurons, i.e.,
without adding the fully-connected layer before the output one. Since the
accuracy levels seem to achieve similar outcomes with 10 or more neurons,
we seth= 10 neurons to reduce computational cost.
The drop rate at the Dropout layer was chosen based on Srivastava et al.
(2014), in which the authors state that 0 :5 appears to be near to optimal for
most networks and tasks.
16