second, and, for each day, we measured the average 
ow/s rate. On regular
days, around 500 
ows/s pass through the collector, while on heavy trac
days, they achieved peaks of a maximum of 1681 
ows/s. Fig. 16 presents the
average 
ow/s rates reached by the tested methods compared to the average
and worst-case rates observed through the real-world environment data. For
ease of data visualization, we removed the results of DNN, LR, and GD
from the graph. Although these methods achieved a much higher 
ow/s rate
compared to the others, they presented inferior outcomes regarding attack
detection. Thus, Fig. 16 shows the comparison of the most ecient detection
methods.
By comparing the achieved results with the real collected data, we con-
clude that GRU is a feasible method for real-world anomaly detection. In this
case study, it was able to analyze around two times the amount of 
ows/s re-
quired in dense trac situations, operating within the limited CPU and mem-
ory resources of a personal computer. Furthermore, it presented the most
balanced results regarding the accuracy, precision, recall, and f-measure for
both test scenarios. Thus, it is possible to conclude that GRU is a promising
method to operate within the Detection module of the proposed SDN defense
system.
6. Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we proposed an SDN defense system against intrusion and
DDoS attacks. This approach can protect the SDN central controller against
situations that may compromise it, consequently impairing the network op-
eration. The proposed system is composed of two main parts, the Detection
and Mitigation modules. The Detection module is responsible for detecting
the occurrence of attacks, while the Mitigation module takes the required
countermeasures to reduce its impact over the network and, consequently, its
users. The proposed approach individually analyzes and classies IP 
ows
into normal or abnormal, which enables a faster detection process that con-
tributes to minimizing the attack's in
uence over the SDN controller. Fur-
thermore, this individualized analysis of IP 
ows can easily identify attackers
and their targets through feature extraction.
We also propose the usage of the Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) method
on the system's Detection module. GRU is a recurrent deep learning ap-
proach that simplies the operation of the Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM)
method while maintaining similar performance outcomes. To test the ef-
30