A GRU Deep Learning System against Attacks in
Software Dened Networks
Marcos V. O. Assisa, Luiz F. Carvalhob, Jaime Lloretd, Mario L. Proen ca
Jr.c
aDepartment of Engineering and Exacts, Federal University of Paran a, Brazil
bFederal University of Technology - Paran a, Brazil
cComputer Science Department, State University of Londrina, Paran a, Brazil
dIntegrated Management Coastal Research Institute, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia,
Valencia, Spain
Abstract
The management of modern network environments is becoming more and
more complex due to new requirements of devices' heterogeneity regarding
the popularization of the Internet of Things (IoT), as well as the dynamic
trac required by next-generation applications and services. To address
this problem, Software-dened Networking (SDN) emerges as a management
paradigm able to handle these problems through a centralized high-level net-
work approach. However, this centralized characteristic also creates a critical
failure spot since the central controller may be targeted by malicious users
aiming to impair the network operation. This paper proposes an SDN de-
fense system based on the analysis of single IP 
ow records, which uses the
Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) deep learning method to detect DDoS and
intrusion attacks. This direct 
ow inspection enables faster mitigation re-
sponses, minimizing the attack's impact over the SDN. The proposed model
is tested against several dierent machine learning approaches over two pub-
lic datasets, the CICDDoS 2019 and the CICIDS 2018. Furthermore, a
lightweight mitigation approach is presented and evaluated through perfor-
mance tests regarding each detection method. Finally, a feasibility test is
performed regarding the throughput of 
ows per second that each detection
method can analyze. This test is accomplished through the use of real IP
Flow data collected at a large-scale network. The results point out promising
detection rates and an elevated amount of analyzed 
ows per second, which
makes GRU a feasible approach for the proposed system.
Preprint submitted to Journal of Network and Computer Applications November 12, 2020