techniques may perform this task (Pena et al., 2014; Lei, 2017; Qin et al.,
2018). On the past years, machine learning (ML) methods have been widely
applied as classication systems on the detection of network anomalies. In
Nanda et al. (2016), the authors proposed the usage of machine learning algo-
rithms trained over historical data to detect network attacks. They compared
the eciency of four dierent ML algorithms, the C4.5, Bayesian Network,
Decision Table, and Naive-Bayes, achieving around 91% of prediction accu-
racy through the use of Bayesian Network. In Kornycky et al. (2017), the
authors investigated the use of low-cost WLAN dongles to monitor a network,
and passively perform trac classication, improving service monitoring by
focusing on enforcing network security policies. To reach this objective, the
authors applied dierent machine learning methods, such as kNN, WkNN,
GMM, GMM-UBM, BCT, PTSVQ, and TRAP-VQ. The results point out
that TRAP-VQ, a technique proposed by the authors, achieved the highest
f-measure among all tested approaches, proving to be ecient for WLAN
trac characterization regarding prior knowledge requirements and compu-
tational complexity. In Fukuda et al. (2017), the authors proposed the usage
of the Domain Name System (DNS) backscatter as an additional source of in-
formation regarding network activity. The authors applied dierent machine-
learning algorithms to classify originator activity of malicious trac based
on the retrieved data, which are classication and regression tree (CART),
random forest (RF), and support vector machine (SVM). The proposed algo-
rithm achieved reasonable accuracy and precision outcomes of around 75%,
which demonstrates both that DNS backscatter is a good source of network
information and that the tested machine learning approaches are ecient for
malicious activity detection.
Moreover, several network anomaly detection approaches operate through
sampling, analyzing data in time intervals, such as Cortez et al. (2006) and
Berezi nski et al. (2015), which operates in ve-minute ranges. Smaller time
intervals implicate on faster anomaly detection, as well as an increase in
processing usage for data analysis. In Sun et al. (2016), the authors proposed
an anomaly detection method based on Streaming Performance Metrics and
Logs operating in one-minute intervals.
Furthermore, a subclass of machine learning algorithms named Deep
Learning is increasingly gaining space among researchers in the area (Chowd-
hury et al., 2019). This subclass describes algorithms that use multiple layers
to learn data representation with various abstraction levels, usually when a
large dataset is available for training. Deep Learning methods are being
6