5.2. Scenario 2 - CICIDS 2018 Dataset
In this test scenario, we applied simulated IP 
ows collected from the
public dataset CICIDS 2018 Sharafaldin et al. (2018). As described in the
previous test scenario, the authors also generate realistic background traf-
c proled through B-Prole System (Sharafaldin et al., 2017) to describe
human communications for legitimate trac. In this dataset, the authors
simulate the behavior of 500 machines, 420 legitimate users, 30 server nodes,
and 50 attacking nodes. The authors used a system called M-Prole to gen-
erate dierent attack scenarios in which the devices operate specic tasks
accordingly to the attack's type. They are:
Inltration of the network from inside;
HTTP denial of service;
Collection of web application attacks;
Brute force attacks;
Last updated attacks.
Unlike the previously addressed dataset, the CICIDS 2018 does not divide
the data into training and test groups. Thus, we randomly selected 66% of
the dataset for training and used the remaining 34% for testing.
This dataset provides data in two dierent extensions: \.pcap", the stan-
dard extension for 
ow export, and \.csv", in which the authors present data
ready for training on machine learning methods, i.e., without qualitative di-
mensions such as source and destination IP addresses and Flow ID. We used
the \.csv" les and, thus, in this scenario, the methods operate through the
usage ofF= 79 features provided.
This test scenario has a more signicant amount of computers performing
legitimate communications. Furthermore, intrusion attacks need to cause
minimal impact on the network's behavior to avoid detection, unlike 
ooding
attacks that aim to impair network operations. These characteristics make
this test scenario a challenge for the anomaly detection approaches.
Fig. 11 presents the individual results achieved by the tested methods.
As observed, for this scenario, the methods' results for the test metrics
are more heterogeneous. However, except for DNN, all approaches achieved
22