2020; Zhang et al., 2020). Thus, ecient protection mechanisms are needed
in SDNs to guarantee the availability of the network and the quality of the
provided services (Correa Chica et al., 2020).
The occurrence of these attacks can be generically described as an anomaly,
a situation when the network behavior diers from its normal state (Proen ca
et al., 2005). The anomaly detection is a widely approached area, with sev-
eral dierent methods proposed in the past years (Fernandes et al., 2019).
However, it is still an open research eld, since no consensus has been reached
due to the enormous amount of dierent network scenarios and architectures
available. In SDN environments, security is a central concern, arousing great
interest from the scientic community due to the importance of this paradigm
to present and future networks (Maziku et al., 2019).
Among all the anomaly detection methods, the IP 
ow-based ones are
proving to be ecient approaches in SDN environments. It is mainly due
to the amount of information these systems can provide, which can be used
to characterize the regular network operation with high precision. However,
most of the research in this area operates through sampling processes, an-
alyzing the data in intervals of ve minutes (Cortez et al., 2006; Berezi nski
et al., 2015; Shuying Chang et al., 2010), one minute (Pena et al., 2014;
Sun et al., 2016), or even in smaller time intervals, such as thirty seconds
(Carvalho et al., 2018), and ve-seconds (De Assis et al., 2018). While the
sampling process helps in scaling the defense system, this process may hide
stealthier attacks, such as port scans. Thus, the data analysis performed
on each 
ow separately may provide a more precise detection approach, in
which the detection method can nd anomalies in specic communications
and even identify who is participating in it.
In this paper, we propose a defense system against intrusions and denial-
of-service attacks for SDNs based on the analysis of single IP 
ow records.
This individual 
ow inspection enables faster mitigation responses, ensuring
the quality of the services provided by the SDN. The system is divided into
two main modules, Detection, and Mitigation.
The Detection Module is responsible for analyzing individual IP 
ows
aiming to identify the occurrence of an anomaly. In this module, we used
a recurrent deep learning algorithm called Gated Recurrent Units (GRU)
(Cho et al., 2014) as a classier. Deep learning approaches use multiple lay-
ers to learn data representation with various levels of abstraction and is in-
creasingly gaining space among researchers for network applications (Lopez-
Martin et al., 2018) (Aldweesh et al., 2020). GRU is widely applied in prob-
3