4
TABLE I:
Summary of AI agents For Digital Twin
AI agent Input Data OutcomesML
algorithm(s)Candidate
Runtime
Location
ApplicationMovement
PredictionHistoric of commands,
real-time commandsPredictions on the
N next
commandsV AR, TCN,
GR
U, LSTMFog, Edge
Task LearningDemonstrations of the
task from different knowl-
edge domains (e.g., physical object states)Generalized task polic
y IL, RL Fog, Edge
Risk ReductionSensor data, video
streams, localization data and
machinery statesIdentiﬁcation and fore-
casting
unsafe situationsCNN Fog, Edge
Predictive
MaintenanceMachinery and en
vironmental sensor data (e.g.,
motors status, vibration, temperature)Failure predictionsARIMA,
LSTM + LR,
SVMEdge, Cloud
Infrastructure
(Computing
and
Networking)Dynamic
ScalingResource usage, date
and time, task, number of
instances, application KPIs and SLAsScale in/out or
up/down
suggestionsRL, RT
, RF,
MLP, BNEdge, Cloud
Privac
y, Security
and Intrusion
DetectionInfrastructure and netw
ork context information,
trafﬁc ﬂows patterns, service and infrastructure
KPIsSecurity breaches and
sus-
picious ﬂowsPCA, K-means,
AutoencodersEdge, Cloud
Heterogeneous
RAT SelectionRadio network
information, available resources,
mobility patterns, application KPIs and SLAsRAT and
handover candi-
date selectionRL, ANN,
Fuzzy LogicFog, Edge
ANN: Artiﬁcial Neural
Networks; ARIMA: Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average; BN: Bayesian Network; CNN: Convolutional Neural Networks; GRU: Gated Recurrent
Unit; IL: Imitation Learning; LR: Logistic Regression; LSTM: Long-Short Term Memory; MPL: Multi-Layer Perceptron; PCA: Principal Component Analysis; RL: Reinforcement
Learning; RF: Random Forest; RT: Random Tree; SVM: Support Vector Machines; TCN: Temporal Convolutional Networks; V AR: Vector Autoregressive.
algorithms to identify dangerous situations analyzing a video-
stream, helping the Digital Twin to act preventively, such as
blocking the physical object or adapting its operation. Since
fast counter-measures are required, its runtime deployment is
best ﬁt in the Edge or, in scenarios with higher degree of
autonomy, in the Fog. For example, based on a real-time video
stream, the Risk Reduction can detect that a human-operator is
in a dangerous proximity of an operational industrial machine,
and use this information to block the machine.
4) Predictive Maintenance: Industrial physical objects have
always been held to a higher reliability and predictability stan-
dard than any general-purpose systems. Industrial companies
consider unplanned downtime and emergency maintenance
caused by failures a major challenge. For preventing from
eventual failures, the future state of a given component must be
forecasted and classiﬁed in order to verify if it requires main-
tenance. ML-based solutions provide high accuracy to solve
both prediction and classiﬁcation problems. Thus, Predictive
Maintenance AI-agent is a suitable candidate to preemptively
detect failures or repair needs by using a combinations of
algorithms as ARIMA, LSTM, LR or SVM. The Predictive
Maintenance checks if the available sensor data might lead to
failure situations and, if so, it schedules the maintenance of the
physical object. Since this AI-agent is not performing a time-
sensitive operations, it can be deployed anywhere from the
Edge up to the Cloud. For example, if historical data reported
high vibrations upon the break of a screw, the Predictive
Maintenance can forecast future vibrations (e.g., LSTM), and
decide if maintenance is required (e.g., SVM).
B. Infrastructure Related Enhancements
The following AI agents highlight several enhancements
applicable to the computing and network domains, which have
the potential to impact and optimize the performance of a
Digital Twin.1) Dynamic Scaling: With the recent development of vir-
tualization technologies, smart factories beneﬁt from having
Digital Twins coexisting under the same cloud-to-thing con-
tinuum. During the lifetime of a given application, an adequate
scaling of resources is required, so that Digital Twin related
KPIs (e.g., latency) are satisﬁed without deteriorating the
performance of others. Such a problem is analyzed in the
existing literature as a NP-hard problem, that is, optimal
scaling polices cannot be found in feasible run-times. Con-
sequently, AI solutions based on Markov Decision Processes
can be used to ﬁnd near optimal scaling policies in feasible
times, using algorithms based on RL, RT, RF, MLP and
BN. The Dynamic Scaling follows scaling policies learned
with the aforementioned algorithms, training with data such
as resource consumption, date and time, task, number of
instances and sessions. The Dynamic Scaling can then compute
scaling decisions in order to fulﬁll KPIs and Service Layer
Agreements (SLAs). The runtime deployment of this AI agent
is most suitable on the network side (i.e., Edge or Cloud),
depending on inference time and network latency towards
the orchestrator. For example, whenever a new robotic arm
is added in the factory ﬂoor, the Dynamic Scaling increases
the allocation of vCPUs to the virtual instance in charge of
holding its digital replica, allowing its processing delay to stay
below a threshold.
2) Privacy, Security and Intrusion Detection: By employ-
ing Digital Twins in an industrial environment, huge volumes
of network trafﬁc are distributed in the cloud-to-things con-
tinuum in order to create the digital factory. This makes the
detection and diagnosis of security breaches and intrusions
very challenging and complex for the infrastructure operators
and their tenants. Performing an exhaustive analysis of all the
network trafﬁc would take a vast amount of time, which is
unfeasible to early detect intrusions, or security breaches. ML
learning algorithms, like PCA, K-means or autoencoders, are