2
Networks Computing
Edge
nodes
Edge
nodesEdge
nodes
Access
Ring
Edge
nodesAggregation
RingCloud
nodes
PhysicalCyber
(Radio)
Access
Network
Training
&
InferenceAI
StateCommandsUpdate
Digital Replica
Execute 
CommandsFog
nodes
Cloud
nodes
Fog
nodesFog
nodes
Fog
nodesDigital
Twin
Fig. 1: General
Concept for Digital Twin
mechanisms. It creates digital replicas of physical objects in
the cyber space, replicating the behaviors of their physical
counterparts, and provide feedback mechanisms for control.
The control-loop starts with the physical object sending sensor
information and its current state to the digital replica, which
then closes the control-loop by sending back commands in
real-time. In doing so, industrial machinery become software-
enhanced objects that incorporate self-management capabil-
ities and respond quickly to changes. In this way, cyber-
physical integration is achieved, providing a new set of tools
to monitor, control and predict behaviors and to accurately
optimize the factory ﬂoor.
Digital Twins for industrial applications in the areas of
design, production, and system-health checks demonstrate
superiority over the traditional solutions. These allow to re-
inforce the collaboration between design and manufacturing,
mimicking the real factory environment to ease remote control
operations, and facilitate the detection of machinery problems,
respectively.
Challenge #1: How to effectively use sensors real-time data
streams in Digital Twins to further improve remote control
operations and maintenance?
B. Computing
In Industry 4.0, physical objects are composed by either
low-performance and constrained hardware or hardware tai-
lored to a speciﬁc task. Owing to the development of vir-
tualization, software components of the physical object are
represented as modular virtualized functions, which execution
is outsourced into more powerful computing resources.
Cloud-based solutions have been initially exploited for im-
plementing such concepts [8], by providing elastic and power-
ful computing capabilities required to support the Digital Twin.However, Cloud providers cannot ensure the performance of
the network between the physical object and its digital replica,
worsening with their network distance and the number of
providers in-between. As a result, Cloud-based Digital Twins
suffer from time-varying network delay, unpredictable jitter,
limited bandwidth, or data loss. These drawbacks prevent time-
sensitive tasks, including real-time remote control, to be fully
supported by the Cloud computing substrate. To overcome the
shortcomings of Cloud computing, Edge and Fog emerged as a
natural extension. While Edge computing provides computing
capabilities near the physical objects via static substrates,
Fog computing also integrates volatile, constrained or mobile
resources (including the physical objects). By exploiting Edge
and Fog computing, the Digital Twin can ofﬂoad time-sensitive
processing from the physical object, which in turn contributes
towards further optimizations of the hardware costs. Addition-
ally, new algorithms for efﬁcient data ﬁltering, envisioning
privacy and security improvements [9], can be applied and the
data can be restricted within a trusted private infrastructure.
Finally, due to the close proximity, Edge-based Digital Twins
can use the available radio network information to adapt the
physical objects operations or to optimize resource allocation
in order to improve the Quality of Experience (QoE).
Challenge #2: How to optimally allocate computing re-
sources for Digital Twins in the cloud-to-thing continuum,
to satisfy Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) as latency, and
security requirements?
C. Networks
The underlying network infrastructure of the Digital Twin
comprises of different dynamic and heterogeneous topologies.
It can be divided in three segments, as shown in Figure 1: