5
ideal solutions to
shrink trafﬁc volume and speed up the trafﬁc
inspection. The Privacy, Security and Intrusion Detection uses
these algorithms to detect malicious trafﬁc and, consequently,
block remote control of physical objects through their Digital
Twins. Moreover, federated learning and transfer learning
appear as ML approaches that boost a collaborative training
across different industrial players, which, by not centralizing
the training data, retain the privacy and locality of private data.
The Edge and Cloud are candidate locations to deploy this AI
agent, depending on whether on-site security operations are
required or not.
3) Heterogeneous Network (HetNet) Selection: In an in-
dustrial environment comprising multiple RATs, the challenge
of being always best connected arises, directly affecting the
design and performance of Digital Twins. RAT selection is
traditionally solved by applying rules derived from the network
infrastructure with prior domain knowledge and experience
by experts. However, applying this type of RAT selection to
Digital Twins is often complex to manage on dynamic and
heterogeneous industrial environments. A HetNet Selection AI-
agent that uses ML algorithms (e.g., RL, ANN and Fuzzy
Logic) appears as a tool to mitigate the aforementioned
challenges. It exploits the locally available radio context
information to select the best RAT for each physical object in
the factory ﬂoor and, if required, the best handover candidate.
The radio context information is deﬁned by ETSI Multi-access
Edge Computing (MEC), and provided by different radio infor-
mation services, such as Radio Network Information Service
(RNIS) and WLAN Access Information Service (WIS) [12].
Based on such information, the HetNet Selection detects when
e.g., an AGV will be out of coverage and lose the connection
to the point of attachment. The Digital Twin can use this
information to preemptively transfer state information to the
new point of attachment, and to instruct the AGV to change its
RAT in order to seamless move within the factory ﬂoor. Since
this AI agent depends on the locally available information, its
preferable deployment location is the Edge or Fog.
IV. M OVEMENT PREDICTION : EXPERIMENTAL
VALIDATION
A proof-of-concept showcasing the Movement Prediction
is implemented over a Digital Twin application for robotic
arms (as deﬁned in [10]), extending the baseline service with
a newly implemented Movement Prediction component.
A. Experimental setup
The Digital Twin application consists of: (i) Digital Replica
used for remote operation; (ii) Robotic Stack ;(iii) Robotic
Drivers; and (iv) Movement Prediction. The Digital Replica
and the Robotic Stack are deployed in a virtual machine with
1 vCPUs and 2 GB of RAM in an Edge Server (Dell Pow-
erEdge R430), while the Robotic Drivers and the Movement
Prediction are deployed in a Niryo One robotic arm. The
robotic arm is equipped with IEEE 802.11n interface and an
Edge TPU accelerator for ML inferring. Note that the robotic
arm is part of the Fog computing infrastructure, thereforeincluded in the network service graph. Finally, all components
are deployed through Docker containers.
TheMovement Prediction continuously stores received com-
mands as Cartesian coordinates (i.e., xyz points), computing
the prediction for the subsequent movements. This allows
creation of a dataset with the past movements in order to
compute the predictions. If the robotic arm does not receive the
corresponding movement on each control loop, the Movement
Prediction triggers the execution of a predicted movement.
This proof-of-concept compares two ML-based algorithms:
(i) Vector Autoregressive (V AR) [13]; and a (ii) Sequence-
to-Sequence Neural Network (seq2seq) [14] that produces
a prediction matrix of the three xyz coordinates. A classic
Moving Average (MA) is used as benchmark. Results are
derived using a seq2seq implementation in Tensorﬂow, and
a V AR implementation using the statsmodels library. The
seq2seq model has a layer of 200 LSTM units [15] with
163200 parameters, and a repeat vector layer that feeds a dense
time-distributed layer of 603 parameters.
A set of 4 actions is considered for the creation of the
dataset. Each action is manually repeated 20 times by an
operator making use of the Digital Replica. Lastly, a new
instruction is issued every 20ms, representing a total of 22893
instructions. 80% of the dataset is used for training, while the
remaining 20% for testing the performance of each selected
technique.
B. Prediction Accuracy
Figure 2 depicts the performance of each algorithm with
respect to the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE), a widely
adopted metric for predictions’ accuracy. As the prediction
window increases (i.e., number of movements ahead), seq2seq
increases its error faster than the Moving Average and the
V AR. Even though the loss function converges in 100 episodes
for seq2seq, it does not manage to train properly the 163803
parameters that ended up having with scenarios of 1sec
forecasting windows. Whereas V AR beats the MA by an order
of 10-3units.
Figure 3 showcases how the different forecasting methods
differ from the real position given prediction windows of (a)
5 movements (100ms), and (b) 50 movements (1000ms). The
position is represented using the distance from the origin.
On the 5 movements’ forecasts, the predicted values overlap
the real one, given the short prediction period. However,
in the scenario of 50 movements’ forecasts, all solutions
evidence a delay in the predicted values, unable to anticipate
the peaks until the increase/decrease of past values happens.
Nevertheless, V AR guesses the different actions (each different
action is appreciated by different peak patterns highlighted
with dashed circles), despite of some perturbations appearing
in a saw teeth fashion (Figure 3b between milliseconds 3000
and 5000). On the other hand, the seq2seq presents a delayed
stair-step pattern, that deviates more than V AR with respect to
the real position (Figure 3b).
Overall, Figure 3b evidences that seq2seq provided worse
predictions than V AR, a solution designed to forecast corre-
lated signals. Moreover, it is very likely that seq2seq under-
performance is due to its bast amount of training parameters.