3
(i)Aggregation
Ring; (ii)Access Ring; and (iii)(Radio) Ac-
cess Network ((R)AN). The Aggregation Ring resides far from
the physical objects, relying on wired connectivity to connect
Cloud-based Digital Twins that are suitable for human-scale
responsive services and delay-tolerant tasks (e.g., monitoring).
The Access Rings go closer to the physical objects, intercon-
necting multiple (R)ANs. The Access Rings are locally present
and expose radio network information (e.g., radio channel)
to Edge-based Digital Twins, namely for time-sensitive tasks
(e.g., remote manipulation). Finally, the (R)AN is in the
vicinity of the factory ﬂoor, providing connection to the
physical objects using both wired and wireless connectivity.
Different radio access technologies (RATs) are available (e.g.,
WiFi, LTE, 5G), differing on their capabilities with respect to
latency, range, data rate, power proﬁle, and scalability.
Wired technologies are most suitable for fulﬁlling the
communication requirements of a Digital Twins. Due to their
limitations in terms of ﬂexibility, mobility and high-density
connections, wireless technologies are becoming more ap-
pealing in the (R)AN. However, the critical processes within
industrial environments are sensitive to radio-frequency in-
terference, requiring RATs to be interference-free, to work
on licensed bands, and to provide an extremely controlled
environment. Industry 4.0 claims 5G as a key enabler to fulﬁll
the communication requirements set by Digital Twin [10],
not only through radio enhancements but also by employing
network slicing and virtualization as core features. At the same
time, WiFi 6E appears as another candidate for Industry 4.0,
with trials already showcasing its capability to sustain the
presence of interference and noise, and to meet the stringent
requirements of most use cases.
Challenge #3: How to build Digital Twins that beneﬁt from
an optimal use of heterogeneous RAT resources, and overcome
radio interference problems?
The aforementioned challenges demand Digital Twins that
satisfy the expected real-time and secure performance. On top,
Digital Twins should also tackle the problems derived from
its integration with the network and computing infrastructure.
AI agents are strong candidates to handle such challenges, as
they can beneﬁt from ML algorithms to exploit existing data
sources with context information at both the application, and
infrastructure level.
III. AI A GENTS FORDIGITAL TWIN
In order to address the challenges presented in the previous
section, exemplary AI agents for Digital Twins are identiﬁed
(Table I), including possible ML algorithms [11] to implement
them. The In-Network orOn-Device deployment strategies are
envisioned while leveraging on the pervasiveness of the cloud-
to-things continuum (i.e., Fog, Edge and Cloud). Moreover,
AI agents can be trained in the Cloud (cloud learning) for
computation-intensive training, or in the Edge (edge learning)
for local training considering enormous real-time and private
data generated by the industrial processes.A. Application Related Enhancements
The following AI agents describe different enhancements
on top of Digital Twins, which improve the robustness and
reliability of the existing processes and pave the way for
novel features and capabilities that rely on highly automated
processes.
1) Movement Prediction: Remotely control a physical ob-
ject over a wireless channel via its Digital Twin can be prone
to unpredictable radio-frequency interference that introduce
high jitter and packet loss. Consequently, the remote operator
experience lagged behavior that breaks the real-time control
of the physical object and creates an unsafe environment.
A solution that recovers from such unpredictable behaviors,
keeping the remote control uninterrupted, is required. AI
stands out as strong candidate that can forecast future move-
ments providing extra reliability in case movement commands
are lost. In this context, Movement Prediction uses the historic
of commands to predict future ones using ML time-series
algorithms like V AR, TCN, GRU or LSTM (see bottom of
Table I for description). Whenever the next command is lost,
or do not arrive on time, the Movement Prediction triggers
the forecasting of such command to keep the remote control
uninterrupted (as showcase in Section IV). To prevent from
packet loss and high latencies, the Movement Prediction has to
be deployed in the Fog, executing when a failure occurs, or in
the Edge, piggybacking predictions with every real command.
2) Task Learning: In industrial scenarios, there are still
highly complex and dynamic tasks that require human exper-
tise/presence. Traditional agents based on ﬁnite state machines
are not suitable for automating such tasks, as they cannot
react under unforeseen situations, such as appearance of
unpredictable obstacles. Task Learning AI agents based on
IL and RL algorithms are potential solutions to overcome
such situations, as they are designed to learn and, afterwards,
interact with a dynamic environment. The Task Learning is
ﬁrst trained through observations of human-based operations,
in a trial and error fashion, through the simulated environment
enabled by the Digital Twin. Then, its behavior is validated
in the simulated environment, which includes unexpected
and random situations. Finally, its runtime deployment is
envisioned in the factory ﬂoor (i.e., Fog or Edge) to ensure
secure, reliable, and low-latency execution of the task. For
example, the Task Learning is able to introduce generalization
and adaptability to drive a lift truck for package delivery.
Thus, the Digital Twin can learn how to act robustly upon
introduction of obstacles in the path, or changes in the shapes
or position of packages.
3) Risk Reduction: As remote control mechanisms emerge
and physical objects become more autonomous, safety plays
a critical role in the design of a Digital Twin. When con-
sidering human-machine collaboration scenarios, failures of
either humans or machines may suppose a risk for the safety.
Factory ﬂoors equipped with surveillance cameras could reuse
them to perform image segmentation, and pattern recognition
in order to identify and mitigate dangerous situations. Over
the recent years, it has been proved that AI solutions based on
CNN algorithms achieve the best performance on computer
vision related tasks. Hence, the Risk Reduction uses CNN