1
Tow
ards Intelligent Cyber-Physical Systems:
Digital Twin meets Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Milan Groshev, Carlos Guimar ˜aes, Jorge Mart ´ın-P´erez, Antonio de la Oliva
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Spain
Abstract —Industry 4.0 aims at supporting smarter and au-
tonomous processes while improving agility, cost efﬁciency and
user experience. To fulﬁll its promises, properly processing the
data of the industrial processes and infrastructures is required.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) appears as a strong candidate to
handle all generated data, and to help in the automation and
smartiﬁcation process. This article overviews the Digital Twin
as a true embodiment of a Cyber-Physical System (CPS) in
Industry 4.0, showing the mission of AI in such concept. It
presents the key enabling technologies of the Digital Twin such
as Edge, Fog and 5G, where the physical processes are integrated
with computing and network domains. The role of AI in each
technology domain is identiﬁed by analyzing a set of AI agents
at the application and infrastructure level. Finally, movement
prediction is selected and experimentally validated using real
data generated by a Digital Twin for robotic arms with results
showcasing its potential.
Index Terms—Cyber-Physical System, Digital Twin, Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, Industry 4.0
I. I NTRODUCTION
The rapid advancements in Information and Communica-
tion Technology (ICT) are transforming the industrial sector
towards a full digitalization and integration concept. This
transformation, known as Industry 4.0, enhances industrial
systems with the ability to make decentralized and autonomous
decisions through the use of Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs).
Consequently, the industrial world can improve the productiv-
ity, logistic and lower production costs [1]. CPSs are the main
linchpin for Industry 4.0 to move towards a fully automated
industrial infrastructure that relies on real-time capabilities,
distributed control systems, virtualization, service orientation,
and modularity [2].
Digital Twin is deﬁned as “ a virtual representation of
a physical asset enabled through data and simulators for
real-time prediction, optimization, monitoring, controlling, and
improved decision-making” [3]. This concept truly embodies
the cyber-physical integration within Industry 4.0, combining
any industrial process achieved through closed-loop feedback
mechanisms. The digital factory includes geometrical and
virtual models of tools, machines, operatives, products, etc.,
as well as behaviors, rules, physics and analytic models. The
outputs of the Digital Twin processes are executed in the
factory ﬂoor to improve the physical object performance [4].
The adaptation of Digital Twin in Industry 4.0 is inseparable
from recent advances in ICT, such as 5G and supporting
technologies. 5G networks are architected to simultaneously
support different types of service proﬁles in the shared in-
frastructure, such as enhanced Mobile BroadBand (eMBB),massive Machine Type Communication (mMTC) and Ultra-
Reliable Low Latency Communication (URLLC). Together
with the Edge [5] and Fog [6] computing, they provide a
communication link with low end-to-end (E2E) latency, low
jitter, and localization awareness to industrial services. Still,
by themselves these technologies cannot efﬁciently manage
automation or compute best decisions to achieve dynamic
adaptation.
In this sense, the cyber space mirrored through Digital
Twins arises as the perfect playground for the development
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) agents [7]. Moreover, Machine
Learning (ML) is a strong candidate to implement such agents,
as an alternative to heuristic or decision-tree based solutions,
among others. Digital Twins provide the tools for transferring
the domain expertise of specialized personal into raw data in
the cyber space, which can be later used to train and cross-
validate different ML algorithms used in AI agents. These
agents not only develop expertise in speciﬁc tasks but also
extend and optimize it beyond the human capability due to the
volume of data they can handle to make decisions. Ultimately,
smarter and more accurate Digital Twins can be devised where
autonomy is achieved through AI-controlled processes that
operate in all types of environments and conditions.
This article overviews the Digital Twin as a CPS solution,
where AI is introduced as the missing piece in its integration
with networks and computing. In particular, it focuses on
providing an analysis of different AI agents based on ML
algorithms, with relevant applicability to improve and enhance
Digital Twins. Section II introduces the envisioned concept
of an Industry 4.0 environment, highlighting speciﬁc aspects
related of a Digital Twin that can be enhanced with AI
capabilities. The identiﬁed AI agents, both at application and
infrastructure level, are discussed in Section III, followed
by the experimental validation of a selected AI agent in
Section IV. Finally, conclusions are presented in Section V.
II. T OWARDS INTELLIGENT INTEGRATION OF DIGITAL
TWINS WITH COMPUTING AND NETWORKS
This section overviews the Digital Twin, and its integration
with the underlying Computing and Network infrastructure,
emphasizing still open challenges to be tackled by AI.
A. Digital Twin
Digital Twin in Industry 4.0 integrates any industrial process
achieved through the implementation of closed-loop feedback