Drones 2021 ,5, 110 16 of 20
plant species in the state. Current conservation practices can be transformed by prioritizing
monitoring areas using the continuously improving probability maps and tracking the
status of the monitored plants over time. Additionally, the monitored areas can be extended
as the process becomes more automated and the state of the entire ecosystem supporting
the rare plants can be assessed. The regional adaptation of the proposed approach would
require us to equip regional managers and their personnel with multiple drones, which
is facilitated by focusing on low-cost equipment. At the same time, the Maxent modeling
and the environmental variables can be provided as an online application. We are working
on a project similar to the one presented in this paper to identify Virginia spiraea with
UAS along waterways in the mountains of North Carolina to assist an electric utility with
regulatory compliance.
5. Conclusions
This research provides a data-driven approach to plan ﬂight areas from predictive
modeling, which will improve UAS data collection and processing efﬁciencies. Using a
machine-learning predictive model, we created targeted ﬂight plans to collect data in areas
with a high probability of a target plant. This technique reduces battery requirements and
data storage needs as well as ﬂight and processing time. The model also offers insight
into which variables were signiﬁcant in determining the monitored plant, Geum radiatum,
distribution. The UAS imagery was sufﬁcient to identify the plants’ locations and discover
four previously unknown Geum radiatum occurrences. Of the ﬁve actions listed in the
USFWS recovery plan for Geum radiatum , this research has the potential to contribute to
two; (1) the survey of suitable habitat for additional populations and (2) monitor and
protect existing populations. Finally, the 2020 USFWS 5-year review for Geum radiatum
recommends the agency continue working with and supporting efforts to identify rare
species using UAS [ 28] (p. 31). This study demonstrates that UAS and machine learning
can enhance future monitoring efforts for additional rare or endangered plants.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, W.R.; Methodology, W.R., H.M. and K.W.; Validation,
W.R., H.M. and G.K.; Formal Analysis, W.R., H.M. and K.W.; Investigation, W.R., G.K. and R.R.; Data
Curation, W.R.; Writing—Original Draft Preparation, W.R.; Writing—Review and editing, W.R., H.M.
and K.W.; Visualization, W.R. and H.M. The ﬁndings and conclusions in this article are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or the U.S.
Forest Service. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Data Availability Statement: The species presence and probability data presented in this study are
available on request from the corresponding author. The access to these data is restricted to protect
the rare plant species locations.
Acknowledgments: Thanks to U.S. Forest Service, and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service for coordinating
the UAS ﬁeldwork at Roan Mountain and Neelesh Mungoli for assistance with object detection.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.