Drones 2021 ,5, 110 10 of 20
Drones 2021 , 5, x FOR PEER REVIEW  10 of 21  
2.4. Analysis of UAS Data for Plant Locations  
The UAS aerial imagery and orthomosaics w ere visually analyzed to identify the 
plant locations, and semi -automated detection of target plant species was explored using 
computer vision.  
2.4.1. Expert -Directed Visual Analysis  
UAS orthomosaics have been successfully used to identify plant locations and char-
acteristics [4].  However, in a heavily forested area, detail from the source images can be 
lost in the process as the orthophoto rectification process may omit canopy gaps and 
smooth tree crowns [63].  Therefore, rather than inspecting the orthomosa ic or individual 
orthophotos, each uncorrected UAS aerial photo was visually analyzed for Geum radiatum  
leaves/flowers.  To help spatially locate the position of each photo, points representing the 
center of the images in QGIS were created with the ImportPh otos plugin [64]  (Figure 8). 
The points were displayed over the orthomosaic, which facilitated the detection of plants 
in their correct geographic locations.  The orthomosaic was then used for digitizing poly-
gon outlines of the known and previously unknown Geum radiatum  plant patches in a GIS.  
 
Figure 8. Orthomosaic with the point locations of each UAS aerial photograph.  A single aerial photo 
containing a Geum radiatum  plant is shown with its associated point.  
2.4.2. Semi -Automated Detection with Computer Vision  
Computer vision methods have been successfully implemented to identify, count 
and capture the morphological features of plants [65]. An approach to semi -automated 
identification of plants was explored with a YOLO (Y ou Only Look Once) neural network 
object detector. The Visual Object Tagging Tool [66] was used to label Geum radiatum  
plants in 73 photos downloaded from an internet search and taken by the authors ( Figure 
9). The labels were used to train a model using t he darknet neural network framework 
[67] for generating custom models. This methodology was selected because of its success-
ful implementations in the agricultural industry and with UAS datasets [68,69].  YOLOv3 
[70] was used to explore the possibility of de tecting the Geum radiatum plants on the UAS 
aerial imagery.  
Figure 8. Orthomosaic with the point locations of each UAS aerial photograph. A single aerial photo
containing a Geum radiatum plant is shown with its associated point.
2.4.2. Semi-Automated Detection with Computer Vision
Computer vision methods have been successfully implemented to identify, count
and capture the morphological features of plants [ 65]. An approach to semi-automated
identiﬁcation of plants was explored with a YOLO (You Only Look Once) neural network
object detector. The Visual Object Tagging Tool [ 66] was used to label Geum radiatum plants
in 73 photos downloaded from an internet search and taken by the authors (Figure 9).
The labels were used to train a model using the darknet neural network framework [ 67]
for generating custom models. This methodology was selected because of its successful
implementations in the agricultural industry and with UAS datasets [ 68,69]. YOLOv3 [ 70]
was used to explore the possibility of detecting the Geum radiatum plants on the UAS
aerial imagery.
Drones 2021 , 5, x FOR PEER REVIEW  11 of 21  
 
Figure 9. Geum radiatum  leaves and flowers are enclosed (labeled) with the green polygon in the 
Visual Object Tagging Tool software.  
3. Results  
3.1. Species Distribution Modeling  
Maxent modeling  resulted in a raster map with a probability of  Geum radiatum  pres-
ence value for each cell for the entire Blue Ridge region ( Figure 10). The replicate Maxent 
algorithms converged after 500 to 720 iterations.  The statistical analysis from the Geum 
radiatum  Maxent run averaged over five replicates shows an excellent match between the 
predicted omission rate and test omission rate on test samples (see Appendix A, Figure 
A1). The receiver operating curve (ROC) evaluation shows predictions regarding the area 
under the curve (AUC).  AUC measures the probability that a random presence site was 
ranked higher than a random absence site.  The AUC for Geum radiatum  was 0.997, and the 
standard deviation was 0.001, which demonstrated a high accurac y [51] (see Appendix A, 
Figure A2). 
 
Figure 10. Maxent probability raster for the entire Blue Ridge region. Because of the rareness of the 
habitat, the high probability are as are hard to differentiate at this scale.  Darker colors indicate higher 
probability areas that are suitable for Geum radiatum . 
Figure 9. Geum radiatum leaves and ﬂowers are enclosed (labeled) with the green polygon in the
Visual Object Tagging Tool software.