Drones 2021 ,5, 110 5 of 20
locations for model training and then reprojected to the geographic WGS84 coordinates
required by Maxent (Figure 3).
Drones 2021 , 5, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 21  
The North Carolina Natural Heritage Program (NHP) maintains an inventory of rare 
plants, animals, and communities in North Carolina.  Specific occurrences of these groups 
are known as elements and are stored as georeferenced polygo ns in a natural heritage 
element occurrences shapefile [39] which is updated on a quarterly basis.  QGIS 2.18.7 [40] 
was used to extract Geum radiatum  polygons from the inventory resulting in 44 polygons 
ranging in sizes from 40 m2 to 2.7 km2 and a median s ize of  3278 m2. The extracted Geum 
radiatum  polygons were converted to centroids within polygons to approximate plant lo-
cations for model training and then reprojected to the geographic WGS84 coordinates re-
quired by Maxent ( Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3. Example Geum radiatum  species presence locations from the N.C. Natural Heritage Pro-
gram database converted from polygons to centroids and overlain on a shaded relief.  Specific loca-
tion information is purposefully not included.  
2.2.2. Environmental Layers  
Environmen tal layers, also referred to as covariates or predictors, are the independ-
ent variables used in the SDM [36].  Ten variables were selected based on relevance to 
habitat preferences described in a plant survey for  Geum radiatum  conducted by Massey 
et al. (1980) ( Table 1) and availability of data at adequate resolution. The data were ac-
quired from public repositories, processed into a common raster representation required 
by Maxent, and clipped to the Blue Ridge ecoregion ( Figure  4). 
Table 1. Geum radiatum  habitat preferences.  
Variable  Attributes  
Climate  Cool, cloudy, windy  
Soil Clay loam, loam, sandy loam, hummus soils  
Geology  Rock substrates composed of muscovite and quartz schist or phyllite, biotite, quartz diorite, 
granitoid gneiss, and garnet rich mica  
Hydrology  Moderate poorly drained to excessively drained  
Figure 3. Example Geum radiatum species presence locations from the N.C. Natural Heritage Program
database converted from polygons to centroids and overlain on a shaded relief. Speciﬁc location
information is purposefully not included.
2.2.2. Environmental Layers
Environmental layers, also referred to as covariates or predictors, are the independent
variables used in the SDM [ 36]. Ten variables were selected based on relevance to habitat
preferences described in a plant survey for Geum radiatum conducted by Massey et al. (1980)
(Table 1) and availability of data at adequate resolution. The data were acquired from
public repositories, processed into a common raster representation required by Maxent,
and clipped to the Blue Ridge ecoregion (Figure 4).
Table 1. Geum radiatum habitat preferences.
Variable Attributes
Climate Cool, cloudy, windy
Soil Clay loam, loam, sandy loam, hummus soils
GeologyRock substrates composed of muscovite and quartz schist or phyllite, biotite,
quartz diorite, granitoid gneiss, and garnet rich mica
Hydrology Moderate poorly drained to excessively drained
TopographyCliff faces and ledges, outcropping and scattered boulders, or exposed
mountain peaks with 10% to 90% exposure. Rounded mountain tops,
bluff/cliff faces open to partly sheltered. Surface cracks and crevices serve
for placement of grass mounds and moss, which inﬂuence the surface
features. 0–90-degree slopes on W, WNW, NW, NNW, and NNE exposures
Physiography Elevation of 1400 to 2100 m