Drones 2021 ,5, 110 2 of 20
differences in detection among observers may occur, and population sizes might be incom-
plete or underestimated. A miscount of plants in a census can lead to biased population
health and extent estimates [1].
Rare plants are often located in hard-to-access areas that may pose challenges for
conducting detailed surveys (e.g., cliffs). Traditional ground-based monitoring methods
can be resource-intensive and dangerous when performed in overgrown, rough, or steep
terrain [ 4]. Unmanned aerial systems (UAS) provide powerful tools for monitoring rare
plants with little inherent risk to personnel or the species being monitored [ 5]. It has been
demonstrated that UAS can cost-effectively collect detailed data in rugged alpine and cliff
environments [ 6–10]. UAS have been used for various conservation purposes, including
law enforcement, disaster response, environmental monitoring, and management [ 11].
High-resolution photographs and 3D models generated from UAS imagery have been used
to identify plant locations, measure plant distribution, and gather data on their habitat [ 4].
However, planning UAS ﬂight paths is somewhat subjective and can result in inefﬁ-
cient usage of limited ﬂight time or overcollection of data [ 12]. There are examples of UAS
ﬂight preplanning to search for poachers [ 12] and to optimize imagery/data collection for
tree structure monitoring [ 13]. Additionally, probability mapping has been used to plan
UAS ﬂight paths for search and rescue [ 14–16] and even as a method to direct autonomous
underwater vehicles [17].
Although species distribution modeling and UAS plant monitoring have been individ-
ually used for species conservation, we present a method that combines them to improve
the efﬁciency of UAS-based plant monitoring and facilitate the potential discovery of
unknown plant locations. We ﬁrst outline the general workﬂow for the proposed approach
and then demonstrate its implementation and application for monitoring the rare plant
species, Geum radiatum , to a site in the Blue Ridge Mountains in North Carolina. Next,
we describe the machine-learning predictive model used to create UAS ﬂight areas with a
high probability of these species’ locations and evaluate which predictors are signiﬁcant
variables in determining these locations. Finally, we collect and analyze the UAS data
in one of the high probability areas and assess whether the collected UAS imagery is of
sufﬁcient detail to identify rare plants at the test location. We also discuss the potential for
using object detection and feature extraction to automate the monitoring process further.
2. Materials and Methods
To target UAS monitoring of rare plants in challenging-to-inaccessible locations and
acquire UAS data with a high probability of ﬁnding new plant locations, we propose a
general approach/workﬂow that combines machine learning with UAS ﬂight planning
designed explicitly for a studied plant (Figure 1). We also discuss the potential for using
object detection to further automate the monitoring process. Given the plant species and a
general region where it should be monitored, environmental data layers were identiﬁed and
derived, which characterize the ecosystem favorable for a plant at a study site. Using these
layers and known plant locations, a predictive model was developed to map plant location
probabilities. Species distribution is modeled with a maximum entropy machine-learning
method implemented in Maxent [ 18]. A probability threshold is selected to delineate the
ﬂight area for targeted monitoring based on ﬂight parameters (height, overlap, ground
sample distance, pattern) and UAS endurance (battery and weather). Topographic and
environmental conditions at the selected areas are analyzed, and the ﬂight pattern design
is optimized for the speciﬁc location. If the area is in complex or steep topography, daytime
shadow evolution is computed to identify the time of day to ﬂy with minimum shadowing
effect. The acquired data are then processed, and an orthomosaic, point cloud, and digital
surface model (DSM) are derived. These provide input for identifying target plant locations
using visual analysis or semi-automated approaches depending on species properties and
the mapped area environment.