Drones 2021 ,5, 110 15 of 20
gaps allow enough light for plant survival as well as for identiﬁcation in UAS imagery.
Multiple points from within the NHP polygons or precise Geum radiatum locations mapped
from the orthomosaic can be used as training data to improve ﬂight planning over time
and potentially discover previously unknown individuals.
The selection of the probability threshold used to derive ﬂight area depends on the
goal of the mapping and available resources. It is possible plants might be located at
lower probability thresholds outside of the 95% probability boundary used in this study.
Moreover, to further validate the predictive model results, it would be useful to ﬂy zero to
very low probability areas to conﬁrm that both conditions for presence and absence of the
modeled species are adequately represented by the model.
Preparing environmental data for Maxent data can introduce uncertainties from
resampling that need to be handled appropriately. Five of the six most important variables
contributing to the model were derived from the 6 m elevation dataset, and no resampling
was necessary. The coarser resolution data, such as landcover, was not an inﬂuencing
factor at the 30 m resolution indicating that the resolution of this dataset was too low
to play a role in the predictive modeling or the landcover indeed does not inﬂuence the
distribution of the studied plant species. The impact of the landcover variable could be
different and potentially further improve the modeling results if this layer were derived
from higher resolution data such as 1 m resolution National Agriculture Imagery Program
(NAIP) or UAS orthomosaics. However, we believe that the modeling results were more
than adequate for ﬂight planning, where our focus was on outlining a mapping area rather
than the precise location of the plants.
Although the object detection approach successfully detected plants in on-ground
images, it was not possible to identify occurrences of Geum radiatum from UAS collected
imagery. The model failed because it was trained with plant images captured at close
range or ground level, with resolutions approximately 30 times greater than the aerial
UAS imagery. We anticipate that object detection performance will improve with train-
ing using UAS imagery collected at similar distances and angles [ 69] or with different,
higher-resolution, or multispectral sensors. Future work is planned to label and train
an object detection model using UAS imagery and plant locations collected during this
project to analyze the images taken in subsequent ﬂights. In addition, we will collect
images under varying environmental conditions and at speciﬁc heights to determine the
threshold at which the plant cannot be detected anymore. Finally, experimentation with an
object detection method UAS-YOLO, speciﬁcally designed to detect small objects in UAS
imagery [69], is underway.
Ground control points (GCPs) and checkpoints are important for processing drone
imagery and estimating accuracy. We brought global navigation satellite system (GNSS)
survey equipment and aerial targets to Roan Mountain on ﬂight days, but the extreme relief
and heavy tree cover made placement of GCPs impractical. Positional information from
the onboard UAS GNSS receivers was used in processing with sufﬁcient results. The only
photo identiﬁable feature in the ortho imagery is the platform used for ﬂight operations.
Width measurements between the platform in the UAS orthomosaic and NC OneMap
imagery [ 73] were within 3 cm of each other. Measurements from the platform corners
showed a horizontal accuracy under 1.5 m. A real-time kinematic (RTK) or post-processed
kinematic (PPK) capable UAS can mitigate positional accuracy problems. However, these
types of UAS are not a substitute for checkpoints to verify the accuracy of ﬁnal products.
In areas where it is challenging to perform survey work, conservation organizations will
have to balance the beneﬁts of positional accuracy with the cost of RTK UAS equipment
and GCP survey.
We selected ten environmental parameters (map layers) in the Blue Ridge region that
were relevant predictors of Geum radiatum habitat, although a total of 16 environmental
layers were created for the entire state of North Carolina as part of this work. The relevant
layers can be selected based on applicability to the species of interest. This will allow us
to scale to a larger region by applying a similar methodology to other rare or endangered