Drones 2021 ,5, 110 14 of 20
3.3.2. Computer Vision
First, Geum radiatum photos were acquired with the UAS camera for testing purposes
as it was being held by hand. The YOLOv3 object detection program, trained for Geum
radiatum, was able to identify the plant in these photos, even among other leaves, and with
varying light conditions (Figure 15).
Drones 2021 , 5, x FOR PEER REVIEW  14 of 21  
 
Figur e 14. Possible location of flowering Geum radiatum  plant ( a); documented Geum radiatum  loca-
tion for comparison ( b). 
3.3.2. Computer Vision  
First, Geum radiatum  photos were acquired with the UAS camera for testing purposes 
as it was being held by hand.  The YOLOv3 object detection program, trained for  Geum 
radiatum,  was able to identify the plant in these photos, even among other leaves, and with 
varying light conditions ( Figure 15). 
 
Figure 15. Results from the YOLOv3 model for two photos acquired by UAS camera on the ground 
with Geum radiatum  shown by green object detection boxes, including the confidence level of the 
detection.  
However, it was impossible to detect and identify Geum radiatum  plants in any of the 
814 nadir and oblique UAS photos collected in the project using the object detection pro-
gram.  Images taken at the ground level had leaf diameters captured by approximately 300 
pixels ( Figure 2). In contrast, the aerial images had leaf dia meters represented by approx-
imately 10 pixels ( Figure 14) which were insufficient to capture the leaf shape with the 
detail needed for automated detection.  
4. Discussion  
This research highlights the use of machine learning to plan targeted UAS flights for 
rare plant monitoring, demonstrated by a case study mapping Geum radiatum  in the Blue 
Ridge Mountains ecoregion.  To our knowledge, this is the first study that has used a spe-
cies distribution model to create targeted  UAS flight areas to map locations of ra re and 
Figure 15. Results from the YOLOv3 model for two photos acquired by UAS camera on the ground
with Geum radiatum shown by green object detection boxes, including the conﬁdence level of
the detection.
However, it was impossible to detect and identify Geum radiatum plants in any of
the 814 nadir and oblique UAS photos collected in the project using the object detection
program. Images taken at the ground level had leaf diameters captured by approximately
300 pixels (Figure 2). In contrast, the aerial images had leaf diameters represented by
approximately 10 pixels (Figure 14) which were insufﬁcient to capture the leaf shape with
the detail needed for automated detection.
4. Discussion
This research highlights the use of machine learning to plan targeted UAS ﬂights
for rare plant monitoring, demonstrated by a case study mapping Geum radiatum in the
Blue Ridge Mountains ecoregion. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study that has used a
species distribution model to create targeted UAS ﬂight areas to map locations of rare and
endangered plant species. Targeting the UAS ﬂights is important because the overcollection
of data over broad areas increases battery power consumption. Battery capacity and
discharge rate are the primary factors affecting the duration of UAS missions. Having
multiple batteries at hand or ﬂying at higher altitudes to capture more area per image are
not ideal solutions because batteries are heavy to transport to remote ﬁeld sites, and ﬂying
at higher altitudes would decrease the detail of the imagery such that the mapped plant
might not be identiﬁed. Additionally, targeted ﬂight areas allow for faster data collection so
that changing weather and lighting conditions do not affect the ﬁnal imagery products [ 6].
Species distribution modeling using Maxent identiﬁed high probability areas with
suitable conditions for Geum radiatum with a high level of certainty. Still, the 95% probability
polygon included non-bluff areas where Geum radiatum is not typically found. Investigat-
ing the variable contributions to the model shows that soils and elevation had the most
inﬂuence on the result. However, these two predictors are not directly associated with bluff
areas. Although the 95% probability polygon contains unlikely habitat for the plant, there
was one probable plant location to investigate in the atypical area. Additional environ-
mental variables, such as geology, landforms, and vegetation structure from LiDAR [ 71]
or UAS orthomosaic [ 72], could improve the Maxent results. For example, one conﬁrmed
Geum radiatum plant and another possible plant are in gaps in the forest canopy. Canopy