Drones 2021 ,5, 110 9 of 20
2.3. Flight Data Acquisition and Processing
Because the Roan Mountain ﬂight area spans two National Forests and is near the
Appalachian Trail (a no-ﬂy zone), UAS ﬂight authorization was coordinated with the U.S.
Forest Service, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and the National Park Service. Three UAS
ﬂights were executed at the Roan Mountain study site at 1:30 p.m. on 25 July 2019, with
a DJI Phantom 4 Advanced quadcopter with a 24 mm, 20-megapixel RGB sensor. The
UAS sensor was set to 90 degrees nadir camera angle, manual focus set to inﬁnity, and f2.8
aperture. The ﬁrst two ﬂights were ﬂown at 30 m above the ground altitude at takeoff. As
a precautionary measure, the second ﬂight was ﬂown with the same parameters except for
changes to the ﬂight pattern from a crosshatch to a linear path and an increase in overlap
to 75%. The linear ﬂight path allowed for shorter ﬂight duration and was only collected
as backup data. These ﬂights were autonomously ﬂown and controlled with the Android
DroneDeploy Flight App [ 59] previously conﬁgured with the targeted ﬂight area. The third
ﬂight was ﬂown manually to collect photographs at a 40-degree oblique angle with the DJI
Go app [ 6] to collect more detailed imagery of the vertical cliff face [ 60]. The live video
feed and distance measurements in the DJI app were used to estimate overlap as the UAS
moved along and down the cliff face.
The high-resolution RGB aerial photography from the ﬁrst and third ﬂights was
processed in Agisoft Metashape 1.6.3 [ 61]. Imagery collected from the ﬁrst ﬂight was
sufﬁcient, and the redundant second ﬂight data set was unnecessary. The imagery was
processed with high quality and accuracy settings with mild depth ﬁltering to eliminate
noise in the point cloud [ 62]. A 3D mesh and interpolated digital surface model (DSM)
were created from the point cloud. An orthomosaic was generated by rectifying the images
to the DSM. An orthomosaic, digital surface model (DSM), and point cloud were exported
for analysis in GIS software. Ground control and checkpoints were not collected or used in
the imagery processing; the steep terrain and heavy canopy made target placement and
survey unattainable.
2.4. Analysis of UAS Data for Plant Locations
The UAS aerial imagery and orthomosaics were visually analyzed to identify the
plant locations, and semi-automated detection of target plant species was explored using
computer vision.
2.4.1. Expert-Directed Visual Analysis
UAS orthomosaics have been successfully used to identify plant locations and char-
acteristics [ 4]. However, in a heavily forested area, detail from the source images can
be lost in the process as the orthophoto rectiﬁcation process may omit canopy gaps and
smooth tree crowns [ 63]. Therefore, rather than inspecting the orthomosaic or individual
orthophotos, each uncorrected UAS aerial photo was visually analyzed for Geum radiatum
leaves/ﬂowers. To help spatially locate the position of each photo, points representing the
center of the images in QGIS were created with the ImportPhotos plugin [ 64] (Figure 8).
The points were displayed over the orthomosaic, which facilitated the detection of plants in
their correct geographic locations. The orthomosaic was then used for digitizing polygon
outlines of the known and previously unknown Geum radiatum plant patches in a GIS.