Drones 2021 ,5, 110 11 of 20
3. Results
3.1. Species Distribution Modeling
Maxent modeling resulted in a raster map with a probability of Geum radiatum presence
value for each cell for the entire Blue Ridge region (Figure 10). The replicate Maxent algorithms
converged after 500 to 720 iterations. The statistical analysis from the Geum radiatum Maxent run
averaged over five replicates shows an excellent match between the predicted omission rate and
test omission rate on test samples (see Appendix A, Figure A1). The receiver operating curve
(ROC) evaluation shows predictions regarding the area under the curve (AUC). AUC measures
the probability that a random presence site was ranked higher than a random absence site. The
AUC for Geum radiatum was 0.997, and the standard deviation was 0.001, which demonstrated
a high accuracy [51] (see Appendix A, Figure A2).
Drones 2021 , 5, x FOR PEER REVIEW  11 of 21  
 
Figure 9. Geum radiatum  leaves and flowers are enclosed (labeled) with the green polygon in the 
Visual Object Tagging Tool software.  
3. Results  
3.1. Species Distribution Modeling  
Maxent modeling  resulted in a raster map with a probability of  Geum radiatum  pres-
ence value for each cell for the entire Blue Ridge region ( Figure 10). The replicate Maxent 
algorithms converged after 500 to 720 iterations.  The statistical analysis from the Geum 
radiatum  Maxent run averaged over five replicates shows an excellent match between the 
predicted omission rate and test omission rate on test samples (see Appendix A, Figure 
A1). The receiver operating curve (ROC) evaluation shows predictions regarding the area 
under the curve (AUC).  AUC measures the probability that a random presence site was 
ranked higher than a random absence site.  The AUC for Geum radiatum  was 0.997, and the 
standard deviation was 0.001, which demonstrated a high accurac y [51] (see Appendix A, 
Figure A2). 
 
Figure 10. Maxent probability raster for the entire Blue Ridge region. Because of the rareness of the 
habitat, the high probability are as are hard to differentiate at this scale.  Darker colors indicate higher 
probability areas that are suitable for Geum radiatum . 
Figure 10. Maxent probability raster for the entire Blue Ridge region. Because of the rareness of the
habitat, the high probability areas are hard to differentiate at this scale. Darker colors indicate higher
probability areas that are suitable for Geum radiatum .
The Maxent summary output suggested elevation, soils, and distance from water
were the most important variables overall, contributing to 90% of the model solution (see
Appendix A, Table A1). Elevation represented the most critical predictor in explaining
species distribution for Geum radiatum . Analysis of the response curves indicated elevations
over 1800 m, Balsam sandy loam and Wayah–Burton complex soils, increasing distance
from hydrographic features, high solar insolation values, and north-northwest aspects are
the most important attributes within each predictor (see Appendix A, Figure A3).
3.2. Targeted Flight Plan and UAS Data
Isolines generated from the predictive model for the 230,955 km2Blue Ridge ecoregion
resulted in 173 polygons totaling 1840 km2with a 95% probability that environmental
conditions are suitable for Geum radiatum (Figure 11). The high probability polygons were
in high-elevation areas with bare cliffs and forested areas in steep terrain.