Drones 2021 ,5, 110 8 of 20
auto ﬂight mode to limit data size, frontal and side image overlap increased to 65% to
improve feature matching [56].
Drones 2021 , 5, x FOR PEER REVIEW  8 of 21  
gimbal.  Although the DroneDeploy software defaults to a front and sidelap of 50% i n 
crosshatch auto flight mode to limit data size, frontal and side image overlap increased  to 
65% to improve feature matching [56].  
 
Figure 6. Targeted flight area polygon uploaded into DroneDeploy flight planning web application.  
White points are the 95%  probability polygon vertices, and the green dotted line is the crosshatch 
flight path for the UAS.  This flight area polygon is within the study site shown in Figure 5 . Due to 
restrictions on sharing rare plant information, the authors were asked to avoid showing exact de-
tails/locations.  
2.2.5. Time of Day Flight Planning  
Previous experience with UAS mapping in mountainous regions highlights the diffi-
culty of capturing cliff imagery without shadows [6,57].  Therefore, a shadow model was 
created for the study  area to determine the best time for UAS imagery capture to minimize 
imaging areas in the shade.  A GRASS GIS hourly solar insolation model was calculated 
using an available 1 m resolution  LiDAR  derived DEM [58] for one -hour increments.  The 
output indicated  a window between 12:00  p.m. and 2:00  p.m. to have the least shadow 
along the cliff face ( Figure 7).  
Figure 6. Targeted ﬂight area polygon uploaded into DroneDeploy ﬂight planning web application.
White points are the 95% probability polygon vertices, and the green dotted line is the crosshatch
ﬂight path for the UAS. This ﬂight area polygon is within the study site shown in Figure 5. Due
to restrictions on sharing rare plant information, the authors were asked to avoid showing exact
details/locations.
2.2.5. Time of Day Flight Planning
Previous experience with UAS mapping in mountainous regions highlights the difﬁ-
culty of capturing cliff imagery without shadows [ 6,57]. Therefore, a shadow model was
created for the study area to determine the best time for UAS imagery capture to minimize
imaging areas in the shade. A GRASS GIS hourly solar insolation model was calculated
using an available 1 m resolution LiDAR derived DEM [58] for one-hour increments. The
output indicated a window between 12:00 p.m. and 2:00 p.m. to have the least shadow
along the cliff face (Figure 7).
Drones 2021 , 5, x FOR PEER REVIEW  9 of 21  
 
Figure 7. Solar models depicting cast shadows at the Roan Mountain study site (red box).  Black 
shading represents modeled shade areas.  
2.3. Flight Data Acquisition and Processing  
Because the Roan Mountain flight area spans two National Forests and is near the 
Appalachian Trail (a no -fly zone),  UAS flight authorization was coordinated with the U.S. 
Forest Service, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and the National Park Service.  Three UAS 
flights were executed at the Roan Mountain study site at 1:30  p.m. on 25 July 2019, with a 
DJI Phantom 4 Advanced quadcopter with a 24  mm, 20 -megapixel RGB sensor.  The UAS 
sensor was set to 90 degrees nadir  camera angle, manual focus set to infinity, and f2.8 
aperture.  The first two flights were flown at 30 m above the ground altitude at takeoff.  As 
a precautionary measure, the second flight was flown with the same parameters except 
for changes to the flight  pattern from a crosshatch to a linear path and an increase in over-
lap to 75%. The linear flight path allowed for shorter flight duration and was only col-
lected as backup data.  These flights were autonomously flown and controlled with the 
Android DroneDepl oy Flight App [59] previously configured with the targeted flight 
area.  The third flight was flown manually to collect photographs at a 40 -degree oblique 
angle with the DJI Go app [6] to collect more detailed imagery of the vertical cliff face [60].  
The li ve video feed and distance measurements in the DJI app were used to estimate over-
lap as the UAS moved along and down the cliff face.   
The high -resolution RGB aerial photography from the first and third flights was pro-
cessed in Agisoft Metashape 1.6.3 [61].  Imagery collected from the first flight was suffi-
cient, and the redundant second flight data set was unnecessary.  The imagery was pro-
cessed with high quality and accuracy settings with mild depth filtering to eliminate noise 
in the point cloud [62].  A 3D mesh and interpolated digital surface model (DSM) were 
created from the point cloud.  An orthomosaic was generated by rectifying the images to 
the DSM. An orthomosaic, digital surface model (DSM), and point cloud were exported 
for analysis in GIS software. Ground control and checkpoints were not collected or used 
in the imagery processing; the steep terrain and heavy canopy made target placement and 
survey unattainable.  
  
Figure 7. Solar models depicting cast shadows at the Roan Mountain study site (red box). Black
shading represents modeled shade areas.