generated CAMs. The essential causes of these phenomena
come from the supervision gap between fully and weakly
supervised semantic segmentation.
In this paper, we propose a self-supervised equivari-
ant attention mechanism (SEAM) to narrow the supervi-
sion gap mentioned above. The SEAM applies consistency
regularization on CAMs from various transformed images
to provide self-supervision for network learning. To fur-
ther improve the network prediction consistency, SEAM in-
troduces the pixel correlation module (PCM), which cap-
tures context appearance information for each pixel and
revises original CAMs by learned afﬁnity attention maps.
The SEAM is implemented by a siamese network with
equivariant cross regularization (ECR) loss, which regular-
izes the original CAMs and the revised CAMs on different
branches. Fig. 1 shows that our CAMs are consistent over
various transformed input images, with fewer over-activated
and under-activated regions than baseline. Extensive exper-
iments give both quantitative and qualitative results, demon-
strating the superiority of our approach.
In summary, our main contributions:
•We propose a self-supervised equivariant attention
mechanism (SEAM), incorporating equivariant regu-
larization with pixel correlation module (PCM), to nar-
row the supervision gap between fully and weakly su-
pervised semantic segmentation.
•The design of siamese network architecture with
equivariant cross regularization (ECR) loss efﬁciently
couples the PCM and self-supervision, producing
CAMs with both fewer over-activated and under-
activated regions.
•Experiments on PASCAL VOC 2012 illustrate that our
algorithm achieves state-of-the-art performance with
only image-level annotations.
2. Related Work
The development of deep learning has led to a series
of breakthroughs on fully supervised semantic segmenta-
tion [6, 11, 23, 37, 38] in recent years. In this section, we
introduce some works, including weakly supervised seman-
tic segmentation and self-supervised learning.
2.1. Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Compared to fully supervised learning, WSSS uses weak
labels to guide network training, e.g., bounding boxes [7,
18], scribbles [22, 30] and image-level classiﬁcation la-
bels [19, 25, 27]. A group of advanced researches utilizes
image-level classiﬁcation labels to train models. Most of
them reﬁne the class activation map (CAM) [39] generated
by the classiﬁcation network to approximate the segmenta-
tion mask. SEC [19] proposes three principles, i.e., seed,expand, and constrain, to reﬁne CAMs, which are followed
by many other works. Adversarial erasing [15, 32] is a pop-
ular CAM expansion method, which erases the most dis-
criminative part of CAM, guides the network to learn clas-
siﬁcation features from other regions and expands activa-
tions. AfﬁnityNet [2] trains another network to learn the
similarity between pixels, which generates a transition ma-
trix and multiplies with CAM several times to adjust its ac-
tivation coverage. IRNet [1] generates a transition matrix
from the boundary activation map and extends the method
to weakly supervised instance segmentation. Here are also
some researches endeavor to aggregate self-attention mod-
ule [29, 31] in the WSSS framework, e.g., CIAN [10] pro-
poses cross-image attention module to learn activation maps
from two different images containing the same class objects
with the guidance of saliency maps.
2.2. Self­supervised Learning
Instead of using massive annotated labels to train net-
work, self-supervised learning approaches aim at design-
ing pretext tasks to generate labels without additional man-
ual annotations. Here are many classical self-supervised
pretext tasks, e.g., relative position prediction [9], spatial
transformation prediction [12], image inpainting [26], and
image colorization [20]. To some extent, the generative
adversarial network [13] can also be regarded as a self-
supervised learning approach that the authenticity labels for
discriminator do not need to be annotated manually. La-
bels generated by pretext tasks provide self-supervision for
the network to learn a more robust representation. The fea-
ture learned by self-supervision can replace the feature pre-
trained by ImageNet [8] on some tasks, such as detection [9]
and part segmentation [17].
Considering there is a large supervision gap between
fully and weakly supervised semantic segmentation, it is
an intuition that we should seek additional supervision to
narrow the gap. Since image-level classiﬁcation labels are
too weak for network to learn segmentation masks which
should well ﬁt object boundary, we design pretext task us-
ing the equivariance of ideal segmentation function to pro-
vide additional self-supervision for network learning with
only image-level annotations.
3. Approach
This section details our SEAM method. Firstly, we il-
lustrate the motivation of our work. Then we introduce the
implementation of equivariant regularization by a shared-
weight siamese network. The proposed pixel correlation
module (PCM) is integrated into the network to further im-
prove the consistency of prediction. Finally, the loss design
of SEAM is discussed. Fig. 2 shows our SEAM network
structure.
12276