the image are predicted the same class. Therefore, we pro-
pose an equivariant cross regularization (ECR) loss as:
LECR=||A(yo)−ˆ yt||1+||A(ˆ yo)−yt||1. (10)
The PCM outputs are regularized by the original CAMs on
the other branch of the siamese network. This strategy can
avoid CAM degeneration during PCM reﬁnement.
Although the CAMs are learned by foreground object
classiﬁcation loss, there are many background pixels, which
should not be ignored during PCM processing. The orig-
inal foreground CAMs have zero vectors on these back-
ground positions, which cannot produce gradients to push
feature representations closer between those background
pixels. Therefore, we deﬁne the background score as:
ˆ yi,bkg= 1−max
1≤c≤C−1ˆ yi,c, (11)
whereˆ yi,cis the activation score of original CAM for cate-
gorycat position i. We normalize the activation vectors of
each pixel by suppressing foreground non-maximum activa-
tions to zeros and concatenate with additional background
score. During inference, we only keep the foreground acti-
vation results and set the background score as ˆ yi,bkg=α,
whereαis the hard threshold parameter.
In summary, the ﬁnal loss of SEAM is deﬁned as:
L=Lcls+LER+LECR. (12)
The classiﬁcation loss is used to roughly localize objects
and the ER loss is used to narrow the gaps between pixel-
and image-level supervisions. The ECR loss is used to inte-
grate PCM with the trunk of the network, in order to make
consistent predictions over various afﬁne transformations.
The network architecture is illustrated in Fig. 2. We give
the details of network training settings and carefully inves-
tigate the effectiveness of each module in the experiments
section.
4. Experiments
4.1. Implementation Details
We evaluate our approach on PASCAL VOC 2012
dataset with 21 class annotations, i.e., 20 foreground ob-
jects and the background. The ofﬁcial dataset separation has
1464 images for training, 1449 for validation and 1456 for
testing. Following the common experimental protocol for
semantic segmentation, we take additional annotations from
SBD [14] to build an augmented training set with 10582 im-
ages. Noting that only image-level classiﬁcation labels are
available during network training. Mean intersection over
union (mIoU) is used as a metric to evaluate segmentation
results.
In our experiments, ResNet38 [35] is adopted as back-
bone network with outputstride= 8. We extract the fea-
ture maps from stage 3 and stage 4, reduce their channelnumbers into 64 and 128 respectively by individual 1×1
convolution layers. In PCM, these features are concatenated
with images and fed into function θin Eq. (5), which is
implemented by another 1×1convolution layer. The im-
ages are randomly rescaled in the range of [448, 768] by the
longest edge and then cropped by 448×448as network in-
puts. The model is trained on 4 TITAN-Xp GPUs with batch
size 8 for 8 epochs. The initial learning rate is set as 0.01,
following the poly policy lritr=lrinit(1−itr
maxitr)γwith
γ= 0.9for decay. Online hard example mining (OHEM) is
employed on the ECR loss remaining the largest 20% pixel
losses.
During network training, we cut off gradients back-
propagation at the intersection point between PCM stream
and the trunk of the network to avoid the mutual interfer-
ence. This setting simpliﬁes the PCM into a pure context
reﬁnement module which still can be trained with the back-
bone of the network at the same time. And the learning of
original CAMs will not be affected by PCM reﬁnement pro-
cess. During inference, since our SEAM is a shared-weight
siamese network, only one branch needs to be restored. We
adopt multi-scale and ﬂip test during inference to generate
pseudo segmentation labels.
4.2. Ablation Studies
To verify the effectiveness of our SEAM, we generate
pixel-level pseudo labels from revised CAMs on PASCAL
VOC 2012 train set. In our experiments, we traverse all
background threshold options and give the best mIoU of
pseudo labels, instead of comparing with the same back-
ground threshold. Because the highest pseudo label accu-
racy represents the best matching results between CAMs
and ground truth segmentation masks. Speciﬁcally, the
foreground activation coverage will expand with the in-
crease of average activation intensity, while its matching
degree with ground truth is not changed. And the highest
pseudo label accuracy will not be improved when CAMs
only increase average activation intensity rather than be-
coming more matchable with ground truth.
Comparison with Baseline: Tab. 1 gives an ablation
study of each module in our approach. It shows that us-
ing the siamese network with equivariant regularization has
a 2.47% improvement compared to baseline. Our PCM
achieves signiﬁcant performance elevation by 5.18%. Af-
ter applying OHEM on equivariant cross regularization loss,
the generated pseudo labels further achieve 55.41% mIoU
on PASCAL VOC train set. We also test the baseline CAM
with dense CRF to reﬁne predictions. The results show that
dense CRF improves the mIoU to 52.40%, which is lower
than the SEAM result 55.41%. And our SEAM can further
improve the performance up to 56.83% after aggregating
dense CRF as post process. Fig. 4 shows that the CAMs
12279