𝑦𝑜 𝑦𝑜
ො 𝑦𝑜ො 𝑦𝑜
ො 𝑦𝑜
ො 𝑦𝑜ො 𝑦𝑡
ො 𝑦𝑡ො 𝑦𝑡ො 𝑦𝑡
𝑦𝑡𝑦𝑡
Figure 2. The siamese network architecture of our proposed SEAM method. The SEAM is the integration of equivariant regularization
(ER) (Section. 3.2) and pixel correlation module (PCM) (Section. 3.3). With specially designed losses (Section 3.4), the revised CAMs not
only keep consistent over afﬁne transformation but also well ﬁt the object contour.
3.1. Motivation
We denote ideal pixel-level semantic segmentation func-
tion asFws(·)with parameters ws. For each image sample
I, the segmentation process can be formulated as Fws(I) =
s, wheresdenotes pixel-level segmentation mask. The for-
mulation is also consistent in classiﬁcation task. With ad-
ditional image-level label land pooling function Pool(·),
classiﬁcation task can be represented as Pool(Fwc(I)) =l
with parameters wc. Most WSSS approaches are based on
the hypothesis that the optimal parameters for classiﬁcation
and segmentation satisfy wc=ws. Therefore, these meth-
ods train a classiﬁcation network ﬁrstly and remove pooling
function to tackle segmentation task.
However, it is easy to ﬁnd the properties of classiﬁca-
tion and segmentation function are different. Suppose there
is an afﬁne transformation A(·)for each sample, the seg-
mentation function is more inclined to be equivariant, i.e.,
Fws(A(I)) =A(Fws(I)). While the classiﬁcation task fo-
cuses more on invariance, i.e.,Pool(Fwc(A(I))) =l. Al-
though the invariance of classiﬁcation function is mainly
caused by pooling operation, there is no equivariant con-
straint for Fwc(·), which makes it nearly impossible to
achieve the same objective of segmentation function dur-
ing network learning. Additional regularizers should be in-
tegrated to narrow the supervision gap between fully and
weakly supervised learning.
Self-attention is a widely accepted mechanism that can
signiﬁcantly improve the network approximation ability. It
revises feature maps by capturing context feature depen-
dency, which also meets the ideas of most WSSS methods
using the similarity of pixels to reﬁne the original activation
map. Following the denotation of [31], the general self-attention mechanism can be deﬁned as:
yi=1
C(xi)/summationdisplay
∀jf(xi,xj)g(xj)+xi, (1)
f(xi,xj) =eθ(xi)Tφ(xj). (2)
Herexandydenote input and output feature, with spatial
position index iandj. The output signal is normalized by
C(xi) =/summationtext
∀jf(xi,xj). Function g(xj)gives a representa-
tion of input signal xjat each position and all of them are
aggregated into position iwith the similarity weights given
byf(xi,xj), which calculates the dot-product pixel afﬁnity
in an embedding space. To improve the network ability for
consistent prediction, we propose SEAM by incorporating
self-attention with equivariant regularization.
3.2. Equivariant Regularization
During the data augmentation period of fully supervised
semantic segmentation, the pixel-level labels should be ap-
plied with the same afﬁne transformation as input images.
It introduces an implicit equivariant constraint for the net-
work. However, considering that the WSSS can only access
image-level classiﬁcation labels, the implicit constraint is
missing here. Therefore, we propose equivariant regular-
ization as follows:
RER=||F(A(I))−A(F(I))||1. (3)
HereF(·)denotes the network, and A(·)denotes any spatial
afﬁne transformation, e.g., rescaling, rotation, ﬂip. To inte-
grate regularization on the original network, we expand the
network into a shared-weight siamese structure. One branch
applies the transformation on the network output, the other
12277