Self-supervised Equivariant Attention Mechanism
for Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Yude Wang1,2, Jie Zhang1,2, Meina Kan1,2, Shiguang Shan1,2,3, Xilin Chen1,2
1Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Shanghai, 200031, China
yude.wang@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {zhangjie, kanmeina, sgshan, xlchen }@ict.ac.cn
Abstract
Image-level weakly supervised semantic segmentation is
a challenging problem that has been deeply studied in re-
cent years. Most of advanced solutions exploit class activa-
tion map (CAM). However, CAMs can hardly serve as the
object mask due to the gap between full and weak supervi-
sions. In this paper, we propose a self-supervised equivari-
ant attention mechanism (SEAM) to discover additional su-
pervision and narrow the gap. Our method is based on the
observation that equivariance is an implicit constraint in
fully supervised semantic segmentation, whose pixel-level
labels take the same spatial transformation as the input im-
ages during data augmentation. However, this constraint
is lost on the CAMs trained by image-level supervision.
Therefore, we propose consistency regularization on pre-
dicted CAMs from various transformed images to provide
self-supervision for network learning. Moreover, we pro-
pose a pixel correlation module (PCM), which exploits con-
text appearance information and reﬁnes the prediction of
current pixel by its similar neighbors, leading to further im-
provement on CAMs consistency. Extensive experiments on
PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset demonstrate our method out-
performs state-of-the-art methods using the same level of
supervision. The code is released online1.
1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental computer vi-
sion task, which aims to predict pixel-wise classiﬁcation
results on images. Thanks to the booming of deep learn-
ing researches in recent years, the performance of semantic
segmentation model has achieved great progress [6, 23, 38],
promoting many practical applications, e.g., autopilot and
1https://github.com/YudeWang/SEAM
(a) (b)
Figure 1. Comparisons of CAMs generated by input images with
different scales. (a) Conventional CAMs. (b) CAMs predicted by
our SEAM, which are more consistent over rescaling.
medical image analysis. However, compared to other tasks
such as classiﬁcation and detection, semantic segmentation
needs to collect pixel-level class labels which are time-
consuming and expensive. Recently many efforts are de-
voted to weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS)
which utilizes weak supervisions, e.g., image-level classiﬁ-
cation labels, scribbles, and bounding boxes, attempting to
achieve equivalent segmentation performance of fully su-
pervised approaches. This paper focuses on semantic seg-
mentation by image-level classiﬁcation labels.
To the best of our knowledge, most of advanced WSSS
methods are based on the class activation map (CAM) [39],
which is an effective way to localize objects by image clas-
siﬁcation labels. However, the CAMs usually only cover
the most discriminative part of the object and incorrectly
activate in background regions, which can be summarized
as under-activation and over-activation respectively. More-
over, the generated CAMs are not consistent when images
are augmented by afﬁne transformations. As shown in
Fig. 1, applying different rescaling transformations on the
same input images causes signiﬁcant inconsistency on the
12275