baseline ER PCM OHEM CRF mIoU√47.43%√ √52.40%√ √49.90%√ √ √55.08%√ √ √ √55.41%√ √ √ √ √56.83%
Table 1. The ablation study for each part of SEAM. ER: equiv-
ariant regularization. PCM : pixel correlation module. OHEM :
online hard example mining. CRF : conditional random ﬁeld.
model mIoU
CAM 47.43%
GradCAM 46.53%
GradCAM++ 47.37%
CAM + SEAM 55.41%
Table 2. Evaluation of various weakly supervised localization
methods with semantic segmentation metric (mIoU).
generated by SEAM have fewer over-activations and more
complete activation coverage, whose shape is closer to the
ground truth segmentation masks than baseline. To further
verify the effectiveness of our proposed SEAM, we visual-
ize the afﬁnity attention maps generated by PCM. As shown
in Fig. 5, the selected foreground and background pixels are
very close in spatial, while their afﬁnity attention maps are
greatly different. It proves that the PCM can learn boundary
sensitive features from self-supervision.
Improved Localization Mechanism: It is an intuition
that improved weakly supervised localization mechanism
will elevate mIoU of pseudo segmentation labels. To
verify the idea, we simply evaluate GradCAM [28] and
GradCAM++[3] before aggregating our proposed SEAM.
However, the evaluation results given by Tab. 2 illustrates
that both GradCAM and GradCAM++ cannot narrow the
supervision gap between fully and weakly supervised se-
mantic segmentation tasks, since the best mIoU results do
not have improvement. We believe the improved localiza-
tion mechanisms are only designed to represent object cor-
related parts without any constraints by low-level informa-
tion, which is not suitable for the segmentation task. The
CAMs generated by these improved localization methods
are not becoming more matchable with ground truth masks.
The following experiments further illustrate that our pro-
posed SEAM can substantially improve the quality of CAM
to ﬁt the shape of object masks.
Afﬁne Transformation: Ideally, the A(·)in Eq. (3) can
be any afﬁne transformation. Several transformations are
conducted in the siamese network to evaluate the effect of
them on equivariant regularization. As shown in Tab. 3,
there are four candidate afﬁne transformations: rescaling
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Figure 4. The visualization of CAMs. (a) Original images. (b)
Ground truth segmentations. (c) Baseline CAMs. (d) CAMs pro-
duced by SEAM. The SEAM not only suppresses over-activation
but also expands CAMs into complete object activation coverage.
foreground pixels with attention maps background pixels with attention maps
Figure 5. The visualization of afﬁnity attention map on foreground
and background. The red and green crosses denote the selected
pixels, with similar feature representation in blue color.
with 0.3 down-sampling rate, random rotation in [-20, 20]
degrees, translation by 15 pixels and horizontal ﬂip. Firstly,
our proposed SEAM simply adopts rescaling during net-
work training. Tab. 3 shows that the mIoU of pseudo la-
bels has signiﬁcant improvement from 47.43% to 55.41%.
Tab. 3 also shows that simply incorporating different trans-
formations is not much effective. When rescaling transfor-
mation integrates with ﬂip, rotation, and translation respec-
tively, only ﬂip makes tiny improvement. In our view, it
is because the activation maps between ﬂip, rotation, and
translation are too similar to produce sufﬁcient supervision.
Without additional instructions, we only preserve rescaling
as the key transformation with 0.3down-sampling rate in
our other experiments.
Augmentation and Inference: Compared to the original
one-branch network, the siamese structure expands the aug-
mentation range of image size in practice. To investigate
whether the improvement stems from the rescaling range,
12280