branch warps the images by the same transformation before
the feedforward of the network. The output activation maps
from two branches are regularized to guarantee the consis-
tency of CAMs.
3.3. Pixel Correlation Module
Although equivariant regularization provides additional
supervision for network learning, it is hard to achieve ideal
equivariance with only classical convolution layers. Self-
attention is an efﬁcient module to capture context informa-
tion and reﬁne pixel-wise prediction results. To integrate the
classical self-attention module given by Eq. (1) and Eq. (2)
for CAM reﬁnement, the formulation can be written as:
yi=1
C(xi)/summationdisplay
∀jeθ(xi)Tφ(xj)g(ˆ yj)+ˆ yi, (4)
whereˆ ydenotes the original CAM and ydenotes the revised
CAM. In this structure, the original CAM is embedded into
residual space by function g. Each pixel aggregates with
others with similarity given by Eq. (2). Three embedding
functions θ,φ,g can be implemented by individual 1×1
convolution layers.
To further reﬁne original CAMs by context information,
we propose a pixel correlation module (PCM) at the end of
the network to integrate the low-level feature of each pixel.
The structure of PCM refers to the core part of the self-
attention mechanism with some modiﬁcations and trained
by the supervision from equivariant regularization. We use
cosine distance to evaluate inter-pixel feature similarity:
f(xi,xj) =θ(xi)Tθ(xj)
||θ(xi)||·||θ(xj)||. (5)
Here we take the inner-product in normalized feature space
to calculate the afﬁnity between current pixel iand others.
Thefcan be integrated into Eq. (1) with some modiﬁca-
tions as:
yi=1
C(xi)/summationdisplay
∀jReLU(θ(xi)Tθ(xj)
||θ(xi)||·||θ(xj)||)ˆ yj.(6)
The similarities are activated by ReLU to suppress negative
values. The ﬁnal CAM is the weighted sum of the original
CAM with normalized similarities. Fig. 3 gives an illustra-
tion of the PCM structure.
Compared to classical self-attention, PCM removes the
residual connection to keep the same activation intensity
of the original CAM. Moreover, since the other network
branch provides pixel-level supervision for PCM, which is
not as accurate as ground truth, we reduce parameters by
removing embedding function φandgto avoid overﬁtting
on inaccurate supervision. We use ReLU activation func-
tion with L1 normalization to mask out irrelevant pixels and
generate an afﬁnity attention map which is smoother in rel-
evant regions.HW
HW feature1×1 conv
1×1 conv
original CAMH×W×C1HW×C2
C2×HW
H×W×CHW×Cmodified CAM
H×W×CPixel Correlation Module (PCM)
Figure 3. The structure of PCM, where H,W,C/C 1/C2denote
height, width and channel numbers of feature maps respectively.
3.4. Loss Design of SEAM
Image-level classiﬁcation label lis the only human-
annotated supervision that can be used here. We employ
the global average pooling layer at the end of the network
to achieve prediction vector zfor image classiﬁcation and
adopt multi-label soft margin loss for network training. The
classiﬁcation loss is deﬁned for C−1foreground object
category as:
ℓcls(z,l) =−1
C−1C−1/summationdisplay
c=1[lclog(1
1+e−zc)
+(1−lc)log(e−zc
1+e−zc)].(7)
Formally we denote the original CAMs of siamese network
asˆ yoandˆ yt, whereˆ yocomes from the branch with origi-
nal image input and ˆ ytstems from the transformed images.
The global average pooling layer aggregates them into pre-
diction vector zoandztrespectively. The classiﬁcation loss
is calculated on two branches as:
Lcls=1
2(ℓcls(zo,l)+ℓcls(zt,l)). (8)
The classiﬁcation loss provides learning supervision for ob-
ject localization. And it is necessary to aggregate equivari-
ant regularization on original CAM to preserve the consis-
tency of output. The equivariant regularization (ER) loss on
original CAM can be easily deﬁned as:
LER=||A(ˆ yo)−ˆ yt||1. (9)
HereA(·)is an afﬁne transformation which has already
been applied to the input image in the transformation branch
of the siamese network. Moreover, to further improve
the ability of network for equivariance learning, the orig-
inal CAMs and features from the shallow layers are fed
into PCM for reﬁnement. The intuitive idea is introducing
equivariant regularization between revised CAMs yoand
yt. However, in our early experiments, the output maps of
PCM fall into the local minimum quickly that all pixels in
12278