areas of marketing (Balducci and Marinova 2018 ), analytics
for consumer value in healthcare (Agarwal et al. 2020 ), ma-
chine learning prediction for mobile marketing personaliza-
tion (Tong et al. 2020 ), in-store technology (e.g., robots, smart
displays, or augmented reality) for convenience or social pres-
ence (Grewal et al. 2020 ), and AI for personalized customer
engagement (Kumar et al. 2019 ).
To facilitate the strategic use of AI in marketing, we devel-
op a three-stage framework, from marketing research, to mar-
keting strategy (segmentation, targeting, and positioning,
STP), to marketing actions (4Ps/4Cs), for strategic marketing
planning incorporating AI. This strategic AI framework is
based on a more nuanced perspective of the technical devel-
opment of AI, existing studies on AI and marketing, and cur-
rent and future AI applications. It can be used for strategic
marketing planning, for organizing the existing AI marketing
studies, and for identifying research gaps in AI marketing.
This paper contributes to the strategic application of AI in
marketing by developing a framework that guides the strategic
planning of AI in marketing in a systematic and actionable
manner. It is achieved by bringing together diverse AI litera-
tures on algorithms (e.g., Bauer and Jannach 2018 ; Davis and
Marcus 2015 ), psychology (e.g., Lee et al. 2018 ; Leung et al.
2018 ), societal effects (e.g., Autor and Dorn 2013 ;F r e ya n d
Osborne 2017 ), and managerial implications (e.g., Huang
et al. 2019 ) to explore what those literatures can tell us about
managing AI in marketing. Marketing is an applied field, and
using the more foundational literatures to inform marketing
practice is an important role for marketing academia. This
paper also contributes to strategic marketing research by pro-
viding a systematic and rigorous approach to identifying re-
search gaps that bridge strategic AI marketing practice and
research.
Conceptual foundation
The marketing research –strategy –action cycle
We propose a three-stage strategic planning framework based
on the marketing research –marketing strategy –marketing ac-
tion cycle. Similar cycles have been proposed, such as
Deming ’s(1986 ) plan-do-check-act cycle, but that cycle omits
the role of strategy. Our cycle views strategic planning as a
circular process, starting from conducting marketing research
to understand the market, the firm, the competitors, and the
customers; to developing strategies for segmentation,
targeting, and positioning; and to designing specific marketing
actions to execute the strategy. This cycle does not stop at
marketing actions. The execution of marketing actions will
feed back to marketing research as market data, which consti-
tutes a continuous cycle for marketing research –strategy –ac-
tion, as illustrated in Fig. 1.Multiple AI intelligences
Figure 1illustrates that AI can play critical roles in all three
strategic marketing stages. It shows that there are multiple AI
intelligences that a marketer can leverage: mechanical, think-
ing, and feeling.
We conceptualize AI as the use of computational machin-
ery to emulate capabilities inherent in humans, such as doing
physical or mechanical tasks, thinking, and feeling; the mul-
tiple AI intelligence view considers that, rather than treating
AI as a thinking machine, AI can be designed to have multiple
intelligences, as humans have, for different tasks. Ordered by
the difficulty with which AI can address them, there are me-
chanical, thinking, and feeling AI intelligences (Huang and
Rust 2018 ; Huang et al. 2019 ).
Mechanical AI is designed for automating repetitive and
routine tasks. For example, remote sensing, machine transla-
tion, classification algorithms, clustering algorithms, and di-
mensionality reduction are some current technologies that can
be considered mechanical AI.
Thinking AI is designed for processing data to arrive at
new conclusions or decisions. The data are typically unstruc-
tured. Thinking AI is good at recognizing patterns and regu-
larities in data, for example, text mining, speech recognition,
and facial recognition. Machine learning, neural networks,
and deep learning (neural networks with additional layers)
are some of the current methods by which thinking AI pro-
cesses data. IBM Watson, expert systems, and recommender
systems are some current applications for decision making.
Feeling AI is designed for two-way interactions involving
humans, and/or for analyzing human feelings and emotions.
Some current technologies include sentiment analysis, natural
language processing (NLP), text-to-speech technology, recur-
rent neural networks (RNN), chatbots for mimicking human
speech, embodied and embedded virtual agents for human
interactions, and robots with customized hardware for sensing
affective signals (McDuff and Czerwinski 2018 ).
It is important to note two qualifications of this multiple AI
intelligences view. First, although we set up three intelli-
gences, the assignment of some applications to a particular
intelligence is mainly based on the purpose they are used
for. Sometimes those applications may have some elements
of more than one intelligence; thus, suggesting that the three
intelligences are fuzzy sets (Varki et al. 2000 ). For example,
facial recognition that is trying to identify someone is thinking
AI (e.g., customs uses it to identify potential terrorists), while
facial recognition that is trying to figure out somebody ’se m o -
tional state from their facial expression is feeling AI (e.g.,
advertisers use it to identify audience responses to ads).
Second, we do not have true feeling AI yet1;t h u s ,t h ec u r r e n t
1According to Huang and Rust ( 2018), true feeling AI needs to be able to
recognize, emulate, and respond appropriately to human emotions.31 J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci.  (2021) 49:30–50