and accurate emotion sensing from posted messages can better
engage customers and provide a better interaction experience
(Hartmann et al. 2019 ; Lee et al. 2018 ).
Managerial implications
Our framework provides a roadmap for marketers to imple-
ment various AI intelligences in marketing, strategically and
systematically. Table 4summarizes the managerial implica-
tions of the framework by contrasting current marketing prac-
tice with the emerging AI-enabled marketing practice. The
two practices should be viewed as two ends of a continuum,
with more AI intelligences expected to be used for more stra-
tegic elements at the three stages over time. We discuss these
implications below.
Implications for marketing research
At this stage, marketers need to decide (1) how to use AI to
identify competitors (including competitors in the same indus-
try and outside options) and to understand competitive advan-
tages (i.e., the way the product can do better to meet cus-
tomers ’needs), and (2) how to use AI to discover and under-
stand existing and potential customers (i.e., who they are,
what they want, and what their current solutions are) and to
understand their preferences and feelings. For firms that em-
brace a theory-driven approach to marketing strategies, data
and intelligences resulting from this stage play a critical role.
Data collection Currently, surveys, experiments, interviews,
panels, and sales data are still the major approaches for mar-
keters to obtain data, even though the administration of these
methods can be partially automated or facilitated by technol-
ogy. Surveys and experimental methods tend to be more the-
ory driven, while other methods tend to be more data driven.
Marketers often also rely on thirty-party syndicated data (e.g.,
YouGov), especially for external data that are difficult for the
firm to collect. These data are typically delayed, out of con-
text, and ad hoc, meaning that they are collected periodically,
after the fact (after consumption has occurred), and not during
data generation.
By contrast, emerging practices automate most of the data
collection by connecting technology (e.g., IoT, social network-
ing sites, mobile apps), sensor technology (e.g., remote sensing,
detection), and wearable technol ogy (e.g., smart watch, Fitbit).
These mechanical AI approaches track and capture real-time
data when they are occurring. Thus, the data are in context,
about the customer, and during the consumption experience.
Such spontaneous data collection tends to be more data driven,
but if theories can be developed priori to guide and update the
continuous data collection, they can be theory driven as well.Market analysis Current market analysis, although marching
toward machine learning-based analysis rapidly, still relies
heavily on statistical analysis to analyze structured data for
marketing insights. It is also common for firms to purchase
third-party data and analysis, especially for external market
and competitor analysis. Such analysis tends to be standard-
ized across firms (with limited degree of customization), and
thus the insights derived from it are less useful for deriving a
unique value proposition. Firms also monitor and analyze
first-party data, especially for firm marketing resource analy-
sis and for existing customer analysis for which internal data
are available.
By contrast, big data and machine learning-based analytics
are the emerging approach for marketing insights. Online re-
views, opinions, and behaviors all can be mined, and data can
be in text, image, audio, or video. When the question at hand
is clear (e.g., a mature brand), supervised machine learning
can be used to conduct theory-driven analysis, whereas when
the question at hand is unclear (e.g., a new brand), unsuper-
vised machine learning can be applied to obtain data-driven
insights. Balducci and Marinova ( 2018 )o f f e rad e t a i l e dd e -
scription of various methods of analyzing unstructured data in
marketing. More advanced approaches to marketing analysis
include using deep learning methods such as predictive ana-
lytics, computational creativity, personalization algorithms,
and natural language processing systems, to come up with
intuitive suggestions for marketing strategies.
Customer understanding Current practice relies heavily on
focus groups to gain qualitative insights about customers.
Focus groups are time consuming and labor intensive, not to
mention not representative. Marketers also observe cus-
tomers ’behaviors and choices, and their reactions to promo-
tions to understand their preferences and the underlying
reasons.
By contrast, data about customers ’feelings, moods, and
emotions can be obtained directly from customers ’interaction
with AI (e.g., conversational bots), rather than inferred from
psychometrics, using conversational bots and analyzed using
feeling analytics (e.g., posts on social media, voice recordings
of customer interactions, and chat transcripts). Feeling analyt-
ics can identify customer insights with scale and cost-effi-
ciently. Given that emotional data are personal and in context,
understanding customers in context provides richer insights
about who they are and what they like.
Implications for marketing strategy (STP)
At this stage, marketers can leverage the three AI intelligences
for segmentation, targeting, and positioning, respectively. For
firms that embrace a data-driven approach to marketing strat-
egy, this stage may play a bigger role than conclusions derived
from marketing research.41 J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci.  (2021) 49:30–50