model, by analyzing the co-occurrences of products in shop-
ping baskets (Gabel et al. 2019 ), detecting copycat mobile
apps using a machine learning copycat-detection method
(Wang et al. 2018 ), and aiding social media content engineer-
ing by employing natural language processing algorithms that
discover the associations between social media marketing
content and user engagement (Lee et al. 2018 ).
Feeling AI for customer understanding Feeling AI can be used
to understand existing and potential customer needs and
wants, for example, who they are, what they want, and what
their current solutions are. The major distinction between mar-
ket analysis and customer understanding is that the latter often
involves emotional data about customer sentiments, feelings,
preferences, and attitudes. Thus, feeling AI can do a better job
of understanding customers than mechanical AI and thinking
AI, due to its capability of analyzing emotional data.
For existing customers, marketers can use feeling AI to
answer the questions of whether they are happy with the prod-
uct and why. Existing customers ’preferences are more stable,
and a company has past and current transaction data for a
deeper understanding. For example, Affectiva partnered with
Ford to create AutoEmotive sentiment analysis, to try to figure
out drivers ’emotional states.
For potential customers, marketers can use feeling AI to
understand what they want and why they are happy with com-
petitors or outside options. Potential customers ’needs and
wants are more difficult to predict, and their emotional data
are less available. In marketing practice, Albert AI,
Adgorithm ’s AI-driven marketing platform, has been used
by RedBalloon to discover and reach new customers (Sutton2018 ) and by Harley-Davidson to identify high potential cus-
tomers based on the company ’s customer relationship man-
agement database, personalizing the marketing campaign ac-
cordingly (Power 2017 ).
In academic research, existing studies have shown various
approaches of using feeling AI to understand customers. For
example, the sentiment expressed by consumers in social me-
dia (e.g., online reviews, tweets), including explicit and im-
plicit language and discourse patterns, can be analyzed to
understand consumer responses using their own language
(Hewett et al. 2016 ; Humphreys and Wang 2018 ; Ordenes
et al. 2017 ), the interaction between conversational AI and
customers can be enhanced by applying analytical mapping
to script appropriate response sequences that make customers
feel that they have a “conversation ”with AI (Avery and
Steenburgh 2018 ), consumer consideration heuristics can be
understood by machine learning (Dzyabura and Hauser 2011 ),
and customer needs can be identified from user-generated
content using convolutional neural network machine learning
(Timoshenko and Hauser 2019 ).
Marketing strategy (STP)
At this strategic stage, marketers can use AI for the three key
strategic decisions: segmentation, targeting, and positioning.
However, before proceeding to specific STP decisions,
marketers need to decide the overall strategic positioning to
guide their STP decisions. Huang and Rust ( 2017 )p r o p o s ea
technology-driven approach to positioning a firm ’ss t r a t e g y
along the dimensions of standardization –personalization and
transaction –relationship. A firm can pursue a commodityTable 1 A strategic framework for AI in marketing
AI intelligence
Strategic decisionMechanical AI Thinking AI Feeling AI
Marketing research Data collection
Automate continuous market
and customer data sensing,
tracking, collecting,
and processingMarket analysis
Use marketing analytics to identify
competitors and competitive
advantagesCustomer understanding
Use emotional data and customer
analytics to understand existing and
potential customer needs and wants
Marketing strategy (STP) Segmentation
Use mechanical AI to identify novel
customer preference patternsTargeting
Use thinking AI to recommend
the best target segmentsPositioning
Use feeling AI to develop positioning
that resonates with customers
Marketing action (4Ps/4Cs) Standardization Personalization Relationalization
Product/Consumer Automate the process and output of
meeting customer needs and wantsPersonalize products based on
customer preferencesUnderstand and meet customer
emotional needs and wants
Price/Cost Automate the process of price setting
and paymentPersonalize prices based on
customer willingness to payNegotiate price and justify the cost
interactively
Place/Convenience Automate customer
access to productPersonalize frontline interactions Personalize experience for
customer engagement
Promotion/Communication Automate communication with
customersCustomize promotional content for
personal communicationTailor communication based on
customer emotional preferences and
reactions
Note. Product includes tangible goods and intangible services34 J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci.  (2021) 49:30–50