knowing a daughter is pregnant before her father knows, by
mining the daughter ’s purchase patterns, is a classic example.
Targeting Currently targeting mostly uses marketers ’subjec-
tive judgment, based on the resources, the competitive advan-
tage of the firm, and the value of the segment to the firm. It is
typically at the segment level (not individual level), and often
trades off segment size for effectiveness.
By contrast, after very refined segmentation, it is think-
ing AI ’s turn to recommend the best segment(s) to target.
It is very well likely to be a segment of one, since per-
sonalization is the strength of thinking AI. With the capa-
bility to slice the market in unlimited ways and at the
individual customer level, targeting in emerging practice
is more commonly at the individual customer level. For
example, online ads use cookies to target individual cus-
tomers by following them around, wherever they go on
the Internet. The new targeting also is flexible, because it
can aggregate individual customers into a segment, if they
have similar preferences (e.g., like-minded customers rec-
ommendation, aggregating long-tail customers even when
each individual customer may not be valuable), or it can
disaggregate a segment, if heterogeneity within the seg-
ment becomes manifest. Targeting involves not just iden-
tifying segments but also determining whether they
should be pursued. Whether they should be pursued or
not is a matter of predicting the outcome if they pursue,
and prediction at the individual level is only scalable with
the help of AI.
Positioning
Positioning is currently a human task, for it involves judgment,
intuition, and creativity that machines are not particularly good at
it yet (Davis and Marcus 2015; Schoenick et al. 2017). Kelly
(2019) argues that creativity is not just about novelty but is also
about social acceptability. A novel idea has to be accepted by
community to be deemed as creativ e. Because creativity is so-
cially embedded, a good positioning is in the eye of the targeted
customers. Although we have seen an increasing number of ex-
amples of AI participating in the creative process, for example
using AI to compose its own music and to write short stories,
there is still a long way to go for AI to be as creative as humans
while still maintaining strategic relevance. For example, the
script of the 2018 Lexus car “Driven by Intuition ”TV commer-
cial was created by AI by applying the machine learning ap-
proach. Lexus fed machines with award-winning luxury ads,
Lexus brand data, and emotion data, that were shown to connect
with viewers, to tell the story about how Lexus generated the new
ES executive saloon car. The commercial appears to have face
validity as a luxury car commercial. However, this commercial
may not be very strategic because the ad has an unclear customer
segmentation and ambiguous positioning (Rust and Huang2020). This real-world example ill ustrates that positioning can
be expected to be a human-AI collaboration for the immediate
future.
Implications for marketing action
At this stage, marketers can leverage the three AI intelligences
for the 4Ps to serve the 4Cs. The key questions to answers are
which AI to use and how to use it for marketing actions.
Product The current practice for product decisions is to use
conjoint analysis to decide what levels of product attributes to
include in product development, use test markets to decide
whether and to what degree the product will be accepted,
and use aggregate sales results after the launch of the product
as a proxy for customer feedback.
The emerging practice is to use mechanical AI to automate
production and service process (e.g., Huang and Rust 2020), use
thinking AI, such as cognitive technology, to facilitate product
research and development (which is currently more common in
drug development), and use feeling AI, such social robots and
conversational bots, to interact with customers, from which they
obtain real-time, first-hand customer feedback about the prod-
uct. Such a process can become an adaptive loop that improves
the product continuously based on customer feedback.
Price The current practice is to list prices on retail stores, websites,
or mobile apps, set the prices discriminately, based on segments,
and have salespeople handle price negotiations. Price menus
offline are difficult and labor intensive to change, and price menus
online, though easier to update, are also easier to be compared.
Price setting typically requires careful and extensive calculation,
taking various factors into consideration. Price negotiation is more
of an art than a science, especially for big ticket items.
The emerging practice is to use mechanical AI to automate
price setting and changes, thinking AI for price personaliza-
tion, and feeling AI for price negotiation. Price updating is a
simple routine task, price setting can be achieved by the pow-
erful calculating machine, thinking AI, and can be personal-
ized taking individual customers ’preferences and sensitivity
into consideration. Price negotiation can be done when feeling
AI detects customer reactions to the offered price in real-time.
Place The current practice relies on self-service to automate
routine delivery and labor-intensive physical distribution for
ordering processing, materials handling, and delivery; un-
skilled labor at the frontline to offer homogeneous assistance,
and frontline employees for emotional labor.
Distribution, logistics, and delivery can mostly be automat-
ed with mechanical AI, and is a fast-growing emerging prac-
tice, for example, product tracking systems for firms to track
where the product is in the supply chain, and for customers to
track when they can expect to receive the product. Thinking43 J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci.  (2021) 49:30–50