AI, such as personal shopping assistants, has been used to
assist customers about where to find the product. Feeling AI,
such as conversational bots, can be used to display emotions
in service interaction without the need to actually experience
emotions (Wirtz et al. 2018 ).
Promotion The media planning part of promotion has a higher
degree of automation by mechan ical AI, due to the repetitive
nature of the task. The content creation part of promotion, though
having a lower degree of automation, is increasingly handled by
thinking AI, such as AI writers, to generate content on its own, or
to stimulate human creativity. Customers ’reactions to promotion
are still mostly measured using t raditional marketing research
methods. The emerging practic ei st ou s ef e e l i n gA I ,s u c ha s
feeling analytics, to sense, react, and adjust promotions in real-
time based on customers ’emotional reactions.
Directions for future research
The framework lays out a stage-by-stage circular process for
using different AI intelligences in marketing. It provides rich
implications for future research based on the use of AI intel-
ligences. We discuss these implications, organized by the
three AI intelligences. The last column of Table 4illustrates
one example research question for each element.
Marketing research
When mechanical AI is used for data collection, it makes both
the competition and the customer more transparent, making
the governance of privacy issues more central to marketers.
When thinking AI is used for market analysis, it turns theory-
driven marketing research into data-driven, resulting in a de-
bate about whether a data or theory approach to marketing
research should be embraced. When feeling AI is used for
customer understanding, it is as if AI can really understand
emotions, when we don ’t have true emotional machines yet.
These issues give rise to various future research topics.
&How would privacy and data security affect marketing ’s
use of AI for data collection? When mechanical AI is used
to collect and integrate multiple sources of real-time, in-
context consumer data, the risk of privacy infringement
and the consequences of a data breach are much higher.
It is more difficult to keep such “all-in-one ”data anony-
mous, and consumers are more sensitive to data sharing
and data breaches. We have seen the public outcry when
Facebook permitted the unauthorized licensing of 30 mil-
lion user accounts to Cambridge Analytica, with its brand
reputation plummeting dramatically in two weeks (Rust
et al. 2020 ). In the AI age, both competition and customers
become more transparent, due to AI ’s data collectioncapability. How should privacy and data security be han-
dled? The existing studies suggest that both data and
consumer characteristics need to be considered. It has
been shown that some types of data are more sensitive,
such as personal data, financial data, health data, or
medical records. Agarwal et al. ( 2020 ) urge healthcare
organizations to find ways of protecting patient privacy
as a competitive advantage, because healthcare consumers
are especially weak in protecting their own data. It has also
been shown that some consumers are more sensitive to
data sharing. Thomaz et al. ( 2020 ) identify two types of
consumers who vary in willingness to share information.
They advise that marketers need to understand which type
of consumers they are dealing with when providing per-
sonalization. Some methods of protecting marketing data
have been proposed (Schneider et al. 2017 ,2018 ). Future
research will need to explore more delicate approaches to
handle the ubiquitous data collected by AI.
&How to balance data- and theory-driven market analysis?
Traditional market research has the strength of hy-
pothesis testing, whereas the emerging machine
learning approach to analyzing unstructured big data
has the merit of data exploration. How to balance
the two approaches of inquiry and benefit from
them? The Silicon Valley viewpoint is that predic-
tion, driven by data, is everything. Balducci and
Marinova ( 2018 ) show a data-driven approach to
marketing management and research and Ma and
Sun ( 2020 ) argue for machine learning methods for
marketing research, while Lehmann ( 2020 ) proposes
am e t h o dt ob l e n dt h e o r ya n dd a t ai nt h ee v o l v i n g
world of marketing research. These practices and
studies suggest that AI will expand the role of ex-
ploration in the development of theory; thus, inves-
tigating how the two approaches can be balanced,
integrated, or blended would allow marketing to le-
verage the benefit of data-driven market analysis.
&What algorithms and models are needed for feeling AI?
Much of the progress in technical algorithms has been
made in the area of deep learning neural networks, applied
to thinking AI problems, such as personalized advertising.
The current neural network-based machine learning is
mainly for prediction, rather than for understanding. We
need algorithms to understand emotions and react to emo-
tions appropriately (Rust and Huang 2020 ). There are dif-
ferent ways to understand emotions, such as understand-
ing emotions in written language (text-based sentiment
analysis), in oral conversation (natural language process-
ing), or in facial expression (facial recognition). Although
there is some work already in using thinking AI to analyze
emotional data (e.g., affective analytics), with respect to
facial recognition and natu ral language processing,
models in this area are still fairly rudimentary.44 J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci.  (2021) 49:30–50