AI. For example, when AI does more thinking, will cus-
tomers think less when they may feel more ?T ow h a te x -
tent does the advance of AI, from mechanical, to thinking,
to feeling, lead to customers feeling more, at the expense
of thinking, such as accepting fake news on social media
at face value?
Current limitations of AI
Our strategic framework illustrates applications of multiple AI
intelligences to various areas of marketing at different strate-
gic decision stages. These applications are not without limita-
tions. We discuss the major limitations of applying the three
AI intelligences to marketing for marketers to use AI more
wisely.
Limitations of mechanical AI
Although current mechanical AI has the strong capability of
collecting and integrating multiple sources of data autono-
mously, very often contexts of the data are lost, creating prob-
lems in modeling, especially for emotional data. The automat-
ed process of data collection also makes customer intimacy
less achievable because it is machines talking to machines.
Non-contextual data Many data collected by mechanical
AI are non-contextual. This is especially the case for emo-
tional data because such data are about the individual in
context, meaning modeling the emotional state of a con-
sumer requires contextual and individual-specific data.
Contextual data are often lost during interaction. One
Dell AI expert said at a frontline service conference in
2019 that it is not that difficult to model emotions (mean-
ing using the existing machine learning approach), but the
difficulty lies in that emotional data are difficult to cap-
ture, and thus are not analyzed. For example, in a custom-
er service interaction, the content and sentiment of the
conversations are recorded, but not the context of the
conversations. When an angry and frustrated customer
calls, his way of talking may be different, depending on
whether he is alone or with a group of friends, whether
the weather is gloomy or sunny, or whether the traffic is
jammed or smooth. Even if voice analytics can detect the
sentiment of his voice, it cannot provide guidance to the
customer agent as to why the customer is angry, and what
the best way to respond is (Rust and Huang 2020 ).
Machine to machine interactions Or communications are pre-
dicted to be the key emerging technology-enabled interactions
in digital environments (Yadav and Pavlou 2020 ). Examples
include an ATM getting authorization from the bank for a cashwithdrawal, and a refrigerator sensor sending inventory infor-
mation to a vendor via IoT. Mechanical AI plays an important
role in those routine interactions; however, it may come at the
cost of customer intimacy (e.g., Treacy and Wiersma 1997 ).
To be able to figure out the customer side of strategy requires
customer data, collected and compiled by mechanical AI,
which is the only methodology that is powerful enough and
scalable enough to capture individual-level data. When cus-
tomers are removed from the interactions, it is more challeng-
ing for marketers to remain intimate with customers. Machine-
to-machine interactions and communications will be a new
form of customer interactions that calls for more future studies
to tell marketers how to approach them, and how to keep a
balance between operational efficiency and customer
intimacy.
Limitations of thinking AI
Current thinking AI, though powerful, may not be neutral and
transparent, which can result in biased recommendations or
entail unintended consequences.
Opaque AI How thinking AI comes up with a certain recom-
mendation often is not transparent to human marketers. The
current dominant machine learning approach to AI designs
machines to learn via a mapping mechanism (i.e., map input
pairs (X,Y) to output Y=F(X)), not via cognitive reasoning
(Lewis and Denning 2018 ). This results in the output being
unexplainable because it does not answer the “why ”question.
Thus, there is a need for scholars to develop explainable AI so
that thinking AI can be used for trustworthy and fair marketing
exchanges (Rai 2020 ). Opaque AI also results in liability is-
sues. If AI output is not transparent, when AI goes wrong,
marketers who use the AI are likely to be held accountable.
The accountability issue has emerged since the first fatal ac-
cident of an autonomous car. Thus, marketers, as AI users,
when using thinking AI for strategic decisions, need to strive
to use the most explainable AI, rather than just the most pow-
erful AI, to keep the exchanges transparent to both the mar-
keter and the customer.
AI biases Thinking AI is not neutral. If data input is erroneous
or biased, output is likely to be biased too. However, biased
input is not the only way AI bias can occur. For example, it
has been shown that for loan decisions, discriminatory results
can occur even if there is no bigotry programmed into the
system, and the system only seeks to maximize profit
(Ukanwa and Rust 2020 ). Researchers have also shown that
gender bias can occur without any conscious (or unconscious)
attempt to produce a biased outcome —using only an unbiased
algorithm (Lambrecht and Tucker 2019 ).
Marketing researchers have addressed some issues, such as
managers and management education underpreparing the next46 J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci.  (2021) 49:30–50