Marketing strategy
For the three strategic elements of segmentation, targeting,
and positioning, mechanical AI can slice the market based
on virtually an unlimited number of variables, thinking AI
can recommend the target, even if it is a segment of AI cus-
tomers, or a combination of AI and human customers, and
feeling AI can team up with marketers to come up with crea-
tive positioning that touches consumers ’hearts. We discuss
these implications.
&How best to visualize segmentation? The emerging AI ap-
proach to segmentation can be based on an unlimited num-
ber of variables. This creates a challenge as to how best to
visualize for marketers to make sense of these multi-
dimensional segmentation results for targeting. Thinking
AI can easily decipher such complexity, but human mar-
keters may not. Earlier studie s have attempted to visually
display three-dimensional segmentation and positioning
from a larger set of variables (e.g., Donthu and Rust
1989;R u s te ta l . 1992). There are some existing tools, but
they are not designed for STP decisions. We need better
and friendlier human-computer interfaces to summarize
and display those extremely high dimensional results to
inform human marketers.
&What happens when the customer is AI? Alexa and Siri
are not the only AI that can potentially buy things.
Increasingly, customers use AI as their agents for infor-
mation collection, price negotiation, or purchase. When it
becomes more real that marketers will be catering to non-
human customers (Rust 1997 ,2020 ) or a combination of
humans and AI as customers, how AI customers would
behave, and how marketers should serve them are both
pertinent issues. Are customer emotions still pertinent?
Will rational decision making become the only route to
decisions? How will AI customers change the scope of
consumer research?
&How should marketers and AI collaborate, to resonate
with customers? Positioning requires creativity and empa-
thy about the preferred way that a customer would like to
see a product. AI can optimize a positioning recommen-
dation, but may not be mature enough to resonate with
customers, given that we do not have true feeling AI yet.
Thus, for the time being, it is important to explore the best
approaches to marketer-AI collaboration for a positioning
that resonates with customers. This is a question that in-
volves exploring the role of AI intelligences in creativity;
for example, to what extent should marketers let machines
be creative on their own (e.g., the Lexus commercial ex-
ample), or use them as creative support? What will be
consumers ’attitudes toward machine-generated creativi-
ty? What will decide the acceptance or rejection of ma-
chine creativity?Marketing action
For the four strategic elements of 4Ps/4Cs, as illustrated in
Table 4, all three AI intelligences can be applied to each ele-
ment. We illustrate one research question for each of the ele-
ments, highlighting the level of AI intelligence that is likely to
help the most.
&How is AI best used in developing new products to meet
customer needs and wants? Thinking AI can be innovative
and creative, but it may not be straightforward as to wheth-
er the new products will meet customer needs and wants,
because many of those needs and wants are implicit, rather
than explicit. This is the challenge of converting product
attributes into consumer benefits. Rogers ’(1962 ) diffu-
sion of innovation theory suggests that both consumer
and product innovativeness matter for new product accep-
tance. AI, with its capability to find patterns and regular-
ities in data that otherwise would be hard to see, can be
used to uncover consumers ’implicit needs and wants, and
m a t c ht h o s en e e d sa n dw a n t st op r o d u c t sa td i f f e r e n t
stages of lifecycle. For example, for the earlier stages of
product lifecycle, AI may play a bigger role, because con-
sumers ’needs and wants tend to be implicit, whereas for
the latter stages, human marketers may play a bigger role,
because those needs and wants become more explicit.
&How to manage AI-based price negotiation? Negotiating
price to achieve price personalization can be expected to
be more common and increasingly at the individual level
(e.g., price bidding). The price discrimination literature
(e.g., Montes et al. 2019 ) tends to view pricing as a pro-
cess of marketers setting the price and consumers reacting
to the price. In AI-based price negotiation, the process is
dynamic and real-time. We have seen the popularity for
technology giants to use AI for price negotiation, such as
Google ’s search keywords bidding and Facebook ’sa d
bidding for reaching the desirable customers. What will
be the new mechanisms and methods for pricing when AI
is used to negotiate prices more widely?
&How to manage customer disengagement due to place
automation? The goal of the place decision is to provide
the customer a convenience benefit. When the entire place
process is automated, which is increasingly common these
days, there is no human-to-human contact, and thus it is
likely for customers to become less engaged with the
brand. How to avoid customer disengagement while striv-
ing to provide convenience? Are there ways to mitigate
the part that is lost?
&How to use AI to build strong relational bonds? When
two-way communications and interactions are made easier
and richer by AI, how are trust and commitment affected
by interacting with AI? What will be gained, and what will
be lost? Customers may have changed by interacting with45 J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci.  (2021) 49:30–50