Place (convenience)
Place (convenience) is the way that the consumer can access
the product. We discuss two broad categories of place action:
Retailing and frontline, virtually or physically, in which inter-
actions play a key role; and distribution, logistics, and deliv-
ery, in which convenience is the key.
Retailing/frontline is the area of marketing that most em-
ploys embodied AI (i.e., robots) to facilitate frontline
interactions.
Mechanical AI can be used to automate backend marketing
processes and frontend interactions. In the backend, service
processes can be automated (Huang and Rust 2018 ) and retail
processes can be optimized using IoT (Grewal et al. 2018 ). In
the frontend, service robots can interact with scale and consis-
tency (Wirtz et al. 2018 ), and can automate social presence in
the frontline (Mende et al. 2019 ;v a nD o o r ne ta l . 2017 ).
Frontline service robots are common; for example, Giant gro-
cery uses the robot Marty to identify hazards in store (e.g.,
detecting milk spilled on the floor) and HaiDiLao hotpot uses
robots to deliver soup base from kitchen to table side. Grocery
shopping is typically repeat purchase, which does not involve
too much interaction, communication, and emotion, and thus
using mechanical AI to automate the marketing function is
desirable.
At the thinking level, due to the direct customer contact
nature of retailing, AI is used to facilitate in-store shopping
for individual customers. Amazon Go, an experimental gro-
cery store, uses facial recognition technology to identify and
remember each customer, Macy ’s On Call, a mobile shopping
personal aid, provides in-store information to help customers
locate items they are looking for, and Alibaba ’s FashionAI
system uses smart mirrors in sales floor and changing rooms
to display items that each customer selects and suggests com-
plementary items.
Feeling AI can be used to enhance interaction and engage-
ment. For example, service robots can easily do surface acting
(Wirtz et al. 2018 ), and “one-voice ”AI can enhance customer
engagement by integrating various interfaces involved in a
customer ’s journey (Singh et al. 2020 ). At the feeling level,
various embodied robots are used to engage customers and
optimize their experience. For example, Pepper robots are
used by Marriott to greet and interact with customers. Hotels
and travel typically involve more interactions and more emo-
tions, and thus feeling AI naturally suits. Nevertheless, mar-
keters need to be cautious, in that anthropomorphized robots
are found to increase perceived warmth but decrease liking
(Kim et al. 2019 ); thus, in the case of embodied frontline
robots, marketers need to take the appearance of robots into
consideration.
Distribution/logistics/delivery is an area of marketing in
which many functions and processes can be highly automated;
including packaging, inventory, warehousing, supply chain,logistics, and delivery, to provide convenience benefits to
customers.
Tasks in distribution are mostly mechanical, routine, and
repetitive; thus, the standardization benefit of mechanical AI
fits well. We have seen cobots for packaging, drones for de-
livery, IoT for consumption tracking and order refilling, and
self-service technologies for delivering service to customers
directly. Such standardization provides a convenience benefit
to customers.
Moving up to the thinking AI level, we have seen that a
customer ’s future orders and refills can be anticipated by pre-
dictive analytics, and ordered products can be delivered to
customers using autonomous cars equipped with facial recog-
nition technology (e.g., JD.com and Domino ’s use self-
driving cars for delivery).
So far, feeling AI is not as widely used as the other two AI
intelligences for this marketing action, due to distribution ’s
mechanical and thinking nature.
Promotion (communication)
Promotion (communication) is the marketing communica-
tions between the consumer and the marketer. It can include
personal selling, traditional mass media advertising, and more
commonly nowadays direct marketing, database marketing,
and digital marketing (social media marketing, mobile mar-
keting, search engine optimization, etc.). All these can benefit
from AI intelligences.
Mechanical AI is ideal for automating various repeti-
tive, routine, and data intensive functions of promotion
(Huang and Rust 2018 ). Most of these are about promo-
tional media planning and executions. Examples include
automating advertising media planning, scheduling, and
buying; automating search campaigns execution, key-
words researching, and bidding; automating social media
targeting, retargeting, and posting. Especially considering
the real-time nature of digital marketing, such automation
greatly aids marketers ’efforts in the labor-intensive, high-
time-pressure process.
Thinking AI has great potential for promotion content cre-
ation and personalization. For example, AI content writers can
facilitate the generation of ad or post content. A recent exam-
ple was a Lexus car commercial that used IBM Watson to
create the “Driven by Intuition ”commercial script. Content
can be personalized and optimized to different customer pro-
files at different locations and different times. Kantar
Analytics uses content analytics to help advertisers create con-
tent that shortens the idea-to-value time and maximizes con-
tent effectiveness (Gopinath 2019 ).
Feeling AI can be used to track real-time customer re-
sponse to promotional messages (like, dislike, disgusted, fun-
ny, etc.) and then adjust what to deliver and what to emphasize
in both media and content. At the feeling level, more real-time40 J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci.  (2021) 49:30–50