CONCEPTUAL/THEORETICAL PAPER
A strategic framework for artificial intelligence in marketing
Ming-Hui Huang1&Roland T. Rust2
Received: 3 March 2020 / Accepted: 29 September 2020
#The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
The authors develop a three-stage framework for strategic marketing planning, incorporating multiple artificial intelligence (AI)
benefits: mechanical AI for automating repetitive marketing functions and activities, thinking AI for processing data to arrive at
decisions, and feeling AI for analyzing interactions and human emotions. This framework lays out the ways that AI can be used
for marketing research, strategy (segmentation, targeting, and positioning, STP), and actions. At the marketing research stage,
mechanical AI can be used for data collection, thinking AI for market analysis, and feeling AI for customer understanding. At the
marketing strategy (STP) stage, mechanical AI can be used for segmentation (segment recognition), thinking AI for targeting
(segment recommendation), and feeling AI for positioning (segment resonance). At the marketing action stage, mechanical AI
can be used for standardization, thinking AI for personalization, and feeling AI for relationalization. We apply this framework to
various areas of marketing, organized by marketing 4Ps/4Cs, to illustrate the strategic use of AI.
Keywords Artificial intelligence .Machine learning .Mechanical AI .Thinking AI .Feeling AI .Strategic AI marketing .
Marketing strategy .Standardization .Personalization .Relationalization .Segmentation .Targeting .Positioning .4Ps.4Cs
Artificial intelligence (AI) in marketing is currently gaining
importance, due to increasing computing power, lower com-
puting costs, the availability of big data, and the advance of
machine learning algorithms and models. We see wide appli-
cations of AI in various areas of marketing. For example,
Amazon.com ’sP r i m eA i ru s e sd r o n e st oa u t o m a t es h i p p i n g
and delivery. Domino ’s pizza is experimenting with
autonomous cars and delivery robots to deliver pizza to the
customer ’s door. RedBalloon uses Albert ’s AI marketing
platform to discover and reach new customers. Macy ’sO n
Call uses natural language processing to provide an in-storepersonal assistant to customers. Lexus uses IBM Watson to
write its TV commercial scripts, “Driven by Intuition. ”
Affectiva, based on affective analytics, recognizes consumers ’
emotions while they are watching commercials. Replika, a
machine learning-based chatbot, provides emotional comfort
to consumers by mimicking their styles of communication. It
has even been asserted that AI will change the future of mar-
keting substantially (Davenport et al. 2020 ;R u s t 2020 ).
However, academic marketing research to date provides in-
sufficient guidance about how best to leverage the benefits of
AI for marketing impact.
The academic literature on AI in marketing may be sorted
into four main types. These are (1) technical AI algorithms for
solving specific marketing problems (e.g., Chung et al. 2009 ;
Chung et al. 2016 ; Dzyabura and Hauser 2011 ,2019 ), (2)
customers ’psychological reactions to AI (e.g., Luo et al.
2019 ; Mende et al. 2019 ), (3) effects of AI on jobs and society
(e.g., Autor and Dorn 2013 ;F r e ya n dO s b o r n e 2017 ;H u a n g
and Rust 2018 ), and (4) managerial and strategic issues related
to AI (e.g., Fountaine et al. 2019 ; Huang and Rust 2020 ).
The fourth literature stream, managerial issues related to
AI, is currently dominated by consultants gravitating to the
latest hot topic, and largely lacks a solid academic basis, albeit
there are some recent studies trying to tackle strategic market-
ing issues. Examples include unstructured data for variousJohn Hulland and Mark Houston served as Editors for this article.
*Ming-Hui Huang
huangmh@ntu.edu.tw
Roland T. Rust
rrust@rhsmith.umd.edu
1Department of Information Management, College of Management,
National Taiwan University, 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Rd, Taipei 10617,
Taiwan
2Center for Excellence in Service at the Robert H. Smith School of
Business, University of Maryland, 3451 Van Munching Hall,
College Park, MD 20742, USAhttps://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-020-00749-9
/ Published online: 4 November 2020Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science (2021) 49:30–50