Product/branding focuses on product creation (including
tangible goods R&D and production, and service innovation
and process) and branding (i.e., the identity of a product).
Mechanical AI can be used for product/branding actions
that can benefit from standardization. For example, brand logo
design can be automated by a decision-tree like machine
learning using multiple-choice questions, allowing small bud-
get marketers to have AI-assisted branding (Avery 2018 ).
Product adoption and acceptance can be tracked and moni-
tored automatically. While enjoying the standardization ben-
efit of mechanical AI, one existing study is cautious about
automating product decisions, when those products are related
to consumers ’identity (Leung et al. 2018 ).
Thinking AI can be used for product/branding actions that
can benefit from personalization. For example, marketing ana-
lytics can predict market trends for product design that cater
more precisely to target customers ’preferences, big data analyt-
ics can be used to inform product development to quickly adapt
to consumer trends and changing preferences (Dekimpe 2020),
topic modeling can advance service innovation and design
(Antons and Breidbach 2018), adaptive systems can be used
to personalize service to each consumer ’s preference (Chung
et al. 2009; Chung et al. 2016; Dzyabura and Hauser 2019;
Liebman et al. 2019), and deep learning can be used to person-
alize point-of-interest recommendations (Guo et al. 2018).
Feeling AI can be used for product/branding actions that
can benefit from relationalization. For example, conversation-
al AI can be trained to have brand personality to interact with
customers (Wilson and Daugherty 2018 ), machine learning
can recommend TV programs based on the viewer ’sm o o d ,
brands can track their reputation through text and sentiment
analyses tweets, reviews, and social media posts (Rust et al.
2020 ), and chatbots can mimic customers ’communication
style to provide emotional support. Kumar et al. ( 2019 )p r o -
vide a systematic exploration about the role of AI in person-
alized engagement marketing, an approach to create,
communicate, and deliver personalized offering to
customers. Huang and Rust ( 2020 ) show that feeling AI can
be used to engage customers in service interaction.
From the consumer side, existing studies further show that
customers have varying responses and attitudes toward using
AI products. For example, consumers may be resistant to per-
sonal medical AI (Longoni et al. 2019 ), identity-based con-
sumption automation (Leung et al. 2018 ), and anthropomor-
phized consumer robots (Kim et al. 2019 ; Mende et al. 2019 ).
These studies put a boundary condition for marketers when
using AI in the product/branding actions to generate positive
customer responses.
Customer service is emotionally charged, yet is also costly.
A marketer can handle customer service using the three AI
intelligences to balance the cost/satisfaction tradeoff in serv-
ing customers.Mechanical AI, such as text-based chatbots, is widely used
online to handle a massive amount of routine customer ser-
vice. Most customer questions can be answered by such bots.
As long as such automation is not related to customers ’iden-
tity (Leung et al. 2018 ), it is easy to implement, cost-efficient,
and scales up easily.
Thinking AI, such as natural language processing chatbots,
can handle more diversified customers and idiosyncratic is-
sues (e.g., multicultural customers with accents and
contextual-dependent complaints). This is an AI version of
the old telephone menu, except that customers are talking to
chatbots, rather than human customer service agents.
Although a recent study shows that customers may not feel
comfortable yet about talking to chatbots (Luo et al. 2019 ),
with the wider acceptance of AI and the further advance of
chatbots, we can expect the acceptance to increase over time.
Feeling AI, such as Cogito ’s emotional AI systems, can
analyze the pace of speaking, energy and empathy, and com-
mon errors of conversations, and gives in-call guidance to
customer service agents in call centers that make the conver-
sations more natural and engaging.
Price (cost)
Price (cost) action includes the tasks of payment, price setting,
and price negotiation, which is the cost that the consumer pays
for the product.
The payment task is routine and can be handled best by
mechanical AI. Apple Pay, Google Pay, PayPal, Amazon
Payments, and Square are some popular automatic payment
methods for online marketers.
The price setting task is calculation-intensive and analyti-
cal, which is the strength of thinking AI. Misra et al. ( 2019 )
demonstrate that multiarmed bandit algorithms from statistical
machine learning can dynamically adjust online prices in real-
time, even if price information is incomplete. Bauer and
Jannach ( 2018 ) show that a machine-learning framework
based on Bayesian inference can optimize online pricing even
when data are updated frequently, and are sparse and noisy.
Prices can also be personalized by incorporating consumer
online WOM (Feng et al. 2019 ) and consumers ’private per-
sonal information (Montes et al. 2019 ). Dekimpe ( 2020 )p r o -
poses that retailers can use big data to optimize dynamic best-
response pricing algorithms that consider consumer choices,
competitor actions, and supply parameters.
The price negotiation task is interactive; thus, feeling AI is
in a better position to undertake this task. Pulles and Hartman
(2017 ) hypothesize that interpersonal likeability would impact
the price negotiation outcome in a B2B relationship, suggest-
ing that interaction, communication, and sentiment may be
critical for price negotiation.39 J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci.  (2021) 49:30–50