segment. Wang et al. ( 2017 ) demonstrate that transfer learning
can be used to model the tail of the distribution, by learning
from the head of the distribution and transferring the learning
to the data-poor tail. This flexibility in aggregation and disag-
gregation allows marketers to find the right size of segment.
Existing studies have shown how data mining can be used
to uncover patterns that are difficult for human marketers to
see. For example, text-mining and machine learning can be
used to automatically process and analyze loan requests to
slice borrowers into good customers (those will pay back the
loan) and bad customers (those will not) (Netzer et al. 2019 ),
automated text analysis and correspondence analysis can be
used for psychographic consumer segmentation in the art mar-
ket (Pitt et al. 2020 ), data mining can be used to obtain tourist
segments based on the meaning of destinations to consumers,
that is better than the classic clustering methods (Valls et al.
2018 ), and retail customers can be micro-segmented based on
their preferences for personalized recommendation (Dekimpe
2020 ).
Targeting
Targeting is choosing the right segment(s) on which to focus
the firm ’s marketing actions. Slicing the market is more me-
chanical and can be done automatically by mechanical AI,
given the relevant data. However, choosing the right segment
requires domain knowledge, judgement, and intuition.
Various technologies and analytics have been used for
targeting, such as search engines using keywords searched
and browsing history to target search consumers, and social
media platforms using interests, content, and connections to
target social media consumers (Liu 2020 ). The representative
AI for this decision is recommendation engines that can rec-
ommend various potential targets for marketing managers ’
final verdict, and predictive modeling that can be used to
choose which segment to target.
Existing studies show that various thinking AI can be used
for this purpose. Examples inclu de targeting customers using a
combination of statistical and data-mining techniques (Drew
et al. 2001), screening and targeting c ancer outreach marketing
using machine learning and causal forests (Chen et al. 2020),
optimizing promotion targetin g for new customers using vari-
ous machine learning methods (Simester et al. 2020), identify-
ing the best targets for proactive churn programs from field
experimental data using machine learning techniques (Ascarza
2018), and profiling digital consumers for targeting using on-
line browsing data (Neumann et al. 2019).
Positioning
Positioning bridges product attributes and customer benefits
by finding a competitively advantageous position for the prod-
uct in customers ’minds. This term is often associated withbrand positioning or advertising positioning for its association
with customer perceptions and communications to maintain a
desirable perception. Daabes and Kharbat ( 2017 )d e m o n s t r a t e
how data mining techniques can be used to distill a customer-
based perceptual map, as an alternative to marketer knowl-
edge, from mining customers ’perceptions.
Compared with the mechanical-based segmentation and
the thinking-based targeting, positioning is more about speak-
ing to customers ’hearts, typically as a positioning statement
or slogan in promotional communication. Gali et al. ( 2017 )
find that tourism positioning slogans in top destinations tend
to emphasize the affective component.
Some successful positioning statements help brands to oc-
cupy a unique position in customers ’minds and thus succeed
in the market for a long time. For example, Nike ’s“Just do it, ”
Apple computer ’s“Be different, ”and McDonalds ’“I’ml o v -
ing it ”all communicate with customers by speaking to their
hearts. Feeling AI, such as feeling analytics, is ideal for this
strategic decision to help develop compelling slogans by un-
derstanding what resonates with target customers.
Academic research on this decision is sparse, indicating a
research gap for using feeling AI to create compelling
positioning.
Marketing action
At this strategic stage, marketers can use mechanical AI for
standardization, thinking AI for personalization, and feeling
AI for relationalization (Huang and Rust 2020 ). Depending on
which benefit is desirable, a marketer can use multiple AI
intelligences individually or collectively. We illustrate the
use of AI intelligences in various areas of marketing with
examples and current and future scenarios, and support the
illustration using the existing literature. The discussion is or-
ganized by marketing 4Ps (product, price, place, and promo-
tion) (Kotler and Keller 2006 ) and the corresponding 4Cs
(consumer, cost, convenience, and communication)
(Lauterborn 1990 ) to emphasize that the 4P actions need to
be able to deliver consumer benefits.
Product (consumer)
Product (consmer) actions include goods and services as of-
ferings to meet the consumer ’s needs and wants. Such actions
typically include product design, packaging, branding, and
returns, and the associated customer services in these activi-
ties. We illustrate this decision using product/branding and
customer service, with product/branding representing the
“product ”side and customer service representing the “con-
sumer ”side. Product and branding are related in that branding
is the identity (e.g., name, symbol, logo) of a product. We put
them together to maintain the simplicity of the table.38 J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci.  (2021) 49:30–50