generation for feeling and emotional intelligence (Huang and
Rust 2018 ; Huang et al. 2019 ), and IoT may impose con-
straints and restrictions on consumer journeys (Hoffman and
Novak 2018 ; Novak and Hoffman 2019 ). Thus, in using
thinking AI for market analysis, for targeting, and for person-
alized marketing actions, marketers need to be aware of the
potential AI biases and have better knowledge about how AI
learns to avoid AI biases.
Limitations of feeling AI
Although using feeling AI for two-way interactions involving
humans and for analyzing human feelings and emotions is
common in marketing due to the high-touch nature of many
marketing functions (e.g., frontline interactions, customer ser-
vice, and emotional ad appeals), we don ’t yet have true emo-
tional machines that can recognize, act, and react to human
emotions appropriately. The substitutive use of mechanical
and thinking AI for feeling AI may generate some unintended
consequences.
Technology unreadiness The fact that marketers are using
“lower ”intelligence AI for feeling functions (i.e., using me-
chanical AI to capture emotional data and using thinking AI to
analyze emotional data) may inflate the perceived capability
of AI to assist marketers in understanding customer emotions.
For example, marketers may overly rely on such feeing AI to
interact with customers, resulting in customer disengagement.
Srinivasan et al. ( 2016 ) find that higher levels of customer
activity on social media lead to disengagement (i.e.,
Facebook unlikes). Unlikes, as affective responses, may imply
that customer responses may be polarized more easily if tech-
nologies (social media in their study) are not able to interact
with customers appropriately.
Customer unreadiness Another consideration is that cus-
tomers may not be ready for interacting with feeling AI. Luo
et al. ( 2019 ) find that many customers hang up on call-out
marketing chatbots once they realize they are talking to bots.
The Technology Readiness Index surveyed what people think
about AI in the workplace and only 10% consider feeling AI
to have the biggest impact in the past 5 years on their jobs,
indicating that customers are not aware that AI can “have ”
feelings and may constitute a threat to their jobs (Espino
2019 ).
Contributions and conclusions
The most disruptive aspect of AI is that it replaces and im-
proves upon human thinking capability. One of the mostrevolutionary characteristics of modern thinking AI is its abil-
ity to personalize by analyzing big data in an automatic way.
This creates a quantum leap in marketing ’s ability to target
individual customers. Marketing primarily requires thinking
intelligence and feeling intelligence. Until now there has been
only limited ability of technology to help with those things.
Now as thinking AI is advancing rapidly, it is gaining the
ability to assume many of the thinking tasks in marketing.
Eventually will even assume many of the feeling tasks in
marketing, as AI develops further. Such efforts are already
underway by researchers.
We see that marketers who cannot wait for technology to
sufficiently advance use mechanical AI and thinking AI for
feeling tasks, due to true feeling AI not being ready yet. We
also see that AI intelligences may not be used in the most
effective way (e.g., collecting customer data indiscriminately
or accepting AI recommendation blindly). Thus, we develop
this strategic framework to help marketers leverage the bene-
fits of multiple AI intelligences for marketing impact. In this
framework, we lay out the ways in which various AI intelli-
gences can be used in marketing research, marketing strategy
(STP), and marketing action (4Ps/4Cs). It shows the strategic
roles that AI can play in marketing, as well as points out the
limitations of current AI, to help marketers use AI wisely.
Funding This research was supported by grants (106-2410-H-002-056-
MY3 and 107 –2410-H-002-115-MY3) from the Ministry of Science and
Technology, Taiwan.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-
tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, pro-
vide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were
made. The images or other third party material in this article are included
in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's
Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
References
Agarwal, R., Dugas, M., Gao, G., & Kannan, P. K. (2020). Emerging tech-
nologies and analytics for a new era of value-centered marketing in
healthcare. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 48 (2), 9 –23.
Ascarza, E. (2018). Retention futility: Targeting high-risk customers
might be ineffective. Journal of Marketing Research, 55 (1), 80 –98.
Autor, D. H., & Dorn, D. (2013). The growth of low-skill service jobs and
the polarization of the US labor market. American Economic
Review, 103 (5), 1553 –1597.
Avery, J. (2018). Tailor brands: Artificial intelligence-driven branding.
Harvard Business School Case 519 –017, (August).47 J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci.  (2021) 49:30–50