benefits, as shown in Fig. 1. At the marketing research stage,
AI is used for market intelligence, including mechanical AI
for data collection, thinking AI for market analysis, and feel-
ing AI for customer understanding.
At the marketing strategy stage, AI is used for the strategic
decisions of segmentation, targeting, and positioning.
Specifically, mechanical AI is ideal for discovering novel cus-
tomer preference patterns in unstructured data, thinking AI is
ideal for recommending the best segment(s) to target, and
feeling AI is ideal for communicating with the targeted cus-
tomers about the product.2
At the marketing action stage, AI is used for the benefits of
standardization, personalization, and relationalization, indi-
vidually or synergistically. Marketers need to decide which
AI intelligence(s) to use for which marketing actions. For
example, payment and delivery are functions that can benefit
from standardization by using mechanical AI, such as auto-
matic payment and delivery tracking. Digital marketing can
benefit from personalization by using thinking AI, such as
various recommendation systems. Customer service and
frontline customer interaction can benefit from
relationalization by using feeling AI, such as social robots
greeting customers and conversational AI providing customer
service. The discussion of the strategic use of AI in marketing
action is organized in terms of the marketing 4Ps/4Cs, to bal-
ance both the marketer and customer sides. Table 1defines
various strategic elements of this strategic AI framework,
Table 2illustrates marketing actions by using mechanical AI
for standardization, thinking AI for personalization, and feel-
ing AI for relationalization, with various examples and current
and future scenarios,3and Table 3summarizes the existing
literature for using AI in each of the strategic elements. We
discuss this three-stage framework in the following sections.
Marketing research
At this strategic stage, mechanical AI can be used for data
collection, thinking AI for market analysis, and feeling AI
for customer understanding.
Mechanical AI for data collection Mechanical AI can automate
data collection about the market, the environment, the firm,
the competitors, and the customers. In the digitally connected
world, market data can be easily tracked and monitored. Data
sensing, tracking, and collection are routine, repetitive tasks
that can be easily automated by mechanical AI.
Existing studies have shown various ways of using me-
chanical AI for data collec tion. For example, customerintelligence, including data about consumers, their activities,
and their environments, can be collected if they use connected
devices (Cooke and Zubcsek 2017 ), product usage and con-
sumption experience can be visualized with Internet of Things
(IoT) (Ng and Wakenshaw 2017 ), various advanced technol-
ogies and analytics can capture unstructured marketing activ-
ity data (Balducci and Marinova 2018 ), in-car sensors can
track driving behavior for determining insurance premiums
(Soleymanian et al. 2019 ), and retail technologies, such as
heat maps, video surveillance, and beacons, can be used for
profiling and recognizing retail shoppers (Kirkpatrick 2020 ).
These studies show that, given the repetitive, routine, but
high-volume nature of market data, mechanical AI can collect
data efficiently at scale.
The data collection capability of mechanical AI is not lim-
ited to observable behavioral data; it can also be used to facil-
itate survey or experimental data collection to capture con-
sumer psychographics, opinions, and attitudes. For example,
human administration and supervision of ongoing surveys are
no longer required and can be automated. SurveyMonkey and
SurveyCake are two commercial survey platforms that auto-
mate survey design and data collection.
Thinking AI for market analysis Thinking AI can be used to
identify competitors in a well-defined market or outside op-
tions in a new market, and to derive insights for a product ’s
competitive advantages (i.e., the way the product can do better
than competitors to meet customer demands). For example,
supervised machine learning can be used for a mature market
where the market structure is stable and known to marketers,
whereas unsupervised machine learning can be used for a new
market or spotting outside options where the market structure
and trends are unstable and unknown to marketers.
In marketing practice, predictive analytics are commonly
used to predict volatile market trends and customers ’hetero-
geneous preferences. For example, Gap, the fashion clothing
brand, uses it to predict fast fashion trends to better meet
customer needs, and Amazon uses it to predict a customer ’s
future orders (i.e., anticipatory fulfilling).
Existing studies have demonstrated various potential uses
of thinking AI for market analysis. Automated text analysis
can be applied for consumer research (Humphreys and Wang
2018 ), for marketing insights (i.e., prediction and understand-
ing) (Berger et al. 2019 ), and for analyzing consumer consid-
eration heuristics (Dzyabura and Hauser 2011 ). Machine
learning algorithms and lexicon-based text classification can
be used to analyze various social media datasets (Hartmann
et al. 2019 ). Also, big data marketing analytics is now a main-
stream approach for generating marketing insights (Berger
et al. 2019 ; Chintagunta et al. 2016 ; Liu et al. 2016 ;W e d e l
and Kannan 2016 ).
Specific applications include mapping market structures
for large retail assortments using a neural network language2The term “product ”is used to refer to both tangible goods and intangible
services.
3The two strategic stages, marketing research and marketing strategy, are less
relevant for this marketing practice illustration.33 J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci.  (2021) 49:30–50