J. Pers. Med. 2020 ,10, 213 6 of 14
After training all the 5-fold deep CNN models, the best model was identiﬁed by testing with the
test dataset.
J. Pers. Med. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 14 
 The 1458 images selected as the training dataset were randomly divided into five folds. This was 
done to perform 5-fold cross validation to evaluate  the model training, while avoiding overfitting or 
bias [33–35]. Within each fold, the dataset was partitioned into independent training and validation 
sets using an 80 to 20% split. The selected valida tion set was a completely independent fold from the 
other training folds and was used to evaluate the tr aining status during the training. After one model 
training step was completed, the other independent fo ld was used as a validation set and the previous 
validation set was reused as part of the training set to evaluate the model training. An overview of 
the 5-fold cross validation performed in this study is  presented in Figure 4. As an additional method 
to prevent overfitting, drop out was applied to the last fully connected layers, and early stopping was 
also applied by monitoring the va lidation loss at each epoch. 
 
Figure 4. The overview of the 5-fold cross va lidation applied in this study. 
The above training process was repeated for all 24  experimental groups (Figure. 1). All deep 
CNN models were trained and evaluated on an NVIDIA DGX StationTM (NVIDIA Corp., CA, USA) 
with an Ubuntu 18 operating system, 256 GB sy stem memory, and four NVIDIA Telsa V100 GPU. 
The building, training, validation, and prediction of DL models were performed using the Keras [36] 
library and TensorFlow [37] backend engine. The initial training rate of each model was 0.00001. A 
ReduceLROn-Plateau method was employed because it reduces the learning rate when it stops 
improving the training performance. The RMSprop algorithm was used as the solver. After training 
all the 5-fold deep CNN models, the best model wa s identified by testing with the test dataset. 
2.7. Performance Evaluation 
To comprehensively evaluate the screening performance on the test dataset, the accuracy, 
sensitivity, specificity, receiver operating characte ristic (ROC) curve, and precision recall (PR) curve 
were calculated. The accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity score can be calculated as follows: 
Accurac y= 𝑇𝑃 + 𝑇𝑁
𝑇𝑃 + 𝑇𝑁 + 𝐹𝑁 + 𝐹𝑃  
Sensitivit y= 𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃 + 𝐹𝑁  
Figure 4. The overview of the 5-fold cross validation applied in this study.
2.7. Performance Evaluation
To comprehensively evaluate the screening performance on the test dataset, the accuracy, sensitivity,
speciﬁcity, receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, and precision recall (PR) curve were calculated.
The accuracy, sensitivity, and speciﬁcity score can be calculated as follows:
Accuracy =TP+TN
TP+TN+FN+FP
Sensitivity =TP
TP+FN
Speciﬁcity =TN
TN+FP.
TPand FPare the number of correctly and incorrectly predicted images, respectively. Similarly,
TNand FNrepresent the number of correctly and incorrectly predicted images, respectively. The area
under the ROC curve (AUC) was also calculated in this study.
2.8. Interpretation of Model Prediction
Because it is di cult to know the process of how deep CNNs make predictions, DL models have
often been referred to as non-interpretable black boxes. To determine the decision-making process of
the model, and which features are most important for the model to screen COVID-19 in CXR images,
this study employed the gradient-weighted class activation mapping technique (Grad-CAM) [ 18,19] so
that the most signiﬁcant regions for screening COVID-19 in CXR images were highlighted.
3. Results
3.1. Classiﬁcation Performance
Table 2 summarizes the classiﬁcation performance of the three classes, normal (N), pneumonia
(P), and COVID-19 (C), for each experimental group.