J. Pers. Med. 2020 ,10, 213 11 of 14
Figure 8 shows representative examples of correctly classiﬁed cases for each of the three classes
(normal, pneumonia, and COVID-19) in the VGG16-TF2 experimental group that showed the highest
classiﬁcation performance. Through the Grad-CAM result in Figure 8, it is possible to identify the
signiﬁcant region where the di erence in CXR image features of each of the three classes is made.
Figures 9 and 10 show representative examples of wrong and right classiﬁcations based on the wrong
reasons. In most cases where classiﬁcation has occurred based on the wrong reason, there is a foreign
body in the chest cavity of the CXR image.
4. Discussion
In addition to the long-term sustainability of the COVID-19 pandemic and symptom similarity with
other pneumonia diseases, the limited medical resources and lack of expert radiologists have greatly
increased the importance of screening for COVID-19 from CXR images for the right concentration
of medical resources and isolation of potential patients. To overcome these limitations, various
cutting-edge artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) technologies have been applied to screen COVID-19 from
various medical data. Accordingly, until recently, numerous new DL models, such as COVID-Net [ 10],
Deep-COVID [ 16], CVDNet [ 38], and Covid-resnet [ 13], to classify COVID-19 through publicly shared
CXR images have been proposed, or mutual comparison studies through the transfer learning of
various pre-trained DL models have been presented [ 39,40]. These previous papers showed high
accuracy of more than 95%. However, most of them performed transfer learning but did not mention
the speciﬁc degree of ﬁne-tuning. It is also rare to have a qualitative evaluation. As a result, it is often
dicult to reproduce a similar degree of accuracy with the same pre-trained DL model. Therefore,
in the present study, the e ects of the degree of ﬁne-tuning and layer depths on deep CNNs for the
screening performance of COVID-19 from CXR images were evaluated. Furthermore, these inﬂuences
were visually interpreted using the Grad-CAM technique.
4.1. Scalability of Deep CNN
It is known that the VGG architecture used as the deep CNN backbone network in this experiment
does not leverage residual principles, has a lightweight design, and low architectural diversity, so it is
convenient to ﬁne-tune [10]. In particular, the VGG-16 and VGG-19 used in this study have the same
architecture with ﬁve convolutional blocks; however, the depth of the layers of VGG-19 is deeper than
that of VGG-16 (Figure 3).
According to Table 2 and Figure 5, the overall classiﬁcation performance of VGG-16 was higher
than that of VGG-19, regardless of the ﬁne-tuning degree. These results are similar to the fact that the
latest deep neural networks do not guarantee higher accuracy in the classiﬁcation of medical images
such as CXR images, as in other previous research papers [ 39]. It can be considered that in the case of
medical images requiring less than 10 classiﬁcations, deep CNNs with low scalability can show better
performance, unlike the classiﬁcation of general objects that require more than 1000 classiﬁcations.
4.2. Degree of Fine-Tuning of Deep CNN
In general, the deep CNN model learned from pre-trained deep neural networks on a large natural
image dataset which could be used to classify common images but cannot be well utilized for speciﬁc
classifying tasks of medical images. However, according to a previous study that described the e ects
and mechanisms of ﬁne-tuning on deep CNNs, when certain convolutional blocks of a deep CNN
model were ﬁne-tuned, the deep CNN model could be further specialized for speciﬁc classifying
tasks [ 32,41]. More speciﬁcally, the earlier layers of a deep CNN contain generic features that should
be useful for many classiﬁcation tasks; however, later layers progressively contain more specialized
features to the details of the classes contained in the original dataset. Using this property, when the
parameters of the early layers are preserved and that in later layers are updated during the training of
new datasets, the deep CNN model can be e ectively used in new classiﬁcation tasks. In conclusion,
ﬁne-tuning uses the parameters learned from a previous training of the network on a large dataset,