J. Pers. Med. 2020 ,10, 213 4 of 14
J. Pers. Med. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 14 
 Because the image data used in this experiment were collected from multiple centers, most of 
the images have different contrast and dimensions. Th erefore, all images used in this study required 
contrast correction through the histogram equalization technique and resizing to a uniform size 
before the experiment. In this study, preproce ssing was performed using the contrast limited 
adaptive histogram equalization (CLAHE) techniqu e [25], which has been adopted in previous 
studies related to lung segmentation and pneumoni a classification [26–28]. Figure 2 shows sample 
images with CXR contrast corre cted using the CLAHE technique.  For the consistency of image 
analysis, each image was resized to a uniform size of 800 × 800. 
 
Figure 2. Sample images after applying contrast correction by contrast limited adaptive histogram 
equalization (CLAHE) and the semantic segmentation of lung on original chest X-ray (CXR) images. 
2.4. Convolutional Neural Networks 
This study employed two different deep CNNs as backbone networks: VGG-16 and VGG-19. 
VGG [29] is a pre-trained CNN, from the Visual  Geometry Group, Department of Engineering 
Science, University of Oxford. The numbers 16 and 19 represent the number of  layers with trainable 
weights of VGG networks. VGG architecture had been widely adopted and recognized as a state of the art in both general and medical image classification tasks [30]. Since VGG-16 and VGG-19 have 
the same neural network architecture but differe nt layer depths, a comparative evaluation of 
performance according to the degree of layer dept hs can be performed under the same architectural 
condition. 
2.5. Fine-Tuning 
When the training dataset is relatively small,  transferring a network pre-trained on a large 
annotated dataset and fine-tuning it for a specific ta sk can be an efficient way to achieve acceptable 
accuracy and less training time [31]. Although the classification of diseases from CXR images differs 
from object classification and natural images, they can share similar learned features [32]. During the 
fine-tuning of transfer learning with deep CNNs, model weights were initialized based on pre-training on a general image dataset, except that some  of the last blocks were unfrozen so that their 
weights were updated in each training step. In this study, the VGG-16 and VGG-19, used in this study as a backbone neural network, consist of 5 blocks regardless of the network layer depth. Therefore, 
Figure 2. Sample images after applying contrast correction by contrast limited adaptive histogram
equalization (CLAHE) and the semantic segmentation of lung on original chest X-ray (CXR) images.
2.5. Fine-Tuning
When the training dataset is relatively small, transferring a network pre-trained on a large
annotated dataset and ﬁne-tuning it for a speciﬁc task can be an e cient way to achieve acceptable
accuracy and less training time [ 31]. Although the classiﬁcation of diseases from CXR images di ers
from object classiﬁcation and natural images, they can share similar learned features [ 32]. During the
ﬁne-tuning of transfer learning with deep CNNs, model weights were initialized based on pre-training
on a general image dataset, except that some of the last blocks were unfrozen so that their weights were
updated in each training step. In this study, the VGG-16 and VGG-19, used in this study as a backbone
neural network, consist of 5 blocks regardless of the network layer depth. Therefore, ﬁne-tuning was
performed in a total of 6 steps in a manner that was unfrozen sequentially from 0 to 5 blocks starting
from the last block, depending on how many blocks were unfrozen. As a result, VGG-16 and VGG-19
were used as backbone networks, and each deep CNN was divided into 6 subgroups according to the
degree of ﬁne-tuning. Figure 3 shows the schematic diagrams of the layer composition and the degree
of ﬁne-tuning of VGG-16 and VGG-19.
2.6. Training
The 1458 images selected as the training dataset were randomly divided into ﬁve folds. This was
done to perform 5-fold cross validation to evaluate the model training, while avoiding overﬁtting or
bias [ 33–35]. Within each fold, the dataset was partitioned into independent training and validation
sets using an 80 to 20% split. The selected validation set was a completely independent fold from the
other training folds and was used to evaluate the training status during the training. After one model
training step was completed, the other independent fold was used as a validation set and the previous
validation set was reused as part of the training set to evaluate the model training. An overview of the
5-fold cross validation performed in this study is presented in Figure 4. As an additional method to
prevent overﬁtting, drop out was applied to the last fully connected layers, and early stopping was
also applied by monitoring the validation loss at each epoch.