J. Pers. Med. 2020 ,10, 213 12 of 14
and then adjusts the parameters in later layers from the new dataset, improving the performance and
accuracy in the new classiﬁcation task.
As far as the authors know, there has been no previous research paper evaluating the accuracy of
COVID-19 screening according to the degree of ﬁne-tuning. According to Figure 5, regardless of the
scalability of VGG, classiﬁcation accuracy increases as the degree of ﬁne-tuning increases; however,
the ﬁne-tuning of more than a certain convolutional block (more than 3 blocks in this experiment)
decrease the classiﬁcation accuracy. Therefore, it seems necessary to ﬁnd the appropriate degree of
ﬁne-tuning by judging the degree of ﬁne-tuning in the transfer learning by a hyper-parametric variable
such as batch-size or learning rate in DL.
4.3. Visual Interpretation Using Grad-CAM
Grad-CAM uses the gradient information ﬂowing into the last convolutional layer of the deep
CNN to understand the signiﬁcance of each neuron for making decisions [ 18]. In this experiment,
a qualitative evaluation of classiﬁcation adequacy was performed using the Grad-CAM technique.
In the case of the deep CNN model, which showed the best classiﬁcation as shown in Figure 8, image
feature points for each class were speciﬁed within the lung cavity in CXR images. However, as shown
in Figure 9, if there is a foreign substance in the lung cavity in a CXR image, it can be classiﬁed
incorrectly. Moreover, even if a CXR image is correctly classiﬁed, it can be classiﬁed for an incorrect
reason as shown in Figure 10. In the CXR image analysis using the DL algorithm, the implanted
port catheter and pacemaker or deﬁbrillator generator have shown similar results to the previous
studies that interfere with the performance of the DL algorithm by causing false positives or false
negatives [ 42]. This shows the pure function of the Grad-CAM technique and suggests candidate areas
to be excluded through image preprocessing for areas or foreign body subjects that a ect classiﬁcation
accuracy improvement on the image.
5. Conclusions
This experiment showed the appropriate transfer learning strategy of a deep CNN to screen for
COVID-19 in CXR images as follows. In using the deep CNNs for COVID-19 screening in CXR images,
it is not always guaranteed to achieve cutting-edge results, increasing their complexity and layer depth.
In addition, when applying transfer learning to a deep CNN for classiﬁcation, an appropriate degree
of ﬁne-tuning is required, and this must also be treated as an important hyper-parametric variable that
aects the accuracy of DL. In particular, in the case of image classiﬁcation using DL, it is also necessary
to qualitatively evaluate a classiﬁcation as to whether an appropriate classiﬁcation has occurred based
on the correct reason, using visual interpretation methods such as the Grad-CAM technique.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, K.-S.L., J.Y.K., W.S.C., N.H.K. and K.Y.L.; data curation, K.-S.L., J.Y.K.
and E.-t.J.; formal analysis, K.-S.L., J.Y.K. and E.-t.J.; funding acquisition, K.-S.L.; investigation, K.-S.L., J.Y.K. and
K.Y.L.; methodology, K.-S.L. and E.-t.J.; project administration, K.-S.L. and N.H.K.; resources, N.H.K.; software,
K.-S.L. and E.-t.J.; supervision, K.-S.L., J.Y.K. and W.S.C.; validation, J.Y.K., W.S.C., N.H.K. and K.Y.L.; visualization,
K.-S.L.; writing—original draft, K.-S.L.; writing—review and editing, K.-S.L., W.S.C., N.H.K. and K.Y.L. All authors
have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea under Grant NRF-2019R1I1A1
A01062961 and a Korea University Ansan Hospital Grant O2000301.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to
publish the results.
References
1. World Health Organization. Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19): Situation Report, 182 ; World Health Organization:
Geneva, Switzerland, 2020.