J. Pers. Med. 2020 ,10, 213 2 of 14
again act as another source of infection in a healthy community. Conversely, there have been reports of
high sensitivity to COVID-19 screening in radiological tests such as chest computed tomography or
chest X-ray (CXR) [ 3–5]. According to the reports on CXR characteristics of patients conﬁrmed as the
COVID-19 case, it demonstrated multi-lobar involvement and peripheral airspace opacities, which
was most frequently demonstrated as ground-glass [ 6]. However, in the early stages of COVID-19,
this ground-glass pattern may appear at the edges of the lung vessels, or as asymmetric di used
airspace opacities [ 7], it can be di cult to visually detect the characteristic patterns of COVID-19 from
X-rays. Therefore, considering the fact that the number of suspected patients increases exponentially
in contrast to the limited number of highly trained radiologists, the diagnostic supporting procedures,
using an automated screening algorithm with a producing objective, reproducible, and scalable results,
can speed up earlier precise diagnosis.
In recent years, deep learning (DL) technology, a speciﬁc ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
technology, has made remarkable advances in medical image analysis and diagnosis, and is considered
to be a potentially powerful tool to solve such problems [ 8,9]. Despite the lack of available published
data to date, DL approaches for the diagnosis of COVID-19 from CXR have been actively studied [ 10–17].
Because the available data are limited, previous research has focused on creating a new DL architecture
based on deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for providing e ective diagnosis algorithms.
However, previous studies have focused only on the e cacy of the newly created network through
comparison between di erent CNNs, so the e ect of the layer depth, called scalability, and degree of
ﬁne-tuning of transfer learning with CNN has not been comparatively studied. Therefore, the main
objective of this study was to further investigate the e ect of layer depth on the same CNN architecture,
and the degree of ﬁne-tuning of transfer learning with the same CNN at the same hyper-parameters.
Furthermore, by employing the gradient-weighted class activation map (Grad-CAM) [ 18,19], this study
provided a visual interpretation explaining the feature characteristic region that the DL model has the
most inﬂuence on classiﬁcation prediction.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Experimental Design
The overall experimental steps and experimental groups used in this study are shown in Figure 1.
The experiment consisted of 12 experimental subgroups. To evaluate the scalability of the same CNN
architecture, the experiment consisted of two main groups according to the layer depths of each CNN.
Each CNN main group is divided into 6 subgroups according to the degree of ﬁne-tuning.
J. Pers. Med. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 14 
  
Figure 1. The experiment consists of a total of 12 experimental subgroups. It is largely divided into 
two main groups according to the layer depths , and each convolutional neural network (CNN) 
subgroup is divided into 6 subgroups according to the degree of fine-tuning. 
2.2. Datasets 
The datasets used for classification are described  in Table 1. Several publicly available image 
data repositories have been us ed to collect COVID-19 chest -ray  images. Normal and pneumonia 
samples were extracted from the open source NI H chest X-ray dataset used for the Radiological 
Society of North America (RSNA) pneumonia detecti on challenge [20]. The total dataset was curated 
into three classes: normal, pneumonia, and COVID-19 . Since the balance of data for each class is a 
very important factor in classifi cation analysis, this study randomly extracted the images of other 
classes according to the number of COVID-19 images that can be obtained as much as possible. 
The entire dataset was combined with 607 COVID-19  image data publicly shared at the time of 
the study, as well as 607 normal and 607 pneumo nia chest radiographs randomly extracted from the 
RSNA Pneumonia Detection Challenge dataset, resulting in 1821 data being combined. In the case of the COVID-19 dataset, four public  datasets were used, and only one image was used when the source 
of the image was duplicated. In the public datasets  used in the experiment, patient information was 
de-identified or not provided. 
The entire collected dataset was randomly divided into a training and testing ratio of 80:20 for 
each class, and training data were also randomly  divided by a training and validation ratio of 80:20 
for use in the 5-fold cross validation. 
Table 1. Description of datasets for COVID-19 classification. 
Class Reference Samples 
Normal RSNA pneumonia detec tion challenge [20] 607 
Pneumonia RSNA pneumonia det ection challenge [20] 607 
COVID-19 COVID-19 image data collection [21] 468 
Figure 1 COVID-19 Chest X-Ray [22] 35 
Actualmed COVID-19 Chest X-Rays [23] 58 
COVID-19 Radiography Database [24] 46 
Total  1821 
2.3. Image Preprocessing 
Figure 1. The experiment consists of a total of 12 experimental subgroups. It is largely divided into two
main groups according to the layer depths, and each convolutional neural network (CNN) subgroup is
divided into 6 subgroups according to the degree of ﬁne-tuning.