Foundation Models for Decision Making Workshop at NeurIPS 2023
Perception and Prediction 
Language Descriptions Perception and Prediction: 
- Car at (12.05,4.12), moving to (11.98, 2.30) 
…
Ego-States: 
- Velocity: (0, 2.34) 
…
 
 GPT as a 
Motion Planner Language Outputs Notable Objects: 
- Car at (2.34,19.08) … 
Potential Effects: 
- Within the safety zone of the ego-vehicle … 
Planned Trajectory: 
[(0.12, 2.98), …, (3.45,18.90)] 
 Motion Planning Results 
Figure 1: Overview of GPT-Driver. We reformulate motion planning as a language modeling prob-
lem. We convert observations and ego-states into language prompts, guiding the LLM to produce
a planned trajectory alongside its decision-making process in natural language. Subsequently, this
planned trajectory is reverted to the numerical format for motion planning.
ties in natural language processing. GPT (Brown et al., 2020) is a pioneering work that proposed
the Generative Pre-trained Transformer to tackle language understanding and generation problems.
The following versions GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) demonstrated impressive chatting and
reasoning ability. LLaMA and LLaMA 2 (Touvron et al., 2023a;b) are open-source foundation
language models. To better harness the capabilities of LLMs, InstructGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022)
proposed to train LLMs to follow instructions with human feedback. (Wei et al., 2022) proposed
chain-of-thought prompting to enhance the reasoning ability of LLMs. ReAct (Yao et al., 2022)
exploited the synergy of reasoning and acting in LLMs. These methods have bolstered the language
understanding and decision-making capabilities of LLMs. Despite the success of LLMs in language
understanding, exploiting the power of LLMs in autonomous driving remains an open challenge, as
the inputs and outputs of autonomous systems are not language. In this paper, we tackle this chal-
lenge by reformulating the traditional driving problem into a language modeling problem. Moreover,
we propose a novel prompting-reasoning-finetuning strategy tailored for autonomous driving, which
is significantly different from the existing works (Yao et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022) and amplifies
the reasoning capabilities of the LLM-based planner.
There is also a series of works (Ahn et al., 2022; Fu et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2022; Song et al.,
2022) using LLMs for task-level planning, i.e., planning high-level actions for embodied agents. In
contrast, our method focuses on motion planning, i.e.planning waypoint-based low-level driving
trajectories for autonomous vehicles. Unlike the natural language descriptions used for high-level
actions, trajectories are represented as sets of numerical coordinates, posing a greater challenge for
LLMs. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to demonstrate GPT-3.5’s capability for
detailed numerical reasoning in motion planning.
3 GPT-D RIVER
In this section, we present GPT-Driver, an LLM-based motion planner for autonomous driving.
An overview of our GPT-Driver is shown in Figure 1. We first introduce the basic concept and
problem definition of motion planning in the context of autonomous driving (Section 3.1). Then,
we demonstrate how to reformulate motion planning as a language modeling problem (Section 3.2).
Finally, we introduce how to address this language modeling problem using a novel prompting-
reasoning-finetuning strategy (Section 3.3).
3.1 P ROBLEM DEFINITION
The objective of motion planning in autonomous driving is to plan a safe and comfortable driving
trajectory Twith observations Oand ego-states Sas input. The motion planning process Fcan be
formulated as:
T=F(O,S). (1)
3