Foundation Models for Decision Making Workshop at NeurIPS 2023
results, and they need to predict high-precision waypoint coordinates that represent a future driving
trajectory. While LLMs excel at language understanding, they cannot directly handle heterogeneous
data. Moreover, it is yet to be established whether LLMs are capable of precise numerical reasoning,
e.g.forecasting precise coordinate values that are demanded by motion planning.
To this end, we propose a novel approach that successfully unleashes the power of LLMs to address
the motion planning problem in autonomous driving. The critical insight is that we can reformulate
motion planning as a language modeling problem. Specifically, we propose to tackle the heteroge-
neous planner inputs by transforming them into unified language tokens, and we instruct a GPT-3.5
model to understand these tokens and then articulate the waypoint coordinates of a future driving tra-
jectory through natural language description. We further elucidate the essence of language modeling
in motion planning from the perspective of tokenizers. Moreover, to stimulate the numerical reason-
ing potential of GPT-3.5, we propose a prompting-reasoning-finetuning strategy, where GPT-3.5 is
initially prompted in the context of autonomous driving, and then performs chain-of-thought reason-
ing to generate sensible outputs, and finally the model is fine-tuned with human driving trajectories
to ensure alignments with human driving behaviors. With this strategy, GPT-3.5 is able to fore-
cast highly precise waypoint coordinates with only a centimeter-level error. The chain-of-thought
reasoning further enhances transparency in decision-making and makes our approach more inter-
pretable than other learning-based methods. Benefiting from the state-of-the-art GPT-3.5 model,
our approach also exhibits good generalization and common sense reasoning ability.
We summarize our contributions as follows:
·We propose GPT-Driver, a GPT-based motion planner, innovatively transforming the motion plan-
ning task into a language modeling problem. We also provide an intuitive interpretation of language
modeling in motion planning through the lens of the GPT tokenizer.
·We propose a novel prompting-reasoning-finetuning strategy in the context of autonomous driving,
which enables precise numerical reasoning and transparent decision-making of our approach.
·Our GPT-Driver demonstrates superior motion planning performance, few-shot generalization abil-
ity, and interpretability compared to the state-of-the-art motion planners on the nuScenes dataset.
2 R ELATED WORKS
Motion planning in autonomous driving. Motion planning aims to forecast safe and comfortable
driving routes for autonomous vehicles. Existing approaches can be divided into three categories:
rule-based, optimization-based, and learning-based methods. The rule-based approaches (Treiber
et al., 2000; Thrun et al., 2006; Bacha et al., 2008; Leonard et al., 2008; Urmson et al., 2008; Chen
et al., 2015; Sauer et al., 2018; Fan et al., 2018; Dauner et al., 2023) resort to pre-defined rules
to determine future driving trajectories. Intelligent Driver Model (Treiber et al., 2000) (IDM) is a
seminal work that proposed a heuristic motion model to follow a leading vehicle in traffic while
maintaining a safe distance. Despite being simple and interpretable, IDM lacks sufficient capability
to handle complicated driving behaviors such as U-turns. The optimization-based approaches (Li
et al., 2022; Liniger et al., 2015; Scheffe et al., 2022) formulate motion planning as an optimal
control problem. In contrast, the learning-based approaches (Bojarski et al., 2016; Codevilla et al.,
2018; 2019; Rhinehart et al., 2019; Zeng et al., 2019; Sadat et al., 2020; Casas et al., 2021; Hu et al.,
2022; 2023) proposed to handle complex driving scenarios by learning from large-scale human
driving data. Neural motion planner (Zeng et al., 2019) suggested using a learned cost volume to
assess each feasible driving trajectory. P3 (Sadat et al., 2020), MP3 (Casas et al., 2021), ST-P3 (Hu
et al., 2022), and UniAD (Hu et al., 2023) proposed end-to-end learning of planning and other tasks
in autonomous driving. These approaches rely on deep neural networks, while the decision-making
process is implicitly encoded in neural networks and thus less interpretable.
Our GPT-Driver is a learning-based motion planner. In contrast to other learning-based approaches,
we leverage the generalization and reasoning ability of the GPT-3.5 model, which enables our model
to tackle those long-tailed driving scenarios that are generally challenging to other methods. Our
method also has better interpretability thanks to the novel prompting-reasoning-finetuning strategy.
Large language models. Large Language Models (LLMs) are artificial intelligence systems trained
on Internet-scale data to understand and generate human-like text, showcasing remarkable abili-
2