Foundation Models for Decision Making Workshop at NeurIPS 2023
Thoughts:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 - Notable Objects from Perception: animal at (-1.93,7.00)                                                                                                                                                                                                     
   Potential Effects from Prediction: within the safety zone of the ego-vehicle at the 1.0-second timestep                                                                                                                                                       
 - Notable Objects from Perception: adult at (-1.21,6.78)                                                                                                                                                                                                      
   Potential Effects from Prediction: within the safety zone of the ego-vehicle at the 1.0-second timestep                                                                                                                                                       
Meta Action: TURN RIGHT WITH A CONSTANT SPEED                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Trajectory:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
[(0.11,1.14), (0.45,2.28), (1.12,3.47), (2.18,4.54), (3.65,5.29), (5.49,5.58)]     
Figure 3: An example of the expected outputs of the LLM. The chain-of-thought reasoning and
the planned trajectory are highlighted in red.
Prompting. A key obstacle in using LLMs for motion planning is the disparity in data types: while
motion planners process heterogeneous inputs of observations and ego-states, LLMs are primarily
designed to handle language inputs. To overcome the above limitations, we resort to the parame-
terized representations of observations and ego-states and convert them into language descriptions.
In particular, we utilize detected objects that are parameterized by their class names and locations
as perception results. For each object, we formulate a sentence capturing these attributes. These
sentences collectively form the perception prompts. Similarly, we can craft prediction prompts by
converting the parameterized future trajectories of detected objects into natural language descrip-
tions. We can also generate the prompts for ego-states by articulating the ego vehicle’s current
status such as velocity and heading. Furthermore, we provide general context information about
motion planning, such as the coordinate system, objective, etc.Finally, we rephrase these prompts
in a more concise format using ChatGPT-4 and utilize them as the inputs to the GPT-3.5 model. An
example of prompts is shown in Figure 2.
Reasoning. A common weakness of current motion planners is their limited interpretability, since
these planners generate planned trajectories from black-box neural networks without elucidating the
reasoning behind their decisions. To address this problem, we propose a novel chain-of-thought
reasoning strategy specifically designed for autonomous driving. In particular, we summarize the
chain-of-thought reasoning process in autonomous driving into 3steps: First, from the perception
results, the motion planner needs to identify those critical objects that may affect its driving dynam-
ics. Second, by analyzing the future motions of these critical objects from the prediction results, the
planner should infer when, where, and how this critical object may influence the ego vehicle. Third,
on top of the insights gained from the previous analyses, the planner needs to draw a high-level
driving decision and then convert it into a planned trajectory. This three-step reasoning framework
offers a more structured approach to motion planning and ensures greater transparency throughout
the planning procedure. An example is shown in Figure 3.
Fine-tuning. To align the LLM’s outputs with human driving behaviors, we employ a simple fine-
tuning strategy using the OpenAI fine-tuning API. Specifically, we collect human driving trajectories
ˆTfor each scenario from driving logs. To generate the ground truth guidance of chain-of-thought
reasoning ˆR, we initially compute a hypothetical ego-trajectory based on the current velocity and
acceleration of the ego vehicle, assuming there is no interference. Then, we identify the critical
objects and their potential effects by examining if any objects, based on their present positions
and predicted future paths, overlap with the hypothetical ego-trajectory. We found this strategy
works well in practice, enabling us to bypass the tedious task of manually annotating the reasoning
process. Finally, we can fine-tune the LLM’s outputs {T,R}with the ground truth {ˆT,ˆR}using the
language modeling loss LLMdefined in Equation 5. During inference, we transform the language
output of a planned trajectory back to its numerical format for evaluation.
4 E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we demonstrate the effectiveness, generalization ability, and interpretability of our
GPT-Driver through extensive experiments on the large-scale and real-world nuScenes dataset (Cae-
sar et al., 2020). We first introduce the experimental settings and evaluation metrics, and then com-
pare our approach against state-of-the-art motion planning methods on the nuScenes dataset. Finally,
we conduct studies to evaluate the generalization and interpretability of our approach.
6