Foundation Models for Decision Making Workshop at NeurIPS 2023
GPT-D RIVER : LEARNING TO DRIVE WITH GPT
Jiageng Mao1Yuxi Qian1Junjie Ye1Hang Zhao2Yue Wang1
1University of Southern California2Tsinghua University
ABSTRACT
We present a simple yet effective approach that can transform the OpenAI GPT-3.5
model into a reliable motion planner for autonomous vehicles. Motion planning is
a core challenge in autonomous driving, aiming to plan a driving trajectory that is
safe and comfortable. Existing motion planners predominantly leverage heuristic
methods to forecast driving trajectories, yet these approaches demonstrate insuffi-
cient generalization capabilities in the face of novel and unseen driving scenarios.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to motion planning that capitalizes
on the strong reasoning capabilities and generalization potential inherent to Large
Language Models (LLMs). The fundamental insight of our approach is the refor-
mulation of motion planning as a language modeling problem, a perspective not
previously explored. Specifically, we represent the planner inputs and outputs as
language tokens, and leverage the LLM to generate driving trajectories through
a language description of coordinate positions. Furthermore, we propose a novel
prompting-reasoning-finetuning strategy to stimulate the numerical reasoning po-
tential of the LLM. With this strategy, the LLM can describe highly precise trajec-
tory coordinates and also its internal decision-making process in natural language.
We evaluate our approach on the large-scale nuScenes dataset, and extensive ex-
periments substantiate the effectiveness, generalization ability, and interpretability
of our GPT-based motion planner. Code is now available here.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Autonomous driving stands as one of the most ambitious and challenging frontiers in modern tech-
nology, aiming to revolutionize transportation systems globally. Central to this endeavor is the con-
cept of motion planning, a cornerstone in autonomous driving technology that seeks to devise safe
and comfortable driving trajectories for autonomous vehicles. The intricacies of motion planning
arise from its need to accommodate diverse driving scenarios and make reasonable driving decisions.
As autonomous vehicles interact with various environments and unpredictable human drivers, the
robustness and explainability of motion planners become essential for driving safety and reliability.
Existing motion planning approaches generally fall into two categories. The rule-based methods
(Treiber et al., 2000; Thrun et al., 2006; Bacha et al., 2008; Leonard et al., 2008; Urmson et al., 2008;
Chen et al., 2015; Sauer et al., 2018; Fan et al., 2018) designed explicit rules to determine driving
trajectories. These methods have clear interpretability but generally fail to handle extreme driving
scenarios that are not covered by rules. Alternatively, the learning-based approaches (Bojarski et al.,
2016; Codevilla et al., 2018; 2019; Rhinehart et al., 2019; Zeng et al., 2019; Sadat et al., 2020; Casas
et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2022; 2023; Dauner et al., 2023) resorted to a data-driven strategy and learned
their models from large-scale human driving trajectories. While exhibiting good performance, these
approaches sacrifice interpretability by viewing motion planning as a black-box forecasting problem.
Essentially, both prevailing rule-based and learning-based approaches are devoid of the common
sense reasoning ability innate to human drivers, which restricts their capabilities in tackling long-
tailed driving scenarios.
Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022;
OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a;b) have demonstrated great generalization power and common
sense reasoning ability emerged from these language models, indicating their potential in addressing
problems in the realm of autonomous driving. An important question naturally arises: How can we
leverage LLMs to resolve the motion planning problem? The major challenge is that motion planners
are required to process heterogeneous inputs, e.g., ego-vehicle information, maps, and perception
1arXiv:2310.01415v3  [cs.CV]  5 Dec 2023