Foundation Models for Decision Making Workshop at NeurIPS 2023
A planned trajectory Tcan be represented as a set of waypoints of ttimesteps: T ∈Rt×2:
T={(x1, y1),···,(xt, yt)}, (2)
where (xi, yi)is a 2D waypoint coordinate that denotes the vehicle’s anticipated location at the
timestep i. The ego-states Sgenerally consist of a historical trajectory of this vehicle and its current
status such as velocity and acceleration. The observations Ocontain the outputs of perception and
prediction systems, e.g., detected object bounding boxes and their future motions.
The learning-based motion planners generally learn the trajectory Tby imitating a human driver’s
driving trajectory ˆTwithL1regression, where the loss function Lregcan be formulated as:
Lreg=TX
i=1(|xi−ˆxi|+|yi−ˆyi|), (3)
where (xi, yi)and(ˆxi,ˆyi)are waypoints of the planned trajectory Tand the human trajectory T′
respectively. Albeit simple, these approaches attempt to simultaneously regress waypoints across
different scales, e.g.coordinate values ranging from 0 to over 50, which generally results in impre-
cise coordinate estimations of the more distant waypoints. To this end, we propose a novel approach
that supplants the traditional L1trajectory regression with a language modeling framework.
3.2 M OTION PLANNING AS LANGUAGE MODELING
The crucial insight of this paper is to transform motion planning into a language modeling problem.
Given a driving trajectory T, we can represent it as a sequence of words that describe this trajectory:
T=K({(x1, y1),···,(xt, yt)}) ={w1,···, wn}, (4)
where wiis the i-th word in this sequence. Please note that each coordinate value xoryin Equation
2 can be freely transformed into a set of words {w}using a language tokenizer K. For instance, a
coordinate value 23.17can be transformed into three words: “ 23”, “.”, and “ 17” using the GPT-3.5
tokenizer. With this language representation, we can then reformulate the motion planning problem
as a language modeling problem:
LLM=−NX
i=1logP( ˆwi|w1,···, wi−1), (5)
where wandˆware the words from the planned trajectory Tand the human driving trajectory ˆT
respectively. By learning to maximize the occurrence probability Pof the words ˆwderived from the
human driving trajectory ˆT, motion planners can generate human-like driving trajectories.
We can derive a natural interpretation of how language modeling works in motion planning through
the lens of tokenization. Take the coordinate value 23.17as an example. Through tokenization, it is
decomposed into “ 23” which is the integer part of this value, “ .”, and “ 17” which is the decimal part
of this value. Hence, the process of predicting this waypoint coordinate is essentially first estimating
a coarse location at the meter level (“ 23” here) and then estimating a fine-grained location at the
centimeter level (“ 17” here). Moreover, the estimations are established by classifications of the
correct tokens in the vocabulary, rather than regression of their absolute values.
We note that language modeling has been employed in other tasks of computer vision and robotics,
such as object detection (Chen et al., 2021; Xue et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023) and robotic control
(Brohan et al., 2023). However, these approaches heavily rely on specially designed tokens and to-
kenizers, which makes their methods less intuitive and hard to generalize to other tasks. In contrast,
our key observation is that a commonly used language tokenizer such as the GPT tokenizer already
has sufficient capability to estimate very precise numerical values for motion planning. This unique
finding makes our approach significantly simpler than prior methods, and also makes our approach
more generalizable and compatible with natural language.
4