Neural Architecture Search without Training
Figure 4. Kendall’s Tau correlation across each of the NDS CIFAR-10 search spaces. We compare our method to two alternative measures:
grad norm andsynflow . The results for grad norm refer to the absolute Euclidean-norm of the gradients over one random
mini-batch of data. synflow is the gradient-based score deﬁned by Tanaka et al. (2020), summed over each parameter in the network.
We ﬁnd in all cases there is a positive correlation between
the validation accuracy and the score. This is particularly
strong for NAS-Bench-201 and NDS-DARTS. We show the
Kendall’s Tau correlation coefﬁcient between sand ﬁnal
accuracy on CIFAR-10 for NDS in Figure 4. For compar-
ison, we include the best-performing architecture scoring
functions from Abdelfattah et al. (2021) — grad norm
andsynflow — as baselines. The ﬁrst is the sum of the
gradient norms for every weight in the network, and the sec-
ond is the summed Synaptic Flow score derived in Tanaka
et al. (2020). our score (Equation 2) correlates with accuracy
across all of the search spaces, where the other two scores
ﬂuctuate substantially. These results point to our score being
effective on a wide array of neural network design spaces.
3.1. Ablation Study
How important are the images used to compute the
score? Since our approach relies on randomly sampling
a single mini-batch of data, it is reasonable to question
whether different mini-batches result in different scores.
To determine whether our method is dependent on mini-
batches, we randomly select 10 architectures from different
CIFAR-100 accuracy percentiles in NAS-Bench-201 and
compute the score separately for 20 random CIFAR-100
mini-batches. The resulting box-and-whisker plot is given
in Figure 5(top-left): the ranking of the scores is reasonably
robust to the speciﬁc choice of images. In Figure 5(top-
right) we compute our score using normally distributed
random inputs; this has little impact on the general trend.
This suggests our score captures a property of the network
architecture, rather than something data-speciﬁc.
Does the score change for different initialisations? Fig-
ure 5(bottom-left) shows how the score for our 10 NAS-
Bench-201 architectures differs over 20 initialisations.
While there is some noise, the better performing networks
remain distinctive, and can be isolated.
Figure 5. Ablation experiments showing the effect on our score us-
ing different CIFAR-100 mini-batches (top-left), random normally-
distributed input images (top-right), weight initialisations (bottom-
left), and mini-batch sizes (bottom-right) for 10 randomly selected
NAS-Bench-201 architectures (one in each 5%percentile range
from 50-55, ..., 95-100). For each network, 20 samples were taken
for each ablation. The mini-batch size was 128 for all experiments
apart from the bottom-right. The bottom-right experiment used
mini-batch sizes of 32, 64, 128, and 256; as the score depends on
the mini-batch size we normalised the score by the minimum score
of the sampled networks from the same mini-batch size.
Does the size of the mini-batch matter? AsKHscales
with mini-batch size we compare across mini-batch sizes
by dividing a given score by the minimum score using the
same mini-batch size from the set of sampled networks.
Figure 5(bottom-right) presents this normalised score for
different mini-batch sizes. The best performing networks
remain distinct.
How does the score evolve as networks are trained? Al-