Neural Architecture Search without Training
Joseph Mellor1Jack Turner2Amos Storkey2Elliot J. Crowley3
Abstract
The time and effort involved in hand-designing
deep neural networks is immense. This has
prompted the development of Neural Architec-
ture Search (NAS) techniques to automate this
design. However, NAS algorithms tend to be slow
and expensive; they need to train vast numbers
of candidate networks to inform the search pro-
cess. This could be alleviated if we could par-
tially predict a network’s trained accuracy from
its initial state. In this work, we examine the
overlap of activations between datapoints in un-
trained networks and motivate how this can give
a measure which is usefully indicative of a net-
work’s trained performance. We incorporate this
measure into a simple algorithm that allows us to
search for powerful networks without any train-
ing in a matter of seconds on a single GPU, and
verify its effectiveness on NAS-Bench-101, NAS-
Bench-201, NATS-Bench, and Network Design
Spaces. Our approach can be readily combined
with more expensive search methods; we exam-
ine a simple adaptation of regularised evolution-
ary search. Code for reproducing our experi-
ments is available at https://github.com/
BayesWatch/nas-without-training .
1. Introduction
The success of deep learning in computer vision is in no
small part due to the insight and engineering efforts of hu-
man experts, allowing for the creation of powerful archi-
tectures for widespread adoption (Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015; He et al., 2016; Szegedy
et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2017). However, this manual
design is costly, and becomes increasingly more difﬁcult
as networks get larger and more complicated. Because of
these challenges, the neural network community has seen a
1Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh2School of In-
formatics, University of Edinburgh3School of Engineering,
University of Edinburgh. Correspondence to: Joseph Mellor
<joe.mellor@ed.ac.uk >.
Proceedings of the 38thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).shift from designing architectures to designing algorithms
thatsearch for candidate architectures (Elsken et al., 2019;
Wistuba et al., 2019). These Neural Architecture Search
(NAS) algorithms are capable of automating the discovery
of effective architectures (Zoph & Le, 2017; Zoph et al.,
2018; Pham et al., 2018; Tan et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019;
Real et al., 2019).
NAS algorithms are broadly based on the seminal work
of Zoph & Le (2017). A controller network generates an
architecture proposal, which is then trained to provide a
signal to the controller through REINFORCE (Williams,
1992), which then produces a new proposal, and so on.
Training a network for every controller update is extremely
expensive; utilising 800 GPUs for 28 days in Zoph & Le
(2017). Subsequent work has sought to ameliorate this by
(i) learning stackable cells instead of whole networks (Zoph
et al., 2018) and (ii) incorporating weight sharing ; allow-
ing candidate networks to share weights to allow for joint
training (Pham et al., 2018). These contributions have ac-
celerated the speed of NAS algorithms e.g. to half a day on
a single GPU in Pham et al. (2018).
For some practitioners, NAS is still too slow; being able to
perform NAS quickly (i.e. in seconds) would be immensely
useful in the hardware-aware setting where a separate search
is typically required for each device and task (Wu et al.,
2019; Tan et al., 2019). This could be achieved if NAS
could be performed without any network training . In this
paper we show that this is possible. We explore NAS-Bench-
101 (Ying et al., 2019), NAS-Bench-201 (Dong & Yang,
2020), NATS-Bench (Dong et al., 2021), and Network De-
sign Spaces (NDS, Radosavovic et al., 2019), and examine
the overlap of activations between datapoints in a mini-batch
for an untrained network (Section 3). The linear maps of
the network are uniquely identiﬁed by a binary code cor-
responding to the activation pattern of the rectiﬁed linear
units. The Hamming distance between these binary codes
can be used to deﬁne a kernel matrix (which we denote by
KH) which is distinctive for networks that perform well;
this is immediately apparent from visualisation alone across
two distinct search spaces (Figure 1). We devise a score
based on KHand perform an ablation study to demonstrate
its robustness to inputs and network initialisation.
We incorporate our score into a simple search algorithm