Neural Architecture Search without Training
(a) NAS-Bench-201
 (b) NDS-DARTS
Figure 1. KHfor a mini-batch of 128 CIFAR-10 images for untrained architectures in (a) NAS-Bench-201 (Dong & Yang, 2020) and (b)
NDS-DARTS (Radosavovic et al., 2019). KHin these plots is normalised so that the diagonal entries are 1. TheKHare sorted into
columns based on the ﬁnal CIFAR-10 validation accuracy when trained. Darker regions have higher similarity. The proﬁles are distinctive;
theKHfor good architectures in both search spaces have less similarity between different images. We can use KHfor an untrained
network to predict its ﬁnal performance without any training. Note that (b) covers a tighter accuracy range than (a), which may explain it
being less distinctive.
that doesn’t require training (Section 4). This allows us to
perform architecture search quickly, for example, on CIFAR-
10 (Krizhevsky, 2009) we are able to search for a network
that achieves 92:81% accuracy in 30 seconds within the
NAS-Bench-201 search space; several orders of magnitude
faster than traditional NAS methods for a modest change
in ﬁnal accuracy. We also show how we can combine our
approach with regularised evolutionary search (REA, Pham
et al., 2018) as an example of how it can be readily integrated
into existing NAS techniques.
We believe that this work is an important proof-of-concept
for NAS without training. The large resource and time costs
associated with NAS can be avoided; our search algorithm
uses a single GPU and is extremely fast. The beneﬁt is two-
fold, as we also show that we can integrate our approach
into existing NAS techniques for scenarios where obtaining
as high an accuracy as possible is of the essence.
2. Background
Designing a neural architecture by hand is a challenging
and time-consuming task. It is extremely difﬁcult to intuitwhere to place connections, or which operations to use.
This has prompted an abundance of research into neural
architecture search (NAS); the automation of the network
design process. In the pioneering work of Zoph & Le (2017),
the authors use an RNN controller to generate descriptions
of candidate networks. Candidate networks are trained, and
used to update the controller using reinforcement learning
to improve the quality of the candidates it generates. This
algorithm is very expensive: searching for an architecture to
classify CIFAR-10 required running 800 GPUs for 28 days.
It is also inﬂexible; the ﬁnal network obtained is ﬁxed and
cannot be scaled e.g. for use on mobile devices or for other
datasets.
The subsequent work of Zoph et al. (2018) deals with these
limitations. Inspired by the modular nature of successful
hand-designed networks (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015; He
et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2017), they propose searching over
neural building blocks, instead of over whole architectures.
These building blocks, or cells, form part of a ﬁxed overall
network structure. Speciﬁcally, the authors search for a
standard cell, and a reduced cell (incorporating pooling) for
CIFAR-10 classiﬁcation. These are then used as the building