Neural Architecture Search without Training
chitectures themselves contain almost as much information
about ﬁnal performance at initialisation as after training.
Table 2(a) also shows the effect of sample size ( N). We show
the accuracy of networks chosen by our method for each N.
We list optimal accuracy for each N, and random selection
over the whole benchmark, both averaged over 500 runs. We
observe that sample size increases NASWOT performance.
NATS-Bench. Dong et al. (2021) expanded on the original
NAS-Bench-201 work to include a further search space:
NATS-Bench SSS. The same non-weight sharing meth-
ods were evaluated as in NAS-Bench-201. Unlike NAS-
Bench-201, search and evaluation are performed on the
same dataset. Implementation details are available in Dong
et al. (2021). We observe that sample size increases NAS-
WOT performance signiﬁcantly on NATS-Bench SSS, to
the point where it is extremely similar to other methods.
A key practical beneﬁt of NASWOT is its rapid execution
time. This may be important when repeating NAS several
times, for instance for several hardware devices or datasets.
This affords us the ability in future to specialise neural
architectures for a task and resource environment cheaply,
demanding only a few seconds per setup. Figure 7 shows
our method in contrast to other NAS methods for NAS-
Bench-201, showing the trade-off between ﬁnal network
accuracy and search time.
4.1. Assisted Regularised EA — AREA
Our proposed score can be straightforwardly incorporated
into existing NAS algorithms. To demonstrate this we im-
plemented a variant of REA (Real et al., 2019), which we
call Assisted-REA (AREA). REA starts with a randomly-
selected population (10 in our experiments). AREA instead
randomly-samples a larger population (in our experiments
we double the randomly-selected population size to 20) and
uses our score (Equation 2) to select the initial population
(of size 10) for the REA algorithm. Pseudocode can be
found in Algorithm 2 with results on NAS-Bench-101 and
NAS-Bench-201 in Tables 1 and 2. AREA outerforms REA
on NAS-Bench-201 (CIFAR-100, ImageNet-16-120) but
is very similar to REA on NAS-Bench-101. We hope that
future work will build on this algorithm further.
5. Conclusion
NAS has previously suffered from intractable search spaces
and heavy search costs. Recent advances in producing
tractable search spaces, through NAS benchmarks, have
allowed us to investigate if such search costs can be avoided.
In this work, we have shown that it is possible to navigate
these spaces with a search algorithm—NASWOT—in a
matter of seconds, relying on simple, intuitive observations
made on initialised neural networks, that challenges moreAlgorithm 2 Assisted Regularised EA — AREA
population = []
generator = RandomGenerator()
fori=1:M do
net = generator.generate()
scored net = net.score()
population.append(scored net)
Keep the top N scored networks in the population
history = []
fornet in population do
trained net = net.train()
history.append(trained net)
while time limit not exceeded do
Sample sub-population, S, without replacement
from population
Select network in S with highest accuracy as parent
Mutate parent network to produce child
Train child network
Remove oldest network from population
population.append(child network)
history.append(child network)
chosen net = Network in history with highest accuracy
Figure 7. Plot showing the search time (as measured using a
1080Ti) against ﬁnal accuracy of the proposed NAS-Bench-201
network for a number of search strategies.
expensive black box methods involving training. Future ap-
plications of this approach to architecture search may allow
us to use NAS to specialise architectures over multiple tasks
and devices without the need for long training stages. We
also demonstrate how our approach can be combined into an
existing NAS algorithm. This work is not without its limita-
tions; our scope is restricted to convolutional architectures
for image classiﬁcation. However, we hope that this will be
a powerful ﬁrst step towards removing training from NAS
and making architecture search cheaper, and more readily
available to practitioners.
Acknowledgements. This work was supported in part by
the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Pervasive Paral-
lelism and a Huawei DDMPLab Innovation Research Grant.
The authors are grateful to Eleanor Platt, Massimiliano Pat-
acchiola, Paul Micaelli, and the anonymous reviewers for
their helpful comments. The authors would like to thank
Xuanyi Dong for correspondence on NAS-Bench-201.