20
feature statistics (i.e., the mean and variance). With instance
normalisation , the style of each individual image could be
directly normalised to the target style. As a result, the rest
of the network only needs to take care of the content loss,
making the objective easier to learn. Based on instance nor-
malisation , Dumoulin et al. [53] further propose conditional
instance normalisation , which is to scale and shift parameters
ininstance normalisation layers (shown in Equation (8)). Fol-
lowing the interpretation proposed by Huang and Belongie,
by using different afﬁne parameters, the feature statistics
could be normalised to different values. Correspondingly,
the style of each individual sample could be normalised to
different styles. Furthermore, in [51], Huang and Belongie
propose adaptive instance normalisation to adaptively instance
normalise content feature by the style feature statistics
(shown in Equation (9)). In this way, they believe that
the style of an individual image could be normalised to
arbitrary styles. Despite the superior performance achieved
byinstance normalisation ,conditional instance normalisation
and adaptive instance normalisation , the reason behind their
success still remains unclear. Although Ulyanov et al. [50]
and Huang and Belongie [51] propose their own hypothesis
based on pixel space and feature space respectively, there
is a lack of theoretical proof for their proposed theories.
In addition, their proposed theories are also built on other
hypothesises, e.g., Huang and Belongie propose their inter-
pretation based on the observation by Li et al. [42]: channel-
wise feature statistics, namely mean and variance, could
represent styles. However, it remains uncertain why feature
statistics could represent the style, or even whether the
feature statistics could represent all styles, which relates
back to the interpretability of style representations.
Adversarial examples. Several studies have shown that
deep classiﬁcation networks are easily fooled by adversar-
ial examples [125], [126], which are generated by applying
perturbations to input images (e.g., Figure 14(c)). Previous
studies on adversarial examples mainly focus on deep clas-
siﬁcation networks. However, as shown in Figure 14, we
ﬁnd that adversarial examples also exist in generative style
transfer networks. In Figure 14(d), one can hardly recognise
the content, which is originally contained in Figure 14(c).
It reveals the difference between generative networks and
the human vision system. The perturbed image is still
recognisable to humans but leads to a different result for
generative style transfer networks. However, it remains un-
clear why some perturbations could make such a difference,
and whether some similar noised images uploaded by the
user could still be stylised into the desired style. Interpreting
and understanding adversarial examples in NST could help
to avoid some failure cases in stylisation.
8.3 Three-way Trade-off in Neural Style Transfer
In the ﬁeld of NST, there is a three-way trade-off between
speed, ﬂexibility and quality. IOB-NST achieves superior
performance in quality but is computationally expensive.
PSPM-MOB-NST achieves real-time stylisation; however,
PSPM-MOB-NST needs to train a separate network for each
style, which is not ﬂexible. MSPM-MOB-NST improves the
ﬂexibility by incorporating multiple styles into one single
model, but it still needs to pre-train a network for a set
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Figure 14: Adversarial example for NST: (a) is the original
content and style image pair and (b) is the stylised result of
(a) with [47]; (c) is the generated adversarial example and
(d) is the stylised result of (c) with the same model as (b).
of target styles. Although ASPM-MOB-NST algorithms suc-
cessfully transfer arbitrary styles, they are not that satisfy-
ing in perceptual quality and speed. The quality of data-
driven ASPM quite relies on the diversity of training styles.
However, one can hardly cover every style due to the great
diversity of artworks. Image transformation based ASPM
algorithm transfers arbitrary styles in a learning-free man-
ner, but it is behind others in speed. Another related issue
is the problem of hyperparameter tuning. To produce the
most visually appealing results, it remains uncertain how
to set the value of content and style weights, how to choose
layers for computing content and style loss, which optimiser
to use and how to set the value of learning rate. Currently,
researchers empirically set these hyperparameters; however,
one set of hyperparameters does not necessarily work for
any style and it is tedious to manually tune these parameters
for each combination of content and style images. One of
the keys for this problem is a better understanding of the
optimisation procedure in NST. A deep understanding of
optimisation procedure would help understand how to ﬁnd
the local minima that lead to a high quality.
9 D ISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
Over the past several years, NST has continued to become
an inspiring research area, motivated by both scientiﬁc
challenges and industrial demands. A considerable amount
of researches have been conducted in the ﬁeld of NST.
Key advances in this ﬁeld are summarised in Figure 2. A
summary of the corresponding style transfer loss functions
can be found in Table 5. NST is quite a fast-paced area, and
we are looking forwarding to more exciting works devoted
to advancing the development of this ﬁeld.
During the period of preparing this review, we are also
delighted to ﬁnd that related researches on NST also bring
new inspirations for other areas [127], [128], [129], [130],
[131] and accelerate the development of a wider vision
community. For the area of Image Reconstruction , inspired
by NST, Ulyanov et al. [127] propose a novel deep image
prior, which replaces the manually-designed total variation
regulariser in [33] with a randomly initialised deep neural
network. Given a task-dependent loss function L, an image
Ioand a ﬁxed uniform noise zas inputs, their algorithm can
be formulated as:
= arg min
L(g(z);Io); I=g(z): (10)
One can easily notice that Equation (10) is very similar
to Equation (7). The process in [127] is equivalent with