19
a simple experiment for user studies with the stylised results
of different NST algorithms. In our experiment, each stylised
image is rated by 8 different raters (4 males and 4 females)
with the same occupation and age. As depicted in Figure 13,
given the same stylised result, different observers with the
same occupation and age still have quite different ratings.
Nevertheless, there is currently no gold standard evaluation
method for assessing NPR and NST algorithms. This chal-
lenge of aesthetic evaluation will continue to be an open
question in both NPR and NST communities, the solution
of which might require the collaboration with professional
artists and the efforts in the identiﬁcation of underlying
aesthetic principles.
In the ﬁeld of NST, there is another important issue
related to aesthetic evaluation. Currently, there is no stan-
dard benchmark image set for evaluating NST algorithms.
Different authors typically use their own images for evalu-
ation. In our experiment, we use the carefully selected NPR
benchmark image set named NPRgeneral [92], [93] as our
content images to compare different techniques, which is
backed by the comprehensive study in [92], [93]; however,
we have to admit that the selection of our style images is far
from being a standard NST benchmark style set. Different
from NPR, NST algorithms do not have explicit restrictions
on the types of style images. Therefore, to compare the style
scalability of different NST methods, it is critical to seek
a benchmark style set which collectively exhibits a broad
range of possible properties, accompanied by a detailed
description of adopted principles, numerical measurements
of image characteristics as well as a discussion of limitations
like the works in [92], [93], [95]. Based on the above discus-
sion, seeking an NST benchmark image set is quite a sep-
arate and important research direction, which provides not
only a way for researchers to demonstrate the improvement
of their proposed approach over the prior art, but also a tool
to measure the suitability of one particular NST algorithm
to one particular requirement. In addition, as the emergence
of several NST extensions (Section 5), it remains another
open problem to study the specialised benchmark data set
and also the corresponding evaluation criteria for assessing
those extended works (e.g., video style transfer, audio style
transfer, stereoscopic style transfer, character style transfer
and fashion style transfer).
8.2 Interpretable Neural Style Transfer
Another challenging problem is the interpretability of NST
algorithms. Like many other CNN-based vision tasks, the
process of NST is like a black box, which makes it quite
uncontrollable. In this part, we focus on three critical issues
related to the interpretability of NST, i.e., interpretable and
controllable NST via disentangled representations, normali-
sation methods associated with NST, and adversarial exam-
ples in NST.
Representation disentangling. The goal of representa-
tion disentangling is to learn dimension-wise interpretable
representations, where some changes in one or more speciﬁc
dimensions correspond to changes precisely in a single
factor of variation while being invariant to other factors
[114], [115], [116], [117]. Such representations are useful to
a variety of machine learning tasks, e.g., visual conceptsTable 4: Normalisation methods in NST.
Paper Author Name
[50] Ulyanov et al. Instance Normalisation
[53] Dumoulin et al. Conditional Instance Normalisation
[51] Huang and Belongie Adaptive Instance Normalisation
learning [118] and transfer learning [119]. For example, in
style transfer, if one could learn a representation where
the factors of variation (e.g., colour, shape, stroke size,
stroke orientation and stroke composition) are precisely
disentangled, these factors could then be freely controlled
during stylisation. For example, one could change the stroke
orientations in a stylised image by simply changing the cor-
responding dimension in the learned disentangled represen-
tation. Towards the goal of disentangled representation, cur-
rent methods ﬁt into two categories, which are supervised
approaches and unsupervised ones. The basic idea of super-
vised disentangling methods is to exploit annotated data to
supervise the mapping between inputs and attributes [120],
[121]. Despite their effectiveness, supervised disentangling
approaches typically require numbers of training samples.
However, in the case of NST, it is quite complicated to
model and capture some of those aforementioned factors
of variation. For example, it is hard to collect a set of
images which have different stroke orientations but exactly
the same colour distribution, stroke size and stroke com-
position. By contrast, unsupervised disentangling methods
do not require annotations; however, they usually yield
disentangled representations which are dimension-wise un-
controllable and uninterpretable [122], i.e., we could not
control what would be encoded in each speciﬁc dimension.
Based on the above discussion, to acquire disentangled
representations in NST, the ﬁrst issue to be addressed is
how to deﬁne, model and capture the complicated factors
of variation in NST.
Normalisation methods. The advances in the ﬁeld of
NST are closely related to the emergence of novel nor-
malisation methods, as shown in Table 4. Some of these
normalisation methods also have an inﬂuence on a larger
vision community beyond style transfer (e.g., image re-
colourisation [123] and video colour propagation [124]). In
this part, we ﬁrst brieﬂy review these normalisation meth-
ods in NST and then discuss the corresponding problem.
The ﬁrst emerged normalisation method in NST is instance
normalisation (orcontrast normalisation ) proposed by Ulyanov
et al. [50]. Instance normalisation is equivalent to batch nor-
malisation when the batch size is one. It is shown that style
transfer network with instance normalisation layer converges
faster and produces visually better results compared with
the network with batch normalisation layer. Ulyanov et al. be-
lieve that the superior performance of instance normalisation
results from the fact that instance normalisation enables the
network to discard contrast information in content images
and therefore makes learning simpler. Another explanation
proposed by Huang and Belongie [51] is that instance normal-
isation performs a kind of style normalisation by normalising