2
“Dwelling in the Fuchun Mountains” onto a photo of The
Great Wall. Since the algorithm of Gatys et al. does not have
any explicit restrictions on the type of style images and also
does not need ground truth results for training, it breaks the
constraints of previous approaches. The work of Gatys et
al. opened up a new ﬁeld called Neural Style Transfer (NST) ,
which is the process of using Convolutional Neural Network
to render a content image in different styles.
The seminal work of Gatys et al. has attracted wide
attention from both academia and industry. In academia,
lots of follow-up studies were conducted to either improve
or extend this NST algorithm. The related researches of NST
have also led to many successful industrial applications
(e.g., Prisma [11], Ostagram [12], Deep Forger [13]). How-
ever, there is no comprehensive survey summarising and
discussing recent advances as well as challenges within this
new ﬁeld of Neural Style Transfer.
In this paper, we aim to provide an overview of cur-
rent advances (up to March 2018) in Neural Style Transfer
(NST). Our contributions are threefold. First, we investigate,
classify and summarise recent advances in the ﬁeld of
NST. Second, we present several evaluation methods and
experimentally compare different NST algorithms. Third,
we summarise current challenges in this ﬁeld and propose
possible directions on how to deal with them in future
works.
The organisation of this paper is as follows. We start our
discussion with a brief review of previous artistic rendering
methods without CNNs in Section 2. Then Section 3 ex-
plores the derivations and foundations of NST. Based on the
discussions in Section 3, we categorise and explain existing
NST algorithms in Section 4. Some improvement strategies
for these methods and their extensions will be given in
Section 5. Section 6 presents several methodologies for eval-
uating NST algorithms and aims to build a standardised
benchmark for follow-up studies. Then we demonstrate the
commercial applications of NST in Section 7, including both
current successful usages and its potential applications. In
Section 8, we summarise current challenges in the ﬁeld of
NST, as well as propose possible directions on how to deal
with them in future works. Finally, Section 9 concludes the
paper and delineates several promising directions for future
research.
2 S TYLE TRANSFER WITHOUT NEURAL NET-
WORKS
Artistic stylisation is a long-standing research topic. Due
to its wide variety of applications, it has been an impor-
tant research area for more than two decades. Before the
appearance of NST, the related researches have expanded
into an area called non-photorealistic rendering (NPR). In this
section, we brieﬂy review some of these artistic rendering
(AR) algorithms without CNNs. Speciﬁcally, we focus on
artistic stylization of 2D images, which is called image-based
artistic rendering (IB-AR) in [14]. For a more comprehensive
overview of IB-AR techniques, we recommend [3], [14], [15].
Following the IB-AR taxonomy deﬁned by Kyprianidis et al.
[14], we ﬁrst introduce each category of IB-AR techniques
without CNNs and then discuss their strengths and weak-
nesses.Stroke-Based Rendering. Stroke-based rendering (SBR)
refers to a process of placing virtual strokes (e.g., brush
strokes, tiles, stipples) upon a digital canvas to render a
photograph with a particular style [16]. The process of
SBR is generally starting from a source photo, incremen-
tally compositing strokes to match the photo, and ﬁnally
producing a non-photorealistic imagery, which looks like
the photo but with an artistic style. During this process,
an objective function is designed to guide the greedy or
iterative placement of strokes.
The goal of SBR algorithms is to faithfully depict a
prescribed style. Therefore, they are generally effective at
simulating certain types of styles (e.g., oil paintings, water-
colours, sketches). However, each SBR algorithm is carefully
designed for only one particular style and not capable of
simulating an arbitrary style, which is not ﬂexible.
Region-Based Techniques. Region-based rendering is to
incorporate region segmentation to enable the adaption of
rendering based on the content in regions. Early region-
based IB-AR algorithms exploit the shape of regions to
guide the stroke placement [17], [18]. In this way, different
stroke patterns can be produced in different semantic re-
gions in an image. Song et al. [19] further propose a region-
based IB-AR algorithm to manipulate geometry for artistic
styles. Their algorithm creates simpliﬁed shape rendering
effects by replacing regions with several canonical shapes.
Considering regions in rendering allows the local control
over the level of details. However, the problem in SBR per-
sists: one region-based rendering algorithm is not capable of
simulating an arbitrary style.
Example-Based Rendering. The goal of example-based
rendering is to learn the mapping between an exemplar
pair. This category of IB-AR techniques is pioneered by
Hertzmann et al., who propose a framework named image
analogies [9]. Image analogies aim to learn a mapping
between a pair of source images and target stylised images
in a supervised manner. The training set of image analogy
comprises pairs of unstylised source images and the cor-
responding stylised images with a particular style. Image
analogy algorithm then learns the analogous transforma-
tion from the example training pairs and creates analogous
stylised results when given a test input photograph. Image
analogy can also be extended in various ways, e.g., to learn
stroke placements for portrait painting rendering [20].
In general, image analogies are effective for a variety of
artistic styles. However, pairs of training data are usually
unavailable in practice. Another limitation is that image
analogies only exploit low-level image features. Therefore,
image analogies typically fail to effectively capture content
and style, which limits the performance.
Image Processing and Filtering. Creating an artistic
image is a process that aims for image simpliﬁcation and
abstraction. Therefore, it is natural to consider adopting and
combining some related image processing ﬁlters to render a
given photo. For example, in [21], Winnem ¨oller et al. for the
ﬁrst time exploit bilateral [22] and difference of Gaussians
ﬁlters [23] to automatically produce cartoon-like effects.
Compared with other categories of IB-AR techniques,
image-ﬁltering based rendering algorithms are generally
straightforward to implement and efﬁcient in practice. At
an expense, they are very limited in style diversity.