1
Neural Style Transfer: A Review
Y ongcheng Jing, Y ezhou Y ang, Member, IEEE, Zunlei Feng, Jingwen Y e,
Yizhou Yu, Senior Member, IEEE, and Mingli Song, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract —The seminal work of Gatys et al. demonstrated the power of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) in creating artistic
imagery by separating and recombining image content and style. This process of using CNNs to render a content image in different
styles is referred to as Neural Style Transfer (NST). Since then, NST has become a trending topic both in academic literature and
industrial applications. It is receiving increasing attention and a variety of approaches are proposed to either improve or extend the
original NST algorithm. In this paper, we aim to provide a comprehensive overview of the current progress towards NST. We ﬁrst
propose a taxonomy of current algorithms in the ﬁeld of NST. Then, we present several evaluation methods and compare different NST
algorithms both qualitatively and quantitatively. The review concludes with a discussion of various applications of NST and open
problems for future research. A list of papers discussed in this review, corresponding codes, pre-trained models and more comparison
results are publicly available at: https://github.com/ycjing/Neural-Style-Transfer-Papers.
Index Terms —Neural style transfer (NST), convolutional neural network
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
PAINTING is a popular form of art. For thousands of
years, people have been attracted by the art of painting
with the advent of many appealing artworks, e.g., van
Gogh’s “The Starry Night”. In the past, re-drawing an image
in a particular style requires a well-trained artist and lots of
time.
Since the mid-1990s, the art theories behind the ap-
pealing artworks have been attracting the attention of not
only the artists but many computer science researchers.
There are plenty of studies and techniques exploring how to
automatically turn images into synthetic artworks. Among
these studies, the advances in non-photorealistic rendering
(NPR) [1], [2], [3] are inspiring, and nowadays, it is a ﬁrmly
established ﬁeld in the community of computer graphics.
However, most of these NPR stylisation algorithms are
designed for particular artistic styles [3], [4] and cannot
be easily extended to other styles. In the community of
computer vision, style transfer is usually studied as a gener-
alised problem of texture synthesis, which is to extract and
transfer the texture from the source to target [5], [6], [7], [8].
Hertzmann et al. [9] further propose a framework named
image analogies to perform a generalised style transfer by
learning the analogous transformation from the provided
example pairs of unstylised and stylised images. However,
the common limitation of these methods is that they only
use low-level image features and often fail to capture image
structures effectively.
Y. Jing, Z. Feng, J. Ye, and M. Song are with Microsoft Visual Per-
ception Laboratory, College of Computer Science and Technology,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China. E-mails: fycjing,
zunleifeng, yejingwen, brooksong g@zju.edu.cn.
Y. Yang is with School of Computing, Informatics, and Deci-
sion Systems Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ
85281, USA. E-mail: yz.yang@asu.edu.
Y. Yu is with the Department of Computer Science, The Uni-
versity of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong. E-mail:
yizhouy@acm.org.
Input Content
Output
Input Style
Neural Style TransferFigure 1: Example of NST algorithm to transfer the style
of a Chinese painting onto a given photograph. The style
image is named “Dwelling in the Fuchun Mountains” by
Gongwang Huang.
Recently, inspired by the power of Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) , Gatys et al. [10] ﬁrst studied how to use
a CNN to reproduce famous painting styles on natural
images. They proposed to model the content of a photo as
the feature responses from a pre-trained CNN, and further
model the style of an artwork as the summary feature
statistics. Their experimental results demonstrated that a
CNN is capable of extracting content information from an
arbitrary photograph and style information from a well-
known artwork. Based on this ﬁnding, Gatys et al. [10] ﬁrst
proposed to exploit CNN feature activations to recombine
thecontent of a given photo and the style of famous art-
works. The key idea behind their algorithm is to iteratively
optimise an image with the objective of matching desired
CNN feature distributions, which involves both the photo’s
content information and artwork’s style information. Their
proposed algorithm successfully produces stylised images
with the appearance of a given artwork. Figure 1 shows
an example of transferring the style of a Chinese paintingarXiv:1705.04058v7  [cs.CV]  30 Oct 2018