9
(a) Content
 (b) Style
 (c) Small Stroke Size
 (d) Large Stroke Size
Figure 3: Control the brush stroke size in NST. (c) is the output with smaller brush size and (d) with larger brush size. The
style image is “The Starry Night” by Vincent van Gogh.
the stroke size but not others. To address this problem, Jing
et al. [61] propose a stroke controllable PSPM algorithm.
The core component of their algorithm is a StrokePyramid
module, which learns different stroke sizes with adaptive
receptive ﬁelds. Without trading off quality and speed, their
algorithm is the ﬁrst to exploit one single model to achieve
ﬂexible continuous stroke size control while preserving
stroke consistency , and further achieve spatial stroke size con-
trol to produce new artistic effects. Although one can also
use ASPM algorithm to control stroke size, ASPM trades
off quality and speed. As a result, ASPM is not effective at
producing ﬁne strokes and details compared with [61].
3) IOB-NST with high-resolution images: For high-
resolution images (e.g., 30003000 pixels in [60]), a large
stroke size cannot be achieved by simply resizing style
image to a large scale. Since only the region in the content
image with a receptive ﬁeld size of VGG can be affected
by a neuron in the loss network, there is almost no visual
difference between a large and larger brush strokes in a
small image region with receptive ﬁeld size. Gatys et al. [60]
tackle this problem by proposing a coarse-to-ﬁne IOB-NST
procedure with several steps of downsampling, stylising,
upsampling and ﬁnal stylising.
4) MOB-NST with high-resolution images: Similar to 3),
stroke size in stylised result does not vary with style image
scale for high-resolution images. The solution is also similar
to Gatys et al. ’s algorithm in [60], which is a coarse-
to-ﬁne stylisation procedure [62]. The idea is to exploit a
multimodel, which comprises multiple subnetworks. Each
subnetwork receives the upsampled stylised result of the
previous subnetwork as the input, and stylises it again with
ﬁner strokes.
Another limitation of current NST algorithms is that
they do not consider the depth information contained in the
image. To address this limitation, the depth preserving NST
algorithm [63] is proposed. Their approach is to add a depth
loss function based on [47] to measure the depth difference
between the content image and the stylised image. The
image depth is acquired by applying a single-image depth
estimation algorithm (e.g., Chen et al.’s work in [64]).
Semantic Style Transfer. Given a pair of style and
content images which are similar in content, the goal of
semantic style transfer is to build a semantic correspondence
between the style and content, which maps each style re-
gion to a corresponding semantically similar content region.
Then the style in each style region is transferred to the
semantically similar content region.1) Image-Optimisation-Based Semantic Style Transfer. Since
the patch matching scheme naturally meets the require-
ments of the region-based correspondence, Champandard
[65] proposes to build a semantic style transfer algorithm
based on the aforementioned patch-based algorithm [46]
(Section 4.1.2). Although the result produced by the algo-
rithm of Li and Wand [46] is close to the target of semantic
style transfer, [46] does not incorporate an accurate segmen-
tation mask, which sometimes leads to a wrong semantic
match. Therefore, Champandard augments an additional
semantic channel upon [46], which is a downsampled se-
mantic segmentation map. The segmentation map can be
either manually annotated or from a semantic segmentation
algorithm [66], [67]. Despite the effectiveness of [65], MRF-
based design is not the only choice. Instead of combining
MRF prior, Chen and Hsu [68] provide an alternative way
for semantic style transfer, which is to exploit masking out
process to constrain the spatial correspondence and also
a higher order style feature statistic to further improve
the result. More recently, Mechrez et al. [69] propose an
alternative contextual loss to realise semantic style transfer
in a segmentation-free manner.
2) Model-Optimisation-Based Semantic Style Transfer. As
before, the efﬁciency issue is always a big issue. Both [65]
and [68] are based on IOB-NST algorithms and therefore
leave much room for improvement. Lu et al. [70] speed
up the process by optimising the objective function in
feature space, instead of in pixel space. More speciﬁcally,
they propose to do feature reconstruction, instead of image
reconstruction as previous algorithms do. This optimisation
strategy reduces the computation burden, since the loss does
not need to propagate through a deep network. The result-
ing reconstructed feature is decoded into the ﬁnal result
with a trained decoder. Since the speed of [70] does not reach
real-time, there is still big room for further research.
Instance Style Transfer. Instance style transfer is built
on instance segmentation and aims to stylise only a single
user-speciﬁed object within an image. The challenge mainly
lies in the transition between a stylised object and non-
stylised background. Castillo et al. [71] tackle this problem
by adding an extra MRF-based loss to smooth and anti-alias
boundary pixels.
Doodle Style Transfer. An interesting extension can be
found in [65], which is to exploit NST to transform rough
sketches into ﬁne artworks. The method is simply discard-
ing content loss term and using doodles as segmentation
map to do semantic style transfer.