11
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
Figure 4: Diversiﬁed style images used in our experiment.
Table 1: Detailed information of our style images.
No. Author Name & Year
1 Claude Monet Three Fishing Boats (1886)
2 Georges Rouault Head of a Clown (1907)
3 Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec Divan Japonais (1893)
4 Wassily Kandinsky White Zig Zags (1922)
5 John Ruskin Trees in a Lane (1847)
6 Severini Gino Ritmo plastico del 14 luglio (1913)
7 Juan Gris Portrait of Pablo Picasso (1912)
8 Vincent van Gogh Landscape at Saint-R´ emy (1889)
9 Pieter Bruegel the Elder The Tower of Babel (1563)
10 Egon Schiele Edith with Striped Dress (1915)
Note: All our style images are in the public domain.
then Model-Optimisation-Based Ofﬂine Audio Style Transfer .
Inspired by image-based IOB-NST, Verma and Smith [90]
propose a Audio-Optimisation-Based Online Audio Style Trans-
feralgorithm based on online audio optimisation. They start
from a noise signal and optimise it iteratively using back-
propagation. [91] improves the efﬁciency by transferring an
audio in a feed-forward manner and can produce the result
in real-time.
6 E VALUATION METHODOLOGY
The evaluations of NST algorithms remain an open and im-
portant problem in this ﬁeld. In general, there are two major
types of evaluation methodologies that can be employed in
the ﬁeld of NST, i.e., qualitative evaluation and quantitative
evaluation. Qualitative evaluation relies on the aesthetic
judgements of observers. The evaluation results are related
to lots of factors (e.g., age and occupation of participants).
While quantitative evaluation focuses on the precise evalu-
ation metrics, which include time complexity, loss variation,
etc. In this section, we experimentally compare different
NST algorithms both qualitatively and quantitatively.
6.1 Experimental Setup
Evaluation datasets. Totally, there are ten style images and
twenty content images used in our experiment.
For style images, we select artworks of diversiﬁed styles,
as shown in Figure 4. For example, there are impressionism,
cubism, abstract, contemporary, futurism, surrealist, and
expressionism art. Regarding the mediums, some of these
artworks are painted on canvas, while others are paintedon cardboard or wool, cotton, polyester, etc. In addition, we
also try to cover a range of image characteristics (such as de-
tails, contrast, complexity and color distributions), inspired
by the works in [92], [93], [95]. More detailed information of
our style images are given in Table 1.
For content images, there are already carefully selected
and well-described benchmark datasets for evaluating styli-
sation by Mould and Rosin [92], [93], [95]. Their proposed
NPR benchmark called NPRgeneral consists of the images
that cover a wide range of characteristics (e.g., contrast,
texture, edges and meaningful structures) and satisfy lots
of criteria. Therefore, we directly use the selected twenty
images in their proposed NPRgeneral benchmark as our
content images.
For the algorithms based on ofﬂine model optimisation,
MS-COCO dataset [96] is used to perform the training. All
the content images are not used in training.
Principles. To maximise the fairness of the comparisons,
we also obey the following principles during our experi-
ment:
1)In order to cover every detail in each algorithm, we try
to use the provided implementation from their published
literatures. To maximise the fairness of comparison espe-
cially for speed comparison, for [10], we use a popular torch-
based open source code [97], which is also admitted by the
authors. In our experiment, except for [32], [53] which are
based on TensorFlow, all the other codes are implemented
based on Torch 7.
2)Since the visual effect is inﬂuenced by the content and
style weight, it is difﬁcult to compare results with different
degrees of stylisation. Simply giving the same content and
style weight is not an optimal solution due to the different
ways to calculate losses in each algorithm (e.g., different
choices of content and style layers, different loss functions).
Therefore, in our experiment, we try our best to balance the
content and style weight among different algorithms.
3)We try to use the default parameters (e.g., choice of
layers, learning rate, etc) suggested by the authors except
for the aforementioned content and style weight. Although
the results for some algorithms may be further improved by
more careful hyperparameter tuning, we select the authors’
default parameters since we hold the point that the sensitiv-
ity for hyperparameters is also an important implicit criterion
for comparison. For example, we cannot say an algorithm
is effective if it needs heavy work to tune its parameters for
each style.
There are also some other implementation details to be
noted. For [47] and [48], we use the instance normalisation
strategy proposed in [50], which is not covered in the
published papers. Also, we do not consider the diversity
loss term (proposed in [50], [55]) for all algorithms, i.e., one
pair of content and style images corresponds to one stylised
result in our experiment. For Chen and Schmidt’s algorithm
[57], we use the feed-forward reconstruction to reconstruct
the stylised results.
6.2 Qualitative Evaluation
Example stylised results are shown in Figure 5, Figure 7 and
Figure 9. More results can be found in the supplementary