4
maps bypixels to correlate the feature at position (i;j)
with those at positions (i+;j)and (i;j+). In this
way, the representation incorporates spatial arrangement
information and is therefore more effective at modelling
textures with symmetric properties.
2) Non-parametric Texture Modelling with MRFs. An-
other notable texture modelling methodology is to use non-
parametric resampling. A variety of non-parametric meth-
ods are based on MRFs model, which assumes that in a
texture image, each pixel is entirely characterised by its
spatial neighbourhood. Under this assumption, Efros and
Leung [25] propose to synthesise each pixel one by one
by searching similar neighbourhoods in the source texture
image and assigning the corresponding pixel. Their work is
one of the earliest non-parametric algorithms with MRFs.
Following their work, Wei and Levoy [26] further speed
up the neighbourhood matching process by always using
a ﬁxed neighbourhood.
3.2 Image Reconstruction
In general, an essential step for many vision tasks is to ex-
tract an abstract representation from the input image. Image
reconstruction is a reverse process, which is to reconstruct
the whole input image from the extracted image represen-
tation. It is previously studied to analyse a particular image
representation and discover what information is contained
in the abstract representation. Here our major focus is on
CNN representation based image reconstruction algorithms,
which can be categorised into Image-Optimisation-Based On-
line Image Reconstruction (IOB-IR) and Model-Optimisation-
Based Ofﬂine Image Reconstruction (MOB-IR).
1) Image-Optimisation-Based Online Image Recon-
struction. The ﬁrst algorithm to reverse CNN representa-
tions is proposed by Mahendran and Vedaldi [33], [34].
Given a CNN representation to be reversed, their algo-
rithm iteratively optimises an image (generally starting
from random noise) until it has a similar desired CNN
representation. The iterative optimisation process is based
on gradient descent in image space. Therefore, the process is
time-consuming especially when the desired reconstructed
image is large.
2) Model-Optimisation-Based Ofﬂine Image Recon-
struction. To address the efﬁciency issue of [33], [34],
Dosovitskiy and Brox [35] propose to train a feed-forward
network in advance and put the computational burden at
training stage. At testing stage, the reverse process can be
simply done with a network forward pass. Their algorithm
signiﬁcantly speeds up the image reconstruction process.
In their later work [36], they further combine Generative
Adversarial Network (GAN) [37] to improve the results.
4 A T AXONOMY OF NEURAL STYLE TRANSFER
ALGORITHMS
NST is a subset of the aforementioned example-based IB-AR
techniques. In this section, we ﬁrst provide a categorisation
of NST algorithms and then explain major 2D image based
non-photorealistic NST algorithms (Figure 2, purple boxes)
in detail. More speciﬁcally, for each algorithm, we start by
introducing the main idea and then discuss its weaknessesand strengths. Since it is complex to deﬁne the notion of
style [3], [38] and therefore very subjective to deﬁne what
criteria are important to make a successful style transfer
algorithm [39], here we try to evaluate these algorithms in
a more structural way by only focusing on details, semantics,
depth and variations in brush strokes2. We will discuss more
about the problem of aesthetic evaluation criterion in Sec-
tion 8 and also present more evaluation results in Section 6.
Our proposed taxonomy of NST techniques is shown
in Figure 2. We keep the taxonomy of IB-AR techniques
proposed by Kyprianidis et al. [14] unaffected and extend
it by NST algorithms. Current NST methods ﬁt into one of
two categories, Image-Optimisation-Based Online Neural Meth-
ods(IOB-NST) and Model-Optimisation-Based Ofﬂine Neural
Methods (MOB-NST). The ﬁrst category transfers the style
by iteratively optimising an image, i.e., algorithms belong
to this category are built upon IOB-IR techniques. The
second category optimises a generative model ofﬂine and
produces the stylised image with a single forward pass,
which exploits the idea of MOB-IR techniques.
4.1 Image-Optimisation-Based Online Neural Methods
DeepDream [40] is the ﬁrst attempt to produce artistic
images by reversing CNN representations with IOB-IR tech-
niques. By further combining Visual Texture Modelling tech-
niques to model style, IOB-NST algorithms are subsequently
proposed, which build the early foundations for the ﬁeld
of NST. Their basic idea is to ﬁrst model and extract style
and content information from the corresponding style and
content images, recombine them as the target representa-
tion, and then iteratively reconstruct a stylised result that
matches the target representation. In general, different IOB-
NST algorithms share the same IOB-IR technique, but differ
in the way they model the visual style, which is built on the
aforementioned two categories of Visual Texture Modelling
techniques. The common limitation of IOB-NST algorithms
is that they are computationally expensive, due to the itera-
tive image optimisation procedure.
4.1.1 Parametric Neural Methods with Summary Statistics
The ﬁrst subset of IOB-NST methods is based on Parametric
Texture Modelling with Summary Statistics . The style is char-
acterised as a set of spatial summary statistics.
We start by introducing the ﬁrst NST algorithm proposed
by Gatys et al. [4], [10]. By reconstructing representations
from intermediate layers of the VGG-19 network, Gatys
et al. observe that a deep convolutional neural network
is capable of extracting image content from an arbitrary
photograph and some appearance information from the
well-known artwork. According to this observation, they
build the content component of the newly stylised image
by penalising the difference of high-level representations
derived from content and stylised images, and further build
the style component by matching Gram-based summary
statistics of style and stylised images, which is derived from
their proposed texture modelling technique [30] (Section
3.1). The details of their algorithm are as follows.
2. We claim that the visual criteria with respect to a successful style
transfer are deﬁnitely not limited to these factors.