7878Source Document (abbreviated) BART Summary
The researchers examined three types of coral in reefs off the
coast of Fiji ... The researchers found when ﬁsh were plentiful,
they would eat algae and seaweed off the corals, which appeared
to leave them more resistant to the bacterium Vibrio coralliilyti-
cus, a bacterium associated with bleaching. The researchers sug-
gested the algae, like warming temperatures, might render the
corals’ chemical defenses less effective, and the ﬁsh were pro-
tecting the coral by removing the algae.Fisheries off the coast of Fiji are protect-
ing coral reefs from the effects of global
warming, according to a study in the jour-
nal Science.
Sacoolas, who has immunity as a diplomat’s wife, was involved
in a trafﬁc collision ... Prime Minister Johnson was questioned
about the case while speaking to the press at a hospital in Wat-
ford. He said, “I hope that Anne Sacoolas will come back ...
if we can’t resolve it then of course I will be raising it myself
personally with the White House.”Boris Johnson has said he will raise the is-
sue of US diplomat Anne Sacoolas’ diplo-
matic immunity with the White House.
According to Syrian state media, government forces began de-
ploying into previously SDF controlled territory yesterday. ...
On October 6, US President Donald Trump and Turkish Presi-
dent Recep Tayyip Erdoan spoke on the phone. Then both na-
tions issued statements speaking of an imminent incursion into
northeast Syria ... . On Wednesday, Turkey began a military
offensive with airstrikes followed by a ground invasion.Syrian government forces have entered
territory held by the US-backed Syrian
Democratic Forces (SDF) in response to
Turkey’s incursion into the region.
This is the ﬁrst time anyone has been recorded to run a full
marathon of 42.195 kilometers (approximately 26 miles) under
this pursued landmark time. It was not, however, an ofﬁcially
sanctioned world record, as it was not an ”open race” of the
IAAF. His time was 1 hour 59 minutes 40.2 seconds. Kipchoge
ran in Vienna, Austria. It was an event speciﬁcally designed to
help Kipchoge break the two hour barrier.Kenyan runner Eliud Kipchoge has run a
marathon in less than two hours.
PG&E stated it scheduled the blackouts in response to forecasts
for high winds amid dry conditions. The aim is to reduce the risk
of wildﬁres. Nearly 800 thousand customers were scheduled to
be affected by the shutoffs which were expected to last through
at least midday tomorrow.Power has been turned off to millions of
customers in California as part of a power
shutoff plan.
Table 9: Example summaries from the XSum-tuned BART model on WikiNews articles. For clarity, only relevant
excerpts of the source are shown. Summaries combine information from across the article and prior knowledge.
and, in general, the main limitation of the model is a
tendency to hallucinate unsupported information.
These samples demonstrate that the BART pretrain-
ing has learned a strong combination of natural lan-
guage understanding and generation.
7 Related Work
Early methods for pretraining were based on language
models. GPT (Radford et al., 2018) only models left-
ward context, which is problematic for some tasks.
ELMo (Peters et al., 2018) concatenates left-only and
right-only representations, but does not pre-train inter-
actions between these features. Radford et al. (2019)
demonstrated that very large language models can act
as unsupervised multitask models.
BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) introduced masked lan-
guage modelling, which allows pre-training to learn in-teractions between left and right context words. Re-
cent work has shown that very strong performance can
be achieved by training for longer (Liu et al., 2019),
by tying parameters across layers (Lan et al., 2019),
and by masking spans instead of words (Joshi et al.,
2019). Predictions are not made auto-regressively, re-
ducing the effectiveness of BERT for generation tasks.
UniLM (Dong et al., 2019) ﬁne-tunes BERT with an
ensemble of masks, some of which allow only leftward
context. Like BART, this allows UniLM to be used for
both generative and discriminative tasks. A difference
is that UniLM predictions are conditionally indepen-
dent, whereas BART’s are autoregressive. BART re-
duces the mismatch between pre-training and genera-
tion tasks, because the decoder is always trained on un-
corrupted context.
MASS (Song et al., 2019) is perhaps the most similar