7873
A B C . D E .A . C . E .A _ . D _ E .A _C . _ E .C . D E . A BDocument RotationToken MaskingToken DeletionText InﬁllingD E . A B C .Sentence PermutationFigure 2: Transformations for noising the input that we experiment with. These transformations can be composed.
decide which positions are missing inputs.
Text Inﬁlling A number of text spans are sampled,
with span lengths drawn from a Poisson distribution
(= 3). Each span is replaced with a single [MASK]
token. 0-length spans correspond to the insertion of
[MASK] tokens. Text inﬁlling is inspired by Span-
BERT (Joshi et al., 2019), but SpanBERT samples
span lengths from a different (clamped geometric) dis-
tribution, and replaces each span with a sequence of
[MASK] tokens of exactly the same length. Text inﬁll-
ing teaches the model to predict how many tokens are
missing from a span.
Sentence Permutation A document is divided into
sentences based on full stops, and these sentences are
shufﬂed in a random order.
Document Rotation A token is chosen uniformly at
random, and the document is rotated so that it begins
with that token. This task trains the model to identify
the start of the document.
3 Fine-tuning BART
The representations produced by BART can be used in
several ways for downstream applications.
3.1 Sequence Classiﬁcation Tasks
For sequence classiﬁcation tasks, the same input is fed
into the encoder and decoder, and the ﬁnal hidden state
of the ﬁnal decoder token is fed into new multi-class
linear classiﬁer. This approach is related to the CLS
token in BERT; however we add the additional token
to the endso that representation for the token in the
decoder can attend to decoder states from the complete
input (Figure 3a).
3.2 Token Classiﬁcation Tasks
For token classiﬁcation tasks, such as answer endpoint
classiﬁcation for SQuAD, we feed the complete doc-
ument into the encoder and decoder, and use the top
hidden state of the decoder as a representation for each
word. This representation is used to classify the token.
3.3 Sequence Generation Tasks
Because BART has an autoregressive decoder, it can be
directly ﬁne tuned for sequence generation tasks such
as abstractive question answering and summarization.In both of these tasks, information is copied from the
input but manipulated, which is closely related to the
denoising pre-training objective. Here, the encoder in-
put is the input sequence, and the decoder generates
outputs autoregressively.
3.4 Machine Translation
We also explore using BART to improve machine trans-
lation decoders for translating into English. Previous
work Edunov et al. (2019) has shown that models can
be improved by incorporating pre-trained encoders, but
gains from using pre-trained language models in de-
coders have been limited. We show that it is possible
to use the entire BART model (both encoder and de-
coder) as a single pretrained decoder for machine trans-
lation, by adding a new set of encoder parameters that
are learned from bitext (see Figure 3b).
More precisely, we replace BART’s encoder embed-
ding layer with a new randomly initialized encoder.
The model is trained end-to-end, which trains the new
encoder to map foreign words into an input that BART
can de-noise to English. The new encoder can use a
separate vocabulary from the original BART model.
We train the source encoder in two steps, in both
cases backpropagating the cross-entropy loss from the
output of the BART model. In the ﬁrst step, we freeze
most of BART parameters and only update the ran-
domly initialized source encoder, the BART positional
embeddings, and the self-attention input projection ma-
trix of BART’s encoder ﬁrst layer. In the second step,
we train all model parameters for a small number of
iterations.
4 Comparing Pre-training Objectives
BART supports a much wider range of noising schemes
during pre-training than previous work. We compare a
range of options using base-size models (6 encoder and
6 decoder layers, with a hidden size of 768), evaluated
on a representative subset of the tasks we will consider
for the full large scale experiments in x5.
4.1 Comparison Objectives
While many pre-training objectives have been pro-
posed, fair comparisons between these have been dif-
ﬁcult to perform, at least in part due to differences in
training data, training resources, architectural differ-