Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 7871–7880
July 5 - 10, 2020. c
2020 Association for Computational Linguistics7871BART: Denoising Sequence-to-Sequence Pre-training for Natural
Language Generation, Translation, and Comprehension
Mike Lewis*, Yinhan Liu*, Naman Goyal*, Marjan Ghazvininejad,
Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer Levy, Ves Stoyanov, Luke Zettlemoyer
Facebook AI
mikelewis@fb.com,yinhan@ai2incubator.com,naman@fb.com
Abstract
We present BART, a denoising autoencoder
for pretraining sequence-to-sequence models.
BART is trained by (1) corrupting text with an
arbitrary noising function, and (2) learning a
model to reconstruct the original text. It uses
a standard Tranformer-based neural machine
translation architecture which, despite its sim-
plicity, can be seen as generalizing BERT (due
to the bidirectional encoder), GPT (with the
left-to-right decoder), and other recent pre-
training schemes. We evaluate a number of
noising approaches, ﬁnding the best perfor-
mance by both randomly shufﬂing the order of
sentences and using a novel in-ﬁlling scheme,
where spans of text are replaced with a sin-
gle mask token. BART is particularly ef-
fective when ﬁne tuned for text generation
but also works well for comprehension tasks.
It matches the performance of RoBERTa on
GLUE and SQuAD, and achieves new state-
of-the-art results on a range of abstractive di-
alogue, question answering, and summariza-
tion tasks, with gains of up to 3.5 ROUGE.
BART also provides a 1.1 BLEU increase over
a back-translation system for machine transla-
tion, with only target language pretraining. We
also replicate other pretraining schemes within
the BART framework, to understand their ef-
fect on end-task performance.1
1 Introduction
Self-supervised methods have achieved remarkable
success in a wide range of NLP tasks (Mikolov et al.,
2013; Peters et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2019; Joshi
et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019).
The most successful approaches have been variants of
masked language models, which are denoising autoen-
coders that are trained to reconstruct text where a ran-
dom subset of the words has been masked out. Recent
work has shown gains by improving the distribution of
1Code and pre-trained models for BART are avail-
able at https://github.com/pytorch/fairseq
andhttps://huggingface.co/transformersmasked tokens (Joshi et al., 2019), the order in which
masked tokens are predicted (Yang et al., 2019), and the
available context for replacing masked tokens (Dong
et al., 2019). However, these methods typically focus
on particular types of end tasks (e.g. span prediction,
generation, etc.), limiting their applicability.
In this paper, we present BART, which pre-trains
a model combining Bidirectional and Auto-Regressive
Transformers. BART is a denoising autoencoder built
with a sequence-to-sequence model that is applicable
to a very wide range of end tasks. Pretraining has
two stages (1) text is corrupted with an arbitrary nois-
ing function, and (2) a sequence-to-sequence model is
learned to reconstruct the original text. BART uses a
standard Tranformer-based neural machine translation
architecture which, despite its simplicity, can be seen as
generalizing BERT (due to the bidirectional encoder),
GPT (with the left-to-right decoder), and many other
more recent pretraining schemes (see Figure 1).
A key advantage of this setup is the noising ﬂexibil-
ity; arbitrary transformations can be applied to the orig-
inal text, including changing its length. We evaluate
a number of noising approaches, ﬁnding the best per-
formance by both randomly shufﬂing the order of the
original sentences and using a novel in-ﬁlling scheme,
where arbitrary length spans of text (including zero
length) are replaced with a single mask token. This ap-
proach generalizes the original word masking and next
sentence prediction objectives in BERT by forcing the
model to reason more about overall sentence length and
make longer range transformations to the input.
BART is particularly effective when ﬁne tuned for
text generation but also works well for comprehen-
sion tasks. It matches the performance of RoBERTa
(Liu et al., 2019) with comparable training resources
on GLUE (Wang et al., 2018) and SQuAD (Rajpurkar
et al., 2016), and achieves new state-of-the-art results
on a range of abstractive dialogue, question answering,
and summarization tasks. For example, it improves
performance by 3.5 ROUGE over previous work on
XSum (Narayan et al., 2018).
BART also opens up new ways of thinking about ﬁne
tuning. We present a new scheme for machine transla-
tion where a BART model is stacked above a few ad-
ditional transformer layers. These layers are trained