7874
Pre-trained DecoderPre-trained EncoderlabelA  B  C  D  E <s> A  B  C  D  E(a) To use BART for classiﬁcation problems, the same
input is fed into the encoder and decoder, and the repre-
sentation from the ﬁnal output is used.
Randomly Initialized Encoder    α   β   γ   δ   εPre-trained  DecoderPre-trained EncoderA  B  C  D  E<s> A  B  C  D  (b) For machine translation, we learn a small additional
encoder that replaces the word embeddings in BART. The
new encoder can use a disjoint vocabulary.
Figure 3: Fine tuning BART for classiﬁcation and translation.
ences between models, and ﬁne-tuning procedures. We
re-implement strong pre-training approaches recently
proposed for discriminative and generation tasks. We
aim, as much as possible, to control for differences un-
related to the pre-training objective. However, we do
make minor changes to the learning rate and usage of
layer normalisation in order to improve performance
(tuning these separately for each objective). For refer-
ence, we compare our implementations with published
numbers from BERT, which was also trained for 1M
steps on a combination of books and Wikipedia data.
We compare the following approaches:
Language Model Similarly to GPT (Radford et al.,
2018), we train a left-to-right Transformer language
model. This model is equivalent to the BART decoder,
without cross-attention.
Permuted Language Model Based on XLNet (Yang
et al., 2019), we sample 1/6 of the tokens, and gener-
ate them in a random order autoregressively. For con-
sistency with other models, we do not implement the
relative positional embeddings or attention across seg-
ments from XLNet.
Masked Language Model Following BERT (Devlin
et al., 2019), we replace 15% of tokens with [MASK]
symbols, and train the model to independently predict
the original tokens.
Multitask Masked Language Model As in UniLM
(Dong et al., 2019), we train a Masked Language
Model with additional self-attention masks. Self at-
tention masks are chosen randomly with the follow
proportions: 1/6 left-to-right, 1/6 right-to-left, 1/3 un-
masked, and 1/3 with the ﬁrst 50% of tokens unmasked
and a left-to-right mask for the remainder.
Masked Seq-to-Seq Inspired by MASS (Song et al.,
2019), we mask a span containing 50% of tokens,
and train a sequence to sequence model to predict the
masked tokens.
For the Permuted LM, Masked LM and Multitask
Masked LM, we use two-stream attention (Yang et al.,
2019) to efﬁciently compute likelihoods of the outputpart of the sequence (using a diagonal self-attention
mask on the output to predict words left-to-right).
We experiment with (1) treating the task as a stan-
dard sequence-to-sequence problem, where the source
input to the encoder and the target is the decoder out-
put, or (2) adding the source as preﬁx to the target in
the decoder, with a loss only on the target part of the
sequence. We ﬁnd the former works better for BART
models, and the latter for other models.
To most directly compare our models on their ability
to model their ﬁne-tuning objective (the log likelihood
of the human text), we report perplexity in Table 1.
4.2 Tasks
SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) an extractive ques-
tion answering task on Wikipedia paragraphs. Answers
are text spans extracted from a given document context.
Similar to BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), we use concate-
nated question and context as input to the encoder of
BART, and additionally pass them to the decoder. The
model includes classiﬁers to predict the start and end
indices of each token.
MNLI (Williams et al., 2017), a bitext classiﬁcation
task to predict whether one sentence entails another.
The ﬁne-tuned model concatenates the two sentences
with appended an EOS token, and passes them to both
the BART encoder and decoder. In contrast to BERT,
the representation of the EOS token is used to classify
the sentences relations.
ELI5 (Fan et al., 2019), a long-form abstractive ques-
tion answering dataset. Models generate answers con-
ditioned on the concatenation of a question and sup-
porting documents.
XSum (Narayan et al., 2018), a news summarization
dataset with highly abstractive summaries.
ConvAI2 (Dinan et al., 2019), a dialogue response
generation task, conditioned on context and a persona.
CNN/DM (Hermann et al., 2015), a news summa-
rization dataset. Summaries here are typically closely
related to source sentences.