7872
Bidirectional EncoderA  _  C  _  E B       D    (a) BERT: Random tokens are replaced with masks, and
the document is encoded bidirectionally. Missing tokens
are predicted independently, so BERT cannot easily be
used for generation.
Autoregressive DecoderA  B  C  D  E<s> A  B  C  D  (b) GPT: Tokens are predicted auto-regressively, meaning
GPT can be used for generation. However words can only
condition on leftward context, so it cannot learn bidirec-
tional interactions.
Autoregressive DecoderBidirectional EncoderA  B  C  D  EA  _  B  _  E         <s> A  B  C  D  
(c) BART: Inputs to the encoder need not be aligned with decoder outputs, allowing arbitary noise transformations. Here, a
document has been corrupted by replacing spans of text with a mask symbols. The corrupted document (left) is encoded with
a bidirectional model, and then the likelihood of the original document (right) is calculated with an autoregressive decoder.
For ﬁne-tuning, an uncorrupted document is input to both the encoder and decoder, and we use representations from the ﬁnal
hidden state of the decoder.
Figure 1: A schematic comparison of BART with BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) and GPT (Radford et al., 2018).
to essentially translate the foreign language to noised
English, by propagation through BART, thereby us-
ing BART as a pre-trained target-side language model.
This approach improves performance over a strong
back-translation MT baseline by 1.1 BLEU on the
WMT Romanian-English benchmark.
To better understand these effects, we also report
an ablation analysis that replicates other recently pro-
posed training objectives. This study allows us to care-
fully control for a number of factors, including data
and optimization parameters, which have been shown
to be as important for overall performance as the se-
lection of training objectives (Liu et al., 2019). We ﬁnd
that BART exhibits the most consistently strong perfor-
mance across the full range of tasks we consider.
2 Model
BART is a denoising autoencoder that maps a corrupted
document to the original document it was derived from.
It is implemented as a sequence-to-sequence model
with a bidirectional encoder over corrupted text and a
left-to-right autoregressive decoder. For pre-training,
we optimize the negative log likelihood of the original
document.
2.1 Architecture
BART uses the standard sequence-to-sequence Trans-
former architecture from (Vaswani et al., 2017), ex-
cept, following GPT, that we modify ReLU activa-
tion functions to GeLUs (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016)
and initialise parameters from N(0;0:02). For ourbase model, we use 6 layers in the encoder and de-
coder, and for our large model we use 12 layers in
each. The architecture is closely related to that used in
BERT, with the following differences: (1) each layer of
the decoder additionally performs cross-attention over
the ﬁnal hidden layer of the encoder (as in the trans-
former sequence-to-sequence model); and (2) BERT
uses an additional feed-forward network before word-
prediction, which BART does not. In total, BART con-
tains roughly 10% more parameters than the equiva-
lently sized BERT model.
2.2 Pre-training BART
BART is trained by corrupting documents and then op-
timizing a reconstruction loss—the cross-entropy be-
tween the decoder’s output and the original document.
Unlike existing denoising autoencoders, which are tai-
lored to speciﬁc noising schemes, BART allows us to
apply anytype of document corruption. In the extreme
case, where all information about the source is lost,
BART is equivalent to a language model.
We experiment with several previously proposed and
novel transformations, but we believe there is a sig-
niﬁcant potential for development of other new alter-
natives. The transformations we used are summarized
below, and examples are shown in Figure 2.
Token Masking Following BERT (Devlin et al.,
2019), random tokens are sampled and replaced with
[MASK] elements.
Token Deletion Random tokens are deleted from the
input. In contrast to token masking, the model must