IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE (ACCEPTED) 1
Fuzzy Control Systems: Past, Present and Future
Anh-Tu Nguyen
Laboratory LAMIH UMR CNRS 8201, Université Polytechnique Hauts-de-France, Valenciennes, France
Tadanari Taniguchi
IT Education Center, Tokai University, Hiratsuka, Japan
Luka Eciolaza
Department of Robotics and Automation, Mondragon University, Arrasate, Spain
Víctor Campos and Reinaldo Palhares
Department of Electronics Engineering, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil
Michio Sugeno
Tokyo Institute of Technology, Yokohama, Japan
Abstract
More than 40 years after fuzzy logic control appeared as an effective tool to deal with complex processes, the research on
fuzzy control systems has constantly evolved. Mamdani fuzzy control was originally introduced as a model-free control approach
based on expert’s experience and knowledge. Due to the lack of a systematic framework to study Mamdani fuzzy systems, we
have witnessed growing interest in fuzzy model-based approaches with Takagi-Sugeno fuzzy systems and singleton-type fuzzy
systems (also called piecewise multiafﬁne systems) over the past decades. This paper reviews the key features of the three above
types of fuzzy systems. Through these features, we point out the historical rationale for each type of fuzzy systems and its current
research mainstreams. However, the focus is put on fuzzy model-based approaches developed via Lyapunov stability theorem and
linear matrix inequality (LMI) formulations. Finally, our personal viewpoint on the perspectives and challenges of the future fuzzy
control research is discussed.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Fuzzy control was initiated by Mamdani [1] in 1974 stimulated by the Zadeh’s two seminal papers on fuzzy algorithms [2]
in 1968 and linguistic analysis [3] in 1973. In these papers, Zadeh presented a method of system modeling based on fuzzy
IF-THEN rules with linguistic variables. The ﬁrst application of fuzzy logic control was performed by Mamdani and Assilian
on a laboratory steam engine [4] which led to a great impact on the fuzzy control research. Indeed, many fuzzy control systems
have been proposed since the publication of the original paper in 1975. Generally speaking, there are three types of fuzzy
systems as classiﬁed by Sugeno in [5] according to the consequent parts of I F-THEN rules. First, Mamdani-type fuzzy systems
[4] are deﬁned by I F-THEN rules associated with linguistic variables as
RuleRi:IFx1isGi
1; x2isGi
2;:::;xmisGi
m
THENyisHi; i= 1;2;:::;n
Corresponding Author: Anh-Tu Nguyen (Email: nguyen.trananhtu@gmail.com )