IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE (ACCEPTED) 15
V. F UTURE PERSPECTIVES OF FUZZY CONTROL SYSTEMS
This paper provides a concise discussion on the evolution of fuzzy control systems. Through a selective list of references,
we present the historical motivations and the current research progress of three types of fuzzy systems: Mamdani-type fuzzy
systems, T-S fuzzy systems and PMA (or singleton-type fuzzy) systems. Great advances on both fundamental and application
aspects of fuzzy control have been made with a huge number of available publications on the topic. However, many interesting
and important issues still remain challenging, which provide fantastic opportunities for the research on fuzzy control systems in
the future. Since we believe that within fuzzy control context, only fuzzy model-based approaches enable systematic frameworks
for stability analysis and control design of nonlinear systems, below our personal perspectives are focused on T-S fuzzy systems
and PMA systems.
A. Open Issues on Takagi-Sugeno Fuzzy Systems
A large research effort has been focused on reducing the conservativeness of stability analysis and control design. As
discussed above, this has been done by searching for more general Lyapunov function candidates and clever manipulations to
bring the problem to an LMI framework.
Although there are conditions considering the information on the shape of the MFs, see for instance [29], [47], we believe
that more powerful methodologies could arise with the use of interval type-2 T-S fuzzy modeling techniques [88]–[91]. These
fuzzy models allow to deal with uncertain grades of membership. Hence, type-2 T-S fuzzy systems are very useful in the
cases where exact MFs are difﬁcult to be chosen and/or there is a need to cope with large amounts of uncertainties [89], [90].
However, for stability analysis and control design, the lower and upper MFs have to be simultaneously considered leading to
more elaborated manipulations and computational burden [92], [93]. Possible contributions go toward building less conservative
LMI-based conditions for interval type-2 T-S fuzzy models depending on MFs, reducing the gap between type-1 and type-2
T-S fuzzy modeling methodologies. For instance, membership-dependent stability conditions for both type-1 and type-2 T-S
fuzzy systems were recently proposed in [50]. To this end, it is considered that the MFs belong to a uniﬁed space. Then, an
extrema-based method is proposed to construct a polyhedron convex hull to enclose the membership distribution in this space.
Despite the interests of the proposed results, much research effort should be still devoted to the stabilization problem, and even
to the stability analysis to reduce further the gap between both types of fuzzy systems.
In our opinion, the design of T-S fuzzy controllers/observers that do not share the same MFs or premise variables with T-S
fuzzy models is another important topic. This topic should deserve more thorough consideration since it can greatly improve
the ﬂexibility of the control/observer design in many cases [69]. Also, such a design scheme is involved in current research
mainstreams on T-S fuzzy model-based approaches as shown in the two following illustrative examples.
The ﬁrst example is concerned with the design of nonlinear networked control systems (NCSs) in which network-induced
imperfections, for instance network-induced delay and sampling issues, are intrinsic [70], [94]. One of the major difﬁculties
in this case is the fact that, when considering the network-induced delay, the information transmitted over the network to
the controller is usually delayed, causing a mismatch between the premise variables. This mismatch can be seen as extra
constraints in the design of NCSs [95]–[99]. Moreover, it can be very restrictive to assume that the premise variables
of the fuzzy systems and the fuzzy controllers/observers are synchronous if bilateral networks (controller-to-actuator and
sensor-to-controller) have to be designed [99]. Then, the asynchronous transmission issue should be considered.
The second example is related to the fact that in any control system, fault detection, diagnosis and recovery is decisive
to have a robust and resilient system operation. In this context, control reconﬁguration plays a crucial role to obtain a
fault tolerant control (FTC) that can effectively handle severe actuator/sensor faults while still guaranteeing a desired
closed-loop performance [100]. To achieve this goal, it is crucial to have effective fault detection and isolation (FDI)
schemes to support the control reconﬁguration in a proper way [101]. One idea behind the control reconﬁguration is to
redesign the problem for the faulty system by choosing possibly a new structure and adapting the control law to this new
scenario. A possible solution for this problem relies on the use of two-step design procedures for which FDI and FTC