siﬁcation [140] , fall detection in elderly people by analyzing
environment sounds [141] , and in health care monitoring
using speech analysis [142] . The algorithm to extract LTPs
is explained below:
Algorithm 30 : Local Ternary Pattern Extraction
1.Result : Local ternary patterns
2. Input: Audio signal x.
3. Generate spectrogram from the audio signal.
4. Convert the RGB image of spectrogram into gray scale
image.
5. Consider the image mask from where LTPs are to be
extracted.
6. Calculate the lower and upper bits using ternary function
and three threshold values /C01, 0 and 1.
7. Calculate lower and upper values using lower and upper
bits.
8. Construct lower and upper signals using lower and upper
bits.
9. Generate histogram from these signals.
10. Join the histograms to get LTPs.
/C15Histogram of gradients (HOG) feature: Just like LBPs, HOG fea-
tures are used to extract the time-frequency information
from the spectrograms. This feature also has been used in
acoustic scene classiﬁcation [113,116] ,snore sound discrim-
ination [115] , emotion detection [117] .
Algorithm 31 : HOG descriptor from spectrogram
1.Result : HOG descriptor
2. Input: Audio signal x.
3. Generate spectrogram from the audio signal.
4. Convert the RGB image of spectrogram into gray scale
image.
5. Choose name-value pair arguments such as cell size,
block size etc.
6. Extaract HOG features from spectrogram.
7. Output is HOG feature from each cell or block of the
image.
/C15Scale invariant feature transform (SIFT): SIFT is also a feature
extraction algorithm in computer vision used initially for
detecting local information in images. This feature is also
employed on spectrograms of audio signals to detect the
local information. It has been highly used in emotion detec-
tion [117] and audio-video concept classiﬁcation [118] .Algorithm 32 : SIFT descriptor
1.Result : SIFT feature set
2. Input: Audio signal x.
3. Generate spectrogram from the audio signal.
4. Convert the RGB image of spectrogram into gray scale
image.
5. Perform scale-space extrema detection on gray scale
image.
6. Localize the keypoints.
7. Assign orientation to each keypoint.
8. Create keypoint descriptor called as SIFT descriptor.
4.6. Deep features
Deep learning has been proven to be a powerful technique to
extract high level features from low level information. The features
extracted from the hidden layers of various deep learning models is
known as deep features . The deep features could be extracted from
any deep leaning model like convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), deep neural networks (DNNs), recurrent neural networks
(RNNs), Deep stacked auto-encoder (SAE), unidirectional long short
term memory network (LSTM), bi-directional long short term
memory (BLSTM) and other similar models.
Deep features are extracted from the deep neural networks
(DNNs). The MFCCs or any other relevant audio feature is fed to
the DNNs as the input. The deep features depend on how deep
the neural network is. If we have shallow neural network, the deep
features given by lower layers can be thought of as speaker-
adapted features. And from the upper layers class-based discrimi-
natory features could be extracted. The deep features could also be
extracted from the bottleneck layer of a DNN. Fig. 18 shows the
extraction of deep features from bottleneck layer of a DNN. In this
ﬁgure DAF stands for deep audio features ).
Any CNN architecture consists of three major components: con-
volution layers, pooling layers and fully connected layers as shown
inFig. 19 . Convolution layers apply deﬁnite number of convolu-
tional ﬁlters on the spectrogram of an audio signal. The output of
this layer is called as feature map. Pooling layer decrease the
dimensions of the feature maps generated by convolutional layers
and hence reduce the processing time. Fully connected layers
extract global features from the local feature maps. The deep fea-
tures could be extracted from any of these layers, the initial layers
of the CNN gives deep features which is nothing but the informa-
tion about pixels and edges of the spectrogram. The higher layers
gives deep features which have highly discriminative. while the
deep features extracted from the fully connected layer gives globalFig. 17. Left: Wavelet Decomposition, Right: Wavelet packet decomposition.G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020 15