in which the cepstral smoothing is done prior to GDF
computation which smooths the intrinsic spikes of the
signal. GDF is used in speaker identiﬁcation [74], speech
segmentation [73], language identiﬁcation etc.
/C15Envelope Modulation Spectrum (EMS) based : The envelope
modulation spectra represents the slow amplitude modulations
in the signal and distribution of energy in amplitude ﬂuctua-
tions across certain frequencies. The original audio signal is ﬁrst
ﬁltered into 9 octave bands with center frequencies of approx-
imately 30, 60, 120, 240, 480, 960, 1920, 3840, and 7680 Hz,
using eight-order Butterworth ﬁlters. Then the envelope of 10
signals: one original and 9 octave ﬁltered signals is extracted
using Hilbert transform. Once the envelope of each signal is
extracted, the mean is removed and the power spectrum for
each of the bands is estimated by evaluating the DFT usingthe Goertzel algorithm at frequencies 0–10 Hz. From the power
spectrum, six EMS metrics are computed for each of the 9
octave bands, and the full signal and it makes a 60-
dimensional feature vector. The 6 EMS features are:
–Peak frequency 0–10 Hz: It is the frequency corresponding
to the spectral peak with the maximum magnitude in the
spectrum.
–Peak amplitude: It is the absolute amplitude of the spectral
peak described above and it is seen as a measure of rhythm.
–Energy in spectrum 3–6 Hz: Energy in band 3–6 Hz is the
normalized energy present in the band and it corresponds
to the segment 167–333 ms which captures majority of syl-
lable duration in normal speech.
–Energy in spectrum 0–4 Hz: Human auditory system is most
sensitive around 4 Hz of modulation, this peak sensitivity
corresponds to the segment 0–250 ms which is quite close
to common syllable rate for speech.
–Energy in spectrum 4–10 Hz: This region of frequencies
focus on super segmental variations in the rhythm.
–Energy ratio between 0–4 Hz and 4–10 Hz: The energy below
4 Hz is uncorrelated with the energy in band 4–10 Hz. Hence
the ratio of these energies becomes a vital feature.
The EMS features is best used in classifying pathological
speech and control speech [47,48] .
Algorithm 11 : Envelope modulation energy in desired
frequency band
Result : Energy in desired frequency band
1. Input: Audio signal x
2. Find the spectrogram and cyclic frequencies of the signal.
3. Select the range of cyclic frequencies.
4. Calculate square of the spectrogram values.
5. Find summation of the squared spectrogram values.
6. Multiply the result number by 2, this gives energy in a
desired band.
/C15Long-term Avearge Spectrum (LTAS): LTAS captures atypi-
cal spectral information from the signal. LTAS [49] is used in
classifying pathological speech (like dysarthria, dyphasia
etc.) from the controlled normal speech. The intelligibility
of a speech is determined by the variations in nasality,
breath control and loudness of the speech. LTAS tries to cap-
ture these cues from each octave ﬁltered speech signal.
There are 9 octave ﬁlters used at center frequencies 30, 60,
120, 240, 480, 960, 1920, 3840 and 7680 Hz. From each
octave ﬁltered speech signal the following parameters are
determined and joined together to form a 99-dimensional
feature vector.– RMS value normalized/full band RMS value
– Normalized mean frame RMS
– Standard deviation of frame RMS
– Frame standard deviation normalized by full-band RMS
– Frame standard deviation normalized by band RMS
– Skewness of frame RMS
– Kurtosis of frame RMS
– Range of frame RMS
– Normalized range of frame RMS
– Pairwise variability of RMS energy between ensuing
frames
/C15Chroma related features: Chroma features are interesting and
powerful representation of music audio in which entire spec-
trum is mapped into 12 bins that represents the 12 semi-
tones (or chroma) of musical octave. It can be computed fromthe logarithmic short-time fourier transform of the sound sig-
nal. It is also called as chromagram. Another chroma based fea-
ture is chroma energy distribution normalized statistics. This
feature is used to identify similarity between different interpre-
tations of the music given.
/C15Tonality based features: The tonal sounds are actually the fun-
damental frequency of a harmonic stationary audio signal. In
music, tonality organizes the notes of the musical scale. The
main tonality based audio features are:
–Fundamental Frequency (FF): The fundamental frequency
F0 is the ﬁrst peak of the local normalized spectro-
temporal auto-correlation function. In simple terms, funda-
mental frequency is the lowest frequency of a periodic
waveform. For music, the fundamental frequency is the
musical pitch of a note that is perceived as the lowest partial
present. Fundamental frequency is an important feature and
used in music onset detection [61], environmental sound
recognition [39,40] and audio retrieval [63].
Algorithm 12 : Fundamental frequency F0
1.Result : Fundamental frequency (F0)
2. Input: Audio signal xand sampling frequency fs.
3. Find the pitch of the audio signal by auto-correlation or
cepstral methods.
4. Pitch will give an estimate of the fundamental frequency
of the signal x.
–Pitch Histogram: Pitch histogram explains the pitch of a
signal in a more compact form. It has been highly used in
music genre classiﬁcation [15].
–Pitch Proﬁle: This feature is more accurate representation
of musical pitch and it has been used for musical key detec-
tion [64].
–Harmonicity: Harmonicity is a feature used to distinguish
between tonal and noise like sounds. It uses auto-
correlation function to ﬁnd periodicity in sound in time or
frequency domain.
–Harmonic-to-noise ratio: It is computed as the ratio
between the harmonic part of the signal to the rest of the
signal. It has been used in analyzing pathological voices
[65] and music-related applications.
–Jitter: It computes the variations of fundamental frequency,
that is, the average absolute difference between consecutive
periods of speech. It is used in speaker recognition [67], ana-
lyzing pathological voices, determine vocal and non-vocal
sounds [66].
/C15Spectrum shape based features:
–Spectral Centroid: Spectral Centroid indicates the where
the center of mass of the spectrum is located. It describes10 G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020