signal is very less in comparison to the music and environmental
sound. This could be used speech/music classiﬁcation.
3. Audio feature extraction methods: evolution and types
Evolution of audio features: In simple terms, feature extraction is
a process of highlighting the most dominating and discriminating
characteristics of a signal. A suitable feature mimics the propertiesof a signal in a much compact way. The evolution of audio signal
features is explained in Fig. 6 . The evolution of audio features
can be sub-categorized into time domain, frequency domain, joint
time-frequency domain, and deep features. The oldest and simplest
features are extracted from the time domain. The time domain fea-
tures evolved up to late 1950s [18,19,21] . Till date the time domain
features plays an important role in audio analysis and classiﬁca-
tion. To analyze the spectrum of an audio signals, several features
like pitch, formants etc. were evolved from frequency domain and
employed in various application till date. The evolution of
frequency domain features was around 1950s to 1960s [20,22] .
In later 1960s, the joint time-frequency [23–25] feature extraction
algorithms were developed. Since then these features are used in
audio signal processing algorithms. Since the evolution of deep
learning, the deep features are extensively used in various applica-
tions, in audio signal processing deep features have been used
since 2010 in the area of acoustic scene classiﬁcation [127,128] ,
speaker recognition [130] and audio video analysis [129] .4. Audio signal feature extraction
4.1. Time domain features
Before discussing about the time domain features it is impor-
tant to discuss the concept of windowing in time domain. The sim-
plest way to analyze a signal is to analyze it in its original form. All
the sound signals we are discussing here is a time series signal i.e.
these signals evolves with time. By visualizing a signal in timedomain, we may analyze few key characteristics of a signal and this
information can be used in predicting and analyzing similar sig-
nals. This time domain analysis is simple till the signal is of short
time or reﬂects stationary properties over time. In real time audio
signals are non-stationary over the time. To analyze such non-
stationary signals windowing technique is employed and the long
non-stationary signal is analyzed as short chunks of quasi-
stationary signal.Windowing can be seen as multiplying a signal
with a window function that is zero everywhere except the region
of interest. The resultant windowed signal is the subset of the orig-
inal signal which is passed though the window, for rest of the time
the signal is zero. The simplest type of window is rectangular win-
dow which is deﬁned by Eq. (1):
WRðnÞ¼1;/C0M/C01
26n6M/C01
2
0; otherwise(
ð1Þ
Fig. 3. Typical Machine Learning System.
Fig. 4. Speech, Guitar and Fire Truck sound.G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020 3