tempo. It is also used to estimate the pitch (fundamental fre-
quency) of a signal.
Rhythm Based: Rhythm in general is regular recurrence of pat-
tern over the time. The rhythm is found in musical instruments,
poetry (speech) and environmental sounds (e.g. bird chirping).
Some rhythm based features are speech duration, articulation rate,
phoneme duration, pause ratio, total duration, total pause dura-
tion, total vowel duration, pulse metric, pulse clarity, band period-
icity, beat tracker, beat histogram etc. Pulse metric is a measure
that uses the long-time band pass auto-correlation over a window
of 5 s. This feature is used in speech/music discrimination [33,52] ,
analysis of pathological speech [45], music genre classiﬁcation
[46], music instrument classiﬁcation.
4.2. Frequency domain features
Time domain graph shows the signal variation with respect to
time. To analyze a signal in terms of frequency, the time-domain
signal is converted into frequency domain signal by using Fourier
transform or auto-regression analysis. Frequency domain analysis
is a tool of utmost importance in audio signal processing. The
major frequency domain features are discussed below:
/C15Auto-regression based: Auto-regression based features are
extracted from linear prediction analysis of a signal. The most
common auto-regression based features are:
–Linear Predictive Coding (LPC) Coefﬁcients: LPC removes the
redundancy from a signal and tries to predict next values by
linearly combining the previous known coefﬁcients. LPC is
the all pole ﬁlter that represents the spectral envelope of a
digital speech in compressed form using linear prediction
model. LPC coefﬁcients are use for audio segmentation and
audio retrieval. In MATLAB there is a in-build function ‘‘lpc”
having parameters audio signal xand order of linear predictor.
Algorithm 7 : Extraction of LPC coefﬁcients
Result : LPC coefﬁcients
1. Input: Audio signal x.
2. Perform normalization and preemphasis on the signal x.
3. Implement frame blocking.
4. Perform windowing on the frame blocked signal.
5. Do auto-correlation analysis.
6. Analyze using liner prediction by using levinson-durbin
algorithm.
–Code Excited Linear Prediction (CELP): The CELP is based on
three techniques:
1. Use of linear prediction model to mimic vocal tract.
2. Use of adaptive or ﬁxed code-book entries as the excita-
tion signal to the linear prediction model.
3. The search is performed in a closed loop and in a percep-
tually weighted domain. CELP is a speech coding algo-
rithm and provides better quality than low bit rate
algorithms such as linear predictive coding Vocoders
and residual-exited linear prediction algorithms. This
features is the combination of Linear spectral frequency
and features related to pitch and residual signal. The
CELPs are used in environmental sound recognition [50].
–Linear Spectral Frequency: It is also called as linear spectral
pairs and useful in speech coding. LSF are used to represent
linear prediction coefﬁcients for the transmission over the
channel. A linear prediction polynomial is represented as
the average of pallindromic polynomial and antipallindro-mic polynomial. The pallindromic polynomial represents
the vocal tract when glottis is closed and the anti-
pallindromic polynomial represents the vocal tract when
glottis is open. The roots of the pallindromic and anti-
pallindromic polynomials are conjugate in nature and hence
half of the roots are transmitted. The LSF representation of
the Linear Prediction polynomial consists simply of the loca-
tion of the roots. This feature shows variation in value when
the glottis is closed and open. Hence, this feature is used in
voiced/unvoiced segment detection, speaker segmentation
[51] and speech/music discrimination [52].
/C15Peak Frequency: Peak frequency is simply the frequency of
maximum power. It gives an estimate about the most dominant
frequency present in the signal and also helps to calculate fun-
damental frequency of the signal. Peak frequency is a useful
parameter when we are classifying music and speech, gender
classiﬁcation etc. Fig. 14 shows the peak frequency from a single
sided FFT spectrum.
Algorithm 8 : Peak Frequency
1. Input: Audio signal ( x)
2. Covert the signal into frequency domain by using FFT.
3. Calculate the absolute value of the transformed signal.
4. Find the maximum value from the result of step 3.
/C15Method of Selection of Amplitudes of Frequency Multi-
expanded Filter based features: The Method of Selection
of Amplitudes of Frequency Multi-expanded (MSAF MULTI-
EXPANDED) ﬁlter based features are the hand-crafted fea-
tures specially used to detect faults in electric motors used
for drilling or grinding [147] or in detecting faulty commuta-
tor motor [151] . This is an acoustic feature that extracts the
differences between FFT spectra. The generalized algorithm
to extract MSAF-MULTIEXPANDED acoustic features is given
below:
Algorithm 9 : MSAF-MULTIEXPANDED acoustic features
1. Input: Acoustic signal captured from electric motors.
2. Compute FFT spectra of good and faulty acoustic signals.
3. Calculate difference between good and faulty spectra.
4. Compute the absolute value of the difference calculated.
5. Find common frequency components from the absolute
difference values.
6. Form groups of frequency components.
7. Form bandwidth of the frequencies to construct classes
for classiﬁcation.
8. Form a feature vector from those bandwidths.
Fig. 14. Peak Frequency of a Signal from single sided spectrum.8 G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020