/C15Greenwood function cepstral coefﬁcients (GFCC): GFCCs [98]
were introduced as a generalized form of MFCCs. GFCCs
use mel-scale features that mimics the properties of HAS
and theoretically well-founded for nearly all terrestrial
mammals and give good vocal representation for nearly all
species. GFCCs can be implemented using very basic knowl-
edge of the minimum and maximum frequency range for a
particular species and is derived from greenwood equation.
Greenwood equation nearly maps the cochlear-frequency
position for all species. This feature is highly employed in
environmental sound recognition specially for animals and
bird sound classiﬁcation [99].
Algorithm 27 : GFCCs extraction
1.Result : Greenwood function cepstral coefﬁcients
2. Input: Audio signal ( x)
3. Frame the signal into short frames. .Use windowing
4. For each frame, calculate the periodogram estimate of the
power spectrum.
5. Apply the Greenwood-function scaled ﬁlter-bank to
power spectrum, sum the energy in each ﬁlter.
6. Take logarithm of ﬁlter-bank energies.
7. Take Discrete cosine transform (DCT) of the log ﬁlter-
bank energies.
8. Result is GFCCs.
/C15Gammatone cepstral coefﬁcients (GTCCs): The main problem
with the automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems is
noise reduction. In recent years, the GTCCs has shown noise
robustness in many ASR systems. GTCCs are based on gam-
matone ﬁlter banks, these ﬁlter banks give cochleagram as
the output which is actually the frequency-time representa-
tion of a sound signal. The extraction process of GTCCs is
similar to the extraction process of MFCCs except the mel-
ﬁlter bank is replaced by gammatone ﬁlter bank. Just like
MFCCs, GTCCs can also have additional features like delta
GTCCs, delta-delta GTCCs which are actually the ﬁrst and
second order derivatives of GTCCs. These group of cepstral
features are used in environmental sound recognition [100]
and speech recognition [101] .
Algorithm 28 : GTCCs extraction
1.Result : Gammatone cepstral coefﬁcients
2. Input: Audio signal ( x)
3. Frame the signal into short frames. .Use windowing
4. For each frame, calculate the periodogram estimate of the
power spectrum.
5. Apply the gammatone ﬁlter-bank to power spectrum,
sum the energy in each ﬁlter.
6. Take logarithm of ﬁlter-bank energies.
7. Take Discrete cosine transform (DCT) of the log ﬁlter-
bank energies.
8. Result is GTCCs.
4.4. Discrete wavelet transform domain features
The wavelet transform is another way to transform the time-
domain audio signal into a time-frequency representation. It com-putes the inner product of the signal with a member from family of
wavelets. There are two types of wavelets: continuous wavelet
transform (CWT) and discrete wavelet transform (DWT). The
wavelet specially DWT has the capacity to extract information
from non-stationary signals like audio. It overcomes the shortcom-
ings of the STFT that provides uniform time-frequency resolution.
DWT gives high time resolution and low frequency resolution for
higher frequencies and high frequency resolution and low time
resolution for lower frequencies. The approximations and detailed
coefﬁcients are generated by the wavelet transform that gives the
information about a signal. These approximations and detailed
coefﬁcients are called as wavelet features. These wavelet features
could be extracted either from wavelet transform or from wavelet
packet decomposition. In wavelets the approximation coefﬁcients
are decomposed while in wavelet packet decomposition/transformboth approximation and detailed components are decomposed.
Below Fig. 17 explain the difference between wavelet transform
and wavelet packet transform.
The conventional features like MFCCs, PLPC etc could be
extracted from the wavelet packet decomposition. Or these coefﬁ-
cients could be directly used as wavelet features. These features or
coefﬁcients are used in audio analysis [122]
, audio classiﬁcation
[123,136] , audio ﬁngerprinting [124] , content-based audio retrie-
val[125] , music classiﬁcation [126] , vowel detection in speech sig-
nals [145] , snore sound analysis [133] audio-visual emotion
recognition [134] , detecting fault bearing in electric motors [150]
etc.
4.5. Image/texture based features
/C15Local Binary Pattern (LBP): Local binary pattern is primary
used for computer vision applications like face detection, face
recognition, object detection etc. LBPs measures the local spa-
tial information and gray scale contrast. In audio signal pro-
cessing, the LBPs are extracted from the spectrograms of the
signals and used in audio scene classiﬁcation [112,113] ,
depression analysis from speech [114] snore sound discrimi-
nation [115] , emotion detection [117] , and pathological voice
(Cordectomy and frontolateral resection diseases) detection
[143] .
Algorithm 29 : Local Binary pattern from spectrogram
1.Result : LBP feature set
2. Input: Audio signal x.
3. Generate spectrogram from the audio signal.
4. Convert the RGB image of spectrogram into gray scale
image.
5. Choose the radius of the mask and type of normalization.
6. Extarct LBP features from the gray scale image.
7. LBP are generated from each masked image subset.
/C15Local Ternary Patterns (LTPs): LTPs are the extension of the
LBPs. Just like LBPs the LTPs are extracted from the image
description of a signal like a spectrogram. But unlike LBPs,
it doesn’t threshold the pixels into binary pattern of 0’s
and 1’s, rather it uses a threshold constant to threshold pix-
els into three values i.e. /C01, 0 and 1. In this manner each
threshold pixel could have any of these three values and
neighbouring pixels could be combined after thresholding
into a ternary patterns.The LTPs are used in audio scene clas-14 G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020