Trends in audio signal feature extraction methods
Garima Sharma⇑, Kartikeyan Umapathy, Sridhar Krishnan
The Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ryerson University, ON M5B 2K3, Canada
article info
Article history:
Received 6 August 2019Received in revised form 28 August 2019Accepted 1 September 2019Available online 23 September 2019
Keywords:
AudioSpeech
Signal
Feature extractionSurveyMachine learningabstract
Audio signal processing algorithms generally involves analysis of signal, extracting its properties, predict-
ing its behaviour, recognizing if any pattern is present in the signal, and how a particular signal is corre-
lated to another similar signals. Audio signal includes music, speech and environmental sounds. Over thelast few decades, audio signal processing has grown signiﬁcantly in terms of signal analysis and classiﬁ-
cation. And it has been proven that solutions of many existing issues can be solved by integrating the
modern machine learning (ML) algorithms with the audio signal processing techniques. The performanceof any ML algorithm depends on the features on which the training and testing is done. Hence featureextraction is one of the most vital part of a machine learning process. The aim of this study is to summa-
rize the literature of the audio signal processing specially focusing on the feature extraction techniques.
In this survey the temporal domain, frequency domain, cepstral domain, wavelet domain and time-frequency domain features are discussed in detail.
/C2112019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
In order to make machines and computer intelligent like
humans, we are using machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence
methods. Ideally, in today’s world we want computers to have
capability to make decisions like humans. One of the important
sense of humans is hearing. Fig. 1 helps us to understand how
human auditory system behaves over the listening range of
20 Hz–20 kHZ. It is a graph between sound pressure level (SPL)
in decibel and the audible frequency range [1,2] . The graph shows
the absolute threshold of hearing for different frequencies. Abso-
lute threshold of hearing is the minimum sound pressure level of
a pure tone that can be heard by a normal ear in silence. It is nice
to note that the human auditory system’s sensitivity is best
between frequency range 2 kHZ–5 kHZ where the threshold
reaches as low as /C09 db SPL [3]. Approximately, for music our ears
are sensitive between range 50 Hz and 15 kHZ while for speech the
ears are sensitive between 100 Hz and 4.5 kHZ.
Humans can easily classify between various sounds without
putting an extra effort e.g. we can easily classify between speech
and music, car and truck sounds, baby and adult speech quality,
various speakers, noise and useful sound etc. We want machines
would be able to classify between various sounds as humans can
do effortlessly. This problem is also called as machine hearing [4].This leads to the research area of acoustic scene classiﬁcation
(ASC) [15] where a machine is trained to classify between various
sounds that are present in an acoustic scene. Fig. 2 represents the
ASC model was ﬁrst proposed by Gerhard in [5].
Regardless of any particular aim, a ML system requires robust
and discriminatory features that helps a machine to learn accu-
rately and quickly. The intelligence of a machine is deﬁned bythe amount of training given to it. Normally the whole dataset isnot fed into the computer or machine during its training to learn
its properties, rather a reduced in size representation of the signals
is used to train the machine. This compact representation of a sig-nal is called as feature. The challenge is to extract right featuresensures the success of a ML algorithm. The features must be com-
pact in size but must highlight the characteristics of signal. The
Features are so selected that it reduces the size of a signal signiﬁ-cantly while still describing a signal completely and accurately.The reduced version of the signal improves the computational
complexity and time complexity of the ML algorithms which in
turn make it more suitable for real time applications. So, we cansay that feature extraction is a process of dimension reduction ofa signal which makes the signal more suitable for ML algorithms.
In this paper, we focus only on the features extracted from
speech signals and on the musical sound. The application area of
speech signals is very vast, to name a few like speech recognition
[6], speaker recognition [8], blind source separation [7,8] , speech
enhancement [9], pathological speech detection [10,11] , improving
pathological speech [11,12] , noise reduction, noise cancellation,
gender classiﬁcation, human-computer interaction [13] like
Apple’s Siri or Amazon’s alexa etc. While on the other hand, music
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2019.107020
0003-682X/ /C2112019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.⇑Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: garima.sharma@ryerson.ca (G. Sharma), kumapath@ryerson.
ca(K. Umapathy), krishnan@ryerson.ca (S. Krishnan).Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Applied Acoustics
journal homepage: www.elsevi er.com/locate/apacoust