Algorithm 22 : OBSC extarction algorithm
1.Result : OBSC feature
2. Input: Audio signal x.
3. Perform framing or windowing on the signal.
4. Take FFT of each framed signal.5. Divide the transformed signal into 6 octave scaled sub-
bands.
6. For each band, calculate peak and valley values.
7. Calculate the contrast of the peaks and valleys.
8. Valleys and contrast gives OBSC feature set.
4.3. Cepstral domain features
A cepstrum is obtained by taking the inverse Fourier transform
of the logarithm of the spectrum of the signal. There is a complex,
power, phase and real cepstrum. Among all of these, power cep-
strum is the one most relevant to the speech signal processing.
The analysis of the cepstrum is called as cepstrum analysis, que-
frency analysis (equivalent to frequency analysis in spectrum
domain) or liftering [76](equivalent to the ﬁltering in spectrum
domain). The cepstrum features are mainly used in pitch detection
[77,78] , speech recognition and speech enhancement [79]. The
cepstrum/cepstral features are discussed below:
/C15Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefﬁcients (MFCCs): MFCCs are derived
from the cepstral representation of an audio clip. MFCCs repre-
sents short-time power spectrum of an audio clip based on the
discrete cosine transform of log power spectrum on a non-
linear mel scale. In MFCCs the frequency bands are equally
spaced on mel-scale, which mimics the human auditory system
very closely, making MFCCs key feature in various audio signal
processing applications. MFCCs has been widely used in speech
recognition [80,83] , speech enhancement [84], speaker recogni-
tion [81], music genre classiﬁcation [82], music information
retrieval [85], audio similarity measurement [82], vowel detec-
tion [145] etc.
Algorithm 23 : MFCC extraction
1.Result : Mel frequency cepstrum coefﬁcients
2. Input: Audio signal x
3. Frame the signal into short frames. .Use windowing
4. For each frame, calculate the periodogram estimate of the
power spectrum.
5. Apply the mel ﬁlter-bank to power spectrum, sum the
energy in each ﬁlter.
6. Take logarithm of ﬁlter-bank energies.
7.Take Discrete cosine transform (DCT) of the log ﬁlter-bank
energies.
8. Keep 2–13 DCT coefﬁcients, discard the rest.
/C15Linear Prediction Cepstral Coefﬁcients (LPCCs): The cepstrum
has number of advantages like soucre-ﬁlter separation,
orthogonality, compactness etc. These properties makes cep-
strum coefﬁcients robust and suitable for machine learning.
On the other hand, linear prediction coefﬁcients (LPC) are
too sensitive to numerical precision, hence it is desirable to
transform the LPC to the cepstral domain. The resultant
transformed coefﬁcients are called as LPCCs. We can say that
LPCCs are derived from LPCs. LPCCs has been used in various
application areas like speech recognition [86], speech analy-
sis[87], noise removal [88], music genre classiﬁcation [89]
etc. Algorithm below describes the steps to calculate LPCCs
from an audio signal.Algorithm 24 : LPCCs extraction
1.
Result : LPCCs feature
2. Input the audio signal x
3. Perform pre-emphasis on original signal.
4. Frame the signal using windowing method.5. Find the auto-correlation of the signal with itself.
6. Calculate LPC parameters.
7. Convert the LPC parameters in cepstral domain.
8. Result is LPCCs.
/C15Preceptual linear prediction (PLP) cepstral coefﬁcients: The PLP
coefﬁcients is based on the concepts: critical band spectral
resolution, equal-loudness curve and intensity loudness
power law [90]. The PLP coefﬁcients are derived from the
linear prediction coefﬁcients (LPC) by performing percep-
tual processing before auto-regressive modelling. After this
processing, the linear coefﬁcients are converted into cep-
stral coefﬁcients. It has been widely employed in emotion
recognition [91], speech recognition [92], baby crying
sound analysis [93], animal sound vocalization analysis
[94] etc.
Algorithm 25 : PLP cepstral extraction
1.Result : PLP cepstral coefﬁcients
2. Input the audio signal x
3. Perform windowing on signal.
4. Do critical band analysis.
5. Perform equal loudness and pre-emphasis.
6. Do intensity-loudness conversion.
7. Apply linear prediction algorithm.
8. Convert into cepstarl domain.
/C15Relative-spectral PLP (RASTA-PLP) feature: RASTA is a tech-
nique that applies a band-pass ﬁlter to the energy in each
frequency sub-band in order to smooth over short-term
noise variations and to remove any constant offset
resulting from static spectral coloration in the speech
signal. The RASTA-PLP features are robust to noise version
of PLP features. The advantage of the RASTA-PLP feature
is that it tries to incorporate noise cancellation feature
of human auditory system. This hybrid feature is
widely employed in speech recognition [95], gender
classiﬁcation [96], speaker veriﬁcation [97] etc. The
process to extract RASTA-PLP features is explained in
algorithm below.
Algorithm 26 : RASTA-PLP feature extarction
1.Result : RASTA-PLP feature set
2. Input the audio signal x
3. Perform pre-emphasis and windowing on original signal.
4. ﬁnd DFT of the windowed signal.
5. Perform critical bank analysis on DFT signal.
6. Take logarithm of the result of step 5.
7. Perform RASTA-ﬁltering. 8. Perform equal loudness and
pre-emphasis on RASTA ﬁltered signal.
9. Apply Intensity loudness power law.
10. Take inverse of logarithm of the result of step 9.
11. Perform auto-regressive modelling.
12. Convert into cepstral domain.
13. Result is the RASTA-PLP coefﬁcients.G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020 13