signals are analyzed in applications like mood detection [14], emo-
tion prediction, genre classiﬁcation [15], song tagging, singer clas-
siﬁcation etc.
The rest of the paper is organized as: Section 2explains the basic
structure of a typical ML system and explains in brief about the
audio types: speech, music and environmental sounds, Section 3dis-
cuss about the evolution of audio signal features and types of audio
features. Section 4explains the time domain features, frequency
domain features, time-frequency features, wavelet features, cep-
stral features, phase and eigen features and the last section discuss
about the critical analysis, conclusion and future work.
2. Structure of machine learning system
The basic structure of any typical audio ML system is deﬁned in
Fig. 3 . In the ﬁrst stage, the pre-processing is done on the audio sig-
nal. The pre-processing may involve noise cancellation, silence
reduction, normalization etc. The next stage is windowing of the
signal that helps us to analyze the possible non-stationary signal
as quasi-stationary signal. The whole signal can be studied and
analyzed by sliding the window over the whole length of the
signal. Using modern windowing methods, the size of the windowcan be made adaptive according to the characteristics of the signal.
After that, the feature extraction and feature selection steps are
taken. These steps decide the performance of the classiﬁer. Then
the selected features are fed into the classiﬁer for training and test-
ing and based on the classiﬁer’s prediction the decision is made.
2.1. Audio types
As discussed in Fig. 2 , the audible audio signals are categorized
into speech, music and environmental sounds. These are explained
in brief below:
Speech : Speech is produced by human beings by using combina-
tion of various organs like lungs, mouth, nose, abdomen and the
brain. The vocal tract and vocal cords play a major role in speech
production. The speech production starts at frequency of 100 Hz
and may go up to the frequency of 17 kHZ [17].
Music : Musical sounds are produced by musical instruments or
humans in order to produce harmony and expression of emotions.
Music can be described in various dimensions like genre, mood and
sound characteristics. Traditionally, music has been classiﬁed into
categories like rock, jazz, classical or pop. Ideally frequency range
of music varies from as low as 40 Hz and may go as high as up
to 19.5 kHZ [17].
Environmental sounds : In everyday life, we are surrounded by
endless number of environmental sounds like sound of car or any
other vehicle, running water, door bell, phone ring, factory noise,
animal sounds etc. These sounds spread over the whole audible
range. Fig. 4 shows the time domain structure of these 3 types of
sounds. Fig. 4 shows the audio signal for human speech, guitar note
and a car honk sound. The periodicity in the signal can be observed
in speech and music sounds, but it is hard to ﬁnd any periodicity in
environmental sounds.
It is clear from Fig. 4 that speech is continuous in nature and has
a smooth envelope, while guitar notes are of short duration and
non-continuous in nature. The ﬁre truck sound looks like noise
and have very high amplitude. These three sounds not only differ
in time domain, but also differ in frequency domain. Fig. 5 shows
the frequency spectra of these 3 sounds. It can be noted from the
Fig. 4 that the magnitude of the frequency spectrum of speech
Fig. 1. Absolute threshold of hearing [1].
Fig. 2. Sound Classiﬁcation.2 G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020