information. Hence, the signiﬁcance of the deep features highly
depends on the layer from which these are extracted.
Another type of artiﬁcial neural network is auto-encoder, which
is basically used for dimension reduction and works in an unsuper-vised manner. The stacked auto-encoder (SAE) is a neural network
having multiple layers of sparse auto-encoders in such a manner
that the output of the each layer is fed as the input to its successive
layer. Once the SAE is trained, the deep features could be extracted
from the hidden deep layers of the unsupervised trained SAE and
can be used for various applications.
In order to encode the sequential knowledge in the model,
RNNs are used. RNNs have advantages over DNNs as it has ﬂexibil-
ity to process sequential knowledge and have ability to memorize
information internally. The memory unit is called as LSTM. Unidi-
rectional or bi-directional LSTM are the types memory element. In
unidirectional LSTM the ﬂow of information is in just forward
direction while in BLSTM, one LSTM layer process the information
in forward direction and another LSTM layer process the informa-
tion in backward direction. The deep features could be extracted
from any deep layer of LSTM-RNN.
In audio signal processing, deep features have been used in
acoustic scene classiﬁcation [127,128] , speaker recognition [130] ,audio-video analysis [129] , gender recognition [146] , emotion
recognition [131] and spooﬁng detection [132] .
4.7. Sparsity in features
In numerical analysis, a sparse matrix is the one in which most
of the elements is zero and very few elements are non-zero. The
same concept can be applied to audio signals, which may have very
few non-zero components when represented in a particular
domain. For example, a pure tonal signal can be represented by
one single spike in frequency domain, hence we can say that signal
is sparse in frequency domain. Hence, very less number of features
are required to represent a signal if it has sparsity. Sparsity can be
achieved in any domain say time domain, frequency domain, time-
frequency domain, wavelet domain, cepstral domain etc. Once the
sparsity is achieved in any of the domains, the domain speciﬁc fea-
tures can be extracted and analyzed. For example, if sparsity is pre-
sent in cepstral domain, cepstral features can be extracted from the
compact sparse signal. This sparsity of a signal may ﬁnally leads to
compressing sensing. The sparsity can be realized by many meth-
ods, to name a few are:
Fig. 18. Deep feature from bottleneck layer.
Fig. 19. Basic structure of CNN.16 G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020