/C15Shortened method of frequencies selection MULTIEX-
PANDED: Very similar to MSAF-MULTIEXPANDED feature,
Shortened method of frequencies selection MULTIEXPANDED
(SMOFS-MULTIEXPANDED) is another hand crafted feature
that is too employed in industry applications speciﬁcally to
diagnose fault in motors [149] . The algorithm below explains
how SMOFS-MULTIEXPANDED features are extracted and
how these are different from MSAF-MULTIEXPANDED
features.
Algorithm 10 : SMOFS-MULTICRAFTED acoustic feature
1. Input: Vibrations captured from motors.
2. Extract FFTs from various healthy and faulty motor’s
vibration sounds.
3. Calculate absolute difference of the various FFTs.4. Select the frequency components greater than a
threshold.
5. Compute the variable threshold of selection of frequency
components using iterative methods.
6. Set the parameter: Threshold of common frequency
components MULTIEXPANDED extension.
7. Find common frequency components.
8. Form a ﬁnal feature vector from common frequency
components.
/C15STFT based features/Time-Frequency Features: A time-
frequency transform of a signal is the way of looking into
the signal having time on one axis and frequency on another.
The time-frequency analysis could be obtained by using
time-frequency distribution (TFD). Generally the time-
frequency domain is called as time-frequency representation
(TFR) obtained by TFD. The time-domain shows the varia-
tions in signal amplitude over the period of time, while in
frequency domain the magnitude of the frequency content
gives only frequency information but no time information.
A TFR bridges this gap and provide the time and frequency
resolution. STFT is the most common way to have a TFR.
Also, a TFR features are effective for analysis non-
stationary aspects of a signal such as trends, discontinuities
and patterns which is normally missed by the time or fre-
quency domain features [135] .
–Time-Frequency Matrix: By using the STFT, the time-domain
signal could be converted into TFR. However, this representa-tion contains a huge amount of data and information. For
example of the Guitar signal, sampled at 44.1 kHZ the TFD
with a resolution of 128 /C21024 gives 131,072 TF samples.
To reduce the dimension of the TF matrix the various decom-
position techniques could be employed to get the relevant
and compact TFR. Some well known TFD techniques are:
1. linear TFDs: These are the simplest form of TFDs and is
equal to the squared modulus of the STFT signal [139] .
The original size of this TFD is quite huge.
2. Quadratic TFDs: To make the TFD adaptive, the window
size is made adaptive with respect to the signal. The
wigner ville distribution (WVD) is the simplest quadratic
TFD. It is a great method to analyze signals in time-
frequency domain. This distribution doesn’t suffers from
leakage effects as STFT does. Hence it gives the best spec-
tral resolution. This feature has been used in analysis of
audio signals [119] and detecting industrial gear failures
[120] . It is also used in seismic data processing [121] . The
major drawback of the WVD is the generation of cross
terms due to its quadratic nature. This drawback is elim-
inated by Cohens class of bilinear TF representation.3. Positive TFDs: The positive TFDs gives positive terms and
are free from cross terms. The positive TFDs [138] are
based on the signal dependent kernels.
4. Matching pursuit TFDs: Matching pursuits TFD is based
on the matching pursuit decomposition that uses non-
orthogonal basis functions to decompose a signal into
gabor atoms with a variety of possible translations, mod-
ulations and scaling. These are highly used in environ-
mental sound classiﬁcation [135,139] .
This Time-frequency matrix could directly be used in various ap-
plications like classiﬁcation of environmental sounds [135,137] .
The TFD is used in industry too. For instance the vibrations gen-
erated by the motors is analyzed using TFD to ﬁnd the faulty motor
bearing present in the motor [148,150]
.
–Sub-band energy ratio: The sub-band coding breaks the sig-
nal into different frequency bands typically by using FFT or
STFT and encodes each one independently. The sub-band
energy ratio is deﬁned as the measure of normalized signal
energy along these different frequency bands. It has been
used for audio segmentation, environmental audio recogni-
tion [42] and music analysis [43].
–Spectrum envelope: The spectrum envelope is a log-
frequency power spectrum of a signal and can be used to
generate reduced spectrogram of the audio signal. The spec-
tral envelope when generated by linear prediction method, it
is called as linear prediction spectral envelope. Due to error
optimized by linear prediction, the spectral peaks of an
audio signal are more accurate and emphasis on the envel-
ope as they are in auditory system. This feature has been
used in music genre classiﬁcation [29,32] and environmental
sound recognition [42].
–Stereo panning spectrum feature (SPSF): In audio signal pro-
cessing, the stereo audio is converted into to mono channel
audio before proceeding for the processing [68]. Hence, the
information content present due to stereo panning is not
fully utilized. In order to answer this, stereo panning spec-
trum is considered. The frequency-domain source identiﬁca-
tion system based on cross-channel metric is called panning
index. The stereo panning spectrum holds the signals
between /C01 to +1 (0 is center). The main aim of this feature
is to calculate the stereo panning information for different
frequencies based on the STFT of left and right channel.
The basic idea behind the stereo panning spectrum is to
compare the left and right channel signals in the time-
frequency [70] representation to derive a 2-dimensional
map that identiﬁes the different panning gains associated
with each time-frequency bin. Many statistical features canbe derived from the stereo panning spectrum like: derivative
of panning index, panning root mean square for a particular
frequency band, panning for low medium and high frequen-
cies etc. This feature has been used in audio classiﬁcation,
separating audio sources [71], music information retrieval
[69] and music classiﬁcation [72].
–Group delay function (GDF): During frequency domain anal-
ysis of an audio signal, we generally avoid the phase infor-
mation and do analysis based on the real values. The
information in STFT phase function is extracted by calculat-
ing the derivative of the phase, this is called as group delay
function [73,75] . It is also known as negative derivative of
the phase. Group delay function reveals information about
the temporal events in a signal e.g. identifying spectral
peaks. The GDF can be: minimum phase GDF, maximum
phase GDF or mixed phase GDF. Generally formants are
extracted from GDFs and are used in various audio process-
ing algorithms. Another type of GDF is modiﬁed GDF,G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020 9