16but not least, we will highlight the use of multi-
task learning for pretraining (Subramanian et al.,
2018; Cer et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2018).
This review of pretraining approaches will pro-
vide recommendations and discuss trade-offs of
pretraining tasks based on our own experiments
and recent studies (Zhang and Bowman, 2018;
Anonymous, 2019).
We will then shed some light on what the
learned representations can and cannot capture
based on recent studies (Conneau et al., 2018; Pe-
ters et al., 2018b). We will discuss trade-offs be-
tween different modelling architectures and high-
light the capabilities and deﬁciencies of individual
models.
In the second part of the tutorial, we will fo-
cus on the second phase of sequential training, the
adaptation phase as well as downstream applica-
tions. The adaptation phase involves a growing
panel of methods:
Architecture modiﬁcations can range from a
few additional embeddings to additional layers on
top of the pre-trained to the insertion of interven-
ing layers or modules inside the pre-trained model.
Optimization schedules for the adaptation
phase can involve ﬁne-tuning a varying portion of
the pre-trained model (Long et al., 2015; Felbo
et al., 2017; Howard and Ruder, 2018) with
speciﬁcally designed regularization (Wiese et al.,
2017; Kirkpatrick et al., 2017) or even ﬁne-tuning
in sequence a model on a series of datasets using
several training objectives. We will summarize
current trends in adapting pre-trained model to
target tasks while highlighting best practices when
they can be identiﬁed.
We will then focus on a selection of downstream
applications such as classiﬁcation (Howard and
Ruder, 2018), natural language generation, struc-
tured prediction (Swayamdipta et al., 2018) or
other classiﬁcation tasks (Peters et al., 2018a; De-
vlin et al., 2018). This part will comprise hands-
on examples designed around representative tasks
and typical transfer learning schemes as detailed
before. We will aim to demonstrate through prac-
tical examples how NLP researchers and practi-
tioners can adapt these models to their own appli-
cations and provide them with a set of guidelines
for practical usage.
Finally, we will present open problems, chal-
lenges, and directions in transfer learning for NLP.3 Outline
This tutorial will be 3 hours long.
1.Introduction (15 minutes long): This sec-
tion will introduce the theme of the tutorial:
how transfer learning is used in current NLP.
It will position sequential transfer learning
among different transfer learning areas.
2.Pretraining (35 minutes): We will discuss
unsupervised, supervised, and distantly su-
pervised pretraining methods. As part of the
unsupervised methods, we will also highlight
seminal NLP approaches, such as LSA and
Brown clusters.
3.What do the representations capture (20
minutes): Before discussing how the pre-
trained representations can be used in down-
stream tasks, we will discuss ways to analyze
the representations and what properties they
have been observed to capture.
4.Break (20 minutes)
5.Adaptation (30 minutes): In this section, we
will present several ways to adapt these repre-
sentations, feature extraction and ﬁne-tuning.
We will discuss practical considerations such
as learning rate schedules, architecture mod-
iﬁcations, etc.
6.Down-stream applications (40 minutes): In
this section, we will highlight how pretrained
representations have been used in different
downstream tasks, such as text classiﬁca-
tion, natural language generation, structured
prediction, among others. We will present
hands-on examples and discuss best practices
for each category of tasks.
7.Open problems and directions (20 min-
utes): In this ﬁnal section, we will provide
an outlook into the future. We will highlight
both open problems and point to future re-
search directions.
4 Prerequisites
Machine Learning: Basic knowledge of com-
mon recent neural network architectures like
RNN, CNN, and Transformers.