17Computational linguistics: Familiarity with
standard NLP tasks such as text classiﬁca-
tion, natural language generation, and struc-
tured prediction.
5 Tutorial instructor information
Sebastian Ruder Sebastian Ruder is a research
scientist at DeepMind. His research focuses on
transfer learning in NLP. He has published widely
read reviews of related areas, such as multi-task
learning and cross-lingual word embeddings and
co-organized the NLP Session at the Deep Learn-
ing Indaba 2018.
Matthew Peters Matthew Peters is a research
scientist at AI2 focusing on large scale represen-
tation learning for NLP.
Swabha Swayamdipta Swabha Swayamdipta
is a PhD student at the Language Technologies In-
stitute at Carnegie Mellon University (currently a
visiting student at University of Washington). Her
primary research interests are developing efﬁcient
algorithms for structured prediction, with a focus
on incorporating inductive biases from syntactic
sources.
Thomas Wolf Thomas Wolf leads the Science
Team at Huggingface, a Brooklyn-based startup
working on open-domain dialog. He has open-
sourced several widely used libraries for co-
reference resolution and transfer learning models
in NLP and maintains a blog with practical tips
for training large-scale transfer-learning and meta-
learning models. His primary research interest is
Natural Language Generation.
6 Audience size estimate
Due to the broad appeal and relevancy of the con-
tent of our tutorial, we expect a large audience,
around 200 people.
References
Anonymous. 2019. Looking for ELMo’s friends:
Sentence-Level Pretraining Beyond Language Mod-
eling.
David M. Blei, Andrew Y . Ng, and Michael I. Jordan.
2003. Latent Dirichlet Allocation. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research , 3(4-5):993–1022.
Peter F. Brown, Stephen Della Pietra, Vincent J. Della
Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. The mathemat-
ics of statistical machine translation: Parameter esti-
mation. Computational Linguistics , 19(2):263–311.Daniel Cer, Yinfei Yang, Sheng-yi Kong, Nan Hua,
and Nicole Limtiaco. 2018. Universal Sentence En-
coder.
Alexis Conneau, Douwe Kiela, Holger Schwenk, Lo ¨ıc
Barrault, and Antoine Bordes. 2017. Supervised
Learning of Universal Sentence Representations
from Natural Language Inference Data. In Proceed-
ings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing .
Alexis Conneau, German Kruszewski, Guillaume
Lample, Lo ¨ıc Barrault, and Marco Baroni. 2018.
What you can cram into a single vector: Probing
sentence embeddings for linguistic properties. In
Proceedings of ACL 2018 .
Andrew M. Dai and Quoc V . Le. 2015. Semi-
supervised Sequence Learning. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS ’15) .
Scott Deerwester, Susan T Dumais, George W Fur-
nas, Thomas K Landauer, and Richard Harshman.
1990. Indexing by latent semantic analysis. Jour-
nal of the American society for information science ,
41(6):391–407.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. BERT: Pre-training of
Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Un-
derstanding.
Bjarke Felbo, Alan Mislove, Anders Søgaard, Iyad
Rahwan, and Sune Lehmann. 2017. Using millions
of emoji occurrences to learn any-domain represen-
tations for detecting sentiment, emotion and sar-
casm. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing.
Jiatao Gu, Yong Wang, Yun Chen, Kyunghyun Cho,
and Victor O K Li. 2018. Meta-Learning for Low-
Resource Neural Machine Translation. In Proceed-
ings of EMNLP 2018 .
Felix Hill, Kyunghyun Cho, and Anna Korhonen. 2016.
Learning Distributed Representations of Sentences
from Unlabelled Data. In NAACL-HLT .
Jeremy Howard and Sebastian Ruder. 2018. Universal
Language Model Fine-tuning for Text Classiﬁcation.
InProceedings of ACL 2018 .
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz,
Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A Rusu,
Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Ag-
nieszka Grabska-Barwinska, Demis Hassabis, Clau-
dia Clopath, Dharshan Kumaran, and Raia Hadsell.
2017. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural
networks. PNAS .
Ryan Kiros, Yukun Zhu, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
Richard S. Zemel, Antonio Torralba, Raquel Urta-
sun, and Sanja Fidler. 2015. Skip-Thought Vectors.
InProceedings of NIPS 2015 .