37:30 Z.Wanget al.
256×256,(2)increasingthelengthsofthegeneratedvideobeyond48frames,and(3)thegenera-
tion of more realistic video so that much of the generated video contentis not blurred,indistinct,
orevensurreal.Video-basedGANsdonotonlyhavetoconsiderthespatialmodelingproblembut
alsorequiretemporalmodeling,i.e.,themotionbetweeneachadjacentframesinavideosequence.
MoCoGAN[ 126]isproposedtolearnmotionandcontentinanunsupervisedfashionanddivides
the image latent space into content and motion spaces. DVD-GAN [ 24] is able to generate longer
andhigherresolutionvideosbasedontheBigGANarchitecturewhileintroducingscalable,video-
specific generator and discriminator architectures. DVD-GAN comprises two discriminators DS
(spatial discriminators) and DT(temporal discriminators), in which DSscores input frames from
thespatialperspectiveand DTscoresinputframes fromthetemporalperspective(motion).
6.3 Feature Generation
“Can machines think?” This is the question raised in Alan Turing’s seminal paper entitled “Com-
puting Machinery and Intelligence” [ 127] in 1950. The ultimate goal of machines is to be as intel-
ligentashumanbeings.CurrentAIdependsonlargedatasetsratherthanbeinggeneralizedfrom
small datasets and has a catastrophic forgetting problem [ 97] when learning tasks sequentially.
Few-shotlearningandcontinuallearningattractsignificantattentionfromthescientificcommu-
nity in recent years and aims to fill the gaps between AI and humans. Both of these fields suffer
from the problem of a lack of data, i.e., few-shot learning uses few samples (e.g., normally 1 sam-
pleor5samples)foreachcategoryandcontinuallearningcomesacrossunseendatainsequential
tasks. Mandal et al. [ 93] proposes the use of conditional Wasserstein GAN with two additional
terms,i.e.,cosineembeddingandcycle-consistencylossestosynthesizeunseenactionfeaturesfor
zero-shot action recognition. Shin et al. [ 119] proposes a deep generative replay framework for
continual learning, in which training data for previous tasks are sampled by the generator and
interleavedwiththoseforanewtask.TheseshowthatGANshavethepotentialabilitytoprovide
solutionsfor othermachinelearningproblems.
7 DISCUSSION
We have introduced the most significant problems present in the original GAN design namely
mode collapse and vanishing gradients when updating G. We have surveyed significant GAN-
variantsthatremedytheseproblemsthroughtwodesignconsiderations:(1)architecture-variants.
ThisaspectfocusesonarchitecturaloptionsforGANs.ThisapproachenablesGANstobesuccess-
fullyappliedtodifferentapplications,however,itisunabletofullysolvetheproblemsmentioned
above; (2) loss-variants. We have provided a detailed explanation as to why these problems arise
in the original GAN. These problems are essentially caused by the loss function in the original
GAN.Consequently,modifyingthislossfunctioncansolvethisproblem.Itshouldbenotedhow-
ever that the loss function may change for some architecture-variants and it is, in many cases,
an architecture-specific loss. Therefore, it is unable to generalize to other architectures. Table 2
demonstrates our summary for the performance of the presented GANs in this work by using
Inception Score and FID as presented in the literature. Four image datasets are considered in the
summary, i.e., CIFAR10, ImageNet, LSUN, and CelebA, which are the most widely used bench-
markingdatasets.
Interconnections between Architecture and Loss In this article, we highlight the prob-
lemsinherentintheoriginalGANdesign.Inhighlightinghowsubsequentresearchershavereme-
died those problems, we explored architecture-variants and loss-variants in GAN designs sep-
arately. However, it should be noted that there are interconnections between these two types
of GAN-variants. As mentioned before, loss functions are easily integrated to different architec-
tures.Benefitingfromimprovedconvergenceandstabilizationthrougharedesignedlossfunction,
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.