37:16 Z.Wanget al.
higher resolution images. The remaining architecture variants (i.e., BEGAN, PROGAN, SAGAN,
and BigGAN) all have some modifications on the loss function that we will address in a later
section of this article and these are also beneficial in producing better image quality. Regarding
thearchitecturecomponentonly,BEGANusesanautoencoderarchitectureforthediscriminator,
which compares generated images and real images at the pixel level. This helps the generator
produce easy-to-reconstruct data. PROGAN utilizes a deeper architectureand the model expands
as the training progresses. This progressive training strategy improves the learning stability for
discriminatorandgeneratorthusitiseasierforthemodeltolearnhowtoproducehighresolution
images. SAGAN mainly benefits from the spectral normalization, which we address in the next
section. BigGAN demonstrates that high resolution image generation can benefit from a deeper
modelwithlarger batchsizes.
Vanishing Gradient Changing the loss function is the only way to remedy such a problem
currently. Some architecture variants here avoid the vanishing gradient issue but only because
they usedifferentlossfunctions.Wewillexplore thisin thenext section.
Mode Diversity This is the most challenging problem for GANs. It is very difficult for GANs
toproducerealisticdiverseimagessuchasnaturalimages.Intermsofarchitecture-variantGANs,
only SAGAN and BigGAN address this issue explicitly. Benefiting from the self-attention mecha-
nism, CNNs in SAGAN and BigGAN can process a large receptive field that overcomes the shift-
ingcomponentsproblemingeneratedimages.ThisenablessuchtypesofGANtoproducediverse
images.
5 LOSS-VARIANT GANS
AnotherdesigndecisioninGANsthatsignificantlyimpactsperformanceisthechoiceoflossfunc-
tioninEquation( 1).WhiletheoriginalGANwork[ 45]hasalreadydemonstratedglobaloptimal-
ity and the convergence of GANs training, it still highlights the instability problem that can arise
whentrainingaGAN.TheproblemiscausedbytheglobaloptimalitycriterionasstatedinRefer-
ence [45]. Global optimality is achieved when an optimal Dis reached for any G.S ot h eo p t i m a l
Dis achievedwhenthederivative of Dforthelossin Equation( 1) equals0.So we have
−pr(x)
D(x)+pд(x)
1−D(x)=0→D∗(x)=pr(x)
pr(x)+pд(x), (6)
where xrepresentstherealdataandgenerateddata, D∗(x)istheoptimaldiscriminator, pr(x)isthe
real data distribution and pд(x)is the generated data distribution. We have the optimal discrimi-
natorDso far and when we have the optimal D,t h el o s sf o r Gcan be visualized by substituting
D∗(x)intoEquation( 1),
LG=Ex∼prlogpr(x)
1
2/bracketleftBig
pr(x)+pд(x)/bracketrightBig+Ex∼pдlogpд(x)
1
2/bracketleftBig
pr(x)+pд(x)/bracketrightBig−2·log2. (7)
Equation ( 7) demonstrates the loss function for a GAN when the discriminator is optimized and
it is related to two important probability measurement metrics. One is KL divergence, which is
defined as
KL(p1/bardblp2)=Ex∼p1logp1
p2, (8)
and theotherisJensen-Shannon(JS)divergence,whichisstatedas
JS(p1/bardblp2)=1
2KL/parenleftbigg
p1/bardblp1+p2
2/parenrightbigg
+1
2KL/parenleftbigg
p2/bardblp1+p2
2/parenrightbigg
. (9)
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.