37:12 Z.Wanget al.
Fig.6. Self-attentionmechanismarchitectureproposedinthearticle. f,д,andhcorrespondwithquery,key
andvalueintheself-attentionmechanism.Theattentionmapindicatesthelong-rangespatialdependencies.
The⊗denotes matrixmultiplication. Figureis regeneratedfromReference [ 149].
in the generator while batch projection was used in the discriminator. An Adam optimizer with
β1=0a n dβ2=0.9 was used and the learning rate for the discriminator was 4 ×10−4and for
the generator was 1 ×10−4. The authors also demonstrate that the deployment of a self-attention
mechanism for both the discriminator and the generator at large feature maps is more effective,
i.e., deployment of self-attention mechanism with a feature map with 32 ×32 size achieves the
best performance using FID score and deployment of a self-attention mechanism with a feature
m a pw i t h6 4×64 size achieves the best performance using Inception score, which indicates the
self-attention mechanism is complementary to convolution for large feature maps. Thus the self-
attentionmechanism,wesuggest,shouldbeappliedforlargefeaturemapstoimprovethediversity
for GANs.
4.12 BigGAN
BigGAN [ 13] has also achieved state-of-the-art performance on the ImageNet datasets. Its design
is based on SAGAN and it has demonstrated that the performance can yield a scaling up of GAN
training, i.e., an increase in the number of channels for each layer and an increase in the batch
size. The authors train the model on ImageNet with 128 ×128, 256×256, and 512×512 resolu-
tions.ThetrainingsettinginthisworkfollowstheSAGAN,inwhichthelearningratewashalved
and train two Dsteps per Gstep. Different selections of latent variables zare explored and the
authors state that Bernoulli {0,1}and Censored Normal max (N(0,I),0)work best without trun-
cation.Thetruncationtrickinvolvesusingadifferentdistributionforthegeneratoraslatentspace
during training than during inference or image synthesis. In BigGAN, a Gaussian distribution is
used during training, and a truncated Gaussian is used during inference. This truncation trick
providesatradeoffbetweenimagequalityorfidelityandimagevariety.Amorenarrowsampling
rangeresultsinbetterquality,whereasalargersamplingrangeresultsinmorevarietyinsampled
images. We summarize the following operations on BigGAN that make BigGAN scale-up the ar-
chitecture. (1) Self-attention module andHinge loss : The BigGAN uses a model architecture with
attention modules from SAGAN and is trained via hinge loss, in which self-attention contributes
tothemodeldiversityandhingelossenablesstabilityoftraining.(2) Classconditionalinformation :
Theclassinformationisprovidedtothegeneratormodelviaclass-conditionalbatchnormalization.
(3)Update discriminator more than generator : The BigGAN slightly modifies this and updates the
discriminatormodeltwicebeforeupdatingthegeneratormodelineachtrainingiteration.(4) Mov-
ing average of model weights : Before images are generated for evaluation, the model weights are
averagedacrosspriortrainingiterationsusingamovingaverage.(5)Someoperationsonthenet-
work:orthogonal weight initialization ,larger batch size ,skip-z connections (skip connections from
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.