Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:29
Image Completion/Repair Image completion/repair is a common image editing operation,
whichaimstofillthemissingormaskedregionsinimageswithsynthesizedcontent.Mostefficient
traditional completion algorithms [ 9,54] depend on low-level cues, which are used to search for
patches from known regions of the same image, and synthesize the contents that locally appear
similarly to the matched patches. These approaches perform well for background completion as
patterns from the background are similar to each other. The assumption of similar patterns for a
missing part with other parts in an image can be violated in some situations, e.g., filling missing
partsforafaceimage,inwhichmanyobjectshaveuniquepatterns.Lietal.[ 77]proposetheuseof
anautoencoderincorporatingGANs.Twodiscriminators DGandDLaredeployed(oneforglobal
image content and the other for local image content), which produces two adversarial losses that
areusedfor optimization.Theoveralllossfunctionis representedas
L=Lr+λ1LDG+λ2LDL+λ3Lp, (37)
whereLristheL2distancebetweentheautoencoderoutputandtheoriginalimage, LDGandLDL
areadversariallossesof DGandDL,andLpisthepixelwisesoftmaxfortheparsingnetwork[ 85,
140].λ1,λ2,andλ3arehyperparametersusedtocontroltheeffectscausedbydifferent losses.
Image Matting Natural image matting is defined as the operation of accurately estimating the
opacityofaforegroundobjectinanimageorvideostream[ 88].Thisfieldisattractinggrowingin-
terestasithaswideapplicationssuchasforimageeditingandfilmpost-production.Imagematting
approachesformallyrequireaninputimagewithaforegroundobjectandtheimagebackground,
whichcan bemathematically expressedas
Ii=αiFi+(1−αi)Bi,αi∈[0,1], (38)
whereαiis a scalar value that defines the foreground opacity at pixel i,Fiis a scalar value of
foregroundobjectatpixel iandBiisascalarvalueofthebackgroundatpixel i.Lutzetal.introduces
GANstothisfieldandproposedAlphaGANthatcanproducevisuallyappealingcompositions.In
their work, they train the discriminator on images composited with the ground-truth alpha and
thepredictedalphaandthegeneratoris usedtogeneratethecompositions.
Image-to-image Translation Image-to-image translation is a class of graphic problems, in
whichtheobjectiveistolearnthemappingbetweenanoutputimageandaninputimageusinga
trainingsetofalignedimagepairs.Isolaetal.[ 58]proposedtheuseofCGANforimage-to-image
translation when paired training data is available. CycleGAN [ 153] is proposed as a soluution
when unpaired training data is not available for image-to-image translation. CycleGAN achieves
this by introducing a cycle consistency loss to enforce the requirement that the mapping from
one domain Xto the other domain Yis roughly the same in each direction. Other work such
as DiscoGAN [ 66] and DualGAN [ 143] are also proposed to solve the missing paired training
data issue in the area of image-to-image translation. More details can be found in the original
papers.
6.2 Video Generation
GANshavealreadyachievedstrikingresultsfornaturalimagesgeneration.Somerecentworkhas
attempted to extend this success to the area of video generation [ 24,61,126]. Convincing video
generation using GANs remains a significant challenge as it exacerbates all the issues associated
with image generation using GANs. Also it has the problems of increased memory and computa-
tioncostsduetothenatureofvideoandtherequirementfortemporalmodeling.Inaddition,dueto
the limitation of memory and training stability, the generation becomes increasingly challenging
with the increase of the resolution/duration of videos. The current foci of video generation re-
searchviaGANswebelieveare(1)theproductionofhigh-resolutionvideos,e.g.,upto/morethan
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.