37:4 Z.Wanget al.
benchmarking on the Large-scale Scene Understanding (LSUN)-BEDROOM [ 145], CELEBA-HQ-
128[84],andtheCIFAR10[ 70]imagedatasets.TheresultssuggestthattheoriginalGAN[ 45]with
spectral normalization [ 144] is a good starting choice when applying GANs to a new dataset. A
limitation of that review is that the benchmark datasets do not consider diversity in a significant
way. Thus the benchmark results tend to focus more on evaluation of the image quality, which
may ignore GANs efficacy in producing diverse images. Other work [ 51] surveys different GANs
architectures and their evaluation metrics. A further comparison on different architecture-
variants’performance,applications,complexityandsoonneedstobeexplored.Otherpapers[ 26,
52,131] focus on investigation of the newest development treads and the applications of GANs.
They compareGAN-variantsthroughthelensof differentapplicationtargets.
Comparing our review to other existing review articles we emphasize an introduction to
GAN-variants based on their performance including their ability to produce high quality and
diverse images, stability of training, and their ability to handle the vanishing gradient prob-
lem. We approach this exposition through taking a perspective based on architecture and loss
function considerations. This perspective is important, because it covers fundamental challenges
for GANs and it will help researchers on how best to choose an architecture and loss func-
tion for their GAN requirements and specific application. It also gives a snapshot of how re-
searchers to date have dealt with those problems and will thus provide new researchers with a
starting point for their own study. Our literature search strategy and the results of this search
are presented in Supplementary Materials. A detail of searched papers are listed at this link:
https://github.com/sheqi/GAN_Review/blob/master/GAN_CV.csv .
In summary,thecontributionsof thisreview arethreefold:
•We focus on GANs by addressing three important problems: (1) high-quality image gener-
ation;(2)diverse image generation;and (3)stabilizingtraining.
•We proposea usefulGAN taxonomy and contextualize recent GANs through variations in
(1) architecture of generators and discriminators, e.g., network architecture, latent space,
and application driven design, and (2) the objective function for training, e.g., loss design
in IPM based and non-IPM based methods, regularization approaches. Compared to other
reviewson GANs,thisreview providesauniqueview of differentGAN variants.
•We also provide a comparison and analysis in terms of pros and cons across the GAN-
variantspresentedin thisarticle.
3 GENERATIVEADVERSARIAL NETWORKS
A typical GAN comprises two components, one of which is a discriminator ( D) distinguishing
betweenrealimagesandgeneratedimageswhiletheotheroneisagenerator( G)creatingimages
tofoolthediscriminator.Givenadistribution z∼pz,Gdefinesaprobabilitydistribution pдasthe
distributionofthesamples G(z).TheobjectiveofaGANistolearnthegenerator’sdistribution pд
that approximates the real data distribution pr. Optimization of a GAN is performed with respect
to ajoint lossfunctionfor DandG
min
Gmax
DEx∼prlog[D(x)]+Ez∼pzlog[1−D(G(z))]. (1)
GANs, as a member of the deep generative model (DGM) family, have attracted exponentially
growing interest in the deep learning community because of some advantages comparing to the
traditionalDGMs:(1)GANsareabletoproducebetteroutputthanotherDGMs.Comparedtothe
most well-known DGMs, variational autoencoder (VAE), GANs are able to produce any type of
probabilitydensitywhileVAEisunabletogeneratesharpimages[ 44].(2)TheGANframeworkcan
train any type of generator network. Other DGMs may have pre-requirements for the generator,
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.