37:6 Z.Wanget al.
4.2 Semi-supervised GAN
Semi-supervisedGAN(SGAN)isproposedinthecontextofsemi-supervisedlearning[ 105].Semi-
supervised learning is a promising research field between supervised learning and unsupervised
learning.Unlikesupervisedlearning,inwhichweneedalabelforeverysample,andunsupervised
learning, in which no labels are provided, semi-supervised learning has labels for a small subset
ofexamples.ComparedtofullyconnectedGAN(FCGAN),SGAN’sdiscriminatorismulti-headed,
i.e., it has softmax and sigmoid for classifying the real data and distinguishing between real and
fake samples, respectively. The authors trained SGAN on the MNIST dataset. Results show that
both the discriminator and the generator in SGAN are improved compared to the original GAN.
We think the architecture of the multi-headed discriminator is relatively simple that limits the
diversity of the model, i.e., the experiment is only carried out on the the MNIST dataset. A more
complexarchitectureforthediscriminatormay improve theperformanceofthemodel.
4.3 Bidirectional GAN
TraditionalGANshavenomeansoflearningtheinversemapping,i.e.,projectingdatabackintothe
latent space. Bidirectional GAN (BiGAN) is designed for this purpose [ 35]. As seen in Figure 3(c),
the overall architecture consists of an encoder ( E), a generator ( G), and a discriminator ( D).E
encodesrealsampledatainto E(x)whileGdecodes zintoG(z).Asaresult, Daimstoevaluatethe
difference between each pair of (E(x),x)and(G(z),z).A sEandGdo not communicate directly,
i.e.,Eneversees G(z)andGneversees E(x).Theauthorsprovethattheencoderanddecodermust
learn to invert one another to fool the discriminator in the original paper. It would be interesting
toseeifsuchamodelisabletodealwithadversarialexamplesinfuturework.BiGANwastrained
ontheMNISTandtheImageNetdatasets.Adamoptimizerwith β1=0.5andβ2=0.999isusedfor
optimization.Thebatchsizeis128andtheweightdecayas2 .5×10−5isappliedforallparameters.
Batchnormalization isalso deployed.
4.4 ConditionalGAN
The CGAN has the innovation of conditioning on both the discriminator and the generator by
feeding each with class labels [ 99]. As seen in Figure 3(b), CGAN feeds the extra information y
(ythat can be class label or other modal data) to both discriminator and generator. It should be
notedthat yisnormallyencodedinsidethegeneratoranddiscriminatorbeforebeingconcatenated
with the encoded zand encoded x. For example, in the MNIST experiment in the original work,
both zandyare mapped to hidden layers with layer sizes 200 and 1,000, respectively, before
being combined with each other (the combined layer dimensionality is 200 +1000=1200) in the
generator.Bydoingthis,CGANenhancesthediscriminativeabilityofthediscriminator.Theloss
function of CGAN is slightly different from the FCGAN as seen in Equation ( 2), in which xandy
are conditioned by z. Benefiting from the extra encoded yinformation, CGAN is not only able to
handleunimodalimage datasetsbutalsomultimodaldatasetssuchasFlickrthatcontainslabeled
imagedatawiththeirassociateduser-generatedmetadata,i.e.,inparticularuser-tags,whichbrings
GANsovertotheareaofmultimodaldatageneration.TheauthorsexperimentedwiththeCGAN
on the MNIST and Yahoo Flickr Creative Common 100M (YFCC 100M). For the MNIST dataset,
themodelwastrainedusingstochasticgradientdescent(SGD)withmini-batchsizeof100andan
initiallearningrateof0.1thatwasexponentiallydecreaseddownto1 ×10−6withthedecayfactor
set as 1.00004. Dropout was utilized with probability of 0.5 to both generator and discriminator.
Momentum was used with an initial value of 0.5 and finally was increased up to 0.7. Class labels
wereencodedasone-hotvectorsandfedtoboth GandD.IntermsoftheYFCC100Mexperiment,
traininghyperparametersarethesameastheset-upintheMNISTexperiment.EventhoughCGAN
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.