Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:27
Fig. 18. Pipeline of sphere GAN. The generator outputs the real and fake data (generated via noisy inputs)
intothediscriminator.Thefinaloutputisan n-dimensionalEuclideanfeaturespace(yellowplane).Thegreen
andpurplecirclesarethefeaturepointsofthefakeandrealsamples. The key idea behind the sphere GAN is a
remapping of the feature points on to the n-dimensional hypersphere (i.e., yellow sphere). After the geometric
transformation,themappedpointscanbeusedforcalculatingthegeometricmomentscenteredatthenorth
poleofthehypersphere.Atthesametime,thediscriminatortriestomaximizethemomentdifferencesofreal
and fake samples, while the generator tries to interfere with the discriminator by minimizing the moment
differences. Figureis adoptedfromReference [ 108].
adversarial training and self-supervision for bridging the gap between conditional and uncondi-
tionalGANs.
This work imbues the discriminator with a mechanism to learn useful representations, inde-
pendently of the quality of the current generator. In a self-supervised manner, they train a model
onpredictingrotationangleforextractingrepresentationsfromtheresultingnetworks,andthen
proposetoadd a self-supervisedtask(arotation-basedloss)to thediscriminator,as
LG=−V(G,D)−αEx∼PGEr∼R[logQD(R=r|xr)], (34)
LD=V(G,D)−βEx∼PdataEr∼R[logQD(R=r|xr)], (35)
whereV(G,D)istheoriginalvaluefunction[ 45],r∈Risarotationselectedfromasetofpossible
rotations(R={0◦,90◦,180◦,270◦}).Image xrotatedby rdegreesisdenotedas xr,andQ(R|xr)is
thediscriminator’spredictivedistributionovertheanglesofrotationofthesample.Theimplemen-
tationtrickistheyuseoutputofthesecondlastlayerofdiscriminatoraddedwithalinearlayerto
predicttherotationtype.Thisworktriestoenforcethediscriminatortolearngoodrepresentation
via learningtherotationinformation.
5.14 Summary
We explain the training problems (mode collapse and vanishing gradient for G) present in the
original GAN design and we have introduced loss-variant GANs from the literature, which are
proposed primarily for the purposes of improving the GANs performance in terms of three key
aspects. Figure 19(a) illustrates the footprint of loss-variants that are discussed in this section.
Figure19(b) summarizes the efficacy of loss-variant GANs for these challenges. More details of
quantitativeresultsareprovidedinSection 7.LossesofLSGAN,RGAN,andWGANareverysim-
ilar to the original GAN loss. We use a toy example (i.e., two distributions used in Figure 10)t o
demonstrate the Gloss regarding the distance between real data distribution and generated data
distributionin Figure 11(b).
ItcanbeseenthatRGANandWGANareabletoinherentlysolvethevanishinggradientprob-
lems for the generator when the discriminator is optimized. LSGAN in contrast still suffers from
a vanishing gradient for the generator, however, it is able to provide a better gradient compared
to the original GAN in Figure 11(a) when the distance between the real data distribution and the
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.