Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:19
Fig.13. ComparisonoftheparameterdistributionbetweenWGAN(left)andWGAN-GP(right).Figurefrom
Reference [ 47].
where/producttext(pr,pд)denotes the set of all joint distributions and γ(x,y)whose marginals are prand
pд. Compared with KL and JS divergence, EM is able to reflect distance even when prandpдdo
not overlap. It is also continuous and thus able to provide a meaningful gradient for training the
generator. Figure 11(b) illustrates the WGAN gradient compared to that for the original GAN. It
isnoticeablethatWGANhasasmoothgradientfortrainingthegeneratorspanningthecomplete
space.However, the infimum in Equation ( 13) is intractablebut the creatorsdemonstrate thatthe
Wassersteindistancecanbe alternativelyestimatedas
max
w∼WExpr[fw(x)]−Ez∼pz[fw(G(z))], (14)
wherefwcanberealizedby Dbuthassomeconstraints(fordetailstheinterestedreadercanrefer
to the original work [ 4]) and zis the input noise for G.S owhere is the parameters in DwhereD
aims to maximize equation ( 14) to make the optimization distance equivalent to the Wasserstein
distance.When Disoptimized,Equation( 13)willbecometheWassersteindistanceand Gaimsto
minimize it.Sotheloss for Gis
−min
GEz∼pz[fw(G(z))]. (15)
AnimportantdifferencebetweenWGANandtheoriginalGANisthefunctionof D.TheDinthe
original work is used as a binary classifier but Das used in the WGAN has the purpose of fitting
the Wasserstein distance, which is a regression task. Thus, the sigmoid in the last layer of Dis
removedintheWGAN.TheauthorstrainedWGANontheLSUNdatasetwith64 ×64resolution.
Importantly, training of the WGAN will be unstable if a momentum based optimizer such as Adam
(β1>0isused).Therefore,RMSPropisutilized fortrainingtheWGAN.
5.2 WGAN-GP
EventhoughWGANhasbeenshowntobesuccessfulinimprovingthestabilityofGANtraining,
it is not well generalized for a deeper model. Experimentally it has been determined that most
WGAN parameters are localized at −0.01 and 0.01 because of parameter clipping (see Figure 13).
This will dramatically reduce the modeling capacity of D. WGAN-GP has been proposed using a
gradient penalty for restricting /bardblf/bardblL≤Kfor the discriminator [ 47] and the modified loss for the
discriminatornow becomes
LD=Exд∼pд[D(xд)]−Exr∼pr[D(xr)]+λEˆx∼pˆx[(/bardbl/triangleinvˆxD(ˆx)/bardbl2−1)2], (16)
where xris sample data drawn from the real data distribution pr,xдis sample data drawn from
the generated data distribution pдandpˆxis sampled uniformly along the straight lines between
thosepairsofpoints,whicharesampledfromtherealdatadistribution prandthegenerateddata
distribution pд.ThefirsttwotermsaretheoriginallossinWGANandthelasttermisthegradient
penalty.WGAN-GPdemonstratesabetterdistributionoftrainedparameterscomparedtoWGAN
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.