Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:13
Fig. 7. Discriminators of (a) AC-GAN, (b) rAC-GAN, (c) CGAN, and (d) rCGAN. A noise transition model is
denoted as an orange rectangle. Generators in rAC-GAN and rCGAN remain the same as in AC-GAN and
CGAN. Thefigureis regenerated andreorganized fromReference [ 62].
the latent to multiple layers), and shared embeddings , i.e., the authors show these operations are
all able to help improve the performance.The authors also characterizethe analysis of instability
specifictosuchlarge scale.Moredetails canbefound in theoriginalpaper.
4.13 Label-noiserGANs
We have discussed CGAN in Section 4.4and AC-GAN in Section 4.6, respectively, in which both
havetheabilitytolearnthedisentangledrepresentationandimprovethediscriminativeabilityof
GANs. However, large-scale labeled datasets are required for training models, which poses some
challengesinreal-worldscenarios.Kanekoetal.[ 62]proposeafamilyofGANsnamedlabel-noise
rGANs, which incorporates a noise transition model that is able to learn a clean label conditional
generative distribution even when provided training labels that are noisy. Two variants are dis-
cussed, which are an extension for AC-GAN (rAC-GAN) and an extension for CGAN (rCGAN)
as seen in Figure 7. The core part of rGANs is a noise transition module p(˜y|ˆy)(˜yis the noisy
label and ˆyis the clean label) introduced to the discriminator, in which p(˜y=j|ˆy=i)=T(i,j)as
Tis a noise transition matrix T(i,j)∈[0,1](c×c)(/summationtext
iTi,j=1,cis the number of classes). The au-
thors trained rGANs on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100. The authors demonstrate that rAC-GAN and
rCGANperformbetterthantheoriginalarchitecturesonCIFAR-10andalsoexhibitrobustnessto
label noise. However, in CIFAR-100, when high noise is introduced to labels, their performance
drops.Wethinksuchaframeworkisstillsomewhatlimitedwhenencounteringmorecomplicated
datasets,e.g.,ImageNetand itneedstobe investigatedfurtherin thefuture.
4.14 Your LocalGAN
This work [ 29] introduces a new local sparse attention layer that preserves the two-dimensional
geometryandlocality.Toshowtheapplicabilityoftheidea,theyreplacethedenseattentionlayer
of SAGAN [ 129] with a new construction. The key innovations are (1) the attention patterns are
wellsupportedbytheinformationtheoreticframeworkofInformationFlowGraphs;(2)YourLocal
GAN (YLG)-SAGAN is introduced and achieves superior performance with reducing the training
time by approximately 40%; (3) they have made the natural inversion process of performing gra-
dient descent on the loss work for bigger models rather than previous work on small GANs. One
specifictricktheauthorutilizesiscalledEnumerate,Shift,Apply(ESA).Theymodifyonedimen-
sional sparsifications to become aware of two-dimensional locality via enumerating pixels of the
imagebasedontheirManhattandistancefromthepixelatlocation(0,0)(breakingtiesusingrow
priority), shiftingtheindicesofanygivenone-dimensionalsparsificationtomatchtheManhattan
distanceenumerationinsteadofthereshapeenumeration,and applyingthisnewonedimensional
sparsification pattern, that respects two-dimensional locality, to the one-dimensional reshaped
versionof theimage.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.