37:14 Z.Wanget al.
Fig. 8. Architecture of MSG-GAN. Progressive training similar to PROGAN is deployed here. MSG-GAN
includes connections from the intermediate layers of the generator to the intermediate layers of the dis-
criminator.Multi-scaleimagesaresenttothediscriminator,whichareconcatenatedwiththecorresponding
mainpath,i.e.,greeninthediscriminatorrepresentsimagesproducedbythegeneratorwhileorangerepre-
sentstheoriginalfeaturesinthemainpathofthediscriminator.Figureisregeneratedandreorganizedfrom
Reference [ 63].
However, we think two conflicting objectives exist in this work. On the one hand, this method
intendstomakethenetworksassparseaspossibleforcomputationalandstatisticalefficiency,on
theotherhandtheystillneedtosupportgood andfullinformation flow.
4.15 AutoGAN
AutoGAN[ 43]introducestheneuralarchitecturesearch(NAS)algorithmtogenerativeadversarial
networks (GANs). The search space of the generator architectural variations in are guided via an
RNN together with parameter sharing and dynamic-resetting to accelerate the process. They use
the Inception score as the reward, and introduce a multi-level search strategy to perform NAS in
aprogressiveway.TheauthorsusehingelossfortrainingthesharedGAN,followingthetraining
settingofspectralnormalization GAN (SN-GAN).
The whole pipelineis insightful but also posesnovel challenges w.r.t.the marriage of NAS and
GANs. NAS remains to be optimized for standard classification problems, let alone the unstable
training problems brought by GANs. Although in the article AutoGAN shows promising results
with NAS for GAN architecture, which is quite unique compared to the manual design GAN ar-
chitecturesintroducedabove.We thinkitstillhastwocriticalissuesyetto besolved:
•The search space for the generator is limited and the search strategy for the discriminator
isnotdiscussed.
•AutoGAN has not yet been tested on high-resolution image generation datasets. Thus, we
do not have an intuitive estimation of the applicability of this methods. The current image
generationtaskispreliminary.
4.16 MSG-GAN
It is well known that GANs are very difficult to adapt to different datasets. Karnewar et al. argue
thatoneofthereasonsforthisisgradientspassingfromthediscriminatortothegeneratorbecome
uninformativewhenthereisnotenoughoverlapinthesupportsoftherealandfakedistributions.
TheyproposeMSG-GAN[ 63]asameanstohandlesuchproblems.AsseeninFigure 8,latentspace
ofthegeneratorandthediscriminatorareconnectedsoastosharemoreinformationbetweenthe
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.