Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:9
Fig.4. Up-samplingprocessofgeneratorinLAPGAN(fromrighttoleft).Theup-samplingprocessismarked
usinggreenarrowandaconditioningprocessviaaconditionalGAN(CGAN)[ 99]ismarkedusingtheorange
arrow. The process initially uses G3to generate image /tildewideI3and then up-samples the image /tildewideI3tol2. Together
with another noise z2,G2generates a difference image /tildewideh2and adds /tildewideh2tol2, which produces the generated
image /tildewideI2.Therestcanbedoneinthesamemanner.LAPGANcontains3generatorsinthisworktoup-sample
theimage. Figureis regenerated fromRef.[ 31].
LAPGANusethefirstgeneratortoproduceaverysmallimage,whichcanalleviatetheinstability
issue for the generator, and this image is then up-sampled through use of a Laplacian pyramid.
Then the up-sampled image is fed to the next generator for producing the image difference and
the summation of the image difference. The input image will be the generated image. It can be
seen that only the G3in Figure 4is used for generating images but the dimension is very small,
which encourages stabilizing training. For larger images, the generator is used to generate the
image difference, which is much less complex than the same sized raw images. This structure
facilitatesstabilizingtrainingandhighresolutionmodeling.CIFAR10(28 ×28pixel),STL(96×96
pixel), and LSUN (64 ×64 pixel) were used for generation. The Laplacian pyramid up-sampling
processes for each dataset are 8 →14→28 (CIFAR10), 8→16→32→64→96 (STL) and
4→8→16→32→64 (LSUN). The discriminator used three hidden layers and a sigmoid out-
put,whilethegeneratorusedafive-layerCNNwithReLUandbatchnormalization.Alinearouput
layerwasutilized.SGDwithaninitiallearningrateof0.02,decreasedbyafactorof (4×10−5)atev-
eryepoch,wasdeployedintheexperiment.Momentumstartedat0.5,increasingby0.0008ateach
epoch up to a maximum of 0.8. The current structure includes multiple generators for generating
images and the connections between these generators have not been established. In Section 4.10,
we introduce a more advanced strategy, which trains the model in a progressive fashion, i.e.,
PROGAN.
4.8 Deep ConvolutionalGAN
DCGAN is the first work that applied a deconvolutional neural network architecture for G[113].
Deconvolution is proposed to visualize the features for a CNN and has shown good performance
for CNNs visualization [ 148]. DCGAN deploys the spatial up-sampling ability of the deconvo-
lution operation for G, which enables the generation of higher resolution images using GANs.
TherearesomecriticalmodificationsinthearchitectureofDCGANcomparedtooriginalFCGAN,
which benefits high-resolution modeling and stabilizing training. First, DCGAN replaces any
poolinglayerswithstridedconvolutionsfordiscriminatorandfractional-stridedconvolutionsfor
generator.Second,batchnormalizationisusedforboththediscriminatorandthegenerator,which
helpslocatethegeneratedsamplesandtherealsamplescenteringonzero,i.e., similarstatisticsfor
generatedsamplesandrealsamples .Third,theReLUactivationisusedinthegeneratorforalllayers
except the output, which uses Tanh, while Leaky ReLU activation is used in the discriminator for
alllayers.Inthiscase,theLeakyReLUactivationwillpreventthenetworkstagnatingina“dying
state”situation(e.g.,inputssmallerthan0intheReLUlayers)asthegeneratorreceivesgradients
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.