37:20 Z.Wanget al.
(Figure13)andbetterstabilityperformanceduringtrainingofGANs.BeforeWGAN-GP,success-
ful training of GANs only took place on those models consisting of a few layers both in the dis-
criminator and generator,i.e.,DCGAN uses four convolutional layers in Dand 4 deconvolutional
layers in G. WGAN-GP successfully demonstrates stabilizing training by using the ResNet-101
architecture as the backbone. This has had significant impact on research into GANs for large-
scaleimagegeneration,i.e.,PROGAN,BigGAN.Asmentionedintheprevioussection,WGANhas
stability issues when using momentum based optimizers such as Adam. WGAN-GP in contrast
exhibits stabilizing training by using the Adam optimizer and even faster convergence using the
same training settings. WGAN-GP was experimentally explored using the ImageNet dataset with
32×32 image resolution, the LSUN dataset with 128 ×128 image resolution and CIFAR-10 with
32×32 image resolution. Adam optimizer with α=1×10−4,β1=0,β2=0.9 was utilized in the
experiment.Thelearningratewas2 ×10−4andabatchsizeof64.Theauthorsfindpiecewiselin-
ear activation functions, e.g., ReLU, Leaky ReLu and smooth activation functions, e.g., Tanh both
can traintheWGAN-GP in a stableway.
5.3 LeastSquare GAN(LSGAN)
The Least Square GAN (LSGAN) is a new approach proposed in Reference [ 94]t or e m e d yt h e
vanishing gradient problem for Gfrom the perspective of the decision boundary determined by
thediscriminator.Thisworkarguesthatthedecisionboundaryfor DoftheoriginalGANpenalizes
asverysmallerrorinupdatesof Gforthosegeneratedsamplesthatarefarawayfromthedecision
boundary. The creators propose using a least square loss for Dinstead of sigmoid cross entropy
loss asstatedintheoriginalGAN paper[ 45].Theproposedlossfunctionis definedas
min
DLD=1
2Ex∼pr[(D(x)−b)2]+1
2Ez∼pz[(D(G(z))−a)2],min
GLG=1
2Ez∼pz[(D(G(z))−c)2],
(17)
whereais the label for the generated samples, bis the label for the real samples and cis the hy-
perparameter that GwantsDto recognize the generated samples as the real samples by mistake.
Thismodificationhastwobenefits:(1)Thenewdecisionboundarygeneratedby Dpenalizeslarge
errors arising from those generated samples that are far away from the decision boundary. This
pushesthose“bad”generatedsamplestowardthedecisionboundary.Thisisbeneficialintermsof
generatingimprovedimagequality.(2)Penalizingthegeneratedsamplesthatarefarawayfromthe
decisionboundaryprovidessufficientgradientwhenupdatingthe G,whichremediesthevanish-
inggradientproblemsfortraining G.Figure14demonstratesacomparisonofdecisionboundaries
for LSGAN and the original GAN. The work [ 94] has proven that the optimization of LSGAN is
equivalent to minimizing the Pearson χ2divergence between pr+pдand 2pдwhena,bandc
subject to b−c=1a n db−a=2. Similarly to WGAN, Dhere involves regression and the sig-
moid is also removed. LSGAN was evaluated on LSUN and HWDB1.0 [ 81] with 112×112 image
resolution. The Adam optimizer with β1=0.5 was used and the learning rate was 1 ×10−3and
2×10−4forLSUNandHWDB1.0,respectively.SimilarlytoDCGAN,ReLUactivationsandLeaky
ReLU activationswere usedforthegeneratorand discriminatorrespectively.
5.4f-GAN
f-GAN works on the basis that GANs can be trained by using f-divergence [ 104].f-divergence
Df(pr/bardblpд)measures the difference between two probability distributions ( prandpдregarding
GANs), e.g., KL divergence, JS divergence, and Pearson χ2as mentioned before, which can be
summarized as
Df(pr/bardblpд)=/integraldisplay
Xpд(x)f/parenleftBiggpr(x)
pд(x)/parenrightBigg
dx, (18)
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.