Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:17
Fig.10. IllustrationoftrainingprogressionforaGAN.Twonormaldistributionsareusedhereforvisualiza-
tion.Givenanoptimal D,theobjectiveoftheGANistoupdate Gtomovethegenerateddistribution pд(red)
towardtherealdistribution pr(blue)(Gisupdatedfromlefttorightinthisfigure.Left:initialstate,middle:
during training, right: training convergence). However, JS divergence for the left two figures are both 0.693
andthefigure ontheright is0.336, indicatingthat JSdivergence does not providesufficient gradient at the
initialstate.
Fig. 11. JS divergence and gradient change with the distance between prandpд. (a) Left: JS divergence
changes with distance. Right: Gradient JS divergence changes with distance. The distance is the difference
between thetwodistributionmeans. (b) Lossandgradient for generator of different loss-variantGANs.
Thusthelossfor Gregardingtheoptimal Din Equation( 7)canbe reformulatedas
LG=2·JS(pr/bardblpд)−2·log2, (10)
which indicates that the loss for Gnow equally becomes the minimization of the JS divergence
betweenprandpд. With training Dstep by step, the optimization of Gwill be closer to the mini-
mizationofJSdivergencebetween prandpд.Wecannowstarttodescribetheinstabilityproblem
in training, where Doften easily wins over G. This unstable training problem is actually caused
by the JS divergence in Equation ( 9) .G i v e na no p t i m a l D, the objective of optimization for Equa-
tion(10)istomove pдtowardpr(seeFigure 10).JSdivergenceforthethreeplotsfromlefttoright
are 0.693, 0.693, and 0.336, which indicates that JS divergence remains constant (log2 =0.693) if
thereisnooverlapbetween prandpд.Figure11(a)demonstratesthechangeofJSdivergenceand
its gradient corresponding to the distance between prandpд. It can be seen that JS divergence
is constant and its gradient is almost 0 when the distance is greater than 5, which indicates that
training process does not have any effect on G. The gradient of JS divergence for training the G
is non-zero only when pдandprhave substantial overlap, i.e., the vanishing gradient will arise
forGwhenDisclosetooptimal.Inpractice,thepossibilitythat prandpдdonotoverlaporhave
negligible overlap isvery high[ 3].
TheoriginalGANswork[ 45]alsohighlightstheminimizationof −Ex∼pдlog[D(x)]fortraining
Gtoavoidavanishinggradient.However,thistrainingstrategywillleadtoanotherproblemcalled
modedropping.First,letusexamine KL(pд/bardblpr)=Ex∼pдlogpд
pr.Withanoptimaldiscriminator D∗,
KL(pд/bardblpr)canbe reformulatedas
KL(pд/bardblpr)=Ex∼pдlogpд(x)/(pr(x)+pд(x))
pr(x)/(pr(x)+pд(x))=Ex∼pдlog1−D∗(x)
D∗(x)
=Ex∼pдlog[1−D∗(x)]−Ex∼pдlog[D∗(x)].(11)
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.