Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:5
Fig. 2. Timeline of architecture-variant GANs presented in this article. Complexity in blue stream refers to
sizeofthearchitectureandcomputationalcostsuchasbatchsize.Mechanismsrefertothenumberoftypes
of operations (e.g., convolution, deconvolution, self-attention) used in the architecture (e.g., FCGAN uses
fullyconnected layers for both discriminatorand generator.Inthis case,thevalue for mechanisms is1).
e.g.,theoutputlayerofgeneratorisGaussian[ 32,44,67].(3)Thereisnorestrictiononthesizeof
the latent variable. These advantages have led GANs to achieve the state-of-the-art performance
on producingsyntheticdataespeciallyfor image data.
4 ARCHITECTURE-VARIANTGANS
There are many types of architecture-variants proposed in the literature (see Figure 2)[11,64,
113,150,153].Architecture-variantGANsaremainlyproposedforthepurposeofdifferentappli-
cations, e.g., image-to-image transfer [ 153], image super resolution [ 74], image completion [ 55],
and text-to-image generation [ 114]. In this section, we provide a review on architecture-variants
that helps improve the performance for GANs under the three aspects mentioned before, namely
that of improving image diversity, improving image quality and stabilizing training. A review of
architecture-variantsinterms ofdifferent applicationscanbefound here[ 26,51].
4.1 Fullyconnected GAN
The original Energy-based GAN (EBGAN) paper [ 45] uses fully connected neural networks for
both generator and discriminator. This architecture-variant was applied for some simple image
datasets, i.e., MNIST [ 73], CIFAR-10 [ 70], and the Toronto face dataset. The authors suggest k
stepsforoptimizing Dandonestepforoptimizing Gduetooverfittingofthediscriminatorifthe
completionofoptimizing Disdoneintheinnerloopoftraining.Inpractice,Equation( 1)mayin-
duce the vanishing gradient issue for optimizing the generator and the authors instead maximize
logD(G(z))for training G. This modification equivalently optimizes the reverse Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence between pдandprforG, which also causes the asymmetry issue. We will revisit
this in detail in Section 5. For the architecture setting, maxout [ 41] was deployed for the discrim-
inator while a mixture of ReLU and sigmoid activations were used for the generator. It does not
demonstrategoodgeneralization performancefor more compleximage types.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.