37:22 Z.Wanget al.
Fig. 15. An example of computation for an unrolled GAN with three unrolling steps. GandDupdate using
Equation( 22). Each step kuses thegradients of fkregarding θk
DstatedintheEquation( 20).
neuralsamplersbasedonVDMonMNIST(28 ×28pixelimages)andLSUN(96 ×96pixelimages).
Themodelarchitectureandtrainingsettingsarethesame asproposedin DCGAN.
5.5 UnrolledGAN
UnrolledGAN(UGAN)isadesignproposedtosolvetheproblemofmodecollapseforGANsduring
training[ 98].ThecoredesigninnovationofUGANistheadditionofagradienttermforupdating
G, which has an ability of capturing responses of the discriminator to a change in the generator.
Theoptimalparameterfor Dcanbe expressedasan iterativeoptimizationprocedureasfollows:
θ0
D=θD,θk+1
D=θk
D+ηkdf(θGθk
D)
dθk
D,θ∗
D(θG)=lim
k→∞θk
D, (20)
whereηkis the learning rate, θDrepresents parameters for DandθGrepresents parameters for
G.Thesurrogatelossby unrollingfor Kstepscan beexpressedas
fK(θG,θD)=f(θG,θK
D(θG,θD)). (21)
Thissurrogatelossis thenusedforupdatingparametersfor DandG,
θG←θG−ηdfK(θGθD)
dθG,θD←θD+ηdf(θGθD)
dθD. (22)
Figure15illustrates the computational diagram for an unrolled GAN with three unrolling steps.
Equation( 23)illustratesthegradient forupdating G,
dfK(θG,θD)
dθG=∂f(θG,θK
D(θG,θD))
θG+∂f(θG,θK
D(θG,θD))
∂θK
D(θG,θD)dθK
D(θG,θD)
dθG. (23)
It should be noted that the first term in Equation ( 23) is the gradient for the original GAN. The
second term here reflects how Dreacts to changes in G.I fGtends to collapse to one mode, then
Dwill increase the loss for G. Thus, this unrolled approach is able to prevent the mode collapse
problemforGANs.TheauthorstrainedUGANonMNISTandCIFAR10datasets.Allconvolutions
have kernel size of 3 ×3 with batch normalization. The discriminator used Leaky ReLU with a
0.3leakinessandthegeneratorusedReLUs.Thegeneratorconsistedoffivelayers,withonefully
connectedlayer,threedeconvolutionallayers,andoneconvolutionallayer.Thediscriminatorhad
four layers, three of which are convolutional layers and one fully connected layer. The Adam
optimizer with a generator learning rate of 1 ×10−4and a discriminator learning rate as 2 ×10−4
was utilizedin theexperiment.
5.6 LossSensitive GAN (LS-GAN)
LS-GAN is introduced to train the generator to produce realistic samples by minimizing the des-
ignated margins between real and generated samples [ 111]. This work argues that the problems
such as the vanishing gradient and mode collapse as appearing in the original GAN is caused by
a non-parametric hypothesis that the discriminator is able to distinguish any type of probability
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.