Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:25
Fig.17.DoutputcomparisonbetweenRGANandtheoriginalGAN.(a) DoutputinRGAN;(b) Doutputin
theoriginalGAN whentrainingthe G.Figureis regenerated fromReference [ 60].
The authors trained the networks on the CIFAR-10 and the CAT datasets with various image
sizes,i.e.,64×64,128×128,and256×256.TheDCGANarchitecturewiththeAdamoptimizerwas
used. Various training settings have been explored and more details can be found in the original
paper[60].Theauthorssuccessfullydemonstratethattherelativisticdiscriminatoroffersawayto
improveonthestandardGANapproachandisabletoachievebetterperformancewithothertricks,
e.g., spectral normalization and gradient penalty. More importantly, the authors demonstrate the
generabilityofthisapproach,inwhichanytypeofGANcanbetrainedthroughanRGANfashion.
5.10 SN-GAN
SN-GAN[ 100]proposestheuseofweightnormalizationtotrainthediscriminatorinamorestable
way. This technique is computationally light and easily applied to existing GANs. Previous work
forstabilizingthetrainingofGANs[ 4,47,111]emphasizestheimportancethat Dshouldbefrom
thesetof K-Lipshitzcontinuousfunctions .Lipschitzcontinuity [5,36,42]canbeconsideredamore
strictformofcontinuity,onewhichrequiresthatthefunctiondoesnotchangerapidly.Thissmooth
Dis of benefit in stabilizing the training of GANs. The work mentioned previously focused on
the control of the Lipschitz constant of the discriminator function. This work demonstrates an
alternative, simpler way to control the Lipschitz constant through spectral normalization of each
layer forD. Spectralnormalizationis performedas
¯WSN(W)=W
σ(W), (30)
where Wrepresentsweightsoneachlayerfor Dandσ(W)istheL2matrixnormof W.Thearticle
proves this will make /bardblf/bardbl≤1. The fast approximation for the σ(W)is also demonstrated in the
originalpaper.
The authors evaluated the performance of SN-GAN on the CIFAR-10 (32 ×32 resolution), the
STL-10(48×48resolution)[ 25]andtheImageNet(128 ×128resolution)bycomparingtotheexist-
ingregularization/normalizationtechniquesincludingweightclipping[ 4],gradientpenalty[ 136],
batch normalization [ 57], weight normalization [ 118], layer normalization [ 7], and orthonormal
regularization [ 14]. Several training settings have been carried out for a comprehensive compari-
son.Theauthorsdemonstratetheefficacyofspectralnormalizationonthediversityandthequality
of generatedimages comparedtopreviouslyproposedapproaches.
5.11 RealnessGAN
In the original GAN design, the discriminator only outputs 0 and 1, i.e., real and fake instead of a
continuousdistributionasthemeasureofrealness.Xianglietal.[ 137]proposetheRealnessGANto
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.