37:10 Z.Wanget al.
from the discriminator. DCGANs are trained on LSUN [ 145], ImageNet [ 30] and the customized-
assembled face datasets. All models were trained using SGD with a mini-batch size of 128. All
weightswereinitializedfromazero-centeredNormaldistributionwithstandarddeviationof0.02.
An Adam optimizer was utilized with a learning rate of 0.0002 and momentum term of 0.5. The
slopeofLeakyReLUwassetto0.2forallmodels.Modelsweretrainedbyusing64 ×64pixelimage.
DCGANisaveryimportantmilestoneinthehistoryofGANsandthedeconvolutionideabecomes
amainstayforthemainarchitectureusedinGANgenerators.Duetothelimitofthemodelcapac-
ity and the optimization used in DCGAN, it is only successful on low-resolution and less diverse
images.
4.9 BoundaryEquilibrium GAN
BoundaryEquilibriumGAN(BEGAN)usesanautoencoderarchitectureforthediscriminatorthat
was first proposed in EBGAN [ 151]. As seen in Figure 3(e), the autoencoder loss can be gener-
ated forGandD, respectively. When training the autoencoder ( D), the objective is to maximize
the reconstruction loss of real images and maximizes the reconstruction loss for generated im-
ages, i.e., minimize E[L(x)]−E[L(G(z))]. When training the G, the objective is to minimize
E[L(G(z))].Byintroducingtheautoencoder,theauthorshaveprovedtheoptimizationofthere-
construction loss above is equivalent to the Wasserstein distance. The authors also propose the
use of a hyperparameter γ=E[L(G(z))]
E[L(x)],γ∈[0,1]to control the balance between the generator
and discriminant losses, which allows a balancing of the effort allocated to the generator and the
discriminator,i.e.,controlavarietyofgeneratedfaces.Theexperimentintheoriginalpapershows
thatsmaller γmakesGgeneratefacesthatlookoverlyuniform.Thevarietyoffacesincreaseswith
a larger value of γbut this also introduces artifacts. The overall loss function is summarized in
Equation( 5),
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩LD=L(x)−ktL(G(zD)), for updating θD
LG=L(GzG), for updating θG
kt+1=kt+λk(γL(x)−L(G(zG)),for eachtrainingiterationt, (5)
whereL(·)represents the autoencoder reconstruction loss ( L2),kt∈[0,1] is a variable that con-
trolshowmuchemphasisof L(G(z))ispenalizedfortheloss. kisinitializedas0andiscontrolled
byλk(λkcanbeinterpretedasalearningratefor k,whichissetas1×10−3intheoriginalpaper).
Compared to traditional optimization, the BEGAN matches the autoencoder loss distributions
usingalossderivedfromtheWassersteindistanceinsteadofmatchingdatadistributionsdirectly.
This modification helps Gto generate easy-to-reconstruct data for the autoencoder at the be-
ginning, because the generated data are close to 0 and the real data distribution has not been
learnedaccuratelyyet,whichprevents Deasilywinning Gattheearlytrainingstage.Forencoder
and decoder, exponential linear units were applied at their outputs. The model was trained on
CelebAdatasetusing128 ×128pixelimages.SeparateAdamoptimizerswithinitiallearningrates
of1×10−4,decayingbyafactorof2whenthemeasureofconvergencestalls,wereusedfor Dand
G.Thebatchsizewasset as16in theoriginalwork.
4.10 PROGAN
PROGAN involves progressive steps toward the expansion of the network architecture [ 64].
This architecture uses the idea of progressive neural networks first proposed in Reference [ 116].
This technology does not suffer from forgetting and is able to deploy prior knowledge via
lateral connections to previously learned features. Consequently it is widely applied for learning
complextasksequences.Figure 5demonstratesthetrainingprocessforPROGAN.Trainingstarts
withlowresolution4 ×4pixelsimage .Both GandDstarttogrowwiththetrainingprogressing.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.