37:18 Z.Wanget al.
Fig. 12. Optimized q(in red) when minimizing KL divergence KL(p/bardblq)(left) and reverse KL divergence
KL(q/bardblp)(right).
The alternative loss form for Gcan now can be stated by switching the order of the two sides in
Equation( 11)
−Ex∼pдlog[D∗(x)]=KL(pд/bardblpr)−Ex∼pдlog[1−D∗(x)]
=KL(pд/bardblpr)−2·JS(pr/bardblpд)+2·log2+Ex∼pxlog[D∗(x)],(12)
where the alternative loss for Gin Equation ( 12) is only affected by the first two terms (the last
two terms are constant), however, this loss function is dominated by KL(pд/bardblpr), sinceJS(pr/bardblpд)
isboundedin[0,log2]asillustratedinFigure 11(a)ontheleft.Itcanbeseenthatthefirsttermin
Equation( 12)isreverseKLdivergence,inwhichthe pдoptimizedbythereverseistotallydifferent
from the pдoptimized by KL divergence. Figure 12illustrates this difference by using a mixture
of two Gaussians for pand a single Gaussian for q.W h e nphas multiple modes, qtries to blur all
modestogethertoputahigh-probabilitymassonallasseeninFigure 12(a).However,Figure 12(b)
shows that qchooses to recover a single Gaussian to avoid putting probability mass in the low-
probability areas at the centre of the two Gaussians. The optimization on reverse KL divergence
thereforewillcausemodecollapseduringthetrainingofGANs. Thisishighlightedbelow,
•Whenpд(x)→0,pr(x)→1,KL(pд/bardblpr)→0.
•Whenpд(x)→1,pr(x)→0,KL(pд/bardblpr)→+∞.
The penalization for two instances of poor performance made by Gare totally different. The first
instance of poor performance is that Gis not producing a reasonable range of samples and yet
incursaverysmallpenalization.Thesecondinstanceofpoorperformanceconcerns Gproducing
implausible samples but has very large penalization. The first example concerns the fact that the
generated samples lack diversity while the second concerns that fact that the generated samples
are not accurate. Considering this first case, Ggenerates repeated but “safe” samples instead of
takingrisktogeneratediversebut“unsafe”samples,whichleadstothemodecollapseproblem.In
summary,usingtheoriginallossinEquation( 1)willresultinthevanishinggradientfortraining G
and using the alternative loss in Equation ( 12) will incur the mode collapse problem. These kinds
ofproblemscannotbesolvedbysimplychangingarchitectures.Therefore,itcouldbearguedthat
the ultimate problem for GANs stems from the design of the loss function and that innovative
ideas for this redesign of the loss function may solve the problem. Loss-variant GANs have been
researchedextensively toimprove thestabilityof trainingGANsand we considerthesenext.
5.1 WassersteinGAN
WGAN [4] has successfully solved the two problems for the original GAN by using the Earth
mover(EM)orWasserstein-1[ 115]distanceasthelossmeasureforoptimization.TheEMdistance
is definedas
W(pr,pд)=inf
γ∈/producttext(pr,pд)E(x,y)∼γ/bardblx−y/bardbl, (13)
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.