Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:3
Fig.1. The proposedtaxonomyof therecent GANs.
time-seriesdata;and(2)loss-variants.Heredifferentvariationsofthelossfunction(Equation( 1))
areexplored toenablemore stablelearningof G.
Figure1illustrates our proposed taxonomy for the representative GANs presented in the liter-
ature from 2014 to 2020. We divide current GANs into two main variants, i.e., the architecture-
variant and the loss-variant. In the architecture-variant, we summarize three categories, which
are network architecture, latent space, and application-focus. The network architecture category
referstoimprovementormodificationmadeontheoverallGANarchitecture,e.g.,theprogressive
mechanism deployed in Progressive GAN (PROGAN) [ 64]. The latent space category indicates
that the architecture modification is made based on different representations of the latent space,
e.g., Conditional GAN (CGAN) [ 99] involves providing label information to both the generator
and the discriminator. The last category, application-focused, refers to modifications made ac-
cording to different applications, e.g., CycleGAN [ 153] has a specific architecture that deals with
image style transfer. In terms of the loss-variants, we divide this into two categories, loss types
and regularization. Loss types refers to different loss functions that can be optimized for GANs
and regularization refers to additional penalization designed into the loss function or any type of
normalization operation made to the network. More specifically, we divide the loss function into
integralprobabilitymetric (IPM)[101]basedandnon-IPMbased.InIPM-basedGANs,the discrim-
inatorisconstrainedtoaspecificclassoffunction[ 60],e.g.,thediscriminatorinWassersteinGAN
(WGAN) is constrained to 1-Lipschitz . The discriminator in non-IPM based GANs does not have
suchconstraints.
2 RELATEDREVIEWS
There have been previous GANs review papers, for example, in terms of reviewing GANs
performance [ 71]. That work focuses on experimental validation across different types of GANs
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.