Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:23
Fig.16. DemonstrationofthelossinEquation( 25).Δ(x,G(z))isusedtoseparaterealsamplesandgenerated
samples. If some generated samples are close enough to the real samples, then LS-GAN will focus on other
generated samples that are far away from the real samples. This optimization loss puts a restriction on D
to prevent it from separating generated and real samples too well. Thus, it solves the vanishing gradient
problem that arises in the original GAN design. ( Gϕ(z)here is equivalent to G(z)whereϕrepresents the
parameters forgenerator). Figureis regeneratedfromReference [ 111].
distribution between real samples and generated samples. As mentioned before, it is very normal
for the overlap between the real samples distribution and the generated samples distribution to
be negligible. Moreover, Dis also able to separate real samples and generated samples. The JS di-
vergence will become a constant under this situation, where the vanishing gradient arises for G.
In LS-GAN, the classification ability of Dis restricted and is learned by a loss function Lθ(x)pa-
rameterizedwith θ,whichassumesthatarealsampleoughttohavesmallerlossthanagenerated
sample.Thelossfunctioncan beincorporatedas thefollowingconstraint:
Lθ(x)≤Lθ(G(z))−Δ(x,G(z)), (24)
whereΔ(x,G(z))isthemarginmeasuringthedifferencebetweenrealsamplesandgeneratedsam-
ples. This constraint indicates that a real sample is separated from a generated sample by at least
am a r g i no f Δ(x,G(z)).Theoptimizationfor theLS-GAN is thenstatedas
min
DLD=Ex∼prLθ(x)+λEx∼prz∼pz(Δ(x,G(z))+Lθ(x)−Lθ(G(z)))+,min
GLG=Ez∼pzLθ(G(z)),
(25)
whereλis a positive balancing parameter, (a)+=max(a,0)andθare the parameters in D.F r o m
the second term in LDin the Equation ( 25),Δ(x,G(z))is added as a regularization term for op-
timizingDto prevent Dfrom overfitting the real samples and the generated samples. Figure 16
demonstratestheefficacyofEquation( 25).Thelossfor Dputsarestrictiononthecapabilityof D,
i.e., it challenges the ability of Dto separate well-generated samples from real samples, which is
theoriginalcauseforthevanishinggradient.Moreformally,LS-GANassumesthat prliesinaset
ofLipschitzdensitieswitha compactsupport.
The models were trained with CIFAR-10, SVHN [ 102], and CelebA with a mini-batch of 64 im-
ages. All weights were initialized from a zero-mean Gaussian distribution with a standard devia-
tion of 0.02. The Adam optimizer was used to train the model with an initial learning rate set as
1×10−3andβ1as0.5whilethelearningratewasdecreasedevery 25epochsby a factorof0.8.
5.7 ModeRegularized GAN
ModeRegularizedGANproposesametricforregularizationtopenalizemissingmodes[ 18],which
is then used to solve the mode collapse problem. The key idea behind this work is the use of an
encoderE(x):x→zto produce the latent variable zforGinstead of using noise. This procedure
hastwobenefits:(1)Theencoderreconstructioncanaddmoreinformationto Gsothatisnotthat
easyforDtodistinguishbetweengeneratedsamplesandrealsamples;and(2)theencoderensures
acorrespondencebetween xandz(E(x)),whichmeans Gcancoverdifferentmodesinthe xspace.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.