37:8 Z.Wanget al.
samples generated from Gor from real data. To reduuce computational cost, QandDshare all
convolutionallayersexceptthelastfullyconnectedlayer,whichenablesthediscriminatortohave
thecapabilityofdistinguishingrealandfakesamplesandrecovertheinformation y.Thiscanim-
provethediscriminativeabilityforInfoGANcomparedtotheoriginalGANarchitecture.Theloss
usedin InfoGAN isa regularizationof CGAN’s loss
min
Gmax
DV(D,G)−λI(G,Q),λ>0, (3)
whereV(D,G)istheobjectiveofCGANexceptthatthediscriminatordoesnottake yasinputand
I(·)is the mutual information. The authors experimented with InfoGAN using the MNIST, three-
dimensional (3D) face images [ 109], 3D chair images [ 6], SVHN and CelebA. All datasets shared
the same training setting, in which the Adam optimizer was used and batch normalization was
applied. Leaky ReLU with a 0.1 leaky rate was applied to the discriminator while ReLU was used
forthegenerator.Alearningrateof2 ×10−4wassetfor Dwhile1×10−3issetforG.λwassetas
1. Here we think the diversity of the model is very limited due to the fact that the parameters for
DandQare shared with each other except the last layer. A more complex set-up for Qcould be
usefully investigated.
4.6 Auxiliary Classifier GAN
Auxiliary Classifier GAN (AC-GAN) [ 106] is very similar to CGAN and InfoGAN. It contains an
auxiliary classifier in the architecture as seen in Figure 3(f). In AC-GAN, each generated sample
has a corresponding class label cin addition to z. It should be noted that the difference between
AC-GANandtheprevioustwoarchitecture-variants(CGANandInfoGAN)istheadditionalinfor-
mationhere,whichonlyreferstotheclasslabelwhiletheprevioustwocanbeotherdomaindata.
Thus we use candc/primein AC-GAN to explicitly flag this difference from the previous two variants.
The discriminator in AC-GAN consists of a discriminator D(distinguishes real and fake samples)
and a classifier Q(classifies real and fake samples). Similarly to InfoGAN, the discriminator and
classifier share all weights except the last layer. The loss function of AC-GAN can be constructed
by consideringthediscriminatorand classifier,whichcanbe statedas
LS=Ex∼prlog[D(x|c)]+Ez∼pzlog[1−D(G(z|c))],LC=Ex∼prlog[Q(x|c)]+Ez∼pzlog[Q(G(z|c))],
(4)
whereDis trained by maximizing LS+LCandGis trained on maximizing LC−LS. The authors
trained AC-GAN on the CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets for all 1,000 classes. For both CIFAR-10
and ImageNet, the model was trained by using Adam with α=2×10−4,β1=0.5, andβ2=0.999
forD,G,a n dQ. The mini-batch size was set to 100. Details of model performance and relate
experimentscanbefoundintheoriginalpaper[ 106].AC-GANhasimprovedvisualqualityforthe
generated images and has high model diversity. However, these improvements depend on large-
scalelabeleddatasets,whichmayposechallengesinsomereal-worldapplications.Acombination
of AC-GAN and unsupervised or self-supervised approaches should be further investigated. We
havealsointroducedatypeofGAN,label-noiseRobustGANs(rGANs)inSection 4.13,whichdeals
withthenoisy labelissue.
4.7 Laplacian Pyramid of Adversarial Networks
Laplacian Pyramid of Adversarial Networks (LAPGAN) is proposed for the production of higher-
resolutionimagesfromlowerresolutioninputGAN[ 31].TheLaplacianpyramid[ 16]isanimage
codingapproach,whichuseslocaloperatorsofmanyscalesbutidenticalshapeasthebasicfunc-
tions.LAPGANutilizesacascadeofCNNswithinaLaplacianpyramidframework[ 16]toproduce
high quality images, which are demonstrated in Figure 4(from right to left). Rather than using a
deconvolutionalprocess(i.e.,usedinDeepConvolutionalGAN(DCGAN))toup-samplethekernel
output of the previous layer, LAPGAN uses Laplacian pyramids to up-sample the image. First,
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.