Improved Noisy Student Training for Automatic Speech Recognition
Daniel S. Park, Yu Zhang, Ye Jia, Wei Han, Chung-Cheng Chiu, Bo Li, Yonghui Wu and Quoc V . Le
Google Inc., U.S.A.
fdanielspark, ngyuzh, jiaye, weihan, chungchengc, boboli, yonghui, qvl g@google.com
Abstract
Recently, a semi-supervised learning method known as “noisy
student training” has been shown to improve image classiﬁca-
tion performance of deep networks signiﬁcantly. Noisy student
training is an iterative self-training method that leverages aug-
mentation to improve network performance. In this work, we
adapt and improve noisy student training for automatic speech
recognition, employing (adaptive) SpecAugment as the aug-
mentation method. We ﬁnd effective methods to ﬁlter, balance
and augment the data generated in between self-training iter-
ations. By doing so, we are able to obtain word error rates
(WERs) 4.2%/8.6% on the clean/noisy LibriSpeech test sets by
only using the clean 100h subset of LibriSpeech as the super-
vised set and the rest (860h) as the unlabeled set. Furthermore,
we are able to achieve WERs 1.7%/3.4% on the clean/noisy
LibriSpeech test sets by using the unlab-60k subset of Libri-
Light as the unlabeled set for LibriSpeech 960h. We are thus
able to improve upon the previous state-of-the-art clean/noisy
test WERs achieved on LibriSpeech 100h (4.74%/12.20%) and
LibriSpeech (1.9%/4.1%).
Index Terms : speech recognition, semi-supervised learning,
data augmentation
1. Introduction
We aim to improve semi-supervised learning in automatic
speech recognition (ASR) by adapting a method proven suc-
cessful for image classiﬁcation that we refer to as “noisy student
training” (NST) [1]. Noisy student training is an iterative self-
training method that makes use of unlabeled data to improve ac-
curacy. In noisy student training, a series of models are trained
in succession, such that for each model, the preceding model in
the series serves as a teacher model on the unlabeled portion of
the dataset. The distinguishing feature of noisy student training
is the exploitation of augmentation, where the teacher produces
quality labels by reading in clean input, while the student is
forced to reproduce those labels with heavily augmented input
features. To ensure the integrity of the labels provided by the
teacher, the data generated by the teacher is typically ﬁltered by
removing low conﬁdence examples, and balanced by matching
the labeled distribution.
We adapt noisy student training for the purpose of speech
recognition by introducing the following measures:
1. We employ (adaptive) SpecAugment [2, 3], an augmen-
tation method for ASR that directly acts on the spectro-
gram of the input audio, for noisy student training.
2. We use shallow fusion with a language model (LM) [4]
on the teacher network to generate better transcripts for
the student network to train on.
3. We propose a normalized ﬁltering score for transcripts
generated by teacher networks given as a function of the
fusion score and number of tokens.4. We use a variant of sub-modular sampling [5] to weigh
the utterance-transcript pairs generated by the teacher
network to balance the token statistics of the dataset to
be passed on to the student.
When the supervised performance of the task is low, we ﬁnd
gradational self-training over NST generations effective:
1. We use gradational ﬁltering , where the ﬁltering crite-
rion is sytematically relaxed to grow the semi-supervised
dataset as the model performance improves.
2. We introduce gradational augmentation , where aug-
mentation strength is increased with NST iterations.
We are able to achieve state-of-the-art performance on two
ASR tasks by using noisy student training. On the ﬁrst task,
LibriSpeech 100-860, the clean 100h subset of LibriSpeech [6]
is used as the labeled set and the remaining 860h of LibriSpeech
is used as the unlabeled set. We view this as a low-supervised-
performance task, the baseline word error rates (WERs) being
5.5%/16.9% on the test-clean/test-other sets of LibriSpeech. By
employing a noisy student training pipeline with gradational ﬁl-
tering and augmentation, we are able to achieve test-clean/test-
other WERs 4.2%/8.6% on this task.
The second task is LibriSpeech-LibriLight, where the en-
tirety of LibriSpeech is used as the labeled set, and the unlab-
60k subset of LibriLight [7], a large untranscribed speech
dataset based on audio books, is used as the unlabeled set. The
baseline model [8] is able to achieve test-clean/test-other WERs
1.9%/4.1% showing high supervised performance. For this set,
we obtain WERs 1.7%/3.4% on the test-clean/test-other sets by
noisy student training without gradational ﬁltering or augmen-
tation, as we do not ﬁnd gradational self-training effective.
1.1. Related Work
Self-training, where a teacher model is used to generate labels
for the unlabeled set the student can train on, is one of the earli-
est methods in semi-supervised learning (e.g., [9, 10, 11]). Self-
training has a long history of being applied to ASR through nu-
merous studies, e.g., [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19]. Noise
has been studied and shown to have positive effects in self-
training for machine translation and image classiﬁcation re-
cently [1, 20], directly motivating our work. Gradational growth
of the labelled dataset in self-training has been used in [21].
Another direction of semi-supervised learning research is
to use consistency-based methods (e.g., [22, 23, 24]). In this
approach, a separate task/loss to (pre-)train the acoustic model
(or a part thereof) is introduced to help the model learn a good
representation of the input, e.g., [25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31].
Our work builds upon self-training and has three main con-
tributions. First, we make use of new augmentation methods in
speech to improve the task performance. Second, we introduce
a normalized ﬁltering score for shallow-fused models for ﬁlter-
ing generated transcripts. Third, we apply gradational ﬁlteringarXiv:2005.09629v2  [eess.AS]  29 Oct 2020