DN-ResNet: Ecient Deep Residual Network for Image Denoising 3
1. We show that ResNet is eective for image denoising, and using edge-aware
loss function signicantly improves the perceptive quality. The resulting DN-
ResNet achieves the state of art accuracy, and is 4 times less complicate than
existing networks;
2. We introduce the depthwise separable ResBlock (DS-ResBlock) to construct
DS-DN-ResNet. The incrementally evolved DS-DN-ResNet is 2.5 times faster
than DN-ResNet, without signicant accuracy loss;
3. We show that the proposed DN-ResNet works well for all types of noises, even
without knowing the noise level. It can be generalized to other image enhance-
ment task such as compressed image restoration;
2 Related work
2.1 Image denoising
During the past years, numerous approaches have been exploited for model-
ing image priors for denoising, such as nonlocal self-similarity (NSS) [8] and
sparse coding [5]. The block matching with 3D collaborative ltering (BM3D)
[4] and its variants such as iterative BM3D with variance stabilizing transforms
(I+VST+BM3D) [1] and generalized Anscombe variance stabilizing transform
with BM3D (GAT-BM3D) [13] are widely used. These methods generally involve
a complex optimization problem in the testing stage, which makes the denoising
process time-consuming. To improve the eciency, learning-based methods are
proposed to get rid of the iterative optimization procedure, such as the trainable
nonlinear reaction diusion (TNRD) [3], and Gaussian conditional random eld
[20] for non-blind image deblurring. Unforunately, the accuracy of these methods
is still limited due to the use of specic image prior. It is also dicult to set the
handcrafted parameters during the stage-wise learning.
Recently, deep neural networks have been deployed for image denoising due to
their signicant improvement of the accuracy [2]. Zhang et al. [26] constructed
a 20-layer feed-forward denoising convolutional neural networks with residual
learning for Gaussian denoising. Remez et al. trained 20-layer CNNs for each
object category respectively and showed good performance for either Gaussian
denoising [15] or Poisson denoising [16]. Zhang et al. [27] proposed FFDNet
adopting orthogonal regularization to enhance the generalization ability of Gaus-
sian denoising. Tai et al. designed MemNet [22], where the feature map concate-
nations and skip connections are utilized to construct a network for image super
resolution, Gaussain denoising, and JPEG deblocking. 1 1 convolutions are
adopted to integrate the long-term memorization, which shows signicant accu-
racy improvements. Most of the existing networks are designed for single type
of noise only. Due to the high computational cost, they can not be executed in
real-time. In contrast, our DN-ResNet is far more ecient. The same network
architecture can be utilized for Gaussian, Poisson, and Poisson-Gaussian noise,
as well as other image enhancement tasks.