Stereo InputsProjection 
Layer
H'
W'D'
3D Cost Volume Disparity Map
H'
W'D'
Matching Net 4D Feature Volume Feature Net
Figure 2: The pipeline of our proposed stereo matching network. Our network consists of four components:
2D Feature Net, 4D Feature V olume, 3D Matching Net, and Projection Layer. Given a pair of stereo images, the
Feature Net produces feature maps that are processed by the Matching Net to generate a 3D cost volume. The
disparity map can be projected from the cost volume with soft-argmin operation. Since the Feature Net and the
Matching Net are the only two modules that contain trainable parameters, we utilize the NAS technique to select
the optimal structures for them.
benchmarks2). This includes man-designed networks such as [ 24,26] and the NAS work of Saikia
et al. [25], not only in accuracy but also in inference time and the size of the resulting network (as
shown in Figure 1).
2 Our Method
In this section, we present our end-to-end hierarchical NAS stereo matching network. In particular,
we have beneﬁted from decades of human knowledge in stereo matching and previous successful
handcrafted designs in the form of priors towards architecture search and design. By leveraging
task-speciﬁc human knowledge in the search space design, we not only avoid the explosion demands
of computational resources in searching architectures for high resolution dense prediction tasks, but
also achieve better accuracy compared to naively searching an architecture in a very large search
space.
2.1 Task-speciﬁc Architecture Search Space
We recall that the deep solutions for dense prediction ( e.g.,semantic segmentation, stereo matching),
usually opt for an encoder-decoder structure [ 18,25,20]. Inspired by the Auto-DeepLab [ 18] for
semantic segmentation, we propose a two-level hierarchical search that allows us to identify both
cell-level and network-level structures3. Directly extending ideas from semantic segmentation might
not necessarily lead to viable solutions for stereo matching. A fully data-driven U-shape encoder-
decoder network is often hard to train, even with the help of NAS [ 25] in regressing disparity maps.
V olumetric stereo matching methods offer faster convergence and better performance as their pipeline
makes use of inductive bias ( ie.,human knowledge in network design). To be speciﬁc, volumetric
solutions ﬁrst obtain a matching cost for all possible disparity levels at every pixel (based on the
concepts of 3D geometry) and then use it to generate the disparity map ( e.g.,by using a soft-argmin
operation). One obvious drawback here is the overwhelming size of the resulting network. This,
makes it extremely difﬁcult, if not impossible, to use volumetric solutions along the NAS framework.
In this work, we embed the geometric knowledge for stereo matching into our network architecture
search. Our network consists of four major parts: a 2D feature net that extracts local image features,
a 4D feature volume, a 3D matching net to compute and aggregate matching costs from concatenated
features, and a soft-argmin layer that projects the computed cost volumes to disparity maps. Since
only the feature net and the matching net involve trainable parameters, we leverage NAS technique to
search these two sub-networks. The overall structure of our network is illustrated in Figure 2. More
details about the cell and network level search are presented below.
2.1.1 Cell Level Search Space
A cell is deﬁned as a core searchable unit in NAS. Following [ 27], we deﬁne a cell as a fully-connected
directed acyclic graph (DAG) with Nnodes. Our cell contains two input nodes, one output node
2At the time of submitting this draft, our algorithm, LEAStereo, is ranked 1in the KITTI 2015, and KITTI
2012 benchmark, and ranked 1according to Bad 4.0, avgerr, rms, A95, A99 metrics on Middlebury benchmark.
3We would like to stress that our framework, in contrast to the Auto-DeepLab, searches for the fullarchitecture
(Auto-DeepLab only searches for the architecture of the encoder).
3