Figure 1: Our proposed method, LEAStereo (Learning Effective Architecture Stereo), sets a new state-of-the-art
on the KITTI 2015 testdataset with much fewer parameters and much lower inference time.
Direct regression methods are based on direct regression of dense per-pixel disparity from the
input images, without taking into account the geometric constraints in stereo matching [ 7]. In the
majority of cases, this is achieved by employing large U-shape encoder-decoder networks with 2D
convolutions to infer the disparity map. While enjoying a fully data-driven approach, recent studies
raise some concerns about the generalization ability of the direct regression methods. For example,
the DispNet [3] fails the random dot stereo tests [8].
In contrast, the volumetric methods leverage the concept of semi-global matching [ 9] and build a
4D feature volume by concatenating features from each disparity-shift. To this end, the volumetric
methods often make use of two building blocks, the so-called I.feature net andII.matching net .
As the names imply, the feature net extracts features from the input images and the matching net
compute matching costs from the 4D feature volume with 3D convolutions. Different designs of
the feature net and the matching net form variants of the volumetric networks [ 4,10,11,12,6].
Nowadays, the volumetric methods represent the state-of-the-art in deep stereo matching and top the
leader-board across different benchmark datasets. Despite the success, designing a good architecture
for volumetric methods remains an open question in deep stereo matching.
On a separate line of research and to reduce the human efforts in designing neural networks, Neural
Architecture Search (NAS) has mounted tremendous successes in various high-level vision tasks
such as classiﬁcation [ 13,14,15], object detection [ 16,17], and semantic segmentation [ 18,19,20].
Connecting the dots, one may assume that marrying the two parties, ie.,employing NAS to design
a volumetric method for stereo matching, is an easy ride. Unfortunately this is not the case. In
general, NAS needs to search through a humongous set of possible architectures to pick the network
components ( e.g.,the ﬁlter size of convolution in a certain layer). This demands heavy computational
load (early versions of NAS algorithms [ 21,22] need thousands of GPU hours to ﬁnd an architecture
on the CIFAR dataset [ 23]). Add to this, the nature of volumetric methods are very memory hungry.
For example, the volumetric networks in [ 4,11,8,24] require six to eight Gigabytes of GPU memory
for training per batch! Therefore, end-to-end search of architectures for volumetric networks has been
considered prohibitive due to the explosion of computational resource demands. This is probably why,
in the only previous attempt1, Saikia et al. [25] search the architecture based on the direct regression
methods, and they only search partially three different cell structures rather than the full architecture.
In this paper, we leverage the volumetric stereo matching pipeline and allow the network to automat-
ically select the optimal structures for both the Feature Net and the Matching Net. Different from
previous NAS algorithms that only have a single encoder / encoder-decoder architecture [ 18,25,20],
our algorithm enables us to search over the structure of both networks, the size of the feature maps,
the size of the feature volume and the size of the output disparity. Unlike AutoDispNet [ 25] that only
searches the cell level structures, we allow the network to search for both the cell level structures and
the network level structures, e.g.,the arrangement of the cells. To sum up, we achieve the ﬁrst end-to-
endhierarchical NAS framework for deep stereo matching by incorporating the geometric knowledge
into neural architecture search. We not only avoid the explosive demands of computational resources
in searching architectures, but also achieve better performances compared to naively searching an
architecture in a very large search space. Our method outperforms a large set of state-of-the-art
algorithms on various benchmarks ( e.g.,topping all previous studies on the KITTI and Middlebury
1To the best of our knowledge.
2