Table 4: Ablation Studies of different searching strategies. The input resolution is 576960, and EPE is
measured on total SceneFlow test set.
Architecture Variant Achieved Network
OlargeOours Sepa. Join. Direct Residual Params FLOPS EPE
p p p0.68M 682.8G 1.55pxp p p2.00M 782.4G 0.86pxp p p1.52M 538.9G 0.91pxp p p1.81M 782.2G 0.78px
Left image GT Feature Net result Full Network result
Figure 7: Functionality analysis for the Feature Net and the Matching Net. By using the learned features
from the Feature Net directly, we already achieve reasonably good results as shown in the third sub-ﬁgure. After
applying the Matching Net, we could further improve the results signiﬁcantly as evidenced by the gap between
the third and fourth sub-ﬁgures.
3D variants of these operations. As shown in the ﬁrst two rows of Table 4, larger set of operations
poolOlarge leads to a searched architecture with a much lower number of parameters but poor EPE
performance when compared to Oours. The reason is that the algorithm favors skip connections in its
design, leading to a low-capacity architecture. Similar observations, albeit in another context, are
reported in [34].
Joint-search vs.Separate-search To analyze the effectiveness and efﬁciency of joint-search vs.
separate-search, we report their performances on SceneFlow dataset with Oand connection type ﬁxed.
From the metrics of row 2 and 4 in Table 4, we observe that joint-search outperforms separate-search
by an improved margin of 9:30% for EPE and 10:50% reduction on the number of parameters. We
conjecture that the joint-search increases the capacity and compatibility for both Feature Net and
Matching Net.
Residual cell vs.Direct cell We then study the differences between our proposed residual cell and
direct cell. As shown in the last two rows of Table 4, using residual cell slightly generates more
parameters and FLOPs but increase the performance by 14:29%.
Functionality analysis for each sub-net The Feature Net and the Matching Net own different
roles in stereo matching. The Feature Net is designed to extract distinctive features from stereo
pairs while the Matching Net is to compute matching costs from these features. To analyze and
reﬂect the actual behaviour of each searched sub-net, we use the features from the Feature Net to
directly compute a cost volume with dot products [ 2] and project it to a disparity map with the
Winner-Takes-All (WTA) strategy. As shown in Figure 7, this strategy already achieves a reasonably
good result in correctly estimating disparity for most objects, which demonstrates that our Feature
Net is learning discriminative features for stereo matching. The difference between the third and
fourth sub-ﬁgures (before and after the Matching Net) proves the contribution of the Matching Net in
computing and aggregating the matching costs to achieve much better results.
3.4 Discussion
LEAStereo vs.AutoDispNet AutoDispNet [ 25] has a very different network design philosophy
than ours. It is a large U-Net-like architecture and tries to directly regress disparity maps from input
images in pixel space. In contrast, our design beneﬁts from task-speciﬁc physics and inductive bias,
ie.,the gold standard pipeline for deep stereo matching and the reﬁne search space, thus achieves full
architecture search within current physical constraints. Table 5 provides a head-to-head comparison on
KITTI Benchmark. It is worth noting that our method is 32:12% better than AutoDispNet-CSS [ 25]
with only 1:81M parameters (which is 1:7%of the parameters required by AutoDispNet-CSS!)
Hints from the found architecture There are several hints from the found architecture: 1. The
feature net does not need to be too deep to achieve a good performance; 2. Larger feature volumes
lead to better performance ( 1=3is better than 1=6); 3. A cost volume of 1=6resolution seems
8