Hierarchical Neural Architecture Search
for Deep Stereo Matching
*Xuelian Cheng1;5,*Yiran Zhong2;6, Mehrtash Harandi1;7, Yuchao Dai3, Xiaojun Chang1,
Tom Drummond1, Hongdong Li2;6, Zongyuan Ge1;4;5
1Faculty of Engineering, Monash University,2Australian National University,
3Northwestern Polytechnical University,4eResearch Centre, Monash University,
5Airdoc Research Australia,6ACRV ,7Data61, CSIRO
{xuelian.cheng, mehrtash.harandi}@monash.edu,
{xiaojun.chang, tom.drummond, zongyuan.ge}@monash.edu,
{yiran.zhong, hongdong.li}@anu.edu.au, daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn
Abstract
To reduce the human efforts in neural network design, Neural Architecture Search
(NAS) has been applied with remarkable success to various high-level vision tasks
such as classiﬁcation and semantic segmentation. The underlying idea for the
NAS algorithm is straightforward, namely, to enable the network the ability to
choose among a set of operations ( e.g.,convolution with different ﬁlter sizes), one
is able to ﬁnd an optimal architecture that is better adapted to the problem at hand.
However, so far the success of NAS has not been enjoyed by low-level geometric
vision tasks such as stereo matching. This is partly due to the fact that state-of-
the-art deep stereo matching networks, designed by humans, are already sheer in
size. Directly applying the NAS to such massive structures is computationally
prohibitive based on the currently available mainstream computing resources. In
this paper, we propose the ﬁrst end-to-end hierarchical NAS framework for deep
stereo matching by incorporating task-speciﬁc human knowledge into the neural
architecture search framework. Speciﬁcally, following the gold standard pipeline
for deep stereo matching ( ie.,, feature extraction – feature volume construction
and dense matching), we optimize the architectures of the entire pipeline jointly.
Extensive experiments show that our searched network outperforms all state-of-the-
art deep stereo matching architectures and is ranked at the top 1 accuracy on KITTI
stereo 2012, 2015 and Middlebury benchmarks, as well as the top 1 on SceneFlow
dataset with a substantial improvement on the size of the network and the speed of
inference. The code is available at LEAStereo.
1 Introduction
Stereo matching attempts to ﬁnd dense correspondences between a pair of rectiﬁed stereo images and
estimate a dense disparity map. Being a classic vision problem, stereo matching has been extensively
studied for almost half a century [ 1]. Since MC-CNN [ 2], a large number of deep neural network
architectures [ 3,4,5,6] have been proposed for solving the stereo matching problem. Based on
the adopted network structures, existing deep stereo networks can be roughly classiﬁed into two
categories: I.direct regression andII.volumetric methods.
* Indicates equal contribution
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.