Table 5: LEAStereo vs.AutoDispNet
Methods Search Level Params KITTI 2012 KITTI 2015 Runtime
AutoDispNet-CSS Cell 111M 1.70% 2.18% 0.9 s
LEAStereo Full Network 1.8M 1.13% 1.65% 0.3 s
proper for good performance; 4. Multi-scale fusion seems important for computing matching costs
(ie.,using a DAG to fuse multi-scale information). Note that the fourth hint has also been exploited by
AANet [ 26] which builds multiple multi-scale cost volumes and regularizes them with a multi-scale
fusion scheme. Our design is tailored for the task of stereo matching and may not be considered as a
domain agnostic solution for a different problem. For different domains, better task-dependent NAS
mechanisms are still a suitable solution to efﬁciently incorporate inductive bias and physics of the
problem into the search space.
4 Related Work
Deep Stereo Matching MC-CNN [ 2] is the ﬁrst deep learning based stereo matching method. It
replaces handcrafted features with learned features and achieves better performance. DispNet [ 3]
is the ﬁrst end-to-end deep stereo matching approach. It tries to directly regress the disparity maps
from stereo pairs. The overall architecture is a large U-shape encoder-decoder network with skip
connections. Since it does not leverage on pre-acquired human knowledge in stereo matching, this
network is totally data-driven, and requires large training data and often hard to train. GC-Net [ 4]
used a 4D feature volume to mimic the ﬁrst step of conventional stereo matching pipeline and a
soft-argmin process to mimic the second step. By encoding such human knowledge in network
design, training becomes easier while maintaining high accuracies. Similar to our work, GC-Net also
consists of two sub-networks to predict disparities. GA-Net [ 33] proposes a semi-global aggregation
layer and a local guided aggregation layer to capture the local and the whole-image cost dependencies
respectively. Generally speaking and as alluded to earlier, designing a good structure for stereo
matching is very difﬁcult, despite considerable effort put in by the vision community.
Neural Architecture Search for Dense Predictions Rapid progress on NAS for image classi-
ﬁcation or object detection has been witnessed as of late. In contrast, only a handful of studies
target the problem of dense predictions such as scene parsing, and semantic segmentation. Pioneer
works [ 35,36] propose a super-net that embed a large number of architectures in a grid arrangement
and adopt them for the task of semantic segmentation. To deal with the explosion of computational
demands in dense prediction, Chen et al. [37] employ a handcrafted backbone and only search the de-
coder architecture. Rather than directly searching architectures on large-scale dense prediction tasks,
they design a small scale proxy task to evaluate the searching results. Nekrasov et al. [38] focus on the
compactness of a network and utilized a small-scale network backbone with over-parameterised aux-
iliary searchable cells on top of it. Similarly, Zhang et al. [19] penalized the computational demands
in search operations, allowing the network to search an optimized architecture with customized
constraints. Auto-Deeplab [ 18] proposes a hierarchical search space for semantic segmentation,
allowing the network to self-select spatial resolution for encoders. FasterSeg [ 20] leverages on the
idea of [ 19] and [ 18], and introduces multi-resolution branches to the search space to identify an
effective semantic segmentation network. AutoDispNet [ 25] applies NAS to disparity estimation by
searching cell structures for a large-scale U-shape encoder-decoder structure.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed the ﬁrst end-to-end hierarchical NAS framework for deep stereo matching,
which incorporates task-speciﬁc human knowledge into the architecture search framework. Our search
framework tailors the search space and follows the feature net-feature volume-matching net pipeline,
whereas we could optimize the architecture of the entire pipeline jointly. Our searched network
outperforms all state-of-the-art deep stereo matching architectures (handcrafted and NAS searched)
and is ranked at the top 1 accuracy on KITTI stereo 2012, 2015 and Middlebury benchmarks while
showing substantial improvement on the network size and inference speed. In the future, we plan to
extend our search framework to other dense matching tasks such as optical ﬂow estimation [ 39] and
multi-view stereo [40].
9