Fujita, Nagarajan, Kataoka, and Ishikawa
ChainerRLExperiment Utilities
Serial training and synchronous or
asynchronous parallel training for any OpenAI
Gym-like environment  ChainerRL V isualizer
Agents
DQN, C51, Rainbow , IQN
A2C, A3C, PPO, SAC
DDPG, TD3, ACER, PCL, etc.
Replay Buffers
Support prioritized, N-step, and/or episodic
sampling Explorers
ε-greedy , Boltzmann, Additive
Gaussian or Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
Neural Networks
Paper Reproductions
Full reproduction scripts  and results for
A3C, DQN, IQN, Rainbow , DDPG, PPO,
TRPO, TD3, and SACPredeﬁned Arch
DQN, Dueling, MLP
Recurrent NetworksDistributions
Deterministic, Gaussian,
Softmax,  Mellowmax
Noisy NetworksActionV alues
Discrete, Categorical,
Quantile, Quadratic
Figure 1: A depiction of ChainerRL . Using ChainerRL ’s building blocks, DRL algorithms,
called agents, are written by implementing the Agentinterface. Agents can
be trained with the experiment utilities and inspected with the ChainerRL
Visualizer .
to address reproducibility issues in RL via deterministic evaluations and by tracking code
changes for continuous-action algorithms.
In this paper, we introduce ChainerRL , an open-source Python DRL library supporting
both CPU and GPU training, built oﬀ of the Chainer (Tokui et al., 2019) deep learning
framework. ChainerRL oﬀers a comprehensive set of algorithms and abstractions, a set of
“reproducibility scripts” that replicate research papers, and a companion visualizer to inspect
agents.
2. Design of ChainerRL
In this section, we describe ChainerRL ’s design, as in Figure 1.
2.1 Agents
InChainerRL , each DRL algorithm is written as a class that implements the Agentinterface.
The Agentinterface provides a mechanism through which an agent interacts with an en-
vironment, e.g., through an abstract method Agent.act_and_train(obs, reward, done)
that takes as input the current observation, the previous step’s immediate reward, and a ﬂag
for episode termination, and returns the agent’s action to execute in the environment. By
implementing such methods, both the update rule and the action-selection procedure are
speciﬁed for an algorithm.
An agent’s internals consist of any model parameters needed for decision-making and
model updating. ChainerRL includes several built-in agents that implement key algorithms
including the DQN (Mnih et al., 2015) family of algorithms, as well as several policy gradient
and actor-critic algorithms.1
1.ChainerRL ’s algorithms include: DQN (Mnih et al., 2015), Double DQN (Van Hasselt et al., 2016),
Categorical DQN (Bellemare et al., 2017), Rainbow (Hessel et al., 2017), Implicit Quantile Networks
(IQN) (Dabney et al., 2018), Oﬀ-policy SARSA, (Persistent) Advantage Learning (Bellemare et al.,
2