ChainerRL: A Deep Reinforcement Learning Library
2.2 Experiments
While users can directly interact with agents, ChainerRL provides an experiments module
that manages agent-environment interactions as well as training/evaluation schedules. This
module supports any environment that is compatible with OpenAI Gym ’sEnv(Brockman
et al., 2016). An experiment takes as input an agent and an environment, queries the agent
for actions, executes them in the environment, and feeds the agent the rewards for training
updates. Moreover, an experiment can periodically perform evaluations and collect evaluation
statistics. Through the experiments module, ChainerRL supports batch or asynchronous
training, enabling agents to act, train, and evaluate synchronously or asynchronously in
several environments in parallel. A full list of synchronous and asynchronous agents is
provided in the appendix.
2.3 Developing a New Agent
The Agentinterface is deﬁned very abstractly and ﬂexibly so that users can easily implement
new algorithms while leveraging the experiments utility and parallel training infrastructure.
To develop a new agent, we ﬁrst create a class that inherits Agent. Next, the learning
update rules and the agent’s action-selection mechanisms are implemented using ChainerRL ’s
provided building blocks (see Section 2.4). Once an agent is created, the agent and a Gym-like
environment can be given to the experiments module to easily train and evaluate the agent
within the speciﬁed environment.
2.4 Agent Building Blocks
ChainerRL oﬀers a set of reusable components for building new agents, including ChainerRL ’s
built-in agents. Though not comprehensive, we highlight here some of the building blocks
that demonstrate the ﬂexibility and reusability of ChainerRL .
Explorers For building action-selection mechanisms during training, ChainerRL has built-
in explorers including -greedy, Boltzmann exploration, additive Gaussian noise, and
additive Ornstein-Uhlenbeck noise (Lillicrap et al., 2016).
Replay buﬀers Replay buﬀers (Lin, 1992; Mnih et al., 2015) have become standard tools
in oﬀ-policy DRL. ChainerRL supports traditional uniform-sampling replay buﬀers,
episodic buﬀers for sampling past (sub-)episodes for recurrent models, and prioritized
buﬀersthatprioritizesampledtransitions(Schauletal.,2016). ChainerRL alsosupports
samplingNsteps of transitions, for algorithms based on N-step returns.
Neural networks While ChainerRL supports any Chainer model, it has several pre-deﬁned
architectures, including DQN architectures, dueling network architectures (Wang et al.,
2016), noisy networks (Fortunato et al., 2018), and multi-layer perceptrons. Recurrent
models are supported for many algorithms, including DQN and IQN.
2016), (Asynchronous) Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C (Wu et al., 2017), A3C (Mnih et al., 2016)),
Actor-Critic with Experience Replay (ACER) (Wang et al., 2017), Deep Deterministic Policy Gradients
(DDPG) (Lillicrap et al., 2016), Twin-delayed double DDPG (TD3) (Fujimoto et al., 2018), Proximal
Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017), REINFORCE (Williams, 1992), Trust Region Policy
Optimization (TRPO) (Schulman et al., 2015), and Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018).
3