Fujita, Nagarajan, Kataoka, and Ishikawa
Distributions Distribution s are parameterized objects for modeling action distributions.
Network models that return Distribution objects are considered policies. Supported
policies include Gaussian, Softmax, Mellowmax (Asadi and Littman, 2017), and deter-
ministic policies.
Action values Similar to Distribution s,ActionValue s parameterizing the values of ac-
tions are used as outputs of neural networks to model Q-functions. Supported Q-
functions include the standard discrete-action Q-function typical of DQN as well as
categorical (Bellemare et al., 2017) and quantile (Dabney et al., 2018) Q-functions
for distributional RL. For continuous action spaces, quadratic Q-functions called
Normalized Advantage Functions (NAFs) (Gu et al., 2016) are also supported.
By combining these agent building blocks, users can easily construct complex agents such
as Rainbow (Hessel et al., 2017), which combines six features into a single agent. This ability
is highlighted in Appendix D, which provides a pseudocode construction of a Rainbow agent
and trains it in multiple parallel environments in just a few lines.
2.5 Visualization
ChainerRL is accompanied by the ChainerRL Visualizer , which takes as input an environ-
ment and an agent, and enables users to easily inspect agents from a browser UI. With the
visualizer, one can visualize the portions of the pixel input that the agent is attending to
as a saliency map (Greydanus et al., 2018). Additionally, users can either manually step
through the episode or view full rollouts of agents. Moreover, the visualizer depicts the
probabilities with which the agent will perform speciﬁc actions. If the agent learns Q-values
or a distribution of Q-values, the predicted Q-value or Q-value distribution for each action
can be displayed. Figure 2 in Appendix C depicts some of these features.
3. Reproducibility
Many DRL libraries oﬀer implementations of algorithms but often deviate from the original
paper’s implementation details. We provide a set of “reproducibility scripts”, which are
compact examples (i.e., single ﬁles) of paper implementations written with ChainerRL that
match, as closely as possible, the original paper’s (or in some cases, another published
paper’s) implementation and evaluation details. ChainerRL currently has “reproducibility
scripts” for DQN, IQN, Rainbow, A3C, DDPG, TRPO, PPO, TD3, and SAC. For each of
these algorithms and domains, we have released pretrained models for every domain, totaling
hundreds of models. Moreover, for each script, we provide full tables of our scores and
compare them against scores reported in the literature (Tables 2 and 4 in Appendix B).
4. Conclusion
This paper introduced ChainerRL and the ChainerRL Visualizer .ChainerRL ’s comprehen-
sive suite of algorithms, ﬂexible APIs, visualization tools, and faithful reproductions can
accelerate the research and application of DRL algorithms. While ChainerRL targets Chainer
users, we have developed an analogous library, PFRL, for PyTorch users.2
2. The PFRLcode is located at https://github.com/pfnet/pfrl .
4