Journal of Machine Learning Research 22 (2021) 1-14 Submitted 4/20; Revised 12/20; Published 4/21
ChainerRL: A Deep Reinforcement Learning Library
Yasuhiro Fujita fujita@preferred.jp
Prabhat Nagarajan prabhat@preferred.jp
Toshiki Kataoka kataoka@preferred.jp
Preferred Networks
Tokyo, Japan
Takahiro Ishikawa sykwer@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
Editor: Andreas Mueller
Abstract
In this paper, we introduce ChainerRL , an open-source deep reinforcement learning (DRL)
librarybuiltusingPythonandthe Chainer deeplearningframework. ChainerRL implements
a comprehensive set of DRL algorithms and techniques drawn from state-of-the-art research
in the ﬁeld. To foster reproducible research, and for instructional purposes, ChainerRL
providesscriptsthatcloselyreplicatetheoriginalpapers’experimentalsettingsandreproduce
published benchmark results for several algorithms. Lastly, ChainerRL oﬀers a visualization
tool that enables the qualitative inspection of trained agents. The ChainerRL source code
can be found on GitHub: https://github.com/chainer/chainerrl .
Keywords: reinforcement learning, deep reinforcement learning, reproducibility, open
source software, chainer
1. Introduction
Since its resurgence in 2013 (Mnih et al., 2013), deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has
undergone tremendous progress, and has enabled signiﬁcant advances in numerous complex
sequential decision-making problems (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2018; Levine et al., 2016;
Kalashnikov et al., 2018). The machine learning community has witnessed a growing body of
literature on DRL algorithms (Henderson et al., 2018). However, coinciding with this rapid
growth has been a growing concern about the state of reproducibility in DRL (Henderson
et al., 2018). The growing body of algorithms and increased reproducibility concerns beget
the need for comprehensive libraries, tools, and implementations that can aid RL-based
research and development.
Many libraries aim to address these challenges in diﬀerent ways. rllab(Duan et al., 2016)
and its successor, garage, provide systematic benchmarking of continuous-action algorithms
on their own benchmark environments. Dopamine (Castro et al., 2018) primarily focuses
on DQN and its extensions for discrete-action environments. rlpyt(Stooke and Abbeel,
2019) supports both discrete and continuous-action algorithms from the three classes: policy
gradient (with V-functions), deep Q-learning, and policy gradient with Q-functions. Other
libraries also support diverse sets of algorithms (Dhariwal et al., 2017; Caspi et al., 2017;
Hill et al., 2018; Liang et al., 2018). catalyst.RL (Kolesnikov and Hrinchuk, 2019) aims
c
2021 Yasuhiro Fujita, Prabhat Nagarajan, Toshiki Kataoka, and Takahiro Ishikawa.
License: CC-BY 4.0, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ . Attribution requirements are provided
athttp://jmlr.org/papers/v22/20-376.html .