Fujita, Nagarajan, Kataoka, and Ishikawa
Appendix A. Agents
ChainerRL implements several kinds of agents, supporting discrete-action agents, continuous-
action agents, recurrent agents, batch agents, and asynchronous agents. Asynchronous train-
ing, where an agent interacts with multiple environments asynchronously with a single set of
model parameters, is supported for A3C, ACER (Wang et al., 2017), N-step Q-learning, and
Path Consistency Learning (PCL). To train an asynchronous agent, one can simply initialize
an asynchronous agent and train it using experiments.train_agent_async . Batch training
refers to synchronous parallel training, where a single agent interacts with multiple environ-
ments synchronously in parallel, and is supported for all algorithms for which asynchronous
training is not supported. In ChainerRL , users can easily perform batch training of agents by
initializing an agent and using experiments.train_agent_batch_with_evaluation . Many
algorithms require additional infrastructure to support recurrent training, e.g., by storing
and managing the recurrent state, and managing sequences of observations as opposed to
individual observations. ChainerRL abstracts these diﬃculties away from the user, making it
simple to employ recurrent architectures for the majority of algorithms. Note that most of the
algorithms implemented in ChainerRL do not have support for recurrence or batch training
in their original published form. In ChainerRL , we have added this additional support for
most algorithms, as summarized in Table 1.
Algorithm Discrete Action Continuous Action Recurrent Model Batch Training CPU Async Training
DQN(Double DQN, SARSA, etc.) 3 3(NAF) 3 3 7
Categorical DQN 3 7 3 3 7
Rainbow 3 7 3 3 7
IQN(and Double IQN) 3 7 3 3 7
A3C 3 3 3 3(A2C) 3
ACER 3 3 3 7 3
NSQ (N-step Q-learning) 3 3(NAF) 3 7 3
PCL (Path Consistency Learning) 3 3 3 7 3
DDPG 7 3 3 3 7
PPO 3 3 3 3 7
TRPO 3 3 3 3 7
TD3 7 3 7 3 7
SAC 7 3 7 3 7
Table 1: Summarized list of ChainerRL algorithms and their additional supported features.
Appendix B. Reproducibility Results
For each of our reproducibility scripts, we provide the training times of the script (in our
repository), full tables of our achieved scores, and comparisons of these scores against those
reported in the literature. Though ChainerRL has high-quality implementations of dozens
of algorithms, we currently have created such “reproducibility scripts” for 9 algorithms. In
the Atari benchmark (Bellemare et al., 2013), we have successfully reproduced DQN, IQN,
Rainbow, and A3C. For the OpenAI Gym Mujoco benchmark tasks, we have successfully
reproduced DDPG, TRPO, PPO, TD3, and SAC.
The reproducibility scripts emphasize correctly reproducing evaluation protocols, which
are particularly relevant when evaluating Atari agents. Unfortunately, evaluation protocols
tend to vary across papers, and consequently results are often inconsistently reported across
8