ChainerRL: A Deep Reinforcement Learning Library
the literature (Machado et al., 2018), signiﬁcantly impacting results. The critical details of
standard Atari evaluation protocols are as follows:
Evaluation frequency The frequency (in timesteps) at which the evaluation phase occurs.
Evaluation phase length The number of timesteps in the oﬄine evaluation.
Evaluation episode length The maximum duration of an evaluation episode.
Evaluation policy The policy to follow during an evaluation episode.
Reporting protocol Each intermediate evaluation phase outputs some score, representing
the mean score of all evaluation episodes during that evaluation phase. Papers typically
report scores according to one of the following reporting protocols:
1.best-eval: Papers using the best-eval protocol report the highest mean score across
all intermediate evaluation phases.
2.re-eval: Papers using the re-evalprotocol report the score of a re-evaluation of
the network parameters that produced the best-eval.
During a typical Atari agent’s 50 million timesteps of training, it is evaluated periodically
in an oﬄine evaluation phase for a speciﬁed number of timesteps before resuming training.
Since most papers report ﬁnal results using the best model as determined by these periodic
evaluation phases, the frequency of evaluation is key, as it provides the author of a paper with
more models to select from when reporting ﬁnal results. The length of the evaluation phase
is important, because shorter evaluation phases have higher variance in performance and
longer evaluation phases have less variance in performance. Again, since these intermediate
evaluations are used in some way when reporting ﬁnal performance, the length of the
evaluation phase is important when reproducing results. The length of the evaluation
episodes can impact performance, as permitting the agent to have longer episodes may allow
it to accrue more points. Oftentimes, since the agent performs some form of exploratory
policy during training, the agent sometimes changes policies speciﬁcally for evaluations. Each
of the listed details, especially the reporting protocols, can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the results,
and thus are critical details to hold consistent for a fair comparison between algorithms.
Table 2 lists the results obtained by ChainerRL ’s reproducibility scripts for DQN, IQN,
Rainbow, and A3C on the Atari benchmark, with comparisons against a published result.
Table 3 depicts the evaluation protocol used for each algorithm, with a citation of the source
paper whose results we compare against. Note that the results for the A3C (Mnih et al.,
2016) algorithm do not come from the original A3C paper, but from another (Fortunato
et al., 2018). For continuous-action algorithms, the results on OpenAI Gym MuJoCo tasks for
DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2016), TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015), PPO (Schulman et al., 2017),
TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018), and SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) are reported in Table 4. For
all algorithms and environments listed in tables 2 and 4, we have released models trained
through our reproducibility scripts, which researchers can use.
The reproducibility scripts are produced through a combination of reading released
source code and studying published hyperparameters, implementation details, and evaluation
protocols. We also have extensive email correspondences with authors to clarify ambiguities,
omitted details, or inconsistencies that may exist in papers.
9