age of the generated time series in a time series feature space.
Essentially, these models describe the conditional distribu-
tion of time series by assuming the value at time tdepends
on previous points. Once the initial value is perturbed, a new
time series sequence could be generated following the condi-
tional distribution.
3.3 Learning-based Methods
Time series data augmentation methods should be capable of
not only generating diverse samples, but also mimicking the
characteristics of real data. In this section, we summarize
some recent learning based schemes that have such potentials.
Embedding Space
In[DeVries and Taylor, 2017 ], the data augmentation is pro-
posed to perform in the learned embedding space (aka., latent
space). It assumes that simple transforms applied to encoded
inputs rather than the raw inputs would produce more plau-
sible synthetic data due to the manifold unfolding in feature
space. Note that the selection of the representation model
in this framework is open and depends on the speciﬁc task
and data type. When the time series data is addressed, a
sequence autoencoder is selected in [DeVries and Taylor,
2017 ]. Speciﬁcally, the interpolation and extrapolation are
applied to generate new samples. The ﬁrst knearest labels
in the transformed space with the same label are identiﬁed.
Then for each pair of neighboring samples, a new sample is
generated which is the linear combination of them. The dif-
ference of interpolation and extrapolation lies in the weight
selection in sample generation. This technique is particular
useful for time series classiﬁcation as demonstrated in [De-
Vries and Taylor, 2017 ]. Recently, another data augmentation
method in the embedding space named MODALS (Modality-
agnostic Automated Data Augmentation in the Latent Space)
is proposed in [Cheung and Yeung, 2021 ]. Instead of training
an autoencoder to learn the latent space and generate addi-
tional synthetic data for training, the MODALS method train
a classiﬁcation model jointly with different compositions of
latent space augmentations, which demonstrates superior per-
formance for time series classiﬁcation problems.
Deep Generative Models
Deep generative models (DGMs) have recently been shown to
be able to generate near-realistic high-dimensional data ob-
jects such as images and sequences. DGMs developed for
sequential data, such as audio and text, often can be extended
to model time series data. Among DGMs, generative adver-
sarial networks (GANs) are popular methods to generate syn-
thetic samples and increase the training set effectively. Al-
though the GAN frameworks have received signiﬁcant atten-
tion in many ﬁelds, how to generate effective time series data
still remains a challenging problem. In this subsection, we
brieﬂy review several recent works on GANs for time series
data augmentation.
In[Esteban et al. , 2017 ], a Recurrent GAN (RGAN) and
Recurrent Conditional GAN (RCGAN) are proposed to pro-
duce realistic real-valued multi-dimensional time series data.
The RGAN adopts RNN in the generator and discriminator,
while the RCGAN adopts both RNNs conditioned on auxil-
iary information. Besides desirable performance of RGANand RCGAN for time series data augmentation, differential
privacy can be used in training the RCGAN for stricter pri-
vacy guarantees like medicine or other sensitive domains.
Recently, [Yoon et al. , 2019 ]proposed TimeGAN, a natural
framework for generating realistic time series data in various
domains. TimeGAN is a generative time series model, trained
adversarially and jointly via a learned embedding space with
both supervised and unsupervised losses. Speciﬁcally, a step-
wise supervised loss is introduced to learn the stepwise con-
ditional distributions in data. It also introduces an embedding
network to provide a reversible mapping between features
and latent representations to reduce the high-dimensionality
of the adversarial learning space. Note that the supervised
loss is minimized by jointly training both the embedding and
generator networks.
Automated Data Augmentation
The idea of automated data augmentation is to automatically
search for optimal data augmentation policies through re-
inforcement learning, meta learning, or evolutionary search
[Ratner et al. , 2017; Cubuk et al. , 2019; Zhang et al. , 2020;
Cheung and Yeung, 2021 ]. The TANDA (Transformation Ad-
versarial Networks for Data Augmentations) scheme in [Rat-
neret al. , 2017 ]is designed to train a generative sequence
model over speciﬁed transformation functions using rein-
forcement learning in a GAN-like framework to generate re-
alistic transformed data points, which yields strong gains over
common heuristic data augmentation methods for a range
of applications including image recognition and natural lan-
guage understanding tasks. [Cubuk et al. , 2019 ]proposes
a procedure called AutoAugment to automatically search
for improved data augmentation policies in a reinforcement
learning framework. It adopts a controller RNN network to
predicts an augmentation policy from the search space and
another network is trained to achieve convergence accuracy.
Then, the accuracy is used as reward to update the RNN con-
troller for better policies in the next iteration. The experi-
mental results show that AutoAugment improves the accu-
racy of modern image classiﬁers signiﬁcantly in a wide range
of datasets.
For time series data augmentation, the MODALS [Cheung
and Yeung, 2021 ]is designed to ﬁnd the optimal composi-
tion of latent space transformations for data augmentation us-
ing evolution search strategy based on population based aug-
mentation (PBA) [Hoet al. , 2019 ], which demonstrates supe-
rior performance on classiﬁcation problems in continuous and
discrete time series data. Another recent work on automated
data augmentation is proposed in [Fons et al. , 2021 ], where
two sample-adaptive automatic weighting schemes are de-
signed speciﬁcally for time series data: one learns to weight
the contribution of the augmented samples to the loss, and
the other selects a subset of transformations based on the
ranking of the predicted training loss. Both adaptive poli-
cies demonstrate improvement on classiﬁcation problems in
multiple time series datasets.
4 Preliminary Evaluation
In this section, we demonstrate preliminary evaluations in
three common time series tasks to show the effectiveness of
data augmentation for performance improvement.