5.2 Augmentation for Imbalanced Class
In time series classiﬁcation, class imbalance occurs very
frequently. One classical approach addressing imbal-
anced classiﬁcation problem is to oversample the minor-
ity class as the synthetic minority oversampling technique
(SMOTE) [Fern ´andez et al. , 2018 ]to artiﬁcially mitigate the
imbalance. However, this oversampling strategy may change
the distribution of raw data and cause overﬁtting. Another ap-
proach is to design cost-sensitive model by using adjust loss
function [Geng and Luo, 2018 ]. Furthermore, [Gao et al. ,
2020 ]designed label-based weight and value-based weight in
the loss function in convolution neural networks, which con-
siders weight adjustment for class labels and the neighbor-
hood of each sample. Thus, both class imbalance and tempo-
ral dependency are explicitly considered.
Performing data augmentation and weighting for imbal-
anced class together would be an interesting and effective di-
rection. A recent study investigates this topic in the area of
CV and NLP [Huet al. , 2019 ], which signiﬁcantly improves
text and image classiﬁcation in low data regime and imbal-
anced class problems. In future, it is interesting to design
deep network by jointly considering data augmentation and
weighting for imbalanced class in time series data.
5.3 Augmentation Selection and Combination
Given different data augmentation methods summarized in
Fig. 1, one key strategy is how to select and combine vari-
ous augmentation methods together. The experiments in [Um
et al. , 2017 ]show that the combination of three basic time-
domain methods (permutation, rotation, and time warping)
is better than that of a single method and achieves the best
performance in time series classiﬁcation. Also, the results
in[Rashid and Louis, 2019 ]demonstrate substantial perfor-
mance improvement for a time series classiﬁcation task when
using a deep neural network by combining four data aug-
mentation methods (i.e, jittering, scaling, rotation and time-
warping). However, considering various data augmentation
methods, directly combining different augmentations may re-
sult in a huge amount of data, and may not be efﬁcient and
effective for performance improvement. Recently, RandAug-
ment [Cubuk et al. , 2020 ]is proposed as a practical way for
augmentation combination in image classiﬁcation and object
detection. For each random generated dataset, RandAugment
is based on only two interpretable hyperparameters N(num-
ber of augmentation methods to combine) and M(magni-
tude for all augmentation methods), where each augmenta-
tion is randomly selected from K=14 available augmentation
methods. Furthermore, this randomly combined augmenta-
tion with simple grid search can be used in the reinforcement
learning based data augmentation as [Cubuk et al. , 2019 ]for
efﬁcient space searching.
An interesting future direction is how to design effective
augmentation selection and/or combination strategies suitable
for time series data in deep learning. Customized reinforce-
ment learning and meta learning optimized for time series
could be potential approaches. Furthermore, algorithm efﬁ-
ciency is another important consideration in practice.5.4 Augmentation with Gaussian Processes
Gaussian Processes (GPs) [Rasmussen and Williams, 2005 ]
are well-known Bayesian non-parametric models suitable for
time series analysis [Roberts et al. , 2013 ]. From the function-
space view, GPs induce a distribution over functions, i.e., a
stochastic process. Time series can be viewed as functions
with time as input and observation as output, and thus can
be modeled with GPs. A GP f(t) GP (m(t);k(t;t0))
is characterized by a mean function m(t)and a covari-
ance kernel function k(t;t0). The choice of the kernel al-
lows to place assumptions on some general properties of the
modeled functions, such as smoothness, scale, periodicity
and noise level. Kernels can be composed through addi-
tion and multiplication, resulting in compositional function
properties, such as pseudo-periodicity, additive decompos-
ability, and change point. GPs are often applied to interpola-
tion and extrapolation tasks, which correspond to imputation
and forecasting in time series analysis. Furthermore, deep
Gaussian processes(DGPs) [Damianou and Lawrence, 2013;
Salimbeni and Deisenroth, 2017 ], which are richer models
with hierarchical composition of GPs and often exceed stan-
dard (single-layer) GPs signiﬁcantly in many cases, have not
been well studied for time series. We believe GPs and DGPs
are future directions as they allow to sample time series with
those properties mentioned above through the design of ker-
nels, and to generate new data instances from existing ones
by exploiting their interpolation/extrapolation abilities.
5.5 Augmentation with Deep Generative Models
Current DGMs adopted for time series data augmentation are
mainly GANs. However, other DGMs also have great poten-
tials for time series modeling. For example, deep autoregres-
sive networks (DARNs) exhibit a natural ﬁt for time series
because they generate data in a sequential manner, obeying
the causal direction of physical time series data generating
process. DARNs like Wavenet [Oord et al. , 2016 ]and Trans-
former [Vaswani et al. , 2017 ]have demonstrated promis-
ing performance in time series forecasting tasks [Alexan-
drov et al. , 2020 ]. Another example is normalizing ﬂows
(NFs) [Kobyzev et al. , 2020 ], which recently have shown
success in modeling time series stochastic processes with
excellent inter-/extrapolation performance given observed
data [Deng et al. , 2020 ]. Most recently, variational autoen-
coders (V AEs) based data augmentation [Fuet al. , 2020 ]are
investigated for human activity recognition.
In summary, besides the common GAN architectures, how
to leverage other deep generative models like DARNs, NFs,
and V AEs, which are less investigated for time series data
augmentation, remain exciting future opportunities.
6 Conclusion
As deep learning models are becoming more popular on time
series data, the limited labeled data calls for effective data
augmentation methods. In this paper, we give a comprehen-
sive survey on time series data augmentation methods in var-
ious tasks. We organize the reviewed methods in a taxonomy
consisting of basic and advanced approaches, summarize rep-
resentative methods in each category, compare them empiri-
cally in typical tasks, and highlight future research directions.