Time Series Data Augmentation for Deep Learning: A Survey
Qingsong Wen1, Liang Sun1, Fan Yang2, Xiaomin Song1, Jingkun Gao3, Xue Wang1, Huan Xu2
1DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, Bellevue, WA, USA
2Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
3Twitter, Seattle, WA, USA
fqingsong.wen, liang.sun, fanyang.yf, xiaomin.song, xue.w, huan.xu g@alibaba-inc.com,
jingkung@twitter.com
Abstract
Deep learning performs remarkably well on many
time series analysis tasks recently. The superior
performance of deep neural networks relies heavily
on a large number of training data to avoid over-
ﬁtting. However, the labeled data of many real-
world time series applications may be limited such
as classiﬁcation in medical time series and anomaly
detection in AIOps. As an effective way to enhance
the size and quality of the training data, data aug-
mentation is crucial to the successful application
of deep learning models on time series data. In
this paper, we systematically review different data
augmentation methods for time series. We pro-
pose a taxonomy for the reviewed methods, and
then provide a structured review for these methods
by highlighting their strengths and limitations. We
also empirically compare different data augmenta-
tion methods for different tasks including time se-
ries classiﬁcation, anomaly detection, and forecast-
ing. Finally, we discuss and highlight ﬁve future
directions to provide useful research guidance.
1 Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable success in many
ﬁelds, including computer vision (CV), natural language pro-
cessing (NLP), and speech processing, etc. Recently, it is
increasingly embraced for solving time series related tasks,
including time series classiﬁcation [Fawaz et al. , 2019 ], time
series forecasting [Han et al. , 2019 ], and time series anomaly
detection [Gamboa, 2017 ]. The success of deep learning re-
lies heavily on a large number of training data to avoid over-
ﬁtting. Unfortunately, many time series tasks do not have
enough labeled data. As an effective tool to enhance the size
and quality of the training data, data augmentation is crucial
to the successful application of deep learning models. The ba-
sic idea of data augmentation is to generate synthetic dataset
covering unexplored input space while maintaining correct la-
bels. Data augmentation has shown its effectiveness in many
applications, such as AlexNet [Krizhevsky et al. , 2012 ]for
ImageNet classiﬁcation.
The work was done when Jingkun Gao was at Alibaba Group.However, less attention has been paid to ﬁnd better data
augmentation methods speciﬁcally for time series data. Here
we highlight some challenges arising from data augmentation
methods for time series data. Firstly, the intrinsic properties
of time series data are not fully utilized in current data aug-
mentation methods. One unique property of time series data
is the so-called temporal dependency. Unlike image data,
the time series data can be transformed into the frequency
and time-frequency domains and effective data augmentation
methods can be designed and implemented in the transformed
domain. This becomes more complicated when we model
multivariate time series where we need to consider the poten-
tially complex dynamics of these variables across time. Thus,
simply applying those data augmentation methods from im-
age and speech processing may not result in valid synthetic
data. Secondly, the data augmentation methods are also task
dependent. For example, the data augmentation methods ap-
plicable for time series classiﬁcation may not be valid for time
series anomaly detection. In addition, data augmentation be-
comes more crucial in many time series classiﬁcation prob-
lems where class imbalance is often observed. In this case,
how to effective generate a large number of synthetic data
with labels with less samples remains a challenge.
Unlike data augmentation for CV [Shorten and Khoshgof-
taar, 2019 ]or speech [Cuiet al. , 2015 ], data augmentation
for time series has not yet been comprehensively and system-
atically reviewed to the best of our knowledge. One work
closely related to ours is [Iwana and Uchida, 2020 ]which
presents a survey of existing data augmentation methods for
time series classiﬁcation. However, it does not review the
data augmentation methods for other common tasks like time
series forecasting [Bandara et al. , 2020; Hu et al. , 2020;
Lee and Kim, 2020 ]and anomaly detection [Lim et al. , 2018;
Zhou et al. , 2019; Gao et al. , 2020 ]. Furthermore, the poten-
tial avenues for future research opportunities of time series
data augmentations are also missing.
In this paper, we aim to ﬁll the aforementioned gaps by
summarizing existing time series data augmentation methods
in common tasks, including time series forecasting, anomaly
detection, classiﬁcation, as well as providing insightful fu-
ture directions. To this end, we propose a taxonomy of data
augmentation methods for time series, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Based on the taxonomy, we review these data augmentation
methods systematically. We start the discussion from the sim-arXiv:2002.12478v4  [cs.LG]  31 Mar 2022