Collaborative Distillation for Ultra-Resolution Universal Style Transfer
Huan Wang1,2∗, Yijun Li3, Yuehai Wang1, Haoji Hu1†, Ming-Hsuan Yang4,5
1Zhejiang University2Notheastern University3Adobe Research4UC Merced5Google Research
wang.huan@husky.neu.edu yijli@adobe.com {wyuehai,haoji hu}@zju.edu.cn mhyang@ucmerced.edu
Figure 1: An ultra-resolution stylized sample ( 10240×4096 pixels), rendered in about 31seconds on a single Tesla P100
(12GB) GPU. On the upper left are the content and style. Four close-ups ( 539×248) are shown under the stylized image.
Abstract
Universal style transfer methods typically leverage rich
representations from deep Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) models (e.g., VGG-19) pre-trained on large collec-
tions of images. Despite the effectiveness, its application
is heavily constrained by the large model size to handle
ultra-resolution images given limited memory. In this work,
we present a new knowledge distillation method (named
Collaborative Distillation) for encoder-decoder based neu-
ral style transfer to reduce the convolutional ﬁlters. The
main idea is underpinned by a ﬁnding that the encoder-
decoder pairs construct an exclusive collaborative relation-
ship, which is regarded as a new kind of knowledge for style
* This work is mainly done when Huan Wang was with the Depart-
ment of ISEE, Zhejiang University, China. †Corresponding author.transfer models. Moreover, to overcome the feature size
mismatch when applying collaborative distillation, a linear
embedding loss is introduced to drive the student network to
learn a linear embedding of the teacher’s features. Exten-
sive experiments show the effectiveness of our method when
applied to different universal style transfer approaches
(WCT and AdaIN), even if the model size is reduced by
15.5 times. Especially, on WCT with the compressed mod-
els, we achieve ultra-resolution (over 40 megapixels) uni-
versal style transfer on a 12GB GPU for the ﬁrst time. Fur-
ther experiments on optimization-based stylization scheme
show the generality of our algorithm on different stylization
paradigms. Our code and trained models are available at
https://github.com/mingsun-tse/collaborative-distillation .
1
1860