2. Related Work
Style transfer. Prior to the deep learning era, image
style transfer is mainly tackled by non-parametric sam-
pling [ 9], non-photorealistic rendering [ 15,52] or image
analogy [ 20]. However, these methods are designed for
some speciﬁc styles and rely on low-level statistics. Re-
cently, Gatys et al. [13] propose the neural style transfer,
which employs deep features from the pre-trained VGG-
19 model [ 51] and achieves the stylization by matching
the second-order statistics between the generated image
and given style image. Numerous methods have been de-
veloped to improve the visual quality [ 34,57,49,64],
speed [ 35,54,29,11,37], user controls [ 41,59,14], style
diversities [ 8,3,38,24,39]. However, one common limita-
tion of all those neural network based approaches is that
they cannot handle the ultra-resolution content and style
images given limited memory. Some approaches [ 54,29,
49] achieve high-resolution stylization results (up to 10
megapixels, e.g., 3000×3000 pixels) by learning a small
feedforward network for a speciﬁc style example or cate-
gory, but they do not generalize to other unseen styles. In
contrast, our goal is to realize the ultra-resolution image
style transfer for universal styles with onemodel only.
Model compression. Model compression and acceleration
have also attracted much attention recently, which aim to
obtain a smaller and faster model without a considerable
compromise in performance. Existing methods broadly fall
into ﬁve categories, i.e., low-rank decomposition [ 7,27,
32,63], pruning [ 33,18,17,36,58,19,56,55], quanti-
zation [ 5,48,65,25], knowledge distillation [ 2,1,21,61]
and compact architecture redesign or search [ 26,23,50,62,
45,53,10]. However, these methods are mainly explored in
high-level vision tasks, typically the classiﬁcation and de-
tection. Few approaches have paid attention to low-level
vision tasks such as style transfer, where many methods are
also limited by the massive model size of CNNs. Unlike the
CNN compression for high-level vision where it only needs
to maintain the global semantic information of features to
retain accuracies, the extra challenge of model compression
for low-level vision may be how to maintain the local struc-
tures, e.g., local textures and color diversity in style transfer.
In this work, we develop a deeply-supervised knowledge
distillation method to learn a much smaller model from pre-
trained redundant VGG-19 [ 51]. The compressed model en-
joys more than 15×parameter and computation reduction.
More importantly, the decrease of model size enables uni-
versal style transfer on ultra-resolution images. To our best
knowledge, only one recent work [ 30] employs GAN [ 16]
to learn unpaired style transfer network on ultra-resolution
images. However, they achieve this by working on image
subsamples and then merging them back to a whole image.
In contrast, our method fundamentally reduces the modelcomplexity, which can directly process the whole image.
3. Proposed Method
3.1. Collaborative distillation
Style-agnostic stylization methods typically adopt an
encoder-decoder scheme to learn deep representations for
style rendering and then invert them back into the styl-
ized images. Since the style information is not directly en-
coded in the model, the encoder part needs to be expressive
enough to extract informative representations for universal
styles. Existing methods [ 13,4,24,39] commonly choose
VGG-19 [ 51] as the encoder considering its massive capac-
ity and hierarchical architecture. As for the decoder, de-
pending on different stylization schemes, it can have differ-
ent collaborative relationships with the encoder. Two state-
of-the-art arbitrary style transfer approaches, WCT [ 39] and
AdaIN [ 24], are discussed here. (i) For WCT, the stylization
process is to apply Whitening and Coloring Transform [ 22]
to the content features using the second-order statistics of
style feature. Then the transformed content feature is in-
verted to an image by the decoder. Hence, the decoder
training is not directly involved with stylization. The col-
laborative relationship in WCT is essentially image recon-
struction. (ii) For AdaIN, unlike WCT, its decoder training
is directly involved in the stylization. Two images (content
and style) are fed into the encoder, then in the feature space,
the content feature is rendered by the statistics (mean and
variance) of the style feature. Finally, the decoder inverts
the rendered content feature back to stylized images. The
stylized images are supposed to be close to the content (or
style) in terms of content (or style) distance. Therefore, the
collaborative relationship for AdaIN is style transfer.
Despite paradigm difference for the above two schemes,
they are both encoder-decoder based, and the decoder is
trained through the knowledge of the encoder. This means,
during the training of the decoder, the knowledge of the en-
coder is leaked into the decoder. Presumably and conﬁrmed
empirically, the decoder Dcan only work with its matching
encoderElike a nut with its bolt. For another encoder E′,
even if it has the same architecture as E,DandE′cannot
work together (see Fig. 2). This exclusivity shows the de-
coder has some inherent information speciﬁc to its encoder.
If we can ﬁnd a way to make the network E′compatible
withDtoo, it means E′can functionally replace the orig-
inal encoder E. IfE′is meanwhile much smaller than E,
then we achieve the model compression goal. Based on this
idea, we propose a new distillation method speciﬁc to NST,
named Collaborative Distillation , consisting of two steps.
For the ﬁrst step, based on the task at hand, we train a
collaborator network for the large encoder. As shown in
Fig.3(a), for WCT [ 39], the decoder is trained to invert the
feature to be as faithful to the input image as possible ( i.e.,
1862