1. Introduction
Universal neural style transfer (NST) focuses on com-
posing a content image with new styles from any reference
image. This often requires a model with considerable ca-
pacity to extract effective representations for capturing the
statistics of arbitrary styles. Recent universal style transfer
methods based on neural networks [ 13,4,24,39,40,37]
consistently show that employing the representations ex-
tracted by a pre-trained deep neural network like VGG-
19 [51] achieves both visually pleasing transferred results
and generalization ability on arbitrary style images. How-
ever, given limited memory on hardware, the large model
size of VGG-19 greatly constrains the input image resolu-
tion. Up to now, current universal style transfer approaches
only report results around one megapixels ( e.g.,1024×1024
pixels) on one single GPU with 12GB memory. Although it
is likely to achieve higher resolution style transfer through
multiple GPUs, the fundamental problem of the massive
model size of VGG-19 remains, hindering NST from prac-
tical applications, especially on mobile devices.
Meanwhile, recent years have witnessed rapid develop-
ment in the area of model compression [ 17,21,36,19],
which aims at reducing the parameters of a large CNN
model without considerable performance loss. Despite
the progress, most model compression methods only fo-
cus on high-level tasks, e.g., classiﬁcation [ 18,58,56,48]
and detection [ 63,19]. Compressing models for low-
level vision tasks is still less explored. Knowledge distil-
lation (KD) [ 2,1,21] is a promising model compression
method by transferring the knowledge of large networks
(called teacher) to small networks (called student), where
the knowledge can be softened probability (which can re-
ﬂect the inherent class similarity structure known as dark
knowledge ) or sample relations (which can reﬂect the sim-
ilarity structure among different samples) [ 44,46,60,47].
This knowledge works as extra information on top of the
one-hot labels and hence can boost the student’s perfor-
mance. However, this extra information is mainly label-
dependent , thus hardly applicable to low-level tasks. What
is the dark knowledge in low-level vision tasks ( e.g., neu-
ral style transfer) remains an open question. Meanwhile,
encoder-decoder based models are extensively employed in
neural style transfer, where the decoder is typically trained
via the knowledge of encoder. Notably, they together con-
struct an exclusive collaborative relationship in the styliza-
tion process, shown in Fig. 2. Since the decoder Dis trained
to exclusively work with the encoder E, if another encoder
E′can also work with D, it means E′can functionally play
the role of E. Based on this idea, we propose a new knowl-
edge to distill the deep models in neural style transfer: the
collaborative relationship between the encoder and decoder.
Given a redundant large encoder ( e.g., VGG-19), we pro-
pose a two-step compression scheme: First, train a collab-
Input E1+D1 E2+D2 E1+D2 E2+D1
Figure 2: Examples of the exclusive collaboration phe-
nomenon on two different encoder-decoder collaborative re-
lationships: image reconstruction of WCT [ 39] (Row1) and
style transfer of AdaIN [ 24] (Row2). Column 1is the in-
put, the other four columns show the outputs using different
encoder-decoder combinations. If the two encoder-decoder
pairs (E1-D1, E2-D2) are trained independently, the en-
coder can only work with its matching decoder.
orator network for the encoder, namely, the decoder in our
context; second, replace the large encoder with a small en-
coder, then train the small encoder with the collaborator
ﬁxed . Since the small encoder typically has fewer chan-
nels, its output feature has a smaller dimension than that
of the large encoder. Therefore, the small network cannot
directly work with the collaborator. To resolve this, we pro-
pose to restrict the student to learn a linear embedding of
the teacher’s output, so that the teacher’s output can be re-
constructed through a simple linear combination of the stu-
dent’s output before being fed into the collaborator.
Notably, we do not restrict the speciﬁc collaboration
form in our approach. In this paper, we will show it can be
applied to two different state-of-the-art universal style trans-
fer schemes: WCT [ 39] (where the collaboration is image
reconstruction) and AdaIN [ 24] (where the collaboration is
style transfer). The main contributions of this work are:
•We propose a new knowledge distillation method for
universal neural style transfer. The exclusive collabo-
rative relationship between the encoder and its decoder
is identiﬁed as a new kind of knowledge, which can be
applied to different collaborative relationships.
•To resolve the feature dimension mismatch problem
between the student and teacher networks in our algo-
rithm, we propose to restrict the student to learn linear
embedding of the teacher’s output, which also acts as
a regularizer to fuse more supervision into the middle
layers of the student so as to boost its learning.
•Extensive experiments show the merits of our method
with different stylization frameworks (WCT [ 39],
AdaIN [ 24], and Gatys [ 13]),15.5×parameter reduc-
tion with comparable to even better visual effect. Es-
pecially, on WCT, the compressed models enable us
to conduct ultra-resolution ( 40megapixels) universal
style transfer for the ﬁrst time on a single 12GB GPU.
1861