the original Gram matrix G. In other words, the style de-
scription power is maintained if we adopt F′in place of the
original redundant F. In the context of our method, Fis the
output of the original encoder, F′is the output of the small
encoder. The transformation matrix Qis learned through
a fully-connected layer without non-linear activation func-
tion to realize the linearity assumption. Hence, the linear
embedding loss can be formulated as
Lembed=||F −Q·F′||2
2. (5)
One more step forward, the proposed solution above is
not limited to the ﬁnal output layer. For the middle lay-
ers of the small encoder, it can also ﬁnd an application.
Concretely, we apply the linear embedding to the other
four middle layers ( ReLU_k_1 ,k∈ {1,2,3,4}) between
the original encoder and the small encoder, as shown in
Fig. 3(c). We have two motivations for this. First, in the
proposed method, when the small encoder is trained with
the SGD algorithm, its only gradient source would be the
decoder, passed through the fully-connected layer Q. How-
ever,Qdoes not have many parameters, so it will actually
form an information bottleneck, slowing down the learning
of the student. With these branches plugged into the middle
layers of the network, they will infuse more gradients into
the student and thus boost its learning, especially for deep
networks that are prone to gradient vanishing. Second, in
neural style transfer, the style of an image is typically de-
scribed by the features of many middle layers [ 13,24,39].
Therefore, adding more supervision to these layers is neces-
sary to ensure that they do not lose much the style descrip-
tion power for subsequent use in style transfer.
To this end, the total loss to train the small encoder in
our proposed algorithm can be summarized as
Ltotal=βk/summationdisplay
i=1Lembed+Lcollab, (6)
whereβis the weight factor to balance the two loss terms.
4. Experimental Results
In this section, we will ﬁrst demonstrate the effective-
ness of our compressed VGG-19 compared with the origi-
nal VGG-19 within the universal style transfer frameworks
WCT [ 39]. Then we show the proposed collaborative dis-
tillation is not limited to one kind of collaborative relation-
ship on AdaIN [ 24]. Finally, to show the generality of the
proposed approach, we also evaluate on the optimization-
based style transfer using Gatys [ 13], where the collabora-
tive relationship is the same as WCT, i.e., image reconstruc-
tion. We ﬁrst conduct comparisons in the maximal image
resolution which the original VGG-19 can possibly handle
(3000×3000), then show some stylized samples in larger
resolutions ( i.e., ultra-resolutions) with the small models.All experiments are conducted on one Tesla P100 12GB
GPU, namely, given the same limited memory.
Evaluated compression method. Since there are few
model compression methods speciﬁcally designed for low-
level image synthesis tasks, we compare our method with a
typical compression algorithm in the high-level image clas-
siﬁcation task, i.e., ﬁlter pruning (FP) [ 36]. Speciﬁcally, we
ﬁrst apply FP to VGG-19 in classiﬁcation to obtain a com-
pressed model with the same architecture as ours. It is then
ﬁne-tuned on ImageNet [ 6] to regain performance. Finally,
its decoder is obtained by optimizing the loss in ( 1).
4.1. Style transfer on WCT
Since we need the original decoder as collaborator , we
ﬁrst train a decoder with the mirrored architecture of VGG-
19 on the MS-COCO dataset [ 42] for image reconstruction.
During the training, the encoder is ﬁxed , withλp= 1. We
randomly crop 256×256patches from 300×300images
as input. Adam [ 31] is used as optimization solver with
ﬁxed learning rate 10−4, batch size 16. In WCT [ 39], a
cascaded coarse-to-ﬁne stylization procedure is employed
for best results, so the decoders of the 5-stage VGG-19 (up
toReLU_k_1 ,k∈ {1,2,3,4,5}) are all trained. Then
an encoder-decoder network is constructed with loss ( 6),
in which βis set to 10. The compressed encoder can
be randomly initialized, but we empirically ﬁnd using the
largest ﬁlters (based on L1-norms) from the original VGG-
19 as initialization will help the compressed model con-
verge faster, so we use this initialization scheme in all our
experiments. After 20-epoch training, we obtain the com-
pressed encoders. Their mirrored decoders are trained by
the same rule as the ﬁrst step using the loss ( 1).
Fig.4shows the comparison of the stylized results. Gen-
erally, our model achieves comparable or even more visu-
ally pleasing stylized images with much fewer parameters.
Stylized images produced by original VGG-19 model and
our compressed model are fairly better-looking (more color-
ful and sharper) than those by the FP-slimmed model. Com-
pared with the original VGG-19 model, our compressed
model tends to produce results with fewer messy textures,
while the original model often highlights too many textures
in a stylized image. For example, sky and water usually
look smooth in an image, but actually, there are no abso-
lutely smooth parts in natural images, so there are still nu-
ances in the sky and water area. In Fig. 5, the original
VGG-19 model tends to highlight these nuances to so ob-
vious an extent that the whole image looks messy, while
our model only emphasizes the most semantically salient
parts. This phenomenon can be explained since a model
with fewer parameters has limited capacity, which is less
prone to overﬁtting. It is natural that an over-parameterized
model will spend its extra capacity ﬁtting the noises in data,
e.g., the nuanced textures of the sky and water in this con-
1864