limits the access to the global information in the image.
Meanwhile, such information is particularly important for
segmentation where the labeling of local patches often de-
pends on the global image context. To circumvent this issue,
DeepLab methods [8, 9, 10] introduce feature aggregation
with dilated convolutions and spatial pyramid pooling. This
allows to enlarge the receptive fields of convolutional net-
works and to obtain multi-scale features. Following recent
progresses in NLP [50], several segmentation methods ex-
plore alternative aggregation schemes based on channel or
spatial [22, 23, 61] attention and point-wise [66] attention to
better capture contextual information. Such methods, how-
ever, still rely on convolutional backbones and are, hence,
biased towards local interactions. An extensive use of spe-
cialised layers to remedy this bias [8, 10, 22, 58] suggests
limitations of convolutional architectures for segmentation.
To overcome these limitations, we formulate the prob-
lem of semantic segmentation as a sequence-to-sequence
problem and use a transformer architecture [50] to leverage
contextual information at every stage of the model. By de-
sign, transformers can capture global interactions between
elements of a scene and have no built-in inductive prior,
see Figure 1. However, the modeling of global interac-
tions comes at a quadratic cost which makes such meth-
ods prohibitively expensive when applied to raw image pix-
els [11]. Following the recent work on Vision Transform-
ers (ViT) [19, 49], we split the image into patches and
treat linear patch embeddings as input tokens for the trans-
former encoder. The contextualized sequence of tokens pro-
duced by the encoder is then upsampled by a transformer
decoder to per-pixel class scores. For decoding, we con-
sider either a simple point-wise linear mapping of patch
embeddings to class scores or a transformer-based decod-
ing scheme where learnable class embeddings are processed
jointly with patch tokens to generate class masks. We con-
duct an extensive study of transformers for segmentation
by ablating model regularization, model size, input patch
size and its trade-off between accuracy and performance.
Our Segmenter approach attains excellent results while re-
maining simple, flexible and fast. In particular, when us-
ing large models with small input patch size the best model
reaches a mean IoU of 53.63% on the challenging ADE20K
[68] dataset, surpassing all previous state-of-the-art convo-
lutional approaches by a large margin of 5.3%. Such im-
provement partly stems from the global context captured by
our method at every stage of the model as highlighted in
Figure 1.
In summary, our work provides the following four con-
tributions: (i) We propose a novel approach to semantic seg-
mentation based on the Vision Transformer (ViT) [19] that
does not use convolutions, captures contextual information
by design and outperforms FCN based approaches. (ii) We
present a family of models with varying levels of resolu-
tion which allows to trade-off between precision and run-
time, ranging from state-of-the-art performance to modelswith fast inference and good performances. (iii) We pro-
pose a transformer-based decoder generating class masks
which outperforms our linear baseline and can be extended
to perform more general image segmentation tasks. (iv) We
demonstrate that our approach yields state-of-the-art results
on both ADE20K [68] and Pascal Context [38] datasets and
is competitive on Cityscapes [14].
2. Related work
Semantic segmentation. Methods based on Fully Convo-
lutional Networks (FCN) combined with encoder-decoder
architectures have become the dominant approach to se-
mantic segmentation. Initial approaches [21, 36, 39, 40]
rely on a stack of consecutive convolutions followed by spa-
tial pooling to perform dense predictions. Consecutive ap-
proaches [1, 4, 34, 41, 43] upsample high-level feature maps
and combine them with low-level feature maps during de-
coding to both capture global information and recover sharp
object boundaries. To enlarge the receptive field of convolu-
tions in the first layers, several approaches [8, 33, 59] have
proposed dilated or atrous convolutions. To capture global
information in higher layers, recent work [9, 10, 65] em-
ploys spatial pyramid pooling to capture multi-scale con-
textual information. Combining these enhancements along
with atrous spatial pyramid pooling, Deeplabv3+ [10] pro-
poses a simple and effective encoder-decoder FCN archi-
tecture. Recent work [22, 23, 57, 58, 61, 66] replace coarse
pooling by attention mechanisms on top of the encoder fea-
ture maps to better capture long-range dependencies.
While recent segmentation methods are mostly focused
on improving FCN, the restriction to local operations im-
posed by convolutions may imply inefficient processing of
global image context and suboptimal segmentation results.
Hence, we propose a pure transformer architecture that cap-
tures global context at every layer of the model during the
encoding and decoding stages.
Transformers for vision. Transformers [50] are now
state of the art in many Natural Language Processing (NLP)
tasks. Such models rely on self-attention mechanisms and
capture long-range dependencies among tokens (words) in
a sentence. In addition, transformers are well suited for par-
allelization, facilitating training on large datasets. The suc-
cess of transformers in NLP has inspired several methods
in computer vision combining CNNs with forms of self-
attention to address object detection [7], semantic segmen-
tation [53], panoptic segmentation [51], video processing
[54] and few-shot classification [18].
Recently, the Vision Transformer (ViT) [19] introduced
a convolution-free transformer architecture for image clas-
sification where input images are processed as sequences
of patch tokens. While ViT requires training on very
large datasets, DeiT [49] proposes a token-based distilla-
tion strategy and obtains a competitive vision transformer
trained on the ImageNet-1k [16] dataset using a CNN as a
2
7263