Segmenter: Transformer for Semantic Segmentation
Robin Strudel*
Inria†Ricardo Garcia*
Inria†Ivan Laptev
Inria†Cordelia Schmid
Inria†
Abstract
Image segmentation is often ambiguous at the level of
individual image patches and requires contextual informa-
tion to reach label consensus. In this paper we introduce
Segmenter, a transformer model for semantic segmentation.
In contrast to convolution-based methods, our approach
allows to model global context already at the first layer
and throughout the network. We build on the recent Vision
Transformer (ViT) and extend it to semantic segmentation.
To do so, we rely on the output embeddings corresponding
to image patches and obtain class labels from these embed-
dings with a point-wise linear decoder or a mask trans-
former decoder. We leverage models pre-trained for im-
age classification and show that we can fine-tune them on
moderate sized datasets available for semantic segmenta-
tion. The linear decoder allows to obtain excellent results
already, but the performance can be further improved by a
mask transformer generating class masks. We conduct an
extensive ablation study to show the impact of the different
parameters, in particular the performance is better for large
models and small patch sizes. Segmenter attains excellent
results for semantic segmentation. It outperforms the state
of the art on both ADE20K and Pascal Context datasets and
is competitive on Cityscapes.
1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a challenging computer vi-
sion problem with a wide range of applications includ-
ing autonomous driving, robotics, augmented reality, im-
age editing, medical imaging and many others [27, 28, 45].
The goal of semantic segmentation is to assign each im-
age pixel to a category label corresponding to the under-
lying object and to provide high-level image representa-
tions for target tasks, e.g. detecting the boundaries of peo-
ple and their clothes for virtual try-on applications [29].
*Equal contribution.
†Inria, ´Ecole normale sup ´erieure, CNRS, PSL Research University,
75005 Paris, France.
Code: https://github.com/rstrudel/segmenter
Segmentation map
Sky
SidewalkPersonPatch attention mapsFigure 1: Our approach for semantic segmentation is purely
transformer based. It leverages the global image context at
every layer of the model. Attention maps from the first Seg-
menter layer are displayed for three 8×8patches and high-
light the early grouping of patches into semantically mean-
ingful categories. The original image (top-left) is overlayed
with segmentation masks produced by our method.
Despite much effort and large progress over recent years
[10, 22, 31, 37, 48, 65, 66], image segmentation remains a
challenging problem due to rich intra-class variation, con-
text variation and ambiguities originating from occlusions
and low image resolution.
Recent approaches to semantic segmentation typically
rely on convolutional encoder-decoder architectures where
the encoder generates low-resolution image features and the
decoder upsamples features to segmentation maps with per-
pixel class scores. State-of-the-art methods deploy Fully
Convolutional Networks (FCN) [44] and achieve impres-
sive results on challenging segmentation benchmarks [10,
23, 57, 58, 60, 64, 66]. These methods rely on learnable
stacked convolutions that can capture semantically rich in-
formation and have been highly successful in computer vi-
sion. The local nature of convolutional filters, however,
7262