Mach. Learn. Knowl. Extr. 2019 ,1, 19 2 of 28
events. Knowledge of the underlying causes allows us to develop effective policies to prevent or
produce a particular outcome [2].
The traditional way to discover causal relations is to manipulate the value of a variable by using
interventions or real-life experiments. All other inﬂuencing factors of the target variable can be held
ﬁxed, to test whether a manipulation of a potential cause changes the target variable. However,
such experiments and interventions are often costly, time-consuming, unethical or even impossible
to carry out. With the current advances in digital sensing, the amount of observational data grows,
allowing us to do causal discovery [5], i.e., reveal (hypothetical) causal information by analysing this
data. Causal discovery helps to interpret data, formulate and test hypotheses, prioritize experiments,
and build or improve theories or models. Since humans use causal beliefs and reasoning to generate
explanations [ 6], causal discovery is also an important topic in the rapidly evolving ﬁeld of Explainable
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI) that aims to construct interpretable and transparent algorithms that can
explain how they arrive at their decisions [7].
The notion of time aids the discovery of the directionality of a causal relationship, since a cause
generally happens before the effect. Most algorithms that have been developed to discover causal
relationships from multivariate temporal observational data are statistical measures, which rely on
idealized assumptions that rarely hold in practice, e.g., assumptions that the time series data is linear,
stationary or without noise [ 8,9], that the underlying causal structure has no (hidden) common causes
nor instantaneous effects [ 10,11]. Furthermore, existing methods are usually only designed to discover
causal associations, and they cannot be used for prediction.
We exploit the representational power of deep learning by using Attention-based Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs) for both time series prediction and temporal causal discovery. DNNs are able
to discover complex underlying phenomena by learning and generalizing from examples without
knowledge of generalization rules, and have a high degree of error resistivity which makes them less
sensitive to noise in the data [12].
Our framework, called Temporal Causal Discovery Framework (TCDF), consists of multiple
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), where each network receives all observed time series as input.
One network is trained to predict one time series, based on the past values of all time series in a dataset.
While a CNN performs supervised prediction, it trains its internal parameters using backpropagation.
We suggest using these internal parameters for unsupervised causal discovery and delay discovery.
More speciﬁcally, TCDF applies attention mechanisms that allow us to learn to which time series a CNN
attends to when predicting a time series. After training the attention-based CNNs, TCDF validates
whether a potential cause (found by the attention mechanism) is an actual cause of the predicted time
series by applying a causal validation step. In this validation step, we intervene on a time series to test if
it is causally related with a predicted time series. All validated causal relationships are included in a
temporal causal graph . TCDF also includes a novel method to learn the time delay between cause and
effect from a CNN, by interpreting the network’s internal parameters. In summary:
 We present a new temporal causal discovery method (TCDF) that uses attention-based CNNs to
discover causal relationships in time series data, to discover the time delay between each cause
and effect, and to construct a temporal causal graph of causal relationships with delays.
 We evaluate TCDF and several other temporal causal discovery methods on two benchmarks:
ﬁnancial data describing stock returns, and FMRI data measuring brain blood ﬂow.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a formal problem statement.
Section 3 surveys the existing temporal causal discovery methods, the recent advances in non-temporal
causal discovery with deep learning, time series prediction methods based on CNNs, and describes
various causal validation methods. Section 4 presents our Temporal Causal Discovery Framework.
The evaluation is detailed in Section 5. Section 6 discusses hyperparameter tuning and experiment
limitations. The conclusions, including future work, are in Section 7.