Mach. Learn. Knowl. Extr. 2019 ,1, 19 21 of 28
for TCDF when applied only to datasets with T>1000 are therefore better than the overall average
from all datasets. For FMRI T>1000 , our results are slightly better than the performance of PCMCI,
and TCDF clearly outperforms tsFCI and TiMINo. PCMCI is not affected by time series length and
performs comparably for both FMRI benchmarks. TiMINo performs very poorly when applied to
FINANCE and only slightly better on FMRI , which is mainly due to a large number of False Positives.
TiMINo’s poor results are in line with results from the authors, who already stated that TiMINo is not
suitable for high-dimensional data [ 22]. In contrast, where TiMINo discovers many incorrect causal
relationships, tsFCI seems to be too conservative, missing many causal relationships in all benchmarks.
Our poor results of tsFCI correspond with poor results of tsFCI in experiments done by the authors on
continuous data [ 21]. In terms of computation time, PCMCI and tsFCI are faster than TCDF for both
benchmarks, as shown in Table 5.
Table 5. Run time in seconds, averaged over all datasets in the benchmark. TCDF (without parallelism)
and TiMINo are run on a Ubuntu 16.04.4 LTS computer with an IntelR
XeonR
E5-2683-v4 CPU and
NVIDIA TitanX 12GB GPU. PCMCI and tsFCI are run on a Windows 10 1803 computer with an IntelR
CoreTMi7-5500U CPU.
TCDF (L=0)PCMCI tsFCI TiMINo
FINANCE 318 s 10 s 93 s 499 s
FMRI 74 s 1 s 1 s 14 s
Table 6 shows the evaluation results for discovering the time delay between cause and effect.
Since FMRI does not explicitly include delays and therefore does not have a delay ground truth,
we only evaluate FINANCE . PCMCI discovered all delays correctly, closely followed by tsFCI and TCDF.
Note that TiMINo only outputs causal relationships without delays. This experiment suggests that
our delay discovery algorithm performs well not only without hidden layers (which makes the delay
discovery relatively easy), but still keeps the percentage of correctly discovered delays relatively high
when the number of hidden layers L(and therefore the number of kernels, the receptive ﬁeld and
maximum delay) is increased. Thus, the number of hidden layers seems of almost no inﬂuence for the
accuracy of the delay discovery.
Table 6. Delay discovery overview for all data sets of the FINANCE benchmark (nine datasets). Showing
macro-averaged percentage of delays that are correctly discovered w.r.t. the full ground truth,
and standard deviation. TiMINo does not discover delays.
TCDF (L=0)TCDF (L=1)TCDF (L=2) PCMCI tsFCI TiMINo
FINANCE 97.79%2.56 96.42%3.68 95.49%4.15 100.00%0.00 98.77%3.49 n.a.
5.4.2. Impact of the Causal Validation
Table 7 shows the impact of the causal validation method PIVM by comparing the F1-scores and
F1’-scores of TCDF with and without PIVM. The results for FINANCE show that performance decreases
drastically when PIVM is removed. For FMRI andFMRI T>1000 , the F1-scores are exactly the same
when TCDF is applied with or without PIVM.
PIVM is probably very effective when applied to the FINANCE benchmark because of the many
confounders in FINANCE . The attention mechanism can select one of the effects of a confounder as
potential cause of another confounder’s effect, but the potential cause will not be labeled as true cause
by PIVM. In contrast, there are very few confounders in the datasets of FMRI , which might explain the
same scores of TCDF with and without PIVM. This experiment therefore suggests that the impact of
causal validation depends on the number of confounders (shared causes) in the data, but will usually
not have a negative impact on the causal discovery accuracy.