Mach. Learn. Knowl. Extr. 2019 ,1, 19 23 of 28
the results of tsFCI in our experiment are not in accordance with the theoretical claims, since tsFCI did
not discover any hidden confounder. In three cases, it even discovered incorrect causal relationships.
TiMINo discovered in all cases except one an indirect causal relationship.
This case study suggests that TCDF performs as expected by successfully discovering the presence
of a hidden confounder when the delays to the confounder’s effects are equal and, in some cases,
incorrectly discovering a causal relationship between the confounder’s effects when the delays to the
effects are unequal. Compared to other approaches, PCMCI performs better in terms of not discovering
any incorrect causal relationships between the confounder’s effects, but TCDF is the only method
capable of locating the presence of a hidden confounder.
5.5. Summary
Besides being accurate in predicting time series, TCDF correctly discovers most causal
relationships. TCDF outperforms the compared methods (PCMCI, tsFCI and TiMINo) in terms
of causal discovery accuracy when applied to FINANCE and FMRI T>1000 . Since a Deep Learning
method has many parameters to ﬁt, TCDF performs slightly worse on short time series in FMRI .
In contrast, the accuracy of PCMCI is not affected by time series length. Although computation time is
not so relevant in the domain of knowledge extraction, PCMCI is faster than TCDF. TCDF discovers
roughly 95%-97% of delays correctly, which is only slightly worse than PCMCI and tsFCI. TCDF is the
only method to locate the presence of a hidden confounder but, contrary to PCMCI, discovers in some
cases an incorrect causal relationship between a confounder’s effects.
6. Discussion
Since a causal discovery method based on observational data cannot physically intervene in a
system to check if manipulating the cause changes the effect, causal discovery methods are principally
used to discover and investigate hypotheses . Therefore, a constructed temporal causal graph by
TCDF (and any other causal discovery method) should be interpreted as a hypothetical graph,
learnt from observational time series data, which can subsequently be conﬁrmed by a domain expert
or experimentation. This is especially relevant in the case of spurious correlations , where the values
of two unrelated variables are coincidentally statistically correlated. A causal discovery method
will probably label a spurious correlation as a causal relationship if there are no counterexamples
available. Only based on domain knowledge or experiments, one can conclude that the discovered
causal relationship is incorrect. However, whereas most researchers are aware that real-life experiments
are considered the “gold standard” for causal inference, manipulation of the independent variable
of interest will often be unfeasible, unethical, or simply impossible [ 63]. Thus, causal discovery from
observational data is often the better (or only) option.
As shown in the previous section, our Temporal Causal Discovery Framework can discover causal
relationships from time series data, including a correctly discovered time delay. In the following
sections, we will discuss the limitations of our approach as well as the sensitivity of TCDF to
hyperparameters.
6.1. Hyperparameters
In the experiments, we applied TCDF with different values for L, the number of hidden layers
in the depthwise convolutions. From Table 4, we can conclude that the F1-scores of the FINANCE
benchmark barely differ across different values for L. TCDF L=2performs worst on FMRI because
the architecture is probably too complex for the dataset (there are too many parameters to ﬁt) and the
receptive ﬁeld (and therefore the maximum delay) is unnecessary large. The results for TCDF with
L=2improve substantially when applied to time series having more than 1000 time steps. Thus,
the best number of hidden layers depends on the dataset and mainly on the length of the time series.
The number of hidden layers also inﬂuences the receptive ﬁeld: TCDF with L=2and kernel size
K=4has a receptive ﬁeld of 64 time steps. Since the maximum delay in the FINANCE benchmark is