Mach. Learn. Knowl. Extr. 2019 ,1, 19 18 of 28
The second benchmark, called FMRI , contains realistic, simulated BOLD (Blood-oxygen-level
dependent) datasets for 28 different underlying brain networks [ 58]. BOLD FMRI measures the neural
activity of different regions of interest in the brain based on the change of blood ﬂow. Each region
(i.e., node in the brain network) has its own associated time series. Since not all existing methods can
handle 50 time series, we excluded one dataset with 50 nodes. For each of the remaining 27 brain
networks, we selected one dataset (scanning session) out of multiple available. All time series have a
hidden external input, white noise, and are fed through a non-linear balloon model [59].
Since FMRI contains only six (out of 27) datasets with ‘long’ time series, we create an extra
benchmark that is a subset of FMRI . This subset contains only datasets in which the time series have
at least 1000 time steps, therefore denoted as FMRI T>1000 , and coincidentally are all stationary.
To evaluate the predictive ability of TCDF, we created a training and test set corresponding to the
resp. ﬁrst 80% and last 20% of the datasets, referred to as FMRI TRAIN/TEST and FMRI T>1000
TRAIN/TEST .
5.2. Experimental Setup
In the experiments, we compared four methods: the proposed framework TCDF, the constraint-
based methods PCMCI [8] and tsFCI [21], and the Structural Equation Model TiMINo [22].
TCDF : All AD-DSTCNs use the Mean Squared Error as loss function and the Adam optimization
algorithm which is an extension to stochastic gradient descent [ 60]. This optimizer computes individual
adaptive learning rates for each parameter which allows the gradient descent to ﬁnd the minimum
more accurately. Furthermore, in all experiments, we train our AD-DSTCNs for 5000 training epochs,
with learning rate l=0.01, dilation coefﬁcient c=4and kernel size K=4. We chose Ksuch that the
delays in the ground truth fall within the receptive ﬁeld R. We vary the number of hidden layers in
the depthwise convolution between L=0,L=1and L=2to evaluate how the number of hidden
layers inﬂuences to framework’s accuracy. Note that increasing the number of hidden layers leads to
an increased receptive ﬁeld (according to Equation (2)), and therefore an increasing maximum delay.
PCMCI : We used the authors’ implementation from the Python Tigramite module [ 8]. We set
the maximum delay to three time steps and the minimum delay to 0, equivalent to the minimum and
maximum delay that can be found by TCDF in our AD-DSTCNs with K=4and L=0. We use the
ParCorr independence test for linear partial correlation. (Besides the linear ParCorr independence
test, the authors present the non-linear GPACE test to discover non-linear causal relationships [ 8].
However, since GPACE scales T3, we apply for computational reasons the linear ParCorr test.) We
let PCMCI optimize the signiﬁcance level by the Akaike Information criterion.
tsFCI : We set the maximum delay to three time steps, equivalent to the maximum delay that can
be found by TCDF in our AD-DSTCNs with K=4and L=0. We experimented with cutoff value
for p-values2f0.001, 0.01, 0.1gand chose 0.01 because it gave the best results (and is also the default
setting). Since tsFCI is in theory conservative [ 21], we applied the majority rule to make tsFCI slightly
less conservative. We only take the discovered direct causes into account and disregard other edge
types which denote uncertainty or the presence of a hidden confounder. Only in the experiment to
discover hidden confounders, we look at all edge types.
TiMINo : We set the maximum delay to 3, equivalent to the maximum delay that can be found by
TCDF in our AD-DSTCNs with K=4and L=0. We assumed a linear time series model, including
instantaneous effects and shifted time series. (The authors present two other variants besides the
linear model, of which ‘TiMINo-GP’ was shown to be more suitable for time series with more than 300
time steps [ 22], but only the linear model was fully implemented by the authors.) We experimented
with signiﬁcance level 2f0.05, 0.01, 0.001g. However, TiMINo did not give any result for all of the
signiﬁcance levels. Therefore, we set it to 0 such that TiMINo always obtains a DAG.