Mach. Learn. Knowl. Extr. 2019 ,1, 19 3 of 28
2. Problem Statement
Temporal causal discovery from observational data can be deﬁned as follows. Given a dataset X
containing Nobserved continuous time series of the same length T(i.e., X=fX1,X2, ...,XNg2RNT),
the goal is to discover the causal relationships between all Ntime series in Xand the time delay
between cause and effect, and to model both in a temporal causal graph. In the directed causal graph
G= (V,E), vertex vi2Vrepresents an observed time series Xiand each directed edge ei,j2Efrom
vertex vitovjdenotes a causal relationship where time series Xicauses an effect in Xj. Furthermore,
we denote by p=hvi, ...,vjia path inGfrom vitovj. In a temporal causal graph, every edge ei,jis
annotated with a weight d(ei,j), that denotes the time delay between the occurrence of cause Xiand
the occurrence of effect Xj. An example is shown in Figure 1.
. . .
1 16 3
4
Figure 1. A temporal causal graph learnt from multivariate observational time series data. A graph
node models one time series. A directed edge denotes a causal relationship and is annotated with the
time delay between cause and effect.
Causal discovery methods have major challenges if the underlying causal model is complex:
 The method should distinguish direct from indirect causes. Vertex viis seen as an indirect cause
ofvjifei,j62G and if there is a two-edge path p=hvi,vk,vji2G (Figure 2a). Pairwise methods,
i.e., methods that only ﬁnd causal relationships between twovariables, are often unable to make
this distinction [ 10]. In contrast, multivariate methods take all variables into account to distinguish
between direct and indirect causality [11].
 The method should learn instantaneous causal effects, where the delay between cause and effect
is 0 time steps. Neglecting instantaneous inﬂuences can lead to misleading interpretations [ 13].
In practice, instantaneous effects mostly occur when cause and effect refer to the same time step
that cannot be causally ordered a priori, because of a too coarse time scale.
 The presence of a confounder , a common cause of at least two variables, is a well-known challenge
for causal discovery methods (Figure 2b). Although confounders are quite common in real-world
situations, they complicate causal discovery since the confounder’s effects ( X2and X3in Figure 2b)
are correlated, but are not causally related. Especially when the delays between the confounder
and its effects are not equal, one should be careful to not incorrectly include a causal relationship
between the confounder’s effects (the grey edge in Figure 2b).
 A particular challenge occurs when a confounder is not observed (a hidden (or latent)
confounder ). Although it might not even be known how many hidden confounders exist, it is
important that a causal discovery method can hypothesise the existence of a hidden confounder
to prevent learning an incorrect causal relation between its effects.
1 3X1 X2 X34
(a)X1directly causes X2with a delay of 1
time step, and indirectly causes X3with a
total delay of 1 +3=4 time steps.31 4
X2 X3X1
(b)X1is a confounder of X2and X3
with a delay of 1 resp. 4 time steps.
Figure 2. Temporal causal graphs showing causal relationships and delays between cause and effect.