Mach. Learn. Knowl. Extr. 2019 ,1, 19 6 of 28
emerging ﬁeld of explainable machine learning enables DNN interpretation [ 7]. Feature importance
proposed by an interpretable LSTM already showed to be highly in line with results from the Granger
causality test [ 32]. Multiple deep learning models exist for non- temporal causal discovery: Variational
Autoencoders [ 33] to estimate causal effects, Causal Generative Neural Networks to learn functional
causal models [ 34] and the Structural Agnostic Model (SAM) [ 35] for causal graph reconstruction.
Although called ‘causal ﬁlters’ by the authors, SAM uses an attention mechanism by multiplying each
observed input variable by a trainable score, comparable to the TCDF approach. Contrary to TCDF,
SAM does not perform a causal validation step. Non-temporal methods however cannot be applied to
time series data, since they do not check the temporal precedence assumption (cause precedes effect).
3.3. Time Series Prediction
TCDF uses Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for time series prediction. A CNN is a type
of feed-forward neural network, consisting of a sequence of convolutional layers, which makes them
rather easy to interpret. A convolutional layer of a CNN limits the number of connections to only
some of the input neurons by sliding a kernel (a weight matrix) over the input and at each time step
it computes the dot product between the input and the kernel. The kernel will then learn speciﬁc
repeating patterns in the input series to forecast future values of the target time series.
Usually, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are regarded as the default starting point to solve
sequence learning, since RNNs are theoretically capable of having inﬁnite memory [ 36]. However,
long-term information has to sequentially travel through all cells before getting to the present
processing cell, causing the well-known vanishing gradients problem [ 37]. Other issues with RNNs
are the high memory usage to store partial results, their complex architecture making them hard to
interpret and the impossibility of parallelism which hinders scaling [ 36]. RNNs are therefore slowly
falling out of favor for modern convolutional architectures for sequence data. CNNs are already
successfully applied for sequence to sequence problems, including machine translation [ 38] and image
generation from text [ 39]. However, although sequence to sequence modeling is related to our time
series problem, such methods use the entire input sequence (including “future” states) to predict
each output which does not satisfy the causal constraint that there can be no information ‘leakage’
from future to past. Convolutional architectures for time series are still scarce, but deep convolutional
architectures were recently used for noisy ﬁnancial time series forecasting [ 40] and for multivariate
asynchronous time series prediction [41].
3.4. Attention Mechanism in Neural Networks
An attention mechanism (‘attention’ in short) equips a neural network with the ability to focus on
a subset of its inputs. The concept of ‘attention’ has a long history in classical computer vision, where
an attention mechanism selects relevant parts of the image for object recognition in cluttered scenes [ 42].
Only recently attention has made its way into deep learning. The idea of today’s attention mechanism is
to let the model learn what to attend to based on the input data and what it has learnt so far. Prior work
on attention in deep learning mostly addresses recurrent networks, but Facebook’s FairSeq [ 38] for
neural machine translation and the Attention Based Convolutional Neural Network [ 43] for modeling
sentence pairs have shown that attention is very effective in CNNs. Besides the increased accuracy,
attention allows us to interpret where the network attends to, which allows TCDF to identify which
input variables are possibly causally associated with the predicted variable.
4. TCDF—Temporal Causal Discovery Framework
This section details our Temporal Causal Discovery Framework (TCDF). TCDF is implemented in
Python and PyTorch and available at https://github.com/M-Nauta/TCDF. Figure 3 gives a global
overview of TCDF, showing the four steps to learn a Temporal Causal Graph from data: Time Series
Prediction, Attention Interpretation, Causal Validation and Delay Discovery.