Mach. Learn. Knowl. Extr. 2019 ,1, 19 15 of 28
Xj. More speciﬁcally, TCDF will discover that the delay of this causal relationship will be equal to
the delay from the confounder to Ximinus the delay from the confounder to Xj. Figure 8a shows an
example of this situation. The same reasoning applies when the delay from the confounder to Xiis
greater than the delay to Xj(case 2b).
31 4
X2 X3X1
(a) TCDF will incorrectly discover a causal relationship
from X2toX3when the delay from X1toX2is smaller
than the delay from X1toX3.0
04 4
X2 X3X1
(b) TCDF will discover a 2-cycle between X2and X3
where both delays equal 0, such that there should exist
a hidden confounder between X2and X3.
Figure 8. How TCDF deals, in theory, with hidden confounders (denoted by squares). A black square
indicates that the hidden confounder is discovered by TCDF; a grey square indicates that it is not
discovered. Black edges indicate causal relationships that will be included in the learnt temporal causal
graphGL; grey edges will not be included in GL.
However, TCDF will notdiscover a causal relationship when the hidden confounder has equal
delays to its effects Xiand Xj(case 4b), and can even conclude that there should be a hidden confounder
that causes both Xiand Xj. Because the confounder has equal delays to Xiand Xj, the delays from Xi
toXjand from XjtoXiwill both be 0. The zero delays give away the presence of a hidden confounder,
since there cannot exist a 2-cycle where both time series have an instantaneous effect on each other.
Recall that an instantaneous effect means that there is an effect within 1 measured time step. If both
time series cause each other instantaneously, there will be an inﬁnite causal inﬂuence between the time
series within 1 time step, which is impossible. Therefore, TCDF will conclude that Xiand Xjare not
causally related, and that there exists a hidden confounder between Xiand Xj. Figure 8b shows an
example of this situation.
The advantage of our approach is that TCDF not only concludes that two variables are not causally
related, but can also detect the presence of a hidden confounder.
4.4. Delay Discovery
Besides discovering the existence of a causal relationship, TCDF discovers the number of time
steps between a true cause and its effect. This is done by interpreting the kernel weights Wifor a causal
input time series Xifrom a networkNjpredicting target time series Xj. Since we have a depthwise
separable architecture where input time series are not mixed, the relation between the kernel weights
of one input time series and the target time series can be correctly interpreted.
The kernel that slides over the Ninput channels is a weight matrix with Nrows and Kcolumns
(where Kis the kernel size), and outputs the dot product between the input channel and the weight
matrix. Contrary to regular neural networks, all output values of a channel share the same weights and
therefore detect exactly the same pattern, as indicated by the identical colors in Figure 5. These shared
weights not only reduce the total number of learnable parameters, but also allow delay interpretation.
Since a convolution is a linear operation, we can measure the inﬂuence of a speciﬁc delay between
cause Xiand target Xj, by analyzing the weights of Xiin the kernel. The Kweights of each channel
output show the ‘importance’ of each time delay.
An example is shown in Figure 9. The position of the highest kernel weight equals the discovered
delay d(ei,j). Since we also use the current values in the input data, the smallest delay can be 0 time
steps, which indicates an instantaneous effect. The maximum delay that can be found equals the
receptive ﬁeld. To successfully discover a causal relationship, the receptive ﬁeld should therefore be at
least as large as the (estimated) delay between cause and effect.