Mach. Learn. Knowl. Extr. 2019 ,1, 19 24 of 28
three time steps, it might be more challenging for TCDF to discover the correct patterns. Interestingly,
increasing the number of hidden layers barely inﬂuences the number of correctly discovered delays.
The experiments show that despite the more complex delay discovery and the increased receptive
ﬁeld, our delay discovery algorithm correctly discovers almost all delays.
The underlying causal structure is not known when TCDF is applied to actual data, so the number
of hidden layers is a hyperparameter that is difﬁcult to choose. Since the receptive ﬁeld should be
as least as large as the expected maximum delay in the dataset, our ﬁrst rule of thumb would be
that when a large time delay is expected, more dilated hidden layers can be included, such that the
receptive ﬁeld increases exponentially. Secondly, the length of the time series can give an indication of
the number of hidden layers. Short time series seem to require fewer hidden layers.
In our experiments, TCDF performs reasonably well on all benchmarks with L=0. For future
work, it is interesting to study whether this also holds for datasets with a much larger time delay
between cause and effect, since a larger receptive ﬁeld is required there. We also note that TCDF
with L=0(i.e., no hidden layers in the depthwise convolution) is conceptually equivalent to a 2D
convolution with one channel and a 2D kernel with a height equal to the number of time series. It is
interesting to study whether such a simple 2D convolutional architecture with an attention mechanism
would give signiﬁcantly different results than our AD-DSTCN architecture with L=0.
Besides the varying number of hidden layers, there are a few other hyperparameters than can
be optimized: number of epochs, learning rate, loss function and learning rate. We leave this for
future work.
6.2. Limitations of Experiments
A limitation of our experiments is that TCDF is only applied to two benchmarks (although
containing multiple datasets). Especially our conclusions with respect to the detection of hidden
confounders should be carefully considered, since the case study is only based on two datasets of
one benchmark. The datasets in the benchmarks have some speciﬁc properties: the time series are
stationary and there is only a small time delay between cause and effect. Furthermore, both benchmarks
do not contain feedback loops (except self-causation). TCDF should be evaluated to more datasets
with varying properties to evaluate the performance TCDF in more detail. Generating datasets will
allow us to speciﬁcally control desired properties, such as noise level, (non-)linearity, (non-)stationarity,
feedback loops, length of time series and time delays.
7. Summary and Future Work
In this paper, we introduced the Temporal Causal Discovery Framework (TCDF), a deep learning
approach for causal discovery from time series data. TCDF consists of multiple attention-based
convolutional neural networks which we call Attention-based Dilated Depthwise Separable Temporal
Convolutional Networks (AD-DSTCNs). These networks have an architecture that is tailored towards
predicting a time series based on a multivariate temporal dataset. Our experiments indicate that the
implemented attention mechanism is accurate in discovering time series that are a potential cause of the
predicted time series. TCDF interprets the attention scores and subsequently applies a causal validation
step that randomly permutes the values of a potential cause to effectively distinguish causality from
correlation. Our framework also interprets the internal parameters of each AD-DSTCN to discover the
time delay between cause and effect. TCDF summarizes its ﬁndings by constructing a temporal causal
graph that shows the discovered causal relationships between time series and their corresponding
time delays. This temporal causal graph can be used for data interpretation and knowledge discovery,
and might serve as a useful graphical explanation in the ﬁeld of Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
We evaluated TCDF on two benchmarks with multiple datasets, both having a ground truth
containing the underlying causal graph. TCDF discovered most of the causal relationships in the
benchmark containing simulated ﬁnancial data, and outperformed the existing methods we compared
with. TCDF performed slightly worse on the benchmark containing neuroscientiﬁc FMRI data,