Mach. Learn. Knowl. Extr. 2019 ,1, 19 12 of 28
 Since a temporal causal graph is usually sparse, we require that the gap selected for tjlies in the
ﬁrst half of G(ifN>5) to ensure that the algorithm does not include low attention scores in
the selection. At most 50% of the input time series can be a potential cause of target Xj. By this
requirement, we limit the number of time series labeled as potential causes. Although this number
can be conﬁgured, we experimentally estimated that 50% gives good results.
 We require that the gap for tjcannot be in ﬁrst position (i.e., between the highest and
second-highest attention score). This ensures that the algorithm does not truncate to zero the
scores for time series which were actually a cause of the target time series, but were weaker than
the top scorer. Thus, the potential causes Pjfor target Xjwill include at least two time series.
With tjdetermined, the HardSoftmax function is applied. Time series Xiis added to Pjif
ai,j2aj>tj, so if hi,j2hj>0. We have the following cases between HardSoftmax scores hi,jand hj,i:
1. hi,j=0 and hj,i=0:Xiis not correlated with Xjand vice versa.
2. hi,j=0 and hj,i>0:Xjis added to Pisince Xjis a potential cause of Xibecause of:
(a) (In)direct causal relation from XjtoXi, or
(b) Presence of a (hidden) confounder between Xjand Xiwhere the delay from the confounder
toXjis smaller than the delay to Xi.
3. hi,j>0 and hj,i=0:Xiis added to Pjsince Xiis a potential cause of Xjbecause of:
(a) (In)direct causal relation from XitoXj, or
(b) Presence of a (hidden) confounder between Xiand Xjwhere the delay from the confounder
toXiis smaller than the delay to Xj.
4. hi,j>0 and hj,i>0:Xiis added to Pjand Xjis added to Pibecause of:
(a) Presence of a 2-cycle where Xicauses Xjand Xjcauses Xi, or
(b) Presence of a (hidden) confounder with equal delays to its effects Xiand Xj.
Note that a HardSoftmax score >0could also be the result of a spurious correlation. However,
since it is impossible to judge whether a correlation is spurious purely on the analysis of observational
data, TCDF does not take the possibility of a spurious correlation into account. After causal discovery
from observational data, it is up to a domain expert to judge or test whether a discovered causal
relationship is correct. Section 6 presents a more extensive discussion on this topic.
By comparing all attention scores, we create a set of potential causes for each time series. Then,
we will use our Permutation Importance Validation Method (PIVM) to validate if a potential cause is a
true cause. More speciﬁcally, TCDF will apply PIVM to distinguish between case 2a and 2b, between
case 3a and 3b and between case 4a and 4b.
4.3. Causal Validation
After interpreting the HardSoftmax scores hjto ﬁnd potential causes , TCDF validates if a potential
cause in Pjis an actual cause of time series Xj. Potential causes that are validated will be called
true causes, as described in Section 4.3.1. The existence of hidden confounders can complicate the
correct discovery of true causes. Section 4.3.2 describes how TCDF handles a dataset in which not all
confounders are measured.
A causal relationship is generally said to comply with two aspects [51]:
1. Temporal precedence : the cause precedes its effect,
2. Physical inﬂuence : manipulation of the cause changes its effect.
Since we use a temporal convolutional network architecture, there is no information leakage from
future to past. Therefore, we comply with the temporal precedence assumption. The second aspect