machine learning &
knowledge extraction
Article
Causal Discovery with Attention-Based
Convolutional Neural Networks
Meike Nauta *
 , Doina Bucur
 and Christin Seifert
Faculty of EEMCS, University of Twente, PO Box 217, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands;
d.bucur@utwente.nl (D.B.); c.seifert@utwente.nl (C.S.)
*Correspondence: m.nauta@utwente.nl
Received: 5 November 2018; Accepted: 27 December 2018; Published: 7 January 2019
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: Having insight into the causal associations in a complex system facilitates decision making,
e.g., for medical treatments, urban infrastructure improvements or ﬁnancial investments. The amount
of observational data grows, which enables the discovery of causal relationships between variables
from observation of their behaviour in time. Existing methods for causal discovery from time series
data do not yet exploit the representational power of deep learning. We therefore present the Temporal
Causal Discovery Framework (TCDF), a deep learning framework that learns a causal graph structure
by discovering causal relationships in observational time series data. TCDF uses attention-based
convolutional neural networks combined with a causal validation step. By interpreting the internal
parameters of the convolutional networks, TCDF can also discover the time delay between a cause
and the occurrence of its effect. Our framework learns temporal causal graphs, which can include
confounders and instantaneous effects. Experiments on ﬁnancial and neuroscientiﬁc benchmarks
show state-of-the-art performance of TCDF on discovering causal relationships in continuous time
series data. Furthermore, we show that TCDF can circumstantially discover the presence of hidden
confounders. Our broadly applicable framework can be used to gain novel insights into the causal
dependencies in a complex system, which is important for reliable predictions, knowledge discovery
and data-driven decision making.
Keywords: convolutional neural network; time series; causal discovery; attention; machine learning
1. Introduction
What makes a stock’s price increase? What inﬂuences the water level of a river? Although machine
learning has been successfully applied to predict these variables, most predictive models (such as
decision trees and neural networks) cannot answer those causal questions: they make predictions on
the basis of correlations alone, but correlation does not imply causation [ 1]. Measures of correlation are
symmetrical, since correlation only tells us that there exists a relation between variables. In contrast,
causation is usually asymmetrical and therefore gives the directionality of a relation. Correlation which
is not causation often arises if two variables have a common cause, or if there is a spurious correlation
such that the values of two unrelated variables are coincidentally statistically correlated.
Most machine learning methods, including Neural Networks, aim for a high prediction accuracy
encoding only correlations. A predictive model based on correlations alone cannot guarantee robust
relationships, making it impossible to foresee when a predictive model will stop working [ 2], unless the
correlation function is carefully modelled to ensure stability (e.g., [ 3]). If a model would learn causal
relationships, we can make more robust predictions. In addition to making forecasts, the goal in
many sciences is often to understand the mechanisms by which variables come to take on their values,
and to predict what the values would be if the naturally occurring mechanisms were subject to outside
manipulations [ 4]. Those mechanisms can be understood by discovering causal associations between
Mach. Learn. Knowl. Extr. 2019 ,1, 19; doi:10.3390/make1010019 www.mdpi.com/journal/make