Mach. Learn. Knowl. Extr. 2019 ,1, 19 19 of 28
5.3. Evaluation Measures
In this section we describe how we evaluated the prediction performance of the time series,
the discovered causal relationships, the discovered delays, the inﬂuence of the causal validation step
with PIVM and the ability to detect hidden confounders.
For measuring the prediction performance for times series, we report the mean absolute scaled
error (MASE), since it is invariant to the scale of the time series values and is stable for values close to
zero (as opposed to the mean percentage error) [61].
We evaluate the discovered causal relationships in the learnt graph GLby looking at the presence
and absence of directed edges compared to the ground truth graph GG. Since causality is asymmetric,
all edges are directed. We used the standard evaluation measures precision and recall deﬁned in terms
of True Positives (TP), False Positives (FP) and False Negatives (FN). We apply the usual deﬁnitions
from graph comparison, such that:
TP=jE(GG)\E(GL)j, FP =jE(GL)nE(GG)j, FN =jE(GG)nE(GL)j
where E(G)is the set of all edges in graph G. These TP and FP measures evaluate GLonly based on
thedirect causes inGG. However, also an indirect cause has, although indirectly, a causal inﬂuence
on the effect. Counting an indirect cause as a False Positive would not be objective (see Figure 12a,c
for an example). We therefore construct the full ground-truth graph GFfrom the ground truth graph
GGby adding edges that correspond to indirect causal relationships. This means that the full ground
truth graphGFcontains a directed edge ei,jfor each directed path hvi,vk,vjiin ground truth graph
GG. An example is given in Figure 12. Note that we do not adapt the False Negatives calculation,
since methods should not be punished for excluding indirect causal relationships in their graph.
Comparing the full ground-truth graph with the learnt graph we obtain the following measures:
TP’=jE(GF)\E(GL)j, FP’ =jE(GL)nE(GF)j, F1=2TP
2TP+2FN+FP, F1’=2TP0
2TP0+2FN+FP0.
1 3X1 X2 X3
(a) Ground truthGG1 3X1 X2 X34
(b)Full ground truthGF4X1 X3
(c) LearntGL
Figure 12. Example with three variables showing that GLhas TP = 0, FP = 1 ( e1,3), TP’ = 1 ( e1,3), FP’ = 0
and FN = 2 ( e1,2and e2,3). Therefore, F1 = 0 and F1’= 0.5.
We evaluate the discovered delay d(ei,j2G L)between cause Xiand effect Xjby comparing it to
the full ground truth delay d(ei,j2G F). By comparing it to the fullground truth, we not only evaluate
the delay of direct causal relationships, but can also evaluate if the discovered delay of indirect causal
relationships is correct. The ground truth delay of an indirect causal relationship is the sum of the
delays of its direct relationships. We only evaluate the delay of True Positive edges since the other
edges do not exist in both the full ground truth graph GFand the learnt graph GL. We measure the
percentage of delays on correctly discovered edges w.r.t. the full ground-truth graph.
We summarize the PIVM effectiveness by calculating the relative increase (or decrease) of the
F1-score and F1’-score when PIVM is applied compared to when it is not. The goal of the Permutation
Importance Validation Method (PIVM) is to label a subset of the potential causes as true causes.
We evaluate whether a causal discovery method discovers the existence of a hidden confounder
between two time series by applying it to the FINANCE HIDDEN benchmark and counting how many
hidden confounders were discovered. As discussed in Section 4.3.2, TCDF should be able to discover
the existence of a hidden confounder between two time series Xiand Xjwhen the confounder has
equal delays to its effects Xiand Xj. If the confounder has unequal delays to its effects, we expect that