Which Tasks Should Be Learned Together in Multi-task Learning?
Figure 7. Setting 1: Qualitative results for our baselines (left) and our techniques (right). All solutions are allowed 2.5 SNT.
present in our methods. Both of our approximate methods
produce predictions similar to the optimal task grouping.
Discussion: In all four settings, our optimal grouping out-
performed every baseline. Furthermore, the Higher Order
Approximation always performed very similarly to the opti-
mal solution, and often equally well. However, because we
had ﬁve tasks, more than half of the candidate set was fully
trained for this approximation. The Early Stopping Approx-
imation was usually competitive, but the solutions tended
to be worse than optimal. In principle, one could stop after
training on more of the data, likely resulting in better results.
We could not test ESA with other data amounts because our
adaptive learning rates resulted in networks that were no
longer comparable after being trained on more data.
7. Conclusion
We describe the problem of task compatibility as it pertains
to multi-task learning. We provide a computational frame-
work for determining which tasks should be trained jointly
and which tasks should be trained separately in a given set-
ting. Our solution can take advantage of situations in which
joint training is beneﬁcial to some tasks but not others in
the same group. For many use cases, this framework is
sufﬁcient, but it can be costly at training time. Hence, weoffer two strategies for coping with this issue and evaluate
their performance. Our methods outperform single-task net-
works, a multi-task network with all tasks trained jointly,
as well as other baselines. We also use this opportunity to
analyze how particular tasks interact in a multi-task setting
and compare that with previous results on transfer learning
task interactions. We ﬁnd that unlike transfer task afﬁnities,
multi-task afﬁnities depend highly on a number of factors
such as dataset size and network capacity. This is another
reason why a computational framework like ours is neces-
sary for discovering which tasks should be learned together
in multi-task learning.
Acknowledgements We gratefully acknowledge the sup-
port of TRI (S-2018-29), NSF grant DMS-1546206, a Van-
nevar Bush Faculty Fellowship, and ONR MURI (W911NF-
150100479). Toyota Research Institute (“TRI”) provided
funds to assist the authors with their research but this article
solely reﬂects the opinions and conclusions of its authors
and not TRI or any other Toyota entity.
References
Achille, A., Lam, M., Tewari, R., Ravichandran, A., Maji,
S., Fowlkes, C., Soatto, S., and Perona, P. Task2Vec:
Task Embedding for Meta-Learning. arXiv e-prints , art.