Which Tasks Should Be Learned Together in Multi-task Learning?
ping Approximation (ESA) and present the results of using
this technique in Section 6.
5.3.2. PREDICT HIGHER -ORDER FROM LOWER -ORDER
Do the performances of a network trained with tasks A
andB, another trained with tasks AandC, and a third
trained with tasks BandCtell us anything about the per-
formance of a network trained on tasks A,B, andC? As it
turns out, the answer is yes. Although this ignores complex
task interactions and nonlinearities, a simple average of the
ﬁrst-order networks’ accuracies was a good indicator of the
accuracy of a higher-order network. For example, if you
have networks, a&b with losses 0.1&0.2, b&c with 0.3&0.4,
and a&c with 0.5&0.6, the per-task loss estimate for a net-
work with a&b&c would be a= (0:1 + 0 :6)=2 = 0 :35,
b= (0:2 + 0:3)=2 = 0 :25andc= (0:4 + 0:6)=2 = 0 :5.
Using this strategy, we can predict the performance of all
networks with three or more tasks using the performance
of all of the fully trained two task networks. First, simply
train all networks with two or fewer tasks to convergence.
Then predict the performance of higher-order networks, run
network selection on both the trained and the predicted
networks, then train the higher order networks from scratch.
With our setup, this strategy saves only about 45% of the
training time, compared with 95% for the early stopping
approximation, and it still comes with a prediction quality
penalty. However, this technique requires only a quadratic
number of networks to be trained rather than an exponential
number, and would therefore theoretically win out when the
number of tasks is large.
We call this strategy the Higher Order Approximation
(HOA), and present its results in Section 6.
6. Task Grouping Evaluation
We applied our framework and approximations in all four
settings. We computed solutions for inference time budgets
from 1 SNT to 5 SNT at increments of1=2SNT. The perfor-
mance scores used for network selection were calculated on
the validation set. Each solution chosen was evaluated on
the test set. Note that the total loss numbers reported cannot
be properly compared between settings because of small
differences in label normalization and loss deﬁnitions.
Baselines: We compared our results with conventional
methods, such as ﬁve single-task networks and a single
network with all tasks trained jointly.
For Setting 1, we also compared with two multi-task meth-
ods in the literature. The ﬁrst one is (Sener & Koltun, 2018).
We found that their algorithm under-weighted the Semantic
Segmentation task too aggressively, leading to poor per-
formance on the task and poor performance overall com-pared to a simple sum of task losses. We speculate that
this is because the loss for Semantic Segmentation behaves
differently from the other losses. Next we compared to
GradNorm (Chen et al., 2018b). GradNorm’s results were
also slightly worse than classical MTL with uniform task
weights, though that may be because we evaluated with
uniform task weights, while GranNorm optimized for task
weights that it computed. In any event, these techniques
are orthogonal to ours and can be used in conjunction for
situations in which they lead to better solutions than simply
summing losses.
Each baseline was evaluated with multiple encoder sizes
(more or fewer channels per layer) so that the results could
be compared at many inference time budgets.
Finally, we compared our results to two control baselines
illustrative of the importance of making good choices about
which tasks to train together, ‘Random’ and ‘Pessimal.’
‘Random’ is a solution consisting of valid random task
groupings that solve our ﬁve tasks. The reported values
are the average of one million random trials. ‘Pessimal’ is
a solution in which we choose the networks that lead to
the worst overall performance, though the solution’s perfor-
mance on each task is still the best among the networks that
solve that task.
Setting 1: Figure 3 shows the task groups that were chosen
for each technique, and Figure 2 shows the performance
of these groups along with those of our baselines. We can
see that each of our methods outperforms the traditional
baselines for every computational budget.
1 2 3 4 50.440.460.480.50.520.540.56Sener et al.
GradNorm
Worst Network Choice
Single T raditional
Multi-task Network
Random gropings
Five Independent Networks
ESA (ours) 5.3.1
HOA (ours) 5.3.2
Optimal Network
Choice (ours)Performance vs Compute
Inference T ime CostTotal Loss (lower is better)
Figure 2. Performance/inference time trade-off for various
methods in Setting 1. We do not report error bars because the test
set is large enough that standard errors are too small to be shown.
When the computational budget is only 1 SNT, all of our
methods must select the same model—a traditional multi-
task network with a 1 SNT encoder and ﬁve decoders. This
strategy outperforms GradNorm (Sener & Koltun, 2018),
as well as independent networks. However, solutions that
utilize multiple networks outperform this traditional strategy
for every budget >1.5—better performance can always be
achieved by grouping tasks according to their compatibility.