Which Tasks Should Be Learned Together in Multi-task Learning?
Trevor Standley1Amir Zamir2Dawn Chen3Leonidas Guibas1Jitendra Malik4Silvio Savarese1
http://taskgrouping.stanford.edu/
Abstract
Many computer vision applications require solv-
ing multiple tasks in real-time. A neural net-
work can be trained to solve multiple tasks si-
multaneously using multi-task learning . This
can save computation at inference time as only
a single network needs to be evaluated. Unfor-
tunately, this often leads to inferior overall per-
formance as task objectives can compete, which
consequently poses the question: which tasks
should and should not be learned together in
one network when employing multi-task learn-
ing? We study task cooperation and competition
in several different learning settings and propose a
framework for assigning tasks to a few neural net-
works such that cooperating tasks are computed
by the same neural network, while competing
tasks are computed by different networks. Our
framework offers a time-accuracy trade-off and
can produce better accuracy using less inference
time than not only a single large multi-task neural
network but also many single-task networks.
1. Introduction
Many applications, especially robotics and autonomous ve-
hicles, are chieﬂy interested in using multi-task learning to
reduce the inference time required to estimate many char-
acteristics of visual input. For example, an autonomous
vehicle may need to detect the location of pedestrians, deter-
mine a per-pixel depth, and predict objects’ trajectories, all
within tens of milliseconds. In multi-task learning, multiple
tasks are solved at the same time, typically with a single neu-
ral network. In addition to reduced inference time, solving a
set of tasks jointly rather than independently can, in theory,
have other beneﬁts such as improved prediction accuracy,
increased data efﬁciency, and reduced training time.
1Stanford University2Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
(EPFL)3Google Inc.4The University of California, Berkeley.
Correspondence to: Trevor Standley <tstand@cs.stanford.edu >.
Proceedings of the 37thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the au-
thor(s).
Enco derShared
RepresentationDecoder DecoderSemantic
SegmentationDepth
Estimation
Enco derShared
RepresentationDecoder DecoderEdge
DetectionKeypoint
Detection
Half 
Sized
EncoderDecoderSurface
Normal
Prediction
A B C
Input ImageDiscarded
DecoderDiscarded
Surface Normal
Prediction
Discarded
DecoderDiscarded
Surface Normal
PredictionFigure 1. Given ﬁve example tasks to solve, there are many
ways that they can be split into task groups for multi-task
learning. How do we ﬁnd the best one? We propose a com-
putational framework that, for instance, suggests the following
grouping to achieve the lowest total loss, using a computational
budget of 2.5 units: train network A to solve Semantic Segmenta-
tion, Depth Estimation, and Surface Normal Prediction; train net-
work B to solve Keypoint Detection, Edge Detection, and Surface
Normal Prediction; train network C with a less computationally
expensive encoder to solve Surface Normal Prediction alone; in-
cluding Surface Normals as an output in the ﬁrst two networks
were found advantageous for improving the other outputs, while
the best Normals were predicted by the third network. This task
grouping outperforms all other feasible ones, including learning
all ﬁve tasks in one large network or using ﬁve dedicated smaller
networks .
Unfortunately, the quality of predictions are often observed
to suffer when a network is tasked with making multiple
predictions due to a phenomenon called negative transfer .
In fact, multi-task performance can suffer so much that
smaller independent networks are often superior. This may
be because the tasks must be learned at different rates. Or
because one task may dominate the learning leading to poor
performance on other tasks. Furthermore, task gradients
may interfere and multiple summed losses may make the
optimization landscape more difﬁcult.
On the other hand, when task objectives do not interfere
much with each other, performance on both tasks can be
maintained or even improved when jointly trained. Intu-
itively, this loss or gain of quality seems to depend on the
relationship between the jointly trained tasks . We empiri-
cally study these relationships in depth.
Prior work has studied the relationship between tasks for
transfer learning (Zamir et al., 2018). However, we ﬁnd that
transfer relationships are not highly predictive of multi-task
relationships. In addition to studying multi-task relation-