Which Tasks Should Be Learned Together in Multi-task Learning?
ships, we attempt to determine how to produce good pre-
diction accuracy under a limited inference time budget by
assigning competing tasks to separate networks and cooper-
ating tasks to the same network.
More concretely, this leads to the following problem: Given
a set of tasks,T, and a computational budget b(e.g., maxi-
mum allowable inference time), what is the optimal way to
assign tasks to networks with combined cost bsuch that
a combined measure of task performances is maximized?
To this end, we develop a computational framework for
choosing the best tasks to group together in order to have a
small number of separate neural networks that completely
cover the task set and that maximize task performance under
a given computational budget. We make the intriguing
observation that the inclusion of an additional task in a
network can potentially improve the accuracy of the other
tasks, even though the performance of the added task might
be poor. This can be viewed as guiding the loss of one
task by adding an additional loss, for instance similar to
curriculum learning (Bengio et al., 2009). Achieving this,
of course, depends on picking the proper auxiliary task to be
added – our system can take advantage of this phenomenon,
as schematically shown in Figure 1.
This paper has two main contributions. First, in Section 4,
we provide an empirical study of a number of factors that in-
ﬂuence multi-task learning including network size, dataset
size, and how tasks inﬂuence one another when learned
together. Then, in Section 5, we outline a framework for
assigning tasks to networks in order to achieve the best total
prediction accuracy with a limited inference-time budget.
We analyze the results and show that selecting the best as-
signment of tasks to groups is critical for good performance.
2. Prior Work
Multi-Task Learning: See (Zhang & Yang, 2017) for a
good overview of multi-task learning. The authors of (Ruder,
2017) identify two clusters of contemporary techniques hard
parameter sharing and soft parameter sharing.
In hard parameter sharing, most or all of the parameters in
the network are shared among all tasks. A known contempo-
rary example of hard parameter sharing in computer vision
is UberNet (Kokkinos, 2017) which tackles 7 computer vi-
sion problems using hard parameter sharing. The author
focuses on reducing the computational cost of training for
hard parameter sharing, but experiences a rapid degrada-
tion in performance as more tasks are added to the network.
Hard parameter sharing is also used in many other works
such as (Thrun, 1996; Caruana, 1997; Nekrasov et al., 2018;
Dvornik et al., 2017; Bilen & Vedaldi, 2016; Pentina &
Lampert, 2017; Doersch & Zisserman, 2017; Zamir et al.,
2016; Long et al., 2017; d. Miranda et al., 2012; Zhou et al.,2018; Rudd et al., 2016; Leang et al., 2020; Chennupati
et al., 2019; Suteu & Guo, 2019).
Other works, such as (Sener & Koltun, 2018) and (Chen
et al., 2018b), aim to dynamically re-weight each task’s
loss during training. The former work ﬁnds weights that
provably lead to a Pareto-optimal solution, while the latter
attempts to ﬁnd weights that balance the inﬂuence of each
task on network weights. (Kendall et al., 2018) uses uncer-
tainty to weight tasks. (Gong et al., 2019) and (Leang et al.,
2020) compare loss weighting strategies. They both ﬁnd
no clear winner and similar performance among strategies,
including a uniform weighting strategy. Similarly to us, they
ﬁnd that multi-task learning is often inferior to single task
learning with multiple networks.
In soft or partial parameter sharing, either there is a sepa-
rate set of parameters per task, or a signiﬁcant fraction of
the parameters are unshared. The models are tied together
either by information sharing or by requiring parameters
to be similar. Examples include (Dai et al., 2016; Duong
et al., 2015; Misra et al., 2016; Tessler et al., 2017; Yang &
Hospedales, 2017; Lu et al., 2017).
A canonical example of soft parameter sharing can be seen
in (Duong et al., 2015). The authors are interested in de-
signing a deep dependency parser for languages such as
Irish that do not have much treebank data available. They
leverage the abundant data from other languages and tie the
weights of two networks together by adding an L2 distance
penalty between corresponding weights and show substan-
tial improvement for the target language.
Another example of soft parameter sharing is Cross-stitch
Networks (Misra et al., 2016). Starting with separate net-
works for two tasks, the authors add ‘cross-stitch units’ be-
tween them, which allow each network to peek at the other
network’s hidden layers. This approach reduces but does
not eliminate task interference, and the overall performance
is less sensitive to the relative loss weights.
(Liu et al., 2019) adds a per-task attention layer after each
layer, and (Maninis et al., 2019) adds task speciﬁc residual
paths and adversarial training to match gradients. Both run
the network separately for each task.
Finally, (Bingel & Søgaard, 2017) studies task interaction
for NLP, and (Zamir et al., 2020) makes use of task relation-
ships to improve the predictions for related tasks.
Unlike our method, none of the aforementioned works at-
tempt to discover good groups of tasks to train together.
Also, soft parameter sharing does not reduce inference time,
a major goal of ours.
Hybrid approaches such as PathNet (Fernando et al., 2017),
and AdaShare (Sun et al., 2019) attempt to learn what to
share and what not to. These works do not attempt to dis-