LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021, Thompson et al.
in previous section have roughly equivalent statistical fits — but
quite different extrapolations — we report both in table 3.
We do not anticipate that the computational requirements
implied by the targets in Figure 3 will be hit. The hardware,
environmental, and monetary costs would be prohibitive and enor-
mous effort is going into finding ways to improving scaling perfor-
mance to avoid these outcomes (as we discuss in the next section).
Nevertheless, these projections do provide a scale for the efficiency
improvements that would be needed to hit these performance tar-
gets. For example, even in the more-optimistic model, an additional
650×more computing would be needed to get to an error rate of
5%for ImageNet. Hitting this in an economical way will require
more efficient hardware, more efficient algorithms, or other im-
provements such that the net impact is at least this large. Figure 4
(a) shows the large effects that improving the polynomial scaling
performance would have on projections and how well these agree
with current data.
The rapid escalation in computing needs in Table 3 also makes a
stronger statement: without substantial efficiency improvements,
it will not be possible for deep learning to hit these benchmarks.
The environmental impacts are also troubling. To put these into
perspective, they imply that training an ImageNet model to an
accuracy of 5% would produce almost as much carbon as the city
of Boulder (CO) in a month, while an accuracy of 3% would require
as much carbon as New York City emits in a month.
To avoid these outcomes, fundamental rearchitecting is needed
to lower the computational intensity so that the scaling of these
problems becomes less onerous - which we discuss this in detail
in section 5. Efforts will also be needed to minimize these carbon
emissions, as we describe in section 6, but first we consider how
our findings differ from other scaling studies that have been done
on deep learning.
4 COMPARISON TO OTHER SCALING
STUDIES
The key question for the future of deep learning is how performance
scales up, that is, how much performance for the field improves
as computing power increases . This article addresses this question
differently from the growing body of work on deep learning scaling.
In studying the performance of the whole field, rather than just a
class of models, we are tracking not just mathematical scaling of
models but also the pace of innovation as researchers find better
ways to harness computing power, which Rich Sutton has argued
is “the only thing that matters in the long run.” [ 111]. By measur-
ing the average progress of the field (or in Table 2 specification 4,
just the state-of-the-art) we capture cross-researcher, cross-model
differences that other scaling papers miss. Not surprisingly, this
results in different estimates for scaling performance.
Table 4 summarizes how our analysis compares to other papers
in this field. Like most of the papers in this field, we focus on the
training costs needed. Of these, other papers generally fall into
two groups: within-model experiments and across-model histori-
cal analyses. Within-model experiments have a specific reference
point, the benchmark being analyzed. As a result, they provide an
excellent view of how deep learning performance scales as more
computation is used. But this analysis has a limited scope — onlythe model used by the researchers — and thus these analyses cannot
make any claims about innovation happening across the field. In
contrast, most across-model historical analyses can capture inno-
vation, but lack the specificity of benchmark comparisons and thus
cannot articulate the performance benefits of additional computa-
tion. Our analyses sits between these, capturing both the specificity
of individual benchmarks (and thus the performance vs compute
trade-off), but also the breadth of looking across models that allows
us to capture innovation in the field. More specifically, our approach
provides the following benefits:
First, our analysis has more specificity in its comparison set
because we examine performance within particular deep learning
benchmarks rather than across domains. This contrasts, for exam-
ple, with [ 4,73,104] that aggregate analysis across different deep
learning benchmarks and domains, and therefore do not distinguish
between increases in computational burden within particular tasks
(e.g. image classification on ImageNet) and the application of deep
learning to more computationally-intensive sub-fields (e.g. play-
ing Go). In contrast with those papers, we are able to measure the
growth in computational burden that has been needed to get better
performance on particular benchmarks.
Second, our analysis tracks the evolution of performance in each
field differently than within model studies where authors examine
trade-offs by implementing many different model configurations
[14,19,46,64,112,130]. The weakness of these experimental studies
is that the ‘space’ of potential models they explore is limited to what
the authors implement themselves — for example [ 14] only consid-
ers particular network architectures and [ 64] only studies language
models that use the Adam optimizer. Therefore these experimental
approaches necessarily miss innovations that those authors did
not consider or that take deep learning in new directions. These
exclusions hinder the ability of those scaling studies to capture
progress over time, whereas our across models approach is able
to capture the innovations that are missed by these experimental
studies.
Third, as we discuss in more detail below, our analysis is more
reliable for estimating future progress, i.e., how things scale up , be-
cause analyses that estimate scaling by looking at how performance
deteriorates with less computing power, i.e., by scaling down , can
yield artificially rosy estimates.
In general, one would expect that our analysis would show faster
performance gains from increased computing power than other
studies because while both capture the improvements from scaling
within models, our also accounts for innovation over time that
could further improve on this performance. In practice, however,
this is not what we see. While some studies do show slower model
scaling than we show for the field, others show faster scaling. We
hypothesize that this inconsistency arises because of differences
in measurement approaches, depending on whether scaling is de-
termined by how performance scales with additional computation
versus how it scales with less. These approaches sound like they
might be symmetric, but they are not.
Put simply, the ‘scaling up’ approach measures improvements to
the state of the art, whereas the ‘scaling down’ approach measures
performance deterioration. To see this, we consider each in turn.
The scaling up approach measures how performance changes as
computing power increases . As shown in Figure 4 (a), scaling up