LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021, Thompson et al.
to believe that deep learning is intrinsically highly reliant on com-
puting power. This arises from the role of overparameterization
and how this scales as additional training data are used to improve
performance.
It has been proven that there are significant benefits to having a
neural network containing more model parameters than data points
available for training, that is, by overparameterizing it [108]. Clas-
sically this would lead to overfitting, but stochastic gradient-based
optimization methods provide a regularizing effect due to early
stopping [ 9,92]2, moving the neural networks into an interpola-
tion regime, where the training data is fit almost exactly while
still maintaining reasonable predictions on intermediate points
[10,11]. An example of large-scale overparameterization is the cur-
rent state-of-the-art image classification system, CoCa, which has
2.1B parameters for ImageNet’s 1.2M data points [128].
The challenge of overparameterization is that the number of
deep learning parameters must grow as the number of data points
grows. Since the cost of training a deep learning model scales with
theproduct of the number of parameters with the number of data
points, this implies that computational requirements grow as at least
thesquare of the number of data points in the overparameterized
setting. This quadratic scaling, however, is an underestimate of how
fast deep learning networks must grow to improve performance ,
because a linear improvement in performance generally requires a
faster-than-linear increase in the amount of training data.
For instance, statistical learning theory tells us that, in general,
root mean squared prediction error can at most drop as 1/√n(where
nis the number of data points) [ 72]. These rates indicate that at
least a quadratic increase in data points would be needed to im-
prove performance. So, combining the computational overhead
from overparameterization and the data requirements for statistical
learning yields a back-of-the envelope estimate that the computa-
tion required to train an overparameterized model should grow at
least as a fourth-order polynomial with respect to performance,3
i.e.Computation =Ω(Per f ormance4). This is, of course, just a
lower bound. Due to the complexity of deep learning, performance
could be considerably worse, perhaps even requiring exponential
increases in computing power as has been seen in other tasks like
weather prediction [113].
While the bound above was derived for root mean squared error,
the result is more general, applying to the large class of perfor-
mance metrics that converge as 1/√n. For example, this includes
any smooth loss function (or error metric) that is computed by av-
eraging over data points, as [ 42] showed.4In particular, this result
applies to most popular neural network training losses, including
the cross entropy loss.
The relationship between model parameters, data, and computa-
tional requirements in deep learning can be illustrated by analogy
in the setting of linear regression, where the statistical learning
theory is better developed (and, which is equivalent to a 1-layer
neural network with linear activations). Under the usual conditions,
2This is often called implicit regularization, since there is no explicit regularization
term in the model.
3Here, performance is 1/(RMSE).
4See [42] for precise assumptions.the root mean squared prediction error from the ordinary least-
squares (OLS) estimator scales as Oq
d
n
, where dis the number
of model parameters and nthe number of observations. Under
these conditions, and assuming stochastic gradient descent is used
for estimation, learning a model with 1,000×as many parameters
would take 1,000,000×longer (due to the necessary increase in n
to preserve the same RMSE). Regularization (either explicit regu-
larization or the implicit regularization created by state of the art
training of neural networks) can help. For instance, the lasso estima-
tor [117], which performs an explicit regularization, improves root
mean squared error scaling to Oq
slogd
n
where sis the number
of nonzero coefficients in the true model [ 82]. We make an analogy
between the role of regularized lasso estimation in linear regression
to the role of deep learning in nonlinear problems, since neural
networks have been shown to be implicitly regularized [9, 92].
Even with regularization, however, theory tells us that the com-
puting power needed for improved performance still grows incredi-
bly rapidly. For example, the computational power needed to run a
highly flexible (flexibility is sometimes also called “effective model
complexity” [ 84]) lasso model with d=1,000sparameters, is about
1,000×that for running a lasso model with just the true number
of parameters, d=s. Figure 1 (a) generalizes this, showing the
increase in computation needed as the effective model complexity
(d/s) increases [84].
Figure 1: a) Computational burden of running regularized
models (lasso) as the effective model complexity [84], d/s, is
increased (where dis the number of parameters in the esti-
mated model and sis the number in the true model. b) Im-
plications of flexibility for machine learning model perfor-
mance.