LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021, Thompson et al.
learning, and natural language processing tasks, building a high-
level symbolic representation of the system in order to be able to
understand and explore it more effectively with less data.
A recent study which compared neural to non-neural models
of text classification found, unsurprisingly, that non-neural ap-
proaches outperformed when data was limited, but that neural ap-
proaches won out when data was copious (echoing our discussion
in the theory section). For those researchers, moving to non-neural
approaches produced a more than 23×speedup with a 5% drop in
performance [22].
Finally, exploring combinations of the above approaches to achieve
even larger compounded gains may be fruitful in reducing com-
putation [ 24], or reducing environmental damage [ 87]. Based on
the reported gains of the individual approaches so far, however, we
don’t believe compounding them would yet be sufficient to dra-
matically bring down the very severe scaling we have seen in this
work.
6 LESSENING THE ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACT
As first highlighted by Strubell et al in 2019, the environmental
impact of deep learning models is an important concern. For exam-
ple, they noted that training a single language model could emit as
much carbon dioxide equivalent as the lifetime emissions from five
cars [ 110]. Our analysis heightens this concern, because environ-
mental damage grows with computing power use, and our analysis
predicts enormous increases in computing power are needed for
future performance improvements (See Table 3). To put the scale
of this challenge into perspective, our estimations suggest that if
current technology was used to train ImageNet performance to 3%
then the carbon emissions produced would be 1010pounds of CO2
- more than the monthly emissions of New York City in 2011 [ 114].
One encouraging aspect of our analysis for the environment is
that financial costs rise roughly proportionally to environmental
costs. This means that there are strong financial incentives to reduce
carbon emissions. Even so, faced with such sizable environmental
damages, it is important to ask which approaches could mitigate
these damages. To understand this, we disaggregate the carbon
emissions into three pieces: the compute done (C), the energy (E)
required per unit of computation, and the carbon emissions per
joule of energy used. This relationship is summarized in equation
3:
Carbon =#Compute·Enerдy
Compute·Carbon
Enerдy. (3)
In the analysis that follows, we consider each of these terms
separately and ask what strategies are being used (or could be) to
mitigate the environmental damage16through this pathway.
6.1 REDUCING THE AMOUNT OF
COMPUTATION
In many ways, reducing the amount of computation needed to train
or use deep learning models is the best solution to this problem. In
16In the analysis that follows, we focus on the carbon pollution from computation. But
it is important to note that there are also other environmental costs, e.g. water usage,
electronic waste, rare earth usage, that could also be considered.the same way that "Negawatts" [ 75] are beneficial to the energy
sector because they represent joules not used, these "NegaFlops"
would be the computations never needed and thus which don’t
produce any carbon emissions.
In section 5 we discussed these approaches in detail. But the
broad approach is to recognize that some of the model details and
data representations may be more complex than are needed to solve
the problem. Efforts to simplify these take many forms, including
pruning weights, quantizing the network, or using low-rank com-
pression techniques. Early stopping and model distillation can also
help by reducing training iterations and computations [17, 53].
Efforts to decrease the amount of computation have shown con-
siderable promise, doubling in efficiency every year or so [ 50].
While an impressive achievement, it is important to recall that this
algorithmic improvement is already accounted for in our analy-
sis and thus it does not mitigate the escalation of environmental
damage we discussed if scale-up continues at the same pace.
6.2 REDUCING THE AMOUNT OF ENERGY
PER COMPUTATION
Historically, the most promising way of reducing the energy per
computation was the miniaturization of processor components that
underpinned Moore’s Law. According to ”Dennard scaling,” for
about thirty-two years, the number of computations per joule dou-
bled every 18 months [ 123]. More recently, hardware designers
have instead turned to specialization, building chips suited to par-
ticular calculations (at the cost of not being able to do others well)
[116]. Google estimates that from one Tensor Processing Unit (TPU)
generation to another, they obtained a 2.1x increase in performance
and improved performance/Watt by 2.7x [61].
As discussed above, most algorithmic improvements have tackled
environmental concerns indirectly, optimizing for fewer calcula-
tions rather than energy usage per se. But recently, researchers
have also shown interest in explicitly designing algorithms to mini-
mize energy usage [ 89,95]. Other work in this area has looked at
how to efficiently update models and retrain them without unneces-
sary energy overhead, and how to do better model versioning and
retirement practices to further reduce energy consumption [ 6,109].
Another method of reducing the environmental impact of each
computation is to site those computations in efficient data centers.
Such data centers can be efficient for a variety of reasons: they may
be situated in areas with natural cooling, or just better designed
to make the needed cooling more efficient. Server management
can also make data centers more efficient, for example via tech-
niques such as server consolidation, dynamic voltage scaling, and
intelligent workload distribution [8, 80].
6.3 REDUCING THE AMOUNT OF CARBON
PER ENERGY
An additional determinant of the carbon produced by deep learning
models is the energy source used to power data centers. For ex-
ample, in its 2021 environmental report, Google claimed that they
purchased enough renewable energy to cover 100% of the electric-
ity needed by their data centers and offices [ 43]. This means that
hosting in some areas can yield greatly less carbon [ 87] than others
[32].