LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021, Thompson et al.
the≈35×total improvement from moving to GPUs, the mea-
ger improvements from the last vestiges of Moore’s Law [ 116],
or the improvements in neural network training efficiency [ 49].
Instead, much of the increase came from a much-less-economically-
attractive source: running models for more time on more machines.
For example, in 2012 AlexNet trained using 2 GPUs for 5-6 days[ 66],
in2017 ResNeXt-101 [ 126] was trained with 8 GPUs for over 10
days, and in 2020 Meta Pseudo Labels (EfficientNet-L2) was trained
with 2048 TPU cores for 11 days[ 91]. Another extreme example
is the machine translation system, “Evolved Transformer”, which
used more than 2million GPU hours and cost millions of dollars
to run[ 107,125].7Scaling deep learning computation by scaling up
hardware hours or number of chips is problematic in the longer-
term because it implies that costs scale at roughly the same rate as
increases in computing power [ 4], which (as we show) will quickly
make it unsustainable.
3.2 Present
To examine deep learning’s dependence on computation, we con-
ducted an extensive review of allthe research papers we could find
that covered the domains of image classification (ImageNet , CIFAR-
10, CIFAR-100), object detection (MS COCO), question answering
(SQuAD 1.1), named-entity recognition (COLLN 2003), machine
translation (WMT 2014), speech recognition (ASR SWB Hub500),
face detection (WIDER Face Hard), image generation (CIFAR-10),
and pose estimation (MPII Human Pose)8. We limit our analysis to
benchmarks with exact right and wrong answers, so that error rates
can be precise. For this reason, our analysis excludes generative
models in language and audio. Using established benchmarks to
measure progress in these areas is important because it ensures
a common baseline for comparison (which is a significant prob-
lem in parts of the deep learning literature[ 23]). We source these
deep learning papers from the arXiv repository as well as other
benchmark sources.
In total, we gathered 1,527deep learning papers, for which we
did a detailed manual review for their performance and computa-
tion burden data. Unfortunately, as is well known in deep learning,
few papers report the details of the amount of computation they
used [ 31,35], reflecting the field’s historical focus on accuracy at
the expense of other measures of progress [ 79]. Most papers do not
report anydetails of the computational requirements for their mod-
els, and in many others only limited computational information is
provided. Table 1 summarizes our data. Because there is insufficient
computational data for other benchmarks, we limit our analysis to
ImageNet, MC COCO, SQuAD 1.1, COLLN 2003, and WMT 2014
(EN-FR) and WMT 2014 (EN-DE).
7Some have argued that neural architecture search costs should not be included in
training costs because they help reduce inference costs [ 28]. While we agree with the
latter point, it doesn’t change that this search is part of the initial training cost and
thus we include it in our calculations.
8ImageNet, CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100 are datasets of labeled images that have been
widely used to train and evaluate image classification models. MS COCO is a large-
scale dataset for object detection, segmentation, and captioning tasks. SQuAD 1.1 is
a dataset designed for question-answering tasks. CoNLL-2003 is a dataset designed
for named entity recognition tasks. WMT 2014 consists of parallel texts in different
languages and is commonly used for training and evaluating machine translation
models. ASR SWB Hub500 is a dataset used for training and evaluating automatic
speech recognition models. WIDER Face Hard is a dataset used for face detection and
recognition tasks. MPII Human Pose is a dataset used for human pose estimation tasks.Reflecting the computational information available in these pa-
pers, we do separate analyses for two measures of the computational
burden: (1) Network Operations[ 4,104], the number of floating
point operations computed in the network10, and (2) Hardware
burden, the computational capacity of the hardware used to train
the model.
Õ
i∈{pre−traininд,
traininд,
f ine−tuninд}Epochs i·FlopsPerNetworkPass i
·NetworkPassesPerEpoch i(1)
Õ
i∈{pre−traininд,
traininд,
f ine−tuninд}Processors i·ComputationRate i·Time i(2)
We illustrate our analysis first in the area with the most data and
longest history: image classification. The relevant performance met-
ric here is the error rate for classification. As discussed in the previ-
ous section, we should expect computation to scale at least as a high
order (e.g. 4th order) polynomial versus performance, which we
estimate via the equation: log(1/error)=α+β·log(computation).
Figure 2 (b) shows the fall in the image classification error rate
for the ImageNet dataset and its correlation to the computation
used in these models. Each data point reflects a particular deep
learning model from the literature. Because this is plotted on a log-
log scale, a straight line indicates a polynomial growth in computing
per unit of performance – that is, a power law. In particular, a
polynomial relationship between computation and performance
of the form Computation =Per f ormanceαyields a slope of−1
αin
our plots. Thus, our estimated slope coefficient of −0.084(p-value
<0.01) indicates that computation used for ImageNet scales as
O(Per f ormance12.0). Concretely, this means that every halving of
the remaining error on this problem requires ≈212.0>4,000×as
much computation.
Taking into account the standard error on this estimate yields a
95% confidence interval for scaling between O(Per f ormance10.4)
andO(Per f ormance13.9), i.e. between≈1,350×and≈15,290×as
much computation to halve the error. Not only is computational
power a highly statistically significant predictor of performance,
but it also has substantial explanatory power, explaining 72% of the
variance in ImageNet performance. Table 2a, specification 1, reports
9Top 1 score refers to the accuracy of a classification model, indicating the percentage
of correct predictions where the model’s top-ranked prediction matches the true label.
BOX AP measures the precision and recall of a model by evaluating how well it
localizes and classifies objects within bounding boxes. Percentage correct represents
the accuracy of a model or classifier, indicating the percentage of correct predictions
out of the total number of predictions made. AP is a metric used to evaluate the
performance of models in information retrieval or object detection tasks. PCKh-0.5
stands for Percentage of Correct Keypoints and is often used to evaluate human
pose estimation models. The F1 score is a measure of a model’s accuracy, combining
precision and recall. BLEU is a metric commonly used to evaluate the quality of
machine translation. Percentage error: This general term refers to the percentage
difference between an observed or predicted value and the true value.
10Note that, one multiply−add operation is composed of two arithmetic operations
(the product of two numbers and the addition of this product to an accumulator).
Therefore, for cases where authors report the number of forward-pass operations in
multiply−add operations, we use a conversion factor equals to 2to convert this
value to f lops [4]