The Computational Limits of Deep Learning
Neil Thompson
MIT Computer Science and A.I. Lab, MIT Initiative on the
Digital Economy
Cambridge, MA, USA
neil_t@mit.eduKristjan Greenewald
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
Cambridge, MA, USA
Keeheon Lee
Underwood International College, Yonsei University
Seoul, KoreaGabriel F. Manso
MIT Computer Science and A.I. Lab
Cambridge, MA, USA
ABSTRACT
Deep learning’s recent history has been one of achievement: from
triumphing over humans in the game of Go to world-leading per-
formance in image classification, voice recognition, translation, and
other tasks. But this progress has come with a voracious appetite
for computing power. This article catalogs the extent of this depen-
dency, showing that progress across a wide variety of applications
is strongly reliant on increases in computing power. Extrapolat-
ing forward this reliance reveals that progress along current lines
is rapidly becoming economically, technically, and environmen-
tally unsustainable. Thus, continued progress in these applications
will require dramatically more computationally-efficient methods,
which will either have to come from changes to deep learning or
from moving to other machine learning methods.
KEYWORDS
Deep Learning, Computing Power, Computational Burden, Scaling,
Machine Learning
ACM Reference Format:
Neil Thompson, Kristjan Greenewald, Keeheon Lee, and Gabriel F. Manso.
2021. The Computational Limits of Deep Learning. In LIMITS ’21: Workshop
on Computing within Limits, June 14–15, 2021. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
16 pages.
1 INTRODUCTION
In this article, we present a comprehensive meta-analysis of how
deep learning progress depends on growing computational power
and use this to understand not just how particular models scale, but
how the field as a whole does. Our analysis differs from previous
ones in that we are (i) more precise in the models we compare than
are many high-level historical analyses, which allows us to better
understand how performance changes as computing scales up, and
(ii) better able to account for innovation in the field than estimates
where researchers have tested scaling by varying the compute used
in training their own models.
To understand scaling in deep learning, we analyze 1,527re-
search papers found in the arXiv pre-print repository, as well as
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021,
©2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).other sources, in the domains of image classification, object de-
tection, question answering, named entity recognition, machine
translation, speech recognition, face detection, image generation,
and pose estimation. We find that computational requirements have
escalated dramatically and that increases in computing power have
been central to performance improvements.
This finding has important public policy implications: if cur-
rent trends continue, the growing “computational burden” of deep
learning will rapidly become technically and economically prohib-
itive. Such a rapid escalation in computing needed also implies
alarming growth in deep learning’s environmental cost[ 26]. Faced
with these challenges, the machine learning community will be
pushed to either dramatically increase the efficiency of deep learn-
ing1or to move to more computationally-efficient machine learning
techniques.
To understand why deep learning is so computationally expen-
sive, we analyze its statistical and computational scaling in theory.
We show that deep learning is not computationally expensive by
accident, but by design. The same flexibility that makes it excellent
at modeling diverse phenomena and outperforming expert models
also makes it dramatically more computationally expensive. De-
spite this, we find that the actual computational burden of deep
learning models is scaling more rapidly than (known) lower bounds
from theory, suggesting that substantial improvements might be
possible.
It would not be a historical anomaly for deep learning to become
computationally constrained. Even at the creation of the first neural
networks by Frank Rosenblatt, performance was limited by the
available computation. In the past decade, these computational
constraints have been relaxed due to speed-ups from moving to
specialized hardware and a willingness to invest more resources to
improve performance. But, as we show, the computational needs
of deep learning scale so rapidly that they will quickly become
constraining again.
2 DEEP LEARNING’S COMPUTATIONAL
REQUIREMENTS IN THEORY
In deep learning, the relationship between performance, model
complexity, and computational requirements is still not well un-
derstood theoretically. Nevertheless, there are important reasons
1There are already significant efforts underway to increase efficiency[ 87], as we will
discuss in section 5