LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021, Thompson et al.
(“good scaling”) simply means that smaller models are farther from
the frontier of what is possible. A simple example illustrates how
misleading this can be: imagine a state-of-the-art model that, if it
used one flop less for training, became useless (i.e. would have an
error rate = 100%). Such a hypothetical system would have an enor-
mous change in performance from a small change in computing, so
it would seem to scale enormously well. But, in reality, the system
simply breaks when it uses less computation. A less extreme ex-
ample of this seems to be the case with ResNet scaling[ 46], which
nominally shows dramatically better scaling than the field as a
whole (i.e., to get a performance improvement requires compute
to only grows to the power of 5.6, whereas for the field it grows
by12.2). In practice, however, these models are not competitive
for state-of-the-art performance (as shown in Figure 4) and the
rapid scaling just seems to indicate that their relative performance
deteriorates more quickly as less computation is used.
The example of NasNets provides an alternative way to under-
stand why we hypothesize that models will not scale up. The class
of NasNet models reports to have vastly better scaling than the field
as a whole. If one projects this reported scaling, it would indicate
that a (hypothetical) NasNet using the same amount of computation
as one of the largest vision models (XCiT-L24) should achieve an
error rate of 6.85%, handily beating the actual state of the art by
more than 2%. That we do not see NasNets easily beating state-of-
the-art models is strongly suggestive that they do not in fact scale
upthis well.
The problem of misinterpreting rapidly deteriorating perfor-
mance as an indication of good scaling is not limited to deep learn-
ing. Similar issues arise in studies of parallelism and lead to perverse
conclusions including a parallel algorithm that ‘scales well’ being
run on 128 cores and being outperformed by a serial algorithm run-
ning on a single core [ 81]. To avoid having deep learning studies
fall prey to this same defect, it is important to analyze how models
scale up and to compare such performance across models so that
deteriorating performance is not misinterpreted as a virtue.
With this conceptual framework, we can consider how our re-
sults compare to other scaling studies. Our results notionally agree
with the power law growths found by the experimental studies of
[64] and [ 51], and the rapid growth (appearing to be approximately
exponential) indicated by the plots in [ 14]. But we can also be more
quantitative, comparing our ImageNet scaling results to those found
by others [ 19,46,112,130]. Figure 4 (b) plots these studies, and
ours, on the same graph.13
As already mentioned, two sets of analyses show faster scaling
for individual models that we observe for the field: ResNet and NAS-
Net. NASNet in particular achieves cutting-edge performance and
shows an impressive scaling of O(Per f ormance5.3). Based on the
argument above, however, we would expect that observing scaling
faster than the whole field is just an indication that performance
deteriorates rapidly for smaller models.
Of the other scaling studies that we consider, perhaps the most
interesting is EfficientNet [ 112]. For most levels of computation,
EfficientNets are at, or close to, the frontier of performance. So
they do not seem to fall prey to the ‘rapid deterioration equals
13Because the comparison papers do not report all the necessary information to
calculate network operations, we instead measure computing by the operations per
network pass for this analysis.
Figure 4: Scaling laws for Deep Learning. (a) schematic repre-
sentation of scaling up versus scaling down where the slope
is the same but the implications are quite different. (b) Com-
parison of ImageNet scaling estimates between this paper,
ResNet [46], DPN [19], NASNet [130], and EfficientNet [112].
good scaling’ trap. Moreover, while EfficientNet scales less well
than the field as a whole, it is very close ( p12.3versus p12.2) and
remains near the state-of-the-art for each level of computing. All
of which suggest that it may be harnessing many of the important
innovations used across the field.
Thus, because our analysis accounts for innovation and because
it is not misled by overly-optimistic scaling down studies, we believe
it provides a better long-term view of the evolution of computing
power as higher model performance is sought.
While not the focus of our work, it is also important to consider
the research being done on scaling laws for generative AI, for
example as summarized by [ 34]. Here, as well, scaling laws are
emerging. Also, as we would expect given our discussion above,
we see disagreements when different within-model scaling results
are reported and conflict (significantly) in their recommendations
[54,118]. This suggests that across-model comparisons like ours
will also be useful in such circumstances - although they will also
be quite challenging because the generality of these models means
there is not a single measure for comparison.
An important distinction between generative language models
and our analysis of computer vision is data. Currently the largest
language models are already running into challenges finding new
data sources[ 34], which might either limit their ability to scale up