The Computational Limits of Deep Learning LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021,
As Figure 1 (a) shows, there is an enormous computational price
that has to be paid for building models with many parameters,
even when regularization is used. But while the price of including
so many parameters may be high, it also offers flexibility for the
model. In contrast, smaller models may be more efficient, but if they
do not include the parameters that matter for the answer (in the
example above, some of the scoefficients), this would imply lower
RMSE values being unachievable for any amount of computation.
In other words, the performance of that model will eventually
plateau at a low level as available computation/number of samples
increase, since it lacks important predictive features. In contrast,
the model with many parameters will eventually achieve a high
level of performance, but at the cost of more data and computation.
Thus, we arrive at the central tradeoff between traditional ma-
chine learning methods (like regression) that use small numbers of
parameters and deep learning methods that use enormous numbers
of parameters. The more parameters that one adds to a model the
greater the flexibility and hence potential for better performance.
Indeed, it has been shown that sufficiently large neural networks
areuniversal function approximators [55], hence in theory, any de-
sired performance level can be achieved by making the model large
enough and including enough training data. But these additional
parameters also make the model more expensive to train (even
before any needed increase in amount of training data) and can
make it do less well when the amount of data (or computation) is
not large enough. Figure 1 (b), our adaptation of a graph attributed
to Andrew Ng [67], summarizes this.
3 DEEP LEARNING’S COMPUTATIONAL
REQUIREMENTS IN PRACTICE
3.1 Past
Even in their early days, it was clear that computational require-
ments limited what neural networks could achieve. In 1960, when
Frank Rosenblatt wrote about a 3-layer neural network, there were
hopes that it had “gone a long way toward demonstrating the fea-
sibility of a perceptron as a pattern-recognizing device.” But, as
Rosenblatt already recognized “as the number of connections in the
network increases, however, the burden on a conventional digital
computer soon becomes excessive” [ 101]. Later that decade, in 1969,
Minsky and Papert explained the limits of 3-layer networks, includ-
ing the inability to learn the simple XOR function. At the same
time, however, they noted a potential solution: “the experimenters
discovered an interesting way to get around this difficulty by in-
troducing longer chains of intermediate units” (that is, by building
deeper neural networks) [ 83]. Despite this potential workaround,
much of the academic work in this area was abandoned because
there simply wasn’t enough computing power available at the time.
As Léon Bottou later wrote “the most obvious application of the
perceptron, computer vision, demands computing capabilities that
far exceed what could be achieved with the technology of the 1960s”
[83].
In the decades that followed, improvements in computer hard-
ware provided, by one measure, an approximately 50,000×improve-
ment in performance [ 48] and the largest neural networks being
used grew their computational requirements proportionally, as
shown in Figure 2(a). Since the growth in computing power perdollar closely mimicked the growth in computing power per chip
[116], this meant that the economic cost of running such models
was largely stable over time. Despite this large increase, deep learn-
ing models in 2009 remained “too slow for large-scale applications,
forcing researchers to focus on smaller-scale models or to use fewer
training examples.”[ 96] The turning point seems to have been when
deep learning was ported to GPUs, initially yielding a 5−15×speed-
up [96] which by 2012 had grown to more than 35×[85], and which
led to the important victory of Alexnet at the 2012 ImageNet com-
petition [ 66].5But image classification was just the first of these
benchmarks to fall. Shortly thereafter, deep learning systems also
won at object detection [ 36,105,124], named-entity recognition
[70], machine translation [ 60,76,129], question answering[ 56], and
speech recognition [3, 45].
Figure 2: Computing power used in: (a) the largest deep
learning models in different year (across all applications)
[4] as compared with the growth in hardware performance
from improving processors[25], as analyzed by [48] and
[69],6(b) image classification models tested on the Ima-
geNet benchmark with computation normalized to the 2012
AlexNet model [66].
The introduction of GPU-based (and later ASIC-based) deep
learning led to widespread adoption of these systems. But the
amount of computing power used in the largest cutting-edge sys-
tems grew even faster, at approximately 10×per year from 2012 to
2019 [4]. This rapid increase in computing burden far outpaced
5The ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) released a large
visual database to evaluate algorithms for classifying and detecting objects and scenes
every year since 2010 [29, 103].
6The range of hardware performance values indicates the difference between SPECInt
values for the lowest core counts and SPECIntRate values for the highest core counts.