Figure 7: Pruning ResNet-56 for CIFAR-100 with LeGR by
learningαandκusing different ˆ⌧and FLOP count con-
straints.
for40% FLOP count). We ﬁnd that LeGR with or without
employing Assumption 1results in similar performance for
the pruned networks.
5.2. Fine-tuned Iterations
Since we use ˆ⌧to approximate ⌧when learning the α-
κpair, it is expected that the closer ˆ⌧to⌧, the better the
α-κpair LeGR can ﬁnd. We use LeGR to prune ResNet-
56 for CIFAR-100 and learn α-κat three FLOP counts
ˆ⇣l2{10%,30%,50%}. We consider ⇣to be exactly ˆ⇣l
in this case. For ˆ⌧, we experiment with {0,50,200,500}.
We note that once the α-κpair is learned, we use LeGR-
Pruning to obtain the pruned ConvNet, ﬁne-tune it for ⌧
steps, and plot the resulting test accuracy. In this exper-
iment,⌧is set to 21120 gradient steps (60 epochs). As
shown in Figure 7, the results align with our intuition in
that there are diminishing returns in increasing ˆ⌧. We ob-
serve that ˆ⌧affects the accuracy of the pruned ConvNets
more when learning the ranking at a lower FLOP count
level, which means in low-FLOP-count regimes, the vali-
dation accuracy after ﬁne-tuning a few steps might not be
representative. This makes sense since when pruning away
a lot of ﬁlters, the network can be thought of as moving
far away from the local optimal, where the gradient steps
early in the ﬁne-tuning phase are noisy. Thus, more gradi-
ent steps are needed before considering the accuracy to be
representative of the fully-ﬁne-tuned accuracy.
5.3. FLOP count and Runtime
We demonstrate the effectiveness of ﬁlter pruning
in wall-clock time speedup using ResNet-50 and Mo-
bileNetV2 on PyTorch 0.4 using two types of CPUs. Specif-
ically, we consider both a desktop level CPU, i.e., Intel i7,
and an embedded CPU, i.e., ARM A57, and use LeGR as
the pruning methodology. The input is a single RGB image
Figure 8: Latency reduction vs. FLOP count reduction.
FLOP count reduction is indicative for latency reduction.
of size 224x224 and the program (Python with PyTorch) is
run using a single thread. As shown in Figure 8, ﬁlter prun-
ing can produce near-linear acceleration (with a slope of ap-
proximately 0.6) without specialized software or hardware
support.
6. Conclusion
To alleviate the bottleneck of using model compression
in optimizing the ConvNets in a large system, we pro-
pose LeGR , a novel formulation for practitioners to explore
the accuracy-vs-speed trade-off efﬁciently via ﬁlter prun-
ing. More speciﬁcally, we propose to learn layer-wise afﬁne
transformations over ﬁlter norms to construct a global rank-
ing of ﬁlters. This formulation addresses the limitation that
ﬁlter norms cannot be compared across layers in a learnable
fashion and provides an efﬁcient way for practitioners to ob-
tain ConvNet architectures with different FLOP counts. Ad-
ditionally, we provide a theoretical interpretation of the pro-
posed afﬁne transformation formulation. We conduct ex-
tensive empirical analyses using ResNet and MobileNetV2
on datasets including CIFAR, Bird-200, and ImageNet and
show that LeGR has less training cost to generate the pruned
ConvNets across different FLOP counts compared to prior
art while achieving comparable performance to state-of-the-
art pruning methods.
Acknowledgement
This research was supported in part by NSF CCF Grant
No. 1815899, NSF CSR Grant No. 1815780, and NSF
ACI Grant No. 1445606 at the Pittsburgh Supercomputing
Center (PSC).
References
[1] Peter Anderson, Qi Wu, Damien Teney, Jake Bruce, Mark
Johnson, Niko S ¨underhauf, Ian Reid, Stephen Gould, and
1525