Towards Efﬁcient Model Compression via Learned Global Ranking
Ting-Wu Chin1, Ruizhou Ding1, Cha Zhang2, Diana Marculescu13
Carnegie Mellon University1, Microsoft Cloud and AI2, The University of Texas at Austin3
{tingwuc, rding }@andrew.cmu.edu, chazhang@mirosoft.com, dianam@utexas.edu
Abstract
Pruning convolutional ﬁlters has demonstrated its effec-
tiveness in compressing ConvNets. Prior art in ﬁlter prun-
ing requires users to specify a target model complexity (e.g.,
model size or FLOP count) for the resulting architecture.
However, determining a target model complexity can be
difﬁcult for optimizing various embodied AI applications
such as autonomous robots, drones, and user-facing appli-
cations. First, both the accuracy and the speed of ConvNets
can affect the performance of the application. Second,
the performance of the application can be hard to assess
without evaluating ConvNets during inference. As a con-
sequence, ﬁnding a sweet-spot between the accuracy and
speed via ﬁlter pruning, which needs to be done in a trial-
and-error fashion, can be time-consuming. This work takes
a ﬁrst step toward making this process more efﬁcient by al-
tering the goal of model compression to producing a set of
ConvNets with various accuracy and latency trade-offs in-
stead of producing one ConvNet targeting some pre-deﬁned
latency constraint. To this end, we propose to learn a global
ranking of the ﬁlters across different layers of the ConvNet,
which is used to obtain a set of ConvNet architectures that
have different accuracy/latency trade-offs by pruning the
bottom-ranked ﬁlters. Our proposed algorithm, LeGR, is
shown to be 2⇥to3⇥faster than prior work while hav-
ing comparable or better performance when targeting seven
pruned ResNet-56 with different accuracy/FLOPs proﬁles
on the CIFAR-100 dataset. Additionally, we have evaluated
LeGR on ImageNet and Bird-200 with ResNet-50 and Mo-
bileNetV2 to demonstrate its effectiveness. Code available
athttps://github.com/cmu-enyac/LeGR .
1. Introduction
Building on top of the success of visual perception [ 49,
17,18], natural language processing [ 10,11], and speech
recognition [ 6,45] with deep learning, researchers have
started to explore the possibility of embodied AI applica-
tions. In embodied AI, the goal is to enable agents to take
actions based on perceptions in some environments [ 51].We envision that next generation embodied AI systems
will run on mobile devices such as autonomous robots and
drones, where compute resources are limited and thus, will
require model compression techniques for bringing such in-
telligent agents into our lives.
In particular, pruning the convolutional ﬁlters in Con-
vNets, also known as ﬁlter pruning, has shown to be an
effective technique [ 63,36,60,32] for trading accuracy
for inference speed improvements. The core idea of ﬁl-
ter pruning is to ﬁnd the least important ﬁlters to prune by
minimizing the accuracy degradation and maximizing the
speed improvement. State-of-the-art ﬁlter pruning meth-
ods [ 16,20,36,70,46,8] require a target model complex-
ity of the whole ConvNet ( e.g., total ﬁlter count, FLOP
count1, model size, inference latency, etc.) to obtain a
pruned network. However, deciding a target model com-
plexity for optimizing embodied AI applications can be
hard. For example, considering delivery with autonomous
drones, both inference speed and precision of object de-
tectors can affect the drone velocity [ 3], which in turn af-
fects the inference speed and precision2. For an user-facing
autonomous robot that has to perform complicated tasks
such as MovieQA [ 56], VQA [ 2], and room-to-room nav-
igation [ 1], both speed and accuracy of the visual percep-
tion module can affect the user experience. These afore-
mentioned applications require many iterations of trial-and-
error to ﬁnd the optimal trade-off point between speed and
accuracy of the ConvNets.
More concretely, in these scenarios, practitioners would
have to determine the sweet-spot for model complexity and
accuracy in a trial-and-error fashion. Using an existing ﬁl-
ter pruning algorithm many times to explore the impact
of the different accuracy-vs.-speed trade-offs can be time-
consuming. Figure 1demonstrates the usage of ﬁlter prun-
ing for optimizing ConvNets in aforementioned scenarios.
With prior approaches, one has to go through the process of
ﬁnding constraint-satisfying pruned-ConvNets via a prun-
1The number of ﬂoating-point operations to be computed for a ConvNet
to carry out an inference.
2Higher velocity requires faster computation and might cause accuracy
degradation due to the blurring effect of the input video stream.
1
1518