Figure 4: Results for ImageNet. LeGR is better or comparable compared to prior methods. Furthermore, its goal is to output
a set of ConvNets instead of one ConvNet. The detailed numerical results are in Appendix C.
4.4. Transfer Learning: Bird-200
We analyze how LeGR performs in a transfer learn-
ing setting where we have a model pre-trained on a large
dataset, i.e., ImageNet, and we want to transfer its knowl-
edge to adapt to a smaller dataset, i.e., Bird-200. We prune
the ﬁne-tuned network on the target dataset directly follow-
ing the practice in prior art [ 68,40]. We ﬁrst obtain ﬁne-
tuned MobileNetV2 and ResNet-50 on the Bird-200 dataset
with top-1 accuracy 80.2% and 79.5%, respectively. These
are comparable to the reported values in prior art [ 33,41].
As shown in Figure 5, we ﬁnd that LeGR outperforms Uni-
form andAMC , which is consistent with previous analyses
in Section 4.2.
Figure 5: Results for Bird-200.
5. Ablation Study
5.1. Ranking Performance and ˆ⇣l
To learn the global ranking with LeGR without knowing
the Pareto curve in advance, we use the minimum consid-
Figure 6: Robustness to the hyper-parameter ˆ⇣l. Prior art is
plotted as a reference (c.f. Figure 3a).
ered FLOP count ( ˆ⇣l) during learning to evaluate the per-
formance of a ranking. We are interested in understanding
how this design choice affects the performance of LeGR .
Speciﬁcally, we try LeGR targeting ResNet-56 for CIFAR-
100 with ˆ⇣l2{20%,40%,60%,80%}. As shown in Fig-
ure6, we ﬁrst observe that rankings learned using differ-
ent FLOP counts have similar performances, which empiri-
cally supports Assumption 1. More concretely, consider the
network pruned to 40% FLOP count by using the ranking
learned at 40% FLOP count. This case does not take advan-
tage of the subset assumption because the entire learning
process for learning α-κis done only by looking at the per-
formance of the 40% FLOP count network. On the other
hand, rankings learned using other FLOP counts but em-
ployed to obtain pruned-networks at 40% FLOP count have
exploited the subset assumption ( e.g., the ranking learned
for80% FLOP count can produce a competitive network
1524