Figure 1: Using ﬁlter pruning to optimize ConvNets for em-
bodied AI applications. Instead of producing one ConvNet
for each pruning procedure as in prior art, our proposed
method produces a set of ConvNets for practitioners to efﬁ-
ciently explore the trade-offs.
ing algorithm for every model complexity considered un-
til practitioners are satisﬁed with the accuracy-vs.-speedup
trade-off. Our work takes a ﬁrst step toward alleviating the
inefﬁciency in the aforementioned paradigm. We propose to
alter the objective of pruning from outputting a single Con-
vNet with pre-deﬁned model complexity to producing a set
of ConvNets that have different accuracy/speed trade-offs,
while achieving comparable accuracy with state-of-the-art
methods (as shown in Figure 4). In this fashion, the model
compression overhead can be greatly reduced, which results
in a more practical usage of ﬁlter pruning.
To this end, we propose learned global ranking (or
LeGR) , an algorithm that learns to rank convolutional ﬁl-
ters across layers such that the ConvNet architectures of
different speed/accuracy trade-offs can be obtained easily
by dropping the bottom-ranked ﬁlters. The obtained archi-
tectures are then ﬁne-tuned to generate the ﬁnal models. In
such a formulation, one can obtain a set of architectures by
learning the ranking once . We demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed method with extensive empirical analyses
using ResNet and MobileNetV2 on CIFAR-10/100, Bird-
200, and ImageNet datasets. The main contributions of this
work are as follows:
•We propose learned global ranking ( LeGR ), which pro-
duces a set of pruned ConvNets with different accu-
racy/speed trade-offs. LeGR is shown to be faster than
prior art in ConvNet pruning, while achieving compa-
rable accuracy with state-of-the-art methods on three
datasets and two types of ConvNets.
•Our formulation towards pruning is the ﬁrst work that
considers learning to rank ﬁlters across different layers
globally, which addresses the limitation of prior art in
magnitude-based ﬁlter pruning.2. Related Work
Various methods have been developed to compress
and/or accelerate ConvNets including weight quantiza-
tion [ 47,71,29,30,65,24,12,7], efﬁcient convolution op-
erators [ 25,22,61,26,67], neural architecture search [ 69,
9,4,15,54,53,52], adjusting image resolution [ 55,5],
and ﬁlter pruning, considered in this paper. Prior art on ﬁl-
ter pruning can be grouped into two classes, depending on
whether the architecture of the pruned-ConvNet is assumed
to be given.
Pre-deﬁned architecture In this category, various work
proposes different metrics to evaluate the importance of ﬁl-
ters locally within each layer. For example, some prior
work [ 32,19] proposes to use `2-norm of ﬁlter weights as
the importance measure. On the other hand, other work
has also investigated using the output discrepancy between
the pruned and unpruned network as an importance mea-
sure [ 23,40]. However, the key drawback for methods that
rank ﬁlters locally within a layer is that it is often hard to
decide the overall target pruned architectures [ 20]. To cope
with this difﬁculty, uniformly pruning the same portion of
ﬁlters across all the layers is often adopted [ 19].
Learned architecture In this category, pruning algo-
rithms learn the resulting structure automatically given a
controllable parameter to determine the complexity of the
pruned-ConvNet. To encourage weights with small magni-
tudes, Wen et al. [60] propose to add group-Lasso regular-
ization to the ﬁlter norm to encourage ﬁlter weights to be
zeros. Later, Liu et al. [36] propose to add Lasso regular-
ization on the batch normalization layer to achieve pruning
during training. Gordon et al. [16] propose to add compute-
weighted Lasso regularization on the ﬁlter norm. Huang
et al. [27] propose to add Lasso regularization on the out-
put neurons instead of weights. While the regularization
pushes unimportant ﬁlters to have smaller weights, the ﬁ-
nal thresholding applied globally assumes different layers
to be equally important. Later, Louizos et al. [39] have pro-
posedL0regularization with stochastic relaxation. From a
Bayesian perspective, Louizos et al. [38] formulate prun-
ing in a probabilistic fashion with a sparsity-induced prior.
Similarly, Zhou et al. [70] propose to model inter-layer de-
pendency. From a different perspective, He et al. propose
an automated model compression framework (AMC) [ 20],
which uses reinforcement learning to search for a ConvNet
that satisﬁes user-speciﬁed complexity constraints.
While these prior approaches provide competitive
pruned-ConvNets under a given target model complexity,
it is often hard for one to specify the complexity parameter
when compressing a ConvNet in embodied AI applications.
To cope with this, our work proposes to generate a set of
1519