Diagnosing and Enhancing VAE Models
Diagnosing and Enhancing VAE Models
Bin Dai daib13@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Institute for Advanced Study
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
David Wipf davidwipf@gmail.com
Microsoft Research
Beijing, China
Abstract
Although variational autoencoders (VAEs) represent a widely in
uential deep generative
model, many aspects of the underlying energy function remain poorly understood. In
particular, it is commonly believed that Gaussian encoder/decoder assumptions reduce the
eectiveness of VAEs in generating realistic samples. In this regard, we rigorously analyze
the VAE objective, dierentiating situations where this belief is and is not actually true.
We then leverage the corresponding insights to develop a simple VAE enhancement that
requires no additional hyperparameters or sensitive tuning. Quantitatively, this proposal
produces crisp samples and stable FID scores that signicantly reduce the gap with GAN
models when a neutral architecture is applied, all while retaining desirable attributes of the
original VAE architecture. A shorter version of this work has been accepted to the ICLR
2019 conference proceedings (Dai and Wipf, 2019). The code for our model is available at
https://github.com/daib13/TwoStageVAE .
Keywords: Variational Autoencoder, Deep Generative Model
1. Introduction
Our starting point is the desire to learn a probabilistic generative model of observable
variablesx2, whereis ar-dimensional manifold embedded in Rd. Note that if
r=d, then this assumption places no restriction on the distribution of x2Rdwhatsoever;
however, the added formalism is introduced to handle the frequently encountered case where
xpossesses low-dimensional structure relative to a high-dimensional ambient space, i.e.,
rd. In fact, the very utility of generative models of continuous data, and their attendant
low-dimensional representations, often hinges on this assumption (Bengio et al., 2013). It
therefore behooves us to explicitly account for this situation.
Beyond this, we assume that is a simple Riemannian manifold, which means there
exists a dieomorphism 'betweenandRr, or more explicitly, the mapping ':7!
Rris invertible and dierentiable.1Denote a ground-truth probability measure on as
gtsuch that the probability mass of an innitesimal dxon the manifold is gt(dx) andR
gt(dx) = 1.
1. Although this assumption is sucient for modeling a wide variety of data structures arbitrarily well, there
are of course real-world examples that involve alternative topologies. For one interesting representative
example, see (Davidson et al., 2018).
1arXiv:1903.05789v2  [cs.LG]  30 Oct 2019