Dai and Wipf
0 2 4 6 810
Iterations #104-6-4-20log .
00.020.040.060.08
Square Pixel ErrorLearnable .
Fix .=1
(a) log
and Reconstruction Error.
MNIST Fashion Cifar10 CelebA050100150200
DatasetReconstruction FID
  
VAE (cross−entr.)
VAE (Fix γ=1)
VAE (Learnable γ) (b) Reconstruction FID.
Figure 1: Validation of Theorem 4. ( a) The red line shows the evolution of log 
, converging
close to 0 during training as expected. The two blue curves compare the associated pixel-
wise reconstruction errors with 
xed at 1 and with a learnable 
respectively. ( b) The
FID score obtained using reconstructed images from various VAE models (reconstructed
image FID is another way of evaluating reconstruction quality; it is distinct from measuring
generated sample quality via FID scores). In general, the VAE with learnable 
produces
the best reconstructions as expected.
compares the FID score computed using reconstructed training images from dierent VAE
models (these are not new generated samples). The VAE with a learnable 
achieves
the lowest FID on all four datasets, implying that it also produces more realistic overall
reconstructions as 
goes to zero. As will be discussed further in Section 6, high-quality
image reconstructions are half the battle in ultimately achieving good generative modeling
performance.
Validation of Theorem 5: Figure 2 bolsters this theorem, and the attendant analysis
which follows in Section 3, by showcasing the dissimilar impact of noise factors applied to
dierent directions in the latent space before passage through the decoder mean network
fx. In a direction where an eigenvalue jofzis large (i.e., a super
uous dimension),
a random perturbation is completely muted by the decoder as predicted. In contrast, in
directions where such eigenvalues are small (i.e., needed for representing the manifold),
varying the input causes large changes in the image space re
ecting reasonable movement
along the correct manifold.
Reduced Mismatch between q(z)andp(z):Although the VAE with a learnable 
can
achieve high-quality reconstructions, the associated aggregated posterior is still likely not
close to a standard Gaussian distribution as implied by (10). This mismatch then disrupts
the critical ancestral sampling process. As we have previously argued, the proposed 2-Stage
VAE has the ability to overcome this issue and achieve a standard Gaussian aggregated
posterior, or at least nearly so. As empirical evidence for this claim, Figure 3 displays
the singular value spectrum of latent sample matrices Z=fz(i)gn
i=1drawn from q(z)
(rst stage), and U=fu(i)gn
i=1drawn from q0(u) (enhanced second stage). As expected,
the latter is much closer to the spectrum from an analogous i.i.d. N(0;I) matrix. We
also used these same sample matrices to estimate the MMD metric (Gretton et al., 2007)
betweenN(0;I) and the aggregated posterior distributions from the rst and second stages
in Table 4. Clearly the second stage has dramatically reduced the dierence from N(0;I)
14