Dai and Wipf
is not possible, and if  > r , thenp(z) =N(zj0;I) andq(z) cannot be matched since
the latter is necessarily conned by the training data to an r-dimensional manifold within
-dimensional space. This likely explains the poor performance of WAE-MMD on MNIST
and Fashion MNIST data reported in Table 1.
To further probe these issues, we again adopt the neutral testing framework from (Lucic
et al., 2018), and retrain each model as is varied. We conduct this experiment using Fash-
ion MNIST (relatively small/simple) and CelebA (more complex). FID scores from both
reconstructions of the training data, and novel generated samples are shown in Figure 4.
From these plots (left column) we observe that both the 2-Stage VAE and WAE-MMD
have a similar reconstruction FID values that become smaller as increases (reconstruc-
tions should generally improve with increasing ). Note that the WAE-MMD relies on a
Gaussian output layer with a small 
value,9and hence the reconstructions are unlikely
to be signicantly dierent from the 2-Stage VAE. In contrast, the other baselines are
considerably worse, especially when 
= 1 is xed as is often done in practice.
The situation changes considerably however when we examine the FID scores obtained
from generated samples. While the VAE models remain relatively stable over a signicant
range of suciently large values, some of which are likely to be considerably larger than
necessary (e.g.,  > 16 on Fashion MNIST data), the WAE-MMD performance is much
more sensitive. Of course we readily concede that compensatory, data-dependent tuning
of WAE-MMD hyperparameters might allow for some additional improvements in these
curves, but this then further highlights the larger point: the VAE models were not tuned
in any way for these experiments and yet still maintain stable behavior, with our 2-Stage
variant providing a sizeable advantage.
Of course obviously in practice if we set to be far too large, then the training will likely
become much more dicult, since in addition to learning the correct ground-truth manifold,
we are also burdening the model to detect a much larger number of unnecessary dimensions.
But even so, the 2-Stage VAE is arguably quite robust to within these experimental
settings, and certainly we need not set rto achieve good results; a reasonable r
appears to be sucient. Still, as a nal caveat, we should mention that the VAE cannot
automatically manage all forms of excess model capacity. As discussed in (Dai et al.,
2018)[Section 4], if the decoder mean network becomes inordinately complex/deep, then a
useless degenerate solution involving the implicit memorization of training data can break
even the natural VAE regularization mechanisms we have described herein (in principle,
this can happen even with = 1 for a nite training dataset). Obviously though, GAN
models and virtually all other deep generative pipelines share a similar vulnerability.
5.3 Qualitative Evaluation of Generated Samples
Finally, we qualitatively evaluate samples generated via our 2-Stage VAE using a simple,
convenient residual network structure (with fewer parameters than the InfoGAN architec-
ture). Details of this network are shown in the appendices. Randomly generated samples
9. Unlike standard VAEs that are capable of self-calibration in some sense, with 
and elements of z
jointly pushing towards small values, 
may be dicult to learn for WAE models because there is also
a required weighting factor balancing the MMD (or GAN) loss. Additionally, the WAE code posted in
association with (Tolstikhin et al., 2018) does not attempt to learn 
.
16