Dai and Wipf
training of these two VAE stages is actually critical to achieving high quality results as will
be demonstrated next.
5. Empirical Evaluation of VAE Two-Stage Enhancement
In this section we rst present quantitative evaluations of the proposed two-stage VAE
against various GAN and VAE baselines. We then describe experiments explicitly designed
to corroborate our theoretical ndings from Sections 2 and 3, including a demonstration of
robustness to the choice of . Finally, we include representative samples generated from
our model.
5.1 Quantitative Comparisons of Generated Sample Quality
We rst present quantitative evaluation of novel generated samples using the large-scale test-
ing protocol of GAN models from (Lucic et al., 2018). In this regard, GANs are well-known
to dramatically outperform existing VAE approaches in terms of the Fr echet Inception Dis-
tance (FID) score (Heusel et al., 2017) and related quantitative metrics. For fair comparison,
(Lucic et al., 2018) adopted a common neutral architecture for all models, with generator
and discriminator networks based on InfoGAN (Chen et al., 2016a); the point here is stan-
dardized comparisons, not tuning arbitrarily-large networks to achieve the lowest possible
absolute FID values. We applied the same architecture to our rst-stage VAE decoder and
encoder networks respectively for direct comparison. For the low-dimensional second-stage
VAE we used small, 3-layer networks contributing negligible additional parameters beyond
the rst stage (see the appendices for further design details).
We evaluated our proposed VAE pipeline, henceforth denoted as 2-Stage VAE , against
three baseline VAE models diering only in the decoder output layer: a Gaussian layer with
xed
, a Gaussian layer with a learned 
, and a cross-entropy layer as has been adopted
in several previous applications involving images (Chen et al., 2016b). We also tested the
Gaussian decoder VAE model (with learned 
) combined with an encoder augmented with
normalizing 
ows (Rezende and Mohamed, 2015), as well as the recently proposed Wasser-
stein autoencoder (WAE) (Tolstikhin et al., 2018) which maintains a VAE-like structure.
All of these models were adapted to use the same neutral architecture from (Lucic et al.,
2018). Note also that the WAE includes two variants, referred to as WAE-MMD and
WAE-GAN because dierent Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) and GAN regulariza-
tion factors are involved. We conduct experiments using the former because it does not
involve potentially-unstable adversarial training, consistent with the other VAE baselines.7
Additionally, we present results from (Lucic et al., 2018) involving numerous competing
GAN models, including MM GAN (Goodfellow et al., 2014), WGAN (Arjovsky et al.,
2017), WGAN-GP (Gulrajani et al., 2017), NS GAN (Fedus et al., 2017), DRAGAN (Ko-
dali et al., 2017), LS GAN (Mao et al., 2017) and BEGAN (Berthelot et al., 2017). Testing
is conducted across four signicantly dierent datasets: MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998), Fash-
ion MNIST (Xiao et al., 2017), CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky and Hinton, 2009) and CelebA (Liu
et al., 2015).
7. Later we compare against both WAE-MMD and WAE-GAN using the setup from (Tolstikhin et al.,
2018).
10