Dai and Wipf
N(zj0;I). This then implies that if we take samples from N(zj0;I) and pass them through
the learned decoder, the result may not closely resemble real data.
Of course if we could somehow directly sample from q(z), then we would not need
to useN(zj0;I). And fortunately, because the rst-stage VAE ensures that q(z) will
satisfy the conditions of Theorem 2, we know that a second VAE can in fact be learned to
accurately sample from this distribution, which in turn addresses criteria ( ii). Specically,
per the arguments from Section 4, sampling uN(uj0;I) and thenzp0(zju) is akin
to samplingzq(z) even though the latter is not available in closed form. Such samples
can then be passed through the rst-stage VAE decoder to obtain samples of x. Hence our
framework provides a principled alternative to existing encoder-decoder structures designed
to handle criteria ( i) and ( ii), leading to state-of-the-art results for this class of model in
terms of FID scores under neutral testing conditions.
Finally, before closing this section, it is also informative to consider the vector-quantization
VAE (VQ-VAE) from (van den Oord et al., 2017). This model of discrete distributions in-
volves rst training a deterministic autoencoder with a latent space parameterized by a
vector quantization operator. Later, a PixelCNN (van den Oord et al., 2016) or related is
trained to approximate the aggregated posterior of the corresponding discrete latent codes.
In this sense the VQ-VAE is eectively satisfying criteria ( ii), at least in the regime of
discrete distributions. However, in (van den Oord et al., 2017) it is also mentioned that
joint training of the VQ-VAE reconstruction module and the PixelCNN aggregated poste-
rior estimate could improve performance. While this may be true for discrete distributions
(verication is left to future work in (van den Oord et al., 2017)), at least for continuous
data lying on a low-dimensional manifold as has been our focus, we reiterate that joint
training of our two proposed continuous VAE stages is likely to degrade performance. This
is for the detailed reasons provided in Section 4. In this regard, there can seemingly exist
non-trivial dierences in the properties of generative models of discrete versus continuous
data.
6.2 Identiability of Disentangled Representations
Although denitions vary, if a latent zis `disentangled' so to speak, then each element
should ideally contain an interpretable, semantically-meaningful factor of variation that can
act independently on the generative process (Chen et al., 2018). For example, consider an
MNIST image xand a hypothetical latent representation z= [z1;:::;z]>2R, whereby
z1encodes the digit type (i.e., 0 ;1;:::; 9),z2is the stroke thickness, z3is a measure of
the overall digit slant, and so on for z4;z5;:::;z. Thiszis a canonical disentangled
representation, with clearly interpretable elements that can be independently adjusted to
generate samples with predictable dierences, e.g., we may adjust z2while keeping other
dimensions xed to isolate variations in stroke thickness.
A number of VAE modications have been putatively designed to encourage this type
of disentanglement (likewise for other generative modeling paradigms). These eorts can
be partitioned into those that involve some degree of supervision, to both dene and isolate
specic ground-truth factors of variation (which may be application-specic), and those that
aspire to be completely unsupervised. For the latter, the VAE is typically refashioned to
minimize, at least to the extent possible, some loose proxy for the degree of entanglement.
20