Diagnosing and Enhancing VAE Models
Broadly speaking, if the overriding objective is generating realistic samples using an
encoder-decoder-based architecture (VAE or otherwise), two important, well-known criteria
must be satised:10
(i) Small reconstruction error when passing through the encoder-decoder networks, and
(ii) An aggregate posterior q(z) that is close to some known distribution like p(z) =
N(zj0;I) that is easy to sample from.
The rst criteria can be naturally enforced by a deterministic AE, but also for the VAE as 
becomes small as quantied by Theorem 5. Of course the second criteria is equally impor-
tant. Without it, we have no tractable way of generating random inputs that, when passed
through the learned decoder, produce realistic output samples resembling the training data
distribution.
Criteria ( i) and ( ii) can be addressed in multiple dierent ways. For example, (Tomczak
and Welling, 2018; Zhao et al., 2018) replace N(zj0;I) with a parameterized class of prior
distributions such that there exist more 
exible pathways for pushing p(z) andq(z) closer
together; a VAE-like objective is used for this purpose in (Tomczak and Welling, 2018),
while (Zhao et al., 2018) employs adversarial training. Consequently, even if q(z) is not
Gaussian, we can nonetheless sample from a known non-Gaussian alternative using either
of these approaches. This is certainly an interesting idea, but it has not as of yet been
shown to improve FID scores. For example, only log-likelihood values on relatively small
black-and-white images are reported in (Tomczak and Welling, 2018), while discrete data
and associated evaluation metrics are the focus of (Zhao et al., 2018).
In fact, prior to our work the only competing encoder-decoder-based architecture that
explicitly attempts to improve FID scores is the WAE model from (Tolstikhin et al., 2018),
which can be viewed as a generalization of the adversarial autoencoder (Makhzani et al.,
2016). For both WAE-MMD and WAE-GAN variants introduced and tested in Section
5 herein, the basic idea is to minimize an objective function composed of a reconstruc-
tion penalty for handling criteria ( i), and a Wassenstein distance measure between p(z)
andq(z) (either MMD- or GAN-based) for addressing criteria ( ii). Note that under the
reported experimental design from (Tolstikhin et al., 2018), the WAE-GAN model more-or-
less defaults to an adversarial autoencoder, although broader dierentiating design choices
are possible. The adversarially-regularized autoencoder proposed in (Zhao et al., 2018) can
also be interpreted as a variant of the WAE-GAN customized to handle discrete data.
As with the approaches mentioned above, the two VAE stages we have proposed can also
be motivated in one-to-one correspondence with criteria ( i) and ( ii). In brief, the rst VAE
stage addresses criteria ( i) by pushing both the encoder variance, and the decoder vari-
ances selectively, towards zero such that accurate reconstruction is possible using a minimal
number of active latent dimensions. However, our detailed analysis suggests that, although
the resulting aggregate posterior q(z) will occupy nonzero measure in -dimensional space
(selectively lling out super
uous dimensions with random noise), it need not be close to
10. In presenting these criteria, we are implicitly excluding models that employ powerful non-Gaussian
decoders that can parameterize complex distributions even while excluding any signal from z, e.g.,
PixelCNN-based decoders or related (van den Oord et al., 2016). Such models are considerably dierent
than a canonical AE and do not generally provide a way of accurately reconstructing the training data
using a low-dimensional representation.
19