Dai and Wipf
Disentangled
RepresentationEntangled
Representation
z1z2 z1z2
xFY 0 0 0 0
xFO 0 1 1 1
xMY 1 0 0 1
xMO 1 1 1 0
Table 5: Illustration of identiability issues. Both candidate representations display zero
total correlation and cannot be dierentiated without supervision, but only the one on the
left is disentangled with respect to the factors gender (male and female) and age (young and
old). In other words, with the disentangled representation, we can vary z1(withz2xed)
to change only gender, while we can vary z2(withz1xed) to vary only age. In contrast,
with the entangled representation, if we vary z1(withz2xed) both age andgender will
be changed simultaneously.
female (F), and age, young (Y) or old (O). Both factors can be varied independently to mod-
ify the images with respect to either gender or age to create a set of four possible images,
namelyfxFY;xFO;xMY;xMOg, where the subscripts indicate the latent factor values. But
if given only a set of such images without explicit labels as to the ground-truth factors of
interest, nding a disentangled representation with respect to age and gender is impossible.
To visualize this, let z= [z1;z2]>denote a 2D binary vector that serves as the latent
representation. In Table 5 we present two candidate encodings, both of which display
zero total correlation between factors z1andz2(i.e., knowledge of z1tells us nothing
about the value of z2and vice versa). However, in terms of the semantically meaningful
factors of gender and age, these two encodings are quite dierent. In the rst, varying
z1alters gender independently of age, while z2varies age independently of gender. In
contrast, with the second encoding varying z1while keeping z2xed changes both the age
and gender, an entangled representation per these attributes. Without supervising labels to
resolve such ambiguity, there is no possible way, even in principle, for any generative model
(VAE or otherwise) to dierentiate these two encodings such that the so-called disentangled
representation is favored over the entangled one.
Although in some limited cases, it has been reported that disentangled representations
can be at least partially identied, we speculate that this is a result of nuanced artifacts of
the experimental design that need not translate to broader problems of interest. Indeed, in
our own empirical tests we have not been able to consistently reproduce any stable disentan-
gled representation across various testing conditions as expected. It was our original intent
to include a thorough presentation of these results; however, in the process of preparing
this manuscript we became aware of a contemporary work with extensive testing in this
area (Locatello et al., 2018). In full disclosure, the results from (Locatello et al., 2018)
are actually far more extensive than those that we have completed, so we simply defer the
reader to this paper to examine the compelling battery of tests presented there.
22