Dai and Wipf
dened across allofRdas mentioned previously. Moreover, if this density converges towards
innity on the manifold during training without increasing the KL term at the same rate,
the VAE cost can be unbounded from below, even in cases where (6) is not satised, meaning
incorrect assignment of probability mass.
To conclude, the key take-home message from this section is that, at least in principle,
VAE Gaussian assumptions need not actually be the root cause of any failure to recover
ground-truth distributions. Instead we expose a structural deciency that lies elsewhere,
namely, the non-uniqueness of solutions that can optimize the VAE objective without nec-
essarily learning a close approximation to gt. But to probe this issue further and motivate
possible workarounds, it is critical to further disambiguate these optimal solutions and their
relationship with ground-truth manifolds. This will be the task of Section 3, where we will
explicitly dierentiate the problem of locating the correct ground-truth manifold, from the
task of learning the correct probability measure within the manifold.
Note that the only comparable prior work we are aware of related to the results in
this section comes from Doersch (2016), where the implications of adopting Gaussian en-
coder/decoder pairs in the specialized case of r=d= 1 are brie
y considered. Moreover,
the analysis there requires additional much stronger assumptions than ours, namely, that
pgt(x) should be nonzero and innitely dierentiable everywhere in the requisite 1D ambient
space. These requirements of course exclude essentially all practical usage regimes where
d=r>1 ord>r , or when ground-truth densities are not suciently smooth.
3. Optimal Solutions and the Ground Truth Manifold
We will now more closely examine the properties of optimal -simple VAE solutions, and in
particular, the degree to which we might expect them to at least re
ect the true , even if
perhaps not the correct probability measure gtdened within . To do so, we must rst
consider some necessary conditions for VAE optima:
Theorem 4 Letf

;

gdenote an optimal -simple VAE solution (with r) where the
decoder variance 
is xed (i.e., it is the sole unoptimized parameter). Moreover, we assume
thatgtis not a Gaussian distribution when d=r.4Then for any 
 > 0, there exists a

0<
 such thatL(

0;

0)<L(

;

).
This result implies that we can always reduce the VAE cost by choosing a smaller value
of
, and hence, if 
is not constrained, it must be that 
!0 if we wish to minimize
(2). Despite this necessary optimality condition, in existing practical VAE applications,
it is standard to x 
1 during training. This is equivalent to simply adopting a non-
adaptive squared-error loss for the decoder and, at least in part, likely contributes to unre-
alistic/blurry VAE-generated samples (Bousquet et al., 2017). Regardless, there are more
signicant consequences of this intrinsic favoritism for 
!0, in particular as related to
reconstructing data drawn from the ground-truth manifold :
4. This requirement is only included to avoid a practically irrelevant form of non-uniqueness that exists
with full, non-degenerate Gaussian distributions.
6