Diagnosing and Enhancing VAE Models
For each dataset we executed 10 independent trials and report the mean and standard
deviation of the FID scores in Table 1.8No eort was made to tune VAE training hyper-
parameters (e.g., learning rates, etc.); rather a single generic setting was rst agnostically
selected and then applied to all VAE-like models (including the WAE-MMD). As an anal-
ogous baseline, we also report the value of the best GAN model (in terms of average FID
across all four datasets) when trained without data-dependent tuning using suggested set-
tings from the authors; see (Lucic et al., 2018)[Figure 4] for details. Under these conditions,
our single 2-Stage VAE is quite competitive with the best individual GAN model, while the
other VAE baselines were not competitive.
Note that the relatively poor performance of the WAE-MMD on MNIST and Fashion
MNIST data can be attributed to the sensitivity of this approach to the value of , which
for consistency with other models was xed at = 64 for all experiments. This value is
likely much larger than actually needed for these simpler data types (meaning r64),
and the WAE-MMD model can potentially be more reliant on having some r. We will
return to this issue in Section 5.2 below, where among other things, we empirically examine
how performance varies with across dierent modeling paradigms.
Table 1 also displays FID scores from GAN models evaluated using hyperparameters
obtained from a large-scale search executed independently across each dataset to achieve
the best results; 100 settings per model per dataset, plus an optimal, data-dependent stop-
ping criteria as described in (Lucic et al., 2018). Within this broader paradigm, cases
of severe mode collapse were omitted when computing nal GAN FID averages. Despite
these considerable GAN-specic advantages, the FID performance of the default 2-Stage
VAE is within the range of the heavily-optimized GAN models for each dataset unlike the
other VAE baselines. Overall then, these results represent the rst demonstration of a VAE
pipeline capable of competing with GANs in the arena of generated sample quality using a
shared/neutral architecture.
Of course there are still other ways of evaluating sample quality. For example, although
the FID score is a widely-adopted measure that signicantly improves upon the earlier
Inception Score (Salimans et al., 2016), it has been shown to exhibit bias in certain cir-
cumstances (Bi nkowski et al., 2018). To address this issue, the recently-proposed Kernel
Inception Distance (KID) applies a polynomial-kernel MMD measure to estimate the incep-
tion distance and is believed to enjoy better statistical properties (Bi nkowski et al., 2018).
Note that we cannot evaluate all of the GAN baselines using the KID score; only the authors
of (Lucic et al., 2018) could easily do this given the huge number of trained models involved
that are not publicly available, and the need to retrain selected models multiple times to
produce new average scores at optimal hyperparameter settings. However, we can at least
compare our trained 2-Stage VAE to other VAE/AE-based models. Table 2 presents these
results, where we observe that the same improvement patterns reported with respect to FID
are preserved when we apply KID instead, providing further condence in our approach.
8. All reported FID scores for VAE and GAN models were computed using TensorFlow ( https://github.
com/bioinf-jku/TTUR ). We have found that alternative PyTorch implementations ( https://github.
com/mseitzer/pytorch-fid ) can produce dierent values in some circumstances. This seems to be
due, at least in part, to subtle dierences in the underlying inception models being used for computing
the scores. Either way, a consistent implementation is essential for calibrating results across dierent
scenarios.
11