The exact values of transition probabilities depend on the
sampling and transmissions actions, dictated by the policies
introduced in Section 4. We can also compute the stationary
distribution of this two-state DTMC, where π0is the prob-
ability the system is synced (or the percentage of time the
system is synced), and π1the probability the system is in an
erroneous state.
3.3. Cost of actuation error
The second performance metric is the cost of actuation er-
ror, which captures the significance of the error at the point
of actuation. Note that some errors may have larger impact
than others. At timeslot t,Ci,jdenotes the cost of being in
stateiat the original source and in j̸=iat the reconstructed,
i.e.,Et= 1. Whenever i=j, there is no error, and con-
sequently no cost. We consider the general and practically
relevant case of non-commutative errors, i.e., C0,1̸=C1,0.
This means that different erroneous actions may have differ-
ent cost (penalty) due to different repercussions for the system
performance. We assume that Cijdoes not change over time.1
In order to calculate the average cost of actuation error, we
can use a two-dimensional Markov chain describing the joint
status of the system regarding the current state at the original
source and whether the reconstructed source is synced or not.
That way, we can obtain expressions for the average real-time
reconstruction error and the average cost of actuation error.
The latter can be written as
¯CA=π(0,1)C0,1+π(1,0)C1,0 (6)
where π(i,i+1 (mod 2)) is obtained from the stationary distri-
bution of the two-dimensional DTMC.
Remark. The above Markov chain formulation provides a
very general view of the system, which can be used to derive
optimal online policies using Markov Decision Processes or
Deep Reinforcement Learning.
4. GOAL-ORIENTED SAMPLING AND
COMMUNICATION POLICIES
In this section, we propose two semantics-empowered poli-
cies of information acquisition (sampling) and transmission
for real-time reconstruction of a Markov source with the pur-
pose of actuation. We start by presenting two conventional
policies, which are used for comparison purposes. Due to
space limitations, expressions only for the last goal-oriented
policy are provided; analyzing the other policies involves a
modification of the general expressions given in Section 3.
4.1. Uniform
In this baseline policy, sampling is performed periodically, in-
dependently of the temporal evolution of the source. Despite
being simple and easy to implement, process-agnostic poli-
cies could result in missing several state transitions during
1Penalty functions based on non-linear aging [3], where the cost of being
in an erroneous state is increasing over time, can be employed.the time interval between two collected samples. In the case
of erasure, the most recently acquired sample is transmitted.
4.2. Age-aware
In this policy, the receiver triggers the acquisition and trans-
mission of a new sample, once the AoI reaches a predefined
threshold Ath. This can be extended to different AoI thresh-
olds depending on the state [18].
Whenever a transmission fails, the receiver tries to antic-
ipate the update based on the statistics of the source process.
In that case, the receiver, given its current state, tries to pre-
dict the next state based on the state transition probabilities,
assumed to be known (or learned after a period of time). This
policy remains source-agnostic regarding the value of infor-
mation but takes into account the timeliness.
4.3. Change-aware
In this policy, sample generation is triggered at the transmit-
ter whenever a change at the state of the source (with respect
to the previous sample) is observed. Consider that for a cer-
tain period of time Xt+kt=i, k= 0,1, . . . , K , at the end
of which the state changes, i.e., Xt(K+1)+1 =j, j̸=i, and
hence the transmitter generates and transmits a new status up-
date sample.
4.4. Semantics-aware
This policy extends the previous one into that the amount
of change is not solely measured at the source, but is also
tracked by the difference in state between receiver and trans-
mitter. Sample generation is triggered whenever there is dis-
crepancy between XtandˆXt. Assume that at a given timeslot
t,Xt=ˆXt. Then, a change in Xt(source’s state) occurs in
t+ 1with a given probability, resulting in transmission of a
newly acquired sample. If transmission fails, ˆXt+1=ˆXt.
Suppose now that in the next slot, Xt+2=Xt. Thus, there
is no discrepancy between the original and the reconstructed
source ( ˆXt+2=Xt+2), thus, there is no need for sending an
update. Particularizing the general expressions in Section 3,
the transition matrix PEfor the DTMC that models the sys-
tem state is given by
PE="
1−2pq(1−ps)
p+q2pq(1−ps)
p+q
ps+2pq(1−ps)
p+q1−ps−2pq(1−ps)
p+q#
.
Then, we obtain the the probability that the system is in
an erroneous (not synced) state
¯E=2pq(1−ps)
ps(p+q) + 4pq(1−ps). (7)
Note that the previous expression is also the percentage of
time that the system is not synced or the time-average recon-
struction error.
Remark. Evidently, sampling and transmission at every
timeslot could provide the best performance for achieving the
goal (real-time reconstruction). However, this comes at the