GOAL-ORIENTED COMMUNICATION FOR REAL-TIME TRACKING IN AUTONOMOUS
SYSTEMS
Nikolaos Pappas1, Marios Kountouris2
1Department of Science and Technology, Link ¨oping University, Norrk ¨oping 60174, Sweden
2Communication Systems Department, EURECOM, Sophia-Antipolis 06904, France
Email: nikolaos.pappas@liu.se, marios.kountouris@eurecom.fr
ABSTRACT
Real-time remote tracking using under-sampled and delayed
measurements is considered here. We study an autonomous
system where a transmitter monitors the evolution of a dis-
crete Markov source and sends status updates to a destina-
tion over an unreliable wireless channel. The destination is
tasked with real-time source reconstruction for remote actu-
ation. We introduce new goal-oriented sampling and com-
munication policies, which leverage the significance and ef-
fectiveness of messages, as a means to generate and trans-
mit only the most “informative” samples for real-time actua-
tion. Our results illustrate that semantics-empowered policies
significantly reduce both the real-time reconstruction and the
cost of actuation errors, as well as the amount of ineffective
updates.
Index Terms —Goal-oriented communication, semantics
of information, cost of actuation error, real-time tracking.
1. INTRODUCTION
Networked autonomous systems are ubiquitous in various do-
mains, with applications spanning from swarm robotics and
healthcare to autonomous transportation and environmental
monitoring. These systems require reliable real-time commu-
nication, autonomous interactions, and timely computations.
In this context, information is valuable when it is fresh, accu-
rate, and effective. For instance, real-time knowledge of the
trajectory and the velocity of a mobile robot is essential in
autonomous navigation. Timely and accurate updates are of
cardinal importance in mission-critical decision-making. In
this setting, real-time tracking and reconstruction of an infor-
mation source/process from a set of under-sampled and de-
layed measurements is an important yet challenging problem.
Information freshness is assessed by the Age of Information
(AoI) [1, 2], i.e., the time elapsed since the newest success-
fully received update was generated. However, AoI does not
This work is supported in part by the Swedish Research Council (VR),
ELLIIT, and CENIIT. This project has received funding from the European
Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme (grant agreement no. 101003431).take into account the source/process evolution and the appli-
cation context. Several metrics [3–7] have been employed to
address the shortcomings of AoI. A line of work that con-
siders AoI and its variants as a criterion for remote estima-
tion can be found in [8–14]. A new communication paradigm
has recently been proposed, which accounts for the seman-
tics(i.e., significance, goal-oriented usefulness, and contex-
tual value) of information and leverages the synergy between
data processing, information transmission, and signal recon-
struction [15–17].
In this work, we consider the problem of real-time track-
ing and reconstruction of an information source. A transmit-
ter (observer) tracks the state of a Markov source and sends
status updates (samples) to a receiver over an unreliable wire-
less channel. Real-time reconstruction is performed at the
destination for the purpose of remote actuation. This fun-
damental setting could model various real-time applications
in autonomous networked systems. We introduce new goal-
oriented, semantics-empowered sampling and communica-
tion policies, which account for the temporal evolution of the
source/process and the semantic and application-dependent
value of data being generated and transmitted. Our approach
is shown to significantly reduce both reconstruction error and
cost of actuation error, as well as the number of uninforma-
tive/ineffective samples.
2. SYSTEM MODEL
We consider a time-slotted communication system, in which
a monitoring device (transmitter) observes a process Xtand
informs a remote actuator (receiver) about its state by send-
ing updates (samples) over a communication channel. This is
depicted in Fig. 1. We assume that transmissions take place
over a wireless erasure channel. The channel realization htis
equal to 1if the packet is successfully decoded at the receiver
and0otherwise. The success probability is defined as ps=
P(ht= 1) . Successful/failed transmissions are declared to
the transmitter using acknowledgement (ACK)/negative ACK
packets, assumed to be delivered instantaneously and error-
free. When the transmission fails, the update is discarded (no
retransmission). The information source is modeled by a two-
state discrete-time Markov chain (DTMC) {Xt, t∈Z+
0}, as-