computationally expensive, a metamodel need not be created for that function. However, many
real-world problems involve black box functions and therefore, an explicit information about them
can be diﬃcult to obtain. Secondly, sometimes performing an experiment to calculate the value of
an objective function may take less time or may give better results when compared to using a nu-
merical model to evaluate the same. For example in [73], a closed-loop optimization was performed,
where values of objective functions are obtained by performing real experiments and selection while
crossover and mutation operations are performed by using an EA. For more details about closed-
loop evolutionary multiobjective optimization, see [73]. Thus, both types of problem information
can lead to signiﬁcant savings in computation time.
5 Conclusions
In this paper, we have presented a survey of diﬀerent algorithms to reduce the computation time
while solving computationally expensive multiobjective optimization problems. Altogether, 45 algo-
rithms were found in the literature published in years 2008-2016, which were classiﬁed based on the
type of approximation used, i.e. problem, function or ﬁtness approximation. We found that function
approximation or using surrogates is the most common approach for reducing the computation time.
Diﬀerent algorithms were summarized based on the steps of a uniﬁed function approximation frame-
work involving an evolutionary algorithm. Additionally, six important challenges were identiﬁed,
involving using the metamodel, updating the metamodel, training time, type of the metamodel to
be used, when to update the metamodel and constraint handling for implementing the proposed ap-
proximation framework. Subsequently, the ﬁrst three important challenges were used in the survey
to highlight the diﬀerences among diﬀerent algorithms.
A proper management of the metamodel makes an algorithm eﬃcient to solve a computationally
expensive problem. As diﬀerent algorithms used diﬀerent strategies to manage the metamodels and
solved problems with diﬀerent characteristics, it is diﬃcult to generalize the eﬃciency of a method.
However, the eﬃciency of an algorithm can be attributed by 1. number of function evaluations used,
2. dimensions (both in objective and decision spaces) of problems solved and 3. characteristics of the
problems solved e.g. multimodality or disconnected Pareto front. As metamodel based algorithms
are generally developed for black-box problems, where characteristics of the problems to be solved
are not known a priori, one can measure the eﬃciency of an algorithm by its ability to provide
meaningful solutions in a least number of function evaluations. We also provided the dimensions
and the number of function evaluations used to solve a particular problem.
We also compared these algorithms with respect to diﬀerent criteria such as type of metamodel
and evolutionary algorithm used, type of problem (benchmark or real-world) solved and evolution
control. Some of the major ﬁndings were: 1. Kriging and neural networks were the most commonly
used metamodels, 2. most of the algorithms were based on dominance based evolutionary algorithms,
3. most of the algorithms solved the problems with no more than three objectives, 4. most of the
algorithms were not developed to handle constraints, 5. the number of decision variables was also
limited especially when using Kriging, 6. only few algorithms used an ensemble of metamodels,
7. many algorithms were tested only on benchmark problems which were not at all computationally
expensive
We discussed problem and ﬁtness approximation based algorithms with respect to their poten-
tial towards reducing the computational complexity and the number of function evaluations. We
also identiﬁed some promising elements and issues among algorithms in the literature. Promising
elements involve using an ensemble of metamodels, hybrid algorithms with function approximation
based algorithms and diﬀerent types of approximations together. We plan to address several issues