w1R 
w2R 
w3R 
w4R 
w5R BRw1R 
BRw5R Figure 2: Association of weight vectors from WtoWR
for each objective function instead of scalarized objective function. An ensemble of metamodels
(RBF with three diﬀerent basis functions) is used for each objective function in step 5. A weighted
sum of predictions from each metamodel is used in the ensemble of metamodels and the weights are
decided based on the prediction error of the metamodel. To update the metamodel in step 9, the
following procedure is adopted.
In MOEA/D let, W=/braceleftbig
w1,...,wN/bracerightbig
are a uniformly distributed set of weight vectors and Ris
the number of points to be re-evaluated in step 9. An another set of uniformly distributed weight
vectorsWR=/braceleftbig
w1R,...,wNR/bracerightbig
is deﬁned such that size of WR¡ size ofWas shown in Figure 2. For
eachwiR∈WR, a neighborhood is deﬁned BR(wiR) =/braceleftbig
w1,...,wNa/bracerightbig
, such that w1,...,wNa∈W
are theNaclosest weight vectors from WtowiR. After this, from each neighborhood, an individual
which minimize the single objective optimization problem used in MOEA/D is selected for re-
evaluation and added to the archive in step 10. In this algorithm, a penalty boundary intersection
approach [146] is used for decomposition of the MOP into single objective optimization problems.
The size of the archive is ﬁxed in this algorithm and the same procedure mentioned above is applied
to eliminate extra individuals from the archive.
MOEA/D-RBF was tested on ﬁve benchmark (two objectives and 8-30 decision variables) and
one real-world problem (two objectives and 11 decision variables). It was compared with MOEA/D
(for both benchmark and real-world problems) and MOEA/D-EGO (only for benchmark problems)
with hypervolume as the comparison criterion. The proposed algorithm obtained better performance
in 5 out of six problems in the same number of function evaluations.
3.6 Comparison of function approximation based algorithms
In what follows, a comparison of function approximation based algorithms discussed so far is pre-
sented in Figure 3. This ﬁgure represents the number of papers with respect to the metamodel
(upper part of the ﬁgure), EA (lower part of the ﬁgure) and evolution control strategy used. The
references for these three criteria are mentioned inside the bars of the ﬁgure. One should note that
some algorithms mentioned in this section were not tested on computationally expensive MOPs.
These algorithms are still cited here as they have been proposed for considering the computational
burden in any MOP.