One more promising element observed in some of the algorithms in the literature is to use a com-
bination of diﬀerent approximations. In [131], ﬁtness inheritance (a type of ﬁtness approximation)
is used with function approximation to reduce the computation time. Problem approximation is
used with function approximation in [151] to decrease the computational complexity of the problem
in question and the numbers of function evaluations. Moreover, the use of multilevel approaches
[43, 68] which depend on the problem to be solved needs more attention from both researchers and
practitioners. In these approaches, either diﬀerent solvers were used to solve governing equations
(e.g. Navier-Stokes equations) or diﬀerent problems were solved at diﬀerent levels. For more details
about multilevel approaches, see [43].
In addition, metamodels have been used in the literature to predict the quality of solutions
instead of the objective functions. For instance, in [8], the metamodel was used to predict the
hypervolume contribution of the individuals. In [105, 106], the metamodel was used to predict the
distance from the current nondominated individuals. Moreover, in [10, 87, 88], the metamodel was
used to classify the individuals into diﬀerent classes based on their dominance relations. In [123],
the metamodel was used to predict rank of individuals by creating boundaries between individuals
in the objective space. This way of using a metamodel other than function approximation could be
aﬀective as instead of actual objective functions, quality of individuals (e.g. using hypervolume or
rank) is predicted.
Hybrid EAs with a combination of global and local searches are used to enhance the rate of
convergence towards the Pareto front [54, 55, 125, 126]. However, such algorithms are not commonly
used together with function approximation to handle computationally expensive MOPs. In the
literature e.g. in [52, 84, 134], a local search is used with function approximation. This way of
using local search algorithm with function approximation can inherit advantages of both hybrid
algorithms and function approximation based algorithms, i.e. fast convergence and reducing the
numbers of computationally expensive function evaluations.
4.2 Performance metrics and benchmark problems
It is also important to point out that diﬀerent algorithms use diﬀerent performance metrics for
measuring their eﬃciency compared to other algorithms. These metrics e.g. generational distance
(GD), inverted generational distance (IGD) and hypervolume (or S metric) are widely used in the
literature. For deﬁnitions, see [20, 28]. In Table 2, we mention the performance metrics used in
diﬀerent articles. As can be seen in the table, some articles do not use any performance metric which
is notated by no preference measure and some articles compare solutions obtained with diﬀerent
algorithms visually e.g. by plotting a scatter plot of nondominated solutions.
Moreover, diﬀerent algorithms have been tested on diﬀerent benchmark problems as can also
be seen in Table 2. We mention the name of the benchmark problem suite e.g. ZDT, DTLZ and
WFG in the table. For more details about these problems, see [20]. From the names of the suites,
one can observe the trend of using diﬀerent benchmark problems in the ﬁeld of surrogate-assisted
multiobjective optimization.
4.3 Guidelines for selecting an algorithm
For practitioners and engineers, it is very important to select an appropriate algorithm for solving
a real-world problem. In the literature, diﬀerent algorithms use diﬀerent EAs, surrogate techniques
and other relevant parameters. Therefore, it is challenging to generalize the eﬃciency of an algorithm
or choose an algorithm. However, one can consider the following points to select an algorithm:
1. dimensions in both objective and decision spaces and