A survey on handling computationally expensive
multiobjective optimization problems with evolutionary
algorithms
Tinkle Chugh∗1, Karthik Sindhya1, Jussi Hakanen1, and Kaisa Miettinen1
1University of Jyvaskyla, Faculty of Information Technology, P.O. Box 35 (Agora),
FI-40014 University of Jyvaskyla, Finland
Abstract
Evolutionary algorithms are widely used for solving multiobjective optimization problems
but are often criticized because of a large number of function evaluations needed. Approxi-
mations, especially function approximations, also referred to as surrogates or metamodels are
commonly used in the literature to reduce the computation time. This paper presents a survey
of 45 diﬀerent recent algorithms proposed in the literature between 2008-2016 to handle com-
putationally expensive multiobjective optimization problems. Several algorithms are discussed
based on what kind of an approximation such as problem, function or ﬁtness approximation they
use. Most emphasis is given to function approximation based algorithms. We also compare these
algorithms based on diﬀerent criteria such as metamodelling technique and evolutionary algo-
rithm used, type and dimensions of the problem solved, handling constraints, training time and
the type of evolution control. Furthermore, we identify and discuss some promising elements
and major issues among algorithms in the literature related to using an approximation and
numerical settings used. In addition, we discuss selecting an algorithm to solve a given com-
putationally expensive mmultiobjective optimization problem based on the dimensions in both
objective and decision spaces and the computation budget available.
Keywords: surrogate, metamodel, machine learning, multicriteria optimization, computational
cost, response surface approximation, Pareto optimality
1 Introduction
Many engineering problems have multiple objectives to be optimized and these objectives are typi-
cally conﬂicting in nature, i.e. improvement in one objective is possible only by allowing deterioration
of at least one of the other objectives. These kinds of problems are known as multiobjective opti-
mization problems (MOPs). Because of the conﬂicting nature, there typically does not exist one
optimal solution, but multiple so-called Pareto optimal solutions. The set of all Pareto optimal
solutions in the objective space is called a Pareto front. In many problems, explicit formulations of
objective or constraint functions are not known and such functions are called black box functions.
Usually, problems involving such functions need a long time to be solved e.g. problems involving
∗Corresponding author (tinkle.chugh@jyu.ﬁ)