partitioned into two sets in the decision space, nondominated ( xnd) and dominated ( xd). MMD is
calculated as, MMD = min/braceleftBig/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddoubleˆf(xnd)−ˆf(xd)/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/bracerightBig
, where ˆfis the predicted objective vector using
the metamodel. MMD is then projected to each objective function axis to obtain MMD ˆfi(for i
= 1,...,k). Thereafter, a threshold si(x)≤MMD ˆfiis speciﬁed by using the standard deviation
obtained (si(x)) from the Kriging model for each objective function. The individuals which do not
satisfy this threshold are re-evaluated using the original functions. The size of the archive is not
ﬁxed in this algorithm.
K-MOGA was tested on ﬁve benchmark (two objectives and 3-6 decision variables) and two
real-world problems (two objectives and 2-4 decision variables) and compared with MOGA. For
comparison, nondominated individuals from both algorithms were visualized and similar solutions
were obtained in fewer function evaluations with K-MOGA.
The same algorithm was extended to KD-MOGA in [81] with one additional element. In KD-
MOGA, a ﬁxed number of individuals is generated using constrained maximum entropy design after
step 9, which is an extension of unconstrained maximum entropy design [25]. These individuals are
then added to the population for the next generation.
KD-MOGA was tested on the same set of problems as K-MOGA with one more real-world prob-
lem (two objectives, four decision variables and four constraints). It was compared with both EAs
(modiﬁed version of NSGA-II) and K-MOGA using visualization of the nondominated individuals.
A similar performance was obtained in fewer function evaluations with KD-MOGA.
Kriging was used as a metamodel in [59]. This paper is based on an algorithm called combined
AASO-AAMO (adaptive approximation in single objective optimization - adaptive approximation in
multiobjective optimization) [144] which uses a multiobjective genetic algorithm [144] as an EA. The
metamodel is built for each objective and constraint function in step 5. To update the metamodel
in step 9, a ﬁxed number of individuals is selected for re-evaluation using the original functions and
added to the archive in step 10. The individuals having the best value according to the maxmin
distance design criterion [66], i.e. the largest value of minimum distance from individuals in the
archive in the decision space, are selected for re-evaluation. The size of the archive is not ﬁxed in
this algorithm.
The proposed algorithm was tested on a fatigue design MOP with two objectives, 17 decision
variables and 11 constraints. It took 70 hours to complete 25 generations but the eﬃciency of the
algorithm was not compared to any EA without using the metamodel. The authors mentioned that
it was practically impossible to do the optimization without using approximation.
In Zhang et al. [148], Kriging was used as a metamodel with the decomposition based EA
MOEA/D [146]. The algorithm is known as MOEA/D-EGO. In MOEA/D-EGO, after evaluating
a ﬁxed number of individuals in steps 1-4, the metamodel is built for the scalarized objective func-
tion. Chebyshev scalarizing function [93] is used to convert multiobjective optimization problem
into single objective optimization problems. After using the metamodel in step 7, the expected im-
provement ( EI) [67] is calculated for each subproblem. Expected improvement is then maximized
(for each subproblem) using MOEA/D-DE [82] for a ﬁxed number of generations. In other words,
the scalarized problem is changed into another problem to maximize EI. To update the metamodel
in step 9, ﬁrstly, all individuals after the local search, which are diﬀerent from the individuals in
the archive (in the decision space) are selected. After this, K-means clustering is used to cluster the
weight vectors (used in MOEA/D initially) associated with the individuals selected above. From each
cluster, an individual with maximum EIis selected and re-evaluated using the original functions.
These individuals are then added to the archive in step 10. Moreover, to reduce the training time, a
fuzzy clustering [12] is used for selecting a ﬁxed number of individuals for training or updating the
metamodel.