f1(x) 
f2(x) θ1 
θ2 
rank 1 individuals  
rank 2 individuals  
rank 3 individuals  Figure 4: Assignment of ranks to individuals
variables. In both types of approximation used, Kriging performed the best. In comparing diﬀerent
scalarizing functions, TCH performed the best in the ﬁrst type of approximation and WS in the
second type of approximation. Developing a algorithm was considered as a future work.
4 Discussion
In this section, we ﬁrst summarize promising elements that we found in the algorithms proposed
in the literature. Furthermore, we also discuss ways which can be used to design enhanced EAs to
handle computationally expensive MOPs. Finally, we discuss the main issues we have observed in
the algorithms in the literature with respect to using an approximation in an EA and the numerical
settings used to test their eﬃcacy.
4.1 Promising elements in the literature
We discuss here promising elements with respect to the choice of the metamodel to be used, build-
ing/updating the metamodels and using diﬀerent types of approximations together to reduce the
computation time. Furthermore, we discuss the potential of using hybrid algorithms with function
approximation based algorithms to enhance the rate of convergence of EAs near Pareto optimal
solutions. Also, one can use these elements while designing an algorithm for using an approximation
with EA to reduce the computation time.
Often when metamodels are used, the type of metamodel to be used is a random choice. It is
often diﬃcult to know a priori the best metamodel to be used in the solution process. An ensemble
of metamodels (see e.g. [84] and [127]) could be an easy ﬁx, where the algorithm is not limited to one
single metamodel. In [84], weights are assigned to the ﬁtness values predicted by each metamodel
and the weighted sum is then used to get the ﬁnal ﬁtness value. In [127], one metamodel having
the highest accuracy is used for evaluating individuals of the EA population. Moreover, in [6], the
authors present an improved way of using multiple metamodels that focus on diﬀerent parts of the
Pareto front. These metamodels are updated using some solutions that were more and less accurate.
Selection of these solutions enables the algorithm proposed in [6] to converge faster and explore the
search space for promising candidate Pareto optimal solutions.