which consumes less computation time. There can be diﬀerent computationally expensive elements
while solving a MOP. For example, original functions or constraints, hypervolume etc. A surrogate
is often used as a synonym for a metamodel and the process to build a metamodel is known as
metamodelling or function approximation. Therefore, what to approximate using a metamodel is
an important concern in reducing the computation time. Neural networks [94, 145], radial basis
functions [111], support vector regression [7] and Kriging [52] are some examples of commonly used
metamodelling techniques.
Anensemble of metamodels means using more than one metamodel to reduce the computation
time and usually there are two ways to use an ensemble of metamodels in the literature. In the ﬁrst
one, one metamodel having the highest accuracy among diﬀerent metamodels is selected to evaluate
individuals [127]. In the second one, diﬀerent metamodels are used to evaluate individuals with a
diﬀerent weight coeﬃcient ( ωj) assigned to them. For instance, in [84], the predicted ﬁtness value
from an ensemble of mmetamodels was deﬁned as:
Fens(x) =m/summationdisplay
j=1ωjFj(x) andm/summationdisplay
j=1ωj= 1, (2)
whereFj(x) is the approximated ﬁtness value of F=/summationtextk
i=1wifi(x) usingjthmetamodel and
wi,i= 1,...,k is the weight vector assigned to each objective function. A weighted sum method
was used in [84], however, other scalarizing methods such as /epsilon1-constraint method, achievement
scalarizing function [93] can also be used to convert a multiobjective optimization problem into a
single objective optimization problem. Fitness values, Fens(x) is approximated by mmetamodels
andωjis the weight assigned to the ﬁtness value of the jthmetamodel. The ﬁtness value of a
metamodel is assigned a larger weight if it is found to be more accurate than other metamodels and
the accuracy can be obtained by statistical measurements such as root mean square error [132] etc.
Anevolution control ormodel management [64] is a strategy to manage metamodels in an EA.
There are two diﬀerent ways to manage metamodels, ﬁxed and adaptive evolution control. In a ﬁxed
evolution control, metamodels are used for a preﬁxed number of generations and updated afterward
with a predeﬁned criterion. On the other hand, in an adaptive evolution control, the frequency of
using the metamodel is adjusted according to the accuracy of the metamodel. Therefore, the model
management is also concerned with when to update the metamodel.
Inﬁtness inheritance [121, 150], the ﬁtness values of oﬀspring are evaluated using ﬁtness values
of the parents. In ﬁtness imitation [70], individuals are grouped into several clusters e.g. using K-
means clustering [57] in the decision space and only those individuals are evaluated which represent
the clusters (e.g. individuals closest to the centroid of each cluster). The ﬁtness values of other
individuals are estimated using the ﬁtness values of the representative individuals.
Next, we discuss the general function approximation framework and describe various algorithms
based on the steps of the framework.
3 Approximation based algorithms
In approximation based algorithms, the computationally expensive element of the problem is replaced
with an approximation which consumes less computation time. As classiﬁed in [61], an approxima-
tion can be applied in three ways in multiobjective optimization problems: problem, function and
ﬁtness approximation. In problem approximation, the original problem is replaced with a simpliﬁed
problem which is faster to solve. In function approximation, an approximation of a computationally
expensive function is formed which is faster to evaluate. On the other hand, in ﬁtness approxi-
mation, the ﬁtness value referring typically to the function value of an individual is derived from