computational ﬂuid dynamics simulations utilizing ﬁnite element algorithms take substantial time to
obtain one solution. These are examples of problems that we refer to as computationally expensive
multiobjective optimization problems.
In the last few decades, evolutionary algorithms (EAs) [20, 28] have been widely used for solving
MOPs because of their advantages such as obtaining a set of nondominated solutions in one solution
process, ability to handle problems with multiple local and nonconvex Pareto fronts, ability to easily
deal with diﬀerent kinds of variables (such as binary, real, integer or mixed) and no assumptions set
on convexity and diﬀerentiability of objectives and constraints involved. Despite of these advantages,
EAs do not guarantee convergence to optimal solutions. Moreover, they are often criticized as
they consume many function evaluations which increases the computation time. This concern is
particularly relevant when dealing with computationally expensive problems. It is therefore required
to adapt EAs in a way that they can be used to obtain solutions in less computation time without too
much reduction in the quality of solutions. In this paper, a survey of diﬀerent algorithms proposed
in the literature to handle MOPs with computationally expensive objective functions is presented.
For other challenges related to solving MOPs, see [20, 28, 93].
Several algorithms have been proposed reduce the computational cost while solving MOPs using
EAs. Diﬀerent surveys exist in the literature [61, 62, 119, 74] on this topic. One of the popular ap-
proaches mentioned in these surveys is the use of approximation, especially, function approximation
or metamodelling to handle computationally expensive problems. The potential of metamodelling
techniques has been widely studied in the machine learning community [41]. Many algorithms exist
in the literature which use a combination of these techniques and evolutionary algorithms.
In [61], diﬀerent ways of using approximation such as problem, function and ﬁtness approxima-
tion were discussed based on their use in the literature. Additionally, various issues such as how
evolutionary algorithms can beneﬁt from these approximations and what kind of approximation to
be selected etc. were also discussed. It is to be noted that ﬁtness approximation is also used as
evolutionary approximation in the literature [61]. In [119], the main focus was to discuss various
algorithms proposed in the literature before the year 2008 based on the classiﬁcation of [61]. Some
real-world applications were also mentioned, where diﬀerent algorithms had been applied to reduce
the computation time. In [62], the main focus was to discuss the recent developments for using
function approximation in reducing the computation time. In that survey, diﬀerent issues such as
strategies for managing approximation, selection of individuals to be evaluated using approxima-
tion functions etc. were discussed. In addition, the author also mentioned the potential of using
function approximation in dynamic, robust and constrained optimization problems. A taxonomy of
metamodel based optimization algorithms was provided in [49]. In [74], several algorithms based on
the management of using function approximation (e.g. Kriging, radial basis function etc.) were dis-
cussed. In addition, the importance of interactive algorithms with EAs was detailed. Two real-world
applications were also mentioned, which were solved by two diﬀerent algorithms, ParEGO [71] and
the algorithm proposed in [98].
In this survey, we extend these surveys and discuss 45 algorithms based on the classiﬁcation
of [61] from the year 2008 to 2016 published in diﬀerent journals and conference proceedings in
English. We also found that most of the algorithms use Kriging when compared to other function
approximation techniques and therefore, classify diﬀerent function approximation based algorithms
into Kriging and non-Kriging based algorithms. This survey is also diﬀerent from other surveys in
following ways. 1. Algorithms using function approximation or surrogates are emphasized as they
are more widely used. 2. Classiﬁcation of function approximation based algorithms further into
Kriging and non-Kriging based algorithms shows the wide applicability of Kriging. 3. Algorithms
are described in reference to a general function approximation framework which will provide the
reader an understanding for using any function approximation in EAs. 4. The eﬃciency of diﬀerent