MOEA/D-EGO was tested on 12 benchmark problems (2-3 objectives and 2-8 decision variables)
and compared with ParEGO [71] and SMS-EGO [110]. Hypervolume and inverted generational
distance (IGD) were used as the comparison criteria. The proposed algorithm outperformed on seven
problems when compared to ParEGO and performed similar to SMS-EGO. It was also compared
with MOEA/D on two problems (two objectives and 2-8 decision variables) and outperformed with
IGD as the performance criterion.
A multiobjective variable-ﬁdelity optimization (VFO) algorithm was proposed in [151], where
Kriging was used as a metamodel with NSGA-II. Initially, a simpliﬁed or approximated problem
(having low ﬁdelity functions) is used to replace the original MOP in stage 1. This simpliﬁed problem
is then solved for a preﬁxed number of generations using NSGA-II. A ﬁxed number of nondominated
individuals obtained after this step is re-evaluated using the original functions and stored in an
archive. These individuals are selected based on a simple inter-individual distance metric in the
objective space (steps 1-4). These individuals are then used to construct a Kriging model for each
objective function in step 5 of stage 2. For the following ﬁxed number of generations, individuals
generated by crossover and mutation in step 6 are evaluated either using the approximated problem
functions with Kriging model or just the approximated problem functions (step 7) depending on
the error [42] in the Kriging model. Thus, an adaptive evolution control strategy is used to manage
the metamodel. In other words, if the metamodel is not accurate for an objective function, the
original function is used to evaluate individuals. To update the metamodel in step 9, a ﬁxed number
of nondominated individuals evaluated using the metamodel is selected for re-evaluation using the
original functions. The individuals are selected by computing the error from the Kriging model and
added to the archive in step 10. The size of the archive is not ﬁxed in this algorithm.
The VFO algorithm was tested on the ZDT1-3 benchmark problems (with two objectives and
ﬁve decision variables) and a structural engineering problem (with two objectives and six decision
variables). For the ZDT problems, the eﬃciency of the VFO algorithm was not mentioned in terms
of computation time or number of function evaluations.
For the structural engineering problem, an exhaustive search was carried out with diﬀerent values
of decision variables. Around 65 million combinations of decision variable values were evaluated using
both original and approximated problem functions. Nondominated individuals after this search were
identiﬁed and nondominated individuals obtained using original functions were used to compare
results of diﬀerent studies mentioned next. Fourteen studies were performed with changes in the
values of three parameters: number of preﬁxed number of generations in step 3 of stage 1, number
of generations before updating the metamodel of stage 2 and number of individuals selected for re-
evaluation in step 9 of stage 2. Two out of fourteen studies were performed using NSGA-II without
using a metamodel with high and low ﬁdelity functions (to be called case 1 and case 2, respectively).
Results from these studies were then compared with the results of exhaustive search with diﬀerent
criteria (inverted generational distance, error ratio, crowding distance [28] and span [80]). Case 1
gave the best results and in comparison with case 1, one of the studies out of thirteen gave similar
results (a graphical comparison was performed) in fewer function evaluations.
In [86], VFO algorithm was extended, where instead of one global metamodel, multiple local
metamodels were used. The authors mentioned that local metamodels are used for high dimensional
problems in the objective space. K-means clustering is used in the decision space to partition the
data and to build multiple local metamodels. Other details are the same as in VFO.
This algorithm was tested on six benchmark problems (two objectives and 2-30 decision variables)
and one real-world problem (three objectives and six decision variables). For benchmark problem,
nondominated individuals obtained from this algorithm and with VFO and NSGA-II were visualized.
The authors mentioned that the proposed algorithm outperformed on these problems. In case of
the real-world problem, the same performance criterion was used as in the VFO algorithm. In this