algorithms in terms of reducing computational cost or number of function evaluations is empha-
sized. 5. Various shortcomings in algorithms are observed and discussed e.g. handling constraints,
dimensions (both in decision and objective spaces) of the problem solved, training time etc. 6. Some
promising elements are also identiﬁed which can be helpful in overcoming the limitations of several
issues e.g. eﬃcient management of function approximation technique to handle more than three
objectives. 7. Some guidelines are also provided in selecting a particular algorithm based on the
characteristic of the problem to be solved, dimensions in both objective and decision spaces and the
budget available.
In the rest of this paper, in Section 2, some relevant concepts are described which are frequently
used when reducing the computational burden. In Section 3, diﬀerent algorithms are discussed based
on the steps of general approximation framework. In addition, diﬀerent algorithms are compared
based on the type of approximation, evolutionary algorithm, evolution control and characteristics of
the optimization problem solved. A brief discussion on various issues and using promising elements
related to the use of diﬀerent algorithms is presented in Section 4. Finally, conclusions are drawn in
Section 5 along with future research directions.
2 Basic concepts and terminology
We consider multiobjective optimization problems of the form [93]:
minimize{f1(x),...,f k(x)}
subject tox∈S(1)
withk(≥2) objective functions fi(x) :S→/Rfractur. The vector of objective function values is denoted
byf(x) = (f1(x),...,f k(x))T. For the simplicity of presentation, we assume that all the objective
functions are to be minimized. If some objective function fiis to be maximized, it is equivalent to
minimize−fi. The (nonempty) feasible region Sis a subset of the decision variable space /Rfracturnand
consists of decision variable vectors x= (x1,...,x n)Tthat satisfy all the constraints. The image
of the feasible space Sin the objective space /Rfracturkis called the feasible objective set denoted by Z.
The elements of Zare called feasible objective vectors denoted by f(x) orz= (z1,...,z k)T, where
zi=fi(x),i= 1,...,k , are the objective function values.
As discussed in the introduction, objective functions in a MOP are typically conﬂicting in nature,
and, thus, there is no single well-deﬁned optimal solution but a set of so-called Pareto optimal
solutions exists. A decision vector x∗∈Sis Pareto optimal if there does not exist another decision
vectorx∈Ssuch thatfi(x)≤fi(x∗) for all i=1,. . . ,k and fj(x)< fj(x∗) for at least one index
j. An objective vector is Pareto optimal if the corresponding decision vector is Pareto optimal.
A Pareto optimal set consists of all Pareto optimal solutions in the decision space and a Pareto
front consists of all Pareto optimal solutions in the objective space. A solution x1∈Sis said to
dominate another solution x2∈S, denoted by x1/precedesequalx2iffi(x1)≤fi(x2) for alli= 1,...,k and
fi(x1)<fi(x2) for at least one i∈{1,...,k}.
Ideal and nadir objective vectors represent bounds for objective function values in the Pareto
front. Components of an ideal objective vector z∗∈/Rfracturkare determined by minimizing each objective
function individually, that is, z∗
i= minimize
x∈Sfi(x). A nadir objective vector consists of upper bounds
of objective functions in the Pareto front. It is usually diﬃcult to obtain for problems with more
than two objectives. Several ways of approximating it have been proposed in the literature (see e.g.
[29, 93]). In what follows, we deﬁne concepts relevant to the present survey.
Ametamodel is an approximation of some computationally expensive element in a multiobjective
optimization problem. A metamodel replaces the computationally expensive element by an element