In Herrera et al. [48], support vector regression was used as a metamodel for approximation of
each objective function with NSGA-II. The main focus in this algorithm is to use diﬀerent basis
functions for diﬀerent kinds of variables such as discrete, continuous and categorical variables. It
is to be noted that this algorithm does not use an ensemble of metamodels as only one prediction
is obtained for each objective function by using diﬀerent basis functions for the diﬀerent kinds of
variables. To convert categorical values into real number, dummy coding is used. In step 5, the
metamodel is built for each objective function. Steps 9 and 10 are not applicable to this algorithm
as the metamodel and the archive are not updated.
The proposed algorithm was tested on one real-world problem (two objectives and 10 decision
variables) and compared with NSGA-II. Out of 10 variables, 5 were continuous and 5 were categorical
variables. A visualization of nondominated individuals in the objective space was performed to
compare the two algorithms. The authors mentioned that the proposed algorithm performed similar
to NSGA-II in fewer function evaluations.
In [107], support vector regression was used as a metamodel. This algorithm is known as HO-
MOMA, where a metamodel is built for each objective function in step 5. After evaluating new
individuals in step 7, a local search is used to optimize the ﬁtness function obtained from the
metamodel evaluations. This is done as follows. Firstly, several nondominated fronts are obtained
with nondominated sorting. Then, in each front, sorting is performed according to the ﬁrst objective
function values in the ascending order. A reference point is then calculated for each individual in
each front using these sorted values. After calculating the reference point, a ﬁtness value for each
individual is calculated. Let ˆf=/braceleftBig
ˆf1,ˆf2/bracerightBig
be the predicted objective vector for one individual and
r={r1,r2}the reference point for that individual. Fitness is then calculated as
ﬁtness =

(r1−ˆf1)(r2−ˆf2)ˆf1<r1and ˆf2<r2= 0
(r1−ˆf1) ˆf1>r1and ˆf2<r2= 0
(r2−ˆf2) ˆf1<r1and ˆf2>r2= 0
−d(r,ˆf) otherwise ,(3)
whered(r,ˆf) is the Euclidean distance between rand ˆf. This ﬁtness is then optimized using CMA-
ES [47] as the local search algorithm. To update the metamodel in step 9, nondominated individuals
obtained after the local search are added to the archive in step 10. The size of the archive is ﬁxed in
this algorithm and extra individuals are removed from it randomly. The authors mention the study
for more than two objectives is a future research.
HO-MOMA was tested on 14 benchmark problems with two objectives and 10-30 decision vari-
ables. The algorithm was compared with NSGA-II and ASM-MOMA [105] with hypervolume as the
performance criterion. The proposed algorithm performed better than the others in nine out of 12
problems.
In [104, 103], an extreme learning based MOEA/D-DE [82] was used. This algorithm is known
as ELMOEA/D-DE and inspired by MOEA/D-RBF. The main focus in this algorithm is to use the
metamodel for higher dimensional problems in the decision space. Extreme learning is a single-layer
feedforward neural network proposed in [50]. In step 5, the metamodel is built for each objective
function. To update the metamodel in step 9, the same procedure is used as in MOEA/D-RBF.
In addition, a minimum distance (in the decision space) is maintained between the individuals to
be selected for re-evaluation. After adding these individuals in the archive, inferior solutions (in
terms of scalarized single objective problem) are removed. Otherwise, the closest individual in the
objective space is replaced by the individual obtained in step 9. This is done to ensure that every
new solution is added to the archive for updating the metamodel.