contribution.
The proposed algorithm was tested on 12 benchmark (2-3 objectives and 8-30 decision variables)
and one real-world problem (two objectives and 11 decision variables). The algorithm was compared
with MOEA/D-RBF [90] and IBEA [154]. The hypervolume was used as the comparison criterion.
In case of benchmark problems, NN-SS-IBEA performed better in eight out of 12 problems with
the same number of function evaluations. In case of the real-world problem, the proposed algorithm
performed better than others for a given number of function evaluations.
A similar algorithm to [88] was proposed in [10], where nondominated individuals were also used
during classiﬁcation. In this algorithm, a metamodel is built for three classes while doing pairwise
dominance comparison. Here, three possibilities exist, one solution dominates another, one solution
is dominated by another or both solutions are nondominated. Ten diﬀerent classiﬁcation algorithms
were used independently. The metamodel is updated in step 9 after a ﬁxed number of generations
with the previously evaluated individuals in step 7. The information on the size of the archive is
not mentioned.
The proposed algorithm was tested on three benchmark problems (two objectives and 5-20 de-
cision variables). However, this algorithm was not compared with any other algorithm, but the
results of ten classiﬁcation algorithms were compared using the training time and the accuracy
as the comparison criteria. The authors mentioned that SVM, classiﬁcation trees, k-neural net-
work and quadratic discriminant analysis were the most preferred among other metamodels as these
metamodels found the knee region in the objective space.
In [123], a metamodel was used to predict the rank of individuals in the objective space. In this
algorithm, the metamodel is used to create boundaries between fronts in the objective space. As
shown in Figure 4, θ1andθ2represent the two boundaries created using individuals of three diﬀerent
fronts. The ranks of oﬀspring individuals are then predicted with an indicator function mentioned
in the paper with boundaries created (steps 5-7). For example, individuals that lie below θ1are of
rank 1, individuals between θ1andθ2are of rank 2 and individuals above θ2are of rank 3. The ﬁrst
rank individuals are re-evaluated using the original functions in step 9 and added to the archive in
step 10. The size of the archive is not ﬁxed in this algorithm.
This algorithm was tested on 19 benchmark problems (the authors did not mention explicitly
the number of objectives and decision variables) and compared with NSGA-II, SPEA2 [155] and
MOEA/D [146]. Three performance criteria (generational distance, inverted generational distance
and hypervolume [35]) were used to compare the proposed algorithm and EAs for the same number
of function evaluations. Out of 19 problems, the proposed algorithm performed better than the other
algorithms in 16, 14 and 12 problems in generational distance, inverted generational distance and
hypervolume, respectively. In the rest of the problems, MOEA/D and NSGA-II performed better
than the proposed algorithm.
In [133], a study was performed to compare four metamodelling techniques and three diﬀerent
scalarizing functions using two diﬀerent approaches of approximation. Therefore, for each approxi-
mation, 12 diﬀerent experiments were performed on diﬀerent problems. A data set of preﬁxed size
was used for training and validation. The error after the validation was used to compare diﬀerent
studies. As no algorithm was proposed in the current study, other steps of the function approxi-
mation were not applied. Four metamodels were based on Kernel ridge regression (KRR), Kriging,
Generalized linear models and Tree-based regression. Three diﬀerent scalarizing functions tested
were based on Tchebychef (TCH), Boundary intersection (PBI) and weighted sum (WS). As men-
tioned, two diﬀerent approaches of approximation were used, in the ﬁrst one, the metamodel was
used for the scalarizing funcion and in the second one, the metamodel was used to approximate the
rank of individuals.
In the study, experiments were conducted on DTLZ suite with 4-10 objectives and 8-19 decision