results inSthan the other algorithms in the same number of function evaluations.
A quadratic polynomial approximation was used as a metamodel with the EA µ-MOGA [21] in
Liu et al. [85]. In this algorithm, the bounds of decision variables are updated after every generation
using a trust region algorithm. In step 5, the metamodel is built for each objective and constraint
function. To update the metamodel in step 9, a ﬁxed number of uniformly distributed individuals
(Pa) from nondominated individuals is re-evaluated using the original functions. The nondominated
individuals in the decision space after re-evaluation are stored in a set Pe. The setPo=Pa∩Pe
is determined which is then used to calculate a reliability index N(Po)/N(Pa), whereN(Po) and
N(Pa) are the numbers of individuals in Poand the number of nondominated uniformly distributed
individuals evaluated using the metamodel, respectively. This reliability index is used to update the
bounds of the decision variables in the next generation with a trust region algorithm. The trust
region radius is updated according to [4] and the algorithm terminates if the trust region radius is
smaller than a predeﬁned limit or after a ﬁxed number of generations (step 8). A Latin hypercube
design is used for sampling the decision variables with updated bounds. These individuals with the
updated bounds are evaluated with the original functions which are used to update the metamodel.
Step 10 is not applicable in this algorithm as individuals after step 9 are not added to the archive.
The proposed algorithm was compared with µ-MOGA using two benchmark problems (two ob-
jectives and 2-3 decision variables) and one structural engineering problem (two objectives, three
decision variables and one constraint). Using generational distance as a performance metric for the
benchmark problems and visual comparison for the structural engineering problem the quality of the
obtained set of nondominated solutions within a ﬁxed budget of function evaluations using µ-MOGA
with metamodel was better.
A feedforward neural network was used as a metamodel with NSGA-II in [94]. The metamodel
is built for each objective function in step 5 if a threshold based on a predicted tolerance is satisﬁed.
This predicted tolerance, which is an indication of the accuracy of the metamodel, is calculated
(however, calculation of the predicted tolerance is not detailed in the paper) after every generation.
If this predicted tolerance is less than a user-speciﬁed tolerance, then the metamodel is used in the
next generation. Otherwise, the original functions are used to evaluate individuals. The predicted
tolerance is updated after every generation and again a decision is to be made either to use the
original functions or the metamodel and thus, an adaptive evolution control strategy is used. Indi-
viduals obtained after every generation are added to the archive (steps 9 and 10) and as a result,
the size of the archive grows with generations. In this algorithm, the metamodel is not updated
after every generation but after every generation, it is checked whether the existing metamodel is
suﬃcient enough to predict function values to the extent of accuracy required.
This algorithm was tested on an iron induration MOP with two objectives, 22 decision variables
and three constraints. To check the eﬃciency of the proposed algorithm, a graphical comparison was
presented to the solutions from the algorithm and NSGA-II without using any metamodel. Similar
nondominated individuals were obtained in 50% fewer function evaluations and for the same number
of function evaluations, better nondominated individuals were obtained.
In Chen et al. [14], an extension of algorithm proposed in [85] was proposed. The main diﬀerences
include the type of metamodel, stopping criterion in step 8 and selection of individuals for re-
evaluation for updating the metamodel in step 9. The algorithm proposed utilizes a radial basis
function as a metamodel. In addition to the stopping criteria posed in [85] mentioned earlier, the
algorithm also terminates if the bounds of the decision variables are equal to predeﬁned limit and
the reliability index is equal to one. In step 9, the individuals are selected using an inherited
Latin hypercube design (ILHD) [141] and a local-densifying strategy (to reduce the possibility of an
ill-conditioned RBF matrix) for re-evaluation and subsequently updating the RBF.
The proposed algorithm was tested on eight diﬀerent benchmark problems (two objectives and 1-5