individuals obtained using each metamodel were re-evaluated with other metamodels. For exam-
ple, individuals obtained while using polynomial approximation were re-evaluated with Kriging and
radial basis function. Individuals obtained while using Kriging when re-evaluated with other meta-
models gave the least error in objective function values. In the third one, nondominated individuals
were obtained utilizing steps 1-10 (i.e. by updating the metamodel in steps 9 and 10) and results
were compared graphically in the objective space with the ﬁrst study. While using Kriging and radial
basis function, better results were obtained when compared to results of the ﬁrst study and while
using polynomial approximation, similar results were obtained. However, the proposed algorithm
was not tested using NSGA-II without any metamodel and the eﬃciency of the algorithm was not
mentioned in terms of computation time or the number of function evaluations.
In [6], ﬁve diﬀerent radial basis functions (RBFs) with diﬀerent basis functions were used as
metamodels along with the EA MODE-LD+SS [5]. However, these metamodels were used inde-
pendently for each objective function but individuals from each metamodel evaluation were used to
update all metamodels as discussed next. A metamodel is built for each objective function in step 5.
In step 9, to select the individuals for updating the metamodel, one individual from each metamodel
evaluation is selected for re-evaluation using the original functions and added to the archive in step
10. To select one individual, a set of uniformly distributed weight vectors ( λ1,λ2,...,λN) (where N
is the population size of EA) is deﬁned. Next, from each metamodel evaluation, the individual is se-
lected that minimizes the Chebyshev scalarizing function [93] given by max
i=1,...,k(λij|ˆfi(xj)−f∗
i|). The
values of objective functions obtained after step 7 and the minimum value of the objective function
in the population of EA at the current generation are represented by ˆfandf∗, respectively. The
authors mentioned that this updating criterion can balance the accuracy of the metamodel and the
diversity among individuals. The size of the archive is ﬁxed in this algorithm and extra individuals
are removed from it based on their rank.
This algorithm was tested on ﬁve diﬀerent aerodynamic shape optimization problems with 2-3
objectives and 12 decision variables. Hypervolume was used as the comparison criterion for the
results of MODE-LD+SS with and without metamodels. The proposed algorithm gave a better
hypervolume in fewer function evaluations for all ﬁve optimization problems.
In Palar et al. [101], SS-MOMA described in Section 3.3.2 was tested with diﬀerent metamod-
els for diﬀerent problems i.e. RBF with linear kernel function for ZDT problems and Kriging for
UF problems because of diﬀerent function landscape of the problems. Using a particular technique
for a problem with an assumption that function landscape is known a priori raises the question of
applicability of the algorithm to black-box problems. In addition, one modiﬁcation of achievement
scalarizing function used, where reference point was replaced by the upper bounds of the objective
function values at the current generation was also tested. An another locals search algorithm called
random mutation hill climber [1] was also tested after building the metamodels for each objective
function. To handle constraints, metamodels were ﬁrst built for each objective function and af-
ter scalarization, a constrained SQP algorithm was used to solve the single objective optimization
problem.
The algorithm was tested on seven biobjective benchmark problems with 8-15 decision variables
and a biobjective airfoil optimization problem with 16 variables and one constraint. Diﬀerent versions
of the algorithm with diﬀerent scalrzing functions were compared with each other also with NSGA-II
using IGD. Overall a low number of function evaluations were used to obtain a given IGD value
when Tchebycheﬀ function with reference point as the individual objective function values was used.