to reduce the computation time. As an example, replacing 3-dimensional Navier-Stokes equations
by 2-dimensional Euler equations [78] reduces the computational complexity of the problem. In
[78] and [79], Euler equations were used instead of Navier-Stokes equations to solve aerodynamic
shape optimization problems. A similar approach was followed in [92, 100], where 2-dimensional
Navier-Stokes equations were used for solving aerodynamic shape optimization problems.
Recently, data-driven optimization algorithms [142] are also proposed to solve problems, where
an analytical forms or simulations models for the objective functions are not available and some
data is available obtained through some physical experiments. Therefore, to obtain Pareto optimal
solutions, one has to rely upon the data available. In Wang et al. [142], a MOP was formulated
using the data available from a trauma system. In addition, the authors found out that accuracy
and size of the data used in optimization are conﬂicting.
In ﬁtness approximation, we have algorithms which use metamodels for approximating some ele-
ment instead of objective functions. For instance, approximating a rank, classiﬁcations of individuals
into nondominated and dominated sets and distance to the nondominated individuals. Moreover, we
consider the papers in the categories of ﬁtness inheritance and ﬁtness imitation (deﬁned in Section
2) in this section.
Fitness inheritance was originally proposed in [129] to improve the performance of genetic algo-
rithms. Two types of ﬁtness inheritance were proposed in that paper. In the ﬁrst one, known as
averaged inheritance, the ﬁtness values of the oﬀspring were calculated by taking the average of the
ﬁtness values of the parents. In the second one, known as proportional inheritance, weighted average
of the ﬁtness values of the parents were assigned to oﬀspring and weights were assigned according
to common elements between oﬀspring and parents. This algorithm was tested on OneMax problem
[2] and the algorithm with ﬁtness inheritance gave better performance (a graphical comparison was
performed) than without inheritance in fewer function evaluations.
In what follows, some papers are cited here which use the concept of ﬁtness inheritance. One
should note that all these algorithms were not tested on computationally expensive MOPs. In [15],
analytical algorithms for computing convergence time and population size were proposed for using
the ﬁtness inheritance in MOPs. In [34], the ﬁtness inheritance was used with a binary genetic
algorithm (GA) for the ZDT benchmark problems. The authors found a similar performance of
the binary GA with and without using the ﬁtness inheritance for problems having convex and
continuous Pareto fronts. In case of nonconvex and discontinuous Pareto fronts, the binary GA
without inheritance performed better and the authors mentioned that ﬁtness inheritance can only
be applied to problems having convex and continuous Pareto fronts. In contrast, in [115], the
authors found out that the ﬁtness inheritance can also be applied to problems having nonconvex
and discontinuous Pareto fronts.
In Loshchilov et al. [87], a metamodel was used to predict the class for the individuals. This
class was the indication that individuals were either nondominated or dominated. This algorithm is
known as Pareto-SVM, where one class SVM is used for the classiﬁcation of individuals in the decision
space into nondominated and dominated. In addition, support vector regression is used to predict
those individuals (after classiﬁcation in the decision space) to a target value in the objective space.
Aggregate surrogate metamodel terminology is used in the paper as two metamodels are used, one in
the decision space and another in the objective space. Instead of binary classiﬁcation in the decision
space, all nondominated individuals mapped to the single value ρwith tolerance /epsilon1and all dominated
individuals are mapped to ] −∞,ρ−/epsilon1[. In this way, the individuals belonging to [ ρ+/epsilon1,+∞[ are in the
unexplored region. In step 9, an updating criterion for the metamodel is inspired from EA PESA-II
[23]. Firstly, individuals obtained after step 7 are added to the archive and duplicate individuals
are removed. Then, the objective space is partitioned into a ﬁxed number of equal sized hyperboxes
and one individual or nondominated individual (if the box contains nondominated) is selected from