2. budget e.g. maximum number of expensive function evaluations available.
The ﬁrst point in selecting an algorithm is the dimensions of the problem to be solved both in the
objective and decision spaces. One can observe from Table 2 that some algorithms e.g. [6, 8, 86, 136]
were tested with up to three objectives, few (i.e. [18, 109, 106]) were tested with more than three
and most of the algorithms were tested only on biobjective optimization problems. A similar pattern
can be observed for decision variables: only two algorithms i.e. [84, 104] were tested on problems
with more than 30 variables. Therefore, references provided in the table give options for selecting
an algorithm based on the dimensions of the problem to be solved.
The second key point in selecting an algorithm should be the capability of the algorithm to obtain
solutions in a given limited budget. In many real-world problems, the number of expensive function
evaluations is limited e.g. because of a time limit and it may be infeasible to do initial experimental
runs to select an algorithm. As can be seen in Table 1, some algorithms in the literature use up
to 50000 function evaluations to solve benchmark problems and such a high number may not be
realistic in solving real problems. Although the eﬃciency of diﬀerent algorithms with the number
of function evaluations is not visible in most of the articles, one can look at the maximum number
of function evaluations used to choose an algorithm.
4.4 Issues with the present algorithms
Let us discuss next the main issues we have observed in the algorithms in the literature related to
using an approximation in an EA and the numerical settings used to test their eﬃcacy. These main
issues include: 1. type of test problems used (benchmark or real-world), 2. dimensions of the test
problems both in objective and decision spaces considered, 3. scarce use of constrained problems
for numerical testing, 4. neglecting the training time for ﬁtting the metamodel used when reporting
results, 5. less focus on the accuracy of the metamodel, 6. not well explored updating criterion of the
metamodel, 7. not well structured ensemble of metamodels, and 8. less emphasis to algorithms that
consider problem information when available. To augment the discussion on the issues enumerated
above, we present in Table 2 an overview of the test problems considered in the literature with their
dimensions both in objective and decision spaces and the type of metamodel used. Issues 1-3 and
4-8 address the shortcomings in numerical testing and solution algorithms used, respectively.
In Table 2, it can be clearly seen that both benchmark and real-world problems have been widely
used by researchers to test their proposed EAs. Benchmark problems available in the literature are
designed to be simple to implement, fast to evaluate, have known global optimal solutions, pose
varied challenges to EAs such as several locally optimal solutions etc. Benchmark problems solved
are not computationally expensive and used just to test the eﬃciency of a particular algorithm.
For more details about the characteristics of benchmark problems, see [28, 20]. On the other hand,
real-world problems either are actual problems considered in the industry or an emulation of them.
Often, real-world problems are computationally expensive to evaluate, have uncertainties in their
input and output variables, which in turn does not allow a thorough testing of an EA in practice
using several real-world problems. Thus, it could be a good practice, if a numerical test setting
involving several benchmark and a few real-world problems could be used to thoroughly test EAs.
However, in the literature very few researchers have adopted this practice. One reason for this could
be attributed to the lack of open availability of real-world problems to all researchers.
Real-world problems in industries often involve a large number of objectives, a large decision
space and a large number of constraints. It can be seen in Table 2 that most of the problems
considered in the literature had low dimensions both in decision and objective spaces. Additionally,
only six algorithms in Table 2 considered constraints besides the bounds for the decision variables.
Thus, signiﬁcant attention is needed towards issues 2 and 3 and more constrained benchmark and