ELMOEA/D-DE in [104] was tested on ZDT problems with 10-60 decision variables and com-
pared with MOEA/D-DE and MOEA/D-RBF.Later in [103], the algorithm was tested on ZDT,
DTLZ and WFG problems with 2-5 objectives and 5-60 decision variables and on an airfoil shape
optimization problem with two objectives and 12 decision variables. The algorithm was also com-
pared using addictive-Epsilon and R2[156] as the performance indicators. For the given number of
function evaluations, the proposed algorithm obtained better performance.
In [3], an algorithm called gap optimized multiobjective optimization using response surfaces
(GOMORS) was proposed, where radial basis functions were used to approximate the objective
functions. After building the metamodels in step 5 for each objective function, an EA proposed
in [139] was used for optimization from step 6-7. After step 7, an another optimization problem
was solved using the same EA by reducing the bounds of the decision variables. This problem was
referred as gap optimization problem in the article. In step 9 for updating the metamodels, four
criterion were used and one individual corresponding to these criterion was selected and added to the
training archive in step 10. Four criterion were based on hypervolume, distance to the individuals
in the decision space, distance to the individuals in the objective space and hypervolume in the gap
optimization problem. A maximum number of function evaluations was used as the termination
criterion.
The algorithm was tested on 11 benchmark problems with 8-24 decision variables and two ob-
jectives. In addition, a groundwater remediation problem with 6-24 variables and two objectives
was also solved. The algorithm was compared with NSGA-II and ParEGO using hypervolume in
200-400 function evaluations. The proposed algorithms obtained better performance than others in
the given number of function evaluations.
In [102], an algorithm called surrogate assisted local search memetic algorithm (SS-MOMA) was
proposed, where RBF as a metamodel was build on the single objective problem after converting
multiobjective optimization problem using a scalarization function. Two common ways of scalar-
ization i.e. Tchebycheﬀ and weighted sum were tested, where weights were generated randomly and
the reference point in Tchebycheﬀ scalarization was the current individual objective function val-
ues. After generating the oﬀspring population in step 6, metamodels were built locally for each
individual. For instance, if the oﬀspring population of size 100 was generated, one metamodel for
each individual (i.e. 100 in total) was built. As multiobjective optimization problem was converted
into single objective using the scalarzing function, SQP algorithm was used to obtain the solutions.
All solutions thus obtained were re-evaluated with the original functions and added to the training
archive. Afterward, these solutions were combined with the parent individuals and non-dominated
sorting [31] was performed to obtain the population for the next generation. In this way, after every
generation metamodels were updated with a number equal to the population size used.
The algorithm was tested on three benchmark problems with 15 variables and two objectives.
The algorithm was not compared with any other algorithm. However, in 1606 function evaluations,
Tchebycheﬀ scalarization performed better than weighted sum in terms of generational distance [28]
and one diversity metric used.
In Datta and Regis [27], RBF as metamodels were built for every objective and constraint function
in step 5. A ( µ+λ) evolution strategy mutation operator was used to generate new individuals in
step 6 which were then evaluated using the metamodels in step 7. After using metamodels for
each objective and constraint functions, feasible solutions were found and a nondominated sorting
was performed on these feasible solutions. The best individuals i.e. individuals in the ﬁrst front
were re-evaluated with the original functions to update the metamodels in step 9 and added to the
training archive in step 10. Therefore, the maximum number of individuals to be updated was λ. In
addition, initial training of metamodels in step 5was performed without considering any feasibility or
infeasibility of solutions. However, the authors clearly mentioned that the algorithm is not expected