the individuals in the objective space and the representative individuals are re-evaluated using
the original functions [45, 65]. The representative individuals can be the individuals closest
to each cluster center or the best individuals (with highest ﬁtness values) in each cluster. In-
dividuals with low approximation accuracy can also be selected for re-evaluation [13, 39] and
this selection may be eﬀective in improving the approximation accuracy of the metamodel.
In the literature, criteria for updating the metamodel in single objective optimization are also
modiﬁed to be used in multiobjective optimization. For instance, expected improvement in
[71, 60, 69, 24, 140] and probability of improvement in [24] are used to update the metamodel
in multiobjective optimization. In addition, expected hypervolume improvement is used in
[38, 37, 124] to select the individuals for re-evaluation so that the metamodel can be updated.
It is to be noted that inﬁlling criterion is sometimes used as a synonym for updating criterion
in the literature.
3.Training time for the metamodel: Training time is also an issue in case of single objective
optimization but when moving to multiobjective optimization, training or updating time be-
comes more inﬂuential. For example, diﬀerent metamodels for diﬀerent objective functions
may take a diﬀerent amount of training data (archive size) which increases the training time
when compared to single objective optimization. In the literature, unfortunately, most of the
algorithms do not mention the training time for the metamodel. This is due to the reason that
the training time of the metamodels is usually assumed to be negligible compared to objective
function evaluations. However, it may happen that the training time of the metamodels is
substantial and the whole aim of reducing computation time is jeopardized.
In addition to the three challenges above, two challenges exist which are common to both
single objective and multiobjective optimization. They can inﬂuence the performance of an
EA while using metamodels.
1.Choice of the metamodel: In the literature, there is very little guidance about the choice of the
metamodel for approximation of computationally expensive functions. A metamodel is either
selected randomly or due to its popularity in the area with which the problem is associated.
For instance, in [76], radial basis neural network was used as a metamodel for approxima-
tion of objective functions in coastal aquifer management problem and it was mentioned that
neural networks were popular for groundwater applications. Kriging was used in [59] due to
its promising nature for building accurate global approximations.In [101], diﬀerent metamod-
elling techniques were used for diﬀerent problems i.e. RBF with linear kernel function for ZDT
problems and Kriging for UF [149] problems. The reason mentioned was that RBF was used
due to simplicity of the function landscape in ZDT problems and and Kriging was used be-
cause functions in UF problems are highly non-linear and test with RBF showed a very low
accuracy when used for UF problems. However, the algorithm was developed for black-box
computationally expensive problems, where function landscape of the problems in question is
not known a priori. Moreover, Kriging is most popular technique when compared to others
because of its ability to provide uncertainty for the approximated values. To overcome the
problem of choosing of a metamodel, an ensemble of metamodels described in Section 2 is also
used in the literature [127, 84]. However, there are still some open challenges related to the
ensemble of metamodels such as what should be the criterion for choosing diﬀerent metamodels
or how diﬀerent metamodels can be used simultaneously?
2.When to update the metamodel: It is also an important issue to decide when to update the
metamodel or in other words, is there any need to update the metamodel. For example, before
selecting individuals in step 9, one can check whether the existing metamodel is accurate