of generations in step 3 in stage 1 and the number of individuals for re-evaluation in step 9 in stage
2, as reported for example problems solved in the papers cited.
All parameters mentioned in Table 1 are important and can inﬂuence the performance of the
algorithm. The population size |NP|is a critical parameter and several studies like [16, 22] show the
eﬀect of the population size on the performance of evolutionary algorithms. The size of the archive
|NA|mainly aﬀects the training time of the metamodels and as can be seen from the table, most of
the algorithm do not have a ﬁxed size archive. The size of data set |NI|used to train metamodels is
diﬀerent in diﬀerent algorithms. One can adjust this parameter based on the resources or maximum
number of function evaluations available. In addition, the size of the data set |NU|to update the
surrogates is also important and should be decided based on the resources available. For instance, if
it is possible to do parallel evaluations, one can select the size accordingly. An example is given in
[72], where the ParEGO algorithm could not be applied in doing experiments for drug design because
the algorithm did not have an option to select multiple sample points at a time. The maximum
number of function evaluations FEmaxis also important when comparing diﬀerent algorithms.
Many algorithms use diﬀerent numbers of function evaluations, which makes it diﬃcult to select an
algorithm to solve a given problem. The number varies from 50 to 30000 in the literature. Next, we
classify algorithms which use only a single metamodel, which are further classiﬁed into Kriging and
non-Kriging based algorithms.
3.3 Algorithms based on a single metamodel
In this subsection, we discuss algorithms using one metamodel for all objective and/or constraint
function. As mentioned, to make the a clear structure of the paper and also due to wide applicability
of Kriging models, we further classify this subsection into Kriging based algorithms and non-Kriging
based algorithms. Further these algorithms are discussed year wise, i.e. starting from the year 2008.
3.3.1 Kriging based algorithms
In this section, we discuss algorithms using Kriging.
A DACE model [118] which is a Kriging based approximation was used in [109]. This algorithm
is known as SMS-EGO which is an extension of eﬃcient global optimization (EGO) [67] for multi-
objective optimization problems. In step 5, the metamodel is built for each objective function and
to update it in step 9, one individual having maximum contribution to the hypervolume is selected
for re-evaluation using the original functions. This individual is then added to the archive in step
10 and the metamodel is updated in the next generation. The size of the archive is not ﬁxed in this
algorithm.
SMS-EGO was tested on ﬁve benchmark problems (2-5 objectives and 3-6 decision variables) and
compared with ParEGO [71] and the algorithm proposed in [60]. The unary hypervolume indicator
[156], the R2 indicator [46] and the unary epsilon indicator [157] were used as the comparison criteria.
The proposed algorithm performed better than the other algorithms in all cases when hypervolume
was used as the performance measure. In terms of other comparison criteria, it performed worse
than the other algorithms for three problems.
In Li et al. [83], Kriging was used as a metamodel with a modiﬁed version of NSGA-II. In this
algorithm which is known as K-MOGA, the metamodel is used for approximating each objective
function in step 5. To update the metamodel in step 9, domination status is measured for each
individual evaluated using the metamodel. Individuals which change the domination status are re-
evaluated using the original functions and added to the archive in step 10. To check the domination
status, minimum of minimum distance (MMD) is measured. To calculate MMD, individuals are