enough to predict objective function values in the next generation. If so, the metamodel is
not updated and the existing metamodel is used for approximation. An oﬀspring population
has to be generated before updating the metamodel so that the metamodel accuracy can be
measured for the individuals of the oﬀspring population. There may be a possibility that the
metamodel is never updated and the metamodel trained after stage 1 is used in all generations.
In that situation, steps 9 and 10 are eliminated from stage 2. In the literature, there is very
little focus on the question of when to update the metamodel.
3.Handling constraints: While using metamodels in constrained problems, an appropriate set of
solutions is needed to train them. Most of the metamodel-based algorithms in the literature
are not developed to handle constraints. In addition, few algorithms which are developed
to handle constraints assume that feasible solutions are available to train metamodels for
constraint function. In many problem, obtaining a feasible solution is not trivial e.g. C1-
DTLZ1 problem [58] with very small feasible region. In such instances, using metamodels for
constraints can be very challenging. We provide more details of handling constraints while
describing diﬀerent algorithms.
Steps 5, 9 and 10 representing the ﬁrst three main challenges are written in italics in the function
approximation framework to indicate the steps, where algorithms using function approximation in
multiobjective optimization mainly diﬀer from each other. Other three challenges, selection of a
metamodel, when to update the metamodel and size of the data to train the metamodel are not the
major diﬀerences in the algorithms.
In what follows, 30 algorithms and from the literature are discussed utilizing the three main
steps (5,9 and 10) of the function approximation framework and attention is paid to their eﬃciency
in reducing the computation time. These algorithms are classiﬁed according to the number of
metamodels they have used e.g. single metamodel, multiple metamodels independently or ensemble
of metamodels. Among single metamodel based algorithms, Kriging is used more often than other
metamodels. As mentioned, the main advantage from Kriging is the uncertainty information besides
the predicted objective and/or constraint function values. This uncertainty information can be
further utilized in the algorithm. For instance, uncertainty information is used while updating the
metamodel in [37, 18, 110, 71].
In contrast to single metamodel based algorithms, some algorithms use metamodels indepen-
dently. Moreover, some algorithms use ensemble of metamodels to solve the problem of choosing
a metamodel. In what follows, three categories, algorithms based on single metamodel, algorithms
based on multiple metamodels and algorithms based on ensemble of metamodels, are used to de-
scribe diﬀerent algorithms. It was found that the number of papers in the literature belonging to
the function approximation are largely skewed towards the ﬁrst category, i.e. algorithms based on
a single metamodel. Hence a sub-classiﬁcation based on the usage of metamodel within diﬀerent
algorithms is devised to enhance clarity and readability. Thus we further classify the algorithms
using single metamodel into Kriging and non-Kriging based algorithm. Due to a limited number of
articles in other categories, such a sub-classiﬁcation is not used for others. It is also worth mention-
ing that most of the algorithms are based on dominance based EAs and are generic for using any
metamodel. At the end of this section, a comparison is presented based on which metamodel and
type of EAs are used, what is the evolution control strategy and what are the characteristics of the
optimization problems.
Parameter values used in these algorithms in stages 1 and 2 of the function approximation
framework are presented in Table 1, where “NA” indicates that the parameter is not applicable to
the algorithm and “not given” means that this information is not given in the reference. The table
collects information of the population size in step 1, the size of archive in step 2, the preﬁxed number