3.5 Algorithms based on ensemble of metamodels
In this subsection, we discuss algorithms using ensemble of metamodels. As deﬁned in Section 2,
either the weights are given to predicted output of the metamodel or a metamodel is selected based
on its accuracy. In [84], an ensemble of metamodels (Kriging, polynomial regression and radial
basis function) was used with the proposed generalized surrogate multiobjective memetic algorithm
(GS-MOMA). In this algorithm, the oﬀspring population is generated in step 6 before building the
metamodel. A ﬁxed number of individuals, equal to n+ (n+ 1)(n+ 2)/2, (wherenis the number of
decision variables) is selected from the archive to build an ensemble of metamodels and a separate
polynomial regression metamodel in step 5. The individuals are selected in the decision space using
the Euclidean distance between the individuals in the oﬀspring population and the individuals in the
archive. The individuals which are closer to oﬀspring individuals are used to build the metamodels.
The ensemble ﬁtness values of oﬀspring individuals are calculated as Fens(x) =/summationtextm
j=1ωjFj(x),
whereωjis the weight coeﬃcient for ﬁtness values Fj(x) of thejth metamodel (step 7). The
weight coeﬃcient is assigned based on the accuracy of the metamodels which is calculated using
root mean square error. A local search algorithm (sequential quadratic programming) is also used
for single objective optimization of Fj(x) to improve the individuals evaluated with the metamodel.
The best found individuals after this step and the local search algorithm are combined with the
parent population and a selection mechanism is used to select individuals for the next generation.
To update the metamodels, an oﬀspring population is generated and individuals are selected from
the initial archive based on the mechanism used to build the metamodel. Steps 9 and 10 are not
applicable in this algorithm and the size of the archive is ﬁxed.
This algorithm was tested on six benchmark problems (labeled as MF problems in the paper)
with 2-3 objectives and with 10-50 decision variables. Three performance criteria namely generalized
distance [138], maximum spread [152] and hypervolume ratio [137] were used for comparison between
GS-MOMA and NSGA-II without a metamodel. GS-MOMA performed better in all performance
criteria for all problems in the same number of function evaluations.
In Singh et al. [127], a surrogate assisted simulated annealing (SASA) algorithm was proposed,
where an ensemble of metamodels (quadratic polynomial and radial basis function) was used with
constrained Pareto simulated annealing (C-PSA) as an EA. In this algorithm, one of two diﬀerent
metamodels is selected to evaluate individuals based on their accuracy which is calculated using the
root mean square error. A ﬁxed number of recently evaluated individuals in stage 1 is used to create
the metamodels in step 5. In what follows, for each objective function, either one of the metamodels
or the original functions are used to evaluate the oﬀspring individuals in step 7 and thus, an adaptive
evolution control strategy is used. In other words, if none of the metamodels is accurate enough
(accuracy is compared with a predeﬁned parameter), the original functions are used. To select the
individuals for updating the metamodel in step 9, nondominated individuals after step 7 (in case
a metamodel is used) are re-evaluated with the original functions and added to the archive in step
10. Dominated individuals are removed from the archive and the remaining individuals are used to
update the metamodels. The size of the archive is ﬁxed here and clustering is used via a linkage
algorithm [56] to remove extra individuals.
The SASA algorithm was tested on eight benchmark problems [28] with two objectives, 10
decision variables and 1-2 constraints. The hypervolume and displacement metric [11] were used
to compare SASA with NSGA-II and the infeasibility driven evolutionary algorithm (IDEA) [113].
For the same number of function evaluations, SASA performed better than the other algorithms for
seven problems and for one problem, IDEA performed the best in both performance criteria.
In [90], a similar algorithm to MOEA/D-EGO was proposed, where radial basis function was
used as the metamodel. This algorithm is known as MOEA/D-RBF, where the metamodel is built