The number of papers which used benchmark and real-world problems is also mentioned in
Figure 3. Seven algorithms [84, 104, 107, 110, 127, 131, 148] were tested on benchmark problems,
seven algorithms [6, 48, 52, 59, 75, 94, 128] on real-world problems and seven algorithms [14, 81, 83,
85, 86, 90, 151, 18] on both. The eﬃciency of the diﬀerent algorithms in terms of computation time
or number of function evaluations reduced is very important, especially in the case of real-world
problems. In some cases, the authors mentioned that it was practically diﬃcult to do optimization
without approximations due to high computation time and the algorithm was not compared with
an EA without any metamodel.
As far as selection of a metamodel is concerned, as mentioned in Section 3.1, there is no general
rule or correlation between a metamodel for approximation and a particular problem to be solved.
As shown in Figure 3, single metamodel is used more than multiple metamodels and ensemble of
metamodels. In algorithms using single metamodel, Kriging [59, 83, 81, 86, 110, 128, 148, 151] has
been used more than other metamodels such as neural networks [14, 76, 94, 104, 131], support vector
regression [48, 107] and polynomial regression [85].
In [151], Kriging was used as a metamodel and the authors mentioned that within diﬀerent
metamodels studies to date, perhaps the most common type of metamodel used is the Kriging
model. In [14], radial basis functions (RBFs) were used and the authors mentioned that RBF was
a kind of approximation having a very good approximation accuracy. In [6], the authors mentioned
that RBFs were very powerful functions to represent complex ﬁtness landscapes. In addition, the
authors mentioned that Kriging had a strong mathematical basis, and is probably one of the most
powerful interpolation algorithms currently available.
Managing the metamodels or evolution control is also very important as it aﬀects the performance
of the metamodel used. As shown in Figure 3, the ﬁxed evolution control strategy was used more
than the adaptive evolution control strategy. As mentioned in Section 2, using an adaptive evolution
control strategy depends on the accuracy of the metamodel used and using a ﬁxed evolution control
strategy implies that either the metamodel is accurate enough for approximation or the metamodel
accuracy is not important or not checked. There are only ﬁve algorithms [86, 94, 95, 127, 151], where
adaptive evolution control was used. For instance in [86], after using Kriging models, uncertainty
of the approximated values was compared with a predeﬁned value and if that uncertainty was
acceptable, then only Kriging models were further used otherwise original function were used. A
similar strategy was followed in [94], where accuracy of neural networks was measured after every
generation and compared with a predeﬁned value. In [95], uncertainties of oﬀspring was compared
with the uncertainties of parents and based on the comparison, the decision was made to use Kriging
models or original functions. Singh et al. [127] and Zhu et al. [151] the approximation accuracy
of metamodels for using them in subsequent evaluations. Moreover, the training time for diﬀerent
metamodels was not considered in many papers though training time can be substantially high in
some cases, particularly, when the metamodel approximation accuracy is important. Among EAs,
dominance based algorithms are more widely used than other algorithms e.g. decomposition based
or indicator based. Moreover, in dominance based EAs, NSGA-II was used more often than other
EAs.
3.7 Problem and ﬁtness approximation
In addition to function approximation, problem and ﬁtness approximations are also used in the liter-
ature to reduce the computation time in multiobjective optimization problems. In problem approx-
imation, the original problem is replaced by a simpliﬁed problem which is faster to solve. The main
goal in problem approximation is to reduce the computational complexity of the problem. For exam-
ple, in computational ﬂuid dynamics or structural analysis, the governing equations can be modiﬁed