real-world problems need to be included in the numerical test settings. The number of objectives
considered did not usually exceed three and thus the applicability of existing surrogate-based algo-
rithms is limited. In the literature, the term many-objective optimization is also used as a synonym
for optimizing (usually) more than three objectives. Moreover, the maximum number of decision
variables considered is under 60. In fact, only three algorithms were used on more than three objec-
tive functions, four algorithms were used for three objective functions and the rest of the algorithms
were used for solving biobjective optimization problems.
Furthermore, it is worth noting the connection between the type of metamodels used and the
number of decision variables associated with the problem. In one instance, neural network was used
when the number of decision variables was high (60). Next, in the decreasing order of popularity
are algorithms using ensemble of metamodels, Kriging, support vector regression and polynomial
approximation (including linear regression) for handling high dimensional (decision space) problems.
What is missing in the literature is a study with each of the algorithms about the eﬃcacy of using
diﬀerent metamodels when the dimensions of the decision space increases, especially in algorithms
where the type of the metamodel to be used within the algorithm is not binding. Hence, further
research towards dimensions and types of metamodels is needed.
The issues 4-7 concern the use of metamodels. The major concern in the literature is how to
alleviate the computational cost of the MOP. However, the training time needed to build/update
a metamodel is completely neglected when reporting the results. This is mainly based on the
assumption by the researchers that the computation time needed to compute objective and constraint
function values is signiﬁcantly higher as compared to the building/updating time of the metamodel
used. This assumption may not hold in all cases and, speciﬁcally, when a large amount of data is
used to build/update the metamodel.
Most of the algorithms discussed in this survey used a ﬁxed evolution control strategy, i.e. the
accuracy of the metamodel is not considered as an important issue. In this survey, we deﬁned the
adaptive evolution control, where if the metamodel is not accurate, the original functions are used
for evaluating individuals. A desired accuracy for a metamodel can be predeﬁned (e.g. in terms of
a parameter) or changed by the user during the solution process. The accuracy can be calculated
by diﬀerent statistical measurements such as root mean square error, coeﬃcient of determination,
analysis of variance (ANOVA) etc. [132]. As the accuracy of the metamodel is not considered in
many algorithms in the literature and this is a valid future research direction.
The updating criterion of the metamodel can inﬂuence the quality of nondominated solutions.
Considering the function approximation framework mentioned in Section 3, selected individuals from
step 7 are re-evaluated with the original functions. The number and selection criterion of individuals
to be used for re-evaluation from step 7 is not well explored in the literature, however, few algorithms
considered both exploration and exploitation while updating the metamodel. We consider this as
an important issue as selection of these individuals aﬀects the updating time and accuracy of the
metamodel, which may ﬁnally aﬀect the quality of the set of nondominated solutions generated by
the algorithm.
Although we consider an ensemble of metamodels to be a very promising element in the literature,
yet, we consider it as an issue as well. In most of the algorithms proposed in the literature, only
the accuracy of the metamodel is used as the criterion to select a particular metamodel. However,
there can be other criteria that can be considered in addition to the accuracy of the metamodel,
e.g. diversity among individuals, training time of the metamodel etc. Considering these criteria for
structuring an ensemble of metamodel is a future research direction.
Finally, the information about the MOP such as a diﬀerent computation time required for evalu-
ating diﬀerent objective and/or constraint functions must be considered by the EA. Here we suggest
two types of problem information that can be considered: ﬁrstly, if any objective function is not
32