to work well on problems when the feasible region is empty.
The algorithm was tested on 15 benchmark problems with 2-15 decision variables, 2-5 objective
functions and 2-13 constraint functions. In addition it was also tested on a manufacturing and
robotics problem with 3-7 decision variables, 2-5 objectives and 2-8 constraints. Hypervolume was
used to compare the performance of the algorithm against constrained version of ( µ+λ) evolution
strategy [9] and NSGA-II. The algorithm performed better in 500-5000 function evaluations.
In [114], RBF was used as a metamodel for each objective and constraint function. It was
assumed that at least one feasible solution is available to train the metamodels in step 5. To create
new individuals in step 6, two diﬀerent approaches were tested. In the ﬁrst one, uniform random
individuals were generated over the search space and in the second one, individuals were generated by
adding Gaussian perturbation centered at the nondominated individual that has the most isolated
objective function values. The most isolated individuals is identiﬁed by measuring the distance
among nondominated individuals. Metamodels were then used to approximate the objective and
constraint function values in step 7. Afterward, nondominated solutions with minimum constraint
violations were found. Among these individuals, one individual was selected for re-evaluations in
step 9 to update the metamodels. One individual was selected by the weighted sum (with equal
wights) of two criterion. One criterion was the distance of solutions (in the decision space) obtained
in step 7 from the individuals in the training archive and the second criterion was the distance from
the nondominated individuals from the last generation in the objective space. Selected individual
was then re-evaluated and added to the archive in step 10.
The algorithm was tested on 28 benchmark problems with 2-5 objectives, 2-15 decision variables
and 1-11 constraint functions. the algorithm was compared with its two diﬀerent versions (based
on the generation of individuals in step 7), NSGA-II and DirectMultiSearch(DMS) [26] using hyper-
volume as the performance indicator. Overall, the version where individuals were generated using
Gaussian distribution performed better in the given number of function evaluations.
3.4 Algorithms based on multiple metamodels
In this subsection, algorithms using multiple metamodels are discussed. These metamodels are used
independently to predict objective and/or constraint functions.
In [52], three independent case studies were performed, where three diﬀerent metamodels (poly-
nomial approximation, Kriging and radial basis function) were used with NSGA-II. The metamodel
is built for each objective function in step 5. The nondominated individuals obtained after this step
are improved using a local search algorithm with sequential quadratic programming. To perform
local search, a variant of /epsilon1-constraint algorithm [93] is used i.e. one of the objectives is optimized
and other objectives are converted to equality constraints. The improved individuals are combined
with individuals from step 7 and dominated and duplicated individuals are eliminated. To update
the metamodel in step 9, a ﬁxed number of individuals is selected from the remaining individuals
using K-means clustering in the objective space for re-evaluation using the original functions. These
individuals are then added to the archive in step 10. The size of the archive is not ﬁxed in this
algorithm.
This algorithm was used to solve a heat sink MOP with two objectives and three decision vari-
ables. Three diﬀerent studies were performed to compare the results while using diﬀerent metamod-
els. In the ﬁrst one, nondominated individuals were identiﬁed while using each metamodel involving
steps 1-8 (i.e. without updating the metamodel) of the function approximation framework. Five
representative individuals among nondominated individuals were selected using K-means clustering
and re-evaluated with the original functions. The proposed algorithm with Kriging gave the least
error in objective function values for these ﬁve individuals. In the second study, ﬁve representative