the ﬁtness values of the existing evaluated individuals in its vicinity. The function approximation
is more widely used than other approximations and algorithms applying it are discussed next in
Section 3.1. Approaches using problem and ﬁtness approximation are discussed in Section 3.2.
3.1 Function approximation
As said, function approximation is the most commonly used approach among approximation based
algorithms and there, an explicit or an implicit approximation of a computationally expensive,
function is formed, which is faster to evaluate. In what follows, we refer to the functions of the
original, computationally expensive problem as original functions. In the literature, metamodel is
often used for all objective functions, therefore all objective functions are assumed as computationally
expensive. Neural networks [76, 94, 8, 84], Kriging [71, 59, 109, 83] and polynomial regression
[52, 127] are examples of algorithms used for function approximation.
The general steps for using function approximation in an EA can be divided into two stages
consisting of ten steps and most of the algorithms discussed in this section follow these steps. In
what follows, we present a function approximation framework that captures the core of the EA
proposed in the literature utilizing function approximation. Additionally, it is assumed that one
type of metamodel is used for all objective and constraint functions involved although it is possible
to use diﬀerent metamodels for diﬀerent objective functions.
Stage 1
1. Initialize the population either randomly or using a sampling method.
2. Evaluate the individuals of the population using the original functions and add them to an
archive.
3. If a preﬁxed number of generations is completed, go to stage 2.
4. Use EA operators (selection, crossover and mutation) to create a new population and go to
step 2.
Stage 2
5.Build or update a metamodel for each computationally expensive objective and constraint func-
tion using the individuals from the archive.
6. Use EA operators (selection, crossover and mutation) to create a new population.
7. For each objective and constraint function, evaluate the individuals of the new population either
using the metamodel or the original function (ﬁxed or adaptive evolution control strategy).
8. If a stopping criterion is met, select the non-dominated individuals from step 7 as the ﬁnal
population and stop. Otherwise, continue.
9.Select individuals from step 7 for re-evaluation using the original functions if needed.
10.Add the individuals from step 9 to the archive and go to step 5.
In stage 1, a general evolutionary algorithm works and in stage 2, an EA with a metamodel is
used. In step 1, a population is initialized either randomly or using a sampling method such as Latin
hypercube sampling [91]. Individuals of the population are evaluated using the original functions
and the evaluated individuals are added to an archive in step 2. If a preﬁxed number of generations