f1(x) f2(x) 
f1(x) f2(x) Individuals  belong  to A 
Individuals  belong  to A1 
Individuals  belong  to A2 
o1 o2 Figure 1: Selection of individual from individuals evaluated using metamodel
decision variables) and a structural engineering problem (two objectives and ﬁve decision variables).
The results were compared with µ-MOGA without any metamodel and the algorithm proposed in
[85]. In case of benchmark problems, the proposed algorithm obtained better values for spread and
convergence metrices [31] in fewer function evaluations. For the structural engineering problem, the
proposed algorithm was not tested using µ-MOGA without any metamodel.
In [76], a multiobjective surrogate assisted (MOSA) algorithm was proposed, where a modular
neural network (MNN) [75] was used as a metamodel with NSGA-II. A metamodel is built for each
objective function in step 5. A ﬁxed number (equal to the population size of NSGA-II) of better
performing individuals (the authors did not mention any criterion for deﬁning better performing
individuals) is used as the population of NSGA-II and the nondominated individuals ( A) after
this step are determined. The nondominated individuals after evaluating the oﬀspring individuals
(generated in step 6) are compared with Ato select one individual for re-evaluation (step 9). To do
this, the individuals evaluated using the metamodel are clustered into two sets A1andA2as shown
in Figure 1. The ﬁrst set ( A1) consists of the individuals which dominate at least one individual
ofAwhile the second set ( A2) consists of the individuals that do not dominate nor are dominated.
For each oﬀspring in A1, the Euclidean distances between the oﬀspring and the individuals in Aare
calculated. As shown in left part of Figure 1, individual ( o1) with the largest distance is selected for
re-evaluation using the original functions. In case A1is empty, an individual is selected from the set
A2for re-evaluation. To select the individual, for each oﬀspring individual in A2, the normalized
perimeter for rectangles created between consecutive individuals in A(as shown in the right part
of Figure 1) is calculated. An individual located in the rectangle with the largest perimeter ( o2) is
selected for re-evaluation using the original functions. In case both A1andA2are empty, oﬀspring
are generated again. However, the authors did not mention about how this algorithm can be used for
more than two objectives. The selected individual is added to the archive to update the metamodel
in step 10. The size of the archive is not ﬁxed in this algorithm.
The algorithm was used to solve a coastal aquifer management optimization problem with two
objectives and eight decision variables. The time required to evaluate the original functions was
26 hours while the time to train the metamodels was 63 minutes. A graphical comparison was
presented between MOSA and NSGA-II and the proposed algorithm gave similar results in fewer
function evaluations.