is completed in step 3, stage 1 is terminated and the archive is carried over to stage 2. Otherwise, a
new population (oﬀspring population) is generated using EA operators such as selection, crossover
and mutation in step 4. A preﬁxed number of generations is required to obtain an archive of a ﬁxed
size. In most of the papers cited in this paper, there is no explicit criterion mentioned for choosing
the preﬁxed number of generations. However, it is mentioned in [6] that the preﬁxed number of
generations depends on the dimensions of the problem (both in objective and decision spaces) and
the budget of evaluations with the original functions. For instance, in three popular algorithms
known as ParEGO [71], SMS-EGO [109] and MOEA/D-EGO [148], a data set of size 11n-1 was
used for training the metamodels. We provide the size of the data set used in diﬀerent algorithms
in Table 1.
After completion of stage 1, a metamodel is created for each computationally expensive objective
and constraint function to work with the EA algorithm for evaluating individuals in stage 2. A
metamodel is created using the individuals from the archive in step 5. In step 6, an oﬀspring
population is generated using EA operators. In step 7, either the metamodel or the original functions
are used to evaluate individuals i.e. a ﬁxed or an adaptive evolution control strategy is used to manage
the metamodel. In step 8, if a termination criterion such as maximum number of generations or
function evaluations is met, nondominated individuals from the last population are selected as
the ﬁnal population. Otherwise, some individuals are selected from step 7 and re-evaluated using
the original functions in step 9. There are diﬀerent criteria mentioned in the literature to select
individuals for re-evaluation e.g. selection of nondominated individuals, using expected improvement
[67], expected hypervolume improvement [109] etc. These individuals are then added to the archive
in step 10 to update or re-train the metamodel. If the size of the archive is preﬁxed, some individuals
(e.g. random or dominated individuals) are eliminated from the archive using a predeﬁned criterion.
3.2 Challenges in using metamodels
Before going into the details of diﬀerent algorithms, we mention here major challenges when applying
function approximation in multiobjective optimization when compared to single objective optimiza-
tion. It is not straightforward to use a metamodel with an EA because several challenges exist
which aﬀect the performance of the metamodel used. These challenges are also the main diﬀerences
in several algorithms in using function approximation.
1.Using the metamodel: In case of single objective optimization, often one metamodel is used
for the approximation of the objective and constraint function. Using metamodels in multi-
objective optimization is not that trivial. For example, one can use diﬀerent metamodels for
diﬀerent objective functions, one metamodel for all objective functions, diﬀerent metamodels
for one objective function or a single metamodel for scalarized objective functions. The same
options may arise for diﬀerent constraints. In the literature, most of the algorithms use a single
metamodel for all objective functions. In addition, there are no guidelines for using diﬀerent
metamodels for diﬀerent objective functions.
2.How to update the metamodel: Updating the metamodel is an important step both in single
objective and multiobjective optimization. In case of single objective optimization, diﬀerent
strategies have been used for updating the metamodel e.g. lower conﬁdence bound [33], prob-
ability of improvement [135], expected improvement [120, 67] etc. In case of multiobjective
optimization, two goals, convergence and diversity have to be achieved in contrast to single
objective optimization. In case of multiobjective optimization, one of the simplest ways is
to select the nondominated individuals for re-evaluation [63, 64] using the original functions.
Alternatively, a clustering method such as K-means clustering [57] can be applied to cluster