each box randomly. These individuals are re-evaluated using the original functions. The size of
the archive is ﬁxed in this algorithm. In addition, to generate oﬀspring in step 6, ﬁrstly, a ﬁxed
number of individuals (more than the population size) is generated using the variation operators.
Then a ﬁxed number of individuals is selected based on their distance to the current nondominated
individuals in the decision space.
The proposed algorithm was tested on eight benchmark problems with two objectives and 10-30
decision variables. Hypervolume was used as the performance criterion for comparison of Pareto-
SVM with ( µ+λ)−S−NSGA-II [36] and µ×(1 +λ)−MO-CMA-ES [53]. Pareto-SVM obtained
similar performance in fewer function evaluations.
In [88], Pareto-SVM was extended to a rank based aggregate surrogate model. In this algorithm,
instead of two classes, various classes were obtained in the decision space based on the rank of
individuals. In this way, nondominated individuals at the current generation are not constrained
to the bounds. A pairwise dominance relation was used to classify individuals. For example, two
possibilities exist, if an individual dominates another individual or is dominated by it. The case
for nondominated individuals is mentioned as the future work. Other details are the same as in
Pareto-SVM.
The proposed algorithm was tested on the same benchmark problems. It was compared with ( µ+
λ)−S−NSGA-II,µ×(1+λ)−MO-CMA-ES and Pareto-SVM with hypervolume as the performance
criterion. In comparison to Pareto-SVM, it performed similar and in comparison to other two
algorithms, it performed better in fewer function evaluations.
In [105], instead of predicting objective functions, a metamodel was used to predict the distance
to the current nondominated individuals in the decision space. Three metamodels, linear regression,
support vector regression and multilayer perceptron were used independently. This algorithm is
known as ASM-MOMA, where the metamodel is built for the distance to the nondominated individ-
uals in step 5. In addition, a local search algorithm is used to improve the individuals obtained after
step 7. To update the metamodel in step 9, nondominated individuals at the current generation
are added to the archive in step 10. The size of the archive is ﬁxed in this algorithm and extra
individuals are removed from it randomly.
ASM-MOMA was tested on four benchmark problems (two objectives and 15 decision variables)
and compared with NSGA-II and IBEA [154] with hypervolume as the performance criterion. The
proposed algorithm obtained similar performance in fewer function evaluations than other algorithms
while using linear regression as the metamodel.
In Pil´ at and Neruda[106], ASM-MOMA was extended to high dimensional problems (in the
objective space) with two diﬀerent additional elements. Instead of using one global metamodel,
multiple local metamodels were used. This algorithm is known as LAMM-MMA, where the training
data in the decision space is partitioned into diﬀerent sets based on the distance of individuals to
the current nondominated individuals. Diﬀerent from ASM-MOMA, the algorithm allocates weights
to samples based on the distance to nondominated samples in the decision space. Other details
are the same as in ASM-MOMA. This algorithm was tested on four benchmark problems with 5-15
objectives and 20 variables and compared with IBEA and ASM-MOMA with hypervolume as the
performance criterion. LAMM-MMA performed better than IBEA and similar to ASM-MOMA in
the same number of function evaluations.
In [8], a metamodel was used to predict the contribution to the hypervolume instead of the
objective functions. This algorithm is known as NN-SS-IBEA, where a metamodel (neural network)
is built for the contribution to the hypervolume of individuals in step 5. After evaluating the
new individuals in step 7, one individual having the maximum contribution to the hypervolume
is re-evaluated in step 9 and added to the archive in step 10. The size of the archive is ﬁxed in
this algorithm and extra individuals are eliminated from the archive based on their hypervolume
26