its component functions. The algorithm was proposed to handle problems with large number of
decision variables. In each HDMR model, ncomponent functions were approximated using Kriging,
thereforen×k(nand krepresent the number of decision variables and objectives respectively)
Kriging models were built and kHDMR models were built. After building the metamodels in step
5, NSGA-II was used to from steps 6-7. To update HDMR models, a preﬁxed number of individuals
were re-evaluated using the original functions in step 9. These individuals were selected by doing
clustering in the decision space and then added to the training archive in step 10. In addition, bounds
of the decision variables were updated to limit the search space after metamodels were updated.
The algorithm was tested on 17 benchmark problems from ZDT, DTLZ and CEC09 suite [149]
biobjective problems with 15-30 decision variables. It was compared with NSGA-II and Kriging
based NSGA-II [89] using IGD and performed better than others in 500 function evaluations.
3.3.2 Non-Kriging based algorithms
In this subsection, algorithms using metamodels other than Kriging such as neural network, support
vector regression and polynomial regression are discussed.
In [131], a multiobjective parallel surrogate-assisted evolutionary algorithm (MOPSA-EA) was
proposed, where a feedforward neural network was used as a metamodel with a steady state EA.
The metamodel is built for each objective function in step 5. A ﬁxed number of oﬀspring individuals
is generated in step 6 using crossover and mutation and evaluated using the metamodel in step
7. The ﬁtness values of oﬀspring individuals are altered as per the ﬁtness values of parents. The
authors mentioned that this approach was motivated by ﬁtness inheritance, where the ﬁtness values
of oﬀspring depend on the ﬁtness values of parents.
To get the altered ﬁtness values for oﬀspring individuals, the parents which are used for creating
the oﬀspring individual are evaluated with the metamodel and the error is calculated between true
ﬁtness values and the approximated ﬁtness values (using the metamodel) for parents. For example,
if the errors (for a biobjective optimization problem) between the true ﬁtness values and the approx-
imated ﬁtness values for two parents are ( ae,be) and (ce,de) and an oﬀspring individual is generated
using these parents having ﬁtness values ( e,g), then the new altered ﬁtness values for oﬀspring are
(e+w1×ae+w2×ce,g+w2×be+w1×de). The weight coeﬃcients w1andw2are selected based
on the inﬂuence of parent individuals on an oﬀspring individual during crossover. An individual is
selected in step 9 after getting new ﬁtness values for oﬀspring individuals and added to the archive
in step 10 to update the metamodel. To select this individual, a nondominated sorting for oﬀspring
individuals and individuals in the archive is performed and nondominated individuals in both sets
are identiﬁed. Let OR1andPR1denote nondominated individuals in oﬀspring and in the archive,
respectively. These individuals are combined and individuals in OR1dominating PR1are identiﬁed.
Among these individuals, individual having the largest Euclidean distance to its closest individual in
PR1is selected and added to the archive. A nondominated sorting is performed again for individuals
of the archive and the worst individual (having the worst ﬁtness value and the smallest crowding
distance) is removed from the archive. The size of the archive is ﬁxed in this algorithm.
The MOPSA-EA was tested on the ZDT1-4 and ZDT6 benchmark problems (2 objectives and
not explicit information of the number of decision variables) and on a manufacturing MOP (with two
objectives and 11 decision variables). Generational distance (GD), inverted generational distance
(IGD), spread and hypervolume metrics were used to compare the proposed algorithm with SMS-
EMOA [36], MAES [38] and NSGA-II-ANN [97]. For the same number of function evaluations,
MOPSA-EA performed better than other algorithms in Y, Ω andSmetrics and in ∆, SMS-EMOA
and MOPSA-EA performed equivalent. As the Pareto front was not known for the manufacturing
problem, only the Smetric was used as the performance criterion and MOPSA-EA gave better