case too, the proposed algorithm performed better than NSGA-II and VFO in the same number of
function evaluations.
In [128], Kriging was used as a metamodel. In this algorithm, the main focus was to apply
diﬀerent strategy for objective and constraint functions while updating the metamodel. In step 5, a
metamodel is built for each objective and constraint function. To update the metamodel in step 9,
for objectives, selection is performed using hypervolume based probability of improvement ( POI hv)
[24] and for constraints, probability of feasibility (POF) [41] is used. After this, γ=POI hv×POF
is obtained and a ﬁxed number of individuals with highest γvalues is selected for re-evaluation in
step 9. These individuals are then added to the archive in step 10. The size of the archive is not
ﬁxed in this algorithm.
The proposed algorithm was tested on two real-world problems with two objectives, 2-3 decision
variables and 5-7 constraints. This algorithm was implemented using the SUrrogate MOdeling
MATLAB Toolbox (SUMO) [44] and was not compared with any other algorithm.
In [95], Kriging models were used with a diﬀerential evolution based EA to approximate the
objective functions. After building the metamodels in step 5, individuals were generated using
diﬀerential evolution operator in step 6 and metamodels were then used for approximation in step
7. For each oﬀspring in step 7, uncertainties of the approximated values were compared to its
corresponding parent. In other words, if the uncertainty value of oﬀspring was less than that of
parent, it would selected and kept in the population. On the other hand, if the uncertainties of
both oﬀspring and parent are comparable, both are kept in the population. All the oﬀspring thus
selected were re-evaluated with the original function to update the metamodels in step 9 and added
the training archive in step 10.
The algorithm was tested on 12 benchmark problem out of which three had constraints. However,
it was not mentioned in the article how the constraints were handled. All these 12 problems had two
objectives and the number of decision variables for all problems was not mentioned. The algorithm
was also tested on a continuous steel casting and an electrocardiography problem with four variables
and 2-3 objectives. The algorithm was compared with diﬀerential based EA [116] and an algorithm
based on NSGA-II-ANN [30]. The algorithm obtained better performance when measured with
hypervolume in 10000 function evaluations.
In Chugh et al. [18], an algorithm called K-RVEA was proposed to solve computationally ex-
pensive problems with more than three objectives. In this algorithm, the metamodels were updated
based on the need of convergence or diversity. Angle penalized distance [17] and uncertainty infor-
mation from the Kriging models with the help of reference vectors are used to select individuals in
step 9 for updating the metamodels. In addition, extra individuals are removed from the archive in
step 10 to further reduce the computation time.
The proposed algorithm was tested on DTLZ and WFG benchmark problems with 3-10 objectives
and 10 decision variables. It was also compared with ParEGO, MOEA/D-EGO and SMS-EGO
using IGD and hypervolume. In addition to benchmark problems, the algorithm was also tested on
a free-radical polymerization problem [96] and also compared with the state-of-the-art algorithms.
In the given number of function evaluations, the proposed algorithm performed better than other
algorithms.
The same algorithm was also extended to handle constraints in [19]. Three diﬀerent approaches
are used to while training metamodels based on the feasibility of solutions. The proposed algorithm
was tested on constrained version of DTLZ problems [58] with 3-10 objectives and 10 decision
variables. The authors found out that infeasible solutions are having a vital role on the performance
of surrogates.
In Roy and Deb [117], a high dimensional model representation (HDMR) [130] was used as a
metamodel for each objective function. Kriging was further used within HDMR to approximate