SOFTWARE TECHNOLOGY SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2019  |  IEEE SOFTWARE  7vehicle should be able to recognize 
other cars and trucks, pedestrians, 
and so forth, for vision-based func -
tionality. Combinations of these 
recognized objects can act as inputs 
to decision functionality, and sev -
eral decisions can lead to actions. 
Functionality-based testing breaks 
down the scenarios into various op -
erational components that can be 
tested individually.
Hardware in the Loop
Although simulation tries to encapsu -
late the real world as closely as pos -
sible, inherent limitations invariably 
create a void between the two. Hard -
ware in the loop (HIL) closes this gap 
a little by using physical components 
for certain aspects of simulation. For 
example, a camera model in a simu -
lation technique can be replaced 
by an actual camera. The input to 
the camera can be fed by means of 
a computer screen where videos of 
various real-time traffic conditions 
are played to validate the behavior 
of car. A more advanced technique 
has been proposed for autonomous 
systems that are tested by robots, 
for instance, vehicle HIL, where the 
simulated vehicles in traffic have been 
replaced by moving robots. This has 
the advantage that, in addition to the 
camera, radar and lidar hardware 
can be tested using HIL.
Vehicle in the Loop
Human interaction can have a dras -
tic influence on the behavior of par -
tially automated cars. The methods 
specified earlier fail to account for 
this reality. In vehicle-in-the-loop 
simulations, real cars are used, 
though in a safe environment. A 
driver is shown simulated feeds of 
the external environment to cap -
ture his interaction with the car. The 
car travels across a ground devoid of obstacles, simulating inertial ef -
fects and simultaneously respond -
ing to the external feed. The greatest 
advantage to this method is safety: 
Since there are no real obstructions 
involved, no harm will be incurred 
by the test drivers, even if they en -
counter dangerous situations.
Simulators
Simulators are closed, indoor cubi -
cles that act as substitutes for physi -
cal systems. They can replicate the 
behavior of any system by using 
hardware and a software model. The 
behavior of a driver can be captured 
by immersing him a replicated exter -
nal environment. Since simulators 
employ hydraulic actuators and elec -
tric motors, the inertial effects they 
generate feel nearly the same as the 
real-life version. They are used for 
robots in industrial automation, and 
surgery planning in medicine, and 
railway and automotive applications.
Brute Force
Nothing can come closer to the real 
world than the real world itself. This 
is perhaps the final validation phase, 
where a completely ready system is 
physically driven onto roads with 
actual traffic. The sensor data are 
recorded and logged to capture be -
havior in critical situations. They 
are analyzed to accommodate and 
fine-tune the system according to ev -
eryday scenarios. The challenge in 
this stage, however, lies in the sheer 
amount of test data that are gener -
ated. A stereo video camera, alone, 
generates 100 GB of data for every 
kilometer driven. In such situations, 
big data analysis becomes extremely 
important.
Intelligent Validation Techniques
Intelligent validation techniques tend 
to automate the complete testing process or certain aspects of testing. 
This eliminates the potential errors 
associated with manual derivations 
of test cases, since humans may fail 
to recognize and think about certain 
scenarios. It also eradicates the enor -
mous amount of time that needs to 
be invested to obtain the test cases. 
The “Intelligent Testing” section 
summarizes some approaches that 
attempt to derive such validation 
techniques.
Truly transparent validation 
methods and processes assume the 
utmost relevance and will be chal -
lenged by the progress of technology 
through the five steps toward auton -
omous behavior that are sketched in 
Figure 1. Although they are still rele -
vant, traditional validation methods 
aren’t enough to completely test the 
growing complexity of autonomous 
cars. Machine learning, with situ -
ational adaptations and software up -
dates and upgrades, demands novel 
regression strategies. Figure 2 pro -
vides a map of the different testing 
techniques.
Intelligent Testing
With AI and machine learning, we 
need to satisfy algorithmic trans -
parency. For instance, what are the 
rules, in a neural network that is 
obviously no longer algorithmically 
tangible, to determine who gets a 
credit or how an autonomous vehicle 
might react with several hazards at 
the same time? Classic traceability 
and regression testing will certainly 
not work. Future verification and 
validation methods and tools will in -
clude more intelligence based on big 
data exploits, business information, 
and the processes’ ability to learn 
about and improve software quality 
in a dynamic way.4
A key question concerns which 
way AI can support the process