SOFTWARE TECHNOLOGY
SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2019  |  IEEE SOFTWARE 9would be able to test faster and with 
a better coverage of situationally 
relevant scenarios. On the level of 
a component or module,7 testing it 
is also required to identify relevant 
cases. This can range from a simple 
support mechanism for how to feed a system with adequate inputs and checks on the outputs, to complex 
algorithms that automatically cre-
ate test cases based on code or a user interface. Figure 3 provides an over-view of intelligent testing as we ramp 
up for autonomous systems. Unlike 
brute force, intelligent testing con-siders the white-box and black-box 
dependencies and, thus, balances 
efficiency and effectiveness. See “Cognitive Testing for Autonomous Systems” for a concrete case study.COGNITIVE TESTING FOR AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
In our industrial projects, we often face the challenge of 
how systems can be validated, and safety assured, when 
they undergo a change during operation. Updates over the 
air are commonly used for functional modifications of soft-ware-based automated systems. Be they in manufacturing, 
automotive applications, or intelligent building, automated 
systems are mostly component based; they consist of mul-tiple control units that are distributed. Each unit is in a cer-
tain location and has a specific functionality that it provides 
to the overall system.
Unwanted behavior and basic functional errors might 
occur somewhere in a distributed system because of an alteration elsewhere. How can such a system be safe-guarded when changes in its components occur during 
runtime? How can safety and security certifications be 
maintained after a software modification happens within a single module?
A test certification requires an understanding of the ef-
fect of a change that is triggered somewhere in a software 
module and has impacts elsewhere. How can this inter-
action be deduced and the consequences for all modules be verified without testing the whole system again from scratch? The method presented here applies an artificial intelligence (AI) that can ascertain the consequences of an 
individual change in all the control units.
From our industry experience, we recommend a 
three-step approach to assess the impacts of software updates and upgrades (see Figure 3). First, the alteration 
in the system needs to be identified in terms of its origin in a module and its localization in the network. Second, 
a logical model of the overall system is composed to 
understand the impact on other modules. However, this model is distributed and needs to be automatically pro-
cessed from the multiple submodules of the components 
that are available.
Third, a process of functional verification is required 
to check how the change is propagated and what it means with respect to potential malfunctions in the dis-tributed system. This AI can be used to test and safe-
guard following a stepwise procedure for testing. It only 
requires the specification of the control models and their 
intended interaction with the other modules, upon which 
the overall functionality can be deduced and test certifi-cates can be obtained on request.ABOUT THE AUTHORS
CHRISTOF EBERT is the managing director of Vector Consulting 
Services. He is on the IEEE Software  editorial board and teaches 
at the University of Stuttgart, Germany, and the Sorbonne in Paris. 
Contact him at christof.ebert@vector.com.
MICHAEL WEYRICH is the director of the Institute of Industrial 
Automation and Software Engineering at the University of Stuttgart, Germany. Contact him at michael.weyrich@ias.uni-stuttgart.de.