2 IEEE SOFTWARE  |  PUBLISHED BY THE IEEE COMPUTER SOCIETY  0740-7459/19©2019IEEE
Editor: Christof Ebert
Vector Consulting Services
christof.ebert@vector.comSOFTWARE 
TECHNOLOGY
SOCIETY TODAY DEPENDS on 
autonomous systems, such as intel-
ligent service systems, self-driving 
trains, and remote surgeries.1 The 
ultimate validation of the Turing test 
is that we often do not recognize au-
tonomous systems. This growing us-age poses many challenges, such as how to provide transparency, which 
rules or learning patterns are applied 
in a complex situation, and if these rules are the right ones. Validation is the key challenge, of which we will 
provide an overview in this article.
With machine learning and con-
tinuous over-the-air upgrades and updates, a core tenant of any qual-
ity strategy is continuous verifica-
tion and validation. Corrections and 
changes must be deployed in a fluid and continuous scheme, reliably over 
the air. We will face future scenarios 
where software-driven systems, and maybe whole infrastructures, must not be started if they do not include 
all of the latest software upgrades. 
Automobiles and manufacturing processes that are safety-critical fall into that category. Even more de-
manding are medical devices, which 
must provide a hierarchical software assurance because there is no room for failure.
Autonomous systems have mul-
tiple complex interactions with the real world. They perceive and act in the environment, based upon the 
reflections of an intelligent control 
system, and they have an increasing impact on our lives as they imple-
ment and execute high-level tasks 
without detailed programming and without direct human control. Un-like automated systems, which exe-
cute a carefully engineered sequence 
of actions, they are self-governing their course of action to indepen-dently achieve their goals.
Figure 1 indicates the five steps 
from automation to autonomy as we know them from human learn-ing, where we advance from novice 
to expert. Those steps exemplify the 
progress of a simple and “assisted From the Editor
Autonomous systems are widely used. Yet, for lack of transparency, we are 
increasingly suspicious of their decision making. Traditional validation, such 
as functional testing and brute force, won’t help, due to complexity and cost. To 
achieve dependability and trust we need dedicated, intelligent validating tech-
niques that cover, for instance, dynamic changes and learning. Michael Weyrich 
and I provide industry insights into validating autonomous systems. I look forward 
to hearing from both readers and prospective authors about this article and the 
technologies you want to know more about. — Christof Ebert   Validation of Autonomous 
Systems
Christof Ebert and Michael Weyrich
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/MS.2019.2921037
Date of publication: xxxxxx