SOFTWARE TECHNOLOGY SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2019  |  IEEE SOFTWARE  3behavior” from low-level sensing 
and control toward “full cognitive 
systems” with a very high degree 
autonomy. Automated systems are 
gradually enhanced to develop a 
skilled behavior along with en -
hanced mission planning, and con -
trol and execution capabilities that 
will eventually lead to the full cog -
nitive actions of an autonomous sys -
tem. It is expected that an intelligent 
behavior can be identified by acquir -
ing knowledge and understanding, 
which entails system functionalities 
such as perception, reflection, and 
action in terms of a cognition.
A completely autonomous car on 
level 5 is supposed to drive with no 
human intervention, even in dire situ -
ations. This implies that the car must 
have intelligence on par with or bet -
ter than humans to handle not just 
regular traffic scenarios but unex -
pected ones. Although several play -
ers, such as Google and Uber, are 
granted permission to operate their 
self-driving services, deadly inci -
dents put our faith in these cars to a 
test.2 It is quite apparent that existing 
validation measures aren’t enough.3 <AU: On the proofs, you changed 
this reference number to Ref. 4. To 
keep the reference numbers in order 
per the style for this magazine, the 
original Ref. 4 (Rodriguez et al.) was 
moved up in the reference list so that 
it became Ref. 3.> We need new test 
methods that can envision fatal traf -
fic situations that humans haven’t 
encountered yet. In addition, testing 
cannot simply be isolated to the final 
development stages. It must be part of 
every phase in the product lifecycle. A 
sensible engineering process must be 
adopted in the development of auton -
omous cars that lays enough empha -
sis on testing and validation.
Unlike an automated system, 
which cannot reflect on the conse -
quences of its actions and cannot 
change a predefined sequence of ac -
tivities, an autonomous system is 
meant to understand and decide how 
to execute tasks based on its goals, 
skills, and a learning experience. 
While contemplating the deficiencies 
of autonomous systems, we should 
acknowledge that humans have nat -
ural limits, in terms of processing 
speed, repeatability of tasks, handling complexity, and so forth. In fact, in 
aerospace, we already trust autono -
mous flying, and for automotive ap -
plications, automation is forecast to 
reduce deadly accidents by 90%.4 
<AU: On the proofs, you asked that 
we change “by 90%.4”  to “by 90% 
[4].” Please confirm that this should 
remain as a citation of Ref. 4 (Rodri -
guez et al.). According to style, the 
superscript reference number should 
come after the period rather than af -
ter the percent symbol.> Autonomous 
systems can become an aid in the fu -
ture, in areas such as automated and 
autonomous driving, flying, and pro -
duction robotics.
Validation of Autonomous 
Systems
Autonomous systems provide effi -
ciency and safety as they relieve hu -
man operators from tedious manual 
activities. For instance, widespread 
use of self-driving cars could elimi -
nate as much as 50% of a person’s 
daily commuting time.4 <AU: On the 
proofs, you changed this reference 
number to Ref. 5. To keep the refer -
ence numbers in order per the style FIGURE 1. The five steps from automation to autonomy.1 
Assisted2 
Partially
Automated3 
Conditionally
Automated4 
Highly
Automated5 
Fully
AutomatedLow-Level
Sensing and
Control  Reactive
BehaviorSkilled
BehaviorMission
Planning,
Control, and
ExecutionCognitive
BehaviorAspects of
Cognition
PerceptionAction
ReflectionAutomated Systems Autonomous Systems