3
Encoding Modulation Channel Demodulation Decodings x yy = hx + z
s
Computing 
Node
Computing 
NodeResource Pool
Channelyy = hx + z
x
s
xy = hx + zy
Computing 
NodeComputing 
Node
RB 9
RB 10
RB 4RB 5RB 7
RB 8 Protocol Cooperation
InterferenceLearning
AI Central 
Control Node
Algorithm  DomainDevice
Preference
Plain
Protocol
Layer
Plain
CPUGPUFPGAASIC
Supervised
Learning
Unsupervised
Learning
Semi -supervised
Learning
Reinforcement
Learning
Popular 
ContentsReinforcement 
LearningDNN -based
CoderFading 
Channel DNN -based
DecoderUser 2DNN -based
DecoderUser 1
AI-OS Layer
Coding
 Caching
 Computing
Hardware
Description
LanguageEstimate
Hardware
Capacity
Co-design
Antenna
Phase
Shifter
ADC
HardwareAlgorithm -Hardware 
Separation Architecture
RB 1
RB 2RB 3Resource Block (RB) 2
Resource Block (RB) NResource Block (RB) 1
      
          
          
  
      
    
            
Could
ServersNon-IID
DataDistributed 
NN
Non-IID
DataDistributed 
NN
Non-IID
DataDistributed 
NNUser 2User 1
User 3
training
DRL 
agent
EnvironmentFeedback
reward , utility , 
throughput
resource management , 
coding , ...DecisionResource availability
Radio condition
Traffic characteristics
Fig. 2. The architecture of 6G.
inter-subnetwork coordination. One possible solution is
to adopt game and learning approaches in 6G, which can
assure the convergence of the subnetworks upgrades.
3) The local evolution of 6G requires a relatively stable
control plane to support the evolution in the “network
of subnetworks” level. One possible solution relies on
the “learning from scratch” method developed in Alpha
Zero [9]. The control plane of 6G should evaluate each
upgrade of subnetworks, and then implement a network-
level learning process to identify the best strategy for
each subnetwork, accounting for its local environments
and user behaviors.
In summary, the local evolution of subnetworks substantially
speeds up the deployment of novel physical and MAC layer
protocols, and can better adapt to the spatially and tempo-
rally varying radio environments and user demands. With the
subnetwork-wide upgrades, we envision a smooth evolution
from 5G to 6G and beyond.
C. Towards Intelligent Radio (IR)
The emerging hardware revolutions, e.g., in the RF and
circuit systems, will drive 6G to track and fully exploit the fast
upgrade of the device-level and base-station level hardware.
We envision that an algorithm-hardware separation architec-
ture will become essential in 6G. Particularly, a transceiver
algorithm will be able to automatically estimate the capability
of the transceiver hardware over which the protocol runs, then
conﬁgures itself based on the hardware capability.
This is in contrast to the systems from 1G to 5G where
the devices and transceiver algorithms are jointly designed.
Conventionally, the hardware capabilities, e.g., the number
of antennas, RF chains, and phase shifters, the resolution
and sampling rates of ADCs, as well as, the computation
abilities of decoders, etc., have remained quasi-static in the
previous cellular generations. However, the recent state-of-
the-art circuits and antennas advances are speeding up andsigniﬁcantly improving the hardware capabilities, which make
it possible for the 6G BS and handset to be diversiﬁed and
upgradable within 6G. In other words, 6G will not be operating
under the conventional joint design, which fails in allowing
agile adaptation to a diversiﬁed and upgradable hardware.
To overcome the shortcoming of joint hardware-algorithm
design and reap the beneﬁt of the algorithm-hardware separa-
tion architecture, we present an operating system (OS) between
the device hardware and the transceiver algorithms, where
we can regard a transceiver algorithm as a software running
over the OS. The OS is capable of not only estimating the
capabilities of local RF chains, phase shifters, ADCs, and
antennas, etc., but also measuring their analog parameters
automatically. Based on the hardware information and AI
methods, the OS will then be capable of conﬁguring its own
transceiver algorithms via an interface language. We shall refer
to this framework as intelligent radio (IR). In contrast to the
learning based intelligent PHY layer surveyed in subsection
III-C, IR is a much broader concept relying on the algorithm-
hardware separation architecture. In Table I, we compare key
features of IR, software-deﬁned radio (SDR), and cognitive
radio. Owing to Mitola’s milestone works [10], IR can be
regarded as a further extension, in which the cutting edge
AI techniques are deeply involved. The conventional modu-
lation/coding modules are replaced by deep neural networks,
which can in an intelligent way adapt to the environment and
hardware. IR also takes into account the protocols over layer 3,
which are self-upgradable to support various AI applications.
By exploiting IR, 6G is expected to evaluate the contri-
butions of various hardware components and identify their
bottlenecks. In return, the bottleneck analysis helps the de-
vice manufactures in optimizing the budget allocation of the
hardware costs. As a result, the application of IR will help 6G
enjoy a much reduced implementation time and a signiﬁcant
reduction in the cost of new algorithms and hardware in
both the PHY and MAC layers, thereby speeding up its own