6
Fig. 5. A hardware-efﬁcient hybrid beamforming structure with ﬁxed phase
shifters. The base station and user are equipped with 144 and 16 antennas,
respectively, and 4 RF chains. The fully- and partially-connected structures
require 576 and 144 adaptive phase shifters, respectively, while the new
structure only requires 30 ﬁxed phase shifters in the ﬁrst simulation. The
second simulation shows that 15 phase shifters are already sufﬁcient for the
new structure.
and privacy constraints on individual devices, increasing re-
search interests are moving towards leveraging the dispersed
computing resources across the cloud, network edge and end-
devices of 6G networks through the lens of mobile edge
computing [14]. For example, for a deep neural network, the
initial features can be extracted on the end devices, which are
then sent to the edge and cloud computing devices for further
processing. However, with the heterogeneity in the computing
capabilities and communication bandwidths among the com-
puting devices, it becomes extremely challenging to allocate
the operations of the neural networks to the computing devices
so that the latency and energy are optimized. Fig. 4 demon-
strates the on-device distributed inference process, where each
device locally computes the intermediate values based on the
map function using the local data. The intermediate values are
further shufﬂed across the devices assisted by a central radio
access points. The inference process will be accomplished
by collecting all the required intermediate values to construct
the prediction results. A joint optimization of the uplink and
downlink communication strategy was thus developed in [13]
for shufﬂing the locally computed intermediate values across
mobile devices.
V. H ARDWARE -AWARE COMMUNICATIONS FOR 6G
As new radio access technologies emerge, and IoT de-
vices become more pervasive, hardware constraints will play
critical roles when designing 6G networks. On one hand,
as radio communication is moving towards millimeter-wave
bands, and possibly Terahertz bands, the high cost and power
consumption of hardware components will signiﬁcantly affect
the transceiver architecture and algorithm design. On the other
hand, IoT devices have limited storage, energy source, and on-
device computing power. Such resource-constrained platforms
call for a holistic design of communication, sensing, and
inference. In this section, we present a new design paradigm
for 6G, namely hardware-aware communications , and dis-
cuss three promising new design principles. For performance-
critical scenarios, the objective is to develop hardware-efﬁcient
transceivers that are also algorithm friendly, which calls for
hardware-algorithm co-design . For IoT-like application sce-
narios, application-aware communications will be essential.Meanwhile, intelligent communications is needed to effec-
tively adapt to heterogeneous hardware constraints.
A. Hardware-Algorithm Co-design
The desire to communicate at ever higher data rates will
never stop. To reach Terabytes per second data rates, it is
inevitable to operate at higher and higher frequency bands. The
major obstacle is from the hardware perspective. Very large
scale antenna arrays are needed to overcome the increased
pathloss and other propagation phenomena, which will bring
a large number of hardware components, including signal
mixers, ADCs/DACs, power ampliﬁers, etc. The high cost and
power consumption of these components at the mmWave and
THz band make it difﬁcult to adopt conventional transceiver
structures, which in turn will affect the design of signal
processing algorithms. To effectively design such complex
systems, collaboration among the hardware and algorithm
domains will be needed, i.e., hardware-algorithm co-design
should be advocated. The target is to develop hardware-
efﬁcient transceiver structures that are also algorithm friendly:
such structures should employ few of the costly hardware
components, and they should be able to leverage existing
signal processing algorithms.
Case Study: Consider mmWave hybrid beamforming as
an example, which is a cost-effective approach for providing
effective beamforming gains. It requires a small number of
RF chains, and thus can signiﬁcantly reduce hardware cost
and power consumption. However, a large number of phase
shifters are still needed for existing hardware structure. Phase
shifters at mmWave bands are still very expensive, and thus
their number needs to be reduced. A new hardware-efﬁcient
hybrid structure was recently proposed in [15], as shown in
Fig. 5. It only requires a small number of phase shifters,
each with a ﬁxed phase. As such, hardware modiﬁcation
is only in the analog network, basic design principles for
hybrid beamforming can still be applied. As shown in Fig.
5, this new structure can approach the performance of the
fully digital beamforming, with much fewer phase shifters than
other hybrid beamforming structures.
B. Application-Aware Communications for IoT Devices
Thanks to the recent development of IoT technologies,
intelligent mobile applications will thrive, and many of them
are powered by specialized low-cost, low-power devices.
Such devices will handle basic sensing and simple on-device
processing tasks, while relying on proximate edge servers
or remote cloud data centers for computation-intensive pro-
cessing. Thus, effective communications between devices and
servers will be essential. Rather than serving as a bit pipe
for traditional data services and focusing on maximizing data
rates, wireless communications for IoT applications should di-
rectly serve speciﬁc applications. An integrated consideration
of communication, sensing, and inference will be critical to
overcome the hardware limitations, as illustrated below.
Joint sampling, communication, and inference: IoT devices
have serious challenges. These include, 1) limited computing
power to process the collected data; 2) their limited energy