4
TABLE I
THE COMPARISON OF SOFTWARE DEFINED RADIO (SDR), C OGNITIVE RADIO (CR), AND INTELLIGENT RADIO (IR).
SDR CR IR
Frequency Band Fixed Adapt to environment Adapt to environment and hardware
Spectrum Sharing Fixed Opportunistic AI-enabled
Hardware Capability Pre-claimed Pre-claimed Online estimated
Hardware Upgradability No No Yes
PHY Tx/Rx Module Modulation/coding/detection/estimation Modulation/coding/detection/estimation Deep neural networks
Multiple Access Predetermined Sensing Based Distributed ML based
Protocols over Layer 3 Fixed Fixed Self-upgradable
Main Steam Apps V oice, Data Multimedia, Data AI, In-network Computation
evolution.
III. AI-E NABLED TECHNOLOGIES FOR 6G
The unprecedented transformation of wireless networks will
make 6G substantially different from the previous generations,
as it will be characterized by a high degree of heterogeneity in
multiple aspects, such as network infrastructures, radio access
technologies, RF devices, computing and storage resources,
application types, etc. In addition, the wide range of new ap-
plications will mandate an intelligent use of communications,
computing, control, and storage resources from the network
edge to the core, and across multiple radio technologies
and network platforms. Last but not least, the volume and
variety of data generated in wireless networks are growing
signiﬁcantly. This opens up great opportunities for data-driven
network planning and operation to achieve real-time additivity
to dynamic network environments.
In this section, we advocate AI as an indispensable tool to
facilitate intelligent learning, reasoning, and decision making
in 6G wireless networks.
A. Big Data Analytics for 6G
The ﬁrst natural application of AI is big data analytics.
There are four types of analytics that can be applied to 6G
systems, namely descriptive analytics, diagnostic analytics,
predictive analytics, and prescriptive analytics. Descriptive
analytics mine historical data to get insights on network per-
formance, trafﬁc proﬁle, channel conditions, user perspectives,
and etc.. It greatly enhances the situational awareness of
network operators and service providers. Diagnostic analytics
enable autonomous detection of network faults and service
impairments, identify the root causes of network anomalies,
and ultimately improve the reliability and security of 6G
wireless systems. Predictive analytics use data to predict future
events such as trafﬁc patterns, user locations, user behavior
and preference, content popularity, and resource availabil-
ity. Prescriptive analytics take advantage of the predictions
to suggest decision options for resource allocation, network
slicing and virtualization, cache placement, edge computing,
autonomous driving, etc. For example, by predicting, antic-
ipating, and inferring future user demands through big data
analytics, the notion of proactive caching has recently emerged
to signiﬁcantly relieve peak trafﬁc loads from the wireless core
network.B. AI-enabled Closed-loop Optimization
Traditional methodologies for wireless network optimiza-
tion may not be applicable in 6G systems due to the following
reasons. First, 6G wireless systems will be extremely dynamic
and complex due to the scale, density, and heterogeneity of
the network. Modeling such systems is very hard, if not
impossible. As such, traditional optimization approaches that
rely heavily on mathematically convenient models will no
longer be adequate. Hence, the second major application of
AI in 6G wireless systems is automated and closed-loop
optimization. Problems in wireless networks are traditionally
solved by applying sets of rules derived from system analysis
with prior domain knowledge and experience. For example,
in traditional network optimization problems, the objective
functions are assumed to be available in nice algebraic forms,
allowing an optimizer to evaluate a solution by simple cal-
culation. However, in the complex 6G network environment,
the mapping between a decision and its effect on the physical
system is cost prohibitive to deﬁne and may not be analyt-
ically available. Recent advances in AI technologies, such
as reinforcement learning and deep reinforcement learning
(DRL), can establish a feedback loop between the decision
maker and the physical system, so that the decision maker can
iteratively reﬁne its action based on the system’s feedback to
reach optimality eventually. For example, [11] recently applied
DRL to address several emerging issues in communication and
networking, including adaptive modulation, wireless caching,
data ofﬂoading, and so on, as shown in Fig. 2.
C. Intelligent Wireless Communication
AI technologies will play a critical role in end-to-end
optimization of the full chain of the physical layer signal
processing, from the transmitter to the receiver. The end-to-
end communication system suffers from a wide variety of
impairments, including hardware impairments such as am-
pliﬁer distortion, quadrature imbalance, local oscillator and
clock harmonic leakage, and the channel impairments such as
fading and interference. Meanwhile, the number of factors and
parameters to be controlled will continue to increase. With
this level of complexity, end-to-end optimization has never
been practical in today’s wireless systems. Instead, existing
approaches divide the full chain into multiple independent
blocks, each with a simpliﬁed model that does not accurately
or holistically capture the features of real-world systems.
AI technologies open up the possibilities to learn the best
way to communicate over combinations of hardware and chan-