5
nel effects. We envision an “intelligent PHY layer” paradigm
in 6G, where the end-to-end system is capable of self learning
and self optimization by combining advanced sensing and
data collection, AI technologies, and domain-speciﬁc signal
processing approaches.
IV. 6G FOR AI A PPLICATIONS
With the ubiquitousness of smart mobile gadgets and the
revival of artiﬁcial intelligence, various AI-empowered mobile
applications are emerging. In this section, we present how 6G
will handle mobile AI applications.
A. Trends and Challenges
AI has achieved remarkable successes in many application
domains, e.g., computer vision, natural language processing,
and autonomous driving. AI tasks are computationally in-
tensive and mostly trained, developed, and deployed at data
centers with custom-designed servers. Given the fast growth
of smart mobile gadgets and Internet of Things devices, it is
expected that a large number of intelligent applications will
be deployed at the edge of wireless networks in the near
future. As such, the 6G wireless network will be designed
to leverage advanced wireless communications and mobile
computing technologies to support AI-enabled applications
at various edge mobile devices with limited communication,
computation, hardware and energy resources. Notably, the
capacity and latency of wireless links are the key bottlenecks
of mobile AI applications due to three reasons. First, to protect
privacy, some AI applications require data to be kept at the
mobile devices instead of being uploaded to the cloud during
the model training process. This has stimulated the recent
research interest for on-device distributed training, i.e., feder-
ated learning [12], where frequent communications among the
computing devices are needed for model updates. Secondly, to
overcome the resource limitation of edge devices, on-device
distributed computing provides new opportunities by pooling
the computation and storage resources of multiple mobile
devices. In this case, data shufﬂing is a key component for
exchanging the computed intermediate values among mobile
devices to enable on-device distributed inference [13]. Last
but not least, the heterogeneous mixture of the cloud, edge
and end computing devices provides a dispersed computing
environment for both training and inference of deep neural
networks.
To enable ubiquitous and diversiﬁed mobile AI services,
6G is expected to provide ﬂexible platforms for develop-
ing advanced communication and computation technologies.
Moreover, it will provide a holistic way to optimize across
the communication, computation, and storage resources to
span the functionalities of modern AI across the end-devices,
network edges, and cloud data centers.
B. Communication for Distributed Machine Learning
Large-scale distributed machine learning is needed for mo-
bile AI applications in 6G, for which communication becomes
the key bottleneck for scaling up distributed training and
global model 
update 
local model 
update 
Fig. 3. Over-the-air computation for on-device distributed federated learning.
map 
reduce node 
map map 
reduce reduce node 1 node 2 
 e 1
dataset 
split 
machine 
learning tasks 
shuffle shuffle dataset 
placement 
Fig. 4. On-device distributed inference via wireless MapReduce.
distributed inference over the cloud, network edge, and end-
devices.
Communication-Efﬁcient Distributed Training : The
growing computation and storage power of devices provides
opportunities for on-device distributed training by processing
data locally. However, communicating over the volatile wire-
less channel becomes the signiﬁcant bottleneck for distributed
training on mobile devices. To strengthen data privacy and
security, federated learning [12] allows the training data to
be kept at each device, thereby learning a shared global
model from distributed mobile devices. However, the limited
bandwidth becomes the main bottleneck for global model
aggregation from locally updated models computed at each
mobile device. The over-the-air computation can be exploited
to enable low-latency global model aggregation via exploit-
ing the superposition property of a wireless multiple-access
channel, as shown in Fig. 3.
Communication-Efﬁcient Distributed Inference : In 6G,
intelligent services will span from cloud data centers to end-
devices and IoT devices, e.g., self-driving cars, drones, and
auto-robots. As such, it is of prime importance to design ultra-
low latency, ultra-low power and low-cost inference processes.
To overcome stringent computation, bandwidth, storage, power