1
The Roadmap to 6G – AI Empowered
Wireless Networks
Khaled B. Letaief, Wei Chen, Yuanming Shi, Jun Zhang, and Ying-Jun Angela Zhang
Abstract —The recent upsurge of diversiﬁed mobile applica-
tions, especially those supported by Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), is
spurring heated discussions on the future evolution of wireless
communications. While 5G is being deployed around the world,
efforts from industry and academia have started to look beyond
5G and conceptualize 6G. We envision 6G to undergo an unprece-
dented transformation that will make it substantially different
from the previous generations of wireless cellular systems. In
particular, 6G will go beyond mobile Internet and will be required
to support ubiquitous AI services from the core to the end
devices of the network. Meanwhile, AI will play a critical role
in designing and optimizing 6G architectures, protocols, and
operations. In this article, we discuss potential technologies for
6G to enable mobile AI applications, as well as AI-enabled
methodologies for 6G network design and optimization. Key
trends in the evolution to 6G will also be discussed.
I. I NTRODUCTION
The wireless communications industry is one of the few
industry sectors that have kept a fast growing trend with
creative features for a number of decades. The current 4G LTE
networks have led to the thriving of mobile Internet, enabling
various innovative applications, such as mobile shopping and
payment, smart home/city, mobile gaming, etc. The great suc-
cess of mobile Internet has in turn been a driving force behind
the evolution of wireless technologies. The upcoming 5G net-
work will support a wide range of services, including eMBB
(enhanced mobile broadband), uRLLC (ultra-reliable and low-
latency communications), and mMTC (massive machine-type
communications) [1], [2]. According to a Cisco forecast,
major operators will embark on a signiﬁcant investment in
5G networks during the next one or two years.
While 5G is still at an initial stage, to maintain the sus-
tainability and competitiveness of wireless communication
systems, it is time for both the industry and academia to
think about what 6G will be. There are already initiatives
describing the roadmap towards 6G [3], [4], [5] along with
the emerging trends and requirements, as well as various
enabling techniques and architectures, e.g., Terahertz band
communications [6].
In contrast to previous generations, 6G will be transfor-
mative and will revolutionize the wireless evolution from
Khaled B. Letaief is with Hong Kong University of Science and Tech-
nology; Wei Chen is with Tsinghua University; Yuanming Shi is with
ShanghaiTech University; Jun Zhang is with The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University; Ying-Jun Angela Zhang is with The Chinese University of Hong
Kong.
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication.
Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may
no longer be accessible.“connected things” to “connected intelligence” with more
stringent requirements speciﬁed as follows.
Very high data rates, up to 1 Tbps;
Very high energy efﬁciency, with the ability to support
battery-free IoT devices;
Trusted global connectivity;
Massive low-latency control (less than 1 msec end-to-end
latency);
Very broad frequency bands (e.g., 73GHz-140GHz and
1THz-3THz);
Ubiquitous always-on broadband global network cov-
erage by integrating terrestrial wireless with satellite
systems;
Connected intelligence with machine learning capability
and AI networking hierarchy.
6G will also require the support of three new service types
beyond the eMBB, uRLLC, and mMTC services supported by
5G, as described below.
Computation Oriented Communications (COC): New
smart devices call for distributed and in-network computation
to enable the key functionalities of AI-empowered 6G, such as
federated learning and edge intelligence. Instead of targeting
classical quality of service (QoS) provisioning, CoC will
ﬂexibly choose an operating point in the rate-latency-reliability
space depending on the availability of various communications
resources to achieve a certain computational accuracy.
Contextually Agile eMBB Communications (CAeC): The
provision of 6G eMBB services is expected to be more agile
and adaptive to the network context, including communication
network context such as link congestion and network topology;
physical environment context such as surrounding location and
mobility; and social network context such as social neighbor-
hood and sentiments.
Event Deﬁned uRLLC (EDuRLLC): In contrast to the
5G uRLLC application scenario (e.g., virtual reality and in-
dustrial automation) where redundant resources are in place
to offset many uncertainties, 6G will need to support uRLLC
in extreme or emergency events with spatially and temporally
changing device densities, trafﬁc patterns, and spectrum and
infrastructure availability.
Inspired by these trends, in this article, we attempt to
conceptualize 6G as an intelligent information system that is
both driven by and a driver of the modern AI technologies. A
roadmap for 6G is depicted in Fig. 1, which is plotted based
on the strategic plans of various standard bodies and is also
projected based on the 5G status. Key performance indicators
(KPIs) and service types are also illustrated. Meanwhile, a
potential network architecture for 6G is shown in Fig. 2.arXiv:1904.11686v2  [cs.NI]  19 Jul 2019