2
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2030 2031 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 
Standard Rquirement 
Spectrum
Technology 
5G trial 
Rel10 Rel11 Rel12 Rel13 Rel14 Rel15 Rel16 Rel17 5G Evolution(Beyond 5G)
6G Study 6G Specifications 6G Product 
LTE-Advanced LTE-B LTE-C3GPP 
ITUIMT New spectrum, Vision Requirement 5G Evaluation 6G Vision 6G Requirements 6G Evaluation 
WRC-12 WRC-15 WRC-18/19 
SIG Vision/KPI/Scope/Timeline 
Collaborati 
ve Research FP9: Horizon Europe 
Beyond 5G: ICT 20 
5G Key technology Full 6G PoC, 5G services 
HW,SW functions demos 6G testbeds PoC Market 
Research on spectrum 
below 6GHz 
Low/High-frequency candidate bands KPIs Evaluations 
Key technologies System design Enhanced technologies 
5G Technology R&D Trial 
5G Product R&D 
Trial Deployment(China plans commercial 5G in 2020)Intelligence 
 level 
COC 
COC
CAeC EDuRLLC 
Fig. 1. The roadmap of 6G.
We envision that AI will greatly enhance the situational
awareness of the network operators, and enable close-loop
optimization to support the new service types as mentioned
above. As such, 6G will unleash the full potential of mobile
communications, computing, and control in a host of exciting
applications, including smart cities, connected infrastructure,
wearable computers, autonomous driving, UA Vs [7], seamless
virtual and augmented reality, Internet of Things, space-air-
ground integrated networks [8], and a lot more.
This article is a humble attempt to provide a forward-
looking research roadmap for 6G. The rest of the article is
organized as follows. In Section II, a vision on 6G archi-
tecture will be presented. In Section III, we will show how
6G leverages the advent of AI to enable its key features.
Various AI applications of 6G will be given in Section IV. To
meet the expected stringent requirements of such applications,
hardware-aware communications will be embraced in 6G, as
discussed in Section V. Finally, Section VI concludes the
article.
II. T HEARCHITECTURE OF 6G N ETWORKS
In this section, we introduce a potential architecture for
6G as shown in Fig. 2, in which network intelligentization,
subnetwork evolution, and intelligent radio are embraced.
A. From Network Softwarization to Network Intelligentization
We envision that 6G will take network softwarization to a
new level, namely, towards network intelligentization. In 5G,
the “non-radio” aspect has become more and more important,
and has been the key driver behind the recent efforts on “soft-
warization”. More speciﬁcally, two key 5G technologies are
Software-Deﬁned Networking (SDN) and Network Functions
Virtualization (NFV), which have moved modern communica-
tions networks towards software-based virtual networks. They
also enable network slicing, which can provide a powerful
virtualization capability to allow multiple virtual networks to
be created atop a shared physical infrastructure.
Nevertheless, as the network is becoming more complex
and more heterogeneous, softwarization is not going to be
sufﬁcient for beyond 5G networks. In particular, to support
AI-based applications, the network entities have to support di-
verse capabilities, including communications, content caching,computing, and even wireless power transfer. Furthermore,
6G will embrace new radio access interfaces such as THz
communications and intelligent surfaces. It will also need to
support more advanced Internet of Things (IoT) functionalities
including sensing, data collection, analytics, and storage. All
of the aforementioned challenges call for an architecture that is
ﬂexible, adaptive, and more importantly, intelligent. Existing
technologies, such as SDN, NFV , and network slicing will
need to be further improved to meet these challenges. By
enabling fast learning and adaptation, AI-based methods will
render network slicing a lot more versatile in 6G systems.
The design of the 6G architecture shall follow an “AI native”
approach where intelligentization will allow the network to
be smart, agile, and able to learn and adapt itself according
to the changing network dynamics. It will evolve into a
“network of subnetworks,” allowing more efﬁcient and ﬂexible
upgrades, and a new framework based on intelligent radio and
algorithm-hardware separation to cope with the heterogeneous
and upgradable hardware capabilities. Both of these two
features will exploit AI techniques, as further illustrated in
the following subsections.
B. A Network of Subnetworks – Local vs Global Evolution
Given its expected ultra-high heterogeneity, one key feature
of 6G will be its capability to exploit a ﬂexible subnetwork-
wide evolution to effectively adapt to the local environments
and user demands, thereby resulting in a “network of sub-
networks”. Particularly, local subnetworks in 6G may evolve
individually to upgrade themselves. The local evolution may
happen in a few neighboring cells or even in a single cell
in order to ﬂexibly apply cutting-edge developments on new
waveforms, coding, and multi-access protocols in subnetworks
without extensive time-consuming tests. Since there is no
need to rebuild the whole system, the evolution cost can be
substantially reduced. To achieve this goal, we need to address
the following three challenges:
1) Each subnetwork should collect and analyze its local
data, which may include wireless environments, user
requests, mobility patterns, etc. and then exploit AI
methods to upgrade itself locally and dynamically.
2) When the local PHY or MAC protocols are changed, the
inter-subnetwork interaction is expected to maintain new