3 Nested Graph Neural Network
In this section, we introduce our Nested Graph Neural Network (NGNN) framework and theoretically
demonstrate its higher representation power than message passing GNNs.
3.1 Limitations of the message passing GNNs
Most existing GNNs follow the message passing framework [ 18]: given a graph G, each node’s
hidden state ht+1
vis updated based on its previous state ht
vand the messages mt+1
vfrom its neighbors
ht+1
v=Ut(ht
v;mt+1
v);where mt+1
v=X
u2N(vjG)Mt(ht
v;ht
u;evu): (1)
HereMt;Utare the message and update functions at time stamp t,evuis the feature of edge (v;u),
andN(vjG)is the set ofv’s neighbors in graph G. The initial hidden states h0
vare given by the raw
node features xv. AfterTtime stamps (iterations), the ﬁnal node representations hT
vare summarized
into a whole-graph representation with a readout (pooling) function R(e.g., mean or sum):
hG=R(fhT
vjv2Gg): (2)
Such a message passing (or neighbor aggregation) scheme iteratively aggregates neighbor information
into a center node’s hidden state, making it encode a local rooted subtree around the node. The
ﬁnal node representations will contain both the local structure and feature information around nodes,
enabling node-level tasks such as node classiﬁcation. After a pooling layer, these node representations
can be further summarized into a graph representation, enabling graph-level tasks. When there is
no edge feature and the node features are from a countable space, it is shown that message passing
GNNs are at most as powerful as the 1-WL test for discriminating non-isomorphic graphs [27, 19].
For anh-layer message passing GNN, it will give two nodes the same ﬁnal representation if they have
identical height-hrooted subtrees (i.e., both the structures and the features on the corresponding
nodes/edges are the same). If two graphs have a lot of identical (or similar) rooted subtrees, they will
also have similar graph representations after pooling. This insight is crucial for the success of modern
GNNs in graph classiﬁcation, because it aligns with the inductive bias that two graphs are similar if
they have many common substructures. Such insight has also been used in designing the WL subtree
kernel [7], a state-of-the-art graph classiﬁcation method before GNNs.
However, message passing GNNs have several limitations. Firstly, rooted subtree is only one speciﬁc
substructure. It is not general enough to represent arbitrary subgraphs, especially those with cycles
due to the natural restriction of tree structure. Secondly, using rooted subtree as the elementary
substructure results in a discriminating power bounded by the 1-WL test. For example, all n-node
r-regular graphs cannot be discriminated by message passing GNNs. Thirdly, standard message
passing GNNs do not allow using root-node-speciﬁc structural features (such as the distance between
a node and the root node) to improve the quality of the learned root node’s representation. We might
need to break through such limitations in order to design more powerful GNNs.
3.2 The NGNN framework
To address the above limitations, we propose the Nested Graph Neural Network (NGNN) framework.
NGNN no longer aims to encode a rooted subtree around each node. Instead, in NGNN, each node’s
ﬁnal representation encodes the general local subgraph information around it more than a subtree, so
that two graphs sharing a lot of identical or similar rooted subgraphs will have similar representations.
Deﬁnition 1. (Rooted subgraph) Given a graph Gand a nodev, the height-hrooted subgraph Gh
v
ofvis the subgraph induced from Gby the nodes within hhops ofv(includingh-hop nodes).
To make a node’s ﬁnal representation encode a rooted subgraph, we need to compute a subgraph
representation. To achieve this, we resort to an arbitrary GNN, which we call the base GNN of NGNN.
For example, the base GNN can be simply a message passing GNN, which performs message passing
within each rooted subgraph to learn an intermediate representation for every node of the subgraph,
and then uses a pooling layer to summarize a subgraph representation from the intermediate node
representations. This subgraph representation is used as the ﬁnal representation of the root node in
4