EBCDAFBAFBCAFBCDF
ECDEDFEBCAFEBCDAFPerformmessagepassingwithineachsubgraphExtract a rooted subgraph around each nodeGraph classificationUse the outputs from inner GNNs as the final node representations of rootsApply  subgraph poolingInner(base) GNNsOuter GNN
Graph regressionApply graph poolingtogetagraphrepresentationFigure 2: A particular implementation of the NGNN framework. It ﬁrst extracts (copies) a rooted subgraph
(height=1) around each node from the original graph, and then applies a base GNN with a subgraph pooling layer
to each rooted subgraph independently to learn a subgraph representation. The subgraph representation is used
as the root node’s ﬁnal representation in the original graph. Then, a graph pooling layer is used to summarize the
ﬁnal node representations into a graph representation.
layer. Take the height-1 rooted subgraphs (marked with red boxes) around v1andv2in Figure 1 as an
example. Although v1andv2’s height-1 rooted subtrees are still the same, their neighbors (labeled by
1 and 2) have different height-1 rooted subtrees. Thus, applying a one-layer message passing GNN
plus a subgraph pooling as the base GNN is sufﬁcient to discriminate G1andG2.
The NGNN framework has multiple exclusive advantages. Firstly, it allows freely choosing the
base GNN, and can enhance the base GNN’s representation power in a plug-and-play fashion.
Theoretically, we proved that NGNN is more powerful than message passing GNNs and 1-WL by
being able to discriminate almost all r-regular graphs (where 1-WL always fails). Secondly, by
extracting rooted subgraphs, NGNN allows augmenting the initial features of a node with subgraph-
speciﬁc structural features such as distance encoding [ 24] to improve the quality of the learned node
representations. Thirdly, unlike other more powerful graph neural networks, especially those based
on higher-order WL tests [ 19–21,25], NGNN still has linear time and space complexity w.r.t. graph
size like standard message passing GNNs, thus maintaining good scalability. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of the NGNN framework in various synthetic/real-world graph classiﬁcation/regression
datasets. On synthetic datasets, NGNN demonstrates higher-than-1-WL expressive power, matching
very well with our theorem. On real-world datasets, NGNN consistently enhances a wide range of
base GNNs’ performance, achieving highly competitive results on all datasets.
2 Preliminaries
2.1 Notation and problem deﬁnition
We consider the graph classiﬁcation/regression problem. Given a graph G= (V;E)whereV=
f1;2;:::ngis the node set and EVVis the edge set, we aim to learn a function mapping Gto
its class or target value y. The nodes and edges in Gcan have feature vectors associated with them,
denoted by xi(for nodei) and eij(for edge (i;j)), respectively.
2.2 Weisfeiler-Lehman test
The Wesfeiler-Lehman (1-WL) test [ 22] is a popular algorithm for graph isomorphism checking. The
classical 1-WL works as follows. At ﬁrst, all nodes receive a color 1. Each node collects its neighbors’
colors into a multiset. Then, 1-WL will update each node’s color so that two nodes get the same new
color if and only if their current colors are the same and they have identical multisets of neighbor
colors. Repeat this process until the number of colors does not increase between two iterations.
Then, 1-WL will return that two graphs are non-isomorphic if their node colors are different at some
iteration, or fail to determine whether they are non-isomorphic. See [7, 26] for more details.
1-WL essentially encodes the rooted subtrees around each node at different heights into its color
representations. Figure 1 middle shows the rooted subtrees around v1andv2. Two nodes will have
the same color at iteration hif and only if their height- hrooted subtrees are the same.
3