the original graph. Take root node was an example. We ﬁrst perform Trounds of message passing
within node w’s rooted subgraph Gh
w. Letvbe any node appearing in Gh
w. We have
ht+1
v;Ghw=Ut(ht
v;Ghw;mt+1
v;Ghw);where mt+1
v;Ghw=X
u2N(vjGhw)Mt(ht
v;Ghw;ht
u;Ghw;evu): (3)
HereMt;Utare the message and update functions of the base GNN at time stamp t,N(vjGh
w)
denotes the set of v’s neighbors within w’s rooted subgraph Gh
w, and ht+1
v;Ghwandmt+1
v;Ghwdenote
nodev’s hidden state and message speciﬁc to rooted subgraph Gh
wat time stamp t+ 1. Note that
when nodevattends different nodes’ rooted subgraphs, its hidden states and messages will also be
different . This is in contrast to standard GNNs where a node’s hidden state and message at time tis
the same regardless of which root node it contributes to. For example, ht+1
vandmt+1
vin Eq. 1 do
not depend on any particular rooted subgraph.
AfterTrounds of message passing, we apply a subgraph pooling layer to summarize a subgraph
representation hGhwfrom the intermediate node representations fhT
v;Ghwjv2Gh
wg.
hw: =hGhw=R0(fhT
v;Ghwjv2Gh
wg); (4)
whereR0is the subgraph pooling layer. This subgraph representation hGhwwill be used as root
nodew’s ﬁnal representation hwin the original graph. Note that the base GNNs are simultaneously
applied to all nodes’ rooted subgraphs to return a ﬁnal node representation for every node in the
original graph, and all the base GNNs share the same parameters. With such node representations,
NGNN uses an outer GNN to further process and aggregate them into a graph representation of the
whole graph. For simplicity, we let the outer GNN be simply a graph pooling layer denoted byR1:
hG:=R1(fhwjw2Gg): (5)
The Nested GNN framework can be understood as a two-level GNN, or a GNN of GNNs —the
inner subgraph-level GNNs (base GNNs) are used to learn node representations from their rooted
subgraphs, while the outer graph-level GNN is used to return a whole-graph representation from the
inner GNNs’ outputs. The inner GNNs all share the same parameters which are trained end-to-end
with the outer GNN. Figure 2 depicts the implementation of the NGNN framework described above.
Compared to message passing GNNs, NGNN changes the “receptive ﬁeld” of each node from a
rooted subtree to a rooted subgraph, in order to capture better local substructure information. The
rooted subgraph is read by a base GNN to learn a subgraph representation. Finally, the outer GNN
reads the subgraph representations output by the base GNNs to return a graph representation.
Note that, when we apply the base GNN to a rooted subgraph, this rooted subgraph is extracted
(copied) out of the original graph and treated as a completely independent graph from the other rooted
subgraphs and the original graph. This allows the same node to have different representations within
different rooted subgraphs. For example, in Figure 2, the same node Bappears in four different
rooted subgraphs. Sometimes it is the root node, while other times it is a 1-hop neighbor of the root
node. NGNN enables learning different representations for the same node when it appears in different
rooted subgraphs, in contrast to standard GNNs where a node only has one single representation at
one time stamp (Eq. 1). Similarly, NGNN also enables using different initial features for the same
node when it appears in different rooted subgraphs. This allows us to customize a node’s initial
features based on its structural role within a rooted subgraph, as opposed to using the same initial
features for a node across all rooted subgraphs. For example, we can optionally augment node B’s
initial features with the distance between node Band the root—when node Bis the root node, we
give it an additional feature 0; and whenBis ak-hop neighbor of the root, we give it an additional
featurek. Such feature augmentation may help better capture a node’s structural role within a rooted
subgraph. It is an exclusive advantage of NGNN and is notpossible in standard GNNs.
3.3 The representation power of NGNN
We theoretically characterize the additional expressive power of NGNN (using message passing
GNNs as base GNNs) as opposed to standard message passing GNNs. We focus on the ability to
discriminate regular graphs because they form an important category of graphs which standard GNNs
cannot represent well. Using 1-WL or message passing GNNs, any two n-sizedr-regular graphs will
have the same representation, unless discriminative node features are available. In contrast, we prove
that NGNN can distinguish almost all pairs of n-sizedr-regular graphs regardless of node features.
5