Nested Graph Neural Networks
Muhan Zhang1;2;Pan Li3;y
1Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Peking University
2Beijing Institute for General Artiﬁcial Intelligence
3Department of Computer Science, Purdue University
Abstract
Graph neural network (GNN)’s success in graph classiﬁcation is closely related to
the Weisfeiler-Lehman (1-WL) algorithm. By iteratively aggregating neighboring
node features to a center node, both 1-WL and GNN obtain a node representation
that encodes a rooted subtree around the center node. These rooted subtree rep-
resentations are then pooled into a single representation to represent the whole
graph. However, rooted subtrees are of limited expressiveness to represent a non-
tree graph. To address it, we propose Nested Graph Neural Networks (NGNNs).
NGNN represents a graph with rooted subgraphs instead of rooted subtrees, so
that two graphs sharing many identical subgraphs (rather than subtrees) tend to
have similar representations. The key is to make each node representation encode
a subgraph around it more than a subtree. To achieve this, NGNN extracts a local
subgraph around each node and applies a base GNN to each subgraph to learn
a subgraph representation. The whole-graph representation is then obtained by
pooling these subgraph representations. We provide a rigorous theoretical analysis
showing that NGNN is strictly more powerful than 1-WL. In particular, we proved
that NGNN can discriminate almost all r-regular graphs, where 1-WL always fails.
Moreover, unlike other more powerful GNNs, NGNN only introduces a constant-
factor higher time complexity than standard GNNs. NGNN is a plug-and-play
framework that can be combined with various base GNNs. We test NGNN with
different base GNNs on several benchmark datasets. NGNN uniformly improves
their performance and shows highly competitive performance on all datasets.
1 Introduction
Graph is an important tool to model relational data in the real world. Representation learning over
graphs has become a popular topic of machine learning in recent years. While network embedding
methods, such as DeepWalk [ 1], can learn node representations well, they fail to generalize to
whole-graph representations, which are crucial for applications such as graph classiﬁcation, molecule
modeling, and drug discovery. On the contrary, although traditional graph kernels [ 2–7] can be
used for graph classiﬁcation, they deﬁne graph similarity often in a heuristic way, which is not
parameterized and lacks some ﬂexibility to deal with features.
In this context, graph neural networks (GNNs) have regained people’s attention and become the
state-of-the-art graph representation learning tool [ 8–17]. GNNs use message passing to propagate
features between connected nodes. By iteratively aggregating neighboring node features to the center
node, GNNs learn node representations encoding their local structure and feature information. These
node representations can be further pooled into a graph representation, enabling graph-level tasks
such as graph classiﬁcation. In this paper, we will use message passing GNNs to denote this class
Corresponding author: Muhan Zhang ( muhan@pku.edu.cn ).
yPan Li contributes Sec. 3.3 that proves the Theorem 1 and some implementation ideas.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).