humanness12,13. Although GPT-3 performed well on free-form
conversation assessments demonstrating reading comprehension,
it performed worst on a dataset meant to mimic the dynamic give-
and-take of student-teacher interactions, and it also did not scorewell on multiple choice questions from middle and high schoolexaminations
1. This makes sense because it does not “know ”
anything. One of the major limitations of GPT-3 is that it repeats
itself semantically, loses coherence over long conversations, andcontradicts itself1,14. It would be unrealistic to consider GPT-3 as a
stand-in for a healthcare provider or as a proxy in high-stakes
interactions, such as a health emergency or an emotionally fraught
interaction.
REALISTIC AND FEASIBLE GPT-3 APPLICATIONS IN
HEALTHCARE
There is compelling promise and serious hype in AI applications
that generate natural language. Some of that promise is realistic.
Routinizing tedious work for providers could productively improvetheir work satisfaction and reduce time interacting with computersystems, a well-documented concern
15. AI NLP applications could
navigate complex electronic health record (EHR) systems, auto-
mate documentation with human review, prepare orders, orautomate other routine tasks.
It is, however, capable of more complexity in its text
conversations than a chatbot, including more natural-sounding
question and answer exchanges14. This could personalize the
experience of data collection in several non-critical healthcare
system encounters, including online chat support for patients or
assisting patients with setting up equipment in preparation for atelehealth visit. In fact, its developer, OpenAI, originally intendedthe software to be used by companies and organizations to
improve customer service chatbots or do other similar tasks
16.
However, each application must also include implementation
guidance, including serious guardrails for all healthcare-relatedinteractions. For example, this could mean it would be primed,
perhaps using few-shot training alongside imposed limitations, to
discuss solely relevant topics —and only after excisions of harmful,
prejudicial, or inappropriate vocabulary.
REALISTIC BUT CHALLENGING GPT-3 APPLICATIONS IN
HEALTHCARE
Implementation guidance will be even more important in
adapting GPT-3 technology for realistic but challenging healthcareapplications. For example, using GPT-3 to assist with triaging non-critical patients presenting in the emergency department might
seem a good use of the technology, from both a patient
experience perspective and a resource allocation perspective. Inthis example, the focus would be on collecting accurate data frompatients in a user-friendly way, thereby improving the patient
experience (by making it easier to provide information) and
enhancing patient care (by freeing up clinicians to spend moretime in meaningful clinical encounters rather than routine data
collection).
FDA approval would likely be required in this type of application
in the United States and any evaluation must consider a broadlydiverse population of patients. For instance, stakeholders, includ-
ing developers and implementers, will need to be mindful of
allocational and representational harms
17,18, particularly when a
virtual agent acts as a gatekeeper19—in which case the patient-
user has no other option than to interact ﬁrst with the virtual
agent. In the triage example, the allocational harm occurs when
those who are more able to successfully interact with the GPT-3text intake process or forms are more likely to be triaged
accurately. Implementation should include another means of
triaging those patients who cannot, or do not wish to, use theconversational agent, which may also be too linguisticallyhomogenous to offer culturally mindful language use. Further-
more, alternatives should be readily apparent and easy to access.
Although this may seem to duplicate work, it is a necessary step in
ensuring that harms are reduced and, as the GPT-3-driveninteraction improves, redundant effort should be needed lessoften. An appropriate staff member would also need to review all
triage forms completed using the GPT-3 application; it will be
important to maintain a “human in the loop ”. A representational
harm in this triage example might be when the GPT-3 intake isonly available in one language. In such a case, one could explore
GPT-3 ’s expanded languages and translation functions: though
the intake interaction could be in Spanish, form material couldthen be translated into the language spoken by the triage staff.There are real possibilities here, if done well, for language and
related healthcare access barriers to be reduced. However,
without careful implementation, including the step-wise processand oversight we describe, this triage application would be
unwise with the potential to cause both immediate harm to
individual patients and broader harm to patient groups, exacer-bating healthcare disparities.
MAKING SURE ANY REALISTIC APPLICATIONS ARE EQUITABLE
AI software that generates natural language could be viewed as
just another vendor-provided information technology tool, but it
should not be. The role of human-computer interactions in
informing the design of these conversational spaces, whether inan online chat or at an emergency department patient registration
kiosk, will be critical to ensure not just that accurate and relevant
data are collected, but also that the experience is what diverseusers expect, want, and value. A broad range of stakeholdersshould be involved from the earliest stages of development (or
tailoring) through deployment and evaluation. Stakeholders
should be selected who can represent as comprehensive a viewas possible on both the harms and bene ﬁts of proposed uses of
GPT-3 in eHealth applications.
Transparency will be key to the appropriate use of GPT-3 types
of technology. Human beings must be informed that theinteraction is with a computer-based text generator. Doing sowould address concerns that humans tend to anthropomorphize
technology applications with human traits, assuming humanness
and ascribing empathic emotional responses when there arenone
20,21. Some applications are highly feasible and seem low-risk
but might harbor hidden hazards. For example, an innocuous
natural language clinic appointment scheduler could not, withexisting technology, detect a change of tone or social cues ofnervousness a patient expresses and that might signal more
urgent clinical needs.
Transparency is also critical for datasets and to disclose the
limitations in language training activities. A GPT-3 application willneed to be given conversation endpoints so that it leads the
prompts rather than having the patient control the focus of the
interaction; for form-completion tasks, it will also need additionalguidance to determine whether the information a patient shares
actually addresses the question posed. IT support personnel, or
those in similar roles, will need to learn how to shape the promptsthat will deliver the most relevant answers or results from a giveninteraction. For GPT-3 priming using few-shot learning, a commit-
ment to transparency would require publishing any customized
parameters. In high-risk applications in healthcare, including anypatient-facing tools, such sharing must be mandatory.
We should have cautious optimism for the potential applica-
tions of sophisticated natural language processing applications to
improve patient care. Additional concerns from our triageexample include many implementation issues, including the ways
AI software would interface with clinical and healthcare support
work ﬂows (a known concern for other AI applications
22,23), how
the data will be analyzed in real-time on the backend toD.M. Korngiebel and S.D. Mooney
2
npj Digital Medicine (2021)    93 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital1234567890():,;