COMMENT OPEN
Considering the possibilities and pitfalls of Generative Pre-
trained Transformer 3 (GPT-3) in healthcare delivery
Diane M. Korngiebel1✉and Sean D. Mooney2
Natural language computer applications are becoming increasingly sophisticated and, with the recent release of Generative Pre-
trained Transformer 3, they could be deployed in healthcare-related contexts that have historically comprised human-to-human
interaction. However, for GPT-3 and similar applications to be considered for use in health-related contexts, possibilities and pitfallsneed thoughtful exploration. In this article, we brie ﬂy introduce some opportunities and cautions that would accompany advanced
Natural Language Processing applications deployed in eHealth.
npj Digital Medicine            (2021) 4:93 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-021-00464-x
A seemingly sophisticated arti ﬁcial intelligence, OpenAI ’s Gen-
erative Pre-trained Transformer 3, or GPT-3, developed using
computer-based processing of huge amounts of publicly availabletextual data (natural language)
1, may be coming to a healthcare
clinic (or eHealth application) near you. This may sound fantastical,
but not too long ago so did a powerful computer so tiny it could
ﬁt in the palm of your hand. GPT-3 and other technologies are
getting close to passing a Turing Test, an assessment of whether
the language such applications generate is indistinguishable from
language produced by humans2,3. This possibility has generated
both excitement and caution4, and Microsoft Corporation recently
acquired an exclusive license from OpenAI for GPT-35. As with so
many technologies and their potential use in eHealth, there are
developments and applications that are unrealistic, realistic, andrealistic but challenging —and perhaps unwise.
Natural Language Processing (NLP) has a long history in clinical
informatics and includes groundbreaking work using computer-
based algorithms that compute on text and natural language.There are many clinical applications of NLP including assisting
with provider documentation, automated structured chart
abstraction, and in machine learning
6.
Despite the large amount of work in this area, AI that generates
text and conversations, such as GPT-3, will not replace a
conversation with another human being for the foreseeablefuture in clinical settings7. This means that it cannot interact with
patients in lieu of healthcare providers or healthcare support
personnel. Interactions with GPT-3 that look (or sound) like
interactions with a living, breathing —and empathetic or sympa-
thetic —human being are not8. A recent example of this failing
was seen in testing the use of GTP-3 for mental health support
using a simulated patient; the model supported the patient ’s
suggestion of suicide9. Moreover, language models such as GPT-3
are not grounded in input-diverse datasets (like visual and
auditory data)1. GPT-3 ’s self-supervised prediction will, therefore,
hit limits based on its pre-training data and cannot dynamicallyadjust a conversation or interaction for tone or body language.
GPT-3 is an autoregressive language model trained with 175
billion parameters and then tested in “few-shot learning settings ”(in
which a new language task can be performed after only a fewexamples). Autoregressive language models predict the next
element in a text, usually a word, based on previous naturallanguage texts. Although its developers at OpenAI think it performs
well on translation, question answering, and cloze tasks (e.g., a ﬁll-in-
the-blank test to demonstrate comprehension of text by providingthe missing words in a sentence)
1, it does not always predict a
correct string of words that are believable as a conversation. And
once it has started a wrong prediction (ranging from a semanticmistake to using biased language), it does not go back and correctitself but continues to predict each word based on the precedingwords. Further, since it is based on real language, human biases are
present and, with inadequate priming of the application, may even
be ampli ﬁed and cause serious harm in sensitive contexts, such as
healthcare. It is well-known that Internet-trained models re ﬂect the
scale of bias seen on the Internet, recently demonstrated by using
the Implicit Association Test (IAT) to measure biases in a machine
learning model trained on web-based content
10. Therefore, it is
unsurprising that GPT-3 showed associations between gender andcertain jobs; often the default was male. Negative sentiments were
associated with Black race and positive with Asian race. Islam was
more often associated with terrorism-related words than were otherreligions
1. Furthermore, according to recent research at the Center
on Terrorism, Extremism, and Cou nterterrorism, GPT-3 is easy to
prime for harmful text generation promoting extremism and
terrorist activities, including Nazism and QAnon11.
It is within this caveat- ﬁlled context that evaluation of AI health
and healthcare applications that produce natural language shouldassess their risk, feasibility, and return on investment —including
prioritizing improved patient care. Realistic applications of GPT-3
must start in areas of high value, high feasibility, and low risk forall stakeholders, including (at a minimum) patients, clinicians,administrators, and payers. Applications with higher levels of riskor feasibility must be studied extensively and their actual and
projected short-, medium-, and long-term impact measured.
Realistic but challenging or unwise applications include thosethat are medium to high feasibility, medium to high risk, andmedium to high value.
UNREALISTIC APPLICATIONS FOR GPT-3 APPLICATIONS IN
HEALTHCARE
GPT-3 is not an arti ﬁcial general intelligence. It will not, and cannot
(for now at least), replace a human interaction that requires
1The Hastings CenterGarrison, New York, NY, USA.2Department of Biomedical Informatics and Medical Education, University of Washington Seattle, Seattle, WA, USA.
✉email: korngiebeld@thehastingscenter.orgwww.nature.com/npjdigitalmed
Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital1234567890():,;