Jacobs Sentiment Analysis for Words and Fiction Characters
FIGURE 2 | Distributions (with probabilities =dotted lines) of the feature values across the three text cat egories (f =fear, h=happy, n =neutral; left panel: HU-LIU,
middle: VADER, right: SentiArt; val =valence).
FIGURE 3 | Emotional ﬁgure proﬁles for seven main characters representi ng percentiles of their raw valence, arousal, and emotion po tential scores within the Harry
Potter corpus based on a sample of 100 ﬁgures (see Appendix in t heSupplementary Material ).
intolanguageasasinglewordthanothers.Theabovemention ed
work byEgloﬀ et al. (2016) already applied the big5 model “to
helpunderstandcharacterinShakespeare”andcreatepersona lity
proﬁles for main characters in his plays such as “Hamlet.” The
authorsusedIBMWatson( Ferrucci,2012 )fortheiranalyses.
Here,Iusedthesamesimpletechnologyasforthemultivariat e
SA and computation of the emotional ﬁgure proﬁle shown in
Figures1 ,3, i.e., a combination of a VSM and task-speciﬁc label
lists.Thelabelswerechosenonthebasisofextensivepilots tudies
examining candidate items for each of the big5 dimensions an d
their underlying more speciﬁc primary factors loosely inspired
byOsgood et al.’s (1957) semanticdiﬀerential, Goldberg’s (1992)
100 unipolar markers and transparent bipolar inventory, as wel l
asThompson’s (2008) “International English Big-Five Mini-
Markers.” Naturally, only labels contained in the German Ha rryPotter VSM’s vocabulary could be used. The procedure started
with a representative seed word [e.g., CURIOUS for the positive
pole of the Openness dimension; cf. “the deﬁning method” of
Turney and Littman (2003) ] and then proceeded with searching
forsynonymsandantonymsofthisseedwordusingthesemantic
relatedness values of the VSM. The seed words for the 10 poles
of the ﬁve dimensions were: Openness/Intellect (unintellig ent-
curious), Conscientiousness(risky-staid), Extraversion (timid-
energetic), Agreeableness(distrustful-friendly), and
Neuroticism(calm-nervous).
Itshouldbenotedthatthepresentapproachtermed“pseudo-
big5” is only loosely inspired by the OCEAN model and that
this computational lexico-semantic approach bears only partia l
similarities to key words appearing in the original or revised
“big5” questionnaires (e.g., Costa and McCrae, 1988 ). Naturally,
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org 7 July 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 53