Jacobs Sentiment Analysis for Words and Fiction Characters
TABLE 3 | Results of the binary ﬁgure classiﬁcation (“good” vs. “bad”); (A)F1
Scores for seven classiﬁers (stratiﬁed 10-fold cross-valida tion) with eight predictors
(100 ﬁgures); (B)Rank scores of the importance of each of eight features.
Method F1
AdaBoost 0.818
kNN 0.815
Random Forest 0.727
Neural Network 0.713
Naive Bayes 0.636
SVM 0.545
Logistic Regression 0.168
Feature/Importance rank Information gain ratio χ²
Arousal 0.501 8.268
Extraversion 0.375 4.602
Neuroticism 0.157 1.875
Emotion potential 0.123 1.3
Openness 0.123 0.180
Agreeableness 0.031 0.018
Conscientiousness 0.031 0.018
Valence 0.031 0.018
DISCUSSION
In sum, applying the empirically validatedtechniques develope d
for SA of texts (study 1) to ﬁction characters (study 2) produc ed
some interesting results with plausible face validity, high -
accuracy identiﬁcation of 100 ﬁgures and a decent classiﬁca tion
accuracyregarding“goodness”ofcharacterdataforthoseﬁ gures
sampled from the internet. The emotional ﬁgure proﬁles and
ﬁgure personality proﬁles of seven main characters from Harry
Potter appear to have suﬃcient face validity to justify future
empirical studies and cross-validation by experts. If replicat ed
with other texts and ﬁgures this advanced SA opens numerous
possibilitiesforresearchindigitalliterarystudies,neu rocognitive
poetics,appliedreadingresearch,andotherﬁelds.
For example, a major issue in neurocognitive poetics is
the investigation of the immersion potential of texts and
other media ( Lüdtke et al., 2014; Schlochtermeier et al.,
2015) which correlates with a number of factors among
which sympathy for and identiﬁcation with protagonists
seems central ( Jacobs and Lüdtke, 2017 ). The emotions that
readers experience during narrative comprehension depend
upon psychological processes, such as identiﬁcation with a
protagonist and sympathy for story characters (e.g., Ferstl
et al., 2005; Oatley, 2016; Jacobs and Willems, 2018 ). The
likeability of stories depends on this, as Jose and Brewer
(1984)already showed for children readers: the overall
liking of a story indeed increased with greater identiﬁcati on,
greater suspense, and greater liking of outcome. While young
children (7 years) preferred positive outcomes regardless
of the valence of the main character, older children (10–
12) liked “happy endings” for good characters and negative
endings for bad characters. To what extent the hybrid hero
potential also contributes to this is a fascinating open empiri calquestion that can now be investigated on the basis of
predictions derived from emotional ﬁgure proﬁles and/or ﬁgur e
personalityproﬁles.
UsingSentiArt one can easily quantify a text’s hypothetical
immersion potential or the theoretical likeability of ﬁctio n
characters,thuspredicttheoutcomeofexperimentswithhuma n
readers and test key hypotheses of the Neurocognitive Poetic s
Model of literary reading ( Jacobs, 2015a,b ), such as the ﬁction
feeling hypothesis. It states that narratives with emotiona l
contentsinvitereadersmoretobeempathicwiththeprotagoni sts
and immerse in the text world (e.g., by engaging the aﬀective
empathy network of the brain), than do stories with neutral
contents. In an fMRI study Hsu et al. (2014) tested and found
support for this. Comparing the neural correlates of post hoc
immersion ratings for fear-inducing vs. neutral passages fr om
theHarry Potter series revealed that activity in the midcingulate
cortexcorrelatedmorestronglywiththeratingsfortheemo tional
than for the neutral passages. Descriptions of protagonists’ pa in
or personal distress featured in the fear-inducing passages m ay
have recruited the core structure of pain and aﬀective empathy
the more readers immersed in the text. Via SentiArt both the
emotion potential of a key passage of text and the likeability
of the character appearing in that passage (emotional ﬁgure
proﬁle, ﬁgure personality proﬁle) can be computed and used
for deriving testable predictions. Adequately combined with a
scientiﬁcassessmentofreaders’personalityproﬁlesoremot ional
states (e.g., Calvo and Castillo, 2001 ) it can be used to predict
not only emotional responses to narratives but also reading
comprehension. The latter can indeed be facilitated when the re
is a felt match between readers and ﬁctive characters, e.g.,
when highly extraverted participants read stories about, and
ratedtheemotionalexperiencesof,extravertedprotagonist s,with
personalitiessimilartotheirown( Komedaetal.,2009 ).
CONCLUSION, LIMITATIONS,
AND OUTLOOK
A ﬁrst general “take home message” from the present
computational studies is that Turney and Littman’s (2003)
unsupervised learning approach termed “semantic orientation
from association” still is a useful tool for VSM-based sentime nt
analyses of literary texts when access to published word lists
providing valence ratings is diﬃcult or impossible, or when
these word lists do not adequately match the vocabulary of the
text.SentiArt’s encouraging performance for this text material
in Study 1 is promising: if replicated with other materials in
future studies, it would mean that texts for which sophistica ted
Englishword-listbasedSATslikeVADERaresuboptimal(such as
Shakespeare sonnets; cf. Jacobs, 2018b ) can still undergo decent
sentiment analyses. The condition is that one applies SentiArt
in combination with an appropriate training corpus and VSM
suchasthepresent“wiki.en.vec”or—for“higher”literaryE nglish
texts—the above mentioned GLEC ( Jacobs, 2018a ). This corpus
comprises ∼3.000 English texts ( ∼650.000 types) spanning a
range of genres from both ﬁction (prose & poetry) and non-
ﬁction written by more than 130 authors (e.g., Darwin, Dicke ns,
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org 10 July 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 53