Jacobs Sentiment Analysis for Words and Fiction Characters
I make no claims regarding the validity of this “pseudo-big5”
approach as a scientiﬁc tool for assessing personality proﬁles o f
realpersons.
Pseudo-Big 5
The exemplary data in Figure4—based on the HPde.vec
model—show the semantic relatedness scores computed for the
words “Harry” and “Voldemort” with six labels hypotheticall y
representingthenegativeandpositivepolesoftheAgreeablen ess
dimension of the pseudo-big5 model (cf. Appendix A in the
SupplementaryMaterial ).Totheextentthatthepresentpseudo-
big5 model is of any heuristic value, the data in Figure4suggest
thatthe“Harry”characterismorecloselyrelatedtothesem antic
concepts of “aﬀectionate,” “caring,” and “friendly” standin g for
the positive pole of the dimension, while “Voldemort” is more
related than “Harry” to the negative concepts of “deadhearte d,”
“hostile,” and “mean.” Still, the data also show the inheren t
ambiguity/complexity (“hybrid hero potential”) resulting f rom
this method: thus, Voldemort, although more deadhearted th an
Harry, also scores >0 on the ’aﬀectionate’ dimension, while
Harry,althoughbeingmorefriendlythanVoldemort,alsosc ores
a.68 value for “hostile.” The overall VSM-based raw scores fo r
“Harry” vs. “Voldemort” on the Agreeableness dimension wer e:
Harry 0.063, Voldemort −0.07, i.e., the “Harry” ﬁgure would
be considered as overall more “agreeable” than “Voldemort, ” if
these scores were on an interval scale. However, as for the da ta
inFigure3. I assumed that this is not the case and rather used
percentiles to estimate each ﬁgure’s score, based on the pseud o-
big5 scores for 100 characters from the book series. The same
procedure was applied for the other four dimensions of the
pseudo-big5 model. The results for seven main characters are
shownin Figure5.
Within this selective set of seven characters, the top
scorer on the Openness (to experience), Conscientiousness an d
Agreeableness dimensions is “Harry,” while “Voldemort” ta kes
the lead on the Neuroticism dimension. Interestingly, “Dob by”
is the winner on the Extraversion dimension. In the absence o f
empirical data, I leave it up to readers of this article to judg e
the face validity of these tentative results. Their heurist ic value
is clear, though, and can readily be tested e.g., by an experim ent
with human readers who are invited to judge these seven (or
more)charactersonscalesborrowedfromthe“big5”personal ity
inventory. A quantiﬁcation of the hybrid hero potential in
future empirical studies investigating its inﬂuence on (aes thetic)
emotional reader responses could make use of data as those
inFigures4 ,5by using, for instance, only opposite categories
such as risky-cautious, good-bad or nice-nasty and computin g
correspondingratios.
Figure Identiﬁcation
As a ﬁrst test of the usefulness of the computational pseudo-
big5 I checked how well the 100 ﬁgures (see Appendix A in
theSupplementaryMaterial ) could be identiﬁed on the basis
of the three features from the emotional ﬁgure proﬁle (valenc e,
arousal, emotion potential) and the ﬁve big5 features from th e
ﬁgure personality proﬁle (i.e., O-C-E-A-N). For this I used
the simple “Neuronal model” from the JMP14 Pro statisticssoftware (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, 1989–2007) shown in
Figure6since it allows anestimation of the feature importances
not only for the total sample of 100 characters, but also for
each individual one4. The model ﬁt was excellent (entropy R2
=0.9995, misclassiﬁcation rate =0) with the overall most
important features—according to the total eﬀect, dependent
resampled inputs option—being: emotion potential/EP =0.63,
N=0.61,A=0.6,E=0.54,aro=0.53,O=0.38,C=0.36,val
=0.12).Thus,forperfectlyidentifyingeachofthe100ﬁgures the
neuralnetmainlyusedinformationabouttheemotionpotenti al,
neuroticism, and agreeableness scores, mixing in data abou t the
extraversion and arousal values, and—to a lesser extent—th e
openness, conscientiousness and agreeableness scores. Loo king
at the individual feature importances for the seven main ﬁgur es
inTable2, it can be seen that the neural net model ﬂexibly uses
the entire spectrum of (eight) features to identify ﬁgures. W hile
the emotion potential/EP played a top role for all seven ﬁgures ,
conscientiousness, and agreeableness were important to ide ntify
“Harry,”butnotforexample“Hermione.”
Figure Classiﬁcation
Sincetheneuralnetmodel’sexcellentperformancewasobtaine d
fortheentiredataset,across-validationnotbeingpossibl egiven
thateachﬁgurerepresentsitsownclass,Irana2ndclassiﬁcati on
FIGURE 4 | Scores on six representative labels for the “Agreeableness ”
dimension for two main characters from HarryPotter (translated from the
German originals by the author). The labels “affectionate, ” “caring,” and
“friendly” hypothetically represent the positive pole of t he dimension, the other
three the negative one6.
4The model parameters were as follows: three hidden units, TanH activa tion
function, learning rate of 0.1, no boosting, 10 iterations with a squared penalty
function(cf. JacobsandLüdtke,2017 ).
5Entropy R2compares the log-likelihoods from the ﬁtted model and a constant
probabilitymodel:R2=1–loglikelihood(model)/loglikelihood(0).
6Not all items used in the present pseudo-big5 model are shown here for
better visibility (the original version used eight negative a nd six positive labels;
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org 8 July 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 53