Jacobs Sentiment Analysis for Words and Fiction Characters
TABLE 1 | F1 scores for the three SATs obtained with ﬁve classiﬁers (stra tiﬁed
random sampling, 70/30, average values for 100 repetitions) .
Classiﬁer/Method Hu-Liu Vader SentiArt LSA
Neural network 0.693 0.742 0.915 0.620
Logistic regression 0.700 0.716 1.000 0.660
AdaBoost 0.613 0.674 0.972 0.420
kNN 0.626 0.675 0.972 0.344
Naive bayes 0.676 0.713 0.838 0.637
emotionalﬁgureproﬁleandﬁgurepersonalityproﬁleintroduce d
here can help quantify this hybrid hero potential to predict
aestheticresponses(“liking,”“interest”)ofreaders,for example.
Emotional Figure Proﬁle
The simple idea behind computing an emotional ﬁgure proﬁle
is that the strength of semantic associations between a char acter
(name) and the prototypical “emotion words” contained in the
label list gives us an estimate of their emotion proﬁle. Thus,
the ﬁgure-based context vectors underlying the emotional ﬁ gure
proﬁle specify the aﬀective context proﬁle of a ﬁgure relative to
other ﬁgures in the story. They are merely suggestive and do
not directly specify emotional or social “traits” of a ﬁgure, for
example via recognizing adjectives or phrases directly refer ring
to the ﬁgure (e.g., “X is a dangerous person”) as in aspect-base d
SA(Liu,2015).
Most SATs are univariate, i.e., they compute a single value,
e.g.,HU-LIU. Based on previous work mainly using a word list-
based approach ( Jacobs et al., 2016a,b ), I recently proposed the
computation of the emotion potential of words, sentences or
chapters as an extension of univariate SA ( Jacobs, 2015a ). In
contrast to the latter which attributes only a valence value to
each unit of analysis, the emotion potential combines two of
the three dimensions in Wundt’s (1874) classical psychological
theory of emotion, i.e., valence and arousal. Thus, the emot ion
potential/EP of a word is computed as: EP w=|valence w|∗
arousal w,andestimatesthebivariatepotentialwithwhichaword
or larger text unit can elicit emotional responses in readers . In
psychology, after more than 150 years there still is no consen sus
whichofthetwo“big”emotiontheoriesiscorrect(cf. Schrottand
Jacobs, 2011 ): “dimensional” theories of emotion (e.g., Wundt’s
valence and arousal) or “discrete” ones (e.g., Ekman, 1999 ). The
VSM-basedvariantoftheemotionpotentialthereforetakesbo th
theoretical approaches into account since its computation is
based on discrete labels (e.g., joy,fearetc.; see Appendix B in
theSupplementaryMaterial inJacobs, 2018a ), but its output
is a continuous value on the bipolar “negativity-positivity” and
“calming/arousing”dimensions,respectively.
To compute the emotional ﬁgure and ﬁgure personality
proﬁles for characters from the Harry Potter book series I
proceeded much like in Study 1. I ﬁrst generated a task-
speciﬁc training corpus merging the texts from all seven
Harry Potter books (in their German translation from the
“childlex”corpus; Schroederetal.,2015 )andthencomputedthe
corresponding VSM using the fasttext tool (https://fasttext .cc/docs/en/pretrained-vectors.html) with the following param eter
speciﬁcations in addition to the default values: skipgram mode l
with 300 dimensions, no character n-grams, minimal count =
0, deterministic thread (so one can replicate the vectors). T he
resulting HPde.vec VSMused ∼85k300dvectorsextractedfrom
∼58ksentencesand,thus,thesevectorsarenotrepresentativ efor
or generalizable to other training corpora: using diﬀerent VSMs
willleadtodiﬀerentresults.Still,thisVSMappearstobethemos t
adequatetask-speciﬁconeforthepresentpurposes.
Like in Study 1 I then “sentiarted” each of the words in the
“Harry Potter” corpus and located the names of seven main
characters from Harry Potter in the resulting 2d space. The ra w
scores (Arousal, Valence, Emotion Potential) were transfo rmed
into percentiles based on a sample of 100 ﬁgures appearing in
the book series (from “Albus” to “Wilkes”; see Appendix in the
SupplementaryMaterial ).Figure3showstheEmotionalFigure
Proﬁlesforthesesevenmaincharacters.
The example emotional ﬁgure proﬁles in Figure3 would
suggest“Harry,”“Hermione,”and“Hagrid”astheprotagonis tsof
the stories with the highest relative valence values. Expect edly,
“Voldemort” has the lowest valence percentile (0), but a very
high emotion potential on account of his relatively high arou sal
and very high negative valence raw score ( −0.03). Lacking
empirical data (e.g., reader ratings) that could validate the se
estimationsIrefrainfromanyinterpretationbeyondfaceva lidity
considerations. Suﬃce it to say that the present emotional ﬁg ure
proﬁles appear solid enough to serve as predictors for empirical
studies of reading (e.g., Jacobs, 2015b ). Thus, one could have
participants read a variety of excerpts from the Harry Potter
series and collect ratings (for liking, familiarity etc.) f or a set of
mainﬁgures,similarlytoratingsregardingtheemotionpote ntial
of the entire excerpt (e.g., Hsu et al., 2015a ). A particularly
interesting prediction concerns those ﬁgures whose arousal a nd
valence values are discrepant, e.g., “Hagrid” or “Voldemort ”: the
1st has a low arousal and high valence whereas the 2nd has the
opposite proﬁle. Together with the ﬁgure personality proﬁles
discussedinthenextsection,suchdiscrepanciesmightcont ribute
to the hybrid hero potential. Peripheral-physiological measure s
such as heart rate variability or electrodermal activity co uld be
sensitive to such discrepancies ( Jacobs et al., 2016b ) as could be
brainactivitymeasuresthataresensitivetomentalconﬂict s(e.g.,
Hofmannetal.,2008 ).
Figure Personality Proﬁle
InthissectionIpresentsomemorediﬀerentiatedcomputationa l
“personality proﬁles” that are inspired by research in personal ity
andclinicalpsychology,inparticularso-calledlexicalappro aches
to personality assessment. These are based on common
language descriptors and therefore on the association betwe en
words rather than on neuropsychological experiments. More
speciﬁcally, the popular OCEAN model (perhaps better
known as “big5”; Norman, 1963 ) assumes that ﬁve global
factors (Openness to experience/Intellect, Conscientiousne ss,
Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Neuroticism/Emotional
Instability) capture personality characteristics that are m ost
important in people’s lives. These are hypothesized to eventuall y
becomepartoftheirlanguageandaremorelikelytobeencoded
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org 6 July 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 53