Jacobs Sentiment Analysis for Words and Fiction Characters
FIGURE 1 | (A) Schematic illustrating the procedure for computing the Emo tion Potential Space shown in (B).(B)Emotion Potential Space with Distribution of
valence (x-axis) and arousal (y-axis) values for the >2 million words from the wiki.en.vec corpus (“green cloud”) and those from two sample segments of the Harry
Potter stimuli (“fear” segment =blue crosses; “happy” segment =red circles, both increased in size for better visibility).
Study 2. Computing the Emotional and
Figure Personality Proﬁles for Main
Characters in “Harry Potter”
As far as I can tell, so far VSM-based SATs have not been used
to estimate the valence or emotion potential of characters in
stories, but it seems to be a natural application which is of
special interest for digital literary and neurocognitive poe tics
studies, e.g., for predicting identiﬁcation and empathy, bot h
important factors driving immersive responses (e.g., Jacobs
and Lüdtke, 2017 ). There is related work, however. Thus,
for example, Elsner (2012) used a word-list based method to
compute the “emotion” of characters such as “Miss Elizabeth
Bennet” from Jane Austen’s Pride and Prejudice by counting
all emotional words in paragraphs that featured only one
character and adding them to the character’s total. Also usi nga word-list based method, Nalisnick and Baird (2013) mined
for character-to-character sentiment in Shakespeare’s Hamletby
summing the valence values over each instance of continuous
speech working on the simplifying assumption that sentiment
was directed toward the character that spoke immediately
before the current speaker. As already mentioned, Egloﬀ et al.
(2016)used IBM Watson to compute Hamlet’s or Othello’s
“big 5.” More recently, Klinger (2018) presents a VSM-based
approachforcomputingthecomplexityofﬁguresinstories(e.g. ,
Eschenbach’s “Parcival”) using lexical diversity and info rmation
content measures. Figure complexity is an interesting featu re
related to what I’d like to call the hybrid hero potential : from
Homer’sIliadtoGilligan’s BreakingBad ﬁctionprotagonistshave
been depicted with conﬂicting features or traits to make them
more interesting/attractive to readers, listeners or view ers. The
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org 5 July 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 53