Jacobs Sentiment Analysis for Words and Fiction Characters
Turney and Littman (2003) argued that their unsupervised tool
with a training set of only 14 labels has the advantage of not
requiring re-training for each new domain unlike supervised
SAtools.
The third method is a hybrid between the ﬁrst two. Like the
2nd, it starts with estimating—using some training corpus—t he
similarity between the test text words and a list of labels fo r
which valence rating data must be available. It then computes
the valence value for a test word as the average of the ratings of
itsk nearest neighbors in the vector space ( Taboada et al., 2011;
Bestgen and Vincze, 2012; Recchia and Louwerse, 2015 ). Thus,
Method 3 combines the advantages as well as the disadvantages
ofthetwoformermethods.
The pros and cons of these diﬀerent methods have been
discussed in detail elsewhere ( Mandera et al., 2015; Westbury
et al., 2015; Hollis et al., 2017 ). Suﬃce it to say that if rating data
arenotavailableorfailtocoverareliablepercentageofthe words
in the test text (cf. Jacobs and Kinder, 2017 ), then the second
method is the only viable one. In this paper I would like to test
thevalidityofanovelvariantofthismethod(called SentiArt)for
doingSAofliterarytextsandcharacterswithintheemergin gﬁeld
ofNeurocognitivePoetics.
Word list-based methods can only be used for the present
task of determining the valence of characters from narrativ es
(see Study 2), if they contain the proper names of the character s
in the story, e.g., “Voldemort.” For the aﬀective word lists i n
Germandevelopedinmygroup(i.e.,theBAWLorANGST),this
is not the case. However, VSM-based techniques can be applied
to the extent that the semantic vectors are computed from an
adequatetrainingcorpus,e.g.,inthepresentcasetheentire Harry
Potter book series ( Rowling, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2003, 2005,
2007) in its German translation ( ∼1.4 million tokens, ∼40.000
types)whichnaturallycontainsthenamesoftheprotagonists and
otherﬁgures.
PRESENT STUDY
The present two computational poetics studies are part
of the larger above-mentioned Neurocognitive Poetics
perspective and aim at proposing and testing a simple,
easy-to-use tool for computing emotional ﬁgure, and ﬁgure
personality proﬁles for characters in literary texts such as
stories, novels, plays or ballads. Study 1 aims at testing
the feasibility of SentiArt as a simple VSM-based tool for
computational poetics studies in multiple languages. Having
obtained encouraging results from study 1, study 2 introduc es
the computation of emotional ﬁgure proﬁles and ﬁgure
personality proﬁles for characters from the Harry Potter
bookseries.
Study 1. Classifying Text Segments From
Harry Potter as “Joyful,” “Fearful,”
or “Neutral”
In a 1st computational study I used a comparative predictive
modeling procedure—successfully applied in previous research
(Jacobs et al., 2016a, 2017; Jacobs, 2017; Jacobs and Kinder,2017, 2018 )—to test how well the sentiment labeling data of a
test setcould be predicted by the results of those of a training
setused to train diﬀerent classiﬁers. Overall 120 text segments
from Harry Potter that were labeled as “happy,” “fearful,” or
“neutral”inapreviousempiricalstudy( Hsuetal.,2015a,b )were
used as stimulus material. Five classiﬁers—as implemented in
the Pythontoolbox Orange(Demsar et al., 2013 )—were used for
predictivemodeling:Adaboost(AB,withSimpleDecisionTree),
kNearestNeighbors(kNN),LogisticRegression(LR),NaïveBa yes
(NB), and Neural Network (MultiLayerPerceptron/MLP). The
taskfortheclassiﬁerswastopredictthesentimentcategory ofthe
segmentsbasedontheinputprovidedbydiﬀerentcomputational
SAtools(SATs).
Computing the Text Emotion Potential
An early empirical study by Bestgen (1994) showed that the
“aﬀective tones” of sentences and entire texts can well be
predicted by lexical valence as determined by a word-list bas ed
method.Morerecentneurocognitivestudiesconﬁrmingthisi dea
showed the power of text valence for evoking emotional reader
responses as measured by their underlying neuronal correlat es
(Altmannetal.,2012,2014;Hsuetal.,2014,2015a,b,c ).
To get an idea about SentiArt’s relative performance, it was
compared with those of two other well-established SATs, both
implemented in publically available software packages such as
OrangeorNLTK(Bird et al., 2009 ). The 1st, VADER(Hutto and
Gilbert, 2014 ), is a popular word list- and rule-based procedure
which computes a continuous score for each text (ranging from
negative to neutral to positive values) and appends a total
sentiment score called compound1. It can deal with some forms
of negation or punctuation emphasis in texts. Like VADER,
the 2nd SAT ( HU-LIU;Hu and Liu, 2004 ) also belongs to the
ﬁrst class of SA methods and computes a single normalized
sentiment score for a text (ranging from negative to neutral
to positive). These scores were obtained directly from Orange
for each of the 120 text segments. The 3rd SAT, belonging
to the second method class ( SentiArt), is derived from the
theory-guided computational semantics perspective allowing to
computetheoreticalvaluessuccessfullypredictinghumanra tings
for imageability ( Westbury et al., 2013 ), valence and arousal
(Westburyetal.,2015 )orlexicalaestheticpotential—foravariety
ofmaterialssuchassinglewords,linesfromShakespearesonn ets
or literary metaphors ( Jacobs, 2017, 2018a,b; Jacobs and Kinder,
2018). In this perspective, valence, for example, is computed as
a semantic association compound based on the relatedness of a
targetwordwitheachofNlabelsinthepositiveandnegativeli sts.
Westbury et al. (2015) tested 12 models based on psychological
emotion theories and established the “Ekman99” ( Ekman, 1999 )
model with 12 labels (seven positive labels, such as HAPPINESS
orPRIDE,andﬁvenegativeonessuchasDISGUSTorFEAR),as
thebest:itaccountedforabout34%varianceinthevalidati onset
1The compound score is a normalized weighted composite score ranging
from−1/negativeto +1/positive.Accordingtotheauthors,awordortextsegment
has a positive sentiment if its compound score >=0.05, a negative one if it
<=0.05. If the score falls in between these two threshold values, the t ext is
consideredneutral.
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org 3 July 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 53