Jacobs Sentiment Analysis for Words and Fiction Characters
of>10.000 human valence ratings from Warriner et al. (2013)
(FordetailsseeTable2in Westburyetal.,2015 ).
Method
To establish e.g., the valence of a text segment with SentiAr t,
the procedure was straightforward and easy to replicate by
researchers not necessarily trained in NLP methods2. In a 1st
step, an appropriate—general or task-speciﬁc—training corpus
such as the above-mentioned “Harry Potter” corpus (HP_TC in
Figure1A )iscreatedbymergingalltexts(e.g.,sevenbooks)into
a single compound and the corresponding VSM is computed,
e.g., by running the easy-to-use fasttext tool (https://fas ttext.cc/
docs/en/pretrained-vectors.html). If a speciﬁc training co rpus is
notrequired,onecanusetheproceduredescribedonthe fasttext
homepage (https://fasttext.cc/docs/en/english-vectors. html) to
directly download the VSM providing e.g., 300d vectors (Ndim
vectors on the right side of Figure1A ) for each of >2 million
words (e.g., in the original, uncleaned version of wiki.en.vec ).
Now all is set up for the 2nd step, i.e., the computation of
the semantic relatedness values between each word in the VSM
and the labels in the label list. For example, computing the
cosinesimilaritiesbetweenthetargetwordAGONYandtheﬁr st
three positive and negative labels of the Ekman99 model set of
labels (HAPPINESS, PLEASURE, PRIDE) empirically validated
inpreviousstudieswithbothEnglishandGermantextmateria ls
(Westburyetal.,2015;Jacobs,2018a,b )wouldyieldameanvalue
of 0.33 for the positive labels and of 0.51 for the negative one s.
Subtracting one from the other gives a valence of −0.18 thus
suggesting that the word AGONY has a negative valence. This
procedure was applied to all words in the VSM ( wiki.en.vec ),
computingbothvalenceandarousalvalues.
The procedure establishes a 2D Emotion Potential Space
(valence X arousal) with >2 million entries (available as an.xlsx
table from the author), illustrated in Figure1B , which could
serveasareferencespaceformanyfutureSAstudies.Thus,ea ch
word of a given test text (e.g., a segment from Harry Potter) c an
easilybelocatedwithinthisspace(e.g.,usingthe.xlsxtab le)thus
receivingastandardized(relative)valenceandarousalva lue.Ina
3rdstep,theaveragescoresforthetextsegmentsofinterest (e.g.,
those rated as fearful or joyful by human readers) are compute d
sotheycanserveasinput(predictors)fortheclassiﬁers.
Predictive Modeling
After computing the three SAT features (VADER’s compound,
HU-LIU’s sentiment, and SentiArt’s valence) for each of the
120 text segments, the features were standardized and used
as input for ﬁve classiﬁers implemented in Orangeto check
the performance accuracy of the three SATs in predicting the
sentiment category of a test set (after being trained on a tra ining
set of 70% of the 120 segments). The random sampling was
stratiﬁed (i.e., balanced across the three text categories ) and
repeated 100 times with varying training and test sets to obta in
stable results. As a control condition, I used LSA ( Deerwester
2The easy-to-use procedure was tested during the workshop Plotting Poetry:
Bringing Deep Learning to Computational Poetry Analysis‘(FU Berlin, sept 12-
14th,2018)whereItrained30studentsfromliteraturestudiesinS Amethods.et al., 1990 ), also implemented in Orange—and which is not a
SAT as such–, to check how well it classiﬁed the text segments
withoutusingspecialsentimentfeatures.
Please note that the present study was not designed as a
“benchmark”testforSATs.TheSATsarenotdirectlycomparab le,
since they belong to diﬀerent method classes. Thus, both
VADER and HU-LIU compute a univariate sentiment feature—
theoretically reﬂecting the “experiential” aspect of valenc e—
which is based on a list of previously rated, special “sentimen t”
words(Vader: ∼7.500entries;https://www.cs.uic.edu/~liub/FBS/
sentiment-analysis.html#lexicon).; (Hu-Liu: ∼6.800; https://
www.cs.uic.edu/~liub/FBS/sentiment-analysis.html#le xicon). In
contrast, SentiArt is a multivariate SAT usually computing fou r
lexical features (valence, arousal, emotion potential, aest hetic
potential) and two interlexical ones (valence span, arousal
span) to predict the multiple “distributional” aspects of a text’s
sentiment (incl. function words which can play important role s
in poetry processing by altering the aesthetic potential of e.g .,
entire lines; Jacobs, 2018b ). Rather than in “benchmarking” I
was interested in testing the feasibility of SentiArt as a si mple
unsupervised learning SAT for neurocognitive poetics studie s in
multiplelanguagesandneededsomereferencetools(working in
English) to be able to better interpret SentiArt’s results fo r the
presentEnglishHarryPottertexts.SincebothVaderandHu-L iu
wereimplementedin OrangeIchosethemforpracticalreasons.
Results and Interim Discussion
The results summarized in Table1show the classiﬁcation
scores3for each of the three SATs and the LSA. The
present—purely descriptive—classiﬁer comparison shows an
optimalperformanceforSentiArt’s valencefeature(withLogistic
Regression) and smaller scores for VADER’s compound feature
(withNeuralNet)andHU-LIU’s sentiment feature(withLogistic
Regression). The performance of the control method (LSA),
though inferior to the others, suggests that the abstract se mantic
featurescomputedbyLSAstillcaptureaﬀectiveaspectsthatallo w
to classify (to a certain extent) texts into sentiment categ ories. A
look atFigure2 shows that SentiArt’s valence feature splits the
three categories better than the other two. Given that Senti Art
computes a feature value for each word in the text this could
beexpected.
It should be emphasized that the present results do not
show that either VADER or HU-LIU are generally less well-
performing than SentiArt. In contrast to SentiArt, they both
are general, widely applicable SATs well-validated in e.g., man y
SAs of social media texts ( Hutto and Gilbert, 2014; Liu, 2015 ).
Also, revised, more sophisticated versions of at least the HU-
LIU SAT exist ( Liu, 2015 ) which may yield diﬀerent results, but
are not (yet) implemented in Orangeand could thus not be
used here. The point is that within the conﬁnes of the present
special materials tested in several neurocognitive poetics s tudies
(Hsuetal.,2015a,b,c ),SentiArt’sperformance canbeconsidered
ascompetitive.
3F1 is a weighted harmonic mean of precision and recall. Precision is the
proportion of true positives among instances classiﬁed as positive. R ecall is the
proportionoftruepositivesamongallpositiveinstancesinthedata.
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org 4 July 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 53