Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1730 4 of 20
 Uninterrupted services with sporadic connectivity to the cloud: A Fog system can function
independently to maintain constant services despite having sporadic network connectivity to
the Cloud.
 IoT security challenges: A Fog system is capable of the following: (1) acting as proxies for
resource-limited devices of which security credentials and software can be managed and updated;
(2) performing numerous security protocols on behalf of the resource-limited devices, to make up
for the lack of security functionality on these devices; (3) overseeing the security status of devices
in close proximity; and (4) using gathered information and context to identify threats promptly.
This section describes articles on the convergence between IoT and Fog computing. Fog computing
is still a recent research topic, thus concrete solutions to support this computer paradigm are lacking.
In this section, we examine existing works discussing the integration of Fog computing with IoT in
different applications.
There are survey papers related to various aspects of Fog computing. For example, Shi et al. [7]
has considered the essential features of Fog computing for healthcare systems. In addition, Yi et al. [8]
contributed a survey of Fog computing by discussing various application scenarios for Fog computing
and various problems that could arise during the implementation of these systems.
Central Fog services are placed in a software-deﬁned resource management layer in the proposed
architecture [ 9]. This provides a Cloud-based middleware that prevents autonomous action by Fog
colonies. Instead, Cloud-based middleware analyzes, orchestrates and monitors Fog cells. In addition,
by examining key aspects of Fog computing and how Fog complements and extends Cloud computing,
Bonomi et al. [10] investigated the integration of IoT with Fog computing. They also proposed
a hierarchically distributed Fog architecture. They provided cases for an intelligent trafﬁc light
system and a wind farm to test the characteristics of their architecture.
Yousefpour et al. [11] proposed a framework for understanding, evaluating and modeling delays
in IoT–Fog–Cloud applications. To minimize service delay for IoT nodes, they proposed a delay
minimizing Fog nodes policy. The proposed policy uses communication between Fog and Fog to
reduce service delays by sharing the load. The policy considers not only queue lengths, but also
various types of requests that have a variety of processing times for calculation ofﬂoading. The authors
also developed an analytical model for the detailed evaluation of service delays in IoT–Fog–Cloud
scenarios and carried out extensive simulation studies to support the model and proposed policies.
Lee et al. [12] investigated the security and privacy issues resulting from integrating Fog
computing with the IoT. They argued that the adoption of the IoT with Fog produces several security
threats. In addition, they discussed existing security measures which might be useful to secure the
IoT with Fog and highlighted the need to conﬁgure a secure Fog computing environment through
different security technologies.
Furthermore, Hong et al. [13] presented a Mobile Fog (MF) that can distribute IoT applications
in a hierarchical computing architecture from the edge devices to the Cloud across several devices.
The MF uses a dynamic node discovery process to combine devices in parent–child associations where
data from child nodes are processed by parent nodes. MFs can collect and process data locally on the
end-user devices so they can supply several advantages for IoT applications.
Mahmud et al. [14] detailed a taxonomy of the Fog computing environment along with challenges
and features in Fog computing. They showed the differences among Cloud computing, Fog computing,
Edge computing, Mobile Cloud computing, and Mobile Edge computing. They studied conﬁguration
of Fog nodes, networking devices and different Fog computing metrics.
2.2. Task Scheduling Algorithms for Fog Computing
Task scheduling problem in Cloud computing has gained attention for several years. Recently,
there are many studies related to this issue when Fog computing has been proposed. Table 2 summarizes
the main ideas, the method, the improvement criteria and limitations of past related works.