Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1730 11 of 20
value in its column is assigned a value of 1, while others in this column are labeled 0. If a column of
velocity matrix has many elements with max value, then one will be selected randomly and 1 assigned
to its corresponding element of position matrix.
4.2. Proposed Evolutionary Algorithm
To deal with task scheduling problem in Cloud–Fog computing environment, the TCaS algorithm
is proposed based on an evolutionary algorithm—Genetic Algorithm (GA)—as follows.
4.2.1. Encoding of Chromosomes
An individual speciﬁed by a chromosome in genetic algorithm represents a solution of task
scheduling. For encoding of chromosomes, an n-dimensional array corresponding to ngenes is used.
The sequence number of gene is the sequence number of task; each gene has a value of an integer kin
range [1;m]with mthe number of nodes, which indicates that the corresponding task is assigned to
the node numbered k.
For the example shown in Section 4.1.1, the chromosome expresses that solution would be:
chromosome =[3, 1, 3, 2, 1, 2, 2, 3, 1, 3 ]
Node 1executes the set of tasks f2, 5, 9g, the set of tasksf4, 6, 7gis assigned to be processed in
node 2, while node 3 is responsible for the set of tasks f1, 3, 8, 10g
This chromosome encoding method was chosen because of the ﬂexibility of performing genetic
operations, such as crossover and mutation, to create new individuals exploring the solution search
space, simultaneously inheriting quality gene segments from parents. The order of tasks processed
is not considered because performing tasks in a different order on one machine does not affect the
objectives, namely makespan and total cost.
4.2.2. Population Initialization
The initial population is the set of all individuals that are used in the GA to ﬁnd the optimal
solution. Assume that the size of population is N. To discover many areas in the search space as well
as to ensure the diversity of the population in the ﬁrst generation, the Nindividuals are initialized
randomly. From the initial population, the individuals are selected, and some operations are applied
on them to form the next generation.
4.2.3. Fitness Function
The ﬁtness function is the measure of the superiority of an individual in the population.
The individual with high ﬁtness value represents a good quality solution. The ﬁtness value of each
individual is estimated by the utility function Fshown in Equation (15). Depending on the ﬁtness
value, the individuals can survive or die out through each generation.
4.2.4. Genetic Operators
a. Crossover operator
With chromosome encoding as an array of integers, two-point crossover operation is used to
generate offspring inheriting good genes from parents. This operation is shown in Figure 3, where
two crossover points are randomly selected, the ﬁrst parent exchanges the middle gene segment to the
second parent, and the remaining genes are unchanged, forming a new individual.
In the crossover process over the population, parental selection inﬂuences the efﬁciency of the
algorithm. Each individual has a crossover rate of a. Everyone in the population is considered to
be the ﬁrst parent with the probability a, and then the roulette wheel technique is applied to select
the second parent in the population to participate in crossover process. With this selection technique,