Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1730 6 of 20
the Cloud hub is responsible for the allocation of work, thus this method is less well suited to the Fog
computing infrastructure. Thus, the overall performance can be reduced.
Gu et al. [16] studied on task distribution, base station association, and virtual machine placement
in medical cyber-physical systems supported by Fog computing. They minimized the overall cost to
guarantee QoS. However, the proposed model does not generalize into scenarios in the Cloud–Fog
computing environment because it is based on cellular network architecture. The model lacks the Cloud
entity, while Fog nodes are assumed to co-locate with the base station and do not have computation
ofﬂoading capability.
Bitam et al. [4]proposed a task scheduling strategy using Bee Life Algorithm (BLA). The article
focuses on two main objectives: execution time and memory. However, this article does not mention
the association with Cloud data center and the method is only tested on small datasets.
Huynh Thi Thanh Binh [15] proposed a task scheduling mechanism in Cloud–Fog computing
environment based on Genetic Algorithm (GA). This method aims at obtaining good trade-off between
time and cost. The proposed method overwhelms Bee Life Algorithm; however, the experiments are
limited as they tested the algorithm only on small datasets.
In most related studies, algorithms are only deployed in Cloud computing or Fog computing
environments where processing nodes have similar abilities. In the hybrid Cloud–Fog environment,
there is a signiﬁcant differentiation between Cloud nodes and Fog nodes in terms of processing speed
and resource usage cost, thus tasks are not evenly distributed to processing nodes such as in Cloud
computing or Fog computing; therefore, some classical cloud based scheduling algorithms may not
be effective. The main contribution of this work is proposing TCaS algorithm—a strategy based
on an evolutionary algorithm to obtain optimal trade-off between execution time and processing
cost. Additionally, we approach the task scheduling problem in Cloud–Fog computing environment
with some other evolutionary algorithms, namely Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) and Bee Life
Algorithm (BLA), and the simple Round Robin (RR) algorithm to demonstrate the efﬁciency of the
proposed algorithm.
3. Task Scheduling Problem
3.1. System Architecture
In the Fog environment, the processing takes place in a data hub on a smart device, or in a smart
router, gateway, switcher, local server, etc. Because of limited processing capacity, some Fog nodes
cooperate regionally together, simultaneously connecting to Cloud nodes known as Cloud virtual
machines to satisfy mobile user’s need. It was assumed that our system consists of fFog nodes and c
Cloud nodes as well as a Fog broker. Fog nodes communicate directly to mobile users. All requests from
mobile users are forwarded immediately to Fog broker, who is responsible for analyzing, estimating
and then scheduling all tasks to be executed in the Cloud–Fog system. The Fog broker is close to the
Fog nodes, thus the time consumed for data communication between each other is negligible.
To guarantee the performance of system, the TCaS algorithm, which is installed on the Fog broker,
aims at ﬁnding an optimal task executing schedule achieving time and cost efﬁciency. The operation of
our system model is described step by step in Figure 1.
Firstly, a mobile user sends a request (Step 1), which is handled by Fog node it is connected to.
This request (or job) is immediately forwarded to the Fog broker (Step 2). To be processed in distributed
system, each job is decomposed into a set of tasks (Step 3), and then the number of instructions and
the resource usage needed are estimated (Step 4). Handling all information of tasks and nodes, the Fog
broker runs a scheduling algorithm (Step 5) to ﬁnd a good task assignment. Following the output,
tasks are sent to the corresponding Cloud nodes and Fog nodes (Step 6). Each node is responsible
for processing all tasks assigned (Step 7) and then sends the results back to the Fog broker(Step 8).
Once all tasks are completed, the result of the job is combined (Step 9) by the Fog broker. Subsequently,
the response is sent to the mobile user through the Fog node that user connects with (Step 10).