Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1730 2 of 20
in 2015 to 30.7 billion devices in 2020 and this figure in 2025 will rise to 75.4 billion. With this dramatic
increase in number of connected devices, the Cloud architecture with traditional centralized processing
characteristics (in which computing and storage resources are gathered and placed in several data
centers) will be unable to meet the requirements of IoT applications. The main reason is due to the
long distance between the Cloud and IoT devices. Massive flow of data sent by IoT devices to the
Cloud via the Internet will result in congestion, especially at bottlenecks, while also creating burden
on network performance and bandwidth. The delay in transmission leads to degraded Quality of
Service (QoS), which has detrimental effect on the user’s experience, since one of the properties of IoT
applications is latency sensitivity. Moreover, constant connection to the Cloud is not always available for
IoT devices, simply because it is very expensive. On the other hand, thanks to advances in both hardware
and software technologies, many devices on the edge of the network (routers, gateways, workstations,
personal computers, etc.) have more and more processing, storage and communication capabilities.
Fog computing [ 1], ﬁrst proposed by Cisco, represents a new model of Cloud computing, which
can transform a network edge into a distributed computing infrastructure capable of implementing IoT
applications. The concept of Fog Computing is to extend Cloud computing closer to the IoT devices
that produce and consume data, which in turn brings processing and storage resources closer to users.
Rather than pushing all processing operation to the Cloud, Fog Computing aims to handle part of
workloads produced by applications on devices close to the network near the users, which are called
Fog servers or Fog nodes. These devices can be deployed anywhere that has network connectivity:
factories, commercial centers, on power poles, next to railways, inside vehicles, etc. Any device
that has computing, storage and networking capabilities can be considered a Fog Node: controllers,
switches, routers, embedded servers, surveillance cameras, etc. By placing resources at the edge of
the network, the time it takes for data to reach a processing station becomes negligible, therefore the
tasks are optimized for transmission time. However, processing capability of a Fog Node is restricted,
thus small tasks or processing requests with short delay will be prioritized to be processed on Fog
Computing infrastructure, while tasks that have delay-tolerant and tasks of larger scale will still be
pushed to Cloud layers. Eventually, Fog computing complements the Cloud to form a new computing
paradigm, Cloud–Fog computing.
The Cloud–Fog computing model has numerous advantages, including reduced latency, reduced
network trafﬁc and increased energy efﬁciency, however, this new model also comes with a set of
challenges. One of them is resource allocation and tasks scheduling. A highly distributed system such
as Cloud–Fog computing is an ideal platform to deploy Bag-of-Tasks (BoT) applications, which are
those parallel applications whose tasks are independent to each other. BoT applications appear in
many scenarios, including data mining, massive searches (such as key breaking), fractal calculations,
computational biology [ 2], computer imaging [ 3], video encoding/decoding, and various other IoT
applications. The main challenge is scheduling tasks in the pool of processing nodes including cloud
nodes (such as servers or virtual machines) and Fog nodes. The goal of task scheduling in Cloud–Fog
system is aimed at the beneﬁt of users or service providers. On the users side, they are concerned about
some criteria of makespan, budget, deadline, security, and cost. On the other hand, the purpose of the
service providers is load balancing, resource utilization, and energy efﬁciency. To guarantee the QoS,
response time plays an important role when directly inﬂuencing the user’s experience. In addition,
the implementation cost is also an aspect that users are very interested. A task schedule, which
minimizes completion time and saves monetary cost, will satisfy Service Level Agreement (SLA)
signed with users.
In this paper, we concentrate on task scheduling problem in Cloud–Fog environment, a highly
distributed computing platform, for processing large-scale BoT applications. A Time–Cost aware
Scheduling (TCaS) algorithm is proposed to solve this problem. The major objective of the TCaS algorithm
is to achieve a good trade-off between execution time and monetary cost to complete a bag of tasks in
Cloud–Fog system. In addition, this algorithm can flexibly adapt with the requires of various users in
which someone wants to prioritize the execution time at current time and others have a desire that their