Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1730 12 of 20
high quality individuals with a larger ﬁtness value have higher probability of being selected as parent,
thus ensuring good gene segments are more likely preserved in the next generation.
𝑇1𝑇2 ...𝑇a𝑇b𝑇c𝑇d𝑇e𝑇f……𝑇n
1 2 2 4 2 3 1 3 3
2 3 1 1 4 4 2 2 11stparent :
2ndparent:
1 2 2 1 4 4 2 3 3 Offspring:1stcrossover point 2ndcrossover point
Figure 3. Two-point crossover operator.
b. Selection strategy
The selection mechanism is used to select individuals to form a population for the next generation
based on the Darwin’s law of survival. Immediately after the crossover process, natural selection
is conducted. The offspring is calculated for the ﬁtness value and is compared to the parent; if the
offspring is better than the parent, the individual is preserved to form the next-generation population.
Otherwise, this offspring is discarded and the parent is retained in the next generation.
This greedy selection maintains the diversity of the population over generations when the genes
of the lesser individuals are not eliminated so rapidly and still contribute to the exploration of new
regions on the search area; simultaneously, good gene segments are not repeated too many times in
individuals in one population.
c. Mutation operator
After crossover and natural selection process, new population is formed with Nindividuals. Each
individual participates in one-point mutation with the rate of g. The location of the mutant gene is
randomly selected and replaced by a different value (see Figure 4); in this way, the task chosen is
assigned to be processed in another node.
Parent:
Offspring:Mutation point𝑇1𝑇2 ...𝑇a𝑇b𝑇c𝑇d𝑇e𝑇f……𝑇n
1 2 2 4 2 3 1 3 3
1 2 2 4 1 3 1 3 3
Figure 4. One-point mutation operator.
Mutation perfects the limitations of crossover operator by ﬁnding the optimal solution when
individuals are vicious around the extremes, or escaping from the local extremes to explore the other
areas in the solution space.
According to the proposed TCaS algorithm, a set of modiﬁcations from GA was introduced. These
modiﬁcations are as follows.
 Parental selection: In the crossover process, each individual in the population is considered to be
the ﬁrst parent, and the second parent was selected by the roulette wheel technique.
 Greedy selection strategy: Each crossover operation produces one offspring, which is preserved
to form the next-generation population if it is better than ﬁrst parent and discarded otherwise.