Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1730 14 of 20
Table 5. Simulation setup.
System IntelR
CoreTMi7-4710MQ, CPU 2.50GHz
Memory 8 GB
Simulator iFogSim
Operating system Windows 10 Professional
Since our proposed TCaS algorithm is based on Genetic Algorithm, we compared our method
with some other evolutionary algorithms: (1) Modiﬁed Particle Swarm Optimization (MPSO); and
(2) Bee Life Algorithm (BLA) [ 4]; as well as a traditional algorithm: (3) simple Round Robin (RR)
scheduling. BLA was introduced by Bitam with the following idea.
BLA is an optimization method that is inspired from the two most important behaviors of bees,
namely marriage (or reproduction) and food foraging. First, Nindividuals, which form the initial
population, are evaluated by a ﬁtness function. After sorting the population, the best individual is
chosen as the queen, the next Dbees are identiﬁed as drones, and the remaining bees Ware workers
bee. Population is changed through each generation; the bee’s life cycle consists of two main behaviors:
reproduction and food foraging. During the reproduction stage, the queen mates with a set of drones
to produce broods by the crossover and mutation operators. The individual evaluation is conducted to
ﬁnd the best bee who substitutes the precedent queen, the following Dﬁttest bees become drones and
Wnew workers. Now, the food foraging stage is executed; each worker is responsible for ﬁnding the
food source and then recruiting other workers to collect the found food. Afterwards, the best worker
of every region keeps alive in the next population.
Table 6 shows the parameter settings of three evolutionary algorithms.
Table 6. BLA, TCaS and MPSO parameters.
Parameter BLA TCaS MPSO
Running times 30 30 30
queen 1
drones (D) 30 Population size ( N)
workers (W) 69100 100
Crossover rate (a) 90% 90% c1=c2=1.5
Mutation rate (g) 1% 1% w=0.9!0.1
Number of generations 500 500 500
In Equation (15), the balance coefﬁcient aindicates the priority of optimization between makespan
and total cost. We ﬁrst conducted simulations in the scenario where time and cost have the same level
of interest, i.e., a=0.5.
5.2. Experimental Results
To analyze our method, several experiments were conducted in two different scenarios. In the
ﬁrst situation, a bag of tasks was executed locally in a set of connected Fog nodes and, in the other,
Fog layer collaborated with a number of Cloud nodes to process requests from users.
5.2.1. Scenario 1: Task Scheduling in Fog Environment
In the ﬁrst setup, we deﬁned a Fog layer consisting of 10 Fog nodes, which connected to each
other to satisfy user requirements in a geographical area. Four algorithms were deployed to produce
schedules for bags of tasks, which included from 40 to 500 tasks to be executed in Fog environment.
The average results were obtained by running four algorithms in each dataset over 30 times with 500
generations (or iterations) and the coefﬁcient balance a=0.5.