Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1730 3 of 20
tasks are completed with a tight budget. Our approach was experimentally evaluated and compared with
Bee Life Algorithm (BLA) [ 4], Modified Particle Swarm Optimization (MPSO) and Round Robin (RR)
algorithm on many datasets with various size. The results prove that the proposed algorithm achieved
better QoS and was more optimal in balance between time and cost efficiency than BLA.
The rest of the article is organized as follows. In Section 2, the related works are presented.
Section 3 speciﬁes the mathematical model for the task scheduling problem in the Cloud–Fog
computing environment. Section 4 presents our proposed algorithm in detail. Experimental results are
given in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes the article and future works are discussed.
2. Related Works
2.1. Fog Computing with IoT
The centralized Cloud architecture is facing a number of challenges from IoT applications.
For example, IoT cannot support applications that require low latency and real-time applications
such as connected vehicles [ 1], smart trafﬁc lights [ 5], etc. Fog computing can solve these challenges.
Table 1 summarizes differences between Cloud and Fog computing.
Table 1. Comparison between Cloud computing and Fog computing.
Parameter Cloud Computing Fog Computing
Latency High Low
Response time of the system Low High
Architecture Centralized Distributed
Communication with
devicesFrom a distance via Internet,
Multiple hopsDirectly from the edge via Various
protocols and standards,
One hop
Data processingFar from the source of information
in long-term timeClose to the source of information in
short-term time
Computing capabilitiesHigher (Cloud Computing does not
provide any reduction in data while
sending or transforming data)Lower (Fog Computing reduces the
amount of data sent to Cloud
computing.)
Server nodesFew nodes with scalable storage
and computing powerVery large nodes with limited
storage and computing power
Security Less secure, Undeﬁned More secure, Can be deﬁned
Working environmentWarehouse-size building with air
conditioning systemsOutdoor (e.g., Streets, gardens) or
indoor (e.g., Restaurants)
Location of server nodes Within the Internet At the edge of the local network
Fog computing can help address Internet of Things challenges according to Chiang and Zhang [ 6]
 Latency constraints: Fog Computing is often the best candidate when it comes to dealing with
strict timing requirements of many IoT systems such as data analyzing, data managing and other
latency-restrictive tasks close to end users.
 Network bandwidth constraints: Fog Computing allows data sent and received from the end users
to the Cloud to be processed hierarchically so that the trade-off between application demands
and available networking and computing resources is considered. This also optimizes data usage,
reducing the amount needed to be sent to the Cloud.
 Resource-limited devices: Resource-intensive tasks can be performed by Fog instead of
resource-limited devices when they cannot be sent to the Cloud, which reduces these devices’s
complexity, maintenance cost, and energy consumption.