Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1730 5 of 20
Table 2. Summary of related works about task scheduling algorithms for Fog computing.
Article Ideas Improvement Criteria Limitation
Huynh Thi Thanh
Binh (2018) [15]genetic algorithmexecution time,
processing costsmall dataset
Bitam et al. (2017) [4] bee life algorithm execution time, memorysmall dataset,
only in Fog environment
Gu et al. (2017) [16]two-phase linear
programming-based
heuristiccommunication cost,
apply for cellular networkno computational ofﬂoading
capability
Deng et al. (2016) [ 17]nonlinear integers,
Hungarian methodpower consumption,
delaysuitable for centralized
infrastructure, not easy to
apply to Fog computing
Guo et al. (2016) [18]Markov decision
problemspower consumption,
delaya continuous-time queueing
system
Ningning et al. (2016)
[19]graph partitioning,
a minimum spanning
treeexecution timecomplexity when the number
of user requests increases
Queis et al. (2015) [ 20]heuristicuser satisfaction,
task latency,
power consumptioncomplexity when the number
of user requests increases
Abdi et al. (2014) [21]particle swarm
optimizationcompletion of task in Cloud environment
Abdi et al. [21] proposed a modiﬁed particle swarm optimization (MPSO) and compared it
with two popular heuristic approaches, namely PSO and GA, in Cloud computing environment for
efﬁciency of task scheduling. They focused on minimizing the completion time of tasks. They merged
the smallest job to fastest processor algorithm (SJFP) and the PSO to make the initial population better.
This MPSO algorithm gives better results than standard PSO and GA but it has only been tested in
Cloud environment.
By addressing load balancing in Fog computing, Oueis et al. [20] focused on improving the
quality of user experience (QoE). Firstly, they allocated local computing resources in small cells. Then,
for requests of each user, clusters in Fog computing are set up depending on a speciﬁc optimization
target of arrival time, delay, and so on. They produced good results with a low computer infrastructure,
but the method could be complicated if the Fog computing infrastructure is expanded to a large extent.
Ningning et al. [19] proposed a graph-based load balancing mechanism for Fog computing. Tasks
are assigned to one or more Fog nodes based on the necessary resources. A non-directed graph
represents the network of Fog nodes. This mechanism inﬂuences the running time of tasks. However,
the main disadvantage of this method is not optimal for dynamic load balancing of Fog computing
because the graph often redistributes to deal with the changes of Fog computing.
Guo et al. [18] focused on minimizing latency in edge Clouds. They proposed job allocation
problem in Cloud–Fog computing. However, they used simple model to determine power consumption
and latency. In particular, end-user devices send tasks to base stations. Base stations receive and send
tasks to the edge Cloud servers for execution. Then, the results are returned to end-users.
Deng et al. [17] solved three independent sub-problems using the existing optimization techniques
to minimize power consumption and latency when allocating jobs in the Cloud–Fog environment.
Firstly, they found the optimal correlation between power consumption and latency in Fog computing.
They used convex optimization to solve this sub-problem [ 22]. Secondly, they found the optimal
correlation between power consumption and latency in Cloud computing. They used nonlinear
integer method to solve this sub-problem [ 23]. Finally, they solved the third sub-problem by the
Hungarian [ 24]. In this sub-problem, transmission latency is minimized from the Fog server to the
Cloud server. This study shows that Fog computing improved performance for Cloud computing by
passing the modest computing resources, to reduce bandwidth and transmission latency. However,