ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 18
Fig. 22. Shift invariance [214]. The two inputs have an offset but keep an
overlap. A shift transformation is included in the one branch for aligning
representations between two branches which are optimized by a contrastive
loss.
Publications w.r.t different modalities
multispectral
hyperspectral
SAR
multimodalPublications w.r.t different SSL types
Generative
Predictive
Contrastive
(a) modality (b) SSL type
Fig. 23. Statistics of recent publications related to self-supervised learning
in remote sensing.
4) Multi-sensor Fusion: As a result of the multi-modality
of remote sensing data, multi-sensor fusion is always an
important task for various objectives, which can beneﬁt from
multi-modal self-supervised learning. There are generally two
ways of combining multi-modal inputs: (1) similar to various
input channels, different modalities can be seen as augmented
views of semantically the same input which can be used
for designing pretext tasks or speciﬁc data augmentation in
contrastive self-supervised learning; (2) two encoders are used
separately to encode features from two different modalities and
then concatenated together for a joint representation learning.
Regarding remote sensing data, a common multi-modality is
from optical and SAR images, leading to the important topic
SAR-optical data fusion, which has been shown by some
recent works that beneﬁts from self-supervised representation
learning [214] (see Fig. 22) and [220]. In addition, the fusion
of other modalities like audio and social media data is also
raising increasing interest [202].
B. Applications
Though the general goal of self-supervised learning is to
perform task-independent representation learning which can
beneﬁt various downstream tasks, it has to be noted that
different self-supervision can have different inﬂuences on
different tasks. Therefore, it is necessary to pre-consider the
choice of self-supervised methods when we are targeting a
speciﬁc application in the end. In fact, so far a large number
of self-supervised works in the remote sensing ﬁeld are based
on a speciﬁc application. In general, the various applications
can be separated into three categories: image-level tasks ,pixel-
level tasks andpatch-level tasks . A list of representative recent
self-supervised works classiﬁed w.r.t applications is shown inTable II. We refer the interested reader to the numerous surveys
on machine learning and deep learning in remote sensing [8,
239, 240, 241, 242, 243, 244] for more details about common
downstream tasks and available datasets.
1) Image-level Tasks: Image-level tasks correspond to the
applications that expect the recognition of the whole image
or image patches, focusing more on global knowledge. The
most common image-level task is scene classiﬁcation for mul-
tispectral [92, 130, 133, 213], SAR [235] and other possible
modalities. Scene classiﬁcation is directly related to natural
image classiﬁcation and is usually the default downstream
task for the evaluation of a self-supervised method. Like
most of the above-mentioned predictive and contrastive self-
supervised methods, an image-level task requires focusing
on a global representation that can be done by predicting
high-level pretexts or contrasting the encoded features of two
augmented image views. Other image-level tasks include time
series classiﬁcation [152] and image retrieval [121].
2) Pixel-level Tasks: Pixel-level tasks correspond to the
applications that expect the recognition of each image pixel,
focusing more on the local details. The most common pixel-
level task is semantic segmentation [245, 229, 132, 197],
which requires ﬁner representation in pixel level. Generative
self-supervised methods like autoencoder and pretext tasks
/ data augmentations like image inpainting and pixel based
contrastive learning can be helpful. Change detection [93, 120,
151, 98, 230, 199, 215, 186, 186] is usually also a pixel-
level task which utilizes multitemporal information to detect
changing pixels. In hyperspectral image analysis, most of the
tasks are based on pixel level, including hyperspectral image
classiﬁcation4[106, 100, 101], image denoising [233], spectral
unmixing [99], target detection [232], image restoration [102]
and super-resolution [105, 104]. Other pixel-level tasks include
depth estimation [158, 95] and SAR despeckling [110, 109].
3) Patch-level Tasks: Patch-level tasks mainly correspond
to object detection, lying in-between image-level and pixel-
level applications. When requiring both the location and the
label of the object in the image, patch-level tasks beneﬁt
from both global representation and local details. Hence for
good performance in the application of object detection, an
integrated representation learning pipeline deserves considera-
tion [231]. In addition, patch-based change detection considers
comparisons between tiles of images (change or no change)
rather than pixels due to reasons like possible misalignment
between time stamps [246], or the requirement of fast pre-
processing to retrieve region of interest and limited band-
width for data communication [247]. We note that patch-level
change detection can also be classiﬁed into image-level tasks.
However, we put them here as there is a stronger correlation
between the small patches and the big scene.
IV. A P RELIMINARY BENCHMARK
As a milestone along the road of large-scale unsupervised
pre-training in the image domain, the past two years have
4Note that with the goal to classify the center pixel, hyperspectral image
classiﬁcation tends to work on a small patch to beneﬁt from spatial relation-
ships, linking towards image and patch level tasks.