ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 7
X  =
Y = (9,5,8,3,2,4,7,1,6)
X  =
Y  =X  =
Y  =
X =
Y = (B, D, A, C)X = Y = 8
X =
Y = (0, 90, 180, 270)
(a) Relative position (b) Jigsaw puzzle (c) Rotation
(d) Inpainting (e) Colorization (f) Frame order
Fig. 6. Examples of different predictive pretext tasks. (a),(b),(c), and (d) are based on spatial contexts; (e) is based on spectral context; (f) illustrates temporal
context.
tations. Larsson et al. [139] proposed a systematic analysis on
image colorization as a pretext task.
Remote sensing. Given remote sensing imagery contains
spectral bands beyond the standard RGB color space, there
may not exist straightforward extensions to the multi/hyper-
spectral domain based on methods established in computer
vision. Indeed, sensing data with increased spectral resolution
imprints ﬁne details of the physical properties of the earth’s
surface. Thus, designing pretext tasks related to spectral bands
is a subtle exercise to be treated with scientiﬁc care. A
recent work established by Vincenzi et al. [135] provided an
initial attempt to leverage spectral context for self-supervised
learning (Fig. 7). Close to an autoencoder, it predicts CIELAB-
encoded RGB imagery of a scene from multi-spectral bands
for extraction of representations zs. At the same time, a second
encoder pre-trained on ImageNet generates representations
zcfrom the RGB imagery. Downstream classiﬁcation tasks
ﬁne-tune corresponding linear layers Ls=csuch that the ﬁnal
prediction reads [Lc(zc)+Ls(zs))]=2. Wu et al. [140] perform
hyperspectral dimensionality reduction using self-supervised
learning by training a model to predict low-dimensional repre-
sentations generated by classic nonlinear manifold embedding
methods (e.g., LLE).
3) Temporal Context: Among others, temporal context is
very important, for example, in video understanding. Without
the cut, footage clearly carries temporal correlation from
frame to frame. With a similarity to both spatial and spectral
predictive methods, temporal pretext tasks can be designed in
two ways: (1)shufﬂing timestamps of frames to let a neural
network predict the correct sequence, (2)masking one or
several frames for the network to predict the missing frame.Missing frame prediction in self-supervised learning typi-
cally estimates future snapshots from a short clip of video
recordings. Provided its superior performance to model tem-
poral dynamics, LSTM [127] or LSTM variants dominate
existing methods to encode temporal correlation in video
data [141, 142, 143].
Frame order prediction in self-supervised learning can be
further divided into two distinct approaches: (1)temporal
order veriﬁcation [144, 145, 146, 147], and (2)temporal
order recognition [148, 149, 66]. While the former amounts to
binary classiﬁcation whether or not a sequence of frames is in
temporal order, the latter goes beyond by explicitly assigning
timestamps to a set of given frames.
One important thing to note for video understanding is that
efﬁcient self-supervised training of footage data may involve
various steps of preprocessing. For example, the frames of a
video may have different importance for the understanding of
the event. Along this line, frame sampling strategies play a
big role to boost the performance of temporal pretext tasks. A
representative method was proposed by Misra et al. [144] that
sampled video recordings from frames with signiﬁcant motion
as indicated by the magnitude of the optical ﬂow [150].
Remote sensing. Though having a promising future,
satellite-based video recording is not yet common in remote
sensing. However, temporal stamps of remote sensing data
are very important for applications like change detection or
crop type classiﬁcation. Dong et al. [151] quantiﬁed temporal
context by coherence in time, proposing a self-supervised
representation learning technique for remote sensing change
detection. The model gets optimized to identify sample patches
in two snapshots of the same geospatial area. The identiﬁcation