ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 8
Fig. 7. The color out of space [135]. CIELAB-encoded RGB imagery of a scene is predicted from other spectral bands for the extraction of representations.
©[2021] IEEE.
network (snapshot one vs. two) is designed to imitate the
discriminatorDof generative adversarial networks with G
generating the self-supervised data representation, as displayed
in Section II-A. The method yields improved, robust differ-
entiation for change detection. Yuan et al. [152] proposed a
Transformer-based self-supervised methods for satellite time
series classiﬁcation. By predicting randomly contaminated
observations given an entire time series of a pixel, the model is
trained to leverage the inherent temporal structure of satellite
time series to learn general-purpose spectral-temporal repre-
sentations. The work was further improved in [153], where the
network is asked to regress the central pixels of the masked
patches for patch-based representation learning.
4) Other Semantic Contexts: Apart from the above three
types of contexts, there are also other semantic contexts
that can be seen using integrated information of the above-
mentioned contexts. Noroozi et al. [67] proposed an artiﬁcial
supervision signal based on counting visual primitives from an
input image and the sum of primitives from cropped tiles. Jenni
et al. [68] proposed a self-supervised learning method based
on spotting and predicting artifacts in an adversarial manner.
To generate images with artifacts, the authors pre-train a
high-capacity autoencoder and then implement a damage-and-
repair strategy. A discriminator is ﬁnally trained to distinguish
artifact images and predict what entries in the feature were
dropped when damaging and repairing.
Multi-sensor or multi-modal self-supervised learning gath-
ers another set of semantic contexts. Owens et al. [69] pro-
posed to predict a statistical summary of the sound associated
with a video frame. By deﬁning explicit sound categories,
the authors formulate this visual recognition problem as a
classiﬁcation task. Ren et al. [154] trained an encoder-decoder
network to predict depth map, surface normal map, and
instance contour map from a synthetic image, and a discrimi-
nator network is trained to distinguish between features from
the synthetic image and the real image.With various pretext tasks proven to be useful for self-
supervised representation learning, there’s also a trend of
gathering different pretext tasks together. A direct example
can be seen in [155], where the authors investigated the com-
bination of four self-supervised tasks: relative position [62],
colorization [65], exemplar [156] (creating a pseudo-class
from the augmented view of a single image and predicting
the class, this is rather a contrastive method which will be
discussed in the next section) and motion segmentation [157]
(the network learns to classify which pixels of a single frame
will move in subsequent frames). It was shown that combining
self-supervised tasks will in general improve the performance
and lead to faster training.
Remote sensing. Due to the difference between remote
sensing data and common images studied in the computer
vision community, there’s also a large potential for designing
remote sensing-speciﬁc pretext tasks. Hermann et al. [158]
proposed to predict different views (pose, projection, and
depth) as well as reconstruction of the input for monocular
depth estimation. Gao et al. [159] proposed to train the model
to realize envelope data extrapolation from a frequency band
to its adjacent low frequency band. He et al. [160] proposed
to reconstruct the corrupted Seismic data with consecutively
missing traces, in which the pseudolabels are automatically
created from the uncorrupted parts of the observed data. Ayush
et al. [161] designed a pretext task based on predicting the
geo-location of the input image. Li et al. [162] made use of
GlobeLand30 [163], a global land cover product that divides
the earth into different areas and includes ten different land
cover types. By aligning the geo-location of the input image
with the land cover map from GlobeLand30, the land cover
class of the input image is then used as a pretext task for
self-supervised learning. However, it has also to be noted that
pretexts like geo-location itself are usually too simple to learn
a good representation, thus they are often used as auxiliary