ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 21
for ﬁne-tuning, which outperforms supervised learning on all
scenarios and provide huge improvements on tiny amount of
labels. In general, the fewer labels we use, the bigger the
advantage of self-supervised pre-training is.
4) Transfer Learning: In addition, we report transfer learn-
ing performance by linear classiﬁcation and ﬁne-tuning on
EuroSat with a ResNet18 pre-trained on BigEarthNet. As
is shown in Fig. 27, the performance plots are similar to
Fig. 26, proving the pre-trained models transfer well the data
representations across datasets. Promisingly, ﬁne tuning on
50% of labels outperforms supervised learning with full labels.
In fact, ﬁne tuning on 10% of labels gives already very close
performance compared to full-label supervised learning.
V. C HALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Self-supervised learning has been achieving great success
in various vision tasks, yet it is still a relatively new branch
of technologies in both computer vision and remote sensing
communities. In this section, we summarize the challenges of
self-supervised learning in remote sensing and discuss possible
future directions.
Model collapse. Model collapse is one of the main chal-
lenges along with the development of self-supervised learning,
especially for modern contrastive learning. Though it has
been shown that contrastive self-supervised learning achieved
great success in the ﬁeld, the fundamental theory behind
those contrastive methods (especially those using no negative
samples) is still not well understood. There are already some
works like SimSiam [84] and [249] that try to investigate the
underline theory, yet they are not enough. In fact, as has been
mentioned in section IV, SimSiam easily gets collapsed in
Earth observation data. Future works need to go deeper into
self-supervised representation learning and explore the theo-
retical foundations behind model collapse in remote sensing
data.
Pretext tasks and data augmentations. Pretext tasks and
data augmentations play a similar and very important role in
self-supervised learning, as they correspond directly to what
invariance the networks need to learn and what information
is important for image understanding. There have been some
early studies on the evaluation of different pretext tasks and
data augmentations and possible improvements [250, 251], yet
they mainly focus on natural images and evaluate on image-
level classiﬁcation tasks. As has been proved in section IV,
the ﬁndings from common computer vision benchmarks may
not completely hold for multispectral imagery, not to mention
other modalities. In section III, we discussed the characteristics
of different remote sensing data, yet still experiments are
needed. Therefore, in general more studies on pretext tasks and
data augmentations are required to better understand which
ones are useful for different types of remote sensing data.
Pre-training datasets. Most of existing remote sensing
datasets are intended for supervised learning. Though they
can also be used for self-supervised pre-training by discarding
the labels, the amount of data is limited and the data is
usually biased towards the tasks of the datasets. Therefore,
it needs to be studied the necessity of self-supervised pre-
training on large-scale uncurated datasets. There have beensome early contributions following this thread: Leenstra et
al.[186] proposed a Sentinel-2 multitemporal cities pairs
dataset for change detection; Manas et al. [201] proposed
a large-scale self-supervised Sentinel-2 dataset; Heidler et
al.[202] proposed an audio-visual dataset for multi-modal
self-supervised learning. However, there is still much space
to explore and contribute (e.g., dataset size, image sampling
strategies, and the availability of more modalities).
Multi-modal/temporal self-supervised learning. As one
of the most important characteristics of remote sensing data,
multi-modality is a signiﬁcant aspect to be explored in self-
supervised representation learning [214, 220, 151]. On the
other hand, multi-temporal image analysis is raising more
interest because of the increasing frequency of data acquisition
and transferring. Without the need for any human annotation,
self-supervised representation learning has a big advantage to
performing big data analysis which is usually a challenge for
multi-modal and multi-temporal data. However, adding modal-
ities and time stamps will also bring complexity to the model
to be trained. Thus how to balance different modalities or time
stamps such that the model can learn good representations
from both modalities is a challenging task to be explored.
Computing efﬁcient self-supervised learning. Self-
supervised pre-training usually requires a large amount of
computing resources because of big pre-training data, various
data augmentations, the requirement of large batch sizes and
more training epochs than supervised learning, etc. Few efforts
have been made towards reducing computational cost, which
is however an important factor for practical usage. Therefore,
efﬁcient data compression [252], data loading, model design
[58] and hardware acceleration are necessary to be explored.
Network backbones. Most of existing self-supervised
methods utilize ResNet [17] as their model backbones, while
there has been a hot trend towards vision transformers
(ViT) [18]. Since ViT has shown promising results in self-
supervised learning [77, 52, 85], and recent advances are
exploring the link between large-scale pretraining for both
language and vision [58, 86], it deserves more exploration
in remote sensing images as well. In addition, the speciﬁc
encoder architecture itself is also important to study, as most
existing methods tend to keep it unchanged with a focus on
the conceptual design of self-supervision.
Task-oriented weakly-supervised learning. Last but not
least, in parallel to the progress of task-agnostic self-
supervised learning, there’s also the need to integrate ”few
labels” or ”weak labels” for better task-dependant weakly-
supervised learning in practice. In other words, not only
can self-supervised learning provide a pre-trained model for
downstream tasks, but there’s also the possibility of bringing
representation learning online. For example, both data rep-
resentations and the supervised task can be learned together,
where the self-supervised branch helps the model capture more
useful information. This scenario is especially important when
moving to extreme applications that do not have a common
large dataset for pre-training. In addition, this can also be
a way to mitigate the generally high computational cost of
training SSL algorihtms.