Self-supervised Learning in Remote Sensing: A
Review
Yi Wang, Student Member, IEEE, Conrad M Albrecht, Member, IEEE, Nassim Ait Ali Braham, Lichao Mou,
Xiao Xiang Zhu, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —In deep learning research, self-supervised learning
(SSL) has received great attention triggering interest within both
the computer vision and remote sensing communities. While there
has been a big success in computer vision, most of the potential
of SSL in the domain of earth observation remains locked. In this
paper, we provide an introduction to, and a review of the concepts
and latest developments in SSL for computer vision in the context
of remote sensing. Further, we provide a preliminary benchmark
of modern SSL algorithms on popular remote sensing datasets,
verifying the potential of SSL in remote sensing and providing
an extended study on data augmentations. Finally, we identify a
list of promising directions of future research in SSL for earth
observation (SSL4EO) to pave the way for fruitful interaction of
both domains.
Index Terms —Deep learning, self-supervised learning, com-
puter vision, remote sensing, Earth observation.
I. I NTRODUCTION
ADV ANCES of deep neural networks to model the rich
structure of large amounts of data has led to major
breakthroughs in computer vision, natural language process-
ing, automatic speech recognition, and time series analysis [1].
However, the performance of deep neural networks is very
sensitive to the size and quality of the training data. Thus,
a plurality of annotated datasets (e.g. ImageNet [2]) have
been generated for supervised training in the last decade,
driving progress in many ﬁelds. Unfortunately, annotating
large-scale datasets is an extremely laborious, time-consuming,
and expensive procedure. This limitation of the supervised
learning paradigm strongly impedes the applicability of deep
learning in real-world scenarios.
A lot of research efforts have been deployed to tackle the
challenge of data annotation in the machine learning literature.
The work is jointly supported by the Helmholtz Association through the
Framework of Helmholtz AI (grant number: ZT-I-PF-5-01) - Local Unit
“Munich Unit @Aeronautics, Space and Transport (MASTr)” and Helmholtz
Excellent Professorship “Data Science in Earth Observation - Big Data
Fusion for Urban Research”(grant number: W2-W3-100), by the German
Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) in the framework of
the international future AI lab ”AI4EO – Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Earth
Observation: Reasoning, Uncertainties, Ethics and Beyond” (grant number:
01DD20001) and by German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and
Climate Action in the framework of the ”national center of excellence
ML4Earth” (grant number: 50EE2201C).
(Corresponding author: Xiao Xiang Zhu.)
Y . Wang, N.A.A. Braham, L. Mou and X. Zhu are with the Remote
Sensing Technology Institute (IMF), German Aerospace Center (DLR), Ger-
many and with the Chair of Data Science in Earth Observation, Technical
University of Munich (TUM), Germany (e-mails: yi.wang@dlr.de; Nas-
sim.aitalibraham@dlr.de; lichao.mou@dlr.de; xiaoxiang.zhu@dlr.de).
C. M Albrecht is with the Remote Sensing Technology Institute (IMF),
German Aerospace Center (DLR), Germany (e-mail: conrad.albrecht@dlr.de).In fact, numerous alternatives to vanilla supervised learning
have been studied, such as unsupervised learning [3], semi-
supervised learning [4], weakly supervised learning [5] and
meta-learning [6]. Recently, self-supervised learning (SSL)
did raise considerable attention in computer vision (see Fig.
1) and achieved signiﬁcant milestones towards the reduction
of human supervision. Indeed, by distilling representative
features from unlabeled data, SSL algorithms are already
outperforming supervised pre-training on many problems [7].
Meanwhile, the success of deep learning did also spark
remarkable progress in remote sensing [8]. Yet, data annotation
remains a major challenge for earth observation as well. In
that regard, self-supervised learning is a promising avenue of
research for remote sensing. While there exist comprehensive
surveys of SSL in computer vision [9, 10, 11, 12], a didactic
and up-to-date introduction to the remote sensing community
is missing. This review aims at bridging this gap, documenting
progress in self-supervised visual representation learning, and
how it did get applied in remote sensing to date. Speciﬁcally:
To the remote sensing community, we provide a com-
prehensive introduction and literature review on self-
supervised visual representation learning.
We summarize a taxonomy of self-supervised methods
covering existing works from both computer vision and
remote sensing communities.
We provide quantiﬁcation of performance benchmarks
on established SSL methodologies utilizing the ImageNet
dataset [2], and extend the analysis to three multi-
spectral satellite imagery datasets: BigEarthNet [13],
SEN12MS [14], and So2Sat-LCZ42 [15].
We discuss the link of natural imagery and remotely
sensed data, providing insights for future work in self-
supervised learning for remote sensing and earth obser-
vation.
A. Supervision: Data vs. Labels
A signiﬁcant fraction of real-world applications of machine/
deep learning methodologies calls for massive amounts of
training data. Fortunately, the increasing adoption of open ac-
cess in earth observation provides remote sensing researchers
with a plethora of such. However, annotation of such vast
amounts of earth observation data implies signiﬁcant human
interaction with frequent updates needed every single day.
For example, apart from the large amounts of sampled data
to label, a single large-scale dataset may require separate
annotation depending on downstream applications. Moreover,
© 2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers
or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.arXiv:2206.13188v2  [cs.CV]  2 Sep 2022