ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 32
Lichao Mou received the Bachelor’s degree in automation from the Xi’an
University of Posts and Telecommunications, Xi’an, China, in 2012, the
Master’s degree in signal and information processing from the University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS), China, in 2015, and the Dr.-Ing.
degree from the Technical University of Munich (TUM), Munich, Germany,
in 2020. He is currently a Guest Professor at the Munich AI Future Lab
AI4EO, TUM and the Head of Visual Learning and Reasoning team at the
Department “EO Data Science”, Remote Sensing Technology Institute (IMF),
German Aerospace Center (DLR), Wessling, Germany. Since 2019, he is
a Research Scientist at DLR-IMF and an AI Consultant for the Helmholtz
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Cooperation Unit (HAICU). In 2015 he spent six months
at the Computer Vision Group at the University of Freiburg in Germany. In
2019 he was a Visiting Researcher with the Cambridge Image Analysis Group
(CIA), University of Cambridge, UK. He was the recipient of the ﬁrst place in
the 2016 IEEE GRSS Data Fusion Contest and ﬁnalists for the Best Student
Paper Award at the 2017 Joint Urban Remote Sensing Event and 2019 Joint
Urban Remote Sensing Event.
Xiao Xiang Zhu (S’10–M’12–SM’14–F’21) received the Master (M.Sc.)
degree, her doctor of engineering (Dr.-Ing.) degree and her “Habilitation” in
the ﬁeld of signal processing from Technical University of Munich (TUM),
Munich, Germany, in 2008, 2011 and 2013, respectively.
She is the Chair Professor for Data Science in Earth Observation at
Technical University of Munich (TUM) and the Head of the Department
“EO Data Science” at the Remote Sensing Technology Institute, German
Aerospace Center (DLR). Since 2019, Zhu is a co-coordinator of the Munich
Data Science Research School (www.mu-ds.de). Since 2019 She also heads
the Helmholtz Artiﬁcial Intelligence – Research Field “Aeronautics, Space and
Transport”. Since May 2020, she is the PI and director of the international fu-
ture AI lab ”AI4EO – Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Earth Observation: Reasoning,
Uncertainties, Ethics and Beyond”, Munich, Germany. Since October 2020,
she also serves as a co-director of the Munich Data Science Institute (MDSI),
TUM. Prof. Zhu was a guest scientist or visiting professor at the Italian
National Research Council (CNR-IREA), Naples, Italy, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China, the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan and University
of California, Los Angeles, United States in 2009, 2014, 2015 and 2016,
respectively. She is currently a visiting AI professor at ESA’s Phi-lab. Her main
research interests are remote sensing and Earth observation, signal processing,
machine learning and data science, with their applications in tackling societal
grand challenges, e.g. Global Urbanization, UN’s SDGs and Climate Change.
Dr. Zhu is a member of young academy (Junge Akademie/Junges Kolleg) at
the Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities and the German
National Academy of Sciences Leopoldina and the Bavarian Academy of
Sciences and Humanities. She serves in the scientiﬁc advisory board in
several research organizations, among others the German Research Center
for Geosciences (GFZ) and Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research
(PIK). She is an associate Editor of IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing and serves as the area editor responsible for special issues
of IEEE Signal Processing Magazine. She is a Fellow of IEEE.