ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 17
Fig. 20. Spatially augmented momentum contrast [196]. Following the underlying assumption of Tile2Vec [177], nearby cropped tiles are seen as spatial
augmentation for the anchor tile, and a similarity loss is optimized based on momentum contrast [75]. ©[2020] IEEE.
𝐸
𝐸 ℎ0
ℎ1 𝐸
ℎ2 𝐸Invariant
Invariant
Invariant𝑇0
𝑇1
𝑇2+
+
Fig. 21. Seasonal Contrast (SeCo) [201]. Three embedding subspaces are
trained to be invariant to temporal (seasonal), synthetic and both temporal
and synthetic transforms T1,T2andT0, respectively.
high spatial resolution. Multispectral images are the most
commonly used remote sensing data, as they are relatively
easy to acquire, and are close to natural images which enable
easier human perception and convenient technology transfer
from the computer vision community. Due to the popularity
and the similarity of multispectral images to natural images, a
lot of self-supervised methods have been directly transferred to
the remote sensing ﬁeld (see Fig. 23). Generally, all categories
of self-supervised methods in CV can be extended to remote
sensing multi-spectral image analysis, but there is some special
attention to pay: (1) the common characteristics of remote
sensing data for all modalities need to be considered as
have been discussed above, (2) spectral contexts of predictive
methods (e.g., colorization) now have possibly more channel
information that can be used to design the pretext tasks, (3)
color-related data augmentations (e.g., color distortions shown
in Fig. 12) which are very important for contrastive self-
supervised learning need to be carefully modiﬁed to ﬁt into
multiple channels.
2) Hyperspectral Images: Hyperspectral imaging also cap-
tures images across the electromagnetic spectrum, but lights
in a far bigger number (up to hundreds) of spectral bands than
multispectral imaging with a trade-off on the spatial resolution.This very high spectral resolution enables us to identify the
materials contained in the pixel via spectroscopic analysis,
yet, on the other hand, requires special care about band-wise
analysis. In fact, with a basic objective of dimensionality
reduction, PCA/ICA/clustering and manifold-learning-based
methods have been widely studied in the ﬁeld before the era
of neural networks. Along the lines, deep-learning-based self-
supervised methods have been focusing on autoencoders and
3D convolution to compress spectral representations. Because
of the large number of spectral channels, the network usually
takes a single-pixel or a small patch as input. In both cases,
spatial contexts for pretext tasks or data augmentations tend
to consider intra-sample instead of inner-sample information
(e.g., neighboring patches or pixels can be seen as positive
samples in contrastive negative sampling). Meanwhile, spectral
contexts have a large potential to be explored because of
the high spectral dimensionality of hyperspectral data. For
example, two spectrally divided parts of a hyperspectral image
can be two augmented views.
3) SAR Images: Synthetic-aperture radar (SAR) is a form
of radar that is used to create two-dimensional images or three-
dimensional reconstructions of objects. Due to the imaging
principle, SAR images are substantially different from mul-
tispectral and hyperspectral images in characteristics like dy-
namic range, speckle statistics, imaging geometry and complex
domain information. While self-supervised learning with SAR
images is also a new research direction and has not been
widely explored, there’s one fact that makes it a valuable topic:
the prevailing lack of ground truth for regression-type tasks.
Though simulators can be used to provide training data for
supervised learning, this bears the risk that the networks will
learn models that are far too simpliﬁed. Therefore, it would
be very beneﬁcial if we can use self-supervised techniques
to learn representations from real SAR data. In addition, the
general self-supervised schemes can also be easily transferred
to SAR images with speciﬁc considerations. For example, the
data augmentation of color distortion is not suitable for SAR
data, the speckle noise of SAR images has a similar effect
as Gaussian blurring, and the ascending and descending order
may serve as a natural augmentation strategy.