ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 6
remote sensing image retrieval based on the similarity of image
features. Cheng et al. [122] proposed perturbation-seeking
GAN in a defense framework for remote sensing image scene
classiﬁcation. Ozkan et al. [123] proposed to use Wasserstein
GAN loss to optimize the multinomial mixture model for
hyperspectral unmixing.
B. Predictive Methods
While most generative methods perform pixel-level recon-
struction or generation, predictive self-supervised methods are
based on auto-generated labels. In fact, one may argue that
being able to generate very high dimensional data points, such
as images, is not necessary to learn useful representations for
many downstream tasks. Instead, one can focus on predicting
speciﬁc properties of the data, which is the general idea behind
predictive methods. To this end, the so-called pretext tasks2get
utilized. A predictive method ﬁrstly designs a suitable pretext
task for the dataset, prepares self-generated labels, and trains
a model to predict such labels and learn data representations.
Predictive self-supervised learning targets two possible
drawbacks associated with generative methods that perform
pixel-level reconstruction: (1)pixel-level loss functions may
overly focus on low-level details whereas in practice such
details are irrelevant for a human to recognize the contents
of an image, (2)pixel-based reconstruction typically do not
involve pixel-to-pixel (long-range) correlations that can be
important for image understanding. Based on the assumption
that providing the network with relevant high-level pretext
tasks, the network may learn high-level semantic information.
In general, the design of different pretext tasks harnesses
various context information of the input data. According
to distinct context attributes, we categorize pretext tasks as
follows: spatial context, spectral context, temporal context, and
other semantic contexts.
1) Spatial Context: Images contain rich spatial information
for designing self-supervised pretext tasks. Doersch et al. [62]
proposed the ﬁrst example of such methods, predicting the
relative position of pairs of randomly cropped image patches
drawn from a given input sample. It is assumed that doing
well on this task requires a global understanding of the
scene and its objects contained. Accordingly, a valuable visual
representation is expected to extract the composition of objects
in order to reason about their relative spatial location.
Following this paradigm, the literature reveals a multitude
of methods to learn image features solving an increasingly
complex set of spatial puzzles [63, 124, 50, 125, 126]. For
example, Noroozi et al. [63] built a jigsaw puzzle from
randomly ordered tiles of an image. The network was then
trained to predict the correct order of tiles. However, given 9
image patches, there are 9! = 362;880 distinct permutations
and a network is unlikely to recognize all of them due to
visual ambiguity. To limit the number of permutations, the
Hamming distance [127] was employed to pick a subset of
2We note that the term pretext task can also represent any generic objective
associated with self-supervised methods. In this paper, we restrict such notion
to predictive approaches (where the term originally came from) to make the
taxonomy more clear.permutations that are signiﬁcantly diverse. Borrowed from
information theory, here the Hamming distance essentially
measures the minimum number of tile permutations required
in order to recover the image. Further works building on this
approach tried to improve the jigsaw puzzles baseline [124]
by introducing tiles from other images [50, 126], and by
extending to larger-size puzzles [125]. Along this line, one
important thing to be taken into account is that if carelessly
designed, the model can ”cheat” from low-level details like
edges.
Another set of spatial-context-based pretext tasks exploit
geometric transformations of input imagery. Among others,
predicting rotation angles [49, 128] and image inpainting [64,
129] are popular approaches. In [49], the input image was
transformed by four separate rotation angles, which then
served as the label for the network to predict. [64] cut a patch
from the input for the network to recover. We note that this
set of image inpainting strategies have also close relation to
generative self-supervised methods—as discussed in Fig. II-A.
Remote sensing. Zhao et al. [130] proposed a multi-task
framework to simultaneously learn from rotation pretext and
scene classiﬁcation to distill task-speciﬁc features adopting a
semi-supervised perspective. Zhang et al. [131] proposed to
predict a set of rotation angles from a sequence of rotated
SAR-probed targets for object detection. Singh et al. [132]
utilized image inpainting as a pretext task for semantic seg-
mentation arguing for spatial correlation of the pretext task
to the downstream task. In [133] the authors exercised both
relative position and inpainting as pretext tasks for remote
sensing scene classiﬁcation. The study added a contrastive
self-supervised component referred to as instance discrimina-
tion which we discuss in the following section. Ji et al. [134]
tackled the few-shot scene classiﬁcation problem by incor-
porating two pretext tasks into training: rotation prediction
and contrastive prediction. An additional adversarial model
perturbation term is also used for regularization.
Notably, jigsaw puzzles are rarely leveraged in remote
sensing. Potentially, spatial correlation in overhead imagery
is less dominant. Indeed, translational invariance is prominent
in blocks of urban areas, across water surfaces, and many other
kinds of natural scenes (desert, forest, mountain ranges, etc.).
2) Spectral Context: Spectral information is another basis
for the design of pretext tasks which is inspired by image
colorization in computer vision. Zhang et al. [65] proposed
one of the ﬁrst of such tasks: a self-supervised network
learns channel-speciﬁc representations by predicting a spectral
channel taking other channels as input in CIELAB color
space [136]. It turned out that the effectiveness of the color
space roots in encoding according to human perception: the
distance of two points reﬂects the amount of visually perceived
change of the corresponding colors. The work was further
extended to hue/chroma color space, and per-pixel color his-
tograms were applied for better representation learning [137].
While these two works learn the representation of a single
channel (the gray-scale intensity), a cross-channel representa-
tion learning method was proposed in [138]. Two sub-encoders
got utilized to extract distinctive color channel representations,
which are then concatenated to provide full-channel represen-