ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 13
𝑥𝑥1
𝑥2𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑢𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑡
𝐸𝑡𝑒𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑟contrastivegrad
sg𝑇1
𝑇2Proj . Pred.
Proj .projector predictor
online
targetema
Fig. 15. Bootstrap Your Own Latent (BYOL) [83]. A similarity loss is
minimized between features from the online (student) and the target (teacher)
branch. A stop-gradient ( sg) operator is applied on the teacher whose
parameters are updated with an exponential moving average ( ema ) of the
student parameters.
3) Knowledge Distillation: Another set of methods for
contrastive self-supervised learning is based on knowledge
distillation [211]. These methods commonly use a teacher-
student network (still Siamese-like structure) and optimize
a similarity metric of two augmented views of the same
input image. Either asymmetric learning rules or asymmetric
architectures are utilized to transfer knowledge between the
student network and the teacher network, and thus no negative
samples are necessary.
Grill et al. [83] proposed a ﬁrst milestone called BYOL
(bootstrap your own latent, see Fig. 15) for self-supervised
learning based on knowledge distillation. The general architec-
ture is similar to MoCo [75] but without the usage of negative
samples. It was shown that, if a ﬁxed randomly initialized
network (which would not collapse because it is not trained)
is used to serve as the key encoder, the representation produced
by the query encoder would still be improved during training.
If then the target encoder is set to be the trained query encoder
and iterates this procedure, it will progressively achieve better
performance. Therefore, BYOL proposed an architecture with
an exponential moving average strategy to update the target
encoder just as MoCo does, and used mean square error as the
similarity measurement. Additionally, BYOL is also similar to
mean teacher [212] (a semi-supervised method including also
a classiﬁcation loss), which would collapse if removing the
classiﬁcation loss. To prevent collapse, BYOL introduced an
additional predictor on top of the online (teacher) network.
SimSiam [84] presented a systematic study on the impor-
tance of different tricks in avoiding collapse and proposed a
simpliﬁed version of the previous self-supervised contrastive
methods, arguing that the additional predictor of BYOL is
helpful but not necessary to prevent model collapse. Instead,
the stop gradient operation of the teacher (target) network
is the most critical component to make target representation
stable. In addition, the authors showed the relationship be-
tween SimSiam and other popular contrastive methods: (1)
SimSiam can be thought of as “SimCLR without negatives”;
(2) SimSiam is conceptually analogous to “SwA V without on-
line clustering”; (3) SimSiam can be seen as ”BYOL without
the momentum encoder”.
DINO [52] further explored the self-distillation scheme with
vision transformer backbones, proposing a new state-of-the-
art self-supervised learning algorithm. Following a common
teacher-student network architecture, the output of the teacher
𝑥𝑥1
𝑥2𝐸𝜃
𝐸𝜃𝑇1
𝑇2𝑧1
𝑧2
P
Pprojector
Empirical
Cross -corr.
Feature 
dimensionTarget
Cross -corr.Fig. 16. Barlow Twins [87]. The objective function measures the cross-
correlation matrix between the embeddings of two identical networks fed
with distorted versions of a batch of samples and tries to make this matrix
close to the identity. This causes the embedding vectors of distorted versions
of a sample to be similar while minimizing the redundancy between the
components of these vectors.
network is centered with a mean computed over the batch.
Each network outputs a K dimensional feature that is normal-
ized with a temperature softmax over the feature dimension
and their similarity is then measured with a cross-entropy
loss. Stop gradient and momentum update are used to improve
the performance. A following work EsViT [85] improved
DINO by introducing additional region-level contrastive task
apart from commonly used global view-level task. Recently,
Zhou et al. [86] integrated masked image modeling into the
contrastive self-distillation scheme with vision transforms,
proposing image BERT pre-training with Online Tokenizer
(iBOT).
Remote sensing. Guo et al. [213] proposed to combine
GAN and BYOL for better discriminative representation learn-
ing. Following a normal GAN structure, a generator is used to
generate fake images and a discriminator is used to distinguish
them from real images. An additional similarity loss is com-
bined with the discriminator loss by seeing the discriminator
as a self-supervised encoder, which encodes both fake and real
images as two input views to a BYOL-like Siamese network.
In addition, gated self-attention and pyramidal convolution are
proposed to be used in both the generator and the discrimina-
tor. Chen et al. [214, 215] utilized Siamese ResUNet to distill
related representations from different modalities (SAR and
optical), and a shift transformation to learn pixel-wise feature
representations. Hu et al. [216] utilized transformer as encoder
backbone and BYOL as baseline structure for hyperspectral
image classiﬁcation. Dong et al. [217] employed SimSiam for
ViT based PolSAR image classiﬁcation. Wang et al. [218]
leverage BYOL for SAR ship detection. Jain et al. [219]
perform pre-training by contrasting SAR and optical images
using BYOL. Wang et al. [220] proposed DINO-MM, a
joint SAR-optical representation learning approach with vision
transformers. Following the main self-supervised mechanism
as DINO, the authors introduced RandomSensorDrop to let
the model see all possible combinations of both modalities
during training. Zhang et al. [221] introduced a self-supervised
spectral–spatial attention-based vision transformer (SSVT),
where global and local augmented views are contrasted based
on self-distillation [222]. Muhtar et al. [223] proposed In-
dexNet, a dense self-supervised method for remote sensing
image segmentation. Their approach is built on BYOL and
performs contrastive at image and pixel level to preserve
spatial information. In a similar fashion, Chen et al. [224]