Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 3619 2 of 14
particular roads have high ﬂow and they are congested, they can provide better real-time guides for
drivers. Hence, tra c ﬂow statistics have very important practical applications.
When video surveillance systems are employed on urban roads, the statistics that are obtained
from the resulting video images are simple and convenient to use, and the detection and statistic
amounts of data are very large, which will not a ect the normal travels of vehicles. In probability theory
and statistics, a Gaussian model is a stochastic process, because it can collect random variables that
are indexed by time or space. A Gaussian model is a simple, easy method for generating background
images. When background images are processed while using a Gaussian background updating method,
foreground targets can be imaged using a background di erence method, with shadow elimination
and morphological processing to reduce the illumination intensity and noise [ 5,6]. This has yielded
more accurate tra c statistics, but the statistical accuracy is still not ideal when the tra c ﬂow is large.
Previously, Li et al. introduced the Vi Be algorithm, which uses the ﬁrst frame of a video to initialize
the model, sets the foreground threshold and background candidate conditions, updates the model,
and extracts the background from the second frame of the video [ 7]. However, this method is too
reliant on relative experiences, and it needs to scan and judge the video image several times when it is
used to identify a pixel.
Tan and Dong trained a vehicle classiﬁer to perform vehicle detection on a set area of a video [ 8].
This method is simple and easy to implement, but only few factors are considerately used in this
study, and the classiﬁer is not in general. The studies in ref. [ 9,10] describe the virtual coil method,
which manually sets candidate areas in a video, detects and counts tra c ﬂow by changing the
coil state, simpliﬁes calculations, and protects road surfaces, but it is not very e ective at detecting
multi-lane tra c ﬂows. Other studies examine vehicle-ﬂow statistics that are based on a target tracking
method [ 11–13]. Vehicles detected between adjacent frames in a video are matched and tracked by
their speciﬁc characteristics to obtain each vehicle’s motion trajectory. The images that were obtained
from the trajectories are used to detect and calculate tra c ﬂow, but most of the data are noise caused
by non-motorized movements and other factors. These results indicate problems with current methods
for gathering tra c-ﬂow statistics.
Today, with the aid of artiﬁcial intelligence, deep learning is used for target detection, semantic
segmentation, image classiﬁcation, and other identiﬁcation tasks in various scenarios. The region-based
method is the most common for target detection, while using the R-CNN, SPP-net, Fast R-CNN, and
Faster R-CNN algorithms [ 14–21]. R-CNN uses a selective search to extract regions from an image,
which is e cient, but training is cumbersome, and its test speed is slow [ 14,22]. SPP-net makes the
network input unrestricted, but the training features are stored on disk, which limits the detection
speed [ 15]. Fast R-CNN combines the R-CNN and SPP-net concepts and it can improve detection
speed and accuracy, but the speed is still relatively slow [ 15,16]. Faster R-CNN uses an RPN network
instead of selective search algorithms, which greatly shortens the time to extract regions from images,
but only achieves seven frames per second for video detection, falling short of real-time detection
requirements [ 20–22]. In order to improve the detection speed and accuracy, based on the DenseNet
model [ 23], the researchers proposed a lightweight PeleeNet model for mobile devices, which had
the highest target classiﬁcation accuracy [ 24]. Their further study had combined the PeleeNet and
optimized SSD (Single Shot MultiBoxDetector) to develop a real-time target detection system for
mobile devices, which had low computational cost and reliable targets’ detection performance [ 24,25].
The ideas have provided very good help and inspiration to subsequent researchers. Next, this paper
proposed a method to detect the pedestrian features, which combined a histogram of the oriented
gradient (HOG) and discrete wavelet transform (DWT). The method uses the motion amplitude to
set the interest region to improve the detection speed. HOG and DWT systems are used to detect
pedestrian multi-features, and ROI is then classiﬁed by SVM with multi-feature mechanisms, and the
detection speed can be improved [ 21,26]. Subsequently, a network model is proposed for the target
detections of lightweight RFBNet, which combines the enhancements of speed and accuracy [ 27].
The model proposes adding dilated convolution to form a Receptive Field Block (RFB) module, which