Fig. 7. Adversarial attack classiﬁcation
such as a word or a byte will alter the meaning of the text
or the data functionality. Hence, approaches for generating
adversarial samples in the domain of machine learning-based
network security ﬁltering systems need to occur in such a
way that the malicious functionality is not distorted. Several
approaches for achieving these adversarial attacks have been
researched and are discussed in the sections below.
A. Adversarial attacks against Malware Detection
A major component of endpoint protection in network
security is malware detection. Yet, malware detection re-
mains a challenging problem in network security. Between
2009 and 2019, the number of new malware digital signa-
tures has increased by over 2000 percent [95]. Therefore,
traditional malware detection systems that rely solely on
digital signatures have become less effective. Signiﬁcant
effort has been made in the use of machine learning to
protect against malware attacks. Several researches have
shown the vulnerability of these machine learning models
to adversarial attacks. The most common approach is the
addition of selected sequence of bytes to the binary ﬁle.
Several approaches have been considered for synthesizing
this sequence of bytes as discussed below.
Malware detection may be based on static analysis, in
which the malware is detected without executing the code.
Alternatively, dynamic analysis for malware detection typi-
cally executes a suspicious malware sample in a sandbox in
an attempt to discover dynamic behavioural patterns such as
API call sequences.
1) Iagodroid: One of the earliest attacks against machine
learning based malware detection systems was the Iagodroid
attack [96]. Iagodroid uses a method to induce mislabelling
of malware families during the triaging process of malware
samples. Their evasion rate reached 97 percent.
2) Stingray: Suciu et al [97] proposed an adversarial
attack against malware using the ’FAIL’ model. Their study
focuses on constraints of obscurity and transferability in
order to realize a targeted poisoning attack. StingRay suc-
ceeded in half of the test cases.3) Texture Perturbation Attacks: Researchers have de-
ployed visualization techniques similar to computer vision
and adapted it for malware classiﬁcation [98]. This involves
conversion of malware binary code into image data. The
Adversarial Texture Malware Perturbation Attack (ATMPA)
achieved a 100 percent effectiveness in defeating visualiza-
tion based machine learning malware detection system and
also resulted in 88.7 percent transfer-ability rate [16]. The
attack model for ATMPA works by allowing the attacker
to distort the malware image data during the visualization
process.
4) Android malware attack in Problem space: [58] et al
formalized an approach for problem space adversarial eva-
sion attacks against machine learning based android malware
detection systems. Their study identiﬁed four main contraints
which are characteristic of any problem space attack. Their
study adopted a technique which automates the generation
thousands of realistic and inconspicuous adversarial malware
samples, further buttressing the notion of adversarial mal-
ware as a service as a real threat in network security. Their
attack led to a misclassiﬁcation rate of 100.0 percent on the
successfully generated samples.
5) EvadeDroid: Bostani et al. [99] presented EvadeDroid,
another problem space Android evasion attack. EvadeDroid
is a query-efﬁcient black-box attack, that can fool ML-based
Android malware detectors without altering the functionality
of the original malware samples. It uses an n-gram-based
similarity method to select candidate donors for gadget
extraction to change malware samples into benign ones
through an iterative and incremental manipulation technique.
Their experimental results demonstrated that EvadeDroid’s
evasion rates are 81, 73, 75, and 79 percent for DREBIN,
Sec-SVM, MaMaDroid, and ADE-MA, respectively.
6) EvnAttack: EvnAttack is an evasion attack model that
was proposed in [47] which manipulates an optimal portion
of the features of a malware executable ﬁle in a bi-directional
way such that the malware is able to evade detection from
a machine learning model based on the observation that
the API calls differently contribute to the classiﬁcation
of malware and benign ﬁles. The detection model’s false
negative ratio almost reached 1 (100 percent), which means
almost all malware samples are misclassiﬁed.
7) AdvAttack: AdvAttack was proposed in [45] as a novel
attack method to evade detection with the adversarial cost as
low as possible. This is achieved by manipulating the API
calls by injecting more of those features which are most
relevant to benign ﬁles and removing those features with
higher relevance scores to malware. AdvAttack increased the
classiﬁer’s false negative ratio to 71 percent while degrade
the accuracy of the classiﬁer to 58.5 percent.
8) MalGAN: To combat the limitations of traditional
gradient-based adversarial sample generation, the use of a
generative adversarial network (GAN) based algorithm for
generating adversarial samples has been proposed. Genera-
tive models have been mostly used for input reconstruction
by encoding an original image into a lower-dimensional
latent representation [2]. The latent representation of the
13