overcomes and remedy the weaknesses of Projected
Gradient Descent (PGD) [6] that lead to model robust-
ness false outcomes. First PGD attack use ﬁxed step
size with cross-entropy as a loss function that causes
the failure as identity by [90]. In [83], they use a new
gradient-based scheme without step size selection with
different loss function. With these two changes, two
versions of PGD produced with free parameters in the
number of iteration. They also integrate the new PGD
versions with FAB-attack [91] and Square attack [87]
to produce a parameter-free attack called AutoAttack.
The authors also integrated two Auto Attack and were
tested on a large scale on 40 classiﬁers.
Sabour et al. [78] proposed a new adversarial image
attack that not only focus on the class label but in the
internal representations. The attack, known as Feature
Adversaries enables the possibility to deceive a trained
DNN to mystify any source image with other target
image by ﬁnding a small perturbation from the source
image that create similar internal representation to the
target image and not related to the source image. The
authors however take into consideration that such adver-
saries are not outliers. Universal Perturbation [84] was
proposed by Moosavi et al. as an algorithm to calculate
a universal small image perturbation to misclassify a
state-of-the-art deep neural network classiﬁer. The main
focus of this algorithm was to ﬁnd the perturbation
vector that deceives classiﬁer on all data point samples.
This ﬁx perturbation is existed to lead changes in image
label gradually to build the universal perturbation.
Gradient-free Attacks: Decision Tree Attack was pro-
posed by Papernot et al. [72] this type of black-box
attacks use transferability of adversarial samples be-
tween and within different classiﬁers, including Deep
neural network. Logistic regression, decision trees, sup-
port vector machines (SVM), ensembles, and nearest
neighbors. They demonstrated that black box attacks
are feasible to a machine learning algorithm that not
using deep neural networks and adversarial samples
works well between and across models using the same
and different machine learning techniques. Chen et al.
[81] proposed an adversarial attack algorithm to attack
DNN based on elastic-net regularization in feature L1
andL2called elastic-net attacks to DNNs (EAD).
EAD considers state-of-the-are L2andLinfinty Au-
thors demonstrated that EAD could break undefended
and defensively distilled DNNs. They also improve
the transferability of attacks and adversarial training.
Shadow Attack was proposed by Ghiasi et al. [85]
which is a new method for attacking systems that rely
on certiﬁcates and fool certiﬁed robust networks to
assign the wrong label to an image and produce a
spoofed secure robustness certiﬁcate for the adversarial
example. Adversarial Patch, proposed by Brown et al.
[86] present universal, robust, and targeted adversarial
patches for the real world that do not require any
knowledge about what image they are attacking. Thoseadversarial samples can be used to attack any classiﬁer,
and they work with many transformations that exist
defense methods may not be robust to such a massive
transformation. The adversarial patch leads the classiﬁer
to switch class labels to any target class. Chen et al. [92]
develop HopSkipJumpAttack based on a decision-based
attack that is a type pf black-box attack. This algorithm
generates iterative targeted and untargeted adversarial
samples with minimum distance. This attack demon-
strates superior efﬁciency over various state-of-the-art
decision-based attacks. The iteration in the algorithm
is based on gradient direction, step size, and boundary
search.
2) Poisoning Attacks: A poisoning attack also known as
causative attack, uses direct or indirect means to alter the data
or the model. Poisoning attacks occurs either by injecting
false data, manipulating the original data, or corrupting the
model logic.
Data Injection: Biggio et al. [76] proposed a gradient
ascent based attack based on SVM that attacks the input
data that lead to maximize the non-convex surface error
and increase classiﬁer classiﬁcation at the test time. Gu
et al. [77] proposed BadNets, which perform adversarial
attacks by discovering the backdoored neural network
or BadNet. The attack is based on a full or partial
outsourced training process where attacker provides the
user with a trained model with a backdoor that causes
a targeted misclassiﬁcation and degrade in the accuracy
in some cases called backdoor trigger. For example, in
autonomous driving, an attacker provides the user with
a street sign detector that is backdoored, which classify
stop sign well in most cases except when the stop signs
have a particular sticker in classifying it as speed limit
signs. This type of attack occurs under two scenarios
user outsource trained model or download a pre-trained
model.
Data Manipulation: Feature Collision Attack proposed
by Shafahi et al. [61] presents a watermarking poisoning
attack based on optimization-based to craft a clean
label attack to target the behavior of a neural network
classiﬁer on a speciﬁc instance. This attack uses en-
hanced preservation techniques to make it difﬁcult to
be detected.
3) Oracle Attacks: In an oracle type adversarial attack,
an adversary who has been given a oracle prediction access
to a model, steals a copy of a remotely deployed machine
learning model. This enables the adversary to duplicate the
functionality of the model, i.e "steal the model" [62]. This
attack has become increasingly common due to the increase
in Machine Learning as a Service "MLaaS" offerings where
several companies that offer cloud-based Machine Learning
services e.g. Google, Amazon, and BigML, provide easy-to-
use web APIs to manage client interaction.
Inversion Attacks: Fredrikson et al. [71] exposed the
privacy issues with providing access to machine learn-
ing API. Their study demonstrated how an adversary
11