9) Universal Adversarial Perturbations and Image Spam
Classiﬁers: Phung et al.[120] evaluated numerous adversar-
ial attack methods against deep learning-based image spam
classiﬁers, and they found that the universal perturbation
method is the most harmful. So they used this approach to
create a novel transformation-based adversarial attack that
was capable of creating tailored “natural perturbations” in
image spam. In some cases, their suggested attack can lower
the model’s accuracy to reach 23.7 percent.
C. Adversarial attacks against Phishing Detection
Phishing detection is a critical endpoint protection element
aimed to save the users from serious fraudulent actions like;
money stealing and accessing private information. There
are multiple techniques for phishing detection like [121];
List-base approach, Visual similarity-base approach, and
Heuristics and machine learning-based approach, which is
the most popular method now. Several adversarial attacks
on machine learning-based phishing detection systems are
discussed below.
1) FIGA: Gressel et al.[122] proposed the Feature Im-
portance Guided Attack (FIGA) to fool phishing detection
models by perturbing the most effective features of the
input in the direction of the target class. It is a model-
agnostic gray-box attack that needs knowledge of the feature
representation of the victim model. FIGA was tested on eight
different phishing detection models, and it reduced the F1-
score of the models from 0.96 to 0.41 on average.
2) Bypassing Detection of URL-based Phishing Attacks
Using Generative Adversarial Deep Neural Networks: AlEr-
oud et al. [123] presented an evasion technique that attacks
URL phishing detection systems via Generative Adversar-
ial Networks (GAN). Their generated samples can deceive
Blackbox phishing detectors even when those detectors are
created using reﬁned methods like those relying on intra-
URL similarities. Their experiments revealed that some
classiﬁers were unable to identify any of the adversarial
examples leading to zero true positive rates. At the same
time, the false positive rates are increased, which indicates
the percentage of benign examples classiﬁed as phishing.
3) Generating Optimal Attack Paths in Generative Adver-
sarial Phishing: Al-Qurashi et al. [124] proposed a method
that creates adversarial phishing attacks by discovering op-
timal subsets of features that lead to a higher evasion rate.
To achieve this, multiple feature engineering techniques are
used, such as Recursive Feature Elimination, Lasso, and
Cancel Out. Their experiments revealed that their attack has
better evasion capability than Generative Adversarial Deep
Neural Network (GAN) which randomly perturbs features.
4) Advanced evasion attacks and mitigations on practical
ML-based phishing website classiﬁers: Song et al. [125]
introduced multiple mutation-based techniques, differing in
the knowledge of the target classiﬁer (white, gray, and black
boxes). They also proposed a sample-based collision attack
to acquire the knowledge of the target model, in the cases
of white- and gray-box scenarios. Their evasion attacks
fooled the classiﬁers without changing the functionalitiesand appearance of the samples. Their attack’s success rate
varied depending on the knowledge and the attacked model.
Attacks on Google’s phishing page ﬁlter achieved a 100
percent attack success rate. Their transferability attack on
BitDe-fender’s industrial phishing page classiﬁer, Trafﬁ-
cLight, achieved 81.25 and 50 percent transferability attack
rates in the black- and gray-box scenarios.
D. Adversarial attacks against Network Anomaly Detection
Network anomaly detection devices learn network activity
patterns and detect irregularities. They must continuously
scan the network, analyze encrypted data, and spot anomalies
in real-time. Machine learning ticks all these boxes, that’s
why it is used extensively in modern Network anomaly
detection tools, however, researches have found some ways
to attack them. Multiple of these adversarial attacks are
discussed below.
1) IDSGAN: IDSGAN was proposed by Lin et al. [126]
for generating adversarial attacks targeted towards intrusion
detection systems. IDSGAN is based on the Wasserstein
GAN [127] which uses a generator, discriminator and a
black-box. The discriminator is used to imitate the black-box
intrusion detection system and at the same time provide the
malicious trafﬁc samples. IDSGAN can lower the detection
rates of some IDS models to approximately zero percent.
2) TCP Obfuscation Techniques: Another method for
evading machine learning based intrusion detection systems
is the use of obfuscation techniques. Homolial et al. [128]
proposed the modiﬁcation of various properties of network
connections to obfuscate a TCP communication which suc-
cessfully evades a wide variety of intrusion detection classi-
ﬁers.
3) Deep Adversarial Learning in Intrusion Detection: A
Data Augmentation Enhanced Framework: Zhang el al.
[129] proposed a framework which incorporates deep ad-
versarial learning with statistical learning in a manner which
exploits learning-based data-augmentation. In the study, the
Poisson-Gamma joint probabilistic generative model is used
to synthesize adversarial samples.
4) Generative Adversarial Networks For Launching and
Thwarting Adversarial Attacks on Network Intrusion Detec-
tion Systems: A Generative adversarial network (GAN) -
based adversarial attack was proposed by Usama et al. [65].
Their method was the ﬁrst attempt to utilize GAN-based
adversarial attacks against a black box Intrusion detection
system (IDS) while still preserving the functional behavior
of the network trafﬁc. In some cases, their attack dropped the
accuracy of the detection model from 84.3 to 43.4 percent.
5) Adversarial deep learning for robust detection of bi-
nary encoded malware: Al et al. [102], developed four
adversarial attack methods to generate an adversarial exam-
ple of a binary malware ﬁle that preserves its functionality
(rFGSM, dFGSM, BCA, and BGA). They developed a
framework for training robust malware detection models by
utilizing the saddle-point formulation that consists of the
inner maximization and outer maximization problems. The
inner maximization approach is used to generate powerful
16