whereis the perturbation. If is applied to all of the input
data (all of the image’s pixels, for example), it is considered
adense adversarial attack . However, if just partial positions
are perturbed, it is called a sparse adversarial attack [54].
Adversarial machine learning in network security is typ-
ically an arms race between two agents. The ﬁrst agent is
an adversary whose objective is to intrude a network with a
malicious payload. The other agent is one whose role is to
protect the network from the consequences of the malicious
payload.
We start with a view of the different type of data that
traverses a network during any given time.
A. Adversarial Attack Taxonomy
We examine the Adversarial Attack Taxonomy in Table I
to consider the goals and capabilities of any adversary for
a machine learning system. We base our threat framework
from the original model in [8] [53] and adapt it within
the context of adversarial attacks in network security
domain. Within this context, adversarial attack threats in
network security may be considered based on the attacker’s
knowledge, attack space, attacker’s strategy, attacker’s goal
and attack target. As mentioned in section I, to the best of
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst review to add the idea of the
space dimension in the classiﬁcation of adversarial attacks
in network security.
1) Knowledge: The knowledge component of the ad-
versarial threat model describes the extent to which the
adversary knows about the machine system as a whole. This
could be classiﬁed as White-box ,Gray-box orBlack-box
attacks.
In white-box attacks, it is assumed that the attacker has
complete knowledge of the training data, the learning
algorithm, the learned model as well as the parameters
which were used while training model. A white-box
attack represents an adversary who has the exact in-
formation that is held by the owner or creator of the
machine learning system which is being under attack.
In the majority of real world adversarial attack settings,
this is usually not feasible.
A Gray-box attacks assumes a more realistic approach,
and considers that there could be varying degrees infor-
mation accessible to the adversary [57]. For example, an
adversary may have partial information about the model
queries, or limited access to the training data. For a
gray-box attack, the adversary does not have the exact
knowledge which the creator of the model possesses, but
has sufﬁcient information to attack the machine learning
system to cause the machine learning system to fail.
A black-box attack assumes that the adversary is totally
unaware of the machine learning system. in this type
of attack, the adversary has no knowledge about either
the learning algorithm or the learned model. It may
be argued that a truly black-box attack is impossible.
this is because it is assumed that the adversary mustat least have some speciﬁc information, for example
the location of the model before it can attack the
model. The severity of blackbox attacks poses a greater
threat in practice. The model for real-world systems
may be more restrictive than a theoretical black-box
model where the adversary can understand the full
output of the neural network on inputs that have been
chosen arbitrarily. In [69], an analysis of three threat
models were proposed. These models, deﬁned as, the
query-limited setting, the partial information setting,
and the label-only setting, provide a more accurate
characterization of real-world classiﬁers. As such, a
representation of black box adversarial attacks was
proposed, such that, it would be possible to fool
classiﬁers under these more restrictive threat models,
whereas, it might have been impractical or ineffective.
2) Space: In the ﬁeld of adversarial machine learning, the
input space can be deﬁned as a dimensional representation of
all the possible conﬁgurations of the objects in determination
context. We categorize this as Feature Space andProblem
Space .
Feature space modeling of an adversarial sample is a
method in which an optimization algorithm is used to
ﬁnd the ideal value out of a ﬁnite number of arbitrary
changes made to the features. In a feature space adver-
sarial attack, the attacker’s objective is to remain benign
without generating a new instance. Conversely, a feature
space is deﬁned as the n dimensional space in which all
variables in the input dataset are represented. We take as
an example an intrusion detection dataset with 70 vari-
ables, this represents a 70-dimensional feature space. A
feature space adversarial attack in the context above will
seek to alter the feature space by making changes within
the 70-dimensional feature space. A feature space attack
modiﬁes the features in the instance directly. Using an
example of malware adversarial attacks, a feature space
adversarial malware attack will only modify the feature
vectors but no new malware is created.
The problem space refers to an input space in which
the objects e.g. image, ﬁle, etc. resides. A problem
space adversarial malware attack will modify the actual
instance from the source to produce a new instance
of the malware. Typically, a problem space adversarial
attack tends to generate new objects in domains such
as malware detection whereby there is no clear inverse
mapping to the feature space [58]. A typical difference
between a problem space adversarial attack, and a
feature space adversarial attack is that a feature space
attack does not generate a new sample but only creates a
new feature vector. A problem space adversarial attack
modiﬁes the actual instance itself to create an entirely
new object.
3) Strategy: Attacker’s strategy implies the phases of
operation in which the adversary launches the attack. Three
7