adversarial risk grid map. Our ﬁndings suggest that the
adversarial risk grid map provides a promising future for
the security of artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning in
network security. Machine learning based network security
applications that are more resilient to adversarial attacks
can be designed by leveraging on the adversarial risk grid
map. We observed that the misclassiﬁcation achieved by an
adversarial attack is dependent signiﬁcantly on the design
of the adversarial attack algorithm with the context of each
speciﬁc attack . White-box, Evasion attacks against endpoint
protection systems (malware detection) are the most common
attacks. While there is limited research in adversarial attacks
against process behavior and user behavior analysis, use
cases of machine learning in network security, endpoint
protection, network protection and application security have
been well researched.
B. Transferability with regards to machine learning tech-
nique
Transferability of adversarial samples [72] [171] has been
shown to be more effective with targeted adversarial samples
[73]. This implies that non-targeted adversarial samples
(reliability attacks) which are solely aimed at causing a
misclassiﬁcation, are more likely to transfer from one model
to the other. In furtherance to this phenomenon, we observe
that adversarial attacks in network security are less likely
to transfer from one machine learning technique to another.
Transferability of adversarial defences in network security
in also impacted by to the heterogenous nature of the
perturbed features. While this is has a positive side with
regards to preventing transferable defenses, it also makes it
more difﬁcult in real world situations. From our observation,
adversarial attacks in problem space are more difﬁcult to
generate, more difﬁcult to defend against and less chances
of being transferable.
In our research, we observed that a signiﬁcant amount
of features are perturbed in the process of generating the
adversarial sample. This is a sub optimal approach. There
is currently no publication which has explored the challenge
of ﬁnding a way to identify the ideal features that need to
be perturbed for creating adversarial samples. In the ﬁeld of
computer vision, Guo et al. [158] restricted the search for
adversarial samples to the low frequency domain, thereby
reducing query complexity.
We reviewed defenses against adversarial attacks on ma-
chine learning applications in network security. We note that
there are two major limitations in the existing research on
adversarial defenses. Firstly, most defenses are designed to
protect against attacks on machine learning applications in
computer vision. Secondly, the defenses studied are usually
designed for a speciﬁc attack or a part of the attack. A
generalized defense model against adversarial attacks is
at best still theoretical as research on generalized defense
models is in early stages [172]. Furthermore, our ﬁndings
indicate that defenses against adversarial attacks are speciﬁc
to a particular type of attack and are not necessarily trans-
ferable. Recent research [72] have studied the transferabilityin malware machine learning models in machine learning
applications such as malware detection.
C. Malware Detection Approaches
In the majority of cases, Android malware detection is
posed as a binary classiﬁcation problem in which a classiﬁer
is used to determine whether an app is malicious or not.
Malware detection take three general approaches which are
dynamic, static, or hybrid. Signiﬁcant overhead is usually
required in order to extract dynamic features because it
requires monitoring the behavior of apps at run time. Several
of the studies we examined have focused on instances
in which static features were extracted, including required
permissions, actions, and application programming interface
(API) calls. In our literature review, we did not come across
any work in which adversarial attacks were successfully
carried out against machine learning based malware detection
systems in which dynamic features were extracted.
D. Quantitative evaluation of adversarial attacks
In network security, majority of the adversarial attacks
reported target the integrity aspect of the CIA triad, with the
intent of causing a misclassiﬁcation. A quantitative analysis
of the attacks’ efﬁciency for the four reviewed categories
(malware detection, phishing detection, spam detection, and
network anomaly detection) was observed. After calculating
the average attack success rate per class, we have found that
the most signiﬁcant adversarial effect was in the malware
detection and the network anomaly detection domains, in
which the adversarial attacks’ success rates averaged more
than 90 percent. It is worth mentioning that we think that
a number of these attacks are theoretical and need more
investigation to deploy them in practical settings, thus the
quantitative effect of some of the reviewed attacks could
be exaggerated. However, we ﬁnd these results as a good
indication of the malicious potential of adversarial attacks
on network security domains.
The challenge of quantifying the efﬁciency of adversarial
example generation, is an emerging ﬁeld and several ap-
proaches have been proposed in recent literature. In [173]
a new performance metric was proposed, called effective
generation rate (EGR) which is the ratio between n and
n, i.e., n /n. Where n represents the number of adversarial
examples generated by an attacker and n denotes the
number of adversarial examples that successfully evades both
malware and adversarial example detection.
E. Difference between adversarial attacks in network secu-
rity and computer vision
1) In image recognition, the primary feature used in
adversarial perturbation is the pixels of the image.
However, in network security, there is a great variation
in the types of features which may be used, and as
such, the perturbation scope for adversarial attacks
becomes largely increased.
2) Adversarial attacks in network security differs from
computer vision since data objects are considered
22