have been recent attempts to review these publications into
a survey work. In the ﬁeld of network security, We identiﬁed
nine survey papers which attempt to discuss adversarial
machine learning from the context of network security. None
of these previous survey papers have however explored the
vast amount of research work currently ongoing on the topic
of adversarial machine learning in network security in a
manner that categorizes them based on security applications,
problem and feature space dimensional classiﬁcation and
adversarial risk grid map.
Our survey more importantly seeks to distinguish between
adversarial attacks in general, and adversarial machine learn-
ing in context. We note that an adversary may seek to
compromise network security applications in various ways
and this may not be related to adversarial machine learning.
For example in [5] where adversarial attacks in Intrusion
detection systems was reviewed. In our context, adversar-
ial machine learning speciﬁcally addresses the optimization
problem in which a machine learning based network security
solution is being attacked. Many network security solutions
are strictly rules based or hard programming dependent and
do not implement machine learning techniques. Our survey
work does not refer to such adversarial attacks, since they do
not capture the real context of adversarial machine learning
in principle.
III. A PPLICATIONS OF MACHINE LEARNING IN
NETWORK SECURITY
Today’s network as well as next generation network archi-
tectures have become quite complex, and new innovations
of network security solutions are required to protect against
the growing landscape of cyber threats. Machine learning
techniques have been increasingly used to carry out a wide
range of tasks in network security [25] incorporating several
layers of defenses both within the network and at the edge
of the network. In this section, we review and highlight
some applications of machine learning in network security by
classifying them into ﬁve categories as illustrated in Figure
2.
A. Machine Learning for Network Protection
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) are essential solutions
for monitoring events dynamically in a computer network
or system. Essentially there are two types of IDS (signature
based and anomaly based) [26]. Signature based IDS detects
attacks based on the repository of attacks signatures with no
false alarm [27]. However, zero-day attacks can easily by-
pass signature-based IDS. Anomaly IDS [27] uses machine
learning and can detect a new type of attacks and anomalies.
A typical disadvantage of anomaly IDS is the tendency to
generate a signiﬁcant number of false positive alarms.
Hybrid Approach for Alarm Veriﬁcation Sima et al. [28]
designed and built Hybrid Alarm Veriﬁcation System
that requires processing a signiﬁcant number of real-
time alarms, high accuracy in classifying false alarms,
perform historical data analysis. The proposed sys-
tem consists of three components: Machine Learning,Stream processing and Batch processing (Alarm His-
tory). Machine learning model trained ofﬂine and used
for veriﬁcation service that can immediately classify
true or false alarms. They used different machine learn-
ing algorithms in the experiments to show the effective-
ness of their system where the accuracy achieves more
than 90% in a stream of 30K alarms per second [28].
Learning Intrusion Detection Laskov et al. [29] worked
in developing a framework to compare the super-
vised learning (classiﬁcation) and unsupervised learn-
ing (clustering) techniques for detecting intrusions and
malicious. They used different methods in supervised
learning to evaluate the work include k-Nearest Neigh-
bor (kNN), decision trees, Support Vector Machines
(SVM) and Multi-Layer Perception (MLP). Also, k-
means clustering was utilized, with single linkage clus-
tering as unsupervised algorithms. The evaluation was
ran under two scenarios to evaluate how much the
IDS could generalize its knowledge to new malicious
activities. The supervised algorithms showed better
classiﬁcation with the known attacks. The best result
among the supervised algorithm was the decision tree
algorithm whiched achieved 95% true positive and 1%
false positive rate, followed by MLP, SVM and then
KNN. If there were new attacks not previously seen in
the training data, the accuracy decreases signiﬁcantly.
However, the unsupervised algorithms performed better
for unseen attacks and did not show signiﬁcant differ-
ence in accuracy for seen and unseen attacks [29].
B. Machine Learning for Endpoint Protection
Malware detection is a signiﬁcant part of endpoint security
including workstations, servers, cloud instances, and mobile
devices. Malware detection is used to detect and identify
malicious activities caused by malware. With the increase in
the variety of malware activities, the need for automatic de-
tection and classiﬁer ampliﬁes as well. The signature-based
malware detection system is commonly used for existing
malware that has a signature but it not suitable for unknown
malware or zero-day malware. Machine learning can cope
with this increase and discover underlying patterns in large-
scale datasets [30].
Automatic Analysis of Malware Behavior Rieck et al.
[31] successfully proposed a framework for analyzing
malware behavior automatically using various machine
learning techniques. The framework allows clustering
similar malware behaviors into classes and assigns new
malware to these discovered classes. They designed an
incremental approach for the behavior analysis that can
process various malware behaviors and reduce the run-
time defense against malware development comparing
to other analysis methods and provide accurate dis-
covery of novel malware. To implement this automatic
framework, they collected a large number of malware
samples and monitored their behaviors using a sandbox
environment and learn those behaviors using Clustering
and Classiﬁcation algorithms [31].
3