mislead current machine learning network intrusion detection
systems in the internet of things. Each byte in a packet is
represented with word embedding. Feedback from the victim
NIDS is needed by this black box attack to update the
parameters of the generator. The attack success rate depends
on multiple factors like the machine model and the modes
of byte embedding, but it reached 98.42 percent in the best
case.
21) Fooling intrusion detection systems using adversar-
ially autoencoder: Chen et al. [150] introduced AIDAE
(Anti-Intrusion Detection AutoEncoder) framework against
IDSs. AIDAE can produce features matching normal fea-
ture distribution, it also keeps the correlation between the
generated continuous and discrete features. They used Eva-
sion Increase Rate (EIR) to evaluate their attack. The EIR
reﬂects the evasion power by comparing the adversarial
detection rate with the original, i.e. 1-(adversarial detection
rate/original detection rate). EIR was higher than 0.9 in all
their experiments.
22) TANTRA: Sharon et al. [151] presented TANTRA
(Timing-Based Adversarial Network Trafﬁc Reshaping)
which deceives NIDSs by reshaping attack network trafﬁc
using the timestamp attribute. Based on the authors’ evalu-
ation, TANTRA had an extremely high success rate (99.99
percent). However, when TANTRA was tested after training
the NIDSs with both benign and reshaped trafﬁc, its success
rate decreased.
VI. E VALUATING ADVERSARIAL RISK
In discussing adversarial risk, we introduce the concept
of discriminative and directive autonomy of machine learn-
ing models. The two-fold goal of an adversarial risk grid
mapping is to evaluate the likelihood of success of an
adversarial attack against a machine learning model, and
the consequence of that attack if successful. Adversarial risk
often seek to measure the performance of a machine learning
model based on worst case inputs [152]. We present in this
paper, an adversarial risk grid map shown in Figure 8 based
on the level of autonomy of the machine learning model
with respect to the learning technique and task. The concept
of discriminative autonomy and directive autonomy of the
machine learning models represents a novel approach for
evaluating the relative adversarial risk of a machine learning
model.
A. Security by Obscurity in Adversarial Risk
The notion of security by obscurity in adversarial context,
in which defenses are proposed based on obscurity to an
adversary does not truly reﬂect the nature of adversarial
risk in machine learning-based network security applications.
The prevalence of black box adversarial attacks which fool
classiﬁers without having direct access to the model further
demonstrate the weakness in the obscurity approach to
adversarial risk.
As adversarial attacks continue to emerge into real world
production systems, the ability to computationally evaluate
and even optimize adversarial risk becomes invaluable. Whileboth adversarial risk and obscurity have been impossible
to compute directly [152], frameworks for adversarial risk
based on the concept of obscurity have been proposed [153].
B. Adversarial Risk Grid Map
A modiﬁed notion of adversarial risk was proposed in
[154] which suggested that certain classiﬁers inherently have
low adversarial risk. Other works [155] [156] have suggested
a trade-off between standard risks and adversarial risk. This
indicates that with increase in standard accuracy of the
classiﬁer, the adversarial risk of the classiﬁer increases.
Based on our review, a grid map based on the autonomy
of the machine learning model is proposed. We term this as
model autonomy adversarial risk approach since it is based
on the directive and discriminative autonomy of the machine
learning models. The map is shown in Figure 8.
Discriminative Autonomy: The discriminative autonomy
is directly related to the type of task being performed
by the machine learning model. Machine learning tasks
such as classiﬁcation are highly dependent on the input
data. As such, they have lower discriminative or condi-
tional autonomy compared to tasks such as generative
modeling which depend less on the input data when
predicting an outcome.
Directive autonomy: The directive autonomy of a ma-
chine learning model is a function of the machine learn-
ing technique. In supervised machine learning, there is
less directive autonomy since the model needs to be ﬁrst
learned with some form of labeled data. Machine learn-
ing techniques such as reinforcement learning depend
less on a model being learned with any form of training
data and posses much higher directive autonomy.
C. Cross Model vs Cross Dataset Attack
In discussing adversarial risk, the notion of transferability
becomes pertinent. Transferability refers to the fact in which
an adversarial example which is crafted for a speciﬁc deep
learning model, is found to be effective in causing a mis-
classiﬁcation in a different model. This is known as cross-
model adversarial samples. in a similar situation, when the
adversarial sample that was generated by altering a particular
dataset. If that sample is used to attack a deep learning
system that was trained using a different dataset, that is called
a Cross-dataset adversarial sample.
VII. D EFENDING AGAINST ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS
Numerous researchers have aimed to review and classify
defenses against adversarial attacks. Barreno et al. [8] ﬁrst
proposed three broad approaches for defending machine
learning algorithms against adversarial attacks. Regulariza-
tion, Randomization, and Information hiding. Yuan et al. [88]
classiﬁed the defenses into two broad strategies. Proactive
strategies and reactive strategies. Rosenberg et al. [9] orga-
nized the defenses based on the cyber security sub-domains
(malware detection, spam detection, biometric systems, etc.),
in our work, we classify the defenses based on generalized
ML approaches.
19