feature space dimensional classiﬁcation of adversarial attacks
in network security. Also, this is the ﬁrst work to propose
an adversarial machine learning risk grid map in the ﬁeld
of network security based on the directive or discriminative
autonomy of the machine learning algorithms.
Fig. 1. Structure of the Paper
As illustrated in Figure 1, We structure the remainder
of the paper as follows. In Section II, we survey some
related work. In section III, we discuss some applications of
machine learning in network security. In section IV , we begin
with a brief background about adversarial machine learning
followed by a description of our adversarial attack taxonomy.
We also review different adversarial attack methods and
algorithms. In section V , we introduce a classiﬁcation method
for adversarial attacks in network security based on the
network security CIA goals of conﬁdentiality, integrity and
availability. In section VI, we discuss and evaluate adver-
sarial risk in machine learning. In section VII, we review
various approaches for defending against adversarial attacks.
In section VIII, we provide some discussion and lessons
learnt. Finally, in section IX, we add a conclusion for our
survey with guidance for future work.
II. R ELATED WORK
Adversarial attacks have been widely studied in the ﬁeld
of computer vision [6][7][8] with several attack methods
and techniques developed mostly for image recognition
tasks. Researchers have discussed the public safety concern
of adversarial attacks such as in self-driving cars which
could be fooled into mis-classifying a stop sign resulting
in a potentially fatal outcome [13]. In network security, the
consequences of adversarial attacks are equally signiﬁcant[14] especially in areas such as intrusion detection [15]
and malware detection [16] where there have been rapid
progress in the adoption of machine learning for such tasks.
Even though adversarial machine learning has recently
been widely researched in network security, to the best of
our knowledge, there is currently no publication that has
surveyed the vast number of growing research work on
adversarial machine learning in this ﬁeld. Some existing
survey papers we reviewed include Akhtar et al. [17]
which reviewed adversarial attacks against deep learning
in computer vision. Qui et al [18] provided a generalized
survey on adversarial attacks in artiﬁcial intelligence, with
a brief discussion on cloud security, malware detection
and intrusion detection. Liu et al. [19] reviewed security
threats and corresponding defensive techniques of machine
learning focusing on the threats in the learning algorithms.
Rosenberg et al. [9] provided a general review on adversarial
attacks on cyber security domains like; Intrusion detection
systems, URL Detection systems, Biometric Systems, CPSs
(Cyber-Physical Systems), and Industrial Control Systems.
Unlike their work, our review only concentrates on network
security and uses different approaches to classify adversarial
attacks and defenses. Duddu el al. in [10] discussed
various research work on adversarial machine learning in
cyberwarfare, with some mention of adversarial attacks
against malware classiﬁers. Zhang et al. [11] discussed
adversarial attacks as a limitation of deep learning in
mobile and wireless networking but did not consider deep
learning in the context of network security applications.
Buczak et al. [20] in their survey on machine learning-based
cybersecurity intrusion detection focused on complexity
and challenges of machine learning in cybersecurity but
did not review adversarial attacks in their study. Biggio
and Roli [12] provided an historical timeline of adversarial
machine learning in the context of computer vision and
cybersecurity but their work did not provide a detailed
review in the context of network security. Gardiner et al.
[21] in their survey on the security of machine learning
in malware detection, focused on reviewing the Call and
Control (C & C) detection techniques. They also identiﬁed
the weaknesses and explained the limitations of secure
machine learning algorithms in malware detection systems.
Domain speciﬁc surveys on adversarial machine learning
has also been published including Hao et al. [22] in which
various adversarial attacks and defenses in images, graphs
and texts were reviewed. In the ﬁeld of natural language
processing, zhang et.al [23] reviewed various publications in
which deep adversarial attacks and defenses were proposed.
Sun et al. [24] published a survey on adversarial machine
learning in graph data. Akhtar et al. [17] computer vision,
Duddu et al. [10] cyber warfare.
Research Gap With growing interest in the use of ma-
chine learning for network security applications, the signif-
icance of adversarial attacks against such machine learning-
based application have become more prevalent. With con-
tinued increase in the amount of work in this ﬁeld, there
2