Adversarial Defense Methods
Gradient
Masking
[159]Defensive
Distillation
[161]Adversarial
Training
[6]Gradient
Regularization
[162]Detecting
Adversarial Samples
[139]Feature
Reduction
[163]Input
Randomization
[164]Ensemble
Defenses
[165]
Fig. 9. Adversarial Defense Methods
more resilient to adversarial crafting.
However, adversarial training has certain limitations par-
ticularly in the context of adversarial machine learning in net-
work security. First, the adversary may implement a different
attack method other than the one which was used in training
the network. Secondly, the adversary may design adversarial
perturbations for a deep learning model that already has been
trained with adversarial training, and craft new adversarial
perturbations which would make the previous adversarial
training ineffective. It has also been shown that adversarial
training can reduce the performance of the deep learning
models on clean inputs as discussed in [68].
4) Gradient Regularization: Gradient regularization is a
technique that penalizes large changes in the output of some
neural network layer, to adjust machine learning models,
minimize the loss function, increase model robustness and
prevent overﬁtting or underﬁtting. Many researchers tested
this approach as a defense against adversarial attacks, like
Ros et al. [162] who found that training DNNs with gra-
dient regularization improves the robustness to adversarial
perturbations as much or more than adversarial training. They
have also found that combining both approaches (gradient
regularization and adversarial training) achieves greater ro-
bustness. The main drawback of Gradient regularization is
that it doubles the training time per batch.
5) Detecting Adversarial Samples: Several approaches
are used to detect the presence of adversarial samples in the
training phase of a machine-learning model. One of such
approaches proposed by [139] works on the premise that
adversarial samples have a higher uncertainty than clean data
and uses a Bayesian neural network that is in dropout layers
of neural networks to estimate the extent of uncertainty in
the input data to detect the adversarial samples. Other ap-
proaches include the use of probability divergence proposed
by [168] as well as the use of an auxiliary network of the
original network introduced by Metzen et al. in [169]. Ren
et al. [170] also proposed adversarial attack detection and
adversarial sample recognition methods by using the causal
inference technique to establish a causal model to describe
the generation and performance of adversarial samples that
attack DNNs.
6) Feature Reduction: Other potential defenses for adver-
sarial attacks have been proposed. Simple feature reduction
was evaluated by Grosse et al. [163] but was found inade-
quate in defending against adversarial attacks.7) Input Randomization: Some researchers tried random-
ization operations on the input of the model as a defense
against adversarial attacks on machine learning, for example,
Xie et al. [164] tried random resizing and adding random
padding on inputs. Experiments demonstrated that their pro-
posed method is effective. Zhang et al. [56] also tried a
similar method by injecting random Gaussian noise. These
approaches have multiple advantages such as simplicity, low
computational complexity, and eliminating the need for addi-
tional training. The main disadvantage is using this defense
technique in the network security domain could change the
functionality of the inputs (Executables, Packets, etc.). In our
opinion, this method needs to be evaluated in the network
security domain.
8) Ensemble Defenses: Similar to the idea of ensem-
ble learning which combines one or more machine learn-
ing techniques, researchers have also proposed the use of
multiple defense strategies as a defense technique against
adversarial samples. PixelDefend was proposed by [165] to
combine adversarial detecting techniques with one or more
other methods for creating a more robust defense against
adversarial attacks.
VIII. D ISCUSSION AND LESSONS LEARNT
This section discusses several key lessons learnt through
our survey on adversarial attacks against ML in network
security.
A. Increased Adversarial Risk
We observed an increased risk of adversarial vulnerability
of machine learning models in network security with reduced
discriminative autonomy and directive autonomy. Similarly,
we observed a reduced risk of adversarial vulnerability with
increased discriminative autonomy and directive autonomy.
As illustrated in the adversarial risk grid map shown in
Figure 8, the discriminative autonomy directly relates to
the machine learning tasks while the directive autonomy
relates to the machine learning technique. The reason for
the adversarial sensitivity of the machine learning models
to the discriminative and directive autonomy based risk grid
map is still an area of open research.
Previous approaches on making machine learning in net-
work security more secure have advocated the development
of machine learning models that are resilient to adversarial
attacks. In this survey, we introduced the concept of an
element of reduced risk of adversarial attacks based on an
21