rather than images. As a result, the perturbed features
are more diverse and heterogeneous. The consequence
of this is that it becomes more difﬁcult to defend
against adversarial attacks in network security due to
the heterogeneity , hence, transferability and universal
defenses against . It should be noted that signiﬁcant
strides have been made in computer vision, with re-
gards to developing universal defences but this is still
an infant research area in network security. Also, the
feature varies greatly based on the network security
application. In most cases, the features used in the ma-
chine learning classiﬁcation are also the features that
are perturbed in generating the adversarial samples.
IX. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We present a ﬁrst of its kind survey on adversarial attacks
on machine learning in network security. The previous survey
[17] that we reviewed had only discussed adversarial attacks
against deep learning in computer vision. We introduced a
new classiﬁcation for adversarial attacks based on applica-
tions of machine learning in network security and developed
a matrix to correlate the various types of adversarial attacks
with a taxonomy-based classiﬁcation to determine their ef-
fectiveness in causing a misclassiﬁcation. We also presented
a novel idea of the concept of an adversarial risk grid map
for machine learning in network security.
In our review on defenses against adversarial attacks,
although there were numerous proposed defenses against
speciﬁc adversarial attacks, research on generalized defenses
against adversarial attacks is still not well established [172].
In our future work, we would study generalized defenses
against adversarial attacks to understand if a generalized
approach towards adversarial defenses will be effectively
attainable. In addition, we would examine the interpretability
of the adversarial risk to further understand why the reduced
adversarial vulnerability occurs, and its implications for other
applications of machine learning such as computer vision and
natural language processing.
Future Work Based on our research, adversarial attack
has mostly been carried out on data at rest, with very
few successful attempts of adversarial attacks on data in
transit, or streaming data such as [174] [175]. However, in
network security domains such as in the ﬁeld of intrusion
detection, realistic adversarial attacks will be carried out on
data in transit. Hence, more research is needed in this area to
understand the potential risks of adversarial attacks against
data in transit and the possible defense techniques.
Adversarial attack against federated learning [176] is still
an open area of research. Federated learning [177], which
is quite different from distributed computation, involves the
situation in which each client performs the machine learning
computation without sending the data to the cloud. As such,
the cloud provider does not have a complete view of the
machine learning model with signiﬁcant gains for privacy
and conﬁdentiality.
Adversarial attacks were demonstrated to affect only clas-
siﬁer and clustering tasks in network security. From thereviewed literature of over ﬁfty attacks against machine
learning in network security, there has been no attempt to
implement adversarial attacks against any other task in net-
work security except classiﬁcation and clustering tasks. This
is consistent with our adversarial risk grid map illustrated
in Figure 8 in which we posit that adversarial risk increases
based on the type of network security task which is being
performed. Our study notes that there are diverse adversaries
in network security compared to computer vision. as such,
there is even more relevant arms race situation in network
security than in computer vision
Several authors have shown that deep learning can be
performed on data that is encrypted[178] [179] [180]. But
in our study, we observe that encrypted data has not been
adversarial defeated. Even though, most data in network
security is encrypted, adversarial attacks or the ability to
generate adversarial samples against encrypted data is an area
of open research. As such, it is a promising idea, subject
to future research, to stipulate that performing encryption
before applying machine learning to the data, is a trusted
and proven defense against adversarial machine learning in
network security.
The use of deep learning as a technique for encryption
is quite restrictive [181]. This is mostly due to the com-
putational costs of deep learning. Research is also required
to understand the effects of adversarial attacks against deep
learning for encryption.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) through
the NSERC Discovery Grant program.
REFERENCES
[1] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harness-
ing adversarial examples (2014),” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572 .
[2] J. Kos, I. Fischer, and D. Song, “Adversarial examples for generative
models,” in 2018 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW) ,
pp. 36–42, IEEE, 2018.
[3] S.-M. Moosavi-Dezfooli, A. Fawzi, and P. Frossard, “Deepfool:
a simple and accurate method to fool deep neural networks,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pp. 2574–2582, 2016.
[4] N. Papernot, P. McDaniel, S. Jha, M. Fredrikson, Z. B. Celik, and
A. Swami, “The limitations of deep learning in adversarial settings,”
inSecurity and Privacy (EuroS&P), 2016 IEEE European Symposium
on, pp. 372–387, IEEE, 2016.
[5] I. Corona, G. Giacinto, and F. Roli, “Adversarial attacks against
intrusion detection systems: Taxonomy, solutions and open issues,”
Information Sciences , vol. 239, pp. 201–225, 2013.
[6] A. Madry, A. Makelov, L. Schmidt, D. Tsipras, and A. Vladu,
“Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1706.06083 , 2017.
[7] N. Papernot, P. McDaniel, I. Goodfellow, S. Jha, Z. B. Celik, and
A. Swami, “Practical black-box attacks against machine learning,” in
Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Asia Conference on Computer and
Communications Security , pp. 506–519, ACM, 2017.
[8] M. Barreno, B. Nelson, R. Sears, A. D. Joseph, and J. D. Tygar,
“Can machine learning be secure?,” in Proceedings of the 2006 ACM
Symposium on Information, computer and communications security ,
pp. 16–25, ACM, 2006.
[9] I. Rosenberg, A. Shabtai, Y . Elovici, and L. Rokach, “Adversarial
machine learning attacks and defense methods in the cyber security
domain,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) , vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1–36,
2021.
23