adversarial examples that maximize the loss, and then they
inject them in the training time. In some conditions, their
attack’s evasion rate exceeded 99 percent.
6) Investigating Adversarial Attacks against Network In-
trusion Detection Systems in SDNs: With the increasing
deployment of ML-based NIDSs which leverage the global
network visibility offered by SDNs, the threat of vulnera-
bility of the ML algorithms to adversarial attacks is also
considered. Their study considered a use-case example of a
SYN Flood DDoS attack, in which they demonstrated the
ability to reduce the NIDS detection accuracy from 100% to
0% on multiple classiﬁers using evasion attacks. This was
one of the most successful attempts of adversarial attacks
against Network Intrusion Detections Systems, proposed by
Aiken et al [130]. Their experimental platform was based
on ML based NIDS for Software deﬁned networks called
Neptune. In their study, they demonstrated that with the
perturbation of a few features, the detection accuracy of a
speciﬁc SYN ﬂood Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS)
attack by Neptune decreases from 100% to 0% across a
number of classiﬁers. Furthermore, they proposed an ad-
versarial test suite named Hydra to evaluate the impact
of adversarial evasion classiﬁers against an anomaly-based
NIDS - Neptune. Their study considered several classiﬁers
and machine learning algorithms, proving that clustering al-
gorithms were more robust to adversarial samples compared
to other ML types. Speciﬁcally, KNN proved to be the most
robust classiﬁer against the adversarial attacks performed
within their research, with only one combination of feature
perturbations halving the detection accuracy from 100% to
50%. In contrast, Random forest, LR, and Support vector
machines were generally vulnerable to the same perturba-
tions resulting in similar detection accuracy reductions. The
concept of attack generalization was also studied in this
publication, using their Neptune NIDS framework as the
adversarial target and which was capable of implementing
multiple classiﬁers.
7) IoT Network Security from the Perspective of Adver-
sarial Deep Learning: . The effect of adversarial attacks
on wireless sensor networks was studied by Sagduyu et.
al. [131]. The study experimented with adversarial attacks
within the context of three types of over-the-air (OTA) wire-
less attacks, namely within the jamming, spectrum poisoning,
and priority violation attack. Their study demonstrated how
adversarial attacks can lead to signiﬁcant loss in throughput,
by fooling an IoT transmitter into making a wrong trans-
mit decision in the test phase. This was also an evasion
attack against the machine learning model. In their study,
they considered an IoT network where an IoT transmitter
predicts if a channel status is idle or busy, by using deep
learning algorithms. Their study showed that deep learning
was effective in performing this task. Then, adversarial
machine learning as applied in three contexts - jamming,
spectrum poisoning and priority violation attakcs. A defense
system based on stackelberg game showed to be an effective
mitigation against adversarial machine learning against ioT
networks. This defense technique is however considered nottransferable as it was not proven to be generalizable across
multiple adversarial attack scenarios.
Several uses of deep learning for anomaly detection
in wireless communication systems have been commonly
implemented including channel decoding, [132], wireless
resource allocation [133] [134] and radio signal (modulation)
classiﬁcation [135]. Uses of Machine Learning in IoT include
anomaly detection [136], device identiﬁcation [137] [138],
and signal authentication [139].
8) Adversarial Attacks on Deep-Learning Based Radio
Signal Classiﬁcation: The robustness of deep learning based
algorithms for the wireless physical layer was also stud-
ied within the context of radio radio signal (modulation)
classiﬁcation tasks. Sadeghi [140] investigated the use of
convolutional neural networks in which they developed both
white-box and blackbox adversarial attacks for a DL based
modulation classiﬁcation. In their study, a VT-CNN was
used as the classiﬁer. The outcome of their research showed
that Signiﬁcantly less transmit power is required by the
attacker in order to cause misclassiﬁcation in the case of
adversarial machine learning, as compared to the case of
conventional jamming (where the attacker transmits only
random noise). Hence, adversarial machine learning is an
alternative to signal jamming with random noise, with less
resource required in terms of transmit power. Their research
also created a a computational efﬁcient algorithm for crafting
universal adversarial perturbations (UAP), which can cause
a misclasiﬁcation of the deep learning model irrespective of
the input provided to the model. Furthermore, their study
revealed an interesting property known as the Shift invariant
Property of their attack method, which makes the attack
generalizable across various deep learning models, without
having any knowledge of the nature of the model, thus
implying a black-box attack. Their tests showed that after
applying these attacks, the targeted model accuracy could
drop from 75 to 0 percent in the cases of a high perturbation-
to-noise ratio (ratio of the perturbation power to the noise
power).
9) Addressing Adversarial Attacks Against Security Sys-
tems Based on Machine Learning: Apruzzese et al. [141]
proposed an attack and defense method against several
types machine learning algorithms in for network intrusion
detection systems. In their study, they evaluated both poison-
ing and evasive adversarial attacks against three supervised
machine learning algorithms. The three algorithms namely
Random forest, K-nearest neighbour and Artiﬁcial Neural
Network (multi-layer perceptron) MLP were used to develop
a network intrusion detection system. Their poisoning and
evasion attack severity averaged 70.1 and 66.4 percent,
respectively. They also demonstrated that adversarial training
was effective in improving the robustness of deep learning
based network intrusion detection systems.
10) Adversarial Deep Learning for Cognitive Radio Secu-
rity: Jamming Attack and Defense Strategies: Shi et al. [142]
proposed an adversarial machine learning approach to launch
jamming attacks on wireless communications and introduces
a defense strategy. The study bases on the premise that in
17