could utilize the conﬁdence information of a model to
result in model inversion attacks. The attack, which
is implemented as a function called MI-Face attack,
enables an adversary to extract pictures of subjects from
a trained machine learning model.
Inference Attacks: Fredrikson et al. [71] proposed the
attribute inference attack which could be launched either
as a white-box or black-box attack.
Extraction Attacks: Correia-Silva et al. [74] demon-
strated how an adversary could create a substitute model
from a black-box convolutional neural network (CNN)
model by querying the black-box model with random
non-labeled data. A more intriguing aspect of this oracle
type of extraction attack is the fact that dataset used to
persuade the model was not related to original problem
domain. Orekondy et al. [75] proposed Knockoff Nets
which are capable of stealing the functionality of a fully
trained model using a two-step approach. The adversary
ﬁrst obtains predictions from the model by querying a
set of input data, then the data-prediction pairs are used
to create a substitute model known as a "knock-off"
model. Their approach uses a reinforcement learning
approach with demonstrated query efﬁciency and per-
formance gains, compared to other oracle type attacks.
Jagielski et al [70] proposed the Functionally Equivalent
Extraction (FEE) attacks which explore accuracy and
ﬁdelity objectives within the space of model extraction
by improving the query efﬁciency of learning attacks.
Their method is demonstrated to be practical for high
parameter models in the range of millions. In their
attack method, an adversarial model is produced whose
architecture and weights are identical to the oracle.
V. A DVERSARIAL ATTACK CLASSIFICATION
Multiple studies [93] [94] have sought to differentiate
the different domains of network security into multiple
fragmented domains. A common approach for example make
attempts at differentiating malware and spam detection from
intrusion detection [9]. We ﬁnd that this attempt of ﬁne
grained classiﬁcation results in redundancy, since the task of
malware or phishing detection in a network could be consid-
ered an intrusion detection task. As such, in this survey, we
consider cyber attacks against a network as an attempt by an
adversary to intrude the network with a malicious payload.
We identify malicious payload in a network to consist of
three broad types: malicious ﬁles (malware), malicious text
(spam) and malicious url links (phishing). We note that
attackers may use a combination of all three payloads in most
cyber attacks. For example, a spam email may also contain a
link to a malicious url or contain a malicious ﬁle attachment.
This payload approach becomes even more crucial in our
study on adversarial attacks within the network security
domain. We realise from our study that this distinction plays
an important role in providing an accurate classiﬁcation of
adversarial attacks within the network security domain, as
compared to other domains such as computer vision.In this section, we introduce a classiﬁcation method for
adversarial attacks in network security based on network
security task. Our classiﬁcation approach considers the data
object which is being manipulated by the adversary. The
feature scope of the adversarial attack corresponds to the
data object as shown in Figure 7.
For the scope of this study, we consider adversarial attacks
based on the actual payload which is being attacked in
context. When a message is being transmitted from a sender
to a receiver, the payload represents the portion of the
transmitted data that is actually the intended message. For
example, when an email is sent, the payload consist of the
message body, attachments, and URL links. Headers and
metadata which help to facilitate the delivery of the payload
are not considered as part of the payload, within the context
of our study. Hence, the protocol overhead is not considered
as part of the actual data.
Our approach for classifying adversarial attacks in network
security is based off this approach, as shown in Figure 7.
This is known as feature scope based classiﬁcation, which
refers to what features are being manipulated or perturbed
by the adversary in other to generate an adversarial sam-
ple. Adversarial attacks against malware detection, phishing
detection and spam detection applications try to perturb the
payload features such as a binary ﬁle, a URL, or an email
message. These attacks are categorized as adversarial attacks
against endpoint protection systems. Conversely, we also
have adversarial attacks against network anomaly detection
applications and these type of attacks will seek to perturb
protocol features such as the network metadata or protocol
headers. We categorize these attacks as adversarial attacks
against network protection systems.
Network security domain that utilize machine learning
techniques fall into four broad categories namely malware
detection, phishing detection, spam detection and network
anomaly detection. We illustrate this categorization in Figure
7. The ﬁrst three categories of network security tasks are
considered as endpoint based protection. Machine learning
applications within this endpoint based protection category
are typically initiated with payload features. Network protec-
tion primarily constitutes network anomaly detection and ma-
chine learning applications within this category are typically
initiated with protocol features. Our study only considers
active attacks against a network, and passive attacks such as
eavesdropping are not within the scope of this study. Ad-
versarial attacks hence seek to generate adversarial samples
using speciﬁc data objects.
In contrast to adversarial attacks in the ﬁeld of image
processing or computer vision, network security’s adversarial
learning is more challenging. This occurs because even very
slight modiﬁcations to URLs, spam, packets, or malware
bytes of the binary ﬁles can signiﬁcantly alter the function-
ality of the data. In computer vision, the addition of tiny
perturbations to an image sample does not alter the human
perception of the image and same as in speech processing.
Text processing and network security ﬁltering techniques are
similar in this regard since a very slight change in the input
12