Neural Networks, Self Organizing Maps (SOMs) and
K-Means on the dataset. Consistently, Support Vector
Machine achieved the best results. The Biased Support
Vector Machine (BSVM) and NN have an accuracy of
97.99% [34].
Adaptively Detecting Malicious Queries in Web Attacks
Don et al. [35] proposed a new system called AMODS
and learning strategy called SVM HYBRID for de-
tecting web attacks. AMODS is an adaptive system
that aims to periodically update the detection model to
detect the latest web attacks. The SVM HYBRID is
an adaptive learning strategy which was implemented
primarily for reducing manual work. The detection
model was trained using dataset which was obtained
from an academic institute’s web server logs. The
proposed detection model outperformed existing web
attack detection methods with an FP rate of 0.09% and
94.79% F-value. The SVM Hybrid system obtained a
total number of malicious queries equal to 2.78 times
by the popular SVM method. Also, the Web Application
Firewall (WAF) can use malicious queries to update the
signature library. The signiﬁcant queries were used for
updating the detection model which consisted of a meta-
classiﬁer as well as other three base classiﬁers [35].
URLNet -Learning a URL Representation with Deep
Learning for Malicious URL Detection Le et al. [36]
proposed an end-to-end deep learning framework which
did not require sophisticated feature. URLNet was in-
troduced to address several limitations which was found
with the other model approaches. This framework learns
from the URL directly how to perform a nonlinear
URL embedding which then enabled it to successfully
detect various Malicious URLs. Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) were applied to both the characters
and words of each URL to discover the URL embedding
method. They also proposed advanced word-embedding
techniques to deal with uncommon words, which was a
limitation being experienced by other malicious URL
detection systems. The framework then learns from
unknown works at testing phase [36].
D. Machine Learning for User Behavior Analytic
User behavior analytics is a cybersecurity process which
involves analyzing patterns in human behaviors and detecting
anomalies that give an indication of fraudulent activities
or insider threats. Machine learning algorithms are used to
detect such anomalies in user actions such as unusual login
tries and to infer useful knowledge from those patterns.
Authentication with Keystroke Dynamics Revett et al.
[37] proposed a system using Probabilistic Neural Net-
work (PNN) for keystroke dynamics that captures the
typing style of a user. A system comprising of 50 user
login credential keystrokes was evaluated. The authors
[37] used eight attributes to monitor the enrollment
and authentication attempts. An accuracy of 90% was
obtained in classifying legitimate users from imposters.
A comparison of the training time between the PNNsystem and a Multi-Layer Perception Neural Network
(MLPNN) showed that the PNN was four times faster.
Text-based CAPTCHA Strengths and Weaknesses
Bursztein et al. [38] in a study showed that several
well known websites still implemented technologies that
have been proven to be vulnerable to cyber attacks. In
the study, an automated Decaptcha tool was tested on
numerous websites including well known names such as
eBay, Google and Wikipedia. It was observed that 13
out of 15 widely used web technologies were vulnera-
ble to their automated attack. They had a signiﬁcant
success rate for most of the websites. Only Google
and Recaptacha were able to resist to the automated
attack. Their study revealed the need for more robust
CAPTCHA designs in most of the widely used schemes.
Authors recommended that the schemes should not
rely on segmentation alone because it did not provide
sufﬁcient defense against automated attacks.
Social Network Spam Detection K. Lee et al. [39]
proposed social network spam detection that gathers
legitimate and spam proﬁles and feeds them to Support
Vector Machine (SVM) model. The authors selected
two social networks: Twitter and MySpace to evaluate
the proposed machine learning system. They collected
data over months and feed them to the SVM classiﬁer.
The dataset contains 388 legitimate proﬁles and 627
spam proﬁles collected from MySpace, and 104 legiti-
mate proﬁles and 168 proﬁles between promoters and
spammers collected from Twitter. The system achieved
a low false positive rate and high precision up to 70%
for MySpace and 82% for Twitter.
E. Machine Learning for Process Behavior Analytic
Machine learning applications usually necessitate the need
to learn and have some domain knowledge about business
process behaviors in order to detect anomalous behaviors.
Machine learning could be used for determining fraudulent
transactions within banking systems. Also it has been suc-
cessfully used for identifying outliers, classifying types of
fraud and for clustering various business processes.
Anomaly detection in Industrial Control Systems
Kravch et al.[40] performed a successful study on
SecureWater Treatment Testeb (SWat) using Deep Con-
volutional Neural Networks CNN to detect most of
attacks on Industrial Control System (ICS) with a low
false positive. The anomaly detection method was based
on the statistical deviation measurement of the predicted
value. They performed the study using 36 different
attacks from SWat. The authors in [40] proofed that
using 1D convolutional networks in anomaly detection
in ICS outperformed the recurrent networks.
Detecting Credit Card Fraud Traditionally, the Fraud
Detection System uses old transactions data to predict a
new transaction. Fraud Detection System (FDS) should
encounter various potential challenges and difﬁculties
to achieve high accuracy and performance [41]. The
traditional detection method does not solve all problems
5