Fig. 5. Poisoning Attack
access to the Application Programming Interface of
a model, to create a substitute model with malicious
intent. The substitute model typically preserves a signif-
icant part of the functionality of the original model [62].
As a result, the substitute model can then be used for
other types of attacks such as evasion attacks [60]. Or-
acle attacks can be further subdivided into Extraction ,
Inversion and Inference attacks. The objective of an
extraction attack is to deduce model architectural details
such as parameters and weights from an observation of
the model’s output predictions and class probabilities
[70]. Inversion attacks occurs when adversary attempts
to reconstruct the training data. An inference attacks
allows the adversary to identify speciﬁc data points with
the distribution of the training dataset [71].
4) Goal: Traditionally in the ﬁeld of computer vision,
adversarial attacks are regarded in terms of targeted or
reliability attacks [17]. In targeted attacks, the attacker has
a speciﬁc goal with regard to the model decision. Most
commonly, the attacker would aim to induce a deﬁnite pre-
diction from the machine learning model. On the other hand,
a reliability attack occurs when the attacker only seeks to
maximize the prediction error of the machine learning model
without necessarily inducing a speciﬁc outcome. Yevgeny et
al. [14] have noted that the distinction between reliability
and targeted attacks becomes blurred in attacks on binary
classiﬁcation tasks such as malware binary classiﬁcation.
As such, these conventional paradigms of attacker goal
classiﬁcation is not optimal for consideration in network
security. We choose to adopt the CIA triad in this context
and ﬁnd that it is more suitable for adversarial classiﬁcation
of the adversary goals in network security domain.
Conﬁdentiality attack refers to the goal of the attacker to
intercept communication between two parties AandB,
to gain access to private information being exchanged.
This happens within the context of adversarial machine
learning, whereby machine learning techniques are be-
ing used to carry out network security tasks.
Integrity attack seeks to cause a misclassiﬁcation, dif-
ferent from the actual output class which the machine
learning model was trained to predict. Integrity attack
could result in a targeted misclassiﬁcation or a reliability
attack. A targeted misclassiﬁcation attempts to make the
machine learning model to produce a speciﬁc wrong
prediction. A reliability attack results in either a conﬁ-
dence reduction or a misclassiﬁcation to any arbritrary
class apart from the correct class.Availability Attack results in a denial of service situ-
ation for the machine learning model. as a result, the
machine earning model becomes either totally unavail-
able to the user, or the quality is signiﬁcantly degraded
to the extent that the machine learning system becomes
unusable to the end users.
5) Target: In our surveyed work, adversarial attacks are
targeted against a speciﬁc machine learning technique. Sev-
eral successful attempts have been made towards the trans-
ferability of adversarial attacks [72] [73]. However, attacks
that have been targeted towards a speciﬁc machine learning
technique for example unsupervised learning, have not been
successfully transfered towards a another technique for ex-
ample supervised learning. Regarding the physical domain,
it includes input sensors, cameras and output actions.
B. Adversarial Attack Methods and Algorithms
We recall that adversarial attacks could be deployed either
during decision time (evasion attacks) or during training time
(poisoning attacks). In each case, the training algorithm (for
poisoning attacks) or the learned model (for evasion attacks)
is being manipulated with some form of carefully crafted
input known as the adversarial samples. A common trend
among the attack methods below reveals that the robustness
of a machine learning model to a large extent depends on
the ability of an attacker to ﬁnd an adversarial sample that
is as close as possible to the original input. In this section,
we evaluate the primary methods for generating adversarial
samples. It should be noted that recent research has shown
the limitations of some earlier methods that are still listed
here for reference even though more effective methods have
been introduced.
In the previous section IV-A, we described our threat
model for adversarial attacks in network security. In this
section, we introduce a classiﬁcation method for the various
adversarial attack algorithms. As seen in Figure 6 our classi-
ﬁcation method is based on the adversary strategy described
in section IV-A.3.
1) Evasion Attacks: Evasion attacks attempt to mislead
the machine learning system during the testing or inference
phase. Below we highlight adversarial attack methods that
fall within this category of evasion attacks. The attacks
are further divided into Gradient-based andGradient-free
attacks.
Gradient-based attacks: Szegedy et al. [44] studied
how adversarial samples could be generated against
neural networks for image classiﬁcation. The L-BFGS
(Limited Broyden-Fletcher- Goldfarb-Shanno) method
was then introduced, which used an expensive linear
search method to ﬁnd the optimal values of the ad-
versarial samples. In a different approach proposed by
Goodfellow et al. [1] called the Fast Gradient Sign
Method (FGSM), adversarial samples are created by
ﬁnding the maximal direction of positive change in the
loss. This is a faster method than the L-BFGS method
since only a one-step gradient update is performed
along the direction of the sign gradient at each level.
9