Fig. 3. Adversarial Machine Learning
and challenges including imbalanced data where there
is a small chance of transactions are fraudulent. Wrong
classiﬁcation and overlapping data and Fraud detection
cost are other major challenges [41]. Chen et al. [42]
proposed an approach to solving the listed challenges
and problems for Credit Card fraud. They introduced a
system to prevent fraud from the initial use of credit
cards by collecting user data from online questionnaire
based on consumer behavior surveys. They used var-
ious classiﬁers models: decision tree (C5.0, CandRT,
CHAID) and SVM ( linear and radial basis, Kernels
of polynomial, sigmoid). They use three datasets to de-
velop questionnaire-responded transaction (QRT) model
to predict new transaction.
Deep Learning Techniques for Side-Channel Analysis
Prouff et al. [43] deﬁned Side-Channel Analysis as a
type of attack that attempts to leak information from a
system by exploiting some parameters from the physical
environment [43]. This attack was utilizing the running-
time of some cryptographic computation, especially in
the block ciphers. The capability of a system to resist
side-channel attacks (SCA) requires an evaluation strat-
egy that focuses on deducing the relationship between
the device behavior and the sensitivity of the infor-
mation that is common in classical cryptography. The
authors in [43] focused on proposing an extensive study
of using deep learning algorithms in the Side-Channel
Analysis. Also, they focused on the hyper-parameters
selection to help in designing new deep learning classi-
ﬁer and models. They conﬁrmed that the Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN) models are better in detecting
SCA. Their proposal system outperformed the other
tested models on highly desynchronized traces and had
the best performance as well on small desynchronized
trace [43].
IV. A DVERSARIAL MACHINE LEARNING
Adversarial attacks have been studied for more than a
decade now [12]. However, the ﬁrst notable discovery in
adversarial attacks for computer vision was by Szegedy et
al. [44] who reported that a small perturbation in the form
of a carefully crafted input could confuse a deep neural
network to misclassify an image object. Other researchers
have demonstrated the use of adversarial attacks beyond
image classiﬁcation [45][46][47][48].
In adversarial machine learning, an adversary seeks toconfuse a machine learning model into making a wrong
decision. The adversary achieves this by modifying the input
data that is fed to the machine learning model either during
the training phase (poisoning attack) [49] or during the
inference phase (evasion attack) [50].
The reason behind adversarial examples has been linked to
the fact that most machine learning models remain overtly
attached to the superﬁcial statistics of the input data [51]
[52] . This attachment to the input data makes the machine
learning highly sensitive to distribution shift, resulting in a
disparity between semantic changes and a decision change
[1].
We consider the security model for use of machine learn-
ing in network security as a combination of four components
namely the attack surface, threat model, adversarial frame-
work and adversarial risk. An alternative adversarial model
was proposed in [53] which modeled the adversary using a
threefold approach based on knowledge, goals and capabil-
ity. The attack surface identiﬁes the various attack vectors
along a typical machine learning data processing pipeline
in network security related applications. The threat model
provides a system abstraction for proﬁling the adversary’s
capabilities and the potential threats that are associated. The
adversarial framework details our approach for classifying
the various attacks and defenses within each network security
domain and lastly the adversarial risk provides an evaluation
of the likelihood and severity of adversarial attacks within a
network security system.
A major component of an adversarial attack is the ad-
versarial sample. As illustrated in Figure 3, an adversarial
sample consists of an input to a machine learning model
which has been perturbed. For a particular dataset with
features x and label y, a corresponding adversarial sample
is a speciﬁc data point x’ which causes a classiﬁer c to
predict a different label on x’ other than y, but x’ is
almost indistinguishable from x. The adversarial samples
are created using one of many optimization methods known
as adversarial attack methods. Crafting adversarial samples
involves solving an optimization problem to determine the
minimum perturbation which maximizes the loss for the
neural network
Considering an input x, and a classiﬁer f, the optimization
goal for the adversary is to compute such perturbation with a
s mall norm, measured w.r.t some distance metric, that would
modify the output of the classiﬁer such that
f(x+)6=f(x)
6