original input can be used to distort the initial input to
create an adversarial sample. MalGAN proposed by [100]
leverages on generative modeling techniques to evade black-
box malware detection systems with a detection rate close
to zero.
9) GAPGAN: Yuan et al. [101] introduced GAPGAN,
an adversarial attack framework that generates adversarial
examples against binaries-based malware detection through
GANs. Adversarial perturbations are appended to the original
malware binaries to maintain its malicious functionality.
They tested GAPGAN on deep learning and MalConv de-
tectors. GAPGAN’s success rate reached 100 percent attack
with appending payloads of 2.5 percent of the total length
of the original data.
10) Black-Box Attacks against RNN Based Malware De-
tection Algorithms: Hu et al. [55] implemented a generative
recurrent neural network (RNN) which generates sequential
adversarial samples. In their study, the Gumbel-Softmax
approach is used to approximate generated discrete API’s.
Before their attack, the victim’s RNN malware detection rates
ranged from 90.74 to 93.87 percent. After their adversarial
attack, the detection rates on adversarial examples ranged
from 0.44 to 3.03 percent.
11) Adversarial Deep Learning for Robust Detection of
Binary Encoded Malware: Al-Dujaili et al [102] proposed
a method of generating adversarial malware samples with a
focus on preserving the malicious functionality of the binary
encoded ﬁles. They also introduce a mitigation framework
known as SLEIPNIR which employs the saddle-point opti-
mization technique to learn malware detection models.
12) Deceiving End-to-End Deep Learning Malware De-
tectors using Adversarial Examples: The authors Kreuk et
al. [103] introduced a novel approach for creating adversarial
malware samples by injecting a small sequence of bytes
to the binary ﬁle. The approach was also found to be
transferable across different malware ﬁles and families. In
their study, they evaluated the effectiveness of adversarial
malware samples based on ﬁve metrics namely (1) File
transferability, (2) Spatial Invariance (3) payload size, (4)
entropy (5) Functionality preservation. Their study was based
on only white box attacks and was not evaluated as white box
scenarios. Their injection procedure resulted in an evasion
rate of 99.21 and 98.83 percent.
13) Adversarial Examples on Discrete Sequences for
Beating Whole-Binary Malware Detection: The authors
[104] focus on adversarial attacks against Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) based end to end malware detectors.
End to end malware detectors such as Malconv [105] func-
tion quite different from most deep learning based malware
detectors in the sense that they take the whole malware
binary ﬁle as an input. To achieve their aim, a loss function
was which functions as a surrogate loss function proposed
which enforces the modiﬁcations in the embedding space.
Thus, the authors were able to modify the embedding vector
in order to reconstruct the modiﬁed binary, which becomes
the adversarial malware sample. To preserve the functionality
of the malware binary, a unique section of payload bytesis perturbed and appended to the original malware binary
ﬁle instead of perturbing the original binary ﬁle. Thus by
adding perturbations in the embedding vector space and
reconstructing new binary ﬁles from the adversarial example.
This attack’s evasion rate reached 100 percent.
14) Adversarial-Example Attacks Toward Android Mal-
ware Detection System: . MalGAN [100] proposed a black-
box adversarial-example attacks toward Android malware
detection, in which adversarial examples are generated using
a generative adversarial network (GAN) without requiring
the knowledge about the target. Unfortunately, the effec-
tiveness of Malgan is affected, if a ﬁrewall is incorporated
into the malware detection system. Adversarial attacks were
also studied against cloud-based Android malware detection
systems. Li et al. proposed a bi-objective GAN type adversar-
ial attack against android malware detection systems. Their
technique has the novelty of implementing a GAN with two
discriminators in which one discriminator contends against
the ﬁrewall while the other discriminator contends against
the malware detector. This study was the ﬁrst study to target
a ﬁrewall-equipped Android malware detection system.
15) Adversarial malware sample generation method
based on the prototype of deep learning detector: Qiaoa
et al.[106] presented a method for generating adversarial
malware to fool the deep learning-based malware detection
systems. The post-hoc interpretability of deep learning is
used by the authors to direct the malware ﬁle’s updates.
Based on their experiments, the time to generate their ad-
versarial malware is less than other attacks. The fooling rate
of this attack reached 92 percent.
16) Slack Attacks: A byte-based convolutional neural
network (MalConv) was introduced by Raff et al. [107].
Unlike image perturbation attacks [44], where the ﬁdelity of
the image is of little concern, attacks that alter the binaries
of malware ﬁles must maintain the semantic ﬁdelity of
the original ﬁle because altering the bytes of the malware
arbitrarily could affect the malicious effect of the malware.
This problem could be solved by appending adversarial noise
to the end of the binary [48]. This prevents the added
noise from affecting the malware functionality. The Random
Append attack and Gradient Append attacks are two types of
append attacks which work by appending byte values from
a uniform distribution sample and gradually modifying the
appended byte values using the input gradient value. Two
additional variations of append attacks; the benign append
and the FGM Append were introduced by Suciu et al. [108]
which improves the long convergence time experienced in
previous attacks. When malware binaries have exceeded the
model’s maximum size, it is impossible to append additional
bytes to them. Hence a slack attack proposed by Suciu et
al. [108] exploits the existing bytes of the malware binaries.
The most common form of the slack attack is the Slack FGM
Attack which deﬁnes a set of slack bytes that can be freely
modiﬁed without breaking the malware functionality.
17) Attack and Defense of Dynamic Analysis-Based, Ad-
versarial Neural Malware Detection Models: Stokes et. al
[109] proposed adversarial attacks against dynamic analysis-
14