a cognitive radio network, a typical transmitter workﬂow
includes the task of sensing available channels, identifying
spectrum opportunities, and then transmitting data to the
receiver in idle channels. As machine learning techniques
have been progressively applied in this context, such as im-
plementing a deep learning classiﬁer for the classiﬁcation of
channels as either idle or busy, attackers seek to compromise
the machine learning classiﬁer. Even though the attacker
has no knowledge of the deep learning classiﬁer, i.e this
is a black box attack. Their experiments showed that their
adversarial deep learning attack reduced the transmission
success rate from 73.79 to 2.91 percent. The authors also
propose a defense technique for the deep learning classiﬁer
that works by allowing the transmitter to deliberately takes
wrong actions in predetermined time slots in order to mislead
the adversary.
11) Performance Evaluation of Physical Attacks against
E2E Autoencoder over Rayleigh Fading Channel: Albaseer
et. al [67] investigated the vulnerabilities of autoencoder
E2E with Rayleigh channel mode. Their study demonstrated
the vulnerability of auntoencoder deep learning models to
adversarial samples when used in end-to-end wireless com-
munication systems. Both white-box and black box attacks
were launched against and e2e model that was based on a
realistic channel model. Their results showed that adversarial
attacks had more signiﬁcant impacts compared to jamming
attack.
12) Physical adversarial attacks against end-to-end au-
toencoder communication systems: Sadeghi et al. [68] also
showed that end to end learning of wireless communica-
tion systems are vulnerable to physical adversarial attacks.
Similar to the work of Albaseer et al. [67], their study
demonstrates that adversarial attacks are more destructive
than jamming attacks.
13) Targeted Adversarial Examples Against RF Deep
Classiﬁers: Kokalj-Filipovic et al. [143] studied the effect
of adversarial samples on machine learning based classiﬁers
for radio frequency signals. The goal of their research was to
verify if adversarial samples against machine learning based
classiﬁcation in of radio frequency signals was as effects in
the physical world (i.e when launched over the air - OTA)
as it was in theoretical settings.
14) Deep Learning-Based Intrusion Detection With Ad-
versaries: Wang et al. [15] evaluated the vulnerabilities of
deep learning-based IDS among state-of-the-art adversarial
attack algorithms, including FGSM, JSMA, Deepfool, and
CW using NSL-KDD dataset. They recognize feature pat-
terns for the attack algorithms, and they demonstrated that
modifying a limited number of features is better for most
of the adversaries, such as JSMA attacks. JSMA attacks
distinguish adversaries in terms of applicability. They noticed
how feature selection to be perturbed by an adversary varies
depending on the degree of signiﬁcance.
15) Evaluating Deep Learning-Based Network Intrusion
Detection System in Adversarial Environment: Peng et al.
[144] evaluated the developed scalable ENIDS framework
robustness in the adversarial environment against variousattacks ( MI-FGSM, L-BFGS, PGD, and SPSA) using NSD-
KDD dataset. They compare different well-known models,
including SVM, RF, and LR, with the proposed framework
under adversarial attacks. They use different metrics to
compare the model robustness, including accuracy(ACC),
Precision Rate (PR), Recall Rate (RR), F-Sorce (FS), and
Success Rate (SR).
16) Analyzing adversarial attacks against deep learning
for intrusion detection in IoT networks: Ibitoye et al. [145]
studied the adversarial samples effectiveness against deep
learning-based Intrusion Detection System (IDS) within the
context of an IoT network. The authors provide a com-
prehensive comparison between two different deep learning
model, a Self-normalizing Neural Network (SNN) and a
Feed-forward Neural Network (FNN). They utilize and study
input features normalization in a deep learning-based IDS in
an adversarial environment. It increases the robustness of
the deep learning model against various adversarial attacks
(FGSM, BIM, and PGD).
17) Online anomaly detection under adversarial impact:
Kloft et al. [146] studied the effect of a poisoning attack
of training data on online centroid anomaly detection (IDS)
with a ﬁnite sliding window. They study the poising attack
with limited and full control of the training dataset using
real HTTP trafﬁc from a web server of Fraunhofer FIRST
institute. This study shows if the attacker has full control
of the data, is it easy to attack while when applying ad-
ditional constraints to have limited control of the training
data by assuming that attacker can inject a small fraction
of the training dataset, the attack fails. Therefore, adding
those constraints adds protection approaches against poising
attacks. Their results show that they cannot consider their
method secure if the attacker has full control of the dataset.
18) Security evaluation of pattern classiﬁers under attack:
Biggio et al. [147] proposed a framework for empirical
security evaluation that can be applied in different three
real-life applications, including Intrusion detection system,
spam ﬁltering, Biometric Authentication. They proposed an
algorithm to sample training and testing sets. They evaluate
their framework performance under causative adversarial
attack using SVM and LR algorithm. For IDS, they used a
public data set of a web-server with 205 malicious samples
collected in ﬁve days in 2006. Authors recommend the
designer of classiﬁers to follow to use their framework to
evaluate the security of the classiﬁer.
19) Evading Machine Learning Botnet Detection Models
via Deep Reinforcement Learning: Wu et al. [148] intro-
duced a generic black-box attack against botnet detection
machine learning models. The authors of this paper use
deep reinforcement learning (DRL) to generate adversarial
trafﬁc ﬂows to deceive the detection models. A reinforcement
learning agent updates the adversarial samples to change the
temporal and spatial features of the trafﬁc ﬂows without
altering the original functionality and executability. Their
attack’s evasion rate ranged from 69.3 to 80.4 percent.
20) Attack-GAN: Cheng et al. [149] proposed Attack-
GAN to generate malicious adversarial raw packets that can
18