Fig. 8. Adversarial Risk Grid Map
Since adversarial examples represent a worst-case scenario
of a distribution shift, the task of generating an adversar-
ial sample is a non-convex optimization problem that can
only be approximately solved. Adversarial attack methods
are mostly optimization algorithms in search for a lower
boundary perturbation that corresponds to an adversarial
sample [157] . These optimization algorithms often result
in high frequency outputs [158]. This however makes the
defense methods against this adversarial samples vulnerable
to adversarial samples that are generated within a low-
frequency subspace.
In this section, we provide the most common defense
methods in use today and classify them based on the strategy
and approach. The reviewed defense methods are shown in
Figure 9 below.
1) Gradient Masking: Since most method of adversarial
attacks are based on the using of gradient, the gradient
masking method modiﬁes a machine learning model in an
attempt to obscure its gradient from an attacker. Nayebi
et al [159] demonstrated the effect of gradient masking by
saturating the sigmoid network which results in a vanishing
gradient effect in gradient-based attacks. Authors force the
neural networks to works in nonlinear saturating system.
By using Jacobian regularization for each network layer
including the output layer, the model becomes non sensi-
tive of perturbations that are generated using fast gradient
sign method (FGSM) and iterative adversarial attacks[159].
However, [160] indicate that gradient masking react as over-
ﬁtting in their experiments.
2) Defensive Distillation: Distillation technique was orig-
inally proposed by Hinton et al. [161] for transferring
knowledge from large neural networks to smaller ones. To
implement the distillation approach, Hinton et al. authors
built 10 DNN models with same architecture and training
method and use soft targets to avoid overﬁtting that occurwhen using hard targets. They proved in their experiments
that ensemble model is able to transfer knowledge to the
distilled model better than individual models. However, en-
semble requires large computation models that have large
networks and large datasets. Therefore, they use learning
specialist models that each use a subset of dataset classes
to reduce the amount of computation [161]. Also, it was
adapted by Papernot et al. [89] to defend against adversarial
crafting by using the output of the original neural network
to train a smaller network rather than using the distillation
as originally proposed by Hinton. Defensive distillation was
initially tested against adversarial attacks in computer vision,
but further research is required to determine its effectiveness
in other applications such as malware detection.
3) Adversarial Training: Adversarial training [6] is a
method that aims to increase the robustness of a machine
learning model to adversarial samples by minimizing the
lossLon data/label pairs fXi;yigwhile maximizing the
corresponding loss function. Szegedy et al. [44] originally
proposed a three-step method known as adversarial training
for defending against adversarial attacks. 1, Train the classi-
ﬁer on the original dataset 2, Generate adversarial samples
3, Iterate additional training epochs using the adversarial
samples. Generally, adversarial training is based on min-max
formulation that solves two problems: attacks as an inner
maximization problem and defenses as an outer minimization
problem to achieve optimization [6]. The inner maximization
intents to generate adversarial samples version that results
to maximize the model loss. Where the outer minimization
intents to minimize the loss by ﬁnding model parameters
that build a more robust model with less adversarial loss
[6]. Numerous researchers tested and evaluated the effect of
adversarial training in the network security domain [166],
[167]. They concluded that it improves the classiﬁcation
performance of the machine learning model and makes it
20