Fig. 2. Machine Learning Applications in Network Security
Automated Multi-level Malware Detection System
In [32], authors proposed Advanced Virtual Ma-
chine Monitor-based guest-assisted Automated Multi-
level Malware Detection System (AMMDS) that affect
both Virtual Machine Introspection (VMI) and Memory
Forensic Analysis (MFA) techniques to mitigate in real
time symptoms of stealthily hidden processes on guest
OS [32]. They use different machine learning techniques
such as Logistic Regression, Random Forest, Naive
Bayes, Random Tree, Sequential Minimal Optimization
(SMO), and J48 to evaluate the AMMDS and the results
achieve 100%.
Classiﬁcation of Malware System Call Sequences
Kolosnjaji et al. [30] focused on the utilization of neural
networks by stacking layers according to deep learning
to improve the classiﬁcation of newly retrieved malware
samples into a predeﬁned set of malware classes. They
constructed Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) layers for modeling
System Call Sequences. The sequences used by the
CNN layers was based on a set of n-grams. The
presence of the n-grams and their relation were counted
in a behavioral trace. The RNN on the other hand used
sequential information to train the model. A dependence
between the system call appearance and the system call
sequence was however maintained. If this model was
trained properly, it usually provided better accuracy on
subsequent data and most often captured more training
set information. This deep learning technique for cap-
turing the relation between the n-grams in the system
call sequences was deemed to be relatively efﬁcient as
it achieved 90% average accuracy, precision and recallfor most of the malware families [30].
A Hybrid Malicious Code Detection Method Li et
al. [33] proposed a hybrid malicious code detection
scheme based on AutoEncoder and Deep Belief Net-
works (DBN). They used the AutoEncoder to reduce the
dimensionality of data by extracting the main features.
Then they used the DBN that composed multilayer
Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBM) and a layer of
BP neural network to detect malicious code. The BP
neural network has an input vector from the last layer
of RBM based on unsupervised learning and then use
supervised learning in the BP neural network. They
achieved the Optimal hybrid model. The experiment
results that are veriﬁed by KDDCUP’99 dataset show
higher accuracy compared to a single DBN and reduce
the time complexity [33].
C. Machine Learning for Application Security
Various machine learning tasks used for application se-
curity including malicious web attack detection, phishing
detection and spam detection.
Detection of Phishing Attacks Basnet et al. [34] studied
and compared the effectiveness of using different ma-
chine learning algorithms for classiﬁcation of phishing
emails using many novel input features that helps in de-
tecting phishing attacks. The training dataset is labeled
with phishing or legitimate email. They used unsuper-
vised learning to extract features without prior training
directly and provides fast and reliable knowledge from
the dataset. They used 4000 emails in total, A total of
2000 emails used for testing. They used Support Vector
Machines (SVM), Leave One Model Out, Biased SVM,
4