The Threat of Adversarial Attacks Against Machine Learning in
Network Security: A Survey
Olakunle Ibitoye, Rana Abou-Khamis, Mohamed el Shehaby, Ashraf Matrawy
and M. Omair Shaﬁq
Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada
Emails: Kunle.Ibitoye@carleton.ca, Rana.Aboukhamis@carleton.ca,
MohamedelShehaby@cmail.carleton.ca, Ashraf.Matrawy@carleton.ca,
Omair.Shafiq@carleton.ca
Abstract — Machine learning models have made many deci-
sion support systems to be faster, more accurate and more
efﬁcient. However, applications of machine learning in network
security face more disproportionate threat of active adversarial
attacks compared to other domains. This is because machine
learning applications in network security such as malware
detection, intrusion detection, and spam ﬁltering are by them-
selves adversarial in nature. In what could be considered
an arm’s race between attackers and defenders, adversaries
constantly probe machine learning systems with inputs which
are explicitly designed to bypass the system and induce a
wrong prediction. In this survey, we ﬁrst provide a taxonomy
of machine learning techniques, tasks, and depth. We then
introduce a classiﬁcation of machine learning in network secu-
rity applications. Next, we examine various adversarial attacks
against machine learning in network security and introduce
two classiﬁcation approaches for adversarial attacks in network
security. First, we classify adversarial attacks in network
security based on a taxonomy of network security applications.
Secondly, we categorize adversarial attacks in network security
into a problem space vs. feature space dimensional classiﬁcation
model. We then analyze the various defenses against adversarial
attacks on machine learning-based network security applica-
tions. We conclude by introducing an adversarial risk grid
map and evaluate several existing adversarial attacks against
machine learning in network security using the risk grid map.
We also identify where each attack classiﬁcation resides within
the adversarial risk grid map.
Keywords: Machine Learning, Adversarial samples, Net-
work security
I. I NTRODUCTION
There has been an ever-increasing application of machine
learning and deep learning techniques in network security.
One key advantage of machine learning is that it makes
optimal decisions more feasible.
It, however, introduces a new challenge since security and
robustness of these models is usually not a huge consid-
eration for machine learning algorithm designers who are
more focused on designing effective and efﬁcient models.
This creates room for various forms of attack models against
machine learning-based network security applications.
Researchers [1][2][3][4] have shown that the presence
of adversarial samples can easily fool machine learning
systems. Adversarial samples are specially crafted inputs that
cause a machine learning model to classify an input wrongly.
Machine learning systems typically take in input data intwo distinct phases. The training data which is fed into the
learning algorithm during the training phase, and the new
or test data which is fed into the learned model during the
prediction phase. If the attacker can manipulate the input data
in either phase, it is possible to induce a wrong prediction
from the machine learning model.
In this survey, we provide a brief introduction to machine
learning using a three-dimensional classiﬁcation method. We
classify the various machine learning approaches based on
the learning tasks, learning techniques and learning depth.
We further organize the various applications of machine
learning in network security based on a taxonomy of security
tasks. Contrary to the survey by Corona et al. [5], our
work focuses on adversarial attacks that are strictly machine
learning based. Next, we classify the various adversarial
attacks based on the applications in network security. We
identify ﬁve main categories of machine learning applications
in network security for our classiﬁcation method. Finally, we
classify adversarial attacks against machine learning based
on a taxonomy of network security applications.
Our contribution is threefold. First, we introduce a new
method for classifying adversarial attacks in network security
based on a taxonomy of network security applications. We
also introduce the concept of problem space and feature
space dimensional classiﬁcation of adversarial attacks in
network security.
Secondly, we introduce the concept of adversarial risk
in computer and network security. We provide a new risk
mapping for evaluating the risk of adversarial attacks in
network security based on the discriminative or directive
autonomy of the machine learning tasks and techniques
respectively.
Lastly, we evaluate several adversarial attacks against ma-
chine learning in network security applications as proposed
by various researchers and classify the attacks based on an
adversarial threat attack taxonomy shown in Table I.
As we outline in Section II, prior adversarial attacks
surveys [6][7][8] mainly covered them in the computer vi-
sion domain. Nevertheless, some surveys tackled adversarial
attacks on cybersecurity [9][10][11][12], but to the best of
our knowledge, there is currently no prior work that has
reviewed adversarial attacks in network security based on
a classiﬁcation of network security applications. No prior
work has also reviewed the concept of problem space vs.arXiv:1911.02621v3  [cs.CR]  21 Mar 2023