based malware detection systems. Their work focuses on
different strategies of crafting adversarial samples for deep
learning based dynamic analysis of malware samples. Their
study is motivated in the fact that static analysis based
deep learning malware classiﬁers only classify the content
of the unknown ﬁle without execution, and become less
effective when faced with packed or encrypted malware
ﬁles. In addition, they propose a defense mechanism known
as the weight defense mechanism. The compare their de-
fence technique to existing defenses such as distillation and
ensemble defenses. They however did not compare their
study to the more popular approach of adversarial training,
which is a proven method for reducing the vulnerability
deep learning classiﬁers to adversarial samples. Their study
also indicates that adding more hidden layers to the neural
network signiﬁcantly improves the robustness of the deep
learning based malware classiﬁer to adversarial samples.
B. Adversarial attacks on Spam Detection
Spam detection is a signiﬁcant endpoint protection com-
ponent, used to protect users from unsolicited digital com-
munications. Machine learning techniques are widely used
for current spam ﬁltering applications, most of which utilize
supervised learning methods [110]. Multiple adversarial at-
tacks on machine learning-based spam detection systems are
discussed below.
1) Adversarial classiﬁcation: Dalvi et al [111] were the
ﬁrst to introduce a formal framework with corresponding
algorithms to describe the problem of adversarial attacks
against machine learning based spam detectors. In their
study, they seek the minimum cost camouﬂage (MCC) of
a data sample xto generate an adversarial sample MCC(x)
with the minimum cost, for which the classiﬁer outputs
a negative sample. Similar studies [112] had considered
adversarial attacks against spam detectors albeit not machine
learning based.
2) Attacks on Statistical Spam ﬁlters: Several spam ﬁlters
such as SpamAssasin, SpamBayes, Bogoﬁlter are based on
the popular Naive Bayes Machine learning algorithm which
was ﬁrst applied to ﬁltering junk email in 1998 [113]. A
variety of good word attacks introduced by Lowd [112]
were successfully evading the machine learning models from
detecting spam or junk emails. Using these attacks, an
attacker can get 50 percent of currently blocked spam past
a typical spam ﬁlter.
3) Exploiting Machine Learning to Subvert Your Spam
Filter: Nelson et al. [114] showed in 2008 that an at-
tacker could effectively disable the SpamBayes spam ﬁlter
with small information and little control over training data.
Their introduced Usenet dictionary poisoning attack caused
misclassiﬁcation of 36 percent of ham messages with only
1 percent control over the training data. They have also
presented a new class of focused attacks that stop victims
from receiving speciﬁc email messages. With knowledge of
only 30 percent of the target’s tokens, their focused attack
altered the classiﬁcation of the target email 60 percent of the
time.4) Attacks against crowd-turﬁng detection systems: Ma-
chine learning techniques are used to identify misbehavior
includes fake users in social networks and detect users who
pays for sites to have fake accounts. Malicious crowdsourc-
ing or crowd-turﬁng systems are used to connect users who
are willing to pay, with workers who carry out malicious
activities such as generation and distribution of fake news,
or malicious political campaigns. Machine learning models
have been used to detect crowdturﬁng activity with up to
95 percent accuracy particularly in detecting the accounts
of crowdturﬁng workers [115]. However, malicious crowd-
sourcing detection systems are highly vulnerable to adver-
sarial evasion and poisoning attacks.
5) Attacks Against ML for Keystroke Dynamics: Negi et
al. [116] created adversarial keystroke samples that misled
an otherwise accurate classiﬁer into accepting the artiﬁcially
generated keystroke samples as belonging to an authentic
user. Almost 50 percent of the tested users were compro-
mised after their attack.
6) Attacks against ML for credit card fraud detection:
Zeager et al. [117] examined how a logistic regression clas-
siﬁer used as a fraud detection mechanism, could be adver-
sarially attacked to cause a number of fraudulent transactions
to go undetected. Previous studies have similar models which
are based on game theory to investigate adversarial attacks
against credit card fraud detection and email spam detectors.
However, the authors introduced a new framework which
successfully produced an improved AUC score on multiple
iterations of the validation sets compared to the performance
of the models which credit card companies had previously
used.
7) Crafting Adversarial Email Content against Machine
Learning Based Spam Email Detection: Wang et al. [118]
proposed two methods to create adversarial email content
to bypass spam detectors. The ﬁrst approach approximates
the Term Frequency–Inverse Document Frequency) TF-IDF
values in the resultant adversarial examples and the second
method recognizes and adds a group of signiﬁcant words
to fool the detectors. They tested their work on multiple
machine language models like; KNN, SVM, decision tree,
and logistic regression, in both white-box and black-box
attack scenarios. Their attacks’ success rates ranged from
2.2 to 98.9 percent, which is inconclusive. However, they
concluded that the second method is more effective.
8) Marginal Attacks of Generating Adversarial Exam-
ples for Spam Filtering: Zhaiquan et al. [119] created the
marginal attack, which generates adversarial samples that can
deceive naive bayesian spam ﬁlters by selecting sensitive
words from a sentence and then add them at the end of
the sentence. Their experiments showed that adding just one
word to the message could reduce the model’s accuracy from
93.6 to 55.8 percent. They also tested the transferability of
the generated adversarial samples against standard machine
learning ﬁlters like logic regression, decision tree, and linear
support vector. In some cases, the accuracy of these ﬁlters
could drop from 100 to 1.5 percent.
15