Neural Abstractive Text Summarization with Sequence-to-Sequence Models 1:15
2.4.4 Distraction [ 17].The coverage mechanism has also been used in [ 17](k n o w na s distrac-
tion) for the document summarization task. In addition to the distraction mechanism over the
attention, they also proposed a distraction mechanism over the encoder context vectors. Both
mechanisms are used to prevent the model from attending certain regions of the source arti-
cle repeatedly. Formally, given the context vector at current decoding step ze
tand all historical
context vectors (ze
1,ze
2,...,ze
t−1)(see Equation ( 4)), the distracted context vector ze,dist
tis defined
byze,dist
t=tanh(Wdist,zze
t−Whist,z/summationtextt−1
jze
j),wher eboth Wdist,zandWhist,zarediagonalparameter
matrices.
2.5 Improving Encoded Representations
Although LSTM and bi-directional LSTM encoders3have been commonly used in the seq2seq
modelsfortheabstractivetextsummarization[ 98,109,119],representationsofthesourcearticles
arestillbelievedtobesub-optimal.Inthissection,wereviewsomeapproachesthataimtoimprove
theencodingprocess.
2.5.1 Selective Encoding [ 159].The selective encoding model was proposed for the abstractive
sentence summarization task [ 159]. Built upon an attention based encoder-decoder framework,
it introduces a selective gate network into the encoder for the purpose of distilling salient infor-
mation from source articles. A second layer representation, namely, distilled representation, of a
sourcearticleisconstructedover therepresentationof thefirstLSTMlayer (abi-directionalGRU
encoder in this work.). Formally, the distilled representation of each token in the source article is
defined as
he
sel,j=gatesel,j×he
j (19)
wheregate sel,jdenotestheselectivegate for token xjand iscalculatedasfollows:
gatesel,j=σ/parenleftBig
Wsel,hhe
j+Wsel,senhe
sen+bsel/parenrightBig
(20)
wherehe
sen=−→he
J⊕←−he
1. The distilled representations are then used for the decoding. Such a gate
network can control information flow from an encoder to a decoder and can also select salient
information, therefore,itbooststheperformanceofthesentencesummarization task[ 159].
2.5.2 Read-Again Encoding [ 152].Intuitively, read-again mechanism is motivated by human
readers who read an article several times before writing a summary. To simulate this cognitive
process, a read-again encoder reads a source article twice and outputs two-level representations.
In the first read, an LSTM encodes tokens and the article as (he,1
1,he,1
2,...,he,1
J)andhe,1
sen=he,1
J,
respectively. In the second read, we use another LSTM to encode the source text based on the
outputsofthefirstread.Formally, theencoderhidden stateof thesecondread he,2
jis updatedby
he,2
j=LSTM/parenleftBig
he,2
j−1,Exj⊕he,1
j⊕he,1
sen/parenrightBig
(21)
Thehiddenstates (he,2
1,he,2
2,...,he,2
J)ofthesecondreadwillbepassedintodecodersforsummary
generation.
2.6 Improving Decoder
2.6.1 Embedding Weight Sharing [ 109].Sharing the embedding weights with the decoder is a
practical approach that can boost the performance since it allows us to reuse the semantic and
syntacticinformationinanembeddingmatrixduringsummarygeneration[ 57,109].Supposethe
3GRUandbi-directional GRUarealso oftenseenin abstractivesummarization papers.
ACM/IMS Transactions on DataScience, Vol.2,No. 1,Article 1.Publicationdate:December2020.