Neural Abstractive Text Summarization with Sequence-to-Sequence Models 1:21
decreases with training time from 1 to 0. As suggested by Bengio et al. [ 8], a scheduling function
can takedifferentforms, e.g.,
pdad=⎧⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎩1−αklineardecay
αkexponentialdecay
α
α+exp(k/α)inversesigmoid decay(31)
wherekisatrainingstepand αisaparameterthatguarantees pdad∈[0,1].Thisstrategyisoften
referredto asa curriculum-learningalgorithm [8,113,155].
Themainintuitionbehindthisalgorithmisthat,atthebeginningstage,amodelwithrandompa-
rameterscannotgeneraterelevant/correcttokens,therefore,adecodertakesground-truthtokens
from training data as input. As the training proceeds, the model gradually reduces the probabil-
ity of using ground-truth tokens. By the end of the training, the model assumes that it has been
welltrainedandcangeneratereasonabletokens;thus,thedecodercancompletelyrelyonitsown
predictions[ 8].
3.1.3 End-To-EndBackprop(E2E)[ 113].Thisalgorithmisanothermethodthatexposesamodel
toitsownpredictionsduringtraining.Ateachdecodingstep,itstillusesXENTtotrainthemodel
parameters. However, the input is neither a ground truth token nor a model-generated token.
Instead, it is a fusion of top- ktokens from the last decoding step, where kis a hyper-parameter.
Morespecifically,themodelfirstsamplesthetop- ktokens,denotedas (ysamp1
t,ysamp2
t,...,ysampk
t),
from thevocabularydistribution Pvocab ,t.Then,itcan re-scaletheirprobabilitiesas follows:
Psamp ,t/parenleftBig
ysampi
t/parenrightBig
=Pvocab ,t/parenleftBig
ysampi
t/parenrightBig
/summationtext
jPvocab ,t/parenleftBig
ysampj
t/parenrightBig (32)
and obtain a vector in the embedding space by Esamp ,t=/summationtextk
i=1Psamp ,t(ysampi
t)Eysampi
t.T h i sf u s e d
vector will be served as the input for the next decoding step. It should be noted that E2E also
makes use of DAD in practice [ 113], where a sampler is used to determine whether to take fused
vectorsor embeddingsof ground-truthtokensasinput.
3.2 Sequence-Level Training
The sequence-level training with deep RL algorithms has recently received a lot of popularity in
theareaofneuralabstractivetextsummarization[ 61,62,78,107,109,113,155]duetoitsabilityto
incorporateany user-definedmetrics, includingnon-differentiable ROUGE scores,to train neural
networks. In this section, we review several different policy-gradient algorithms that have been
usedtotrainabstractivetextsummarizationmodels.Foractor-criticalgorithmsandrelatedwork,
thereadersare encouragedto go throughthesepublications[ 19,62,78].
In the RL setting, generating a sequence of tokens in a summary can be considered as a se-
quentialdecision-makingprocess,whereanencoder-decodermodelisviewedasanagent,which
first reads a source article xand initializes its internal state (hidden and cell states for LSTM). At
the decoding step t, it updates the state and takes an action yπ
t∈V(i.e., picking a token from
the vocabulary) according to a policy π=Pθ(yt|y<t,x). Here, the vocabulary is viewed as an ac-
tion space. By the end of the decoding, it will produce a sequence of actions (yπ
1,yπ
2,...,yπ
T)and
observe a reward R(yπ
1,yπ
2,...,yπ
T), which is usually ROUGE scores [ 80] in the context of text
summarization. Then, RL algorithms will be used to update the agent by comparing the action
sequence based on current policy with the optimal action sequence (i.e., the ground-truth sum-
mary).Inthissection,wewillstartwiththecommonlyusedREINFORCEfortrainingseq2seqmod-
els. Then, we will introduce the MIXER algorithm (which can improve the convergence rate and
ACM/IMS Transactions on DataScience, Vol.2,No. 1,Article 1.Publicationdate:December2020.