1:8 T. Shi et al.
Fig.2. Thebasic seq2seqmodel. SOSandEOS representthestartand endof asequence, respectively.
thetextsummarization,suchasrepetitionandout-of-vocabulary(OOV)words.Wewillhighlight
variousexistingproblems andproposedsolutions.
2.1 Seq2seqFramework Basics
A vanilla seq2seq framework for abstractive text summarization is composed of an encoder and
a decoder. The encoder reads a source article, denoted by x=(x1,x2,...,xJ), and transforms it
to hidden states he=(he
1,he
2,...,he
J); while the decoder takes these hidden states as the context
input and outputs a summary y=(y1,y2,...,yT).H e r e ,xiandyjare one-hot representations of
thetokensinthesourcearticleandsummary,respectively.Weuse JandTtorepresentthenumber
of tokens (document length) of the original source document and the summary, respectively. A
summarization taskisdefined asinferringasummary yfroma given sourcearticle x.
Encodersanddecoderscanbefeed-forwardnetworks,CNN[ 39,40]orRNN.RNNarchitectures,
especially long short-term memory (LSTM) [ 52] and gated recurrent unit (GRU) [ 21], have been
most widely adopted for seq2seq models. Figure 2shows a basic RNN seq2seq model with a bi-
directional LSTM encoder and an LSTM decoder. The bi-directional LSTM is considered since it
usuallygivesbetterdocumentrepresentationscomparedtoaforwardLSTM.Theencoderreadsa
sequenceofinputtokens xandturnsthemintoasequencesofhiddenstates h=(h1,h2,h3,...,hJ).
For the bi-directional LSTM, the input sequence is encoded as−→heand←−he, where the right and left
arrows denote the forward and backward temporal dependencies, respectively. Superscript eis
the shortcut notation used to indicate that it is for the encoder. During the decoding, the decoder
takestheencodedrepresentationsofthesourcearticle(i.e.,hiddenandcellstates−→he
J,←−he
1,−→ce
J,←−ce
1)as
the input and generates the summary y. In a simple encoder-decoder model, encoded vectors are
used to initialize hidden and cell states of the LSTM decoder. For example, we can initialize them
as follows:
hd
0=tanh/parenleftbigg
We2d/parenleftBig−→he
J⊕←−he
1/parenrightBig
+be2d/parenrightbigg
,cd
0=−→ce
J⊕←−ce
1 (1)
Here,superscript ddenotesthedecoderand ⊕isaconcatenationoperator.Ateachdecodingstep,
we first update the hidden state hd
tconditioned on the previous hidden states and input tokens,
i.e.,hd
t=LSTM(hd
t−1,Eyt−1). Hereafter, we will not explicitly express the cell states in the input
andoutputofLSTM,sinceonlyhiddenstatesarepassedtootherpartsofthemodel.Then,thevo-
cabulary distribution can be calculated with Pvocab ,t=softmax(Wd2vhd
t+bd2v),w h e r ePvocab ,tis a
vectorwhosedimensionisthesizeofthevocabulary Vandsoftmax (vt)=exp(vt)/summationtext
τexp(vτ)foreachele-
mentvtofavector v.Therefore,theprobabilityofgeneratingthetargettoken winthevocabulary
Vis denotedas Pvocab ,t(w).
ACM/IMS Transactions onDataScience,Vol. 2,No. 1,Article 1.Publicationdate:December2020.