To appear as a part of an upcoming textbook on dimensionality reduction and manifold learning.
Factor Analysis, Probabilistic Principal Component Analysis,
Variational Inference, and Variational Autoencoder: Tutorial and Survey
Benyamin Ghojogh BGHOJOGH @UWATERLOO .CA
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Machine Learning Laboratory, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Ali Ghodsi ALI.GHODSI @UWATERLOO .CA
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science & David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science,
Data Analytics Laboratory, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Fakhri Karray KARRAY @UWATERLOO .CA
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Centre for Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Mark Crowley MCROWLEY @UWATERLOO .CA
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Machine Learning Laboratory, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Abstract
This is a tutorial and survey paper on factor anal-
ysis, probabilistic Principal Component Analy-
sis (PCA), variational inference, and Variational
Autoencoder (V AE). These methods, which are
tightly related, are dimensionality reduction and
generative models. They assume that every data
point is generated from or caused by a low-
dimensional latent factor. By learning the pa-
rameters of distribution of latent space, the corre-
sponding low-dimensional factors are found for
the sake of dimensionality reduction. For their
stochastic and generative behaviour, these mod-
els can also be used for generation of new data
points in the data space. In this paper, we ﬁrst
start with variational inference where we derive
the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO) and Expec-
tation Maximization (EM) for learning the pa-
rameters. Then, we introduce factor analysis, de-
rive its joint and marginal distributions, and work
out its EM steps. Probabilistic PCA is then ex-
plained, as a special case of factor analysis, and
its closed-form solutions are derived. Finally,
V AE is explained where the encoder, decoder and
sampling from the latent space are introduced.
Training V AE using both EM and backpropaga-tion are explained.
1. Introduction
Learning models can be divided into discriminative and
generative models (Ng & Jordan, 2002; Bouchard &
Triggs, 2004). Discriminative models discriminate the
classes of data for better separation of classes while the
generative models learn a latent space which generates the
data points. The methods introduced in this paper are gen-
erative models.
Variational inference is a technique which ﬁnds a lower
bound on the log-likelihood of data and maximizes this
lower bound rather than the log-likelihood in the Maxi-
mum Likelihood Estimation (MLE). This lower bound is
usually referred to as the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO).
Learning the parameters of latent space can be done us-
ing Expectation Maximization (EM) (Bishop, 2006). Vari-
ational Autoencoder (V AE) (Kingma & Welling, 2014) im-
plements the variational inference in an autoencoder neural
network setup where the encoder and decoder model the
E-step and M-step of EM, respectively. Although, V AE is
usually trained using backprogatation, in practice (Rezende
et al., 2014; Hou et al., 2017). Variational inference and
V AE have had many applications in Bayesian analysis; for
example, see the application of variational inference in 3D
human motion analysis (Sminchisescu & Jepson, 2004) and
the application of V AE in forecasting (Walker et al., 2016).
Factor analysis assumes that every data point is generatedarXiv:2101.00734v2  [stat.ML]  23 May 2022