Factor Analysis, Probabilistic PCA, Variational Inference, and Variational Autoencoder: Tutorial and Survey 10
Figure 4. The structure of a variational autoencoder.
distributions. This change may improve the embedding of
PPCA because of the heavier tails of Student-t distribution
compared to Gaussian distribution. This avoids the crowd-
ing problem which has motivated the proposal of t-SNE
(Ghojogh et al., 2020a).
Sparse PPCA (Guan & Dy, 2009; Mattei et al., 2016)
has inserted sparsity into PPCA. Supervised PPCA (Yu
et al., 2006) makes use of class labels in the formulation of
PPCA. Mixture of PPCA (Tipping & Bishop, 1999a) uses
mixture of distributions in the formulation PPCA. It trains
the parameters of a mixture distribution using EM (Gho-
jogh et al., 2019a). Generalized PPCA for correlated data
is another recent variant of PPCA (Gu & Shen, 2020).
5. Variational Autoencoder
Variational Autoencoder (V AE) (Kingma & Welling, 2014)
applies variational inference, i.e., maximizes the ELBO,
but in an autoencoder setup and makes it differentiable for
the backpropagation training (Rumelhart et al., 1986). As
Fig. 4 shows, V AE includes an encoder and a decoder, each
of which can have several network layers. A latent space is
learned between the encoder and decoder. The latent vari-
ableziis sampled from the latent space. In the following,
we explain the encoder and decoder parts. The input of en-
coder in V AE is the data point xiand the output of decoder
in V AE is its reconstruction xi.5.1. Parts of Variational Autoencoder
5.1.1. E NCODER OF VARIATIONAL AUTOENCODER
The encoder of V AE models the distribution q(zi) =
P(zijxi;e)where the parameters of distribution eare
the weights of encoder layers in V AE. The input and out-
put of encoder are xi2Rdandzi2Rp, respectively. As
Fig. 4 depicts, the output neurons of encoder are supposed
to determine the parameters of the conditional distribution
P(zijxi;e). If this conditional distribution has mnum-
ber of parameters, we have msets of output neurons from
the encoder, denoted by fejgm
j=1. The dimensionality of
these sets may differ depending on the size of the parame-
ters.
For example, let the latent space be p-dimensional, i.e.,
zi2Rp. If the distribution P(zijxi;e)is a multi-
variate Gaussian distribution, we have two sets of out-
put neurons for encoder where one set has pneurons for
the mean of this distribution zjx=e12Rdand the
other set has (pp)neurons for the covariance of this
distribution zjx=matrix form of e22Rpp. If the
covariance matrix is diagonal, the second set has pneu-
rons rather than (pp)neurons. In this case, we have
zjx=diag(e2)2Rdd. Any distribution with any
number of parameters can be chosen for P(zijxi;e)but
the multivariate Gaussian with diagonal covariance is very
well-used:
q(zi) =P(zijxi;e) =N(zijzjx;zjx): (71)
Let the network weights for the output sets of encoder,
fejgm
j=1, be denoted byfe;jgm
j=1. As the input of en-
coder isxi, thej-th output set of encoder can be written
asej(xi;e;j). In the case of multivariate Gaussian dis-
tribution for the latent space, the parameters are zjx=
e1(xi;e;1)andzjx=diag(e2(xi;e;2)).
5.1.2. S AMPLING THE LATENT VARIABLE
When the data point xiis fed as input to the encoder, the
parameters of the conditional distribution q(zi)are ob-
tained; hence, the distribution of latent space, which is
q(zi), is determined corresponding to the data point xi.
Now, in the latent space, we sample the corresponding la-
tent variable from the distribution of latent space:
ziq(zi) =P(zijxi;e): (72)
This latent variable is fed as input to the decoder which is
explained in the following.
5.1.3. D ECODER OF VARIATIONAL AUTOENCODER
As Fig. 4 shows, the decoder of V AE models the condi-
tional distribution P(xijzi;d)wheredare the weights
of decoder layers in V AE. The input and output of decoder
arezi2Rpandxi2Rd, respectively. The output neu-
rons of decoder are supposed to either generate the recon-