A Sharp Analysis of Model-based RL with Self-Play
zero-sum Markov games, the current best sample complex-
ity for model-based algorithms is achieved by the VI-ULCB
(Value Iteration with Upper/Lower Conﬁdence Bounds) al-
gorithm (Bai & Jin, 2020; Xie et al., 2020): In a tabular
Markov game with Sstates,fA;Bgactions for the two
players, and horizon length H, VI-ULCB is able to ﬁnd an
-approximate Nash equilibrium policy in ~O(H4S2AB=2)
episodes of game playing. However, compared with the
information-theoretic lower bound 
(H3S(A+B)=2),
this rate has suboptimal dependencies on all of H,S, and
A;B . In contrast, the current best sample complexity for
model-free algorithms is achieved by Nash V-Learning (Bai
et al., 2020), which ﬁnds an -approximate Nash policy in
~O(H6S(A+B)=2)episodes. Compared with the lower
bound, this is tight except for a poly(H)factor, which may
seemingly suggest that model-free algorithms could be su-
perior to model-based ones in multi-agent RL. However,
such a conclusion would be in stark contrast to the single-
agent MDP setting, where it is known that model-based
algorithms are able to achieve minimax optimal sample com-
plexities (Jaksch et al., 2010; Azar et al., 2017). It naturally
arises whether model-free algorithms are indeed superior
in multi-agent settings, or whether the existing analyses of
model-based algorithms are not tight. This motivates us to
ask the following question:
How sample-efﬁcient are model-based
algorithms in multi-agent RL?
In this paper, we advance the theoretical understandings of
multi-agent RL by presenting a sharp analysis of model-
based algorithms on Markov games. Our core contribution
is the design of a new model-based algorithm Optimistic
Nash Value Iteration (Nash-VI) that achieves an almost
optimal sample complexity for zero-sum Markov games
and improves signiﬁcantly over existing model-based ap-
proaches. We summarize our main contributions as follows.
A comparison between our and prior results can be found in
Table 1.
We design a new model-based algorithm Optimistic
Nash Value Iteration (Nash-VI) that provably ﬁnds
-approximate Nash equilibria for Markov games in
~O(H3SAB=2)episodes of game playing (Section 3).
This improves over the best existing model-based al-
gorithm by O(HS)and is the ﬁrst algorithm that
matches the sample complexity lower bound except for
a~O(minfA;Bg)factor, showing that model-based al-
gorithms can indeed achieve an almost optimal sample
complexity. Further, unlike state-of-the-art model-free
algorithms such as Nash V-Learning (Bai et al., 2020),
this algorithm achieves in addition a ~O(p
T)regret
bound, and outputs a simple Markov policy (insteadof a nested mixture of Markov policies as returned by
Nash V-Learning).
We design an alternative algorithm Optimistic Value
Iteration with Zero Reward (VI-Zero) that is able to
perform task-agnostic (reward-free) learning for multi-
ple Markov games sharing the same transitions (Sec-
tion 4). For N > 1games with the same transition
and different (known) rewards, VI-Zero can ﬁnd -
approximate Nash policy for all games simultaneously
in~O(H4SAB logN=2)episodes of game playing,
which scales logarithmically in the number of games.
We design the ﬁrst line of sample-efﬁcient algorithms
formulti-player general-sum Markov games. In a
multi-player game with Mplayers andAiactions per
player, we show that an near-optimal policy can be
found in ~O(H4S2Q
i2[M]Ai=2)episodes, where the
desired optimality can be either one of Nash equilib-
rium, correlated equilibrium (CE), or coarse correlated
equilibrium (CCE). We achieve this guarantee by ei-
ther a multi-player version of Nash-VI or a multi-player
version of reward-free value iteration (Section 5 & Ap-
pendix A).
1.1. Related work
Markov games. Markov games (or stochastic games) are
proposed in the early 1950s (Shapley, 1953). They are
widely used to model multi-agent RL. Learning the Nash
equilibria of Markov games has been studied in Littman
(1994; 2001); Hu & Wellman (2003); Hansen et al. (2013);
Lee et al. (2020), where the transition matrix and reward are
assumed to be known, or in the asymptotic setting where the
number of data goes to inﬁnity. These results do not directly
apply to the non-asymptotic setting where the transition and
reward are unknown and only a limited amount of data are
available for estimating them.
Another line of works make certain strong reachability as-
sumptions under which sophisticated exploration strategies
are not required. A prevalent approach is to assume access
to simulators (generative models) that enable the agent to
directly sample transition and reward information for any
state-action pair. In this setting, Jia et al. (2019); Sidford
et al. (2019); Zhang et al. (2020a) provide non-asymptotic
bounds on the number of calls to the simulator for ﬁnding
an-approximate Nash equilibrium. Wei et al. (2017) study
Markov games under an alternative assumption that no mat-
ter what strategy one agent sticks to, the other agent can
always reach all states by playing a certain policy.
Non-asymptotic guarantees without reachability as-
sumptions. Recent works of Bai & Jin (2020); Xie et al.
(2020) provide the ﬁrst line of non-asymptotic sample com-
plexity guarantees for learning Markov games without reach-