A Sharp Analysis of Model-based RL with Self-Play
Table 1. Sample complexity (the required number of episodes) for algorithms to ﬁnd -approximate Nash equlibrium policies in zero-sum
Markov games: VI-explore and VI-UCLB (Bai & Jin, 2020), OMVI-SM (Xie et al., 2020), and Nash Q/V-learning (Bai et al., 2020). The
lower bound is proved by Jin et al. (2018); Domingues et al. (2020).
Algorithm Task-Agnosticp
T-Regret Sample Complexity Output Policy
Model-basedVI-explore Yes ~O(H5S2AB=2)
a single
Markov policyVI-ULCB Yes ~O(H4S2AB=2)
OMVI-SM Yes ~O(H4S3A3B3=2)
Algorithm 2 Yes ~O(H4SAB=2)
Algorithm 1 Yes ~O(H3SAB=2)
Model-freeNash Q-learning ~O(H5SAB=2) nested mixture of
Markov policiesNash V-learning ~O(H6S(A+B)=2)
Lower Bound - - 
(H3S(A+B)=2) -
ability assumptions. More recently, Bai et al. (2020) propose
two model-free algorithms—Nash Q-Learning and Nash V-
Learning with better sample complexity guarantees. In par-
ticular, the Nash V-learning algorithm achieves near-optimal
dependence on S,AandB. However, the dependence on
His worse than our results and the output policy is a nested
mixture, which is hard to implement. We compare our
results with existing non-asymptotic guarantees in Table 1.
We remark that the classic R-max algorithm (Brafman &
Tennenholtz, 2002) also provides provable guarantees for
learning Markov games. However, Brafman & Tennenholtz
(2002) use a weaker deﬁnition of regret (similar to the online
setting in Xie et al. (2020)), and consequently their result
does not imply any sample complexity guarantee for ﬁnding
Nash equilibrium policies.
Adversarial MDPs. Another way to model the multi-
player behavior is to use adversarial MDPs . Most works in
this line consider the setting with adversarial reward (Zimin
& Neu, 2013; Rosenberg & Mansour, 2019; Jin et al., 2019),
where the reward can be manipulated by an adversary ar-
bitrarily and the goal is to compete with the optimal (sta-
tionary) policy in hindsight. Learning adversarial MDPs
with changing dynamics is computationally hard even under
full-information feedback (Yadkori et al., 2013). Notice
these results also do not imply provable algorithms in our
setting, because the opponent in Markov games can affect
both the reward and the transition.
Single-agent RL. There is a rich literature on reinforce-
ment learning in MDPs (see e.g., Jaksch et al., 2010; Os-
band et al., 2014; Azar et al., 2017; Dann et al., 2017; Strehl
et al., 2006; Jin et al., 2018). MDPs are special cases of
Markov games, where only a single agent interacts with a
stochastic environment. For the tabular episodic setting with
nonstationary dynamics and no simulators, the best samplecomplexity is ~O(H3SA=2), achieved by the model-based
algorithm in Azar et al. (2017) and the model-free algorithm
in Zhang et al. (2020c). Both of them match the lower bound

(H3SA=2)(Jin et al., 2018).
Reward-free learning. Jin et al. (2020) study a new
paradigm of learning MDPs called reward-free learning,
which is also known as the task-agnostic (Zhang et al.,
2020b) or reward-agnostic setting. In this setting, the agent
goes through a two-stage process. In the exploration phase
the agent interacts with the environment without the guid-
ance of any reward information, and in the planning phase
the reward information is revealed and the agent computes
a policy based on the transition information collected in the
exploration phase and the reward information revealed in
the planning phase.
2. Preliminaries
In this paper, we consider Markov Games (MGs, Shapley,
1953; Littman, 1994), which are also known as stochastic
games in the literature. Markov games are the generalization
of standard Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) into the
multi-player setting, where each player seeks to maximize
her own utility. For simplicity, in this section we describe
the important special case of two-player zero-sum games ,
and return to the general formulation in Appendix A.
Formally, we consider the tabular episodic version of
two-player zero-sum Markov game, which we denote as
MG(H;S;A;B;P;r). HereHis the number of steps in
each episode,Sis the set of states with jSjS,(A;B)
are the sets of actions of the max-player and the min-player
respectively withjAjAandjBjB,P=fPhgh2[H]is
a collection of transition matrices, so that Ph(js;a;b )gives
the distribution of the next state if action pair (a;b)is taken
at statesat steph, andr=frhgh2[H]is a collection of