ApproachTop-1 acc. Top-5 acc. Top-1 acc. Top-5 acc. Top-1 Top-5 FLOPs
baseline baseline after prune after prune acc.↓ acc.↓↓
SRR-NOF
76.13% 92.86%74.88% 92.27% 1.25% 0.59% 44.0%
SRR-PCA 75.19% 92.48% 0.94% 0.38% 44.1%
SRR-GR 75.76% 92.67% 0.37% 0.19% 44.1%
Table 5. Performance of the pruned ResNet50 networks with different redundancy reduction measurements.
ther validates the fact that pruning ﬁlters in the layers with
large redundancy is more essential than identifying unim-
portant ﬁlters.
6.3. The value of gamma
We change the distance threshold γfor graph establish-
ment to analyze its inﬂuence on the performance. We keep
using AlexNet on CIFAR-10 as an example by pruning 40%
of the ﬁlters with γ= 0.003,0.034, and0.3. Results
(Fig. 2(c-d)) shows that with a large γ, the last four layers
remain the same number of ﬁlters, which indicates that the
layer with the largest number of ﬁlters are identiﬁed as the
redundant layer at each time (Fig. 2(c)). When γis small,
nearly the same percent of ﬁlters are removed from all lay-
ers (Fig. 2(d)). With a suitable value of γ(0.034), our ap-
proach identiﬁed Layer 3 as the most redundant layer. Layer
4 and 5 are also redundant to some extent but Layer 4 is
with a little more redundancy. Different from other exist-
ing works, our approach suggests that Layer 1 should not
be pruned if we only aim to remove 40% of the ﬁlters from
AlexNet. These results are consistent with the deﬁnition of
layer redundancy (in the Methodology section). For a layer
withnﬁlters, when γ→0, it is clear that k=n,Nc
1=n,
andR(X) = 1 . Therefore, all layers have the same level of
redundancy and the approach becomes a uniform pruning.
Whenγ→+∞,k= 1,Nc
1= 1, andR(X) =n, which in-
dicates that the layer with the most number of ﬁlters is with
the largest redundancy. Our approach can be considered as
a dynamic architecture search approach controlled by γ.
6.4. Other criteria for structural redundancy iden­
tiﬁcation
Since there are few studies that consider network prun-
ing from the perspective of structural redundancy reduc-
tion, we further investigate the effectiveness of structural
redundancy reduction for channel pruning with the follow-
ing layer redundancy measurement metrics. (1) SRR-NOF:
This strategy simply uses the number of ﬁlters in the con-
volutional layers as the measurement of layer redundancy.
The layer with more ﬁlters is considered as with more re-
dundancy. In the redundancy identiﬁcation phase, for each
iteration, a ﬁlter from the layer with the most number of
ﬁlters are removed. If there exist more than one layer con-
taining the same number of the most ﬁlters, a ﬁlter is re-
moved from a randomly chosen layer. When the require-
ment is reached, the network is pruned with the minimumweight criterion according to the remaining number of ﬁl-
ters in each layer. (2) SRR-PCA: This strategy uses princi-
pal component analysis (PCA) on the intermediate feature
maps of a network to measure the correlation between ﬁl-
ters. We ﬁrst feed training samples to the CNN and record
the ﬂattened feature maps of each convolutional layer. Then
we ﬁt PCA on these ﬂattened feature maps and get a list of
percentage of variance explained by each of them for all
convolutional layers. We select the Nsmallest percentage
of variances across all layers and count how many items are
selected in each convolutional layer. Finally, we prune the
ﬁlters in each layer accordingly, with the minimum weight
ranking criterion. (3) SRR-GR: This strategy uses graph
redundancy as described in the Methodology section. The
training and pruning conﬁguration are the same as in the
Experiment section.
Experiment results (Table 5) show that by pruning 44%
FLOPs from ResNet50, even with a naive layer redundancy
measurement (i.e., the number of ﬁlters in the layer), the
performance is comparable to recent studies. PCA identiﬁes
the layer redundancy better than NOF and with SRR-PCA,
the drops of top-1 and top-5 accuracy further decrease to
0.94% and0.38%. With the graph redundancy-based ap-
proach, the pruning performance is signiﬁcantly improved.
These results validate that (1) structural redundancy reduc-
tion is an efﬁcient approach for channel pruning, and (2) the
proposed graph redundancy-based approach is a promising
way for layer redundancy measurement.
7. Conclusion
We theoretically studied the rationale behind network
pruning from a perspective of redundancy reduction via a
statistical modeling and discovered that pruning ﬁlters in the
layer(s) with the most structural redundancy plays a more
essential role than pruning the least important ﬁlters across
all layers. We proposed to identify the level of redundancy
existed in each convolutional layer of a CNN via a graph es-
tablishment for each layer and two graph-related quantities
as the measurement of the redundancy. After that, ﬁlters are
pruned from the selected layer(s) by a simple ﬁlter selection
criterion. Experimental results validated that our approach
improved the state-of-the-art on image classiﬁcation tasks.
We believe that the proposed approach can be effective on
more complicated tasks such as object detection and image
synthesis, which is left for future research.
14920