Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 8 of 25
The literature indicates that the use of CDSSs has an important impact on monitoring systems.
CDSSs could provide the following: (1) a comprehensive healthcare view of the patient’s medical history;
(2) help to non-expert physicians by providing clinical guidelines, practice standards, and di erential
diagnoses; (3) and help to patients by o ering several assistive tools, such as drug-schedule reminders,
drug prescriptions, and drug-dose interactions. All these factors improve the importance of using
CDSS in remote monitoring systems, especially in remote areas. Velickovski et al. [ 60] provided CDSS
for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPE). CDSSs have also been used for other diseases,
such as Alzheimer’s [ 61] and diabetes [ 62]. To build an e cient CDSS, various components must be
integrated to provide a complete image of a patient’s health status, such as patient EHR, knowledge
base, clinical principle guidelines, etc. Furthermore, ML should continuously refresh the CDSS’s
knowledge base. For the convenience of reader Appendix B, Table A2 inlclude all terms with its
abbreviation’s.
4. The Proposed Framework
The main objective of our framework is to provide a complete system that limits the proliferation
of COVID-19. It concentrates on early detection and isolation because these are the most important
factors that could help in reducing the number of COVID-19 cases. There are many MHMs, but most of
them focus on helping patients by monitoring their vital signs through wearable sensors. Other studies
focus on other issues, including data transmission and integration. None of the previous research
studies proposed an end-to-end solution. Therefore, in this study, a complete health-monitoring
system is proposed. The system helps in early detection, continuous monitoring for suspected cases,
and ensuring patient isolation for suspected and conﬁrmed cases. The framework is divided into three
main parts (i.e., patient side, cloud side, and hospital side). Figure 4 depicts the ﬂow of data in the
proposed framework.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  8 of 25 
 of a healthcare system, and it is used to a ssist healthcare teams in the decision -making process [59]. 
The literature indicates that the use of CDSSs has an important impact on monitoring systems. CDSSs 
could provide  the following : (1) a comprehensive healthcare view of the patient’s medical histor y; (2) 
help to non-expert physicians by providing clinical guidelines, practice standa rds, and differential 
diagnoses ; (3) and help to patient s by offering several assistive tools , such as drug -schedule 
reminders, drug prescriptions, and drug -dose  interactions. All these factors improve the importance 
of using  CDSS in remote monitoring systems , especially in remote areas.  Velickovski et al. [60] 
provide d CDSS for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPE) . CDSS s have also been used for 
other disea ses, such  as Alzheimer ’s [61] and diabetes [62]. To build an efficient CDSS, various 
component s must be integrated to provide a complete image of a patient’s health status , such as 
patient EHR, knowledge base, clinical principle guidelines, etc.  Furthermore, ML should 
continuously refresh the CDSS’s  knowledge base.  For the convenience  of reader Appendix B, Table 
A2 inlclude all terms with its abbreviation’s.  
4. The Proposed F ramework  
The main objective of our framework is to provide a complete sys tem that limit s the proliferation 
of COVID -19. It concentrate s on early detection and isolation  because these  are the most important 
factors  that could  help in reduc ing the  number of COVID -19 cases. There  are many MH Ms, but most 
of them focus on help ing patients by monitoring their vital signs through wearable sensors . Other 
studies focus on other issues , includ ing data transmission and integration. None of the previous 
research  studies  propose d an end-to-end solution. Therefore, in this study, a complete health -
monitoring system is proposed . The system helps  in early detection, continuous monitoring for 
suspected cases , and ensuring patient isolation  for suspected and confirmed cases . The framework is 
divide d into three main parts ( i.e., patient side, clou d side , and hospital side). Figure 4 depicts the 
flow of data in the proposed framework.  
 
Figure 4.  The proposed framework . 
4.1. Patient Side  
Figure 4. The proposed framework.