Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 14 of 25
and 500 for no-ﬁnding), and all images were reshaped to 192 192. Data were randomly selected to
include 70% for training, 15% for validation, and 15% for testing.
6. Classiﬁcation Model
According to the guidelines of WHO, the diagnosis of COVID-19 can be conﬁrmed with either
a SWAP test, CT-Scan, or X-ray chest scan. During the current situation, most health organizations’
identiﬁcation procedure for COVID-19 patients are not quick enough to limit the risk of infections to
the larger population. Therefore, an automatic identiﬁcation tool in highly required.
Our classiﬁer is based on the deep convolution neural network (CNN /ConvNet) that could
automatically identify COVID-19 cases based on chest X-ray images. CNN is a deep learning algorithm
that could take images as input, assigning weights to various aspects /characteristics in a way that
could distinguish one from another.
The following steps summarize the roles of CNN layers. (1) To track and evaluate potential
features, CNN implements multiple convolutions and pooling layers. (2) The max pooling layer is used
to minimize the spatial size of convolutional features and solves issues related to overﬁtting. It extracts
the maximum region obtained from the previous convolutional layer. Figure 9a shows the max pooling
layer, using stride 1 and kernel size of 3. (3) Rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) is an activation function used
to map between an input and its target variable, using linear function. Figure 9b shows the calculation
method of ReLU activation function. (4) Dropout layers are used to minimize overﬁtting in the training
data. (5) Fully connected layers are used as a classiﬁer that utilize features to classify objects.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  14 of 25 
 identification procedure for  COVID -19 patients are not quick enough to limit the risk of infections to 
the larger populatio n. Therefore, an automatic identifi cation tool in highly required.  
Our classifier i s based on the  deep convolution neural network (CNN/ConvNet) that could 
automatic ally identify COVID -19 cases based on chest X -ray images. CNN is a deep learning 
algorithm that could take images a s input , assigning weights to various aspects/characteristics in a 
way that coul d distinguish one fr om another.  
The following steps summarize  the roles of  CNN layers . (1) To track and evaluate potential 
features, CNN implements multiple c onvolutions and pooling layers . (2) The max pooling laye r is 
used to minimize the spatial size of convolutional features  and solve s issues related to overfitting. It 
extract s the maximum region obtained from the previous convolutional layer. Figure  9a show s the 
max pooling layer , using stride 1 and kernel size of 3. (3) Rectified linear unit (ReLU) is an activation 
function used to map between an input and its target variable , using linear function. Figure 9b show s 
the calculation method of ReLU activation function . (4) D ropout layers are used to minimize 
overfi tting in the training data. (5) F ully connected layers are used as a classifier that utilize features 
to classify objects.  
  
(a) (b) 
Figure 9.  (a) Representation of max pooling layer  and (b) rectified linear unit (R eLU) activation 
function . 
Unfortunately, one of the biggest challenges that face researchers in the analysis of medical data 
is the shortage of the available dataset. Deep learning models mainly depend on the availability of 
lots of labeled data. Therefore, the transfer -learning me thod is consider ed the most suitable technique 
with a small number of datasets. Transfer learning is a method that allow s training models with a 
small dataset to gain information (learning parameters) from a pre-trained model on a large dataset  
[79]. This technique has the benefit of decreasing the training time  and the generalization error and 
increas ing the overall performance of the model. Three popular models are used for transfer learning : 
VGG (VGG 16 or VGG 19), GOOGLENet (Inception V3) , and Residual Network (e.g. , RestNet50)  [80]. 
ResNet  (Residual Neural Network) is an effective pre -trained model that was developed in 2015; 
it is an improved version of CNN. It consists of 50 -layer network that trained on the ImageNet 
dataset. ImageNet is an image dataset with 14 million image and 20 thousand categories [73]. The 
main advantage in RestN et-50 is the us e of a new concept called “skip connection ”, which helps to 
mitigate the problem of vanishing gradient. Skip connection (identify mapping) is depicted in Figure 
10. Th is shortcut connection help s in understanding the global features  [74]. It also allows the 
netwo rk to skip the disposable layers , thus result ing in optimal tuning and faster learning by 
increasing the network capacity [73]. Therefore, in our study , we use d a ResNet -50 pre -trained model 
to obtain higher prediction accuracy with a small number of X -ray chest dataset s. Figure 11 show s 
the block diagram of the pre -trained  ResNet model used in this study. Mathematically, if we consider 
the input to be  𝑋, then the output , H, is defined as follows:  
        𝐻(𝑋)=𝐹(𝑥)+𝑋 (1) 
Layers weights learn a residual mapping that is given by  the following:  
Figure 9. (a) Representation of max pooling layer and ( b) rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) activation function.
Unfortunately, one of the biggest challenges that face researchers in the analysis of medical data is
the shortage of the available dataset. Deep learning models mainly depend on the availability of lots of
labeled data. Therefore, the transfer-learning method is considered the most suitable technique with
a small number of datasets. Transfer learning is a method that allows training models with a small
dataset to gain information (learning parameters) from a pre-trained model on a large dataset [ 79].
This technique has the beneﬁt of decreasing the training time and the generalization error and increasing
the overall performance of the model. Three popular models are used for transfer learning: VGG (VGG
16 or VGG 19), GOOGLENet (Inception V3), and Residual Network (e.g., RestNet50) [80].
ResNet (Residual Neural Network) is an e ective pre-trained model that was developed in 2015;
it is an improved version of CNN. It consists of 50-layer network that trained on the ImageNet dataset.
ImageNet is an image dataset with 14 million image and 20 thousand categories [ 73]. The main
advantage in RestNet-50 is the use of a new concept called “skip connection”, which helps to mitigate
the problem of vanishing gradient. Skip connection (identify mapping) is depicted in Figure 10.
This shortcut connection helps in understanding the global features [ 74]. It also allows the network
to skip the disposable layers, thus resulting in optimal tuning and faster learning by increasing the
network capacity [ 73]. Therefore, in our study, we used a ResNet-50 pre-trained model to obtain higher