Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 10 of 25
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  11 of 25 
  
Figure 6.  Main functions of mobile app. 
Frontend App  
For users (patients, homeowners, and physicians), they deal with the android application with 
different profiles. A patient use s his/her app to register his /her basic information and collect data 
from wearable devices. The p hysician monitors patient data a nd set s up the personalized notification. 
Figure 6 shows the main functions of the android app.  
4.2. Cloud S ide 
In this layer , we need what is called “real-time analysis”. Most healthcare systems use cloud 
systems to store , analyz e, and visualiz e all patie nts’ data . Ideally, this scenario might be suitable for 
some healthcare systems, but with the current pandemic , where general population is increasingly 
being affected, the speed and the quality  of care  are the key s of the game. As a result, we need a layer 
that acts as a bridge between the cloud system and IoT devices , a layer that could analyze a patient’s 
data quickly and does not affect  neither  with internet connection status nor bandwidth status. Fog 
computing  can handle all of these challenges . As mentioned above, fog computing allows devices to 
make critical analysis on their own, without the need of a cloud storage process. Therefore, using fog 
nodes could be the key for making the system incredibly useful for  home -care patients.  The collected 
information from sensors  is sent to the nearest fog node , using the LoRa network. LoRa is a 
remarkable protocol for short messages carried over a long range . It could send 12 bit s every ten 
minute s, and t hat is exactly wh at we want when patients are out of range of cell phone towers.  
4.2.1. Fog A rchitecture  
The goal of this experiment was to investigate the effectiveness of fog computing , to provide a 
better business solution that c ould  improve the overall performance of our monitoring framework. 
The setting of this experi ment was conducted upon a personal c omputer (PC) with an Intel Core i5 -
4210U 1.70  GHz (c/TB 2.70 GHz), 4  GB RAM/Disco Duro 500  GB, and a 64 -bit PC (AMD64) Ubuntu 
operat ing system  (Intel, Santa Clara, CA, USA) . The Network Simulation version -2 (NS2.35)  [75] was 
Figure 6. Main functions of mobile app.
Table 2. Initial COVID score.
Factor Score
Temperature 1
Cough 2
Diarrhea 1
Vomiting 1
Inﬁltration 1
Shortness of breath 2
Have chronic diseases 1
Working in health care sector 3
Travel in the last 14 days 3
Suspected case: According to the score that results from the previous step, patients are asked to
take the recommended plasma test if the initial score exceeded six. Depending on plasma returned
to the shortage in of CAT Scan Machines and other kits used in the SWAP test, it is considered
as a ﬁltration step. According to Reference [ 67], WHO stated that there is a correlation between
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and white blood cells to the COVIOD-19 infection. Several studies
reported that lymphopenia is the common ﬁnding between more than 83% of the hospitalized patients.
Lymphopenia, neutrophilia, aspartate aminotransferase, lactate dehydrogenase, high C-Reactive
Protein (CRP), and high ferritin levels are associated with highly illness severity [ 19,61,64,68,69].
Table 3 includes all lab tests recommend by WHO.