Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 7 of 25
 Providing better privacy to users, as patient’s data can be analyzed locally instead of sending
them to the cloud.
 Deploying fog servers in RPMS decreased the required bandwidth for transmission, providing
real-time data to doctors, without the need for an internet connection [54].
 Saves on power consumption while continuously transmitting to cloud servers [55].
Fog IoT systems are divided into three main layers: device layer, fog layer, and cloud layer.
Dastjerdi et al. [ 56] provided a tutorial that discusses the di erences between edge computing,
fog computing and cloud computing. Stojmenovic et al. [ 57] discussed the role of fog computing
in various domains. Figure 3 shows the basic architecture of fog computing model for RPMS.
Table 1 provides in terms of many factors. Note: The comparison concentrates on factors related to
real-time monitoring.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  7 of 25 
 computing and cloud computing. Stojmenovic  et al. [57] discussed the role of fog computing in 
various dom ains. Fig ure 3 show s the basic  architecture of fog computing model for RPMS. Table 1 
provide s in terms of many factors. Note: The comparison concentrate s on factors r elated to real -time 
monitoring.  
 
Figure 3.  Fog computing in remote monitoring system.  
Table 1.  Difference between cloud computing and fog computing . 
Factor  Cloud C omputing  Fog C omputing  
Goal  Enhance the execution process data that 
should be transferred to the cloud for 
handling and storage  Give a powerful storage, 
realistic and efficient 
management  
Latency  High  Low  
Mobility  Limited  Supported  
Geo-
distribution  Centralized  Distributed  
Bandwidth cost  High  Low  
Storage 
capability  Strong  Weak  
Energy 
consumption  High  Low  
Location 
awareness  Partially supported  Fully supported  
No. of servers  Few Large  
Real -time 
interaction  Supported  Supported  
Security  Undefined  Defined  
Location of 
service  With the internet  At the edge of the local 
network  
Run time  Real time  Rea time  
Transmission  Device -to-device  Device -to-cloud  
Response time  Low  High  
Scalability  High  High  
Multitasking  Yes Yes 
3.3. Back end Layer  
This section focus es on the data base layer (third layer) and its role in remote patient monitoring. 
Medical data  are varying  in nature  and characteristics , with uncertainty  and high ly missing data  [58]. 
The early developments of artificial intelligence and medical informatics fields have culminated in 
what is known as the clinical -decision -support system (CDSS)  [13]. CDSS  is considered to be the brain 
Figure 3. Fog computing in remote monitoring system.
Table 1. Dierence between cloud computing and fog computing.
Factor Cloud Computing Fog Computing
GoalEnhance the execution process data that should be
transferred to the cloud for handling and storageGive a powerful storage, realistic
and e cient management
Latency High Low
Mobility Limited Supported
Geo-distribution Centralized Distributed
Bandwidth cost High Low
Storage capability Strong Weak
Energy consumption High Low
Location awareness Partially supported Fully supported
No. of servers Few Large
Real-time interaction Supported Supported
Security Undeﬁned Deﬁned
Location of service With the internet At the edge of the local network
Run time Real time Rea time
Transmission Device-to-device Device-to-cloud
Response time Low High
Scalability High High
Multitasking Yes Yes
3.3. Backend Layer
This section focuses on the database layer (third layer) and its role in remote patient monitoring.
Medical data are varying in nature and characteristics, with uncertainty and highly missing data [ 58].
The early developments of artiﬁcial intelligence and medical informatics ﬁelds have culminated in
what is known as the clinical-decision-support system (CDSS) [ 13]. CDSS is considered to be the brain
of a healthcare system, and it is used to assist healthcare teams in the decision-making process [ 59].