Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 6 of 25
3.1. Data-Acquisition Layer
Sensors play a key role in RPMs. A sensor acts as a bridge between the physical world and the
digital domain [ 39]. An RPMS uses various sensors to collect data about a patient’s health status
(i.e., ECG, SPO2, HR, etc.) and context data (i.e., room oxygen level, gas leakage, room temperature,
light level, etc.). Actuators can respond to feedback from decision support systems (for example,
adjust insulin dose delivered to a patient based on collected sensors data). A WBAN is an IoT-based
wireless network used for remote and real-time monitoring. In healthcare applications, wireless sensor
nodes are classiﬁed into two main types based on implementation technique: (1) implanted sensors,
which are implanted either in the patient’s body or under the skin, and (2) external sensors, which are
directly attached to the patient’s skin or separated from the patient by 2–5 cm [ 40,41]. These sensors
continuously measure the patient’s vital signs and transmit the collected data to a remote location,
using a wireless communication protocol (i.e., LoRa, WLAN, WiMAX, LTE, and UMTS).
Wireless sensor nodes allow RPMSs to capture features and information about patients, such as
aggregating real-time vital signs, tracking patient’s symptoms, and the e ect of therapy plan, monitoring
patient communications and social activities, etc. Various healthcare systems depend on wireless
sensors such as vital-sign-monitoring and health-assessment systems [ 42], reminder systems [ 43–46],
and fall-detection-monitoring systems [47].
3.2. Storage Layer
3.2.1. Cloud Computing
Cloud computing is a new paradigm that adds fruitful beneﬁts to healthcare care systems [ 48].
Beneﬁts could be summarized as the following points: (1) It increases speed and e ciency;
cloud monitoring systems usually use a group of servers to manage patient status, which increases
system speed and e cacy. Ahnn et al. [ 49] showed that CC increased the speed by 20 times and the
energy e ciency by 10 times. In addition, a hardware failure in one server does not dramatically a ect
the performance of the overall system. (2) It provides enormous amounts of storage for saving big
healthcare data ﬁles (e.g., imaging data, time series data, etc.). Moreover, it easily provides a means to
share these ﬁles with other hospitals. (3) It helps in analyzing all patients’ data (such as demographics,
symptoms, therapy plans, and treatment) and makes all the data available, to support and improve
decision-making processes [ 50,51]. (4) It provides more secure servers than do local servers for storing
patient data, as it uses security layers to secure cloud data from theft or hacks.
Cloud computing in conjunction with a WSN enables promising monitoring systems that can
enhance the quality of service (QoS). The combination o ers physicians the ability to monitor all patient
data sensed with biosensors, regardless of the type of patient data. The limitations and challenges of
cloud computing in RPMS are conﬁned to the power and time consumption, privacy, and security
of the transmitted data. In the last decades, fog computing was developed to handle the challenges
associated with CC.
3.2.2. Fog Computing
Fog computing extends the traditional cloud to edge network. The point of using fog computing
is to transfer the processing of some sensitive application to the edge (near the end device), while others
can be done over the cloud. Problems related to location awareness, reliability, latency, and many other
challenges are resolved by using the fog-computing architecture [ 52]. Fog computing in RPMS is a
new concept. It provides many advantages over cloud:
 Data processed and analyzed locally instead of sending them to the cloud; this led to the
consumption of less bandwidth and decreased the overall costs [53].
 Processing data locally decreased the time-latency during transmission, which helps to avoid
problems especially for time-sensitive applications (e.g., real-time monitoring, self-driving car, etc.).