Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 2 of 25
physical and biomedical parameters [ 3]. The IoT-based wireless body area network (WBAN) (IoT-WBAN)
is mainly constructed of a wireless sensor network of wearable embedded computing devices. The term
of IoT-WBAN offers new opportunities for real-time monitoring of patient health status and momentary
controlling quick patients’ reactions. Manirabona et al. [ 4] introduced WBAN as a promising solution for
patient monitoring in medical environments. They made maximized the utilization of data by sharing the
information generated by sensors placed on the patient’s body or under the skin. These sensors are used
to collect certain body parameters or vital signs (e.g., electrocardiogram (ECG), electroencephalogram
(EEG), body movement, temperature, blood pressure, blood glucose, heartbeat, and respiration rate levels).
The collected data are then used for different purposes such as in-hospital monitoring, remote diagnosis,
ambulatory patient monitoring, and trigger emergency services. Every WBAN node has a way for
implementation within the body and a role in the network, as suggested by IEEE 802.15.6 taxonomy.
WBAN could have a significant impact on the management of the spread of COVID-19 infection.
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is considered one of the most critical viruses on earth. It can
spread quickly among humans, as well as animals [ 5]. One Harvard professor stated that around 70% of
the global population might be infected with COVID-19 during the incoming years. The distribution of
COVID-19 cases for the most infected ten counties between 22 January 2020 and 5 August 2020 is shown
in Figure 1. As a result, the need for monitoring systems is highly increasing [ 6]. COVID-19 conﬁrmed
cases need an isolation room with continuous monitoring, and 6% of them need ICU beds to save
their lives. Most developing countries su er from a serious shortage in hospital rooms, as well as ICU
beds. As a result, patients whose lives are at risk are being turned away from the ICU units. Four in
ﬁve intensive care units are having to send patients to other hospitals due to the shortage in care units [ 7].
On the other hand, high-risk patients outside hospitals need to be monitored frequently by checking
their vital signs, like temperature, blood pressure, respiratory rate, drip level, etc. The admission time
to ICU is a critical decision, and various studies demonstrated that the late identiﬁcation of clinical
deterioration will lead to delay of therapeutic intervention and result in increasing of mortality rate [ 8].
With the rapid growing of number of COVID-19 cases, it is impossible for the non-expert physicians to
take the most accurate decisions in the right time. Therefore, various studies have been conducted
based on COVID-19 infection statistics and patient’s metadata. Some studies tried to ﬁnd relation
between the risk of being infected and other factors, such as age [ 9] and diseases (e.g., diabetes) [ 9].
Other studies used patients’ chest X-ray images or CT scans to build deep learning models for detecting
patients with sepsis [10,11].
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  2 of 25 
 various clinical challenges , by facilitating a set of operations such as the  sensing, processing, and 
communication of physical and biomedical parameters [3]. The IoT -based wireless b ody area 
network (WBAN) (IoT -WBAN) is mainly constructed of a wireless sensor network of wearable 
embedded computing devices. The term of IoT -WBAN of fers new opportunities for real -time 
monitoring of patient health status and momentary controlling quick patients’ reactions. Manirabona  
et al. [4] introduced WBAN as a promising solution for patient monitoring in medical environments. 
They made maximiz ed the utilization of data by  sharing the information generated by sensors placed 
on the patient’s body or under the skin. These sensors are used to collect certain body parameters or 
vital signs (e.g., electrocardiogram  (ECG), electroencephalogram (EEG), bod y movement, 
temperature, blood pressure, blood glucose, heartbeat, and respiration rate levels) . The collected data 
are then used for different purposes such as in -hospital monitoring, remote diagnosis, ambulatory 
patient monitoring, and trigger emergency services. Every WBAN node has a way for 
implementation within the body and a role in the network , as suggested by IEEE 802.15.6 taxonomy . 
WBAN could  have a significan t impact on the management of the spread of COVID -19 infection.  
Coronavirus disease (COVID -19) is considered one of the most critical viruses on earth. It c an 
spread quickly among humans , as well as animals  [5]. One Harvard professor stated that around 70% 
of the global population might be infected with COVID -19 during the incoming years.  The 
distribution of COVID -19 cases for the most infected ten counties between 22 January  2020 and 5 
August  2020 is shown in Figure 1. As a result, the need for monitoring systems is highly increasing  
[6]. COVID -19 confirmed cases need an isolation room wi th continuous monitoring , and  6% of them 
need ICU  beds  to save their li ves. Most developing countries  suffer from a serious shortage in hospital 
rooms , as well as ICU beds. As a result, patients whose lives are at risk are being turned away from 
the ICU units. Four in five intensive care units are having to send patients to other hospitals due to 
the shortage in care units [7]. On the other hand, high -risk patients outside hospitals need to be 
monitored frequently  by check ing their vital signs , like tempera ture, blood pressure, respiratory rate, 
drip level, etc. T he admission time to ICU is a critical decision , and various studies demonstrated that  
the late identification of clinical deterioration will lead to delay of therapeutic intervention and result 
in increasing of mortality rate [8]. With the rapid growing of number of COVID -19 cases, it is 
impossible for the non-expert physician s to take the most accurate decisions in the right time. 
Therefore,  various studies have been conducted based on COVID -19 infection statistics and patient’s 
metadata. Some studies tr ied to find relation between the risk of being infected and other factors , 
such as age  [9] and diseases  (e.g., diabetes)  [9]. Other studies used patients ’ chest  X-ray images or CT 
scan s to build deep learning model s for detect ing patients with sepsis [10,11]. 
 
Figure 1.  Distribution of COVID -19 from 22 January  to 5 August  2020.  
In this paper , we propose a complete mobile clinical -decision -support system (CDSS) that could 
continuously monitor patient s inside and outside hospitals. The system automatically collect s patient 
data  and provide s an online communication link between a patient an d healthcare professional . This 
will contribute to improve the quality of patient care. Our system perspective  is based on a set of  
sensors including  temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, SPO2 saturation, blood pressure, etc. 
Figure 1. Distribution of COVID-19 from 22 January to 5 August 2020.
In this paper, we propose a complete mobile clinical-decision-support system (CDSS) that could
continuously monitor patients inside and outside hospitals. The system automatically collects patient
data and provides an online communication link between a patient and healthcare professional.
This will contribute to improve the quality of patient care. Our system perspective is based on a set
of sensors including temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, SPO2 saturation, blood pressure, etc.