Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 13 of 25
To ﬁgure out the overall e ciency of the proposed scenario, a comparison between a system with
applying fog computing approach and another system without applying it was conducted. As seen in
Figure 8, the proposed scenario with fog technology outperforms the traditional network without fog
technology, due to its capability to reduce the total rate of data transmission, and therefore the network
bandwidth and power consumption are vastly improved.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  13 of 25 
  
Figure 8.  A comparison between system with fog and system without fog technology . 
4.2.2. Backend Cloud D atabase  
To enable the centralized storage of all clinical features, we develop ed a backend cloud database 
that utiliz es the  red hat Linux 9, Ap ache, PHP, and MySQL. First, we set  up Apache, MySQL, and 
PHP over Linux environment  for Apache as web servicing, and MySQL as database management 
and storage system. PHP is the language allow server to interact with the application. We built a 
database th at revolves around fog node  and could easily engage with the database . It contains four 
main tables , namely  patients, physicians, devices, and the extract information from patient data. 
Building a cloud database provide s dedicated storage cluster , which provide s many advantages , 
includ ing synchronous data replication, scalability in adding and removing replicas, and reducing 
complexity by using CLI and API . 
A patient’s data and status from different sources , such as medical presentation, wearable 
devices, scan test, etc. , are continuously updated in the patient’s electronic health record ( EHR ), saved 
on the cloud , and sent to analytics module , to determine whether the potential risk is exceeding the 
predefined threshold. After determining that  there  is a problem, notifications are sent to both the 
patient  and physician.  
4.3. Hospital S ide 
For the  in-hospital side , we concentrate on three  main points : (1) build a classification model that 
could classify X -ray images to COVID -19 cases or normal cases ; (2) build complete cloud -integrate d 
EHR system that aggregate s data  from patient sensors, medical presentation, lab test, and X-ray test ; 
and (3) build a CDSS system that depend s on the distributed EHR , in addition to WHO’s clinical 
practice guidelines (CPGs).  
5. Dataset Description  
The COVID -19 dataset was collected from different regions in the world and is publicly available 
from References  [77,78]. It consists of 622 cases ( 122 for COVID -19, and 500 for normal) . Due to 
shortage in training sample , and to make the data balanced, we performed  a data augmentation 
process to increase the training sample size  in COVID -19 class. We end up with 750 images (250 for 
COVID -19, and 500 for no-finding) , and  all images were reshaped  to 192 × 192. Data were  randomly 
selected to include 70% for training, 15% for validation , and 15% for testin g. 
6. Classification M odel  
According to the guidelines of WHO, the diagnosis of COVID -19 can be  confirmed with either 
a SWAP test , CT-Scan , or X-ray chest scan. During the current situation, most health organization s’ 
Figure 8. A comparison between system with fog and system without fog technology.
4.2.2. Backend Cloud Database
To enable the centralized storage of all clinical features, we developed a backend cloud database
that utilizes the red hat Linux 9, Apache, PHP , and MySQL. First, we set up Apache, MySQL, and PHP
over Linux environment for Apache as web servicing, and MySQL as database management and
storage system. PHP is the language allow server to interact with the application. We built a database
that revolves around fog node and could easily engage with the database. It contains four main tables,
namely patients, physicians, devices, and the extract information from patient data. Building a cloud
database provides dedicated storage cluster, which provides many advantages, including synchronous
data replication, scalability in adding and removing replicas, and reducing complexity by using CLI
and API.
A patient’s data and status from di erent sources, such as medical presentation, wearable devices,
scan test, etc., are continuously updated in the patient’s electronic health record (EHR), saved on
the cloud, and sent to analytics module, to determine whether the potential risk is exceeding the
predeﬁned threshold. After determining that there is a problem, notiﬁcations are sent to both the
patient and physician.
4.3. Hospital Side
For the in-hospital side, we concentrate on three main points: (1) build a classiﬁcation model that
could classify X-ray images to COVID-19 cases or normal cases; (2) build complete cloud-integrated
EHR system that aggregates data from patient sensors, medical presentation, lab test, and X-ray test;
and (3) build a CDSS system that depends on the distributed EHR, in addition to WHO’s clinical
practice guidelines (CPGs).
5. Dataset Description
The COVID-19 dataset was collected from di erent regions in the world and is publicly available
from References [ 77,78]. It consists of 622 cases (122 for COVID-19, and 500 for normal). Due to
shortage in training sample, and to make the data balanced, we performed a data augmentation process
to increase the training sample size in COVID-19 class. We end up with 750 images (250 for COVID-19,