Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 5 of 25
reduces the burden of in-hospital data management. Pandey et al. [ 38] proposed a system that integrates
mobile computing and cloud computing to analyze ECG data. The authors provided a cloud environment
to collect people’s health data, such as ECG data, and disseminated them to a cloud-based information
repository, which facilitated the analysis of the data by using software services hosted in the cloud.
Limitations and challenges of cloud computing in RPM systems are confined to the power and time
consumption, privacy , and security of the transmitted data. The proposed system tried to handle some
RPM challenges and used COVID-19 as a case study . Table A1 in Appendix A provides a summarization
of patient-monitoring systems.
3. The General Architecture of RPMS
Most patient-monitoring systems consist of three main layers: data acquisition layer, storage layer,
and backend layer. Figure 2 depicts the general architecture of RPMs.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 25 
 by using software services hosted in the cloud.  Limitations and challenges of cloud computing in 
RPM systems  are confined to the power and time consumption, privacy, and security of the 
transmitted data . The proposed syst em tried to hand le some  RPM challenges  and used COVID -19 as 
a case study.  Table A 1 in Appendix  A provides a summarization of patient -monitoring systems.  
3. The General A rchitecture of RPMS  
Most patient -monitoring systems consist of three main layers : data acquisition layer, storage 
layer , and backend layer . Figure 2 depicts the general architecture of RPMs . 
 
Figure 2.  General architecture of remote patient -monitoring system s (RPMs ). 
3.1. Data -Acquisition Layer  
Sensors play a key role in RPM s. A sensor  acts as a bridge between the physical world and the 
digital domain  [39]. An R PMS uses various sensors to collect data about a patient’s health status (i.e., 
ECG, SPO2, HR, etc.) and context data (i.e. , room oxygen level, gas leakage, room temperature, light 
level, etc.). Actuators can respond to feedback from decision support systems (for example, adjust 
insulin dose delivered to a patient based on collected sensors data). A WBAN is an IoT -based wireless 
Figure 2. General architecture of remote patient-monitoring systems (RPMs).