Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 9 of 25
4.1. Patient Side
The proposed system in this side depends on a lightweight mobile application that could
continuously track the patient status. The following is the set of modules in our mobile system: (1) person
identiﬁcation—each person creates an account using his /her identiﬁcation number; and (2) patients
tracking—all suspected and infected patients are tracked, using a GPS geolocation function of his /her
mobile device. Figure 5 shows the di erent stages of patients in our proposed system. In Figure 6,
(1)–(4) show the screens of the mobile app for identifying and tracking. All of the patient’s data
updates include status, measurements, and movements, and they are updated frequently in the
backend database. On the other hand, each building or public transportation takes a unique QR
code, adding this code on print media (such as brochures or ﬂyers) in front of them. People are not
permitted to pass unless they scan the QR code. Figure 6 (5) shows the QR screen. Once a person
scans the QR code, the person’s status (normal, infected, etc.) is retrieved form the backend database.
Healthy cases are permitted to normally pass, but suspected cases are passed through a special path,
to control the spread of infection, and other infected cases are not permitted to pass. Tracking peoples’
movements prevents all suspected and conﬁrmed cases from walking around and spreading the
infections. Additionally, if anyone is infected by COVID-19 at any time, all close contacts of him /her
will be traced and followed, using these data.
In our proposed framework, we treat with patient at five stages (normal, suspected, highly suspected,
confirmed, and recovered). For each of these stages, different steps are taken to ensure patient safety.
Mobile application is used to manage cases at early stages of the disease.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  9 of 25 
 The proposed system in this side depends on a lightweight mobile application that could 
continuously track the patient status. The following is the set of modules in our mobile system: (1) 
person identification —each person creates an account using his/her identification number ; and (2) 
patients tracking —all suspected and infected patients are tracked , using a GPS g eolocation function 
of his/her  mobile device. Figure 5 shows the different stages of patients in our proposed system. In 
Figure 6 , (1)–(4) show the screens of the mobile app for identifying and tracking. All of the patient’s 
data updates include status, me asurements, and  movements, and they are updated frequently in the 
backend database. On the other hand, each building or public transportation take s a unique QR code, 
adding this code on print media (such as brochures or flyers) in front of them. People are  not 
permitted to pass unless they scan the QR code. Figure 6 (5) shows the QR screen. Once a person 
scan s the QR code, the person’s status (normal, infected, etc.) is retrieved form the backend database. 
Healthy cases are permitted to normally pass, but s uspected cases are passed through a special path , 
to control the spread of infection , and other infected cases are not permitted to pass. Tracking  peoples’  
movements prevent s all suspected and confirmed cases from walking around and spread ing the 
infection s. Additionally, if anyone is infected by COVID -19 at any time, all close contacts of him /her 
will be traced and followed , using these data.  
In our proposed framework , we treat with patient at five stages ( normal, suspected, highly 
suspected, confirmed , and recovered). For each of these stages, different steps are taken to ensure 
patient safety. Mobile application is used to manage cases at early stages of the disease.  
 
Figure 5.  Patient’s side.  
Normal cases : In case anyone start s feeling any symptoms , such as temperature, vomiting, 
infiltration, etc., he/she firstly make s an initial COVID -19 score. This score is based on the W HO 
guidelines [63]. We provide  a graphical user interface ( GUI) form for the patient to manually enter 
the list of symptoms whic h determine the initial state of the patient. In a study of 10,114 patients [64], 
fever was present as the first symptoms for COVID -19 cases. In another studies, authors reported that 
vomiting or diarrhea sometimes are presented prior to fever [65 ,66]. Tab le 2 contains all symptoms 
and their score. If the initial score equal to six or more. Patient status will be updated as a suspected 
patient and will be asked to make the lab tests.  
Table 2.  Initial COVID  score. 
Factor  Score  
Temperature  1 
Cough  2 
Diarrhea  1 
Vomiting  1 
Infiltration  1 
Figure 5. Patient’s side.
Normal cases: In case anyone starts feeling any symptoms, such as temperature, vomiting,
inﬁltration, etc., he /she ﬁrstly makes an initial COVID-19 score. This score is based on the WHO
guidelines [ 63]. We provide a graphical user interface (GUI) form for the patient to manually enter the
list of symptoms which determine the initial state of the patient. In a study of 10,114 patients [ 64],
fever was present as the ﬁrst symptoms for COVID-19 cases. In another studies, authors reported that
vomiting or diarrhea sometimes are presented prior to fever [ 65,66]. Table 2 contains all symptoms
and their score. If the initial score equal to six or more. Patient status will be updated as a suspected
patient and will be asked to make the lab tests.