Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 3 of 25
Smart devices, such as smart phones, remotely receive the information sensed by these sensors and act
as bridges between patients and healthcare personnel [ 12]. Collected information is aggregated in an
electronic health record (EHR) database stored on the cloud [ 13]. In addition to that, in the hospital
side, a deep neural network is proposed based on a patient’s X-ray images for chest scan, to help
non-expert physicians to automatically detect COVID-19 cases. The contributions of this paper can be
summarized as follows:
(a) This is the ﬁrst work that provides an end-to-end (E2E) deep-learning-assisted communication
framework for COVID-19 disease management.
(b) It provides a monitoring system that could limit the spread of infection through the continuous
monitoring for all suspected and infected patients.
(c) The proposed scheme is the ﬁrst attempt in the COVID-19 domain that integrates both fog and
cloud computing paradigms to solve the problems related to power consumption, transmission
issues, data analysis, etc.
(d) Unlike existing works, the present work focuses on building complete data from patients’ data,
to help clinicians in diagnosis.
(e) The proposed classiﬁcation model could detect and classify COVID-19 patients based on the
chest X-ray images with promising results.
The reminder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the related work.
The challenges of a remote patient-monitoring system (RPMS) are discussed in Section 3. The proposed
framework is presented in Section 4. Section 5 contains a dataset descript. Classiﬁcation model
discussed in Section 6. Results are discussed in Section 7. Section 8 provides the limitations of our
contribution. Finally, a conclusion is provided in Section 9.
2. Related Work
2.1. COVID-19 Pandemic
Coronaviruses are non-segmented positive RNA viruses that belong to the Coronaviridae family,
which is widely distributed among humans and other mammals. Although coronavirus infections for
humans are mild, the epidemics of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) [ 14]
and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) [ 15] have resulted in more than
10,000 cumulative cases in the past wo decades (with mortality rates of 10% for SARS-CoV [ 16] and
37% for MERS-CoV [ 17]). In 2019, many unknown cases of pneumonia appeared in Wuhan, China.
Sequence of deep studies on respiratory tract samples revealed a novel coronavirus, which called is
COVID-19. To date, more than 19,193,980 patients have been reported in 210 di erent countries and
territories around the world. Therefore, various medical and non-medical studies have been conducted
to understand the nature of virus.
First, several studies have been conducted to ﬁnd a correlation between COVID-19 progression
and other factors, such as age, heart diseases, etc. In References [ 18–21], the authors reported that
age is one of the main risk factors for diseases complication. Among 44,000 infected cases in China,
the fatality rate between elderly >80 was 14.8%; 70–78 years was 8.0%; and 60–69 years was 3.6%.
The epidemiologic data in the USA also reported that the fatality rate between people aged of more
than 85 years ranged between 10% and 27%, followed by people aged between 65 and 84, with 3%
to 11%. Other studies reported case fatality of 10.5% between patients with cardiovascular disease,
7% for patients with diabetes, and approximately 6% for patients with respiratory diseases [ 9,19,22].
Huang et al. [ 23] aggregated metadata of COVID-19 patients and used data-mining techniques to
analyze these data, such as extracting relations between smoking and infection.
Second, many studies tried to forecast the number of infected cases based on the currently collected
statistics. Id et al. [ 24] used time-series forecasting techniques to predict the number of deaths and
recoveries. Li et al. [ 25] tried to ﬁnd propagation rule of the virus. First, they developed a dynamic