Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 11 of 25
Table 3. Plasma test.
Plasma Test Normal Range
White Blood Cells (WBC) (4–11)
Lymphocytopenia (3–9)
Lactate Dehydrogenase (LDH) (140–280)
C-Reactive Protein (CRP) <3 mg /L
Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR) (0–20) mm /h
Ferritin Level Blood Test (12–150) ng /mL
Highly suspected case: In this step, patients will do a SWAP test and CT scan, and all data on
each of the previous steps are updated on patent’s data.
Conﬁrmed case: In this step, patients are categorized into two categories. The ﬁrst is serve
disease, where patients require hospitalization to manage COVID-19 complications, such as hypoxemic
respiratory failure (ARDS), pneumonia, sepsis, etc. [ 20,69–71]. The second is mild-to-moderate diseases,
where patients may not require hospitalization, and their health status could be managed at home or
through continuous monitoring system. This type of patient is the core of our work. The decision of
the monitoring system (inpatient, outpatient) should be speciﬁed case by case. It depends on several
factors, including the results of clinical examination, the potential of risk factors, and the ability to
make home isolation. People with risk for serve diseases should have close monitoring to avoid the
progression especially in the second week of infection [18,23,69].
To enable home monitoring systems, sensors and actuators are deployed in a patient’s home.
It includes wearable sensors, such as a temperature sensor and heart rate senor, and environmental
sensors, such as motion-detection sensor. The homeowner logs into patient’s mobile application
installed on his /her device and authorizes the access to device data.
Recovered case: The incubation period for COVID-19 (the time between the initial infection and
the onset of symptoms) is estimated to be 14 days, with an average time of four to ﬁve days [ 68,72].
Minaee et al. [ 73] reported that 97.5% of patients who develop COVID-19 symptoms will recover
within 11.5 days. However, Ruiyun et al. [ 74] reported that 4% of COVID-19 patients may be able to
spread infection even after all symptoms disappeared. Therefore, we depend on re-SWAP tests to
ensure patient safety and limit the spread of infection.
Frontend App
For users (patients, homeowners, and physicians), they deal with the android application with
dierent proﬁles. A patient uses his /her app to register his /her basic information and collect data
from wearable devices. The physician monitors patient data and sets up the personalized notiﬁcation.
Figure 6 shows the main functions of the android app.
4.2. Cloud Side
In this layer, we need what is called “real-time analysis”. Most healthcare systems use cloud
systems to store, analyze, and visualize all patients’ data. Ideally, this scenario might be suitable for
some healthcare systems, but with the current pandemic, where general population is increasingly
being a ected, the speed and the quality of care are the keys of the game. As a result, we need a
layer that acts as a bridge between the cloud system and IoT devices, a layer that could analyze a
patient’s data quickly and does not a ect neither with internet connection status nor bandwidth status.
Fog computing can handle all of these challenges. As mentioned above, fog computing allows devices
to make critical analysis on their own, without the need of a cloud storage process. Therefore, using fog
nodes could be the key for making the system incredibly useful for home-care patients. The collected
information from sensors is sent to the nearest fog node, using the LoRa network. LoRa is a remarkable
protocol for short messages carried over a long range. It could send 12 bits every ten minutes, and that
is exactly what we want when patients are out of range of cell phone towers.