Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 4 of 25
model for infected cases; second, they built a statistical model based on time-series analysis and used
data mining to ﬁnd an epidemic law of infection. Jia et al. [ 26] used three machine learning (ML)
models (logistic model, Bertalan y model, and Gompertz model) to analyze the collected number of
infections and to predict the expected number of infections.
Third, various studies depending on ML and deep learning models have been used to predict,
identify, and classify patients with COIVD-19 cases [ 27]. For example, Ozturk el al. [ 28] provided a
deep learning model that was based on Dark Net and convolution neural network (CNN) trained on
125 chest X-ray; they achieved 87.02% in terms of multiclass classiﬁcation (COVID-19 vs. pneumonia
vs. no ﬁnding), and they achieved an accuracy of 98.08% for COVID-19 vs. no-ﬁnding problem.
The same idea has been done in References [ 29,30]. Barstugan el al. [ 31] utilized 150 CT images for
the detection of COVID-19. First, they used wavelet transform (DWT) to extract features, and then
they used a support vector machine (SVM) for classiﬁcation. They achieved 99.68% classiﬁcation
accuracy with 10-fold cross-validation. Pathak el al. [ 10] used the ResNet (Residual Neural Network)
transfer-learning technique to classify CT-scan images.
To the best of our knowledge, none of the existing studies focuses on the deep-learning-aided E2E
communication system to limit the infection of COVID-19. Therefore, a complete tracking system is
highly required, which is the main objective of this study.
2.2. Healthcare Monitoring Systems
In this subsection, we concentrate on the role of mobile monitoring systems in the management
of dierent diseases, including heart diseases, disability diseases, etc. [ 32,33]. These systems aim
to make a patient’s life easier through introducing various supportive systems (e.g., telemedicine,
teleconsultations, etc.). A comprehensive review of mobile health-monitoring systems (MHMs) is
presented by El-Sappagh et al. [ 34] and Sruthi et al. [ 35]. Researches in MHMs divided the development
of monitoring systems into three main steps: (1) patient’s data and vital signs acquisition, (2) data
transmission across various network systems, and (3) backend system (database system), usually
located in the hospital or on the cloud. In this subsection, various studies are analyzed, at di erent
levels of details, to provide complete image of monitoring systems. Pandey et al. [ 36] proposed
a monitoring system for cardiovascular diseases. They use wearable sensors to collect vital signs
(e.g., blood pressure, galvanic skin response (GSR), and electrocardiogram (ECG)), then Bluetooth is
used to transmit WSN data to a mobile device. The aggregated data are stored on patient’s mobile
device and then used to classify the patient’s health status, to determine patient condition “continued
risk” or “no longer risk”, using support vector machine (SVM). Sahoo et al. [ 37] proposed a mobile
monitoring system that used the noncontact method to automatically measure patient’s biomedical
signals. The idea of this research is to monitor patient ECG on various locations (e.g., o ce, car, etc.)
through fabric sensor electrodes embedded in a patient’s chair. The Bluetooth is used to transmit signals
from the sensor to a patient’s mobile device, and the system provides feedback to the patient when any
risk is detected. Such types of systems that depend only on a mobile device in the patient-monitoring
process are not suitable for chronic disease patient, as they have many limitations relating to limited
storage and reliance on incomplete patient personal and medical data. These limitations prevented
their acceptance by the medical community. Therefore, building e ective and e cient RPM systems is
highly required, especially with the health organizations’ inability to provide health services due to the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Using cloud service added many capabilities and solved many limitations in RPM. Cloud computing
(CC) provided services that can be divided into three layers of services: infrastructure as a service
(IaaS), which provided high-volume storage, such as in Amazon storage service S3; platform as a service
(PaaS), which offers both storage and service, such as Google App; and software as a service (SaaS).
Cloud computing combined with WSN provided promising monitoring systems that enhance the quality
of service. It allows real-time access to patient data at any time and from anywhere. It also permits
processing, analyzing, and sharing data; moreover, it provides high-volume storage at a low cost and