family of object detection networks designed around efﬁciency is the YOLO family of neural
network architectures [ 12,13,14], which leverage a number of design principles to create single-shot
architectures which can achieve embedded object detection performance on high-end desktop GPUs.
However, these network architectures remain too large for many edge and mobile scenarios (e.g.,
240MB in the case of the YOLOv3 architecture), and their inference speeds drop considerably when
running on edge and mobile processors due to computational complexity (e.g., >65B operations in the
case of YOLOv3). To address this issue, Redmon et al. introduced the Tiny YOLO family of network
architectures, which has greatly reduced model sizes at a cost of object detection performance.
In this study, we are motivated to explore a human-machine collaborative design strategy to designing
highly compact deep convolutional neural networks for the task of object detection, where principled
network design prototyping is coupled with machine-driven design exploration. More speciﬁcally,
we leverage the design principles from the YOLO family of single-shot object detection network
architectures within this human-machine collaborative design strategy to create YOLO Nano, a highly
compact network with highly customized module-level macroarchitecture and microarchitecture
designs tailored for the task of embedded object detection.
2 Methods
In this study, we introduce YOLO Nano, a highly compact deep convolutional neural network for
embedded object detection designed using a human-machine collaborative design strategy [ 21]. The
human-machine collaborative design strategy for designing YOLO Nano comprises of two main
design stages: i) principled network design prototyping, and ii) machine-driven design exploration.
2.1 Principled network design prototyping
The ﬁrst design stage in creating YOLO Nano is a principled network design prototyping stage,
where we create an initial network design prototype (denoted as '), based on human-driven design
principles to guide the machine-driven design exploration stage. More speciﬁcally, we construct an
initial network design prototype based on the design principles of the YOLO family of single-shot
architecture [ 12,13,14]. A standout characteristic of the YOLO family of network architectures is
that, unlike region proposal-based networks which rely on the construction of a regional proposal
network to generate proposals for where objects lie in the scene followed by classiﬁcation on the
generated proposals, they instead leverage a single network architecture to process the input image
and generate the output results. As such, all object detection predictions for a single image are made
in a single forward pass, compared to hundreds to thousands of passes that need to be performed to
get the ﬁnal results for region proposal-based networks. This makes the YOLO family of network
architectures signiﬁcantly faster to run, and thus better suited for embedded object detection.
The initial design prototype used in this study draws inspiration from the YOLO family of network
architectures and is comprised of a stack of feature representation modules, with shortcut connections
between the modules as with [ 14]. Also, as with [ 14], the feature representation modules are
conﬁgured in a way, similar to feature pyramid networks [ 10], such that it is capable of representing
features at three different scales. These feature representation modules are followed by several
convolutional layers, with output being a three-dimensional tensor that encodes bounding box,
objectness, and class predictions for three different scales. As a result, this initial design prototype
architecture design allows for efﬁcient multi-scale object detection.
The actual macroarchitecture and microarchitecture designs of the individual modules and layers
in the ﬁnal YOLO Nano network architecture, as well as the number of network modules, are left
for the machine-driven design exploration stage to determine automatically given data as well as
human-speciﬁed design requirements and constraints designed speciﬁcally around edge and mobile
scenarios with limited computational and memory capabilities.
2.2 Machine-driven design exploration
Using the initial network design prototype ( '), data, as well as human-speciﬁed design requirements
catered to edge and mobile usage as a guide, a machine-driven design exploration stage is then
leveraged to determine the module-level macroarchitecture and microarchitecture designs for the
proposed YOLO Nano network architecture. More speciﬁcally, machine-driven design exploration
is achieved in this study in the form of generative synthesis [ 22], which is capable of determining
the optimal macroarchitecture and microarchitecture designs of the ﬁnal network architecture within
the human-speciﬁed requirements and constraints. The overall goal of generative synthesis is to
learn generative machines that can generate deep neural networks that meet design requirements and
constraints, and can be described as follows. This is formulated within the concept of generative
2