YOLO Nano: a Highly Compact You Only Look Once
Convolutional Neural Network for Object Detection
Alexander Wong1;2, Mahmoud Famuori1;2, Mohammad Javad Shaﬁee1;2
Francis Li2, Brendan Chwyl2, and Jonathan Chung2
1Waterloo Artiﬁcial Intelligence Institute, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
2DarwinAI Corp., Waterloo, ON, Canada
Abstract
Object detection remains an active area of research in the ﬁeld of computer vision,
and considerable advances and successes has been achieved in this area through the
design of deep convolutional neural networks for tackling object detection. Despite
these successes, one of the biggest challenges to widespread deployment of such
object detection networks on edge and mobile scenarios is the high computational
and memory requirements. As such, there has been growing research interest
in the design of efﬁcient deep neural network architectures catered for edge and
mobile usage. In this study, we introduce YOLO Nano, a highly compact deep
convolutional neural network for the task of object detection. A human-machine
collaborative design strategy is leveraged to create YOLO Nano, where principled
network design prototyping, based on design principles from the YOLO family
of single-shot object detection network architectures, is coupled with machine-
driven design exploration to create a compact network with highly customized
module-level macroarchitecture and microarchitecture designs tailored for the task
of embedded object detection. The proposed YOLO Nano possesses a model size
of4.0MB ( >15.1and>8.3smaller than Tiny YOLOv2 and Tiny YOLOv3,
respectively) and requires 4.57B operations for inference (>34% and 17% lower
than Tiny YOLOv2 and Tiny YOLOv3, respectively) while still achieving an
mAP of69.1% on the VOC 2007 dataset ( 12% and10.7% higher than Tiny
YOLOv2 and Tiny YOLOv3, respectively). Experiments on inference speed and
power efﬁciency on a Jetson AGX Xavier embedded module at different power
budgets further demonstrate the efﬁcacy of YOLO Nano for embedded scenarios.
1 Introduction
An active area in the ﬁeld of computer vision is object detection, where the goal is to not only localize
objects of interest within a scene, but also assign a class label to each of these objects of interest.
Considerable recent successes in the area of object detection stems from modern advances in deep
learning [ 8,7], particularly leveraging deep convolutional neural networks. Much of the initial focus
was on improving accuracy, leading to increasingly more complex object detection networks such as
SSD [ 11], R-CNN [ 2], Mask R-CNN [ 3], and other extended variants of these networks [ 6,9,18].
While such networks demonstrated state-of-the-art object detection performance, they were very
challenging, if not impossible, to deploy on edge and mobile devices due to computational and
memory constraints. In fact, even faster variants such as Faster R-CNN [ 15] have inference speeds at
low single-digit frame rates when running on embedded processors. This greatly limits the widespread
adoption of such networks for a wide range of applications such as unmanned aerial vehicles, video
surveillance, autonomous driving where local embedded processing is required.
To address this challenge of achieving embedded object detection, there has been a growing interest
in the exploration and design of highly efﬁcient deep neural network architectures for object detection
that are more well-suited for edge and mobile devices [ 12,13,14,23,4,17]. A particularly interesting
Preprint. Under review.arXiv:1910.01271v1  [cs.CV]  3 Oct 2019