dimensionality. The use of residual PEP macroarchitectures enables signiﬁcant reductions in the
architectural and computational complexity while preserving model expressiveness.
3.2 Fully-connected Attention Macroarchitecture
The second notable observation about the YOLO Nano network architecture is the strategic introduc-
tion of light-weight fully-connected attention (FCA) within the network by the machine-driven design
exploration process, which is in contrast to ﬁxed module-level introduction in other design exploration
methods [ 19]. As with [ 5], the FCA macroarchitecture consists of two fully-connected layers that
learn the dynamic, non-linear inter-dependencies between channels and produces modulation weights
for re-weight the channels via channel-wise multiplication. The use of FCA facilitates for dynamic
feature recalibration based on global information to pay more attention to informative features, thus
enabling better utilization of available network capacity. This in turn allows for a strong balance
between reduced architectural and computational complexity and model expressiveness.
3.3 Macroarchitecture and Microarchitecture Heterogeneity
The third notable observation about the YOLO Nano network architecture is that there is high hetero-
geneity in terms of not only macroarchitectures (a diverse mix of PEP modules, EP modules, FCA,
as well as individual 3 3 and 11 convolution layers), but also in terms of the microarchitectures of
the individual feature representation modules and layers, with each module or layer in the network
having unique microarchitectures. The beneﬁt of having high microarchitecture heterogeneity in
the YOLO Nano network architecture is that it enables each component of the network architecture
to be uniquely tailored to achieve a very strong balance between architectural and computational
complexity and model expressiveness. This architectural diversity in YOLO Nano also demonstrates
the advantage of leveraging a machine-driven design exploration strategy as ﬂexible as generative
synthesis as it would be impossible for a human designer, or other design exploration methods such
as [19, 1] to customize a network architecture to this level of architectural granularity.
4 Experimental Results and Discussion
To study the efﬁcacy of YOLO Nano for embedded object detection, we examine its model size,
object detection accuracy, and computational cost on the PASCAL VOC datasets. For comparison
purposes, the Tiny YOLOv2 network [ 13] and the Tiny YOLOv3 network [ 14] were used as a
baseline references given that they are amongst the most popular compact deep neural networks for
embedded object detection given their small model sizes and low computational complexities. The
VOC2007/2012 datasets consist of natural images that have been annotated with 20 different types of
objects. The deep neural networks were trained using the VOC2007/2012 training datasets, and the
mean average precision (mAP) was computed on the VOC2007 test dataset to evaluate the object
detection accuracy of the deep neural networks, as is standard practice in research literature.
Table 1 shows the model sizes and the object detection accuracies of the proposed YOLO Nano
network as well as Tiny YOLOv2 and Tiny YOLOv3. First, it was observed that the model size
of YOLO Nano was 4.0MB, which is >15.1and>8.3smaller than Tiny YOLOv2 and Tiny
YOLOv3, respectively, which is very important for edge and mobile scenarios given the memory
constraints. Second, YOLO Nano, despite being much smaller in model size, achieved an mAP of
69.1% on the VOC 2007 test dataset, which is 12% and10.7% higher than that of Tiny YOLOv2
and Tiny YOLOv3, respectively. Third, YOLO Nano requires just 4.57 billion operations to perform
inference, which is >34% lower than Tiny YOLOv2 and 17% lower than Tiny YOLOv3.
Table 1: Object detection accuracy results of tested compact networks on VOC 2007 test set. Input
size is 416416 for all tested networks. Best results are highlighted in bold .
Model Model mAP computational cost
Name size (VOC 2007) (ops)
Tiny YOLOv2 [13] 60.5MB 57.1% 6.97B
Tiny YOLOv3 [14] 33.4MB 58.4% 5.52B
YOLO Nano 4.0MB 69.1% 4.57B
Finally, to investigate the real-world performance of YOLO Nano within an embedded scenario,
we evaluated the inference speed and power efﬁciency of YOLO Nano running on a Jetson AGX
Xavier embedded module at different power budgets. At 15W and 30W power budgets, YOLO Nano
achieved inference speeds of 26.9 FPS and48.2 FPS, respectively, resulting in power efﬁciencies
of1.97 images/sec/watt and 1.61 images/sec/watt, respectively. These experimental results show
that the proposed YOLO Nano network, created through a human-machine collaborative design
strategy, provides a strong balance between accuracy, size, and computational complexity that makes
it well suited for embedded object detection for edge and mobile scenarios.
4