prior inside the datasets [16, 23, 59]. One of the reasons for
having language priors in datasets is the uneven distribution
of answers in the dataset. In VQA v1 [4], since the dataset
is formed from the images of MSCOCO [37], the answers
to the question of “what sport ...” are tennis andbaseball
over 50%. Another example is the question “is there ...”,
having yesas an answer in over 70% of the cases. As can
be seen from Figure 4, our dataset apart from the “sign”
and “year” questions follows a uniform distribution for the
answers, reducing the risk of language priors while having
a big vocabulary for the answers.
whathowwhowhichwhere
is
does
numberwordarebrandtypecolorkindyearcompanynamemanymuchisis
the
written
on
the
itisistheisofofisofiswasisisarethethename
number
brand
ﬁrst
word
licensebuslast
websitestreetsignsecond
on
inthe
signred
sayontheonwrittenthethe
Figure 3. Distribution of questions in the ST-VQA train set by their
starting 4-grams (ordered from center to outwards). Words with a
small contribution are not shown for better visualization.
To put ST-VQA in perspective, VQA 2.0 [16], the
biggest dataset in the community, contains 1.1 million ques-
tions out of which only 8k, corresponding to less than 1%
of the total questions, requires reading the text in the im-
age. The TextVQA [50] dataset on the other hand comprises
28,408images paired with 45,336questions.
As a result of the different collection procedures fol-
lowed, all ST-VQA questions can be answered unambigu-
ously directly using the text in the image, while in the case
of TextVQA reportedly 39% (18k) of the answers do not
contain any of the OCR tokens2. This might be either due
to the type of the questions deﬁned, or due to shortcomings
of the employed text recognition engine.
The fact that ST-VQA answers are explicitly grounded
to the scene text, allows us to collect a single answer per
question To consider an answer as correct, we introduce a
2Presentation of the TextVQA Challenge, CVPR 2019soft metric that requires it to have a small edit distance to
the correct answer (see section 3.4), factoring this way in
the evaluation procedure the performance of the text recog-
nition sub-system. In the case of TextVQA, 10answers
are collected per question and any answer supported by at
least three subjects is considered correct. In order to bet-
ter understand the effects of our approach compared to col-
lecting multiple responses like in TextVQA, we performed
an experiment collecting 10answers for a random subset
of1,000ST-VQA questions. Our analysis showed that in
84.1%of the cases there is agreement between the major-
ity of subjects and the original answer. The same metric
for TextVQA is 80.3%, conﬁrming that deﬁning a single
unambiguous answer results in similarly low ambiguity at
evaluation time.
3.3. Tasks
We deﬁne 3 novel tasks, suitable for the ST-VQA
dataset, namely “strongly contextualised”, “weakly contex-
tualised” and “open vocabulary”.
The proposed differentiation of tasks can be interpreted
by how humans make use of prior knowledge to argue about
their current situation. Such prior knowledge in ST-VQA is
provided as a dictionary, different for each task. Similar ap-
proaches using dynamic per-image dictionaries have been
used for DVQA in [24] and for scene text understanding
in [26]. Our formulation of the tasks is inspired by the pre-
vious notions and the difﬁculty per task increases gradu-
ally. In the strongly contextualised task we capture this prior
knowledge by creating a dictionary per image for the spe-
ciﬁc scenario depicted. In the weakly contextualised task
we provide a single dictionary comprising all the words in
the answers of the dataset. Finally, for the open dictionary
task, we treat the problem as tabula rasa where no a priori
and no external information is available to the model.
For the strongly contextualised task (1), following the
standard practice used for end-to-end word spotting [27,
26, 55], we create a dictionary per image that contains the
words that appear in the answers deﬁned for questions on
that image, along with a series of distractors. The distrac-
tors are generated in two ways. On one hand, they comprise
instances of scene text as returned by a text recogniser ap-
plied on the image. On the other hand, they comprise words
obtained by exploiting the semantic understanding of the
scene, in the form of the output of a dynamic lexicon gen-
eration model [43, 14]. The dictionary for the strongly con-
textualised task is 100words long and deﬁned per image.
In the weakly contextualised task (2), we provide a
unique dictionary of 30,000words for all the datasets’ im-
ages which is formed by collecting all the 22kground truth
words plus 8kdistractors generated in the same way as in
the previous task. Finally for the open dictionary task (3),
we provide no extra information thus we can consider it as
4294