what are
what brand
what companywhat does it say
what does the signwhat is the brandwhat is the bus what is the first
what is the licensewhat is the namewhat is the numberwhat is the word what is written in what is written onwhat kind
what numberwhat type what word what yearwhere whichwho howstop22013201220072009201020082011Figure 4. Distribution of answers for different types of questions in the ST-VQA train set. Each color represents a different unique answer.
an open-lexicon task.
By proposing the aforementioned tasks the VQA prob-
lem is conceived in a novel manner that has certain advan-
tages. First, it paves the way for research on automatically
processing and generating such prior information, and its
effect on the model design and performance. Second, it
provides an interesting training ground for end-to-end read-
ing systems, where the provided dictionaries can be used to
prime text spotting methods.
3.4. Evaluation and Open Challenge
Since the answers of our dataset are contained within the
text found in the image, which is dependent on the accu-
racy of the OCR being employed, the classical evaluation
metric of VQA tasks is not optimum for our dataset, e.g.
if the model reasons properly about the answer but makes
a mistake of a few characters in the recognition stage, like
in Figure 6 (ﬁrst row, third column), the typical accuracy
score would be 0. However, the metric we propose named
Average Normalized Levenshtein Similarity (ANLS) would
give an intermediate score between 0.5 and 1 that will softly
penalise the OCR mistakes. Thus, a motivation of deﬁning
a metric that captures OCR accuracy as well as model rea-
soning is evident. To this end, in all 3 tasks we use the nor-
malized Levenshtein similarity [34] as an evaluation metric.
More formally, we deﬁne ANLS as follows:
ANLS=1
NN/summationdisplay
i=0/parenleftbigg
max
js(aij,oqi)/parenrightbigg
(1)
s(aij,oqi) =/braceleftBigg
(1−NL(aij,oqi))ifNL(aij,oqi)< τ
0 if NL(aij,oqi)/greaterorequalslantτ
whereNis the total number of questions in the dataset,
Mis the total number of GT answers per question, aij
are the ground truth answers where i={0,...,N}, and
j={0,...,M}, andoqiis the network’s answer for the
ithquestionqi.NL(aij,oqi)is the normalized Levenshteindistance between the strings aijandoqi(notice that the nor-
malized Levenshtein distance is a value between 0and1).
We deﬁne a threshold τ= 0.5that penalizes metrics larger
than this value, thus the ﬁnal score will be 0if theNL is
larger than τ. The intuition behind the threshold is that if an
output has an edit distance of more than 0.5to an answer,
meaning getting half of the answer wrong, we reason that
the output is the wrong text selected from the options as an
answer. Otherwise, the metric has a smooth response that
can gracefully capture errors in text recognition.
In addition, we provide an online service where the open
challenge was hosted [5], that researchers can use to evalu-
ate their methods against a public validation/test dataset.
4. Baselines and Results
The following section describes the baselines employed
in this work as well as an analysis of the results obtained
in the experiments conducted. The proposed baselines help
us to showcase the difﬁculty of the proposed dataset and its
tasks. Aside from baselines designed to exploit all the in-
formation available (visual information, scene text, and the
question), we have purposely included baselines that ignore
one or more of the available pieces of information in order
to establish lower bounds of performance. The following
baselines are employed to evaluate the datasets:
Random: As a way of assessing aimless chance, we re-
turn a random word from the dictionary provided for each
task (see section 3.3 for more detail).
Scene Text Retrieval: This baseline leverages a single
shot CNN architecture [13] that predicts at the same time
bounding boxes and a Pyramidal Histogram Of Characters
(PHOC) [3]. The PHOC is a compact representation of a
word that considers the spatial location of each character to
construct the resulting encoding. This baseline ignores the
question and any other visual information of the image.
We have deﬁned two approaches: the ﬁrst (“STR re-
trieval”) uses the speciﬁc task dictionaries as queries to a
given image, and the top-1 retrieved word is returned as the
4295