formation is necessary. Integrating the textual modality in
existing VQA pipelines is not trivial. On one hand, spot-
tingrelevant textual information in the scene requires per-
forming complex reasoning about positions, colors, objects
and semantics, to localise, recognise and eventually inter-
pret the recognised text in the context of the visual content,
or any other contextual information available. On the other
hand, current VQA models work mostly on the principle of
classical [44] and operant (instrumental) conditioning [51].
Such models, display important dataset biases [23] as well
as failures in counting [9, 1], comparing and identifying at-
tributes. These limitations make current models unsuitable
to directly integrate scene text information which is often
orthogonal and uncorrelated to the visual statistics of the
image.
To this end, in this work we propose a new dataset, called
Scene Text Visual Question Answering (ST-VQA) where the
questions and answers are attained in a way that questions
can only be answered based on the text present in the image.
We consciously draw the majority (85.5%) of ST-VQA im-
ages from datasets that have generic question/answer pairs
that can be combined with ST-VQA to establish a more
generic, holistic VQA task. Some sample images and ques-
tions from the collected dataset are shown in Figure 1.
Additionally, we introduce three tasks of increasing dif-
ﬁculty that simulate different degrees of availability of con-
textual information. Finally, we deﬁne a new evaluation
metric to better discern the models’ answering ability, that
employs the Levenshtein distance [34] to account both for
reasoning errors as well as shortcomings of the text recog-
nition subsystem [15]. The dataset, as well as performance
evaluation scripts and an online evaluation service are avail-
able through the ST-VQA Web portal1.
2. Related Work
The task of text detection and recognition in natural im-
ages sets the starting point for a generalized VQA system
that can integrate textual cues towards complete scene un-
derstanding. The most common approach in the reading
systems community consists of two steps, text detection and
recognition. Several works have been proposed addressing
text detection such as [36, 35, 60, 21] which are mostly
based on Fully Convolutional Neural Networks.
Text recognition methods such as the one presented
in [22] propose recognizing text at the word level as a
classiﬁcation problem (word spotting) from a 90KEnglish
words vocabulary. Approaches that use Connectionist Tem-
poral Classiﬁcation have also been widely used in scene text
recognition, in works such as [47, 7, 57, 12, 38], among
others. Later works focus towards end-to-end architectures
such as the ones presented by [8, 39, 20], which mostly con-
1https://rrc.cvc.uab.es/?ch=11sist of an initial Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) that
acts as an encoder and a Long Short Term Memory (LSTM)
combined with attention that acts as the decoder.
Visual Question Answering (VQA) aims to come up with
an answer to a given natural language question about the
image. Since its introduction, VQA has received a lot of
attention from the Computer Vision community [4, 11, 46,
16, 23, 2] facilitated by access to large-scale datasets that
allow the training of VQA models [4, 16, 33, 58, 52, 40].
Despite VQA’s popularity, none of the existing datasets ex-
cept TextVQA (reviewed separately next) consider textual
content, while in our work, exploiting textual information
found in the images is the only way to solve the VQA task.
Related to the task proposed in this paper, are the recent
works of Kaﬂe et al. [24] and Kahou et al. [25] on question
answering for bar charts and diagrams, the work of Kise
at al. [32] on QA for machine printed document images,
and the work of Kembhavi et al. [29] on textbook ques-
tion answering. The Textbook Question Answering (TQA)
dataset [29] aims at answering multimodal questions given
a context of text, diagrams and images, but textual infor-
mation is provided in computer readable format. This is not
the case for the diagrams and charts of the datasets proposed
in [24, 25], meaning that models require some sort of text
recognition to solve such QA tasks. However, the text found
on these datasets is rendered in standard font types and with
good quality, and thus represents a less challenging setup
than the scene text used in our work.
TextVQA [50] is a concurrent work to the one presented
here. Similarly to ST-VQA, TextVQA proposes an alterna-
tive dataset for VQA which requires reading and reasoning
about scene text. Additionally, [50] also introduces a novel
architecture that combines a standard VQA model [49] and
an independently trained OCR module [7] with a “copy”
mechanism, inspired by pointer networks [54, 17], which
allows to use OCR recognized words as predicted answers
if needed. Both TextVQA and ST-VQA datasets are con-
ceptually similar, although there are important differences
in the implementation and design choices. We offer here
a high-level summary of key differences, while section 3.2
gives a quantitative comparison between the two datasets.
In the case of ST-VQA, a number of different source im-
age datasets were used, including scene text understanding
ones, while in the case of TextVQA all images come from
a single source, the Open Images dataset. To select the im-
ages to annotate for the ST-VQA, we explicitly required a
minimum amount of two text instances to be present, while
in TextVQA images were sampled on a category basis, em-
phasizing categories that are expected to contain text. In
terms of the questions provided, ST-VQA focuses on ques-
tions that can be answered unambiguously directly using
part of the image text as answer, while in TextVQA any
question requiring reading the image text is allowed.
4292