Q:What brand are the ma-
chines?
A:bongard
SAN(CNN)+STR: ray
SAAA+STR: ray
Scene Image OCR: zbongard
STR (bbox): 1Q:Where is the high court lo-
cated?
A:delhi
SAN(CNN)+STR: delhi
SAAA+STR: delhi
Scene Image OCR: high
STR (bbox): delhiQ:What does the black label
say?
A:GemOro
SAN(CNN)+STR: st. george ct.
SAAA+STR: esplanade
Scene Image OCR: gemors
STR (bbox): genoaQ:What’s the street name?
A:place d’armes
SAN(CNN)+STR: 10th st
SAAA+STR: ramistrasse
Scene Image OCR: d’armes
STR (bbox): dames
Q:What is the route of the bus?
A:purple route
SAN(CNN)+STR: 66
SAAA+STR: 508
Scene Image OCR: 1208
STR (bbox): purpleQ:What is the automobile spon-
sor of the event?
A:kia
SAN(CNN)+STR: kia
SAAA+STR: kia
Scene Image OCR: kin
STR (bbox): 0Q:Which dessert is showcased?
A:donut
A:Vegan Donut
SAN(CNN)+STR: t
SAAA+STR: Donuts
Scene Image OCR: 175
STR (bbox): northQ:What is preheat oven temper-
ature?
A:350
SAN(CNN)+STR: 350
SAAA+STR: 0
Scene Image OCR: high
STR (bbox): receivables
Figure 6. Qualitative results for different methods on task 1 (strongly contextualised) of the ST-VQA dataset. For each image we show the
question (Q), ground-truth answer (blue), and the answers provided by different methods (green: correct answer, red: incorrect answer,
orange: incorrect answer in terms of accuracy but partially correct in terms of ANLS ( 0.5≤ANLS < 1)).
a starting point for datasets that contain text and answers
in several languages and out of dictionary words such as
license plates, prices, directions, names, etc.
5. Conclusions and Future Work
This work introduces a new and relevant dimension to
the VQA domain. We presented a new dataset for Visual
Question Answering, the Scene Text VQA, that aims to
highlight the importance of properly exploiting the high-
level semantic information present in images in the form
of scene text to inform the VQA process. The dataset
comprises questions and answers of high variability, and
poses extremely difﬁcult challenges for current VQA meth-
ods. We thoroughly analysed the ST-VQA dataset through
performing as series of experiments with baseline meth-
ods, which established the lower performance bounds, and
provided important insights. Although we demonstrate
that adding textual information to generic VQA models
leads to improvements, we also show that ad-hoc baselines
(e.g. OCR-based, which do exploit the contextual words)can outperform them, reinforcing the need of different ap-
proaches. Existing VQA models usually address the prob-
lem as a classiﬁcation task, but in the case of scene text
based answers the number of possible classes is intractable.
Dictionaries deﬁned over single words are also limited. In-
stead, a generative pipeline such as the ones used in image
captioning is required to capture multiple-word answers,
and out of dictionary strings such as numbers, license plates
or codes. The proposed metric, namely Average Normal-
ized Levenshtein Similarity is better suited for generative
models compared to evaluating classiﬁcation performance,
while at the same time, it has a smooth response to the text
recognition performance.
Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by projects TIN2017-
89779-P, Marie-Curie (712949 TECNIOspring PLUS), aB-
SINTHE (Fundacion BBV A 2017), the CERCA Programme
/ Generalitat de Catalunya, a European Social Fund grant
(CCI: 2014ES05SFOP007), NVIDIA Corporation and PhD
scholarships from AGAUR (2019-FIB01233) and the UAB.
4298