answer; the second one (“STR bbox”), follows the intuition
that humans tend to formulate questions about the largest
text instance in the image. We take the text representation
from the biggest bounding box found and then ﬁnd the near-
est neighbor word in the corresponding dictionaries.
Scene Image OCR: A state of the art text recognition
model [20] is used to process the test set images. The de-
tected text is ranked according to the conﬁdence score and
the closest match between the most conﬁdent text detection
and the provided vocabularies for task 1 and task 2 is used
as the answer. In task 3 the most conﬁdent text detection is
adopted as the answer directly.
Standard VQA models: We evaluate two standard
VQA models. The ﬁrst one, named “Show, Ask, Attend and
Answer” [28] (SAAA), consists of a CNN-LSTM architec-
ture. On one hand, a ResNet-152 [19] is used to extract
image features with dimension 14×14×2048 , while the
question is tokenized and embedded by using a multi-layer
LSTM. On top of the combination of image features and the
question embedding, multiple attention maps (glimpses) are
obtained. The result of the attention glimpses over the im-
age features and the last state of the LSTM is concatenated
and fed into two fully connected layers to obtain the distri-
bution of answer probabilities according to the classes. We
optimize the model with the Adam optimizer [31] with a
batch size of 128for30epochs. The starting learning rate
is0.001which decays by half every 50 Kiterations.
The second model, named “Stacked Attention Net-
works” [56] (SAN), uses a pre-trained VGGN [48] CNN
to obtain image features with shape 14×14×512. Two
question encoding methods are proposed, one that uses an
LSTM and another that uses a CNN, both of them yielding
similar results according to the evaluated dataset. The en-
coded question either by a CNN or LSTM is used along with
the image features to compute two attention maps, which
later are used with the image features to output a classiﬁ-
cation vector. We optimize the model with a batch size of
100for150epochs. The optimizer used is RMSProp with a
starting learning rate of 0.0003 and a decay value of 0.9999 .
Overall, three different experiments are proposed ac-
cording to the output classiﬁcation vector. The ﬁrst, is
formed by selecting the most common 1k answer strings in
the ST-VQA training set as in [4]. For the second one, we
selected the 5k most common answers so that we can see
the effect of a gradual increase of the output vector in the
two VQA models. In the third one, all the answers found
in the training set are used ( 19,296) to replicate the wide
range vocabulary of scene-text images and to capture all the
answers found in the training set.
Fusing Modalities - Standard VQA Models + Scene
Text Retrieval: Using the previously described VQA mod-
els, the purpose of this baseline is to combine textual fea-
tures obtained from a scene text retrieval model with ex-isting VQA pipelines. To achieve this, we use the model
from [13] and we employ the output tensor before the non-
maximal suppression step (NMS) is performed. The most
conﬁdent PHOC predictions above a threshold are selected
relative to a single grid cell. The selected features form a
tensor of size 14×14×609, which is concatenated with the
image features before the attention maps are calculated on
both previously described VQA baselines. Afterwards the
attended features are used to output a probability distribu-
tion over the classiﬁcation vector. The models are optimized
using the same strategy described before.
4.1. Results
The results of all provided baselines according to the de-
ﬁned tasks are summarized in Table 2. As a way to com-
pare the proposed Average Normalized Levenshtein Sim-
ilarity (ANLS) metric, we also calculate the accuracy for
each baseline. The accuracy is calculated by counting the
exact matches between the model predictions and collected
answers as is the standard practice in the VQA literature.
The last column in Table 2, upper bound, shows the max-
imum possible score that can be achieved depending on the
method evaluated. The upper bound accuracy for standard
VQA models is the percentage of questions where the cor-
rect answer is part of the models output vocabulary, while
the upper bound ANLS is calculated by taking as answer the
closest word (output class) in terms of Levenshtein distance
to the correct answer. In the case of the Scene Text Retrieval
(STR retrieval) [13] model the upper bound is calculated by
assuming that the correct answer is a single word and that
this word is retrieved by the model as the top-1 among all
the words in the provided vocabularies.
In Table 2 we appreciate that standard VQA models that
disregard textual information from the image achieve simi-
lar scores, ranging between 0.085 to 0.102 ANLS, or 6.36%
to 7.78% accuracy. One relevant point is that although in
VQA v1 [4] the SAAA [28] model is known to outperform
SAN [56], in our dataset the effect found is the opposite,
due to the fact that our dataset and task outline is different
in its nature compared to VQA v1.
Another important point is that the SAAA model in-
creases both its accuracy and ANLS score when using a
larger classiﬁcation vector size, from 1k to 5k classes; how-
ever, going from 5k to 19k classes the results are worse,
suggesting that learning such a big vocabulary in a classiﬁ-
cation manner is not feasible.
It is worth noting that the proposed ANLS metric gen-
erally tracks accuracy, which indicates broad compatibility
between the metrics. But, in addition, ANLS can deal with
border cases (i.e. correct intended responses, but slightly
wrong recognized text) where accuracy, being a hard met-
ric based on exact matches, cannot. Such border cases are
frequent due to errors at the text recognition stage. Exam-
4296