Large-Batch Training for LSTM and Beyond
Yang You2, Jonathan Hseu1, Chris Ying1, James Demmel2, Kurt Keutzer2, Cho-Jui Hsieh1;3
Google1, UC Berkeley2, UCLA3
Abstract
Large-batch training approaches have enabled researchers to utilize large-scale
distributed processing and greatly accelerate deep-neural net (DNN) training. For
example, by scaling the batch size from 256 to 32K [ 32], researchers have been
able to reduce the training time of ResNet50 on ImageNet from 29 hours to 2.2
minutes [ 31]. However, there are three problems in current large-batch research: (1)
Although recurrent neural net (RNN) approaches like LSTM [ 8] have been widely
used in many real-world applications, current large-batch research is principally
focused on Convolutional Neural Nets (CNN). (2) Even for CNNs, there is no
automated technique for extending the batch size beyond 8K. Instead it requires
signiﬁcant parameter tuning. (3) To keep the variance in the gradient expectation
constant, theory suggests that a Sqrt Scaling scheme [ 14] should be used in large-
batch training. Unfortunately, there are not many successful applications using the
Sqrt Scaling scheme. In this paper, we propose a new approach called linear-epoch
gradual-warmup (LEGW) for better large-batch training. With LEGW, we are able
to conduct large-batch training for both CNNs and RNNs with the Sqrt Scaling
scheme. LEGW enables Sqrt Scaling scheme to be useful in practice and as a
result we achieve much better results than the Linear Scaling learning rate scheme
(Figure 1). For LSTM applications, we are able to scale the batch size by a factor
of 64 without losing accuracy and without tuning the hyper-parameters. For CNN
applications, LEGW is able to achieve the same accuracy even as we scale the batch
size to 32K. LEGW works better than previous large-batch auto-tuning techniques
(Figure 1). LEGW achieves a 5.3 average speedup over the baselines for four
LSTM-based applications on the same hardware. We also provide some theoretical
explanations for LEGW.
1 Introduction
Speeding up Deep Neural Network (DNN) training is important because it can improve the produc-
tivity of machine learning researchers and developers. Since the acceleration of training through
exploiting model parallelism is limited, current research principally focuses on data parallelism.
Speciﬁcally, a large-batch training approach has enabled us to successfully exploit large-scale dis-
tributed processing [ 1,6,11,16,33,31,23]. For example, by scaling the batch size from 256 to 32K
[32], researchers are able to reduce the training time of ResNet50/ImageNet from 29 hours [ 7] to 2.2
minutes [31]. However, there are three problems with current large-batch approaches:
Although RNN techniques like LSTM [ 8] have been widely used, the current large-batch
study is mostly focused on CNN applications. On the other hand, adaptive solvers like
Adam do not beat well-tuned Momentum SGD for ImageNet training. We want to evaluate
Adam for large-batch LSTM training.
Even for CNN applications, signiﬁcant hyper-parameter tuning is required to increase the
batch size beyond 8K with no loss in accuracy. For batch sizes lower than 8K, linear scaling
Work done as part of internship at Google Brain.
Preprint. Work in progress. We may update this draft recentlyarXiv:1901.08256v1  [cs.LG]  24 Jan 2019