OpenSpiel: A Framework for Reinforcement Learning in Games
each API function that is overridden will be fully documented in superclasses in spiel.h. See also
the description of extensive-form games in Section 3.1 which closely matches the API.
12.Once done, rebuild and rerun the tests from Sec 2.1 to ensure everything passes (including your
new game’s test!)
2.4. Adding a New Algorithm
Addinganewalgorithmisfairlystraight-forward. Likeaddingagame, itiseasiesttocopyandstartfrom
one of the existing algorithms. If adding a C++ algorithm, choose one from algorithms/ . If adding a
Python algorithm, choose one from python/algorithms/ . For appropriate matches, see Table 2.
Unlikegames,thereisnospeciﬁcstructureorAPIthatmustbefollowedforanalgorithm. Ifthealgorithm
is one in a class of existing algorithms, then we advise keeping the style and design similar to the ones
in the same class, re-using function or modules where possible.
The algorithms themselves are not binaries, but classes or functions that can be used externally. The best
way to show an example of an algorithm’s use is via a test. However, there are also binary executables in
examples/ andpython/examples/ .
3. Design and API
The purpose of OpenSpiel is to promote generalmultiagent reinforcement learning across many diﬀerent
game types, in a similar way as general game-playing [ 25] but with a heavy emphasis on learning and
not in competition form. We hope that OpenSpiel could have a similar eﬀect on general RL in games as
the Atari Learning Environment [8, 48] has had on single-agent RL.
OpenSpiel provides a general API with a C ++foundation, which is exposed through Python bindings
(viapybind11 ). Games are written in C ++. This allows for fast or memory-eﬃcient implementations of
basic algorithms that might need the eﬃciency. Some custom RL environments are also implemented in
Python. Most algorithms that require machine learning are implemented in Python.
Above all, OpenSpiel is designed to be easy to install and use, easy to understand, easy to extend
(“hackable”), and general/broad. OpenSpiel is built around two major important design criteria:
1.Keepitsimple. Simple choices are preferred to more complex ones. The code should be readable,
usable, extendable by non-experts in the programming language(s), and especially to researchers
from potentially diﬀerent ﬁelds. OpenSpiel provides reference implementations that are used to
learn from and prototype with, rather than fully-optimized / high-performance code that would
require additional assumptions (narrowing the scope / breadth) or advanced (or lower-level)
language features.
2.Keepitlight. Dependencies can be problematic for long-term compatibility, maintenance, and
ease-of-use. Unless there is strong justiﬁcation, we tend to avoid introducing dependencies to keep
things portable and easy to install.
3.1. Extensive-Form Games
There are several formalisms and corresponding research communities for representing multiagent
interactions. It is beyond the scope of this paper to survey the various formalisms, so we describe the
onesmostrelevanttoourimplementations. Therehavebeenrecenteﬀortstoharmonizetheterminology
and make useful associations among algorithms between computational game theory and reinforcement
learning [75, 47, 38], so we base our terminology on classical concepts and these recent papers.
8