9 
 
Quantum machine learning (Q ML) has become a new growth research field and has appeared in many applications 
and countries. the progress and success of quantum computing have observed significantly So, we need to apply the 
advantages and properties of QM with the machine learning bra nch.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Due to the success of S hor’s algorithm for solving factorization problems with exponential speedup, Grover’s 
algorithm search problem in unstructured data with a quad ratic speedup, and HHL algorithm (56) to solve linear 
systems equations.  Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimization problem is NP -hard problems that are hard to the 
classical hardware and algorithms solve it. QUBO p roblem is solved by quantum annealing (57) (see table 3)  .  
 
It’s time to discuss the survey questions: Why do we proceed towards Quantum Machine Learning (QML)?  To solve 
challenges and difficult tasks that still exist  in classical machine learning. With increasing size of data, learning phase 
training time and memory consumption to increase during the learning phase. to achieve low -cost learning with 
higher accuracy and performance is a challenging task with classical algorithms. It’s hard to estimate kernel functions 
in higher dimensions  (58-60).  it hard to determine the eigenvector (60) and solve complex optimization problems.    
 
 
 
 B  
 
A 
                                  Figure 2. proposed quantum scheme for classification and prediction  pipeline.  
Above p art (A): the quantum classification and prediction  scheme consist of preprocessing, encoding, train, test, and  
decoding steps. The quantum classifier requires two main st eps encoding and decoding (read out) data.  First, the s tep 
of preprocessing  & encoding  in the quantum model may be applied by classical or quantum techniques. Many 
quantum classifiers work on data and others work on classical often in quantum -inspired classifiers. In the case of  
quantum inspired classifiers that work on quantum data, w e should map classical data (X) to quantum data ( |𝜓𝑥⟩) 
.thirdly, train ing phase, this step varies  by quantum classifier type. For example, in the case of quantum -inspired, we 
train a model on the classical machine. In case of quantum kernel classifier, w e kernel on a quantum device . Last, 
Decoding (measurement) to convert output labels data to classical. Below part (A): classical classification and 
prediction  pipeline consists of preprocessing, Training & validation, testing and  predication phase.