6 
 
 
3 | QUANTUM  CLASSIFICATION SCHEME  
 
Throughout this section, we  present the concept of quantum classification,  encoding methods, v ariational quantum 
circuits and Finally, we disc uss the quantum classification scheme . 
 
a) Classification concept in quantum domain  
Classification is a popular task in a supervised learning domain that maps given inputs data (x)  to discrete target 
output (y) through a function approximation f as follows y  = f(x). The main purpose of classification is an accurate 
prediction model. Classification problems can be classified into two main problems: classification with two -classes is 
known as binary classification (for instance cancer diagnosis and spam detectio n). Classification with more than two -
classes is known as multi -class classification (for instance image and digit classification). classification problem can be 
represented with classical ML domain as C = {𝑐1,𝑐2,…,𝑐n} where C is target labels and a set of data in training phase 
with as 𝐷𝑛= {(𝑥1, 𝑦1), …, ( 𝑥i, 𝑦𝑖), …, ( 𝑥n, 𝑦𝑛)} where xi  is some of the features (n) on the properties of order of data 
point (i) and 𝑦𝑖 is the corresponding of that data point. In the case of binary classification 𝑦𝑖∈ {𝑐1, 𝑐2 }  and xi ∈ 𝑅𝑑. in 
the case of multi -class classification 𝑦𝑖 ∈ {𝑐1, ….., 𝑐n } where  xi ∈  𝑅𝑑   and d is real -valued attributes.  To can describe 
classification problems with the QML domain, we should convert classical data to quantum data then we can be 
represented quantum data in training data as 𝐷𝑛 = {( |𝜓1⟩,𝑦1 ), … , ( |𝜓𝑖⟩,𝑦𝑖 ),…, ( |𝜓𝑛⟩,𝑦𝑛)} where  |𝜓𝑖⟩ is the order 
(i) of the quantum state of 𝐷𝑛, |𝜓𝑖⟩ ∈ ∁2𝑑and 𝑦𝑖∈ {c1, c2 } [33], (49) .in the case of binary classification , How to map 
data to quantum form?  There is more than method (or technique) for encoding classical data to quantum data such 
as basis encoding and amplitude encoding for  in detail (in next sub section b) - Encoding methods)  Algorithm  Classification Type  Based Idea  Q 
Data  Data Set  Advantages  Limitations  
QIBC  Binary  Quantum 
detection theory  ✔ image and 
text corpora 
data set  High precision, recall, 
and F -measure.  
Less computation time 
compared to S VM and 
KNN.  Need to many features to 
improve performance.  
Increase computation cost 
with large number copies.  
 
HQC  Binary  distinguishability 
between  
quantum states  ✔ Appendicitis 
and other 
data sets  Improve classification 
rate.  Don’t work efficiently with  
many features vectors in 
large data set.  
QNMC  Binary &  
Multi -class  quantum 
formalism  ✔ Diabetes, 
Liver  
Cancer  
Ionosphere  Achieve higher 
accuracy than classical 
NMC  Don’t achieve better 
performance  with cancer  
data.  
variational 
quantum 
classifier  Binary &  
Multi -class  Quantum  
Variational  
circuit  ✔ Breast 
Cancer  
and wine 
data  Higher performance  
Classy binary & multi - 
class efficiently.  
 High cost  
QSVM  Binary &  
Multi -class  Run on real 
quantum device  ✔ Breast 
Cancer and 
wine data 
set Better accuracy from 
classical  SVM.  Difficult implementation  
APM  Binary &  
Multi -class  Quantum Bit  x Breast 
Cancer 
Wine 
Vintage  
synthetic 
data  Classify specific 
nonl inear problems 
with one neuron only.  
Take a few instances to 
train model and 
achieve higher 
accuracy.  Work on classical computer 
only.  
  
TABLE 2  
A comparative table among QML classification from through classification type, based idea for algorithm, Q da ta refers to 
algorithm works on quantum data ( ✔) or not (x), data sets that algorithm use it for evaluation the performance, Advantages 
and limitations of algorithm.