2 
 
                                                                               |ψ⟩= (α 
𝛽)= α|0 ⟩ + 𝛽|1⟩                                   (1)  
Where the coefficients α and 𝛽 are probability amplitude s may be complex numbers and | α2 |   + | 𝛽2 |   = 1.  
Recently, different algorithms and approaches have been published in machine learning (ML) depends on quantum 
computing laws to introduce the new concept called quantum machine learning (QML) )4( (10, 11)  with goal 
improvement of classical ML (12). QML appeared in more than a paradigm. the first paradigm, quantum ML, in 2014 
Rebentrost, p et al )24 (present ed a quantum version of support vector machine (QSVM) for classification of big data. 
QSVM achieved logarithmic speed up over classical counterparts. The second paradigm, Quantum inspired ML, in 
2019 Sergioli et al. )28( proposed a binary quantum classifie r inspired by the formalism of quantum theory and this 
classifier achieved a higher performance compared with different classical models. In 2019 Havlicek et al. )40( 
presented a quantum -classical classifier depends on the concept of the variational quantu m circuit and this paradigm 
named hybrid quantum -classical ML. Also, various models have developed in Quantum Neural Networks (QNNs) such 
as QNNs )25(, Quantum inspired NNs )37(, Quantum multi perceptron NNs, quantum dot NNs , and quantum 
convolutional NNs.  in detail, all these paradigms will be presented and comparison among them in section 2. QML is 
used in several applications as medical data classification )30,43 (, recommendation systems, and big data processing 
)24(. 
Quantum subroutines are the lifebloo d of quantum and QML algorithms. Quantum subroutines have a major role in 
speed up and improve the performance of algorithms such as HHL algorithms )88( for solving “linear system 
equations” in exponential speed up based on quantum phase estimation (QPE) a nd quantum matrix - inversion 
subroutines and Grover’s algorithm based on amplitude amplification. Other subroutines as sampling, quantum 
annealing, and quantum fourier transform (QFT).  
The main objectives of this survey introduce a classification scheme wi th QML. To implement a classical algorithm on 
a quantum computer or in general any quantum algorithm  consists of  the main three phases (13, 14) : encoding, 
quantu m computation, and decoding phase. first of all, the encoding phase that means mapping data from classical 
to quantum states. In the second step, quantum computation depends on type QML algorithms. the last step, 
decoding phase. In addition to illustrating  the major phases of quantum classification problems to answer the 
question of survey what is the classification scheme with quantum machine learning?  
We will open a discussion about two questions in QML algorithms. Why do we proceed towards Quantum Machin e 
learning (QML)? How does the concept of quantum computing enhance classical machine learning? The main 
objectives of this survey are:  
1. Summarize and organize the most recent research works to pave the way for researchers in quantum 
machine learning.  
2. Analy ze techniques and show the best and most used methods in classification real problems.  
3. Provide the readers with various quantum methods to enhance classical ML and some of the quantum 
subroutines.  
4. Introduce quantum classification scheme in the quantum worl d. 
5. Present some of the challenges, future directions, and applications of quantum machine learning  
 
The remainder of the survey can be divided into six sections: section 2 presents the major and recent approaches to 
quantum machine learning techniques espe cially quantum classification algorithms classified into 3 categories QML, 
quantum -inspired ML, and hybrid quantum -classical  ML. A lso, summa rizes these techniques in table 1. Next, we 
present the concept of classification with QML, two methods of encoding data, variational quantum circuits, and, 
proposed quantum cl assification scheme in section 3 . Thereafter, a discussion of the survey questions in section 4.  
section 5  introduces some of the challenges and future directions of QML. We provide many applicat ions of QML in 
section 6 Finally, concludes the survey in section 7 
2   | LITERATURE  REVIEW    
 
Here, we present ex haustive previous work about QML.  As well as, we  classify quantum machine learning algorithms