7 
 
 
b) Encoding methods  
There are a lot of encoding methods from classical data to quantum data  in a Hilbert space.  In other words, 
encoding data means loading classical data in to quantum computer  (quantum states ). We  outline two 
methods. for other methods, we refer the reader to (41) (50) (72). 
 
Basis Encoding  is the simplest method to encode data to quantum data.  This meth od associates  between n -bit 
classical input and the computational basis of n -qubit input. For example, ( 1100)  classical input string is encoded to 
four qubits ( |1 100 ⟩) quantum states.  In general, to encode data set by basis method, in other word, to represent 
data in computational basis states of qubits, we use the following equation.  
                                                        |𝐷⟩=1 
√M  ∑   |𝑋𝑚⟩𝑀
𝑚=1                                                 (2) 
Where D = { 𝑋1, 𝑋2,….., 𝑋𝑀} is  classical dat a that is in form binary string  , 𝑋𝑚={𝑏1,𝑏2,…𝑏𝑁}, 𝑏𝑖 ∈ {0,1}  , i ∈ { 
1,2,….,N} and N is number  of features.  
 
Amplitude Encoding  is the most used and popular method enc oding in QML algorithms is amplitude encoding. The 
main idea of amplitude encoding based on association classical data with quantum state amplitudes. To encode 
classical data vector to quantum amplitudes. We should convert the classical vector to a normali zed classical vector 
(28,49). 
                                                                   X =[ 𝑥1
  𝑥2
::  𝑥2𝑛]                                                                  (3) 
Where X is normalized classical vector , x ∈  Ϲ2𝑛, and  is  Ϲ complex numbers.  
quantum state amplitudes can be encoded as follows:  
                                                             |𝜓𝑥⟩=∑   𝑥𝑖|i⟩2𝑛−1
𝑖=1                                                             (4) 
                                                             
 where |𝜓⟩ ∈  Hilbert space( ℋ) and  ∑|𝑥𝑖|𝑖2 =1  
    
c) Variational quantum circuit  
Variational quantum circuits also known as  paramete rized quantum circuits, most hybrid quantum -classical 
algorithms    rely on these circuits  (51). The key idea of the variational circuit is optimiz ing the parameters according 
to an objective function.     variational quantum circuits consist of two phases  (see Figur e 1): the  quantum phase and 
classical phase . The quantum phase includes state preparation, quantum circuit  is the heart of the variational circuit 
that parameterizes input (X) based on numbers of parameters (θ) and measurement. The classical phase includes the 
output of the circuit, objective function and learn ing algorithm .” quantum variational circuit” can be optimized by 
classical optimi zation algorithms as gradient  descent, stochastic gradient descent and particle swarm optimization . 
some of  the uses of v ariational quantum circuit such as machine learning (40-41), optimization (52), deep learning 
(53) and The variational circuit also uses in solving the complicated optimization problems.  
 
d) Classical proposed quantum classification scheme  
 
We propose a new a quantum classification scheme consists of six phases as collect datasets, pre -processing  & 
encoding,  training, validation (ev aluate and optimize model), testing phase  and decoding phase . (as shown in Figure  
2-part A). Also, we show a classical  classification scheme (as shown in Figure  2 -part B), we describe these phases as 
following: