8 
 
 
  
Figure  1. Illustration two phases of the variational circuit (parametrized quantum c ircuit) for Hybrid quantum -classical applications in a quantum 
machine le arning (QML) and quantum neural networks (QNNS). Quantum phase that includes a quantum circuit that consists of state 
preparation, circuit, and measurement. another phase is a classical phase that inc ludes output after measurement and consists of cost func tion 
and learning algorith ms which updates parameters (θ) . 
 
 
1. collect datasets  
According to the classifier, we can determine  whether it works on quantum or classical data. Some of the quantum -
inspired ML works on classical data for instance (37). and other works on quantum data (27). Also, Hybrid quantum -
classical classifiers work on quantum data as (33).  
 
2. Pre-processing & Encoding  
The preprocessing  phase may be applied by classical or quantum technique s. For example, for handling missing 
values, we can use classical or quantum technique s. Then, reduce number of  the features to are compatible with 
available limi ted numbers of qubits on quantum device and split data to training, validation  and test  set. Then, apply 
the encoding for mapping data from  classical data (X) to quantum data ( |𝜓𝑥⟩) in order to  prepare data as quantum 
states . Next, applying a quantum classifier .  
 
3. Training  
Training phase varies according to quantum classifier type.  For example, in the case of quantum -inspired  classifier , 
we train model on classical machine. In the case of quantum kernel classifier, we estimate kernel on a quantum 
device) for  instance , IBM Q  computer or quantum  simulator  (. 
 
4. Validation  
We evaluate and update  parameters to decrease cost function and improve performance of model . 
 
5. Testing  
We t est model performance  by confusion matrix and calculate test time.   
 
6. Decoding (or readout)  
To calculate output data and translate into classical  form  (i.e. C = { −1,1}  ).    
 
4 | DISCUSSION   
Quantum algorithms are quantum model s when running a real quantum computer on but don’t run their classical 
counterparts on such as Shor’s algorithm (8), Grover’s algorithm (9], addition on a quantum computer (54). for more 
details about these algorithms, see (13), (25), (55).