4 
 
and parallel compu ting for image cla ssification. their model improved eﬃciency and classification p erformance. Chen, 
H. et al. (32) used powerful parallel computing to introduce an inspired Quantum K Nearest -Neighbor (QKNN) based 
on one of the well -known properties of QC is superposition to obta in parallel computing and “quantum minimum 
search algorithm” to achieve speed up the search.  
 Lu, S et al (33) proposed a quantum version for decision tree classifier. The quantum model depends on quantum 
entropy impurity and quan tum fidelity measure. In (34) the authors  developed a new model Quantum Support 
Vector Clustering for big data depended on Quantum SVM, quantum Gaussian kernel and quan tum polynomial 
kernel. In  (35), The  authors proposed new framework quantum clustering based on th e Schrödinger equation. Yu, 
C.et al. (36) presented improved quantum techniques for ridge regression. This algorithm bas ed on two subroutines 
quantum K -fold cross -validation and quantum state encoding. In (37) the authors introduced a novel Quantum 
inspired Neural network. they named Autonomous Perceptron Model (APM) depends on one from quantum 
mechanics characteristics a quantum bit. The proposed model accomplished higher accuracy with less complexity 
time comparable to other tradition -al algorithms.  
 
C. Hybrid quantum -classical machine learning  
 
The last approach, hybrid quantum -classic al machine learning  are the algorithms that combine quantum algorithms 
and classical (traditional algorithms) to obtain higher performance and decrease in the learning cost.  
 Soumik et al. (38) used the quantum circuit to present a new variational quantum classifier with  a single quantum 
system (Qu N it) to encode data in N -dimensional with a training algorithm called “single -shot training”. the key 
advant age of single -shot training uses a fewer parameter for training and achieve a higher precision. In  (39), the 
authors introduced a new quantum al gorithms based on many subroutines as a quantum oracle, counting, amplitude 
amplification, and quantum amplitude estimation for feature selection named (HQFSA) with purpose enhancement 
of performance ML techniques. The proposed algorithm accomplished quadr atic time complexity and better 
performance in some of the cases. The main disadvantage of HQFSA is running on a quantum simulator only.  
Havlicek et al. (40) suggested two different models of quantum support vector machines. the first, t he variational 
quantum SVM based on quantum variation circuit. The variational quantum SVM classifier requires two algorithms 
to classify. The one to quantum variational training phase, in this phase, the authors used four steps to compute the 
hyperplane b etween training data and another to quantum variational classification phase to classify new datum to 
correct label. The second model is a SVM quantum kernel -based algorithm based on quantum kernel estimation.  
Maria Schuld et al. (41) proposed two - hybrid quantum techniques for classification problems. Schuld showed that 
quantum computing enhances cla ssical ML algorithms like kernel methods. Quantum computing performs complex 
computations in Hilbert space more eﬃcient. The authors focused on using feature maps and kernel methods in the 
quantum computing world.  
 
 Mitarai, K et al  (42) presented a hybrid quantum -classical technique to perform different tasks like classification, 
regression, and clustering to can implement it on the small -scale quantum devices. Jessica  Pointing introduced (43) 
in the Ph.D. thesis a novel quantum -classical algorithm to handing missing values in data is named “a Quant um 
Algorithm for Handling Missing Data”. The main advantage of the algorithm calculates the probability distribution to 
handle missing data values.  
 
Ruan, Y et al. (44) presented a q uantum KNN algorithm based on the hamming distance matrix. QKNN is a good analog 
for the classical KNN algorithm, which avoids the defect of  the simplified assumption of the task of classification 
QKNN outperforms Centroid and QNN on time performance and classification accuracy.  Grant, E et al. (45) introduced 
a new hybrid classifier based on a hierarchical structure for quantum circuits  for binary  classification problems. Zhang, 
D. B et al  (46) presented  a quantum version of nonlinear regression rely on the hybrid quantum device. also,  the 
authors proposed a new encoding method. Benedetti, M. (47) introduced a framework gene rative model named 
“data -driven  quantum circuit learning” (DDQCL). DDQCL approach is unsupervised hybrid quantum - classic al for the 
characterization of NISQ hardware for solving sampling problems such as bars and stripes (BAS) and random thermal