1 
 
 
 
1 Faculty of Computer Science, Nahda University, Egypt  
                                    2 Faculty of Computers and Information, Mansoura University, Egypt  
                                                      3 Faculty of Computers and Information, Minia University, Egypt  
 
 
Abstract  
Due to the superiority and noteworthy progress of Quantum Comput ing (QC) in a lot of applications such as cryptography, 
chemistry, Big data, machine learning, optimization, Internet of Things (IoT), Blockchain, communication, and many more. 
Fully towards to combine classical machine learning (ML) with Quantum Informati on Processing (QIP) to build a new field in 
the quantum world is called Quantum Machine Learning (QML) to solve and improve problems that displayed in classical 
machine learning (e.g. time and energy consumption, kernel estimation). The aim of this paper p resents and summarizes a 
comprehensive survey of the state -of-the-art advances in Quantum Machine Learning (QML). Especially, recent QML 
classification works. Also, we cover about 30 publications that are published lately in Quantum Machine Learning (QML).  we 
propose a classification scheme in the quantum world and discuss encoding methods for mapping classical data to quantum 
data. Then, we provide quantum subroutines and some methods of Quantum Computing (QC) in improving performance and 
speed up of class ical Machine Learning (ML). And also some of QML applications in various fields, challenges, and future vision 
will be presented.  
 
KEYWORDS  
Quantum Machine Learning, Quantum Computing, Quantum Bit (Qubit), Quantum Inspired, Hybrid Quantum -Classical, 
Varia tional Quantum Classifier, Quantum Cl assification, Machine Learning.  
 
1 | INTRODUCTION  
 
As is well known t he role of machine learning (1-4)  in data   analysis , feature selection, making decision, pattern 
classificati on and future predictions of various applications with achieving better accuracy and performance without 
human decisions. but an enormous increase in typ es of data (i.e., images, text, videos , and record audio s) and current 
computational resources appeared  problems of machine learning such as high -cost learning and kernel estimation.  
Over the last three decades, we noticed using quantum computing (QC) in various applications as cryptography (5), 
artific ial intelligence (AI)  (6), and communication (7). As a result of the superiority and advancement of quantum 
computing for solving many problems as factorization by Shor’s algorithm (8), and search in an unstructured da tabase 
by Grover’s algorithm (9). 
Quantum computing based on postulates and characteristics of quantum mechanics (i.e., quantum bits (Qub its), 
interference, superposition, and entanglement) to informati on processing . qubit can be one state, zero state, or a 
combination of two states at the same time known as linear superposition , unlike classical bit that can represent one 
value either 0 or  1 to store information (7). Qubit state is  a unit vector in Hilbert space. mathematically to represent 
qubit state, we use ket - notation, qubit in state zero is |0 ⟩= [1    0]T and qubit in state one is |1 ⟩ ⟩= [0    1]T . a qubit 
is represented as a linear  superposition of both basis states simultaneously:  
 
                Zainab Abohashima 1 | Mohamed Elhoseny 2 | Essam H. Houssein 3 | Waleed M. Mohamed 3 Classification  with Quantum Machine Learning: 
A Survey