11 
 
arbitrary state to target state overall iterations  (68, 69) . To make amplify the successfu l probability of the amplitude 
by using the following formula:  
 
                                                                        1 - (𝑚2
3 (Р)) (𝑚2 (Р))                                                               (7) 
 
Where m is the number of iterations and Р is success probability.  
 
From table 4 that summarizes quantum subroutines and applications of each subroutine. We note that quantum  
Fourier transform (QFT)  and var iational quantum circuit   is the most common and used subroutine s in most 
algorithms and applications.  
 
 
 
                                                                                   
    
 
5 |   CHALLENGES AND FUTURE  DIRECTIONS  
 
In this section, we outline and present challen ges and future directions in QML as small -scale quantum computer, 
Limited quantum bits , encoding methods and develop  a new QML techniques.  
 
1. Small -scale  quantum computer  
the big and key challenge is to build quantum computer s with  a large number  of qubits  to implement, test QML  
algorithms and work with large different data  in the near future . As shown in Figure  3, numbers o f qubits achieved 
by different technology companies  (75) such as Rigetti,  IBM, Q -Wave, Xanadu, Google, and Microsoft . Up to now , the 
quantum computer is developed  in small -scale  and t his restricts us use a limited amount of data  (76). So, researchers Subroutine Applications Refs.  
Amplitude amplification/Grover’s 
algorithm Quantum counting and searching (9,67) 
sampling Quantum deep learning &” boson 
sampling ”  (47) 
Quantum phase estimation Quantum counting (8 ,55) 
Quantum Matrix - inversion/HHL 
Algorithms QSVM ,  kernel least squares and 
machine learning (55,56) 
Quantum Fourier Transform Shor’s algorithm ,  
Cryptography ,  
Information processing, 
Communication,  Discrete logarithm  
and 
Phase estim ation  (13,54,64) 
Variational quantum circuit Optimization, classification (33,48,40,51,53) 
Quantum Annealing Eigen state solver 
Machine learning 
Optimization 
Nurse Scheduling 
Healthcare (22), (72, 73) , (74) 
TABLE 4 show  quantum subroutines that enhanced classical ML techniques, algorithms applied 
based on it.  To build QML algorithms and some of subroutines applications.