10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
According to Dunjko, V et al.   (15) Quantum ML can improve in run -time and efficiency. D -wave introduced Quadrant 
algorithms based on Central Processing Unit (CPU), Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) and Quantum annealing 
computer . Quadrant  ML algorit hms  can achieve more performance with low -cost training data with large data over 
classical deep learning and  traditional algorithms (61) (62). 
 
Secondly, how does the concept of quantum computing  enhance classical machine learning? Quantum computing 
can boost traditional algorithms by two different methods: The first metho d, implement classical algorithms on 
quantum computers or simulators. This method needs to encode classical data into quantum data. Another method, 
build QML algorithms depend on Quantum algorithms or quantum subroutines (63) such as Amplitude Amplification, 
Grover’s algorithm, Quantum matrix -inversion, the quantum phase estimation, Variational quantum (48), quantum 
annealing, Sampling (47). 
 
Quantum Fourier Transform (QFT) (64) is the heart of other  quantum algorithms such as Quantum Phase Estimation 
algorit hm and Shor’s algorithm. Quantum Fourier Transform is a quantum version of inverse discrete Fourier 
Transform. QFT ac hieves exponential speed -up.  The idea of QFT depends on mapping amplitudes of the current 
quantum state (R) to the next amplitudes of the quantum state (Q).  𝑥𝑖 
Where |R⟩= ∑  𝑥𝑖|¡⟩ 𝑁−1
𝑖=1     ,  |Q⟩= ∑   𝑦𝑗|j⟩𝑁−1
𝑗=1  with 𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦𝑗   are complex numbers  and  mapping equation  as following 
[60,75]  : 
                                                                              Qj=  1
√𝑁 ∑ 𝑋𝑛𝑁−1
𝑛=1  𝑒2𝜋𝑖 𝑗𝑘
𝑁                                                     (5) 
 
Where j= 1, 2,….,N -1. 
 
Quantum Phase Estimation (QPE)  (65, 66)  is one of the most important subroutines in many quantum algorithms 
[8,63] and quantum machine learning algorithms. QPE algorithm is based on Quantum Fourier Transform (QFT) 
subroutine. The goal of Quantum Phase Estimation (QPE) algorithm is to find the eig envalue  (  𝑒2𝜋𝑖 𝜃 ) of the unitary 
matrix (U) or find the optimal approximation of the phase ( 𝜃) asthe following equation.  
 
                                                U|φ⟩= 𝑒2𝜋𝑖 𝜃|φ⟩                                                                    (6)   
 
Where 0 ≤ θ < 1 and | φ⟩ is eigenvecto r.  
 
Amplitude Amplification (AA) (67) (also called Quantum Interfere nce) is one of the fundamental   subroutines and is 
the key  idea for the famous Grover’s algorithm, and Grover’s algor ithm is a subroutine for many different algorithms. 
The key objective of Amplitude Amplification (AA) is boosting the solution probability of the amplitude (Р) from Problem  Solved By  Speed up  
Factorization  Shor’s algorithm  (8) Exponential  
Searching in unstructured 
data  Grover’s algorithm (9) Quadratic  
Linear sy stems equations  HHL algorithm (56) Exponential  
Quadratic Unconstrained 
Binary Optimization (QUBO)  D-Wave  quantum computer 
(70) - 
 
IBM's Neurosynaptic 
hardware (71) 
            TABLE 3     Problems solved by quantum computing.