3 
 
into three approaches : QML, quantum -inspired ML, a nd Hybrid quantum -classical ML  and summarized in table 1  & 
table 2 . The classification of approaches based on information processing devices (a type of algorithm) is classical or 
quantum and type of  data are classical or quantum  (15, 16) .  
Montanaro, A. (17) introduced an overview of quantum algorithms and  some of the applications in diff erent areas. 
Jeswal, S. et al. (18) presented  various quantum neural network techniques and their applications in real -world 
problems. the authors discussed each technique in detail and noted that QNNs are more powerful and enhance 
computational efficiency in contrast to classical NNs. Benedetti, M et al . (19) offered  an overview of hybrid quantum -
classical models based on parameterized quantum circuits and the application of hybrid systems in supervised and 
generative learning. They also provided a framework for  components of models as an example, variational circuit and 
encoder circuit.  In  (20), the authors given  an overview of the progress of quantum computing and applications. Also, 
the authors discuss ed various quantum technologies for quantum computers scalability such as error correcti on and 
going forward. Ciliberto, C et al. (21)  present ed a review about QML and challenges. AS well , the authors provided  
some quantum subroutines especially quantum linear algebra and how a quantum computer works with data. 
Besides, this review illustrates Quantum neural networks.  
 
A. Quantum machine learning algorithms  
 
The first approach, quantum machine learning algorithms are quantum versions from conventional ML. as wel l, 
algorithms that can be executed on the real quantum device. Dennis, et al.  (22) implemented SVM on quantum 
annealer device  (23) (DW2000Q) called QA -SVM. The authors used quantum annealer to train and optimize SVM 
depends on QUBO equation to minimize cost energy. As well, the authors utilized some of feature of quantum 
annealing (i.e. re verse annealing, and special annealing schedules to improve final results. Rebentrost, P. et al (24) 
presented SVM algorithm runs quantum computer on and depends on a non -sparse matrix called QSVM. QSV M is a 
big data binary classifier. As well, it works with a large number of features and samples in complexity logarithmic. da 
Silva, A. et al (25) intro duced a new quantum neural network named “quantum perceptron over a field” (QPF) and 
its learning algorithm (SAL). the learning algorithm (SAL) based on superposition feature and quantum operator. Also, 
it performs NN architecture with polynomial time. QPF  overcomes on limitations of quantum perceptron models. In 
(26) the authors proposed a version of linear regression called quantum linear regression.it works on quantum data 
with N - dimensions of features in logarithmic  time.  
 
B. Quantum -inspired machine learning  
 
The second approach, quantum -inspired machine learning that applies the principles of Quantum Computing (QC) to 
improve classical methods of machine learning (ML).  
Prayag et al. (27) introduced a new quantum -inspired binar y classifier (QIBC), the basic idea is based on decision 
theory, classical ML  and theory of quantum detection that utilize one of the laws of quantum mechanics, 
superposition to increase the higher degree of freedom in decision making. The proposed classif ier can be achieved 
high precision, recall and F -measure comparable with KNN, and SVM and other classical techniques. Sergioli et al. 
(28) proposed a novel quantum -inspired classifier for binary supervised learning called Helstrom Quantum Centroid 
(HQC) based on  density matrices and formalism of quantum theory. The authors evaluated the performance of their 
model by fourteen datasets compared to different classical models.  Ding et al. (29) proposed a novel algorithm 
inspired by the quantum support vector machines(SVM) to solve classif ication problems in exponential speedup. The 
main idea for the algorithm based on linear transformation.  
Sergioli et al. (30) introduced a Quantum Nearest Mean Classifier (QNMC) based on the idea of classical minimum 
distance classifier. The algorithm consists  of three main steps: firstly, density pattern (Encod ing) to transform each 
classical data point to a quantum object. Seco ndly, Quantum c entroid to calcu late a distance among density patterns 
in order to classify unknown quantum objects to the right class. lastly, decoding to transform the final classification 
result into the classified data. The algorithm achieved higher accuracy in many medical data sets than the classical 
counterpart (NMC) e xclusively cancer data set. Dang, Y et al. (31) proposed a new model based on  Quantum KNN