Figure 1. (a) The pipeline of OST for universal style transfer. First, we extract features using the encoder for content image and style
image. Then we use the feature transform method to obtain the stylized feature. Finally, the decoder inverts the stylized feature into image.
The output of top layer is used as the input content image for the bottom layer. (b) The decoder inverts the feature of a certain layer to the
image. Although [10, 29] propose to train the decoder to invert the feature to its bottom layer’s feature, which might be more efﬁcient, we
use the image decoder in this work since decoder is not our contribution. (c) We use the feature loss (denoted by the blue arrow) and the
reconstruction loss (denoted by the red arrow) to train the DecoderX (X=1,2,...,5).
tion of each channel as a Gaussian distribution and matches
the content and style images through mean and variance.
However, since the channels of CNN are correlated, AdaIN
cannot achieve visually pleasing transfer effect. WCT [19]
proposes to use feature whitening and coloring to match the
covariance matrices of style and content images. However,
as pointed out by [18], WCT is not the only approach to
matching the covariance matrices. [29] proposes a method
to combine patch match with WCT and AdaIN. Instead of
ﬁnding the nearest neighbor by the original feature, [29]
conducts it using the projected feature. These projected fea-
ture can be generated by AdaIN or WCT. However, above
methods all fail to give a theoretical analysis of feature
transform. The key observation of current works like WCT
is matching the covariance matrices, which is not enough to
ﬁnd a good solution.
3. Motivation
The pipeline of OST is shown in Figure 1. It is similar to
WCT [19]. We use different layers of the pre-trained VGG
network as the encoders. For every encoder, we train the
corresponding decoder to invert the feature into image as
illustrated by Figure 1 (b, c). Although [10, 29] propose to
train the decoder to invert the feature to its bottom layer’s
feature, which might be more efﬁcient, we use the image
decoder [19] in this work since the framework is not our
contribution.
We start to study the problem of feature transform by
reformulating neural style transfer as the optimal trans-
port problem. We denote the content image as Icand
the style image as Is. For the features of content imageand style image, we denote them as Fc∈RC×HcWcand
Fs∈RC×HsWsseparately, where HcWcandHsWsare
the numbers of activations and Cis the number of channels.
We view the columns of FcandFsas samples from two
Multivariate Gaussian (MVG) distributions N(µc,Σc)and
N(µs,Σs), whereµc,µs∈RCare the mean vectors and
Σc,Σs∈RC×Care the variance matrices. We further de-
note the sample from content distribution as uand the sam-
ple from style distribution as v. Therefore, u∼N(µc,Σc)
andv∼N(µs,Σs). Assuming the optimal transformation
is linear, we can represent it as follows.
t(u) =T(u−µc)+µs (1)
WhereT∈RC×Cis the transformation matrix. Since
we assume the features are from two MVG distributions,
Tmust meet the following equation to match two MVG
distributions.
TΣcTT= Σs (2)
WhereTTis the transpose of T. When Eq. 2 is satis-
ﬁed, we can obtain t(u)∼N(µs,Σs). We then demon-
strate the relations of our formulation with AdaIN [12] and
WCT [19]. We denote the diagonal matrices of ΣcandΣs
asDcandDsseparately. For AdaIn , the transformation
matrixT=Ds./Dc, where./denotes the element-wise
division. Therefore, AdaIN does not satisfy Eq. 2 since it
ignores the correlation of channels. Only the diagonal el-
ements are matched by AdaIN. As for WCT , we can ﬁnd
that the transformation matrix T= Σ1/2
sΣ−1/2
c . Since both
Σ1/2
sandΣ−1/2
c are symmetric matrices, WCT satisﬁes Eq.
5954