Gatys Patch Swap AdaIn AdaIn+ WCT Ours
207.12s 13.15s 0.49s 0.16s 3.47s 4.06s
Table 1. Processing speed comparison.
5. Results
In this section, we ﬁrst qualitatively compare our method
with Gatys [8], Patch Swap [5], AdaIN (with our decoder)
[12], AdaIN+ (with their decoder) [12], and WCT [19] in
Section 5.1. Then we provide a quantitative comparison
of our method against Gatys, Patch Swap, AdaIN, AdaIN+
and WCT in Section 5.2. Following former works, we also
show results of linear interpolation and semantic style trans-
fer in Section 5.3. Finally, we discuss the limitations of our
method in Section 5.4.
Parameters: We train the decoders on the COCO
dataset [22]. The weight to balance the feature loss and
reconstruction loss in Eq. 13 is set to 1 as [19]. For the
results in this work, the resolution of the input is ﬁxed as
512×512.
Performance: We implement the proposed method on a
server with an NVIDIA Titan Xp graphics card. The pro-
cessing speed comparison is listed in Table 1 under the in-
put resolution of 512×512. We do the comparison with
the published implementations on our server, which might
result in slight differences with the papers.
5.1. Qualitative Results
Our Method versus Gatys: Gatys [8] is the pioneer-
ing work of neural style transfer and it can handle arbitrary
styles. Although it uses time-consuming back-propagation
to minimize the content loss and style loss, we still compare
with it since its formulation is the foundation of our method.
As shown in Figure 3, Gatys can usually achieve reasonable
results, however, these results are not so stylized since the
iterative solver cannot reach the optimal solution in limited
iterations. Instead, our method tries to ﬁnd the closed-form
solution, which explicitly minimizes the style loss and con-
tent loss. Comparatively, our results are more stylized and
they also well-preserve the structures of content images.
Our Method versus Patch Swap: As far as we know,
Patch Swap [5] is the ﬁrst work to use the encoder-feature
transform-decoder framework. It chooses a certain layer
of VGG network as the encoder and trains the correspond-
ing decoder. The feature transform is formulated as neural
patch swap. However, neural patch swap using the origi-
nal feature tends to simply reconstruct the feature, thus the
results are not stylized. Besides, Patch Swap only trans-
fers the style in a certain layer, which also reduces the style
transfer effect. [29] proposes to match the neural patch in
the projected domains, for example, the whitened feature
[19]. Apart from this, [29] uses multiple layers to transfer
the style, achieving more stylized results. Our work doesnot use the idea of neural patch match, instead, we focus
on the theoretical analysis to deliver the closed-form solu-
tion. As can be seen in Figure 3, our result is more stylized
compared with Patch Swap.
Our Method versus AdaIN and AdaIN+: As dis-
cussed in the motivation, AdaIN [12] assumes the channels
of CNN feature are independent. For each channel, AdaIN
matches two one-dimensional Gaussian distributions. How-
ever, the channels of CNN feature are actually correlated.
Therefore, using AdaIN as the feature transform cannot
achieve visually stylized results. Instead of using AdaIN as
the feature transform method, AdaIN+ [12] trains a decoder
on large collections of content and style images. Although
AdaIN+ only transfers the feature in a certain layer, it trains
the decoder with style losses deﬁned in multiple layers. We
conduct the comparisons with both AdaIN and AdaIN+. As
illustrated by Figure 3, the results of AdaIN and AdaIN+
are similar and both of them fail to achieve visually pleas-
ing transfer results. Therefore, we believe the reason why
AdaIN and AdaIN+ fail is because they ignore the corre-
lation between channels of CNN feature. Instead, our work
considers the correlation thus achieves more stylized results
as shown in Figure 3.
Our Method versus WCT: WCT [19] proposes to use
feature whitening and coloring as the solution to style trans-
fer. It chooses ZCA whitening in the paper and we test some
other whitening methods with the feature of ReLU3 1 as
shown in Figure 4. As can be seen, only ZCA whitening
achieves reasonable results. This is because ZCA whiten-
ing is the optimal choice, which minimizes the difference
between content feature and the whitened feature. Although
the ZCA-whitened image can preserve the structure of con-
tent image, there is none constraint on the ﬁnal transformed
feature. Contrary to that, we consider to minimize the dif-
ference between content feature and the ﬁnal transformed
feature. As we have analyzed in the motivation section,
WCT satisﬁes Eq. 2. Therefore, it perfectly matches two
high-dimension Gaussian distributions. However, it ignores
the content loss of Gatys. Instead, we seek the closed-form
solution, which additionally minimizes the content loss. As
can be seen in Figure 3, our transformation can preserve
better structures (see the red rectangles).
We also notice that the ﬁnal feature can be the linear
combination of original content feature and the transformed
feature as shown in Eq. 13. Where αis the weight of trans-
formed feature.
t∗(u) =αt(u)+(1−α)u (13)
We show the results of different αvalues in Figure 5.
As illustrated by Figure 5, adjusting the weight can change
the degree of style transfer. With smaller α, WCT can pre-
serve more structure of content image. However, there is
still obvious artifact even with small α. Instead, our method
5956