results by matching all the elements of covariance matrices.
Since the channels of deep Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) are correlated, the non-diagonal elements are es-
sential to represent the style. However, WCT only matches
the covariance matrices, which shares similar spirits with
minimizing the style loss of Gatys. It does not consider
the content loss and cannot well preserve the image struc-
ture. Moreover, multiplying an orthogonal matrix between
the whitening and coloring matrices can also match the co-
variance matrices, which has been pointed out by [18].
[20] shows that matching Gram matrices is equivalent to
minimizing the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) with
the second order polynomial kernel. However, it does not
give a closed-form solution. Instead, our work reformu-
lates style transfer as an optimal transport problem. Opti-
mal transport tries to ﬁnd a transformation that matches two
high-dimensional distributions. For neural style transfer,
considering the neural feature in each activation as a high
dimension sample, we assume the samples of content and
style images are from two Multivariate Gaussian (MVG)
distributions. Style transfer is equivalent to transforming
the content samples to ﬁt the distribution of style samples.
Assuming the transformation is linear, we ﬁnd that both
AdaIN and WCT are special cases of our formulation. Al-
though [18] also assumes the transformation is linear, it still
follows the whitening and coloring pipeline and trains two
meta networks for whitening and coloring matrices. Con-
trary to that, we directly ﬁnd the transformation under the
optimal transport formulation.
As we have described above, there are still inﬁnite trans-
formations, for example, multiplying an orthogonal matrix
between the whitening and coloring matrices can also be the
solution. Therefore, we seek for a transformation, which
additionally minimizes the difference between transformed
feature and original content feature. This shares similar
spirits with minimizing the content loss of Gatys [8]. We
prove that a unique closed-form solution named Optimal
Style Transfer (OST) can be found, once considering the
content loss. We show the detailed proof of OST in the
method part. Since OST further considers the content loss,
it can preserve better structures compared with WCT.
Our contributions can be concluded as follows:
1. We present a novel interpretation of neural style trans-
fer by treating it as an optimal transport problem and eluci-
date the theoretical relations of our interpretation with for-
mer works on feature transform, for example, AdaIN and
WCT.
2. We ﬁnd the unique closed-form solution named OST
under the optimal transport interpretation by additionally
considering the content loss.
3. Our closed-form solution preserves better structures
and achieves visually pleasing results.2. Related Work
Image Optimization. Methods based on image opti-
mization directly obtain the stylized output by minimizing
the content loss and style loss deﬁned in the feature space.
The optimization is usually based on back-propagation.
[7, 8] propose to use Gram matrix to deﬁne the style of
an example image. [16] improves the results by combin-
ing MRFs with Convolutional Neural Networks. [1] uses
the semantic masks to deﬁne the style losses within corre-
sponding regions. In order to improve the results for portrait
style transfer, [28] proposes to modify the feature maps to
transfer the local color distributions of the example paint-
ing onto the content image. This is similar to the gain map
proposed by [30]. [9] studies the problem of controlling
the perceptual factors during style transfer. [25] improves
the results of neural style transfer by incorporating the his-
togram loss. [26] incorporates the temporal consistency loss
into the optimization for video style transfer. Since all the
above methods solve the optimization by back-propagation,
they are intrinsically time-consuming.
Model Optimization. In order to solve the speed bottle-
neck of back-propagation, [14, 17] propose to train a feed-
forward network to approximate the optimization process.
Instead of optimizing the image, they optimize the param-
eters of the network. Since it is tedious to train one net-
work for each style, [3, 6, 32] further study the problem of
training one network for multiple styles. Later, [5] presents
a method based on patch swap for arbitrary style transfer.
First, the content and style images are forwarded through
the deep neural network to extract features. Then the style
transfer is formulated as neural patch swap to get the re-
constructed feature map. This feature map is inverted by
the decoder network to image space. Since then, the frame-
work of encoder-feature transform-decoder has been widely
explored for arbitrary style transfer. [12] uses AdaIN as
the feature transform and trains the decoder over large col-
lections of content and style images. [18] trains two meta
networks for the whitening and coloring matrices, follow-
ing the formulation of WCT [19]. Many other works also
extend neural style transfer to video [2, 11, 27] and stereo-
scopic style transfer [4]. These works usually jointly train
additional networks apart from the style transfer network.
Universal Style Transfer. Universal style transfer
[19] is also based on the framework of encoder-feature
transform-decoder. Unlike AdaIN [12], it does not require
network training on any style image. It directly uses dif-
ferent layers of VGG network as the encoders and train
the decoders to invert the feature into image. The style
transfer effect is achieved by feature transform. [5] re-
places the patches of content feature by the most similar
patches of style feature. However, the nearest neighbor
search achieves less transfer effect since it tends to pre-
serve the original appearance. AdaIN considers the activa-
5953