6 Introduction
•We begin in Chapter 2with a brief introduction of basic concepts
and deﬁnitions on MASs, where we will introduce the deﬁnitions
of agents, autonomy, as well as multi-agent systems. Additionally,
we will delineate the preliminaries on graph theory that is relevant
in characterizing the network topologies among agents. Among
other things, we will point out the diﬀerence among the three
terms “centralized”, “decentralized”, and “distributed”.
•In Chapter 3, we introduce the models describing the dynamics
of agents. The linear models include ﬁrst-integrator dynamics,
double-integrator dynamics, and generic linear systems, while the
nonlinear models involve Lagrangian systems, unicycle systems,
along with attitude dynamics of rigid bodies.
•In Chapter 4, we describe diﬀerent multi-agent cooperative tasks,
including consensus, leader-following coordination, ﬂocking, for-
mation control, coverage control, distributed average tracking,
distributed estimation, containment control and its inverse prob-
lem surrounding control, as well as distributed optimization.
•In Chapter 5, we present various research issues of MASs, includ-
ing time-delays, quantization, packet loss, noise and disturbance,
connectivity maintenance, sampled-data control, along with event-
triggered control.
•In Chapter 6, we introduce diﬀerent types of multi-agent control
algorithms, including proportional control, proportional-integral
control, adaptive control, model predictive control, passivity-based
control, sliding-mode control, ﬁnite-time control, as well as ﬁxed-
time control.
•In Chapter 7, we summarize the applications of MASs in multi-
robot systems, sensor networks, smart grids, machine learning,
social networks, task migration of multi-core microprocessors, co-
ordination of the charging of multiple electric vehicles, distributed
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning optimization.
•Finally, in Chapter 8, we give a conclusion and list some unsolved
problems of MASs from the authors’ perspective.
Full text available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2600000019