4 Introduction
prestigious George S. Axelby outstanding paper award from IEEE
Transactions on Automatic Control, a top-notched journal in systems
and control. After that, the International Federation of Automatic
Control (IFAC) and American Automatic Control Council (AACC)
organized a series of conferences/workshops focusing on MASs. IFAC
established several technical committees having close ties with MASs.
New journals with a primary interest in MAS or network systems are
established, e.g., IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems
and IEEE Transactions on Network Sciences and Engineering.
As a critical enabler of several research ﬁelds, MASs are quintessen-
tially multidisciplinary. In the search for theories and applications, physi-
cists, computer scientists, biologists, and others have all contributed
to the development of MASs. Craig Reynold proposed three rules that
lead to simulated ﬂocking: collision avoidance, velocity matching, and
ﬂock centering [ 4]. Tamas Vicsek et al. introduced a model where the
velocity of the particles is determined by a simple rule with random
ﬂuctuations, to investigate the emergence of group behavior [ 5]. On the
other perspective, the study on MASs also provides insights for the
related ﬁelds, leading to new developments in these ﬁelds. A hallmark
of MAS control is the mathematical rigor where convergence/stability
analysis plays a vital role, perhaps an inheritance from control theory.
Although MAS theory shares some similarities with other branches
of natural sciences, there exist some fundamental diﬀerence. In natural
sciences, methodological reductionism plays a central role and has
achieved great success, which attempts to explain entire systems in
terms of their components. Reductionism assumes that the interactions
amongsystemcomponents(subsystems)arenotessentialandtheireﬀect
is negligible. However, the assumption failed to work for MASs. The
goal of MAS study is to understand and exploit the local interaction
rules among agents, from which a global behavior can emerge. As
a result, methodological reductionism becomes less useful for MAS
study. Compared with single agent control where there already exists
interactionamongdiﬀerentsystemscomponents,e.g.,sensingcomponent
and control component, MASs add another layer of interactions at a
higher level. How to understand and exploit these interactions is the
key to the success of MASs.
Full text available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2600000019