carried out from operator/s or robot/s);
-
Actors (e.g., operator/s, robot/s)
-
Communication between the actors involved (e.g., operator to
robot, 
robot to operator, operator to operator);
-
Cycle time (expressed in seconds);
-
Critical situations and possible solutions (e.g., difficulties or trouble
situations, 
possible solutions and interventions by the operator);
-
Working conditions (e.g., related to the environment and related to
the operator/s).
The 
User/Task Matrix synthetically describes the interaction and
supports 
designers in the definition of the most proper interfaces. This 
tool should be dynamic: it should be compiled by the multidisciplinary 
team at the beginning of the design process, and regularly updated as 
the project continues, with an increasing level of detail as soon as the 
interaction scenario becomes more defined. 
In order to fill in the matrix correctly, some recommendations are 
proposed to stimulate a proper reflection on the above-mentioned 
items:  
•Tasks and Duration: it provides a list of the tasks, differentiating
between 
cycle or monitoring/control activities, and the chron -
ological order of each of them;
•Actors: it associates each task to the actor/s performing the specific
action;
•Communications: it refers to the individual tasks, think about the
specific 
type of input or feedback that the operator should give to
the 
robot or vice versa, in different moments (before, during and
after 
task execution). Some guiding questions:
-
What information or command must the operator provide to the
robot?
-
What information and feedback must the robot provide to the
operator 
(e.g. completion of activities)?
-
Cam fast commands be useful for the operator to dialogue with the
robot 
/ s (e.g. stop, slow down)?
-
What inputs might the operator need to provide in case of error /
problem?
•Cycle time: it indicates the duration of each task (e.g., in seconds)
and 
reports at least 2 activity cycles to understand the succession of
production cycles.
•Critical situations and possible solutions: for each activity, it pro -
vides a list of possible difficulties and predicts the critical situations
that 
could arise (e.g., lack of material, difficulty of the operator in
carrying 
out his task, low control on the process). Some guiding
questions:-
Does the operator encounter difficulties in carrying out his tasks?
What 
are his/her needs?
-
What critical situations could arise?
-
How should the operator intervene to solve the problem? What
does 
he/she need (e.g. instructions, data, specific information)?
•Working conditions: for each task, it indicates the specific en -
vironmental conditions (e.g., if the environment is noisy, restricted
or 
with dust) and indicate whether the operator wears personal
protective 
equipment (e.g., gloves, helmet, glasses).
4.
Experimental validation on industrial cases
A 
set of industrial use cases have been identified to validate the
proposed 
method. They have been developed within an Italian Research 
project in the field of Smart Factories. In particular, the paper describes 
the experimental results obtained on one use case, focusing on the as -
sembly of two counter-rotating shafts by a collaborative robot and an oil pump on a crankcase by a human operator, both supported by two 
AGVs (Automated Guided Vehicles). Such use case is quite complex 
since it involves different actors (e.g., human operator, collaborative 
robots and AGVs). Each actor has a specific role and must be coordinated with the others. In fact, both human-robot and robot-robot collaboration take place. Furthermore, the use case is a valuable ex
-
ample of how the human-robot communication is fundamental for a broad reasoning on interface design. 
4.1. Use case analysis 
The use case described in the paper considers five different actors:  
-
1 human operator;
-
2 collaborative robots, in particular anthropomorphic robots (re -
spectively a KUKA robot and a FRANKA robot);  
-
2 AGV lines (each line is considered as an actor).
More 
specifically, AGVs operate on two lines: the Kit Line and the
Motor 
Line. On the Kit Line the AGVs move on-bound and transport the 
assembly components (i.e., counter-rotating shafts, oil pump, and ne -
cessary small parts). These AGVs make two stops (firstly on position A 
and secondly on position C) to allow the picking of the components. 
Each AGV working on this line is defined as Kit AGV. On the Motor 
Line, the AGVs carry the crankcase and move in the opposite direction. 
These AGVs make two stops (firstly on position C and secondly on 
position A) to allow the placing of the components. The human operator 
stays on position A and performs the double task of inspecting the kit 
transported by the AGVs, and then picking up and positioning the oil 
pump on the crankcase (positioned on an AGV of the motor line). Each 
AGV working on this line is defined as Motor AGV. 
One of the two collaborative robots (R1) moves on a linear rail 
(from position C to position B) for continuously assembling the two 
counter-rotating shafts (one for discharge and another for suction) on 
the crankcase (positioned on an AGV of the Motor Line). Instead, the 
second robot (R2) remains fixed in position C to pick the two counter- 
rotating shafts from the AGV on the Kit Line and pass them to robot R1.  
Fig. 4 shows the use case actors and work cell layout. 
Task Analysis allowed to study the process activities and to analyze 
the interactions on the three positions (A, B and C). A consequence, 
operations can be described also with respect to the place where they 
take place (A, B and C) as follows:  
•Position A:
-
Kit AGV operating on the Kit Line stops (first stop);
-
Motor AGV stops (second stop);
-
Operator checks the assembly components, picks up the oil pump
and 
positions it properly on the crankcase, located on the Motor
AGV;
•Position B:
-
Robot R1 completes the placing of the second counter-rotating
shaft 
while it's moving in parallel with the Motor AGV;
Fig. 4. The use case actors and work cell layout  E. P, et al. Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
7