•Position C:
-
Kit AGV stops (second stop);
-
Robot R2 picks the two counter-rotating shafts up and passes them
to 
Robot R1;
-
Motor AGV stops (first stop);
-
Robot R1 places the first counter-rotating shaft of the crankcase,
located 
on the Motor AGV.
4.2. 
Results and discussion 
As a result of the UX-based analysis, the User/Task Matrix was 
completed and the Experience Map was defined to fully describe the 
interaction. 
About the User/Task Matrix, all tasks performed in the cycle were 
related to the actors (i.e., operator, Robot R1, Robot R2, Kit AGV, Motor 
AGV) and were reported in a temporal sequence. Such preliminary 
analysis was initially useful to clearly recognize that some tasks occur 
simultaneously and to understand with actors are involved in each 
specific task. Moreover, all the information related to the interaction 
modalities, communication needs, and working conditions were col -
lected and formalized. The main tasks analyzed are listed below, in -
dicating the position where they take place:     
-
Kit AGV: Move to the first stop (A);
-
Operator: Control of the two counter-rotating shafts, the oil pump
and 
the assembly components (A);
-
Operator: Pick-up the screws and the oil pump (A)
-
Kit AGV: Move to pick-up location (C)
-
Robot R2: Pick-up the first counter-rotating shaft from Kit AGV
and 
positioning in exchange area for transfer with Robot R1 (C)
-
Motor AGV: Move to the first stop (C)
-
Robot R1: Move to the exchange area for picking up the first
counter-rotating 
shaft from Robot R2;
-
Robot R1: Insert of the first counter-rotating shaft on the crank -
case;
-
Robot R2: Move back and pick up the second counter-rotating
shaft (C);
-
Robot R1: Move to exchange area and pick up the second counter- 
rotating shaft from Robot R2 (C);
-
Robot R2: Return back (C);
-
Motor AGV: Move to position B;
-
Robot R1: Insert the second counter-rotating shaft on the crank -
case in continuous moving up (B);
-
Motor AGV: Move to the next stop (A);-
Operator: Mount screws and oil pump on the crankcase (A).
The 
complete analysis carried out for the use case is described in the
compiled 
User/Task Matrix reported in Appendix A. 
From the analysis of the User/Task Matrix, a lot of useful informa -
tion about the number of tasks, their type and duration, and the com -
munication needs can be retrieved into a unique, overall view. In par -
ticular, it helps to understand how complex the global activity is. The 
execution of multiple tasks simultaneously provides an image of the 
movement of the actors involved and therefore also gives an idea of the 
presence of noise or total confusion. These, for example, can make the 
operator feel stressed or uncomfortable in this context. The list of in -
formation necessary for both the operator and the robot allows to un -
derstand the frequency of human-robot interactions, how complex they 
are and how long they take. It is possible to better understand how 
much the interactions affect the execution of the activity. In addition, 
such a matrix allows to easily look beyond the mere data and provide a 
more in-depth view reading the global interaction scenario, especially 
about how the operator will feel inside it. 
Finally, the Experience Map was defined after a carefully study of 
the process, on the basis of the User/Task Matrix, and by focus groups. 
Indeed, if the User/Task Matrix describes the entire process, the 
Experience Map focuses on the human operator experience and map 
his/her “journey” along the process. This tool refers to the experience of 
interaction between the user and the surrounding environment, and it is 
strictly linked to the performed activities. In this context emotions and 
subjected feelings are not included. The set of activities and interactions 
certainly are affected by emotions, which however are difficult to predict at an early stage of the project. Emotions also depend on the 
specific users that are unknown at this stage. The Experience Map, 
however, is also suitable for adding references to the user's mood at a 
later date. 
For the specific use case, the global UX can be summed up into five 
steps on regular conditions, as indicated in Fig. 5. It sums up the tasks 
that the operator has to accomplish (on the green line) and the main interaction points with robots and AGVs (on the orange line). Moreover,  
Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 provide the UX maps in case of robot error and AGV 
error respectively. 
From the UX analysis, the interaction types and communication 
needs can be easily detected and studied. For instance, the maps highlighted that in regular conditions the operator only interacts with 
the two AGVs and not with the collaborative robots. But it does not 
mean that attention should be paid only on communication with AGVs. 
Indeed, the operator has to have also a complete control of the overall 
process and to take care also of the tasks carried out from the two 
Fig. 5. Experience map for the use case - regular conditions  E. P, et al. Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
8