classified into four main categories [18]:  
-
Visual displays (e.g. graphical user interfaces, augmented reality
interfaces);
-
Gestures (e.g. hand and facial movements);
-
Speech and natural language (e.g. auditory speech and text-based
responses);
-
Physical and haptics interactions.
Such 
interfaces can be also related to the level of interaction pro -
vided. In particular, the first level of interaction (coexistence) can be 
usually satisfied by graphical interfaces. The second level of interaction 
(cooperation) usually requires more advanced interfaces, such as 
speech and gesture interfaces. Finally, the third level of interaction 
(collaboration) can require also a direct physical or haptic interaction in 
order to be effective and natural at the same time. Fig. 1 shows the 
framework to classify Human-Robot Interaction, considering the three 
levels of interaction and the relations to different interface types. 
As far as interfaces is concerned, the industrial sector is actually 
more inclined to use visual interfaces. This is probably due to the 
multiplicity of information options provided to the robot and, conse -
quently, the variety of feedbacks received from the robot. Moreover, 
they simply offer a clear and unequivocal representation of the work 
status to the operator. Natural language interfaces have been poorly 
investigated in industrial context, while they have been already applied 
for interaction with social robots, such as facial expressions, gaze 
tracking, proxemics and kinesics, haptic [8]. In some cases, a multi -
modal interface may be useful. For example, a natural interface can be 
used for simpler or more frequent communications, while a visual in -
terface is reserved for complex and less frequent information exchange. Moreover, interfaces should be intuitive so as not to hinder the human 
work. This means that the interface must be highly usable even by 
novices and people without a particular knowledge on the use of the 
technology. For this purpose, human-robot interfaces should allow easy 
situation control, intuitive giving commands, and clear understanding 
of feedback sent by robots. 2.2. Human Factors for the study of HRI 
From the analysis of the literature review, the research about in
-
dustrial HRI and HRC poorly includes a human-centred approach so far. 
It can be stated that human factors have been included mainly by fo -
cusing on safety, such as the lightening the burden of work. For this reason, the majority of the researchers focused on developing tech
-
nologies that allow a side by side interaction between robots and hu -
mans, to facilitate their work, without a real, close collaboration be -
tween them. A specific line of research about interface is directed 
towards gesture recognition [19] and gesture data set identification  
[20] for 
human-robot communication. Another recent line of research
is 
about affective robotics to study the adaptation of robot behavior
according 
to the operator's cognitive workload, detected by monitoring
the 
human physiological parameters (e.g. electrodermal activity, eye
gaze, 
facial expression) [21,22]. For instance, [23] proposes to re -
cognize the user's heart rate (index of stress, anxiety or fear) using a
smartwatch 
and consequently to adapt the level of robot's autonomy. In
addition, 
Virtual Reality (VR) technology can be used to simulate the
HRI 
scenario during the design phase thanks to the development of a
digital 
twin. Recent studies propose to use VR to verify the effectiveness
of 
the human-robot collaboration [24] or to perform virtual user
testing, 
avoiding dangerous situations [25].
Actually, 
collaborative robots that work alongside humans without 
a fence must respect the ISO safety standards [13,17,26]: these stan -
dards establish a set of precise rules about the robot behavior, like the 
reduction of the speed and the power, based on the distance of the 
operator from the robot. Based on these standards, collaborative robots 
are classified into: Safety Monitored Stop (SMS), Hand Guiding (HG), 
Speed and Separation, Monitoring (SSM), Power and Force Limiting 
(PFL) [27]. However, such standards do not focus on interfaces, that are 
the item that allows the communication and the development of a common understanding between humans and robots. 
As far as interfaces, adopting a Human Factor perspective is ne
-
cessary to design the most proper communication strategies in order to 
allow an intuitive and effective cooperation and collaboration between 
Fig. 1. Framework to classify Human-Robot Interaction: levels of interaction and relations to different interface types  E. P, et al. Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
3