Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/rcim 
Proof
How to include User eXperience in the design of Human-Robot Interaction 
Elisa Pratia, Margherita Peruzzinia,⁎, Marcello Pellicciarib, Roberto Raffaelib
a Department of Engineering “Enzo Ferrari”, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy 
b Department of Sciences and Methods for Engineering, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy  
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords: 
Human-Robot Collaboration 
Human-Robot Interaction 
Industrial Ergonomics 
User eXperience Human Factors ABSTRACT
In recent years Human-Robot Collaboration (HRC) has become a strategic research field, considering the 
emergent need for common collaborative execution of manufacturing tasks, shared between humans and robots within the modern factories. However, the majority of the research focuses on the technological aspects and 
enabling technologies, mainly directing to the robotic side, and usually neglecting the human factors. This work 
deals with including the needs of the humans interacting with robots in the design in human-robot interaction (HRI). In particular, the paper proposes a user experience (UX)-oriented structured method to investigate the 
human-robot dialogue to map the interaction with robots during the execution of shared tasks, and to finally 
elicit the requirements for the design of valuable HRI. The research adopted the proposed method to an in
-
dustrial case focused on assembly operations supported by collaborative robots and AGVs (Automated Guided 
Vehicles). A multidisciplinary team was created to map the HRI for the specific case with the final aim to define 
the requirements for the design of the system interfaces. The novelty of the proposed approach is the inclusion of typically interaction design tools focusing in the analysis of the UX into the design of the system components, without merely focusing on the technological issues. Experimental results highlighted the validity of the pro
-
posed method to identify the interaction needs and to drive the interface design.   
1. Introduction
In 
the context of Industry 4.0 (I4.0), machines are becoming “in -
telligent” and more and more robots are being added to the workforce 
to improve the process quality and productivity. In fact, robots re -
present one of the nine pillars of I4.0 [1]. 
However, humans are still 
necessary to guarantee high process flexibility and to proactively re -
spond to the evolving market needs and to ever-increasing requests for product customization. In this context, smart factories need not only 
robots but also a strong collaboration between robots and humans. 
Based on this, the so-called Human-Robot Collaboration (HRC) is one of 
the main topics of research for the new smart factory. Indeed, in 
modern smart factories humans and robots have to coexist in a common 
workplace: robots can complement the humans’ sensory, physical and 
cognitive characteristics, while humans can take care about the more 
delicate and cognitive tasks. Moreover, robots should be designed to 
properly assist human workers in performing a certain task in order to 
obtain greater efficiency and effectiveness. 
Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) has emerged as a specific research 
field during the early 1990s. It is based on understanding, designing, 
and evaluating robotic systems for use by or with humans, to finally 
understand and shape the interactions between one or more humans and one or more robots, as defined by Goodrich and Schultz in [2]. 
 HRI 
is also the science of studying how people interact with robots, focusing on their behaviour and attitudes towards robots in relationship to the 
physical, technological and interactive features of the robots [3]. In a 
nutshell, the final aim of HRI is to develop not only time efficient ro
-
bots, but also robots acceptable to people, able to meet the social and 
emotional needs of their individual users as well as respecting human 
values. For this purpose, HRI covers several research areas such as 
engineering, technology, psychology, design, anthropology, sociology, 
philosophy [4,43
]. All these disciplines are important to develop a 
successful human-robot interaction, considering the technological lim -
itations and respecting the humans’ needs. Each discipline faces the 
topic in a different way and analyzes different aspects of the human- 
robot interaction. 
Nowadays, interaction and collaboration between humans and ro -
bots are open issues in any application context (from industry to 
healthcare, surgery, urban search and rescue, defense, until personal 
services), but particularly in the manufacturing area. Indeed, there are 
numerous advantages linked to the evolution of manufacturing pro -
cesses with the introduction of robots and the collaboration with hu -
mans. The first reason to include robots in manufacturing is to lighten human physical and cognitive efforts. For this purpose, the operator's 
⁎Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: margherita.peruzzini@unimore.it (M. Peruzzini).Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing xx (20xx) xxxxxxx
T