humans and robots. Authors suggest to apply three different views in 
industrial HRI, similarly to the model proposed in social robots field  
[28], in particular:  
-
Robot-centred view,
-
Robot cognition-centred view,
-
Human-centred view.
Merging 
the human-centred view with the traditional robot-centred
views 
means including human factors and main principles from Human- 
Computer Interactions (HCI) and Human-Machine Interaction (HMI) to 
this specific context, as traditionally human-centred disciplines. Indeed, 
HRC research cannot focus on technological development without in -
vestigating if the result will be good for the human interaction. As 
stated by the International Ergonomics Associations (IEA), human fac -
tors “encompasses not only physical safety and health, but also the 
cognitive and psychosocial aspects of living and working” [3]. 
As a 
consequence, strengthening the inclusion of human factors in HRI 
should allow reducing both physical fatigue and cognitive effort. In 
fact, cognitive factors, including topics such as communication and 
perception, can greatly benefits HRI in general, and manufacturing 
applications in particular [29]. A key aspect for successful HRI is fo -
cusing on the User eXperience (UX), defined by ISO as “a person's perceptions and responses that result from the use or anticipated use of 
a product, system or service" [30]. 
In this context, research on social 
robots has recently recognized the role of UX design to ensure a positive 
interaction. Indeed, a negative experience could prevent taking ad -
vantage from the robots' features or worse from refusing interaction 
with them [31]. 
Only the accurate study of UX from the early design 
stage can ensure an acceptable and pleasant human-robot interaction, able to improve also efficiency and effectiveness of interaction. An 
example of social features applied to industrial robots is Baxter by 
Rethink Robotics. It has a screen on which "his eyes" are displayed and these give humans the impression of being able to create eye contact 
with the robot and to create a natural communication channel. 
About the inclusion of UX in robotics, four trends about the UX 
consideration during the design of socially interactive robots (from 
level 1 with high consideration, to level 4 low consideration have been 
pointed out [32]. Up to now, the UX consideration level in the in
-
dustrial robot design may be placed at the third level, due to the fre -
quent omission of UX aspects in favour of robot-related aspects. How -
ever, considering the way the operator interacts with the robot and understanding his/her UX is hard, especially in the industrial sector [8]. 
In 
order to overcome this issue, a structured human-centred approach 
has to be adopted to support designers to solve the technical questions 
looking at the user's needs and abilities, using UX-based techniques. 
According to UX principles, the quality of interaction can be mea -
sured by mainly evaluating the use of interfaces and the input/output 
information exchange between the human user, the interface, and the 
robot. One of the most common tools in UX is usability assessment, 
widely adopted to assess the quality of interaction with any interactive 
systems. It considers three indicators (i.e., effectiveness, efficiency and 
satisfaction) and proper metrics (e.g., execution time, errors, informa -
tion request) to measure the user performance [32]. 
However, there are 
no specific standard techniques for assessing the human-robot interac -
tion [33], 
even though they are strongly expected tin many studies  
[34]. 
In this context, an in-depth picture of interface evaluation methods 
is provided by [35]. In HRI evaluation, two types on methodologies can 
be defined: the first type of methods looks more at the robot perfor -
mance and behavior, while the second type on the user's feels. User 
testing should be performed under the actual conditions of use, there -
fore involving end-users, performing real tasks in the real use scenario. 
In case of tests on prototypes, it is recommended to recreate the op -
erative context as likely as possible: conditions have to be replicated as 
much as possible, only the type of data to collect will change. Some examples can be found in the recent literature. An interesting approach 
has been presented by Steinfeld et al. [33] that assess HRI considering 
human and robot as a team and studying how they effectively accom -
plish a task. They consider also the system in its complexity, not only 
humans and robots, and anything that can affect the task performance 
(e.g. communication delay, robot update rate, human personnel fac -
tors). Diversely, Olsen et al. [36] addressed HRI considering the au -
tonomy of the robot to understand how much the user attention is re -
quired. Moreover, Crandall et al. [35] try to understand how many 
robots the operator can manage. 
Other set of evaluation techniques investigates more closely the 
user's behavior and perception. According to Lindblom and Andreasson  
[31], 
useful evaluation techniques could derive from HCI field and 
could be adapted to HRI. For example, usability tests can be mainly 
divided into quantitative and qualitative. Quantitative tests do not give 
indications on how to solve usability problems but carry out measure -
ments (e.g. execution time, number of errors, number of tasks com -
pleted) therefore allow to collect data. These data can be collected 
during the observation of users while performing a specific task. These 
tests can be more useful for example to compare two types of interface. 
Quantitative methods also include questionnaires. The questionnaires 
are useful for gathering a large number of opinions in a short time, as 
well as being adaptable to multiple application areas. More specifically, 
Bartneck et al. developed five questionnaires to measure the users' 
perception of social robots [34]. 
Among these, the "Perceived safety" 
questionnaire could also be taken as a reference in the manufacturing 
sector. 
In addition, physiological measurements represent another group of 
objective measurement tool. These techniques allow to investigate in 
real time the level of cognitive load and stress of the operator during the 
interaction. Among quantitative techniques, there is the monitoring of 
human parameters, such as the measurement of the heart rate (HV), the 
breathing rate (RBR) or pupil dilation (PD). Examples of adoption of these tools in manufacturing is provided by [37]. A different approach 
is used in qualitative tests, which aim to collect useful insights to im
-
prove interaction, using user observation or interview. In this way, the 
expert can collect data about the interaction modalities, user experi -
ence, and his/her perception and feelings. Qualitative tests are usually performed on fewer participants, since they require more time and 
more active user participation. 
From the analysis of the existing literature, researchers seem to be 
aware that the introduction of robots significantly affect the human 
work. However, the approach to HRI design does not seem to take it 
into consideration yet. Especially in the manufacturing sector, the in
-
troduction of robots into industries is not just a replacement of previous 
machinery. Moreover, the introduction of robots introduces a sub -
stantial change in human behaviors. For this reason, there is the need to 
develop a structured methodology that allows to face a HRI project 
starting from the analysis of human needs and requirements, according 
to a human-centred approach. It means designing having clear from the 
beginning the operator's needs in terms of communication and in -
formation exchange with the robot. Only in this way, also complex 
industrial projects can succeed, achieving all the potential benefits. 
3.
The research methodology
3.1. 
The UX-based approach
The 
proposed approach is aimed at introducing a set of UX techni -
ques to support the design of human-robot interface to build up HRI- 
HRC applications. Indeed, UX is often taken for granted but, contrarily, 
a positive UX has to be systematically designed [29]. 
According to the 
human-centered approach, end-users should be involved in the whole design process, from the first research stage until the final evaluation. 
The first step to proceed with a UX approach is the creation of a 
multidisciplinary team. Such a method can guarantee a proper E. P, et al. Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
4