activities should be re-organized in order to assign more cognitive and 
control tasks to humans, and to assign repetitive tasks and all opera -
tions that require greater accuracy, speed and repeatability to robots  [5]. 
Roughly 
speaking, most of the industrial and scientific research on 
HRI and HRC is today strongly “robot-centered”, focusing mainly on 
technical issues and technological solutions, without reasoning on the 
human perspective. Some works deal with the technical design of 
specific collaborative robots’ applications [6], or of physical compo -
nents of the robot to allow visual communication [7], 
others on new 
intelligent programming methods (e.g. walk-through programming [8], 
programming by demonstration [7]). Human safety is often taken into 
consideration, mainly facing the issues linked to the human-robot co -
existence in a cell [9]. 
Moreover, a recent study concerns how to adapt 
the robot's behavior to lighten the burden on the operator and to 
comply to his/her needs [10]. 
Conversely, this research focuses on the human side of human-robot 
collaboration and put the humans at the center of the human-robot 
system design, according to the Human-Centered Design (HCD) ap -
proach. Regardless of the specific task performed, robots are designed 
to support humans. Thus, it is not possible speaking of robots without 
considering them in relation with humans. As a consequence, Human 
Factors should be taken into consideration throughout the in human- 
robot interaction design process. The adoption of the human's point of 
view allows to foresee the user's needs, behavior and sensations during 
the interaction with robots, with the final aim to build up a solid 
knowledge about the user to design a better user experience. 
The paper adopts a human-centred approach and presents a struc -
tured methodology for the design of the HRI, primarily focused on the 
detailed knowledge of the communication exchange between humans 
and robots. The first aim of this research is to demonstrate how a 
human-centered design approach can be effectively applied on HRI. 
Moreover, this research aims to identify a set of guidelines for the de -
sign of human-robot interfaces, with particular attention for the man -
ufacturing sector. 
2.
Related works
2.1. 
HRI in manufacturing
Collaboration 
between humans and robots includes interaction and 
all related actions that create a direct communication flow and a 
common understanding between humans and robots, jointly per -
forming a certain task. It is defined also as a state where human beings (operators or simple users) cooperate with purposely designed robots to 
work together within a defined workspace. In particular, Human-Robot 
Interaction (HRI) is a general term to refer to all forms of interaction 
between human and robot [11]. 
As a consequence, Human-Robot Col -
laboration (HRC) can be considered as a subcategory of HRI, as it takes 
place into a specific collaborative workspace, as the space within the 
operating space where robots and humans can perform tasks con -
currently. According to Thrun, collaborative robotic technologies can 
be grouped into three main categories: industrial robotics, professional 
service robotics, and personal service robotics [12]. 
In contrast to robot 
manipulators, which are mainly passive and do not employ sensors and actuators, collaborative robotics is made up of flexible and “intelligent” 
devices to allow a direct interaction with the user, creating a sort of 
“dialogue” with him/her to support the human activity using different 
kind of technologies (e.g. sensors, actuators and data processing) [13]. 
HRI is today applied in many contexts, from industry to healthcare, 
defense, until personal services. In particular, the manufacturing con
-
text offers many situations of co-presence of humans with robots. The 
relationship of humans and robots in a shared work environment is a 
many-faceted phenomenon which is classified according to a number of 
different viewpoints, also according to the specific context of applica -
tion. As far as industrial applications are concerned, four criteria can be defined for decomposing human-robot interactions, according to [14]: 
workspace, working time, aim, and contact. The workspace could be 
collocated or non-collocated as the working time could be synchronous 
or asynchronous [9,15]. In the same way, also the aim of operator and 
robot can be shared or not, and contact between humans and robots can 
take place or not [15]. The classification of the human-robot relation -
ship can also consider other parameters such as shared resources (i.e. 
physical, cognitive or computational) and the presence of multiple ro -
bots and humans, considering also their respective role [16]. On this 
basis, numerous combinations of the human and robotic agents are 
possible. The highest level is the so-called symbiotic collaboration, 
which takes place when human and robots coexist in a physical space to 
interact with each other so as to solve hard tasks requiring a significant 
mental and computational effort [16]. 
On the basis of the above-mentioned criteria, HRI has been classi -
fied into three areas, adapted from [14]:    
-
Human-Robot Coexistence (common workspace and time, se -
quential tasks on common resources or simultaneous tasks on
different 
resources between humans and robots);
-
Human-Robot Cooperation (common workspace, time and shared
aim, 
tasks can be sequential or simultaneous on same resources
without 
a direct contact);
-
Human-Robot Collaboration (common workspace, time, for a
shared 
aim, tasks can be sequential or simultaneous on same re -
sources with a direct physical contact).
This 
classification is valid also in those contexts where multiple 
humans or multiple robots are involved. 
As a consequence, the substantial difference of HRC with respect to 
HRI is the sharing a common goal and having a direct contact. It implies 
that humans and robots have to share their skills to solve a specific task, in a collaborative way. The ISO 10218-1 defines Collaborative Robots 
as robots designed to physically interactions with humans in a shared 
workspace [17]. 
The potential of HRC is the combination of the robot 
features (e.g. adaptability, accuracy, speed) with the properties of the 
human cognitive skills (e.g. problem solving). To facilitate this colla -
boration, humans has to work and interact with the robot safely. Fur -
thermore, the robot must adapt to the human behavior and foresee the 
humans’ needs. 
In any cases, collaboration implies a deeper interaction between 
humans and robots. In this context, interfaces play a central role, as the 
main communication channel between the two entities involved (i.e., 
humans and robots). A key aspect in collaboration is interaction. 
Talking about interactions also means talking about interfaces. A high- 
quality Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) requires intuitive user inter -
faces. On one hand, the operator can give to robot inputs in a simple way, without any distraction from his/her main task; on the other hand, 
the robot provides clearer information to the user, generating an im
-
mediate comprehension and data interpretation. Adopting intuitive interfaces becomes even more important in the case of a close colla
-
boration between robots and humans. In a HRC scenario, humans and robots combine their respective skills to carry out a common task in the 
most efficient and effective way. Based on this, the human-robot com
-
munication should be natural and spontaneous as between humans. For 
this purpose, a detailed knowledge on human-centred interface design 
is required. 
Interfaces can, indeed, generate different kind of communication: 
from graphical language to voice-based communication, until gesture- 
based dialogue. Also, the types of interfaces consequently change. For 
instance, graphical communication can take place either using specific 
devices (e.g., monitor, touchscreen), while voice-based communication 
can use Natural Language Interfaces (NLI) and gesture-based commu -
nication can use proper cameras to track the human's hands [8]. 
Ac-
cording to the communication typology, human-robot interfaces can be E. P, et al. Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
2