information sharing and combination of knowledge from different 
disciplines in order to detail the usage scenario and have a clear view 
on the final result. Specifically, teamwork allows an easier identifica -
tion of the human-robot information exchange in terms of: information typology, physical location, frequency and temporal location, and en
-
vironment of interaction. Besides, it would provide a shared metho -
dology for the analysis of all case studies. 
After that, the user is put on the center of the design process during 
the so-called “user understanding” phase [38]. 
It consists of a deep, 
accurate user analysis based on context research and user analysis, to be carried out in a more or less invasive way. The main UX techniques 
adopted for user understanding are: user observation, focus group and 
interview [39]. User observations is frequently used for the context 
analysis and preliminary user analysis, since it allows to observe user in 
their natural environment without affecting their normal behaviours 
and performance. Diversely, focus groups and interviews provide a 
more active participation of the user to collect, in different ways, 
qualitative data about user needs, expectations or fears. Usually per
-
sonas and usage scenarios are defined to represent the results of the analysis. 
In addition, different kinds of mapping tools can be used in UX 
design to describe various aspects of interaction and processes asso
-
ciated. In particular, task analysis allows to define the steps that the user must take in order to complete a goal. In case of collaborative 
tasks, it can depict the actions taken by the different users (or some 
systems/robots) to help them achieve their goals. It is useful to have a 
unique overview of the process activities and to review the all process, 
minimizing the number of actions that a user has to undertake, ana
-
lyzing the information exchange or eliminating unnecessary steps. Also, link analysis can be useful to evaluate relationships and connections 
between users and systems efficiently in a graphical way. Link analysis 
has been used for user investigation in different field, from criminal 
activity to computer security analysis, 
until market research [40]. 
Moreover, other techniques can be adopted to graphically represent the 
results of the user analysis [39]. Hereafter some examples are provided  
[41]. Empathy maps show the user's perspective regarding the tasks and are frequently used to articulate the knowledge about a particular type 
of user, helping the design team to understand the user's mindset. They 
graphically externalize the user knowledge in order to create a shared 
understanding and to support decision-making. Journey maps focus on 
a specific customer's interaction with a product or service, visualizing 
the process that a user goes through in order to accomplish a task. They 
are generally used for understanding and addressing customer/user 
needs and pain points. Finally, service blueprints are counterparts to 
customer journey maps, focused on the employees. They visualize the 
relationships between different service or process components (in
-
cluding people, machines, any physical or digital evidence), reflecting 
on the organization's perspective with a particular focus on the service 
provider and employees. The UX-based workflow is schematized in  
Fig. 2. 
When 
the design is completed, users are involved in the project 
evaluation phase to test the real efficiency, effectiveness and satisfac -
tion during the use of the final design. In this phase, the involvement of end-users can highlight if there are aspects that had not been con
-
sidered by the design team. A powerful mean for solution prototype and user testing is represented by the use of Virtual Reality (VR) simula
-
tions. Indeed, VR environments enable to directly involve users in task simulation and test the UX about layout, coordination of activities, and 
interactions with robots or other actors involved. 
This research focuses on industrial applications, with particular at
-
tention for the manufacturing sector. In this sector, the potential use 
cases are almost unlimited thanks to the extreme adaptability of robots 
and the large number of applications that can include both humans and 
robot, collaborating and cooperating. For this reason, the proposed 
approach is general-purposes and largely adaptable to different cases. 
Each use case will than adapt the proposed method to its specific particularities and scopes. 
3.2. The UX-based specific tools 
According to the proposed approach, the research selected a set of 
UX specific tools to support the human-robot interface design. The 
adopted tools are as follows:  
-
User analysis (observation, focus groups, interview);
-
Task analysis;
-
User/Task Matrix (new tool);
-
Experience Maps (new tool).
These 
tools allow to carry about a robust, human-centred user re -
quirement analysis, that is the main issue to guarantee a good UX de -
sign. After that, the design phase will define the main features of both robots and workplace. The use of prototypes is useful to check if the 
solution identified is the right one. Also in this phase, it is possible to 
involve users to collect their opinions and first impressions. This will 
make it easier to solve some problems encountered. 
A HRI design flow has been defined according to a UX-based 
workflow. It is made up of 4 steps as follows:  
1.
Requirement gathering:
1.1
Creation of a multidisciplinary team (e.g. involving system en -
gineers, IT engineers, User Interface and UX designers, system
developers, 
system integrators);
1.2 
User analysis (using observations, focus groups and interviews);
1.3 
Activity analysis (using task analysis);
1.4 
Interaction visualization (using User/Task Matrix and
Experience 
Maps);  
2.
Interface Design;
3. Prototyping;
4.
UX assessment (based on user testing).
Like 
all design cycles, the process may be nonlinear but rather
iterative, 
requiring many cycles through the process. 
The main novelty is the introduction of typical UX-based tools in the 
requirement gathering phase, to focus on human factors. In particular, 
interaction analysis and visualization represent the key-points of the 
entire process. Experience maps generalize the concept of customer- 
journey maps across different user types and products. They represent a 
synthetic visualization of an entire end-to-end experience that a “gen -
eric” user goes through in order to accomplish a certain goal. They are used for understanding a general human behavior, as opposed to 
journey maps that are more specific and focused on related to a specific 
business. This tool is better presented hereafter. 
The User/Task Matrix is used to synthesize all information about 
users and tasks, and operational conditions into a table. An example of 
its structured is shown in Fig. 3. 
The matrix organization, indeed, al -
lows to collect a set of information and data into a structured way, to clearly describe the process interaction and to easily compare different 
scenarios. In particular, the Matrix contains all the necessary data to 
guide the choice of the interface type, which is largely influenced by 
multiple aspects [42]. 
First of all, the Matrix considers the tasks to be 
performed, their temporal sequence and the temporal relations among 
different activities. Secondly, it maps who performs the different ac -
tions (e.g., operator, robots). Thirdly, it describes the specific working 
conditions, such as environmental conditions (e.g., noisy, small, dusty) 
or the use of personal equipment (e.g., gloves, goggles, helmet). This 
information is useful to guide the choice of the most proper interface, 
excluding or preferring some types of interfaces to others. Once these 
factors have been clarified, information about the actors involved are 
collected. Finally, also the situations in which errors occur and how to 
solve them can be useful to design the interface. For example, under 
normal conditions, human-robot communications could be limited to E. P, et al. Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
5