(referring to firstly the operator and then the workspace). This column 
gave indications on which types of interfaces should be adopted in the 
specific context of use. In the use case, there were no particular working 
conditions to exclude some interface types (e.g., gesture, speech), but 
observing the operator conditions (i.e., wearing gloves) suggested to 
exclude touch interfaces specifically. However, visual interfaces could 
be adopted but input devices were carefully chosen. The second aspect 
to consider is Communications. This column provided useful indica -
tions about the direction of communication (i.e., from operator to 
robot, from robot to operator, both), the moment of communication, 
the frequency of information exchange, and the information com -
plexity. More specifically, the level of complexity was determined by the combination of the level of detail required and the variety of 
communications. On one hand, if communications are simple (e.g., 
stop, slow down), natural interfaces can be successfully implemented by 
gesture or speech interfaces. However, if messages to be shared are 
simple but also frequent and numerous, the operator could difficulty 
memorize them. On the other hand, if communications are complex and 
based on long sequences, natural interfaces are not suitable since they 
poorly support message composition and decoding, and do not guide 
the user in the correct interpretation. Considering the complexity of the 
contents to be transmitted, also data indicated on the columns about 
critical situations and solutions were used. Indeed, interface dialogue 
must be particularly effective in critical situations. In those cases, where 
standard communications and critical situation communications have a 
very different level of complexity, it may be useful to provide two 
different types of interfaces: the former for regular communications 
(frequently accessed), and the latter for problematic situations (poorly 
accessed). 
Observing the task timeline also supported understanding when the 
communications took place and in what conditions the operator pro
-
vided inputs or received feedbacks. Time analysis as well as commu -
nication frequency analysis helped to define also the type of use (e.g., co-located, remote, ubiquitous), the size of the interface, and their most 
proper positioning. In case of very frequent communications, handheld 
interfaces should be preferred to guarantee an easy and ubiquitous 
access whatever the user position. 
Looking at the information collected of the use case, it was possible 
to define the following design guidelines for interface design:  
-
the workplace conditions allowed the use of theoretically any type
of interfaces;
-
in case of using visual interfaces, the operator conditions suggested
to 
adopt physical devices (e.g., buttons, mouse, knobs) or touch
screens 
able to recognize the touch with gloves (e.g., projected ca -
pacitive touch screens);
-
communications was bidirectional, from operator to robot and vice
versa, 
and was characterized by medium-frequent exchange and low
complexity, 
so that ubiquitous and/or wearable interfaces could be
considered. 
Moreover, multiple interfaces could be used to received
different 
kinds of feedback: for example, a light switch, a short
sound, 
a vibration of a wearable device or a visual pop-up on the
screen 
could be used to provide different types of information,
simplifying 
the comprehension process on the user mind. At the
same 
time, the operator could inform the systems about his/her
activity 
by a speech interface (e.g., using the keyword "Go!"), hand
gestures 
(e.g., open hand or fist);
-
communications did not overlap with other activities, therefore the
operator 
could devote attention to both receiving communications
from 
the robot and sending commands;
-
communications during critical situations were characterized by a
higher 
level of complexity, but a lower frequency. For these pur -
poses, physical or digital commands / buttons could be used. For
example, 
stopping the entire cycle could be carried out by simplypushing 
a physical or digital button, clearly dedicated to extra -
ordinary situations (e.g., red color and more distant position from 
those used for other activities). Similarly, in case of incorrect or 
absent kit components, the operator should communicate the spe -
cific problem by a visual interface, that is the easier way to refer a 
problem and call for assistance. 
Such analysis provides an example of how the combination of all 
information retrieved from the UX tools can practically guide the in -
terfaces design. The proposed analysis supported the definition of the 
interface and the main design issues, but also prototype assessment 
using the User/Task Matrix to verify the satisfaction of the user re -
quirements, and the Experience Map to validate the effective UX on the prototype. 
This method requires a good sensitivity of the design team and a 
good level of expertise to interpret the collected data and relate them in 
order to obtain useful information for the design. Moreover, time spent 
to analyze interactions is then saved during the design phase and leads 
to better results as well as preventing problems in the more advanced 
design phases. 
Finally, both the User/Task Matrix and the Experience Map can be 
customized and expanded according to the specific needs of the project. 
5. Conclusions
The 
paper deals with the design of interface in Human-Robot
Collaboration 
(HRC), when modern robots collaboratively execute tasks 
supporting humans within the modern factories. The research motiva -
tion arises from the need of extending the current research, mainly 
focusing on technological aspects on the robotic side, towards the 
human side. In particular, this work proposed a UX design cycle as a 
methodology to include human factors in human-robot interface design, 
with the final aim to elicit the needs of human beings interacting with 
robots. The paper provided also a set of UX-based tools to investigate 
the human-robot dialogue, to map the UX and the interaction with 
robots during the execution of shared tasks, and to finally elicit the 
design requirements for designing usable and effective interfaces. The 
research validated the application of the proposed tools on an industrial 
case focusing on assembly operations, where humans collaborate with 
anthropomorphic robots and AGVs (Automated Guided Vehicles). A 
multidisciplinary design team was created to map the interaction and 
define the design requirements using User/Task Matrix and Experience 
Maps. The novelty of the proposed approach is the inclusion of UX- 
based design tools in HRC design. Results demonstrated the validity of 
the proposed tools to understand the human-robot interaction, describe 
the communication issues, and define the main interface features to 
support the following interface design activity. 
Disclosure statement 
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influ -
ence the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors wish to acknowledge the ICOSAF project (PON R&I 
2014-2020).   E. P, et al. Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
10