bounding boxes for the training set’s road damages. It is
observable that the areas are distributed mostly around 0
to 400 squared pixels. Therefore, we set the anchor gener-
ator sizes (cfg.MODEL.ANCHOR GENERATOR.SIZES) to
[[32;64;128]] instead of the default [[32;64;128;256]] .
Fig. 4. Bounding box area distributions using a histogram with the number
of bins as 20 (range of a bin is approximately 45.6). It is observable that the
areas distributed mostly around 0 to 400 squared pixels.
The ratios of the anchor boxes are calculated
by their heights over their widths. Therefore, we
also explore the height=width distribution of all
the ground-truth bounding boxes. It is observable
from Figure 5 that a high number of the ratios are
distributed at the lower end. Therefore, we set the ratios
(cfg.MODEL.ANCHOR GENERATOR.ASPECT RATIOS)
to these values [[0:1;0:5;1:0;1:5]]instead of the default
[[0:5;1:0;2:0]] ratios. Training our model with these
parameters does not help to improve the results. However, it
helps make the learning process converges faster (around the
iterations 70,000 instead of 105,000). These results indicate
that specifying appropriate sizes for the anchor boxes helps
the learning speed. However, the model is complicated
enough to learn the boxes though the candidates are not very
close to the predicted ones.
E. EfﬁcientDet model
As discussed, the object detection research ﬁeld is emerg-
ing, and related techniques evolve consistently. Speciﬁcally,
Google Brain team recently published EfﬁcientDet [34], which
claims to achieve a state-of-the-art result on Common ob-
jects in context (COCO) test-dev [35]. Therefore, we also
implement and train a model using EfﬁcientDet. However, the
prediction result is not as good as Faster R-CNN. Though it
takes a similar amount of time to train, it does not produce
a better prediction performance. This result might indicate
either EfﬁcientDet is not suitable for this dataset or need more
experiments to tune its parameters for this speciﬁc case.
Fig. 5. Bounding box ratios (height/width) distributions with the number of
bins as 30 (the width of a bin is approximately 0.55). It’s observable that this
distribution is skewed toward the lower end.
V. E VALUATIONS AND SUGGESTIONS
We also visualize the predicted bounding boxes with corre-
sponding labels and scores to qualitatively evaluate the results.
In general, predictions and ground-truth match pretty well.
However, we also discover several discrepancies and found
some wrong/missing ground-truth bounding boxes. Figure
6 shows a few of these discrepancies. The red boxes are
ground-truth, and the blue boxes are predicted ones. The
predicted boxes also have corresponding labels and prediction
probabilities (ranging from 0 to 1.0 exclusively as low to high
conﬁdence). We only show three examples in this case, and we
also crop and keep only the lower parts of these pictures due to
space limitations. For clarity of these pictures, we recommend
interested readers to check these pictures in their original sizes
from the training folder using the image ﬁle names listed on
top of the pictures.
Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst picture is Japan 008976 , while the
D00 prediction matches the ground-truth, another detected
damage of type D20 is obvious but is not in the annotations
provided by the dataset. On the other hand, there are two
horizontal cracks detected with high conﬁdences in the picture
Czech 001957 , but there are no annotations for these in the
training set. Finally, there is a pothole ( D40) damage detected
inJapan 012722 without a corresponding ground-truth. It’s
also worth noting from this picture ( Japan 012722 ) that there
are currently two overlapping bounding boxes with the same
damage type ( D20), but one with 0.99 and another with 0.60
conﬁdence scores, respectively. The predictive score threshold
and the non-maximum suppression step will remove the one
with lower prediction score. Thus, the predicted one bounding
box for D20 matches the ground-truth one.
In many cases, especially in darker light conditions, machine
learning models can perform better than humans. For instance,
Figure 7 shows the picture India 009632 from test1 set. Our
model predicts that there is a D02 type of damage in the
picture (the red box in panel (A)). However, this is not clear
to humans. We might think that was a wrong prediction as