similar locations. This heuristic does not always hold, but it
would be fast and easy to implement.
Furthermore, instead of using Poisson blending [26] to place
the synthetic damage patches into an existing image, we use a
fast color transfer technique [32] to make the artiﬁcial patches
look more natural to the placing image. Figure 3 shows an
example of the resulted image. D01 (green box) and D10 (blue
box) damage boxes are the real ones, while D40 (yellow box)
is the synthesized one. Though not all the artiﬁcial patches
generated this way look natural or in the correct place, it
helps to quickly generate augmented data and check if this
augmentation strategy worth exploring.
Fig. 3. Damage augmentation: D00 (green-box) and D10 (blue box) are
the real damages. D40 (yellow box) is the augmented one. This patch was
randomly selected from existing D40 damages then slightly modiﬁed and
placed into a position randomly sampled from all positions of this crack type.
Furthermore, in this case, we are not focusing on any
speciﬁc type of damages but would like to balance the num-
ber of damages among the four damage types per country.
Thus, we set different augmentation probabilities for different
damage types in each country. Speciﬁcally, based on data
exploration as shown in Figure 1, we set the augmentation
probabilities as in Table I. Finally, we train the model (with
the selected architecture described above) using the augmented
data. It takes longer training iterations to converge, and the
resulted model does not perform better. This result might
indicate that though individual countries may have different
numbers of damages per type, the combined dataset (with three
different countries) does not pose a big issue about damage
type unbalancing (as shown in Figure 2).
TABLE I
AUGMENTATION PROBABILITIES FOR DIFFERENT DAMAGE TYPES AND
DIFFERENT COUNTRIES .
Country D01 D10 D20 D40
Czech 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.4
India 0.3 0.5 0.2 0.0
Japan 0.0 0.6 0.3 0.5
We also experiment with several other augmentation meth-
ods such as random cutout, random brightness/contrast, and
cropping image augmentations, using albumentations package
[33]. Speciﬁcally, for cutout augmentation, we randomly set
up to 8 random areas with maximum sizes of 3232with
the random probability of 0.5 (i.e., there is a 0.5 chance
of augmenting for every one of the eight cutout areas). For
brightness/and contrasts, we experiment both with a limit
of 0.3 and a random probability of 0.5. Also, for cropping,we set the min and max sizes to 512 and 540, respectively.
The cropping probability used is 0.1. However, all these
augmentations take a higher number of training iterations to
converge, and none of them help to increase the validation
accuracy.
The cutout augmentation technique does not work might
due to the reason that there are already built-in dropout
layers in the Detectron2 Faster R-CNN implementation. The
brightness/contrast technique does not help might indicate that
the training data itself already contains images with different
light and weather conditions. Thus, they already have images
with different brightness/contrast levels. Lastly, the cropping
augmentation technique does not work might due to the reason
that Faster R-CNN uses only the regions of interests of each
training image (i.e., ground-truth boxes) rather than the entire
image [18].
We explore also test time augmentation (TTA). Speciﬁcally,
we apply ﬂipping, resizing, and brightness/contrast augmenta-
tion techniques. We only apply horizontal ﬂipping for ﬂipping
augmentation since the vertical ﬂipping does not make sense
in this case. For resizing, we use the following sizes (400,
500, 600, 700, 800, 900, 1000, 1100, 1200). TTA takes a
longer time to make predictions because they have to make
predictions for several augmented images, then combine them
to produce ﬁnal predictions for each image. However, neither
of these approaches helps to improve prediction accuracy.
D. Other hyperparameters
Batch normalization is one of the breakthroughs in deep
learning. It allows faster and more stable training by making
the output distribution from one layer stable before forwarding
to the next layer. This strategy also helps gradient descent
by avoiding vanishing gradients. It normalizes the previous
layer’s output by subtracting the empirical means over the
batch divided by the observed standard deviations. Therefore,
there are options to change the pixel means and standard
deviations over the 3 image channels (i.e., Red, Green, and
Blue).
Since Detectron2 recommends not to change the
standard deviations, we look into the pixel means
(cfg.MODEL.PIXEL MEAN) from all the images in
the training set as [122:190;122:639;117:788] (in Blue,
Green, and Red channels, respectively) and use them instead
of the default values (generated from ImageNet dataset) as
[103:530;116:280;123:675]. However, this approach does
not help to enhance performance. This result might indicate
that the calculated means for this dataset and those from
ImageNet are not very different. Another indication would
be the base model was trained with the default means and
standard deviations, so changing them impacts the extracted
features from the base model used.
Furthermore, Faster R-CNN has a module to generate
anchor boxes. These anchor boxes are generated with dif-
ferent sizes and ratios. Therefore, we explore our data to
ﬁnd appropriate box sizes and ratios. Speciﬁcally, Figure
4 shows the histogram of the areas of all ground-truth