models to improve the detection result. Similarly, Wenzhe
Wang et al., [17] also propose to use Faster R-CNN with data
exploration step to adjust appropriate hyperparameters such as
anchor boxes and ratios. Furthermore, they use different aug-
mentation types (such as contrast transformation, brightness
adjustment, and Gaussian blur) to improve their results.
On the other hand, [18] uses YOLOv3 with darknet53 as the
base model to tackle these tasks. They also experiment with
two augmentation strategies. The ﬁrst strategy is to generate
more images for damage types with lower number occurrences
using brightening or gray-scale, and the second strategy is
to use cropping. However, in general, augmentations do not
help. Additionally, Kluger et al., [19] utilize Faster R-CNN,
RetinaNet [20], and Convolutional Neural Network combined
with Random Forest to solve the tasks. The use of Random
Forest is due to the assumption that it helps in case there
are few samples in the training data [21]. Furthermore, they
propose (without validating the impacts of the proposal) to use
Cycle-Consistent Adversarial Networks (CycleGAN) [22] for
data augmentation. Their experiments also show that Faster R-
CNN works best for road damage classiﬁcation and detection.
In a recent study, Maeda et al., [23] use Generative Ad-
versarial Nets (GAN) [24] to generate damages with a lower
number of occurrences to improve the detection results for this
speciﬁc type of damages. Speciﬁcally, they use Progressive
Growing GAN (PG-GAN) [25] to artiﬁcially generate more
damages of pothole damage type and improve prediction
results for this type of cracks in Japan. The reason is that
Japan has a low number of pothole damages. Furthermore,
they also use Poisson blending [26] to place the generated
damages to the existing images to make the artiﬁcial patches
look more natural to its containers. In another work, Arya et
al., [3] suggest that the current techniques are not transferable
from one country to another. Therefore, such a model is needed
to save data collection, data labeling, and training time.
All in all, these works show that Faster R-CNN seems to be
a useful technique for road damage detection and classiﬁcation
with a good trade-off between time and accuracy. These works
also indicate that except when we only focus on a damage type
with a small number of occurrences (i.e., pothole damages
in Japan), data augmentations (other than the obvious ones
such as horizontal ﬂipping and resizing) do not generally help.
Furthermore, several of these works use ensembles to improve
their prediction results. Though ensembles help improve the
results, they also signiﬁcantly increase training and prediction
time and are not encouraged in this year’s challenge.
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
Our general methodology is that we start with the data
exploration stage to understand the dataset. We then proceed
by splitting the training dataset further into the training and
evaluation sets. The validation enables us to evaluate the
hyper-parameters for our architectures quantitatively. Regard-
ing deep learning model architectures, we start with the com-
monly used model architectures for road damage detection and
classiﬁcation tasks. We then proceed with strategies to improvethe base models, such as changing hyper-parameters, train data
augmentations, and test time augmentations. It’s worth noting
that ensembles and individual models for individual countries
would have better prediction results. However, it is restricted
by the challenge that we should have a single-algorithm and
single-model approach. Therefore, we do not attempt these
directions.
A. Data exploration and train/evaluation splits
This dataset consists of one training set ( train ) and two
test sets ( test1 and test2 ). The training set contains 21,041
images (2,829, 7,706, and 10,506 for Czech, India, and
Japan, respectively). The two test sets contain 2,631 and
2,664 images, correspondingly. There are 34,702 ground-truth
labels (bounding boxes and damage types) in the training set.
Speciﬁcally, Figure 1 shows the damage type distributions
(of the four corresponding types) over the three countries. In
general, Japan has higher numbers of images and damages, and
the pothole damage type has the lowest number of occurrences.
On the other hand, India has fewer images and dam-
age labels. Also, D04 is the one with the highest number
of occurrences, while there are only a few D01 damages
in India. Finally, Czech has fewest number of images and
damage samples (a total of 1,745 labels). It’s worth noting
that due to different numbers of images, different damage
types distributions over different countries, it is difﬁcult to
have a transferable model for all three countries. In other
words, having different models for different countries (with
a sufﬁcient number of images like Japan and India) should
have better accuracy compared to a single model for all three
countries.
Fig. 1. Damage type distributions over three countries (Czech, India, and
Japan).
We also split the training dataset into training and validation
sets with the stratify as the origin of the damage types (i.e.,
country). Speciﬁcally, we keep 90% of the images for training
and 10% for evaluation. This 10% for the evaluation split
is reasonable because it results in 1,221 images in this set.
More than a thousand images are general enough to evaluate
the performance of the learned models. This evaluation set