Road Damage Detection and Classiﬁcation with
Detectron2 and Faster R-CNN
Vung Pham
Computer Science Department
Texas Tech University
Lubbock, USA
vung.pham@ttu.eduChau Pham
Computer Science Department
Texas Tech University
Lubbock, USA
chaupham@ttu.eduTommy Dang
Computer Science Department
Texas Tech University
Lubbock, USA
tommy.dang@ttu.edu
Abstract —The road is vital for many aspects of life, and road
maintenance is crucial for human safety. One of the critical
tasks to allow timely repair of road damages is to quickly
and efﬁciently detect and classify them. This work details the
strategies and experiments evaluated for these tasks. Speciﬁcally,
we evaluate Detectron2’s implementation of Faster R-CNN using
different base models and conﬁgurations. We also experiment
with these approaches using the Global Road Damage Detection
Challenge 2020, A Track in the IEEE Big Data 2020 Big Data
Cup Challenge dataset. The results show that the X101-FPN base
model for Faster R-CNN with Detectron2’s default conﬁgurations
are efﬁcient and general enough to be transferable to different
countries in this challenge. This approach results in F1 scores of
51.0% and 51.4% for the test1 and test2 sets of the challenge,
respectively. Though the visualizations show good prediction
results, the F1 scores are low. Therefore, we also evaluate the
prediction results against the existing annotations and discover
some discrepancies. Thus, we also suggest strategies to improve
the labeling process for this dataset.
Index Terms —Object detection, Detectron2, Road damage
detection, Faster R-CNN and classiﬁcation, Transferable learning
I. I NTRODUCTION
The road is crucial in different aspects of life, from eco-
nomic development and social beneﬁts to safety. Therefore,
road maintenance is vital for all countries in the world. One of
the road maintenance tasks is to accurately detect damages and
then to devote efﬁcient repairs in a timely manner. However,
for most countries, road crack detection and classiﬁcation
are currently based on human manual works or expensive
sensors. Therefore, automatic detection and classiﬁcation of
road damage types are getting popular recently. Also, deep
learning, with its recent advancements, is gaining traction and
has state-of-the-art results in various computer vision tasks [1].
Therefore, many works in the literature use deep learning
approaches to detect and classify road damages.
Using deep learning for road damage detection and clas-
siﬁcation often involves three sub-tasks: 1) collecting image
data, 2) creating labels for the data, and 3) building deep
learning models from the labeled data. While collecting data
can be done efﬁciently using mobile devices with GPS and
camera [2], the labeling process takes time, and the detec-
tion/classiﬁcation results are still limited. Also, the models
learned from the data coming from one country often are notgeneralized enough to be transferable to different countries [3].
Additionally, providing bounding boxes and labels for road
damages is error-prone and demands a massive amount of
human labor to have accurate results.
Therefore, this work explores state-of-the-art object de-
tection methods to ﬁnd general road damage detection and
classiﬁcation model that is usable for different territories. We
then apply the selected approaches to the Global Road Damage
Detection Challenge 2020, A Track in the IEEE Big Data 2020
Big Data Cup Challenge [4] dataset. Furthermore, we also
evaluate the quality of the currently labeled data and propose a
strategy to generate more labeled data. Thus, our contributions
are:
Exploring current state-of-the-art object detection meth-
ods and their applicability to road damage detection and
classiﬁcation tasks.
Experimenting with these approaches using the Global
Road Damage Detection Challenge 2020 dataset to ﬁnd
one single model that is efﬁcient and can be transferable
to different territories.
Visualizing the prediction results and qualitatively evalu-
ating the existing annotations follows by giving sugges-
tions to improve the labeling process for this dataset.
II. D ATASET AND EVALUATION METHOD
The dataset used in this work is from the Global Road
Damage Detection Challenge 2020 [4]. This dataset consists
of one train set ( train ) and two test sets ( test1 and test2 ).
Speciﬁcally, the training and testing sets contain road damage
images, bounding boxes, and damage types (for training set)
from three countries (i.e., Czech, India, and Japan). Fur-
thermore, for this dataset, there are four types of labelled
road damage types namely Longitudinal Crack, Transverse
Crack, Aligator Crack, and Pothole (labelled D00,D10,D20,
and D40, respectively). For this section’s brevity, we defer
further details about the number of images and damage type
distributions in the individual countries and the whole dataset
to Section IV-A.
For this challenge, the evaluation method is based on the
F1score deﬁned to balance the precision ( p) and recall ( r).arXiv:2010.15021v1  [cs.CV]  28 Oct 2020