These are deﬁned as:
p=Cd
Pd; r=Cd
Ad; F1 =2pr
p+r
where Cd,Pd, and Adare the numbers of correctly predicted
damages, the predicted damages, and all the ground-truth
damages from the evaluating set, respectively. Furthermore,
the deﬁnition of correctly predicted damage has two criteria.
They are 1) the predicted bounding box must match, and 2)
the predicted label is correct. The latter is obvious, and the
former is deﬁned by the Intersection over Union ( IoU) score,
which is deﬁned as follows:
IoU=area(Pb\Gb)
area(Pb[Gb)
where PbandGbare a predicted box and a ground-truth box,
respectively. Also, area(Pb\Gb)andarea(Pb[Gb)means
the areas of the intersection and the union between the two
boxes, correspondingly. In this case, if IoU > = 0:5, then it
is a match, and it is not otherwise.
III. R ELATED WORK
Object detection using deep neural networks is an emerging
ﬁeld, and it is not the purpose of this work to review all the
recent results in this ﬁeld. Also, object detection techniques
are continually evolving, and comparisons might be outdated
quickly. Instead, we brieﬂy survey families of current state-
of-the-art object detection methods in general and methods
related to road damage detection and classiﬁcation speciﬁcally.
A. Deep learning based object detection
Deep learning-based object detection is gaining initial suc-
cess, and there are many works in the literature regarding
this. We refer interested readers to [5] for a good survey of
these methods. Recent techniques are generally related to two
prominent families, namely Region-Based Convolutional Neu-
ral Networks (R-CNNs) and You Only Look Once (YOLO).
Ross Girshick et al. [6] propose R-CNNs approach with
three main modules. The ﬁrst one is a region proposal mod-
ule that generates candidate regions (bounding boxes) using
computer vision techniques. The second one is the feature
extraction module. This second module uses convolutional
neural networks to extract the features from the candidate
regions. Finally, the last module is a classiﬁer that predicts the
classes of the proposed candidates using the extracted features.
R-CNNs takes a long time to train because training is done
in multiple stages. Besides training, the prediction stage is
also slow. Therefore, Girshick proposes another model called
Fast R-CNN [7] to tackle these issues. Fast R-CNN is trained
as a single model instead of three separate modules. This
architecture takes the images and proposes candidate regions,
then passes them through a popular, pre-trained image classiﬁ-
cation model (e.g., ResNet [8], VGG-16 [9]) to extract features
from the candidates. The extracted features then undergo a
Region of Interest (RoI) pooling layer, followed by two fully
connected layers. Finally, there are two other fully connectedheads for bounding box regression and label classiﬁcation
purposes.
Though Fast R-CNN improves the training and predicting
time, it still needs the region proposal as the inputs. In other
words, the region proposals for each image still needs to
be done separately (e.g., using image processing techniques).
Therefore, Ren et al., [10] propose Faster R-CNN to tackle
this issue. Its main improvement is the ability to incorporate
region proposals as a part of the ﬁnal model using Region
Proposal Network (RPN). In other words, there are two smaller
networks in this architecture. The ﬁrst one is a Region Proposal
Network (RPN), and the second one is the Fast R-CNN.
These two sub-networks are trained simultaneously, though for
two different tasks: 1) region proposals and 2) bounding box
classiﬁcation and regression. These strategies help to improve
the training and object detection time and accuracy.
Another famous family of object detection is YOLO
with different versions such as YOLO [11], YOLOv2 [12],
YOLOv3 [13], and YOLOv4 [14]. Different YOLO versions
may differ in terms of architectures and techniques used.
However, generally, it involves a single neural network with
the input being the images and ground-truth boxes/segments
and labels (while training). The outputs are the bounding boxes
and corresponding labels of the detected objects from the
image. Speciﬁcally, it divides an image into a grid of cells.
Feature extracted from each cell is used to predict objects
with centers of the bounding boxes that fall into the cell. The
advantage of this method is that it is faster to train and predict.
However, the beneﬁt comes with a slightly lower accuracy
compared to Faster R-CNNs.
While YOLO mainly has its advantage for speed and
Faster R-CNN is better at accuracy, Single Short Detection
(SSD) [15] allows a better balance between speed and ac-
curacy. SSD runs a convolutional neural network on input
image only one time and computes a feature map. It also uses
anchor boxes at different sizes and aspects as Faster R-CNN.
Regarding bounding box sizes, SSD predicts them at different
convolutional layers. The reason is that convolutional layers
have different receptive ﬁelds of the inputs. In other words,
the deeper a convolutional layer is, the larger its receptive ﬁeld
will be. Thus, the deeper convolutional layer features are used
to predict larger bounding boxes and vice versa.
B. Deep learning based road damage detection
Deep learning is gaining success in various areas, and road
damage detection and classiﬁcation is no exception. Various
works in the literature use deep learning for these tasks. With
the help of GPS- and camera-enabled mobile devices, it is
now relatively easy to collect road images for this purpose.
For instance, Maeda et al., [2] propose using a smartphone
placed on a car’s dashboard to collect pictures of road cracks,
label them, and make them available for the public. Based on
this dataset, Yanbo Wang et al., [16] propose to use Faster
R-CNN and SSD with pre-trained ResNet and VGG as bases
to tackle the damage detection and classiﬁcation tasks. Also,
they aggregate up to 14 Faster R-CNN models and 2 SSD