is used to quantitatively evaluate our model’s performance
and the hyperparameter selection process during training (such
as prediction score threshold and number of train iterations).
Figure 2 shows the distributions of the damage types after
splitting. Generally, though different countries have different
damage type distributions, the combined distribution has a
better balance among damage types. Also, using the origins
of damage types as a stratiﬁed ﬁeld seems sufﬁcient since the
train vs. evaluation distributions are somewhat similar.
Fig. 2. Damage type distributions of the training dataset after splitting it into
training and evaluation sets.
B. Base models
As discussed in Section III-B, most of the successful road
damage detection and classiﬁcation techniques trained using
the Road Damage Detection dataset (version 2018) use the
Faster R-CNN technique. Therefore, we ﬁrst explore this
approach to tackle this year’s challenge. Instead of developing
a Faster R-CNN model from scratch, we use Detectron2 [27] to
speed up our development cycle. Detectron2 is Facebook AI
Research’s next-generation software system that implements
state-of-the-art object detection algorithms.
It is also a common practice to use a base model pre-trained
on a large image set (such as ImageNet [28]) as the feature
extractor part of the network. Detectron2 provides many such
base-models [29]. However, for Faster R-CNN, two commonly
used models are R101-FPN [30] and X101-FPN [31]. We se-
lect to explore these two pre-trained models because they have
good Faster R-CNN box Average Precision (AP) compared to
others. They are 42% and 43%, respectively. Though X101-
FPN has better box AP on the ImageNet benchmark, it takes
longer to train/predict and might be overﬁtting in some cases.
That is the reason why we also explore R101-FPN.
There are many hyper-parameters to be tuned while train-
ing a Faster R-CNN model. Thus, it is nearly impossible
in terms of time and computation resources to explore all
the conﬁgurations. Therefore, we ﬁrst stick with the default
and obvious, common-sense conﬁgurations. Speciﬁcally, we
set ‘cfg.SOLVER.REFERENCE WORLD SIZE’ (number of
GPUs) to 2, both ‘cfg.SOLVER.IMS PER BATCH’ (imagesper batch) and ‘cfg.DATALOADER.NUM WORKERS’ to 16,
‘cfg.SOLVER.BASE LR’ (base learning rate) as 0.00025,
and ‘cfg.MODEL.ROI HEADS.NUM CLASSES’ (number
of classes) is 4 (as correspond to four different types of
damages). All other conﬁgurations are kept as default from
Detectron2. Interested readers can refer to this page1for
further details about these default conﬁgurations.
Although it is faster to train a Faster R-CNN using R101-
FPN as the base model, it has a slightly lower accuracy than
using X101-FPN as the base model (52.85% vs. 54.25% on
the evaluation set at the test time prediction score thresholds of
0.65 and 0.71, respectively). Speciﬁcally, it takes 0.82 seconds
to train an iteration when using R101-FPN while it takes 1.67
seconds when using X101-FPN (using the speciﬁed conﬁg-
uration). The former also takes fewer iterations to converge
than the latter (85,000 vs. 105,000). It takes time to do all the
experiments with these models. Therefore, in the next sections,
we only explore further experiments using the X101-FPN as
the Faster R-CNN base.
C. Data augmentations
As discussed in Section IV-A, though the training dataset
has a good number of images and damage types, they are
imbalanced among damage types and are distributed differ-
ently for different countries. Therefore, besides the apparent
augmentation techniques (such as image resizing and horizon-
tal ﬂipping, called ‘default augmentations’ hereafter), we also
explore other augmentation techniques. Speciﬁcally, Maeda et
al., [23] suggest that using GAN to generate synthetic damage
types with fewer occurrences helps predict that speciﬁc type of
damages (e.g., ‘pothole’ type of damages). Generating images
using GAN often involves three processes: 1) generating a
patch for damage, 2) ﬁnding places in an existing image to
blend the patch, and 3) making the synthetic patch as natural
to (as if it really belongs to) the container image as possible.
The synthetic damage patch generation step using GAN
takes a long time to train. Additionally, we can manually place
the patches to an existing image [23] or use another object
detection model to detect the road areas and automatically
position the artiﬁcial patches [19] to these areas. However,
both of these approaches take time to complete. Therefore,
in the following sections we detail our strategies to quickly
evaluate the efﬁciency of this augmentation method before
developing and training complicated models for these tasks,
in case this direction is promising.
Instead of using GAN to generate the synthetic damage
patches, we randomly extract and select existing patches using
the given ground-truth boxes. We also apply some simple
augmentations to the selected patches (such as horizontal
ﬂipping, slight rotating, or scaling) to increase the varieties of
the damage patches. Furthermore, we also randomly sample
the locations from all existing damages of the same type to
position the artiﬁcial patch into an existing image. The reason
is that we assume that similar damage types would appear in
1https://detectron2.readthedocs.io/modules/conﬁg.html