Fig. 6. Examples of missing bounding boxes and labels in the training set. In
this case, the red boxes are ground-truth, and the blue boxes are the predicted
ones. Both have corresponding labels (for damage types), and there is also
the predicted scores for the predictions.
one can visibly check in the top panel. However, it turns
out to be a correct prediction when we set the brightness of
this picture to 150 (e.g., using Photoshop) and zoom into this
region (200%), as shown in panel (B). Similar story happens
to image Japan 012412 and the detected D00 damage type in
the panels (C) and (D). These examples imply that the human
manual labeling approach might not be sufﬁcient for this type
of dataset. In other words, there should be a combination of
both human and machine learning supports for this task.
Deep learning needs a massive amount of labeled data, and
manual labeling of road damages takes so much time and is
error-prone. The reasons for errors might due to different light
conditions, precisions of the bounding boxes are difﬁcult to
set, or even the confusion between damage types. Kluger et
al., [19] suggest using a learned model to predict the bounding
boxes and classify damage types of the unlabeled, collected
images. These predictions then undergo the human manual
checks to validate/change the bounding boxes or the labels.
Fig. 7. Examples of the case that the machine learning model outperforms
humans. Panel (A) shows that our machine learning model detects a D02 type
of damage in the image India 009632 , and it is not visible to humans. It is
only perceptible when we change the brightness of the picture and zoom into
the region, as in panel (B). Similar story happens to the image Japan 012412
for damage type D00 in panels (C) and (D).
However, it still takes time, and there is a lot of room for
errors with human manual label checks. Figure 8, shows an
example of such mistakes. Image Japan 002970 (from the
train set) has a wrong pothole damage bounding box. This
wrong label is obvious to humans and less clear to machine
learning models. This type of error also indicates that several
labels in this current training set were generated automatically
and did not get validated carefully by humans. This error
would also indicate that the labeling process depends on one
model learned on the initial limited amount of data.
On the other hand, in a recent study, Xie et al., [36] claim
to have state-of-the-art ImageNet classiﬁcation results using
self-learning with noisy student technique. We suggest using
this approach with the following steps. First, train a model
on existing images with labeled bounding boxes and classes.
Use it as a teacher to generate annotations for other unlabeled
images. Combine the newly predicted annotations (with higher
conﬁdences) with the existing annotations, then train a larger
model called a student model. Use this learned student as a
teacher and repeat the process. This approach incrementally
increases the labeled data instead of training on a single model