We begin by reviewing how principles have evolved in AI ethics
over the last two years. Drawing on comparisons with bioethics - a
field with a robust and well-developed tradition in using principles
to govern medical practice - we discuss some of the limitations of
principles. We make the case that all areas of AI ethics would benefit
from a more rigorous exploration of the tensions that arise when
we try to apply principles to concrete cases. We outline some key
tensions that already arise from the use of AI in society, and discuss
what work might be needed to resolve them. To our knowledge,
this is the first paper to explicitly examine the role and limits of
principles in AI ethics, and the importance of focusing more on
tensions as a next step.
2 THE EMERGENCE OF PRINCIPLES IN AI
ETHICS
Though the field is in its infancy, there is widespread agreement
on some of the core issues (such as bias) and values (such as fair-
ness) that AI ethics should focus on. Over the last two years, these
have begun to be codified in sets of ‘principles’ or ‘tenets’. The
Asilomar AI principles, developed in 2017 in conjunction with the
Asilomar conference for Beneficial AI, outline guidelines on how
research should be conducted, ethics and values that use of AI must
respect, and important considerations for thinking about long-term
issues [ 12]. The principles were signed by several thousand AI re-
searchers and others, including many academic ethicists and social
scientists. Around the same time, the US Association for Computing
Machinery (ACM) issued a statement and set of seven principles
for Algorithmic Transparency and Accountability, addressing a
narrower but closely related set of issues [1].
Over the course of 2017, several other initiatives and organisa-
tions published additional sets of principles: including the Japanese
Society for Artificial Intelligence’s Ethical Guidelines in February
2017 [ 16]; a set of draft principles from the Montreal Declaration
on Responsible AI in November [ 25]; and the IEEE’s General Prin-
ciples of Ethical Autonomous and Intelligent Systems in December
[14]. This proliferation of principles has continued into 2018: with
the Partnership on AI publishing a set of ‘tenets’ which its mem-
bers agree to uphold [ 18]; the UK House of Lords suggesting five
principles for a cross-sector AI code which could be adopted inter-
nationally [ 23], and Google publishing their ‘AI ethics principles’
in June [19].
These different sets of principles have considerable overlap.
There is widespread agreement that AI-based technologies should
be used for the common good, should not be used to harm people or
undermine their rights, and should respect widely-held values such
as fairness, privacy, and autonomy. [ 9] suggest that many of the
different existing sets can be synthesised into five key principles:
the four that are already used in bioethics - autonomy, beneficence,
non-maleficence, and justice [ 4] - plus the additional principle of
explicability, which captures the challenges of intelligibility and
accountability unique to AI systems. While this convergence is
encouraging, it is unclear at this point whether this reflects a deep
consensus about what is important, arrived at independently by
numerous different actors, or merely a shallow consensus due to
the fact that different groups have read similar papers and built on
the work of one another.Principles can be a valuable part of applied ethics; agreeing on
high-level principles is therefore an important step for ensuring
that AI is developed and used for the benefit of society. Principles
help condense complex ethical issues into a few central elements
which can be clearly understood and agreed upon by people from
diverse fields and sectors. They encourage widespread commitment
to a shared set of values, and can give them a more prominent role in
institutional decision-making processes. Principles can form a basis
for more formal commitments in professional ethics, internationally
agreed standards, and regulation. They can also help address public
concerns, by clarifying the ethical commitments of researchers and
industry.
However, while principles are important, they are not in them-
selves enough to ensure society can reap the benefits and mitigate
the risks of new technologies. In order to be useful in practice,
principles need to be able to guide action - to help people navigate
the competing demands and considerations of concrete situations.
As we articulate in the next section, there are several obstacles to
this.
3 THE LIMITS OF PRINCIPLES
The four principles of beneficence, non-maleficence, autonomy, and
justice have played a prominent role in bioethics [ 4], a field with
decades of experience in managing the challenges posed by new
technologies. These principles aim to articulate general values on
which everyone can agree, and to function as practical guidelines.
But they have spurred substantial debate: some argue that we should
put no weight on principles and focus entirely on the elements of
specific cases [ 10], while others have advocated a more moderate
view, whereby principles should be considered in close conjunction
with analysis of ‘paradigm’ cases [17].
However, even the strongest advocates of principlism in bioethics
acknowledge that principles alone are not enough. [ 4] suggest
that principles should be taken as guidelines, which need to be
made specific for use in policy and clinical decision-making. They
elaborate that in order to be action-guiding, principles need to be
accompanied by an account of how they apply in specific situations,
and how to balance them when they conflict. In this section, we
review some of the main limitations of principles that have been
highlighted in the bioethics literature and illustrate why these also
apply to the principles proposed for AI ethics.
3.1 Different Groups May Interpret Principles
Differently
The central terms used in principles are often ambiguous, mask-
ing conceptual complexity and differences in interpretation across
populations. As [ 8] point out, the principle of ‘justice’ in bioethics
does not say anything about what is just or unjust, leaving this to
the agent to decide for themselves. Clouser and Gert argue that
principles often mask important moral disagreements rather than
presenting a well-developed unified theory as they propose to, and
that it would be better if these disagreements were articulated and
understood more explicitly.
In particular, lists of broadly agreed-upon principles cannot
recognise that important and legitimate differences in values ex-
ist across people and populations. While everyone might agree
Session 5: Rights and Principles
AIES’19, January 27–28, 2019, Honolulu, HI, USA
196