The Role and Limits of Principles in AI Ethics:
Towards a Focus on Tensions
Jess Whittlestone∗
Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence
University of Cambridge
jlw84@cam.ac.ukRune Nyrup
Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence
University of Cambridge
rn330@cam.ac.uk
Anna Alexandrova
Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence
Department of History and Philosophy of Science
University of Cambridge
aa686@cam.ac.ukStephen Cave
Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence
University of Cambridge
sjc53@cam.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
The last few years have seen a proliferation of principles for AI
ethics. There is substantial overlap between different sets of prin-
ciples, with widespread agreement that AI should  be used for the 
common good, should not be used to harm people or undermine 
their rights, and should respect widely held values such as fair-
ness, privacy, and autonomy. While articulating and agreeing on 
principles is important, it is only a starting point. Drawing on
comparisons with the field of bioethics, we highlight some of the 
limitations of principles: in particular, they are often too broad and
high-level to guide ethics in practice. We suggest that an impor-
tant next step for the field of AI ethics is to focus on exploring the
tensions that inevitably arise as we try to implement principles 
in practice. By explicitly recognising these tensions we can begin
to make decisions about how they should be resolved in specific 
cases, and develop frameworks and guidelines for AI ethics that 
are rigorous and practically relevant. We discuss some different
specific ways that tensions arise in AI ethics, and what processes
might be needed to resolve them.
KEYWORDS
Artificial intelligence, ethics, principles
ACM Reference Format:
Jess Whittlestone, Rune Nyrup, Anna Alexandrova, and Stephen Cave. 2019. 
The Role and Limits of Principles in AI Ethics: Towards a Focus on Tensions. 
In AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society (AIES ’19), January 
27–28, 2019, Honolulu, HI, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 6 pages. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/3306618.3314289
1 INTRODUCTION
AI systems promise widespread benefits to society, while also pos-
ing substantial risks across almost all sectors. In the last few years,
∗Corresponding author
AIES ’19, January 27–28, 2019, Honolulu, HI, USA
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6324-2/19/01.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3306618.3314289a number of different groups and initiatives have attempted to artic-
ulate and agree principles to guide the application of AI in society.
In this paper we discuss the role and limitations of these principles,
and argue that an important next step for AI ethics is to focus more
on the tensions that arise as we try to implement them in practice.
By ‘AI ethics’ we specifically mean the emerging field of practical
AI ethics, which focuses on developing frameworks and guidelines
to ensure the ethical use of AI in society (analogous to the field of
biomedical ethics, which provides practical frameworks for ethical
practice in medicine.) AI ethics therefore covers several different
sectors and types of institutions, including the following:
•Technology companies aiming to develop their own ethi-
cal guidelines (e.g. Google’s ‘AI Ethics principles’);
•Professional bodies whose codes of ethics are aimed at
guiding practitioners;
•Standards-setting bodies that aim to set general standards
for fields of research of industries (e.g. the IEEE or British
Standards Institution);
•Government bodies and legislators that aim to develop
policy and regulation (e.g. the UK’s new Centre for Data
Ethics and Innovation);
•Researchers across disciplines whose work aims to in-
form these ways that AI ethics is put into practice: exploring
the technical, philosophical, or legal aspects of using algo-
rithms in ethical ways [ 20] or synthesising and translating
such research into practice [27].
Agreeing on principles is valuable for the aims of all of these
groups: for example, principles can provide a useful starting point
from which to develop more formal standards and regulation, and
can help to identify priority issues on which both research and pol-
icy should focus. However, we argue that current lists of principles
for AI ethics are too high-level to be immediately useful for these
groups’ aims. When we look at specific cases, it becomes clear that
principles will come into conflict with each other. This means their
practical value is limited: without acknowledging these conflicts
standards may be set unrealistically high, or regulation intended to
protect one value might inadvertently compromise other important
goals. In order to be practically useful, we suggest that the field
of AI ethics should focus more on identifying and attempting to
resolve the tensions that arise when we apply them to specific cases.
Session 5: Rights and Principles
AIES’19, January 27–28, 2019, Honolulu, HI, USA
195
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution International 4.0 License.