in principle that ‘fairness’ is important, there exist deep political
disagreements about what exactly constitutes fairness [ 5]. Groups
may also vary in how much weight they put on one value relative to
others in situations of conflict: more individualist cultures may put
more weight on personal privacy than more collectivist cultures,
for example. An important step in making principles more practical
is to formalize them into standards and regulation [ 27]. But this
process is not a straightforward unpacking of the relevant princi-
ples, as different principles will come into conflict when applied
to concrete cases. In the next section, we make the case that in
order for principles to inform more practical aspects of AI ethics,
including professional ethics, standards, and regulation, we need
to begin by exploring in detail the different kinds of tensions that
arise when principles are applied.
3.2 Principles Are Highly General
Relatedly, principles are by their nature highly general: their value
is that they indicate important moral themes that apply across a
wide range of scenarios. This means that they can be useful as a
kind of checklist: as a set of important considerations that need to
be taken into account in specific scenarios. However, the generality
of most principles also limits their ability to guide practical action
[3]). Many of the principles proposed in AI ethics are too broad to
be action-guiding. For example, ensuring that AI is used for ‘social
good’ or ‘the benefit of humanity’ is a common thread among all
sets of principles. These are phrases on which a great majority
can agree exactly because they carry with them few if any real
commitments. A very wide range of differing ideological, political
and philosophical standpoints could claim to be for the good, or
for the benefit of humanity. Only principles that are narrower and
more specific are likely to be useful in practice. Recent industry
commitments to not develop technology for autonomous weapons
are an example of a principle that is specific, action-guiding and
can be used to hold people to account. But at the same time, exactly
that specificity means its relevance is limited to one sector, and it
has many dissenters.
3.3 Principles Come into Conflict in Practice
The gap between principles and practical judgement grows larger
still when we consider that principles will inevitably conflict with
each other. For example, the UK House of Lords AI Committee
report states that, “it is not acceptable to deploy any artificial in-
telligence system which could have a substantial impact on an
individual’s life, unless it can generate a full and satisfactory ex-
planation for the decisions it will take.” The intentions behind this
principle are important, but it masks a crucial tension between us-
ing algorithms for social benefit (‘beneficence’) and ensuring those
algorithms are fully intelligible to humans (‘explicability’). For ex-
ample, algorithms exist today that can diagnose medical conditions
more accurately than doctors, potentially saving lives [ 24], but for
which a full and satisfactory explanation cannot necessarily be
provided (depending on how this is defined). In some situations, the
benefit of using an algorithm may be high enough, and its accuracy
reliable enough, that all users agree it is worth using even if a fully
comprehensive explanation of its decisions cannot be given. There
are complex and important trade-offs involved here [ 15,22], and aprinciple that simply states that it is not acceptable to deploy AI
systems without full explainability fails to recognise this.
In conclusion, there is a risk that high-level principles give the
impression of being the outcome of meaningful debate about how
AI should be developed, but in reality they are simply postponing
it.
4 WHY THE FIELD SHOULD FOCUS ON
TENSIONS
We use the term ‘tension’ to refer to any conflict, whether ap-
parent, contingent or fundamental, between important values or
goals, where it appears necessary to give up one in order to realise
the other. For example, the use of socially beneficial data-driven
technologies might make it impossible for us to fully guarantee
otherwise desirable levels of data privacy. If the potential gains of
these technologies are significant enough - new and highly effec-
tive cancer treatments, say - we might decide that a higher risk of
privacy breaches is a price worth paying.
In some cases, a tension may reflect a strict moral tradeoff: a
situation where two values or goals conflict and it is not possible
to get more of one without sacrificing another. However, many
tensions in AI are more contingent, and arise as a result of current
technological or societal constraints. Using machine learning for
social benefit may not be fundamentally in tension with privacy,
transparency, or fairness, but many current methods employed for
the former goal do conflict with these ideals. We do not yet know
how far new technological or governance solutions could go to
dissolve these tensions.
Others have acknowledged the importance of recognising con-
flicts between values in AI ethics, but to our knowledge none have
explored in detail why this would be beneficial or what it would
look like in practice. For example, [ 9] say that, “Ensuring socially
preferable outcomes of AI relies on resolving the tension between
incorporating the benefits and mitigating the potential harms of
AI, in short, simultaneously avoiding the misuse and underuse of
these technologies”, but do not discuss specific tensions in detail or
how to resolve them.
In this section, we discuss some of the benefits of focusing on
tensions. We outline four reasons this is an important next step
for AI ethics: (1) bridging the gap between principles and prac-
tice, (2) acknowledging differences in values, (3) highlighting areas
where new solutions are needed and (4) identifying ambiguities
and knowledge gaps.
4.1 Bridging the Gap between Principles and
Practice
In general, we see focussing on tensions as an important way of
bridging the gap between abstract ethical principles and specific
cases, and therefore an important first step towards an ethics of AI
that is practical and action-guiding.
To identify tensions, we need to consider how different values
and goals might come into practice in concrete cases. For example,
when Google DeepMind collaborated with the Royal Free Hospi-
tal, they encountered a conflict between protecting the privacy of
patient data, and their goal of using AI to improve early diagnosis
Session 5: Rights and Principles
AIES’19, January 27–28, 2019, Honolulu, HI, USA
197