of all possible tensions. However, we believe that the following four
tensions will be particularly central to thinking about the ethical
issues arising from the applications of AI systems in society today.
These capture a range of issues which are already salient or likely
to grow in importance moving forward.
Tension 1 : Using data to improve the quality and efficiency
of services vs. respecting privacy and autonomy of individuals.
Machine learning and big data are already being used to improve
various public services (including healthcare, education, and social
care). These improvements could be hugely beneficial to citizens,
but require large amounts of personal data, raising concerns about
how to best protect privacy and ensure meaningful consent.
Tension 2 : Using algorithms to make decisions and predictions
more accurate vs ensuring fair and equal treatment. This tension
arises when public or private bodies base decisions on predictions
about future behaviour of individuals (e.g. when probation offi-
cers estimate risk of reoffending) and when they employ machine
learning algorithms to improve their predictions. These algorithms
may improve accuracy overall, but discriminate against specific
subgroups for whom representative data is not available.
Tension 3 : Reaping the benefits of increased personalisation in
the digital sphere vs enhancing solidarity and citizenship. Compa-
nies and governments can use personal data to tailor the messages,
offers, and services people see. This personalisation can make it
easier for people to find the right products and services for them,
but differentiating between people in such fine-grained ways may
threaten societal ideals of citizenship and solidarity.
Tension 4 : Using automation to make people’s lives more con-
venient and empowered vs promoting selfactualisation and dignity.
Automated solutions may genuinely improve people’s lives by sav-
ing them time on mundane tasks that could be better spent on
more rewarding activities. But they also risk disrupting some of the
practices that are an important part of what makes us human. With
automation we may see the gifts of arts, languages and science
become more accessible to those who were excluded in the past -
but we may also see widespread deskilling, atrophy, ossification of
practices, homogenisation and cultural diversity.
7 IDENTIFYING FURTHER TENSIONS
The above tensions are important and represent areas where ex-
ploring tensions is likely to be fruitful for AI ethics. Going forward,
further such areas can and should be identified. In order to do so, it
is helpful to ask a range of questions, including:
•Where AI is being used to serve a particular goal or value,
or for ‘social benefit’ in general, what risks to other values
are introduced?
•Where might uses of AI that benefit one group, or the pop-
ulation as a whole, have negative consequences for a spe-
cific subgroup? How do we balance the interests of different
groups?
•Where might applications of AI that are beneficial in the
near-term introduce risks in the long-term? How do we
trade-off short and long-term impacts of society?
•Where might future developments in AI either enhance or
threaten important values, depending on the direction they
take?8 RESOLVING TENSIONS
The best approach to resolving a tension will depend on the nature
of the tension in question.
Where a strict trade-off between two values exists, a choice must
be made to prioritise one set of values over another. For example,
this may mean judging what risks to privacy it is acceptable to incur
for the sake of better public health, or where to reject innovative
automation technologies because the threats they pose to human
skills and autonomy are too great.
Making these trade-off judgements will be a complex political
process. Weighing the costs and benefits of different solutions can
be an important part of the process but alone is not enough, since
it fails to recognise that values are vague and unquantifiable, and
that numbers often hide complex value judgements. In addition,
resolving trade-offs will require extensive public engagement, to
give voice to a wide range of stakeholders and articulate their
interests with rigour and respect.
On the other hand, where tensions are more practical in nature,
strict trade-offs may not be inevitable. It may be that we simply
lack the knowledge or tools to advance conflicting values, and
investing in further research could identify solutions that better
serve all relevant values or goals. For example, it might be possible
to use automation to improve people’s lives without sacrificing
self-actualisation and devaluing human skills, if a clear line can
be drawn between the contexts where we do and do not want to
pursue automation.
In these situations we face a choice. Even if a tension between
two goals is not a fundamentally irresolvable one, if we want to
apply current technology in society, we will still need to make the
kinds of trade-offs described above. On the other hand, if we can
hold-off from implementing technologies that introduce tensions -
certain kinds of automation, say - then we could instead invest in
more research on how technological or governance solutions might
reduce the need to navigate potentially difficult value trade-offs. Of
course, this is not a binary choice: we can choose to strike a balance
by making the trade-offs necessary to implement technology where
doing so is relatively unproblematic, while still investing in research
to explore how these tensions might be resolvable in future. This
choice can be thought of as involving its own tension, between
short- and long-term interests: to what extent should we postpone
the benefits of new technologies in order to invest the time and
resources necessary to resolve the tensions they introduce?
9 CONCLUSION
Over the last two years, many different sets of principles for the
ethical use of AI have been developed. We argue that these high-
level principles, rather than representing the outcome of meaningful
debate on how AI should be developed, risk simply postponing it. In
order to make AI ethics practical, the field needs to now focus more
on the tensions that arise when principles are applied to concrete
cases.
Though most of these tensions cannot be resolved straightfor-
wardly, we believe articulating them more clearly and explicitly
has several benefits. To be useful in practice, principles need to
be formalized in standards, codes and ultimately regulation. To be
Session 5: Rights and Principles
AIES’19, January 27–28, 2019, Honolulu, HI, USA
199