of acute kidney injury [20]. Since similar tensions will likely arise
across a range of different cases, focusing on tensions means we are
neither driven entirely by the specifics of an individual case, nor
are we relying on abstract high-level values. If we can articulate
important tensions by looking at a range of cases, and find ways
to resolve them in specific scenarios, what we learn from this can
then be used to develop standards and regulation that are more
sensitive to how principles apply differently across scenarios.
4.2 Acknowledging Differences in Values
Focusing on tensions forces us to consider how different values
might be interpreted and endorsed differently across groups. While
some important tensions are due to conflicts between principles
in practice, others arise because there are conflicting meanings
or values within a single principle: broad terms like ‘fairness’ or
‘justice’ for example are subject to substantial moral and political
disagreement [5, 8].
It may never be possible to totally resolve all of these disagree-
ments. But clearly articulating them is a crucial starting point for
ensuring that all aspects of AI ethics are as inclusive as possible: for
example, to ensure that international standards take full account of
and accommodate cultural differences, and that agreement on such
standards is meaningful.
4.3 Highlighting Areas Where New Solutions
Are Needed
Noting a tension between two values does not necessarily mean
we are forced to choose between them: often, we may be able to
find some way to get more of both things we value. Recognising
these tensions can therefore highlight high priority areas for both re-
searchers and policymakers. For example, acknowledging that there
is currently a tradeoff between performance and interpretability in
state-of-the-art machine learning systems has motivated technical
research that attempts to reduce or eliminate this trade-off [2].
Acknowledging tensions will also help direct the development
of AI in beneficial directions more generally. It is currently far
from clear whether advances in AI will augment or degrade human
capabilities and agency, but making this tension explicit focuses
attention on the important question of which trajectories of devel-
opment are most likely to lead to the former.
4.4 Identifying Ambiguities and Knowledge
Gaps
Finally, a tension-focused approach helps to clearly highlight am-
biguities and gaps in our understanding of how uses of AI are
impacting society. Again, this can help identify new and important
research directions.
To think clearly about all tensions, we need to recognise and
clarify ambiguities in terms: what do we really mean by things
like ‘fairness’, ‘justice’, and ‘autonomy’, and how might these be
interpreted differently across groups and contexts? To understand
the nature of many tensions we need to understand what is cur-
rently technically possible: what are the best current methods for
ensuring data privacy in machine learning, for example, and what
are the costs of these methods? To understand how tensions arise
in practice, we need better evidence on how AI is actually beingapplied in society today: what effect is automation already having
on individual lives across different sectors? And to articulate and
resolve conflicts between the interests of different groups, we need
to really understand the needs and values of affected communities:
how do the trade-offs people are willing to make differ based on
demographic factors, for example? Focussing on tensions should
help to drive this important work.
5 WHICH TENSIONS?
There are several different ways that applications of AI can intro-
duce tensions between important goals and values.
Some tensions arise due to the very nature of AI and machine
learning: these techniques allow us to use and draw inferences
from very large amounts of (often personal) data, and so challenge
important notions of privacy. The most useful models also often
quickly become very complex, introducing new issues around hu-
man interpretability [ 11,26]. This means we face tensions between
using these technologies for socially beneficial goals: improving
healthcare, justice, or security, for example, and other goals such
as respecting privacy and maintaining trust and understanding in
automated systems.
Another possibility is that AI systems exacerbate already ex-
isting ethical or societal tensions: between different conflicting
notions of fairness, for example. Often this is due to the fact that
machine learning models are trained on historical data, and so in-
herit the biases or mistakes they contain [ 13]. Here, applications
of AI in society do not necessarily introduce new tensions, but in-
crease the importance of already-existing ones such as how to make
decision-making more accurate and efficient without inadvertently
discriminating against minority groups.
Other tensions arise because the harms and benefits of AI sys-
tems are unequally distributed in various ways. For example, the
impacts of automation may be unequally distributed across pop-
ulations and cultures: enhancing the agency of some groups by
automating mundane tasks while wiping out the livelihood of oth-
ers, thus threatening their basic needs. The risks and benefits of
AI systems could also be unequally distributed over time, and uses
of AI that present opportunities in the near term may compromise
important long-term values. Increasing personalisation of messages
and services may make our lives more convenient and enjoyable in
the short run, but begin to undermine important aspects of auton-
omy, equality and solidarity over time [21].
Finally, AI may have the potential to both enhance and threaten
a given value. For example, depending on the precise direction in
which technology develops, it could be used to either greatly en-
hance human capabilities - if we can develop sophisticated methods
of intelligence augmentation [ 7] - or to degrade them: if our own
capabilities atrophy as we outsource more and more tasks [ 6]. As
mentioned above, automation might enhance the agency of some
groups while threatening the autonomy of others: whether we see
AI as enhancing or degrading human agency could depend on how
narrow or global a view we take of its impacts.
6 FOUR KEY TENSIONS
Given the wide range of tensions that may arise from applications
of AI, now or in the future, there is unlikely to be an exhaustive list
Session 5: Rights and Principles
AIES’19, January 27–28, 2019, Honolulu, HI, USA
198