1326 GEORGIA STATE UNIVERSIT Y LAW REVIEW [Vol. 35:4 
to search through billions of possible chess positions to find those 
most likely to produce a positive result.102 Another example involves 
credit card fraud detection.103 Although in principle, a human could 
manually inspect credit card transactions looking for signals o f fraud, 
in practice, due to the billions of credit card transactions pe r day, this 
analysis by humans is impossible. Here, the advantage given by the 
incredible computing power of today’s computer hardware, 
combined with machine learning’s ability to automatically detec t 
anomalies indicative of fraud, makes such a process amenable fo r 
automation with AI.104 By contrast, for many other types of 
problems, raw computation provid es little to no advantage over 
human-based analysis. 
Finally, as mentioned, current AI technologies do not generally  
perform well, or at all, in problem areas that involve abstract  
concepts or ideas, such as “reasonableness” or “goodwill,” that  
involve actually understanding the underlying meaning of words.105 
Similarly, these automated technologies tend not to do well in many 
problem areas that require common sense, judgment, or intuition .106 
Finally, the use of AI automation tends to be both ineffective and 
possibly inappropriate in many problem areas that are explicitl y and 
fundamentally about public policy,  are subjective interpretatio n, or 
involve social choices between c ontestable and differing value sets. 
Understanding these limitations will help us understand where current AI is potentially applicable and where it is less appli cable in 
law. 
II.   AI in Law 
Having described AI gen erally, it is time to  turn to how AI is being 
used in law. At its heart, “AI and law” involves the applicatio n of 
                                                                                                                 
 102. Id. at 29, 175–76.  
 103. See Krishna Krishnan, Fraud Detection Using Artificial Intelligence in Payment Services and 
Credit Cards , IDEAS 2IT (Oct. 30, 2018), https://www.ideas2it.com/blogs/ai-credit-card- fraud/ 
[https://perma.cc/ZY6D-5D8P]. 
 104. See id.  
 105. See supra Section I.A. 
 106. See supra Section I.A. 
22Georgia State University Law Review, Vol. 35, Iss. 4 [], Art. 8
https://readingroom.law.gsu.edu/gsulr/vol35/iss4/8