2019] ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LAW 1325 
wanted to make a novel and inte resting argument about philosoph y, it 
is not clear that, aside from very broad patterns, one could mine texts 
for statistical patterns that  could easily produce, in an autom ated way, 
such a useful, novel argument. 
Another characteristic that makes a problem area amenable to AI  
relates to the ability to capture and encode relevant informati on. In 
the case of rules-based knowledge systems, the data that serves  as the 
backbone of the AI system is often obtainable because it comes from 
people who are experts in the field of the problem.96 For instance, if 
one is designing an expert system to help doctors diagnose dise ases 
that asks questions about symptoms and that reasons about the likely diagnosis, the knowledge as to wh at questions to ask and what 
symptoms are relevant will c ome from working with domain 
experts—experts in the relevant field, such as doctors who are experts in the field of practice.
97 Similarly, if one is encoding an 
income-tax-based expert system such as TurboTax, one would gain  
the knowledge as to the relevant rules by working with lawyers, accountants, and other experts in the domain of tax code.
98  
By contrast, for many problem areas there is no easy way to 
identify or capture the relevant knowledge. In some cases, key concepts or abstractions cannot be meaningfully encoded in a computer-understandable form. These problem areas will be less susceptible to automation thr ough knowledge-repr esentation-base d 
AI approaches.
99 
Other areas where AI tends to be successful involve problems 
where fast computation, search, or calculation provides a stron g 
advantage over human capacity.100 Chess, once again, provides a 
good example of AI providing an advantage.101 O n e  o f  t h e  r e a s o n s  
that automated chess systems routinely beat grandmasters is the  
ability of the automated systems to use their incredibly fast h ardware 
                                                                                                                 
 96. S.I.  GASS ET AL ., supra  note 66, at 22. 
 97. Id. 
 98. See id.   
 99. See id. 
 100. R USSELL & NORVIG , supra  note 4, at 1.  
 101. Id. 
21Surden: Artificial Intelligence and Law: An Overview
Published by Reading Room,