1306 GEORGIA STATE UNIVERSIT Y LAW REVIEW [Vol. 35:4 
INTRODUCTION  
Much has been written recently about artificial intelligence (A I) 
and law.1 But what is AI, and what is its relation to the practice and 
administration of law? This article addresses those questions b y 
providing a high-level overview of AI and its use within law. T he 
discussion aims to be nuanced but  also understandable to those 
without a technical background. To  that end, I first discuss AI  
generally. I then turn to AI and how it is being used by lawyer s in the 
practice of law, people and companies who are governed by the l aw, 
and government officials w ho administer the law. 
A key motivation in writing this article is to provide a realis tic, 
demystified view of AI that is rooted in the actual capabilitie s of the 
technology. This is meant to cont rast with discussions about AI  and 
law that are decidedly futurist in nature. That body of work 
speculates about the effects of AI developments that do not cur rently 
exist and which may, or may not, ever come about.2 Although those 
futurist conversations have their place, it is important to acknowledge 
that they involve significant, sometimes unsupported, assumptio ns 
about where the technology is head ed. That speculative discussi on 
often distracts from the importa nt, but perhaps less exotic, la w and 
policy issues actually raised by AI technology today.3 
                                                                                                                 
 1. See generally Sonia K. Katyal, Private Accountability in the Age of Artificial Intelligence , 66 
UCLA  L. REV. 54 (2019);  Frank Pasquale, A Rule of Persons, Not Machines: The Limits of Legal 
Automation , 87 G EO. WASH. L. REV. 1 (2019). 
 2. Pasquale, supra note 1, at 3–4. 
 3. My belief is that AI law and policy discussions are general ly better served b y focusing on the 
current and likely near-term (e.g., no more than five years out ) capabilities of AI tec hnology, rather than 
speculating about long-term or futu ristic AI developments, whic h may or may not arise or which may 
arise in different or unpredictable ways. Although we might mak e reasonable predictions about the 
direction of technology a few (e. g., five) years out, most authors (including this one) are not really very 
good about reliably predicting th e direction of technology more  than a few years out. Those speculative 
discussions sometimes provide a m isleading and exaggerated view  of the current capabilities of 
technology. Finally, they often distract policymakers toward speculative problems of the future and 
ignore more pressing and realistic  problems that exist today. 
2Georgia State University Law Review, Vol. 35, Iss. 4 [], Art. 8
https://readingroom.law.gsu.edu/gsulr/vol35/iss4/8