2019] ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LAW 1307 
I.   What is AI? 
What is AI? There are many ways to answer this question, but on e 
place to begin is to consider the types of problems that AI tec hnology 
is often used to address. In that spirit, we might describe AI as using 
technology to automate tasks that “normally require human 
intelligence.”4 This description of AI emphasizes that the technology 
is often focused upon automating specific types of tasks: those  that 
are thought to involve intellige nce when people perform them.5 
A few examples will help illustrate this depiction of AI. 
Researchers have successfully applied AI technology to automate  
some complex activities, including playing chess, translating languages, and driving vehicles.
6 What makes these AI tasks rather 
than automation tasks generally? It is because they all share a  
common feature: when people  perform these activities, they use 
various higher-order cognitive processes associated with human intelligence. 
For instance, when humans play chess, they employ a range of 
cognitive capabilities, including reasoning, strategizing, planning, and decision-making.
7 Similarly, when people translate from one 
language to another, they activate higher-order brain centers f or 
processing symbols, context, language, and meaning.8 Finally, when 
people drive automobiles, they engage a variety of brain system s, 
including those associated with  vision, spatial recognition, si tuational 
awareness, movement, and judgment.9 In short, when engineers 
automate an activity that requires cognitive activity when perf ormed 
                                                                                                                 
 4 .  Artificial Intelligence , E NG. OXFORD LIVING DICTIONARIES , 
https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/artificial_intelli gence [https://perma.cc/WF9V-YM7C] (last 
visited Feb. 27, 2019); see STUART J. RUSSELL & PETER NORVIG , ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE : A 
MODERN APPROACH  1 (3rd ed. 2010). 
 5 .  R USSELL & NORVIG , supra  note 4, at 1. Let’s put aside, for the purposes of this discus sion, the 
considerable diverse range of views about what human “intellige nce” is or how that word should be 
defined. 
 6 .  Id. at 1, 21. 
 7. J.M. Unterrainer et al., Planning Abilities and Chess: A Comparison of Chess and Non-Chess Players on the Tower of London Task , 97 B
RIT. J. PSYCHOL . 299, 299–300, 302 (2006). 
 8. RUSSELL & NORVIG , supra  note 4, at 21.  
 9. Shunichi Doi, Technological Development of Driv ing Support Systems Based on Human 
Behavioral Characteristics , 30 IATSS  RES. 19, 20–21 (2006). 
3Surden: Artificial Intelligence and Law: An Overview
Published by Reading Room,