1330 GEORGIA STATE UNIVERSIT Y LAW REVIEW [Vol. 35:4 
thousands and sometimes millions of documents—well beyond 
human, manual capabilities.124  
It is important, however, to understand the limits of automated  
predictive coding. The computer typically does not have the las t 
word on the relevance of documents. Human attorneys, at the end  of 
the day, make the decision as to whether individual documents a re or 
are not relevant to the case at hand and the law. The reason is  that the 
computer software is simply not capable of making those decisions, which involve understanding the law and the facts and dealing w ith 
strategy, policy, and other abst ractions that AI technology tod ay is 
not good at dealing with.
125 Rather, we can think of automated 
predictive-coding systems as usi ng patterns and heuristics to f ilter out 
documents that are very likely irrelevant to the case. Thus, ra ther 
than having human attorneys opine  over a vast sea of likely irr elevant 
documents, the software is used to filter out the most irreleva nt 
documents, to reserve the limited attorney-judgment time to tha t 
subset of documents that are much more likely to be relevant.126 At 
the end of the day, it is still a person, not a computer, who i s making 
the decision as to whether a document is helpful and relevant t o the 
law and the case at hand. This is a great illustration of the w ay in 
which many sophisticated AI systems still require humans in the  
loop, as discussed above, and provides lessons of AI use in law  more 
broadly. In areas of law or legal practice that involve judgmen t, 
human cognition will likely be d ifficult to replace given the c urrent 
state of AI technology. 
There is another key point to the litigation discovery example.  It is 
exactly the type of task that that we would expect to be partia lly 
automatable using AI given its characteristics. Within many document troves, there are often clear, underlying heuristics t hat can 
be discerned by algorithms.
127 F o r  i n s t a n c e ,  i f  o n e  h a s  a  l i t i g a t i o n  
                                                                                                                 
 124. Id. 
 125. Id. at 637. 
 126. Yablon & Landsman-Roos, supra  note 120, at 638. 
 127. Demystifying Artificial Intelligence (AI) , THOMSON REUTERS , 
https://legal.thomsonreuters.com/en/insights/white-papers/demystifying-ai [https://perma.cc/S8PX-
HA2V] (last visited Mar. 27, 2019). 
26Georgia State University Law Review, Vol. 35, Iss. 4 [], Art. 8
https://readingroom.law.gsu.edu/gsulr/vol35/iss4/8