1314 GEORGIA STATE UNIVERSIT Y LAW REVIEW [Vol. 35:4 
e-mails originating from elsewhere. The system has learned an 
additional signal for the likelihood of spam that should make i ts 
filtering better. With two signals—“free” and origination from Belarus—the e-mail system now has a better suite of spam-indica ting 
patterns than it did before. When a future e-mail comes in with  either 
the word “free” or origination from Belarus, the system will be  able 
to mark it as spam with a  high degree of probability. 
This example illustrates a few points about machine learning mo re 
broadly. First, it shows how software can learn a useful patter n on its 
own without having a programmer explicitly program that pattern  
ahead of time.
39 In our example, the software learned the rule that the 
presence of the word “free” was a likely indicator for spam on its 
own because its algorithm was specifically designed to identify  
words that are correlated with spam and calculate the associate d 
probabilities. In other words, no programmer had to manually instruct the software that a wor d like “free” was a likely indi cator of 
spam; rather, the machine-learning software determined it automatically by calculating the words most frequently associat ed 
with spam.
40 Thus, machine-learning algorithms are, in some sense, 
able to program themselves because they have the capability of detecting useful decision rules on their own as they examine da ta and 
detect statistical outliers, rath er than having those rules lai d out for 
them explicitly, ahead of time, by human programmers. 
Second, this example illustrates that the software was learning  by 
improving its performance over time with more data.
41 At first, the 
software had detected only one indicia of spam—the presence of the 
word “free, but over time it figured out another spam signal—e- mails 
originating from Belarus. In that way, the software acquired mo re 
heuristics by examining more data that made it better at automa tically 
detecting spam e-mails than it was before. This illustrates how  the 
“learning” in machine learning is merely a metaphor for human learning and does not involve rep licating the higher-order brai n and 
                                                                                                                 
 39. Surden, supra  note 12, at 91. 
 40. Id. 
 41. Id. at 92. 
10Georgia State University Law Review, Vol. 35, Iss. 4 [], Art. 8
https://readingroom.law.gsu.edu/gsulr/vol35/iss4/8