1308 GEORGIA STATE UNIVERSIT Y LAW REVIEW [Vol. 35:4 
by humans, it is common to describe this as an application of A I.10 
This definition, though not fully descriptive of all AI activit ies, is 
nonetheless helpful as a working depiction.11 
A.   Today’s AI is Not Actually Intelligent 
N o w  t h a t  w e  h a v e  a  b r o a d  d e s c r i p t i o n  o f  w h a t  A I  i s ,  i t  i s  a l s o  
important to understand what today’s AI technology is not . When 
many people hear the term “AI” they imagine current AI systems as 
thinking machines.12 A common misperception along this line is that 
existing AI systems are producing their results by engaging in some 
sort of synthetic computer cognition that matches or surpasses 
human-level thinking.13 
The reality is that today’s AI systems are decidedly not  intelligent  
thinking machines in any meaningf ul sense. Rather, as I discuss  later, 
AI systems are often able to produce useful, intelligent result s 
without intelligence. These systems do this largely through heuristics—by detecting patterns in data and using knowledge, r ules, 
and information that have been  specifically encoded by people i nto 
forms that can be processed by computers.
14 Through these 
computational approximations, AI systems often can produce surprisingly good result s on certain complex tasks that, when d one by 
humans, require cognition. Notabl y, however, these AI systems d o so 
by using computational mechanisms that do not resemble or match  
human thinking.
15 
By contrast, the vision of AI as involving thinking machines wi th 
abilities that meet or surpass human-level cognition—often refe rred 
                                                                                                                 
 10. R USSELL & NORVIG , supra  note 4, at 2. 
 11. One reason that this characterization of AI is not fully d escriptive is that AI  has been used to do 
many activities that humans cannot  do. For example, AI technology has been used to spot credit card 
fraud among billions of transactions using statistical probabil ities. See id.  at 1034. If we frame AI as 
engaging in activities that re quire human intelligence, we may miss the group of activities that have 
been automated that humans cannot actually do due to our cognit ive limitations. Those issues aside, the 
working definition that we have here, albeit not complete, is s ufficient for our discussion. 
 12. Harry Surden, Machine Learning and Law , 89 W ASH. L. REV. 87, 89 (2014). 
 13. Id. This exaggerated view of AI has  been promoted by companies adv ertising “cognitive 
computing,” the media, and various projects that provide a misl eading view of the state of AI. Id. 
 14. Id. at 89–90. 
 15. Id. at 87. 
4Georgia State University Law Review, Vol. 35, Iss. 4 [], Art. 8
https://readingroom.law.gsu.edu/gsulr/vol35/iss4/8