2019] ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LAW 1331 
case involving sexual harassment, one can train the software to  look 
for keywords that are likely to  appear in harassing e-mails, or  t h e  
system can use information that it has detected in previous 
harassment cases about words likely to appear in those e-mails.  Many 
current AI approaches require problem areas that have underlyin g 
patterns or structures. Although that might apply to particular  subsets 
of lawyering, such as document review, there are many lawyering tasks that involve abstraction, conceptualization, and other co gnitive 
tasks that current AI technology is not good at.  
There are other examples of machine learning being used in 
settings and in tasks that have traditionally been performed by  
lawyers. These examples include reviewing contracts en masse (for 
example, in a merger due diligence setting), helping to automat ically 
put contracts and other legal documents together using AI (docu ment 
assembly), and AI-assisted legal research.
128  
An important point to emphasize is that these AI systems can 
quickly reach their limits. These technologies often just give a first 
rough pass at many lawyerly tasks, providing, for example, a template document for an attorney. In other cases, the software  may 
merely highlight legal issues fo r a human attorney to be aware of.
129 
By contrast, in more complex situations, ultimately the AI soft ware 
typically does not create the final work product—such as a comp lete, 
written merger contract. Humans are still squarely in the loop for complex, sophisticated legal tasks. It is the part of lawyering that is mechanical  and repetitive that is largely being automated. 
Another interesting use of machin e learning in the practice of law 
is in the prediction of legal outcomes.
130 One function that attorneys 
have traditionally done for clients is to weigh the strength of  client 
arguments and the legal position of a client in a hypothetical or actual 
lawsuit.131 Increasingly, attorneys and others interested in the 
                                                                                                                 
 128. Id. 
 129. Bernard Marr, How AI and Machine Learning Are Transforming Law Firms and the Legal 
Sector , FORBES  (May 23, 2018, 12:29 AM), 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/be rnardmarr/2018/05/23/how-ai-and- machine-learning-are-transforming-
law-firms-and-the-legal-sector /#6308a31c32c3 [https://perma.cc/ 9HQ6-ZGTQ]. 
 130. Id. 
 131. Id. 
27Surden: Artificial Intelligence and Law: An Overview
Published by Reading Room,