2019] ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LAW 1321 
are so many different and unexpected circumstances that could 
happen when driving and that it is difficult to completely train a machine-learning system that can manage every circumstance.
75 For 
instance, if there is an accident blocking an entire road, a po lice 
vehicle may temporarily rerout e vehicles onto a sidewalk. A 
self-driving vehicle driving autonomously may not know what to do 
in such a case. One popular appr oach in self-driving cars is kn own as 
remote assist.76 When a self-driving vehicle encounters a situation 
where it doesn’t know what to do, it can essentially call for h elp to a 
call center staffed by people.77 There, humans can see what is going 
on through the self-driving car’s sensors and figure out what t o do.78 
They can, for instance, take remote control of the vehicle, ste er it 
around the difficult situation, and then return it to autonomous mode once things look normal.
79 This is an example of  a human in the loop, 
where a difficult situation beyond the capability of a self-dri ving 
vehicle is deferred to a human. The larger point is that many c omplex 
AI systems will not be fully autonomous, but rather may include  
humans in the loop for particul arly difficult judgments or 
assessments beyond state-of-the-art AI. As I later discuss, par tially 
autonomous, human-in-the-loop systems are common in the legal domain. 
C.   AI’s Current Capabilities and Limits 
Stepping back for a moment, we are now in a position to more 
realistically appreciate both the capabilities and limits of cu rrent AI 
technology. Understanding the technology also allows us to see why 
AI tends to be useful for certain types of tasks and not others . This is 
key because these same limitations apply in the context of law.  We 
                                                                                                                 
driving/autonomous-cars-vs-kangaroos-the-long-furry-tail-of-unl ikely-events [http s://perma.cc/K2M9-
F2GR]. 
 75. Id. 
 76. Alex Davies, Self-Driving Cars Have a Secret Weapon: Remote Control , WIRED (Feb. 1, 2018, 
7:00 AM), https://www.wired.com/st ory/phantom-teleops/ [https:/ /perma.cc/DKN7-UA7V]. 
 77. Id. 
 78. Id. 
 79. Id. 
17Surden: Artificial Intelligence and Law: An Overview
Published by Reading Room,