2019] ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LAW 1317 
make automated, expert-level diagnoses using the encoded 
knowledge (e.g., If patient has sym ptoms X and Y, the expert sy stem, 
using its rules, determines that it is likely medical condition Z). 
A good example of a legal-expert system comes from 
tax-preparation software such as TurboTax.53 To create such a 
system, software developers, in consultation with tax attorneys  and 
others experts in the personal income tax laws, translate the meaning and logic of tax provisions into a set of comparable formal rul es that 
a computer can process.
54  
Let us get an intuition as to what it actually means to “transl ate” a 
law into a computer rule. Imagine that there is a tax law that says that 
for every dollar of income that somebody makes over $91,000, sh e 
will be taxed at a marginal tax rate of 28%. A programmer can t ake 
the logic of this legal provision and translate it into an if-t hen 
computer rule that faithfully represents the meaning of the law  (e.g., 
If income > 91,000, then tax rate = 28%).55 Once represented 
formally, the preparation software can use such a computer rule  t o  
analyze the income being reported by the filer and automatically apply the appropriate legal tax rate.
56 The same can occur with many 
other translated tax provisions. Although this is an over-simpl ified 
example, it illustrates the basic logic underlying the law-to-computer-rule translation process. 
More broadly, these knowledge, logic, and rules-based AI method s 
involve a top-down approach to computation. This means that programmers must, ahead of time, explicitly provide the compute r 
with all of its operating and d ecision rules. This is in contra st to the 
bottom-up machine-learning approach described earlier, where th e 
computer algorithm organically determined its operating rules o n its 
own.
57  
                                                                                                                 
 53. Surden, supra note 50, at 78. 
 54. Id. 
 55. W ARD FARNSWORTH , THE LEGAL ANALYST : A TOOLKIT FOR THINKING ABOUT THE LAW 164 
(2007) (“Most laws—whether made by legislatures, courts, agenci es, or anyone else—can be 
understood as if-then statements.”); Surden, supra note 50, at 23. 
 56. Surden, supra note 50, at 4. 
 57. Id. at 71–72. 
13Surden: Artificial Intelligence and Law: An Overview
Published by Reading Room,