2019] ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LAW 1315 
cognitive processes found in human  learning, but rather, involv es the 
detection of additional useful  patterns with more data.42  
This example also helps us understand the limits of machine 
learning compared to human intelligence and Strong AI. When a 
human reads an e-mail and decides that it is spam, the person understands its words and their meaning by activating higher-or der 
cognitive centers associated with language. This might happen v ery 
quickly, as a human decides whether, through meaning, that give n 
e-mail is or is not spam. By contrast, in the machine-learning- based 
spam filter listed above, the system doesn’t understand the mea ning 
of words like “free” or the concept of countries like Belarus, nor does it need to.
43 Rather, the machine-learning system described above 
made its automated decisions based upon heuristics—the presence  of 
statistically relevant signals like “free”—to make its intelligent-seeming decisions.
44 
What is interesting, and perhap s amazing, is that these pattern s and 
heuristics can sometimes produce intelligent results—the same 
results that a human would have come to had she read it—without  
underlying human-level cognition. Th is is a fascinating fact—th at 
machines can use detected patterns to make useful decisions abo ut 
certain complex things without understanding their underlying 
meaning or significance in the way a human might. This observat ion 
will be relevant once we examine machine learning applied in th e 
legal context and will be helpful in understanding the limits o f AI in 
law. 
In sum, machine learning is curre ntly the most significant and 
impactful approach to artificial  intelligence. It underlies mos t of the 
major AI systems impacting soci ety today, including autonomous 
vehicles, predictive analytics, fraud detection, and much of automation in medicine.
45 It is important, however, to emphasize how 
dependent machine learning is upon the availability of data. Th e rise 
of machine learning has been fueled by a massive increase in th e 
                                                                                                                 
 42. Id. at 89. 
 43. See id.   
 44. Surden, supra  note 12, at 91. 
 45. M ATHWORKS , supra  note 27. 
11Surden: Artificial Intelligence and Law: An Overview
Published by Reading Room,