Table 5: Accuracy (%) on the Pattern dataset for node-classiﬁcation task. FactorGCN achieves the
best performance, showing its ability to serve as a general GCN framework.
GCN GatedGCN GIN MoNet DisenGCN IPDGN FactorGCN
63.880.07 84.480.12 85.590.01 85.480.04 75.010.15 78.700.11 86.570.02
Figure 4: The inﬂuence of the balanced weight and the number of factor graphs.
5 Conclusion
We propose a novel GCN framework, termed as FactorGCN, which achieves graph convolution
through graph-level disentangling. Given an input graph, FactorGCN decomposes it into several
interpretable factor graphs, each of which denotes an underlying interconnections between entities,
and then carries out topology-aware convolutions on each such factor graph to produce the ﬁnal
node features. The node features, derived under the explicit disentangling, are therefore block-wise
explainable and beneﬁcial to the downstream tasks. Speciﬁcally, FactorGCN enables multi-relation
disentangling, allowing information propagation between two nodes to take places in disjoint spaces.
We also introduce two new metrics to measure the graph disentanglement performance quantitatively.
FactorGCN outperforms other methods on both the disentanglement and the downstream tasks,
indicating the proposed method is ready to serve as a general GCN framework with the capability of
graph-level disentanglement.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the startup funding of Stevens Institute of Technology.
Broader Impact
In this work we introduce a GCN framework, termed as FactorGCN, that explicitly accounts for
disentanglement FactorGCN is applicable to various scenarios, both technical and social. For conven-
tional graph-related tasks, like node classiﬁcation of the social network and graph classiﬁcation of
the molecular graph, our proposed method can serve as a general GCN framework. For disentangling
tasks, our method generates factor graphs that reveal the latent relations among entities, and facili-
tate the further decision making process like recommendation. Furthermore, given sufﬁcient data,
FactorGCN can be used as a tool to analyze social issues like discovering the reasons for the quick
spread of the epidemic disease in some areas. Like all learning-based methods, FactorGCN is not
free of errors. If the produced disentangled factor graphs are incorrect, for example, the subsequent
inference and prediction results will be downgraded, possibly yielding undesirable bias.
9