Disentangling stepAggregation stepMerging stepInput GraphFactor Graph 1Factor Graph 2Factor Graph 3: Edges with high attention: Edges with low attention: Computational flowOutput GraphFactorizationGCN
GCN
GCNFigure 1: Illustration of one layer in the proposed FactorGCN. It contains three steps: Disentangling ,
Aggregation , and Merging . In the disentangling step, the input graph is decomposed into several
factor graphs, each of which represents a latent relation among nodes. In the aggregation step, GCNs
are applied separately to the derived factor graphs and produce the latent features. In the merging
step, features from all latent graphs are concatenated to form the ﬁnal features, which are block-wise
interpretable.
convolutional network (FactorGCN), takes as input a simple graph , and decomposes it into several
factor graphs, each of which corresponds to a disentangled and interpretable relation space, as shown
in Fig. 1. Each such graph then undergoes a GCN, tailored to aggregate features only from one
disentangled latent space, followed by a merging operation that concatenates all derived features
from disentangled spaces, so as to produce the ﬁnal block-wise interpretable features. These steps
constitute one layer of the proposed FactorGCN. As the output graph with updated features share the
identical topology as input, nothing prevents us from stacking a number of layers to disentangle the
input data at different levels, yielding a hierarchical disentanglement with various numbers of factor
graph at different levels.
FactorGCN, therefore, potentially ﬁnds application in a wide spectrum of scenarios. In many real-
world graphs, multiple heterogeneous relations between nodes are mixed and collapsed to one single
edge. In the case of social networks, two people may be friends ,colleagues , and living in the
same city simultaneously, but linked via one single edge that omits such interconnections; in the
co-purchasing scenario [ 5], products are bought together for different reasons like promotion , and
functional complementary , but are often ignored in the graph construction. FactorGCN would, in
these cases, deliver a disentangled and interpretable solution towards explaining the underlying
rationale, and provide discriminant learned features for the target task.
Speciﬁcally, the contributions of FactorGCN are summarized as follows.
Graph-level Disentangling . FactorGCN conducts disentangling and produces block-wise
interpretable node features by analyzing the whole graph all at once, during which process
the global-level topological semantics, such as the higher-order relations between edges
and nodes, is explicitly accounted for. The disentangled factor graphs reveal latent-relation
speciﬁc interconnections between the entities of interests, and yield interpretable features
that beneﬁt the downstream tasks. This scheme therefore contrasts to the prior approaches
of [3,4], where the disentanglement takes place only within a local neighborhood, without
accounting for global contexts.
Multi-relation Disentangling . Unlike prior methods that decode only a single attribute
for a neighboring node, FactorGCN enables multi-relation disentangling, meaning that the
center node may aggregate information from a neighbour under multiple types of relations.
This mechanism is crucial since real-world data may contain various relations among the
same pair of entities. In the case of a social network graph, for example, FactorGCN would
2