nodeito nodejin the factor graph e;cijis the normalization term that is computed according to the
degree of node iand nodej;W(l)is a linear transformation matrix, which is the same as the matrix
used in the disentangling step.
Note that although we use all the neighbours of a node in the input graph to aggregate information,
some of them are making no contribution if the corresponding coefﬁcient in the factor graph is zero.
3.3 Merging Step
Once the aggregation step is complete, different factor graphs will lead to different features of nodes.
We merge these features generated from different factor graphs by applying
h(l+1)
i =jjNe
e=1h(l+1)e
i; (5)
whereh(l+1)
i is the output feature of node i;Neis the number of factor graphs; jjrepresents the
concatenation operation.
3.4 Architecture
We discuss above the design of one disentangle layer, which contains three steps. The FactorGCN
model we used in the experimental section contains several such disentangle layers, increasing the
power of expression. Moreover, by setting different number of factor graphs in different layers, the
proposed model can disentangle the input data in a hierarchical manner.
The total loss to train FactorGCN model is L=Lt+Ld.Ltis the loss of the original task, which
is taken to be a binary cross entropy loss for multi-label classiﬁcation task, cross entropy loss for
multi-class classiﬁcation task, or L1 loss for regression task. Ldis the loss of the discriminator we
mentioned above. is the weight to balance these two losses.
4 Experiments
In this section, we show the effectiveness of the proposed FactorGCN, and provide discussions on its
various components as well as the sensitivity with respect to the key hyper-parameters. More results
can be found in the supplementary materials.
4.1 Experimental setups
Datasets . Here, we use six datasets to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method. The
ﬁrst one is a synthetic dataset that contains a ﬁxed number of predeﬁned graphs as factor graphs.
The second one is the ZINC dataset [ 31] built from molecular graphs. The third one is Pattern
dataset [ 31], which is a large scale dataset for node classiﬁcation task. The other three are widely
used graph classiﬁcation datasets include social networks (COLLAB,IMDB-B) and bioinformatics
graph (MUTAG) [ 32]. To generate the synthetic dataset that contains Nefactor graphs, we ﬁrst
generateNepredeﬁned graphs, which are the well-known graphs like Turán graph, house-x graph,
and balanced-tree graph. We then choose half of them and pad them with isolated nodes to make
the number of nodes to be 15. The padded graphs will be merged together as a training sample. The
label of the synthetic data is a binary vector, with the dimension Ne. Half of the labels will be set
to one according to the types of graphs that the sample generated from, and the rest are set to zero.
More information about the datasets can be found in the supplemental materials.
Baselines . We adopt several methods, including state-of-the-art ones, as the baselines. Among all,
MLP is the simplest one, which contains multiple fully connected layers. Although this method is
simple, it can in fact perform well when comparing with other methods that consider the structural
information. We use MLP to check whether the other compared methods beneﬁt from using the
structural information as well. GCN aggregates the information in the graph according to the laplacian
matrix of the graph, which can be seen as a ﬁxed weighted sum on the neighbours of a node. GAT [ 27]
extends the idea of GCN by introducing the attention mechanism. The weights when doing the
aggregation is computed dynamically according to all the neighbours. For the ZINC dataset, we
also add MoNet [ 25] and GatedGCN E[31] as baselines. The former one is the state-of-the-art
method that does not use the type information of edges while the latter one is the state-of-the-art
one that uses additional edge information. Random method is also added to provide the result of
5