Mixed graphGround truth factor graphsDisentangledfactor graphs
Mixed graphGround truth factor graphsDisentangledfactor graphsFigure 2: Examples of the disentangled factor graphs on the synthetic dataset. The isolated nodes are
eliminated for a better visualization.
random guess for reference. For the other three graph datasets, we add non DL-based methods (WL
subtree, PATCHYSAN, AWL) and DL-based methods (GCN, GraphSage [ 33], GIN) as baselines.
DisenGCN [3] and IPDGN [4] are also added.
Hyper-parameters . For the synthetic dataset, Adam optimizer is used with a learning rate of 0.005,
the number of training epochs is set to 80, the weight decay is set to 5e-5. The row of the adjacent
matrix of the generated synthetic graph is used as the feature of nodes. The negative slope of
LeakyReLU for GAT model is set to 0.2, which is the same as the original setting. The number of
hidden layers for all models is set to two. The dimension of the hidden feature is set to 32 when
the number of factor graphs is no more than four and 64 otherwise. The weight for the loss of
discriminator in FactorGCN is set to 0.5.
For the molecular dataset, the dimension of the hidden feature is set to 144 for all methods and the
number of layers is set to four. Adam optimizer is used with a learning rate of 0.002. No weight
decay is used. of FactorGCN is set to 0.2. All the methods are trained for 500 epochs. The test
results are obtained using the model with the best performance on validation set. For the other three
datasets, three layers FactorGCN is used.
4.2 Qualitative Evaluation
We ﬁrst provide the qualitative evaluations of disentanglement performance, including the visualiza-
tion of the disentangled factor graphs and the correlation analysis of the latent features.
Visualization of disentangled factor graphs . To give an intuitive understanding of the disentangle-
ment. We provide in Fig. 2 some examples of the generated factor graphs. We remove the isolated
nodes and visualize the best-matched factor graphs with ground truths. More results and analyses can
be found in the supplemental materials.
Correlation of disentangled features . Fig. 3 shows the correlation analysis of the latent features
obtained from several pre-trained models on the synthetic dataset. It can be seen that also GCN and
MLP models can achieve a high performance in the downstream task, and their latent features are
hidden entangled. GAT gives more independent latent features but the performance is degraded in
the original task. FactorGCN is able to extract the highly independent latent features and meanwhile
achieve a better performance in the downstream task.
4.3 Quantitative Evaluation
The quantitative evaluation focuses on two parts, the performance of the downstream tasks and that
of the disentanglement.
Evaluation protocol . For the downstream tasks, we adopt the corresponding metrics to evaluate,
i.e., Micro-F1 for the multi-label classiﬁcation task, mean absolute error (MAE) for the regression
task. We design two new metrics to evaluate the disentanglement performance on the graph data. The
ﬁrst one is graph edit distance on edge (GED E). This metric is inspired by the traditional graph edit
distance (GED). Since the input graph already provides the information about the order of nodes,
the disentanglement of the input data, in reality, only involves the changing of edges. Therefore, we
restrict the GED by only allowing adding and removing the edges, and thus obtain a score of GED E
by Hungarian match between the generated factor graphs and the ground truth.
Speciﬁcally, for each pair of the generated factor graph and the ground truth graph, we ﬁrst convert
the continuous value in the factor graph to 1/0 value by setting the threshold to make the number of
6