Factorizable Graph Convolutional Networks
Yiding Yang
Stevens Institute of Technology
yyang99@stevens.eduZunlei Feng
Zhejiang University
zunleifeng@zju.edu.cnMingli Song
Zhejiang University
brooksong@zju.edu.cn
Xinchao Wang
Stevens Institute of Technology
xinchao.wang@stevens.edu
Abstract
Graphs have been widely adopted to denote structural connections between enti-
ties. The relations are in many cases heterogeneous, but entangled together and
denoted merely as a single edge between a pair of nodes. For example, in a social
network graph, users in different latent relationships like friends and colleagues,
are usually connected via a bare edge that conceals such intrinsic connections. In
this paper, we introduce a novel graph convolutional network (GCN), termed as
factorizable graph convolutional network (FactorGCN), that explicitly disentangles
such intertwined relations encoded in a graph. FactorGCN takes a simple graph as
input, and disentangles it into several factorized graphs, each of which represents
a latent and disentangled relation among nodes. The features of the nodes are
then aggregated separately in each factorized latent space to produce disentangled
features, which further leads to better performances for downstream tasks. We eval-
uate the proposed FactorGCN both qualitatively and quantitatively on the synthetic
and real-world datasets, and demonstrate that it yields truly encouraging results in
terms of both disentangling and feature aggregation. Code is publicly available at
https://github.com/ihollywhy/FactorGCN.PyTorch .
1 Introduction
Disentangling aims to factorize an entity, like a feature vector, into several interpretable components,
so that the behavior of a learning model can be better understood. In recent years, many approaches
have been proposed towards tackling disentangling in deep neural networks and have achieved promis-
ing results. Most prior efforts, however, have been focused on the disentanglement of convolutional
neural network (CNN) especially the auto-encoder architecture, where disentangling takes place
during the stage of latent feature generation. For example, V AE [ 1] restrains the distribution of the
latent features to Gaussian and generates disentangled representation; -V AE [ 2] further improves the
disentangling by introducing to balance the independence constraints and reconstruction accuracy.
Despite the many prior efforts in CNN disentangling, there are few endeavors toward disentangling
in the irregular structural domain, where graph convolutional network (GCN) models are applied.
Meanwhile, the inherent differences between grid-like data and structural data precludes applying
CNN-based disentangling methods to GCN ones. The works of [ 3,4], as pioneering attempts, focus
on the node-level neighbour partition and ignore the latent multi-relations among nodes.
We introduce in this paper a novel GCN, that aims to explicitly conduct graph-level disentangling,
based on which convolutional features are aggregated. Our approach, termed as factorizable graph
Corresponding author.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.