6
 4
 2
 0 2 4 6
successor0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9Figure 5. A visualization of the embedding space learned in Example 3. Individual MNIST image embedding
are shown in crosses, with the mean for each label as a solid dot. The direction of the successor relation is
marked by the arrow.
7.4. Conclusions and open challenges
In this chapter, we discussed the base paradigms that make up the vast majority of neuro-
symbolic systems. We then discussed the similarities and differences of two paradigms
that integrate reasoning and learning, namely statistical relational AI and neuro-symbolic
AI. Next, we discussed the desirable properties of neuro-symbolic systems. Firstly, a
framework that is the integration of two frameworks should retain either framework
as a special case. Otherwise, certain abilities have been lost in the integration. Sec-
ondly, neuro-symbolic systems should integrate a logical, neural and a probabilistic
base paradigm. We have showcased this for the neural probabilistic logic programming
paradigm with the DeepProbLog framework.
However, there are still open challenges that need to be solved by the NeSy commu-
nity. One challenge to overcome is the scalability of neuro-symbolic systems. Especially
the inference of systems that have a separate logical inference step can be prohibitively
expensive. Including probabilistic inference can make this problem even worse. Al-
though some progress has been made in this direction by investigating approximate in-
ference, there is not yet a solution that can be applied to arbitrary settings. Furthermore,
a lot of effort has gone into making the training of (large) neural networks as efficient
as possible, maximally utilizing the parallellization capabilities of hardware. The same
considerations will have to be made for neuro-symbolic systems if they are to be made
universally applicable.
Another open challenge is performing structure learning in neuro-symbolic systems.
Although some progress has been made in this direction, the possibilities of these sys-
tems are still not on the level of structure learning seen in pure logic programming /
StarAI. Introducing neural networks into the structure learning problem further compli-
cates this setting as these neural networks might also have to be trained themselves.
A final challenge directly related to the previous challenges is that the field is not yet
mature enough to be applied to a showcase application. This is partly due to the limited
scalability of certain neuro-symbolic methods, but also due to the fact that many systems
assume that the logical structure is given by the user. However, this is not viable for all
areas of application, and a robust system that can discover (part of) the logical structure
would be essential.