Table 1. Conditional probability distribution P(alarm|burglary ,earthquake )as a Conditional Probability
Table, cf. Figure 3.
burglary earthquake P(alarm|burglary ,earthquake )
true true (0.95,0.05)
true f alse (0.95,0.05)
f alse true (0.29,0.71)
f alse f alse (0.001,0.999)
Probabilistic graphical models are an expressive formalism for learning and rea-
soning under uncertainty. However, inference in such models (e.g. computing specific
marginal probabilities), is in general intractable as it is #P-complete. Nevertheless, there
has been a lot of progress in devising various types of approximate and exact inference
algorithms [13, 14, 15].
7.1.3. Neural methods
Neural networks [16] excel in machine learning tasks where the input data is high-
dimensional and feature engineering is hard, for instance for analysing images, video or
audio, or natural language. The key to their success lies in the combination of two prin-
ciples. First, they are exceptionally good in automatically extracting features from raw
inputs (e.g., pixel images, or textual data). To this end, neural networks learn multiple
layers of nonlinear functions that project the input data onto relatively low-dimensional
latent spaces. The latent representation of an input pattern is usually called an embed-
ding. Second, the use of advanced gradient based optimization techniques [17] allows
these nonlinear models to be efficiently trained.
In classification tasks, neural networks typically learn a conditional probability dis-
tribution P(Y|X), where Yis a random variable representing the class and Xis the input
pattern. As an example, a neural network can model the probability P(Y=1|X=
)that
the MNIST image represents the digit 1. It is worth observing that such neural network
models are quite similar to a conditional probability table, such as the one in Table 1, as
they both represent conditional probability distributions over a set of random variables.
However, it would be impractical to represent conditional distributions over complex in-
puts (e.g. images) using a table, as there would be a different row for any possible raw
input, e.g., for every possible 28 x 28 gray scale image. Neural networks can thus be seen
as compact approximations of such tables. The approximation is possible since it is as-
sumed that, in high dimensional spaces, similar inputs have similar output distributions.
This analogy allows for an intuitive understanding of the integration of neural networks
with probabilistic reasoning models by replacing conditional probability tables by neural
network building blocks (cf. Section 7.3.1).
Although deep learning has been successfully applied to a wide variety of domains,
there is a growing awareness of the limitations of deep learning [18]. Deep learning re-
quires large amounts of (the right kind of) data to train the network, it provides neither
justifications nor explanations, and the models are black-boxes that can neither be under-
stood nor modified by domain experts. Although there have been attempts to demonstrate
reasoning-like behaviour with deep learning [19, 20, 21], their current reasoning abili-
ties are nowhere close to what is possible with typical high-level reasoning approaches.
Even when neural networks are used to perform reasoning, they can fail badly when they
have to generalize to unseen reasoning patterns [22]. This failure is for example observed