0.3::b.
a1 :- b.
a2 :- b,b.
Here, 0 .3 is the label of bwithout any particular semantics yet. Given the idempotency
of the Boolean conjunction, we would expect that the scores of both a1anda2to be
identical since both bandb∧bare true when bis true. In a probabilistic approach, the
score is interpreted as a probability, i.e. p(b) =0.3. The probability of any atom is the
sum of the probabilities of all the worlds where that atom is true. It is straightforward to
see that, for both a1anda2, they are the worlds where bis true, thus p(a1) =p(a2) =
p(b) =0.3. On the other side, in the fuzzy settings, the score of bis interpreted as its
truth degree, i.e. t(b) =0.3. Let us consider the product t-norm, where t(x∧y) =t(x)t(y),
then t(a1) =t(b) =0.3 while t(a2) =t(b)t(b) =0.09. While this issue could be solved
by choosing a different t-norm (e.g. the minimum t-norm), similar issues arise due to the
relaxed logical semantics.
7.3. Neural Probabilistic Logic Programming
Based on our experience in upgrading machine learning systems towards the use of
(probabilistic) logical and relational representations [37, 38], we argue that a first desir-
able property of frameworks that integrate two other frameworks A and B, is to have the
original frameworks A and B as a special case of the integrated one . If A or B cannot
be fully reconstructed, one clearly loses certain abilities, which is not only undesirable
but which also implies that there is no true unification. Applying this property to neuro-
symbolic computation implies that the existing frameworks should have both the neural
and the symbolic representations as special case. When this is the case, one retains both
the learning abilities of the neural component as well as the reasoning and learning abil-
ities and the semantics of the symbolic representations. Unfortunately, this property is
not satisfied by the vast majority of neuro-symbolic approaches in that they either push
the symbolic representation inside the neural network (from which the logic cannot be
recovered), or vice versa, apply neural learning principles to symbolic representations
(and risk loosing both the pure neural component and the logical semantics), as we shall
show in the next section.
We also advocate a second desirable property for neuro-symbolic computation:
models that learn from observed samples should be able to deal with uncertainty. There-
fore, one should not only integrate logic with neural networks in neuro-symbolic com-
putation, but also probability .
Although at first sight this may appear as a complication, it actually can greatly
simplify the integration of neural networks with logic. The reason for this is that the
probabilistic framework provides a clear optimisation criterion, namely the probability
of the training examples. Real-valued probabilistic quantities are also well-suited for
gradient-based training procedures, as opposed to discrete logic quantities.
We will now show how DeepProbLog achieves both of the desired properties by
introducing the neural predicate as the interface between neural networks. Although the
examples below are focused on reasoning with image classification, neural probabilistic