probability may appear as a complication, it actually greatly simplifies the integration of
neural networks with logic. The reason for this is that probabilistic frameworks provide
clear optimisation criteria, such as the likelihood of the training examples. Real-valued
probabilistic quantities are also well-suited for gradient-based training procedures, as
opposed to their discrete logic counterparts.
In this chapter, we first look at the three base paradigms (i.e. neural, logical and
probabilistic methods) separately. Then, we look at the well established integrations,
NeSy and StarAI. Next, we consider the integration of all three paradigms as Neural
Probabilistic Logic Programming, and exemplify it with the DeepProbLog framework.
Finally, we discuss the limitations of the state of the art, and consider future directions
based on the parallels between StarAI and NeSy.
7.1. Base paradigms
We first consider the base elements of the integrations: neural, logical and probabilistic
methods.
7.1.1. Logical methods
We now introduce the necessary background on the logical methods for this chapter. For
more details, we refer to [9]. In this chapter, we focus on the subset of logic based on
definite clauses. More formally, a definite clause is an expression of the form h←b1∧
...∧bnwhere hand the biare logical atoms of the form p(t1, ...,tm), with pa predicate of
arity mand the titerms. Terms then are either constants, logical variables or structured
terms of the form f(t1, ...,tk)with fa functor and the tjterms. Definite clauses for
which n=0 are called facts . By using the standard Prolog notation (i.e. commas for
conjunctions and : −for the implication), the following definite clause states that the
alarm goes off if there is an earthquake:
alarm :- earthquake.
A logic program consists of a set of definite clauses. We show an encoding of the
alarm example from [10] in Figure 1. In this example, your alarm can be triggered by
either a burglar or an earthquake. If either of your neighbours, John and Mary, are home,
the will call you if they hear the alarm. This program is propositional since every atom
in the head or the body of the clauses has arity zero.
By introducing relations, we move from a propositional logic program to a first-order
logic program. First-order programs are much more compact since definite clauses with
variables behave as templates for many instantiations of the same clause. In Figure 2,
we show a first order variant of the alarm program from Figure 1, where we compactly
describe the behavior of multiple individuals (i.e. mary orjohn ) using relations (i.e.
at_home ) and variables.
A substitution θis an expression of the form {V1=t1, ...,Vn=tn}where the Viare
different variables and the titerms. Applying a substitution θto an expression e(term
or clause) yields the instantiated expression eθwhere all variables Viinehave been