can alternatively be modeled through independent facts and definite clauses; cf. [8] for
technical details.
To obtain some intuitions about the probabilistic logic program representation, it
is instructive to see how they can represent Bayesian networks. Consider Bayesian net-
works involving only Boolean random variables. Each node without a parent then corre-
sponds to a probabilistic fact. Observe that both nodes without any parents in a Bayesian
network and probabilistic facts in ProbLog are marginally independent. Furthermore,
each entry in a conditional probability table can be mapped onto an annotated disjunc-
tion. Assume the parents of the node narexandy. Then there would be four annotated
disjunctions of the form pi::n:–xv,yv, where xvandyvare the positive or negative lit-
erals corresponding to x, resp. y. This shows that annotated disjunctions can be used to
specify conditional probability tables. For example, consider the node alarm in Figure
3 and its parents burglary andearthquake . The CPT in Table 1 can be encoded with
the following ProbLog program:
0.95 :: alarm :- burglary, earthquake.
0.95 :: alarm :- burglary, \+ earthquake.
0.29 :: alarm :- \+ burglary, earthquake.
0.001 :: alarm :- \+ burglary, \+ earthquake.
7.2.2. Neuro-symbolic AI
We now discuss how neuro-symbolic AI (NeSy) systems differ from each other along
two important aspects.
7.2.2.1. Two types of neuro-symbolic AI
Neuro-symbolic AI integrates neural networks with symbolic representations, often us-
ing symbolic logic. There are at least two ways of approaching such an integration. First,
there are the neural networks approaches that use logic as a regularizer. Second, there are
the logical approaches that are extended with neural constructs.
Neural networks with logical aspects. These methods extend neural network models
with logical aspects. One way to do this is to define logical constraints on their output.
These constraints are not hard constraints (i.e. they are not guaranteed to hold). Rather,
they are only used during the training, where the degree in which these constraints are
not satisfied serves as an additional loss term. Thus the logic acts as a kind of regular-
ization function during the optimization. The effect is that the logic behaves as a kind
of soft constraint on the outputs, which enforces the neural methods to make predictions
that adhere better to the logic. This formalism effectively encodes the logic into the pa-
rameters of the network, so that even when the logic is not explicitly present, the model
should still satisfy the logical constraints more than models that were trained without
these constraints. Examples of such systems include Semantic Based Regularization [27]
and the Semantic Loss function [28].
Another way to extend neural networks with logical aspects is to encode the logic
into the structure. This can be done through a carefully designed architecture that can
perform reasoning using common differentiable operations [20, 21, 22]. One can also
use the logic to define the neural network structure in a templating approach [29, 30, 31].