Logical methods with neural constructs. Whereas the other line of work extends neural
network with logic, this line of work tackles the integration from the other side. These
methods extend logic-based frameworks with neural constructs. The neural constructs
create an interface between the logic-based framework and the neural network. These
constructs generally allow the logic to evaluate neural networks in a differentiable man-
ner such that their parameters can be optimized together with any possible parameters
in the logic. This type of extension similar to how Prolog was extended into the StarAI
system ProbLog through the introduction of probabilistic facts. Example of systems in
this line of work include DeepProbLog [32] and NeurASP [33].
7.2.2.2. Numbers vs Booleans
Neuro-symbolic AI systems need to connect the output of the neural networks to the
Boolean truth values in logic. When we consider neural networks as classifiers, they
output a confidence score for each class. If the neural network are sufficiently confident,
it might suffice to only select the top prediction. However, in general, and especially
when the neural network still needs to be trained, this is not feasible. There are several
strategies for dealing with this.
One strategy is to choose one of the outputs of the neural network, based on the
confidence score. When the choices turn out to be logically inconsistent, different outputs
are chosen until they are consistent. These choices can then be used as pseudo-labels to
train the neural network to make this output more likely. Systems that use this approach
include ABL [34] and NGS [35].
Another strategy is to use the confidence scores directly in the logic. To do this, the
logical operators are turned into real-valued functions, and hence, relax the Boolean truth
values to the continuous [0,1]interval. This introduces the semantics of fuzzy logic (or
soft logic), which is mathematically grounded in the t-norm theory. For example, in the
product t-norm, the truth degree of the conjunction, i.e. t(a∧b), is equal to the product
of the truth degrees of its arguments, i.e. t(a∧b) =t(a)t(b). This approach is used in
systems such as LRNN [30] and DiffLog [36].
Finally, it is also possible to interpret the confidence scores as a probability distribu-
tion, and to use a probabilistic logic to deal with the uncertainty. We will argue in the next
section that this integration is very natural and has benefits over the use of a fuzzy logic.
A probabilistic approach is used in systems such as DeepProbLog [32], NeurASP [33]
and Semantic Loss [28].
The difference in how the probabilistic and the fuzzy methods relax the discrete
logical semantics allows, in general, a computationally cheaper inference for the fuzzy
approaches. However, this comes at the cost of a misalignment with the original Boolean
theory, whose semantics is instead preserved by probabilistic approaches. In particular,
in probabilistic methods, one defines a probability distribution over possible worlds or
models. The probability of an atom or formula is computed as a sum over the proba-
bilities of the worlds in which they are true. Their probability is as such defined only
semantically and independent of the syntax. On the contrary, by relaxing the operators to
continuous functions, fuzzy logics represent an alternative semantics and the truth degree
of atoms and formulas may become a function of the syntax.
Example 7.2.1. Consider for example the following annotated program.