when more reasoning steps are necessary during testing than during training. These types
of generalizations are evaluated in datasets such as the CLUTRR dataset [23].
7.2. Integration
Let us now address the question as to how these different paradigms can be integrated in
order to support both high-level reasoning and low-level perception.
We start by discussing how the field of Statistical Relational Artificial Intelligence
(StarAI) [6] integrates the logic and probabilistic paradigms. This is then exemplified
using the ProbLog [24] framework. Next, we will introduce how neuro-symbolic AI
integrates sub-symbolic and symbolic systems.
7.2.1. Statistical Relational AI
First-order logic (programming), cf. Section 7.1.1, extends propositional logic by intro-
ducing relations. Bayesian networks and probability theory, cf. Section 7.1.2 can be seen
as extending propositional logic with uncertainty. In fact, one can reason on the proba-
bility of a certain proposition given another one. Statistical Relational Artificial Intelli-
gence (StarAI) brings the best of both worlds by extending first-order logic (program-
ming) with uncertainty, or, equivalently, by extending probability theory with relations.
One key idea, due to Poole [25] and Sato [26] is to unify the notion of a logical atom and
a random variable.
StarAI models allow defining templated probabilistic models thanks to the use of
first order clauses with variables. The parameters of these models can be trained on a spe-
cific set of individuals (e.g. mary andjohn)) and then they can be used to make predic-
tions on new individuals (e.g. bob) . Indeed, one of the main properties of StarAI mod-
els is that they can be defined before knowing which individuals exist, by only reason-
ing about their potential relationships. Thus the same model can be applied to different
populations and the learned regularities about the individuals in the training set can be
transferred to new individuals. We will exemplify the domain of StarAI with ProbLog, a
probabilistic extension of Prolog.
ProbLog ProbLog [24] lifts Prolog to a probabilistic model through the introduction of
one concept: the probabilistic fact. Whereas a fact in Prolog is deterministically true, a
probabilistic fact is of the form
p::f
where fis a logical atom and pa probability. This allows us to encode the burglary alarm
Bayesian network as a ProbLog program:
0.1::burglary .
0.5::at_home(mary).
0.2::earthquake .
0.4::at_home(john).alarm :–earthquake .
alarm :–burglary .
calls (X):–alarm ,at_home(X).