Chapter 7
Neuro-Symbolic AI = Neural + Logical +
Probabilistic AI
Robin Manhaeve , KU Leuven, Dept. of Computer Science; Leuven.AI
Giuseppe Marra , KU Leuven, Dept. of Computer Science; Leuven.AI
Thomas Demeester , Ghent University - imec, Dept. of Information Technology
Sebastijan Duman ˇci´c, KU Leuven, Dept. of Computer Science; Leuven.AI
Angelika Kimmig , KU Leuven, Dept. of Computer Science; Leuven.AI
Luc De Raedt , KU Leuven, Dept. of Computer Science; Leuven.AI; Örebro University
[book title, editor(s), print ISBN or online ISBN, pages, year, and DOI or URL].
There is a broad consensus that both learning and reasoning are essential to achieve
true (artificial) intelligence [1]. This explains why the quest for neuro-symbolic artificial
intelligence (NeSy) [2, 3, 4, 5], which combines high-level reasoning with low-level
perception, is high on the research agenda.
The two most prominent frameworks for reasoning are logic and probability. While
in the past, they were studied by separate communities in artificial intelligence, a signif-
icant number of researchers has been working towards their integration, and aiming at
combining probability with logic and statistical learning; cf. the areas of statistical rela-
tional artificial intelligence (StarAI) [6, 7] and probabilistic logic programming [8]. The
reasoning abilities of statistical relational artificial intelligence approaches are comple-
mentary to the strong pattern-recognition abilities of deep learning.
Generally, neuro-symbolic systems integrate logic with neural networks. Probabil-
ity theory has already been integrated with logic (cf. statistical relational AI) and neural
networks. It therefore makes sense to consider the integration of logic, neural networks
and probabilities. This effectively leads to an integration of probabilistic logics with neu-
ral networks and opens up new abilities. Furthermore, although at first sight, including
© Manhaeve et al., 2022. The definitive, peer reviewed and edited version of this Article is published in
the book Neuro-Symbolic Artificial Intelligence: The State of the Art. Ed. Hitzler, P., Sarker, M.K. Frontiers
in Artificial Intelligence and Applications 342, IOS Press,p. 173-191, 2022, ISBN 978-1-64368-244-0. DOI:
10.3233/FAIA210354