by combining these techniques with weak and strong data augmentations and using cross-entropy
loss as the consistency regularization criterion.
However, a drawback of FixMatch and other popular SSL algorithms such as Pseudo-Labeling [ 4]
and Unsupervised Data Augmentation (UDA) [ 11] is that they rely on a fixed threshold to compute
the unsupervised loss, using only unlabeled data whose prediction confidence is above the threshold.
While this strategy can make sure that only high-quality unlabeled data contribute to the model
training, it ignores a considerable amount of other unlabeled data, especially at the early stage of
the training process, where only a few unlabeled data have their prediction confidence above the
threshold. Moreover, modern SSL algorithms handle all classes equally without considering their
different learning difficulties.
To address these issues, we propose Curriculum Pseudo Labeling (CPL), a curriculum learning [ 15]
strategy to take into account the learning status of each class for semi-supervised learning. CPL
substitutes the pre-defined thresholds with flexible thresholds that are dynamically adjusted for
each class according to the current learning status. Notably, this process does not introduce any
additional parameter (hyper-parameter or trainable parameter) or extra computation (forward or back
propagation). We apply this curriculum learning strategy directly to FixMatch and call the improved
algorithm FlexMatch .
While the training speed remains as efficient as that of FixMatch, FlexMatch converges significantly
faster and achieves state-of-the-art performances on most SSL image classification benchmarks.
The benefit of introducing CPL is particularly remarkable when the labels are scarce or when the
task is challenging. For instance, on the STL-10 dataset, FlexMatch achieves relative performance
improvement over FixMatch by 18.96%, 16.11%, and 7.68% when the label amount is 400, 2500,
and 10000 respectively. Moreover, CPL further shows its superiority by boosting the convergence
speed – with CPL, FlexMatch takes less than 1/5 training time of FixMatch to reach its final
accuracy. Adapting CPL to other modern SSL algorithms also leads to improvements in accuracy and
convergence speed.
To sum up, this paper makes the following three contributions:
•We propose Curriculum Pseudo Labeling (CPL), a curriculum learning approach of dynami-
cally leveraging unlabeled data for SSL. It is almost cost-free and can be easily integrated to
other SSL methods.
•CPL significantly boosts the accuracy and convergence performance of several popular SSL
algorithms on common benchmarks. Specifically, FlexMatch, the integration of FixMatch
and CPL, achieves state-of-the-art results.
•We open-source TorchSSL, a unified PyTorch-based semi-supervised learning codebase
for the fair study of SSL algorithms. TorchSSL includes implementations of popular SSL
algorithms and their corresponding training strategies, and is easy to use or customize.
2 Background
Consistency regularization follows the continuity assumption of SSL [ 1,2]. The most basic consis-
tency loss in SSL, such as in ΠModel [ 9], Mean Teacher [ 10] and MixMatch [ 12], is the ℓ-2 loss:
µBX
b=1||pm(y|ω(ub))−pm(y|ω(ub))||2
2, (1)
where Bis the batch size of labeled data, µis the ratio of unlabeled data to labeled data, ωis a
stochastic data augmentation function (thus the two terms in Eq. (1)are different), ubdenotes a piece of
unlabeled data, and pmrepresents the output probability of the model. With the introduction of pseudo
labeling techniques [ 5,7], the consistency regularization is converted to an entropy minimization
process [ 16], which is more suitable for the classification task. The improved consistency loss with
pseudo labeling can be represented as:
1
µBµBX
b=11(max( pm(y|ω(ub)))> τ)H(ˆpm(y|ω(ub)), pm(y|ω(ub))), (2)
2