improve the performance. A possible reason is that the lower threshold prevents noisy training caused
by incorrect pseudo labels at the early stage [36].
Threshold warm-up. We analyze the performance of threshold warm-up on both CIFAR-10 (40
labels) and CIFAR-100 (400 labels) datasets. As shown in Figure 4(c), threshold warm-up can bring
about 0.2% absolute improvement on CIFAR-10 and about 1% on CIFAR-100. At the beginning of
the training without the threshold warm-up, the flexible thresholds may go through heavy fluctuations
because the denominator in Eq. (6)is small. In the meantime, there will always be some classes whose
flexible thresholds reach or approach τ, thereby filtering out most unlabeled data in the batch. The
threshold warm-up solves this issue by gradually raising the thresholds of all classes from zero – it
creates a learning boom at the early training stage where most of the unlabeled data can be utilized.
Comparison with class balancing objectives. CPL has the effect of balancing across classes the
number of unlabeled samples used to compute pseudo-labeling loss in each batch. Similar effect can
be achieved by making the marginal class distribution close to a uniform distribution for each batch.
We conduct such a comparative experiment by directly adding an additional objective to FixMatch:
Lb=P
cqclog(qc/ˆpc)[22], where ˆpcis the mean predicted probability of class cacross all samples
in the batch, and qis a uniform distribution: qc= 1/C. The error rate of adding such an objective
is 7.16% on the CIFAR-10 40-label split (compared with FixMatch 7.47% ±0.28 and FlexMatch
4.97%±0.06). While this approach requires instances of each class within each batch to be balanced
to make sense, CPL does not have such a constraint. It is more flexible and involves less human
intervention to adjust thresholds than adjusting model’s predictions.
5 Related Work
Pseudo-Labeling [ 4] is a pioneer SSL method that uses hard artificial labels converted from model
predictions. A confidence-based strategy was used in [ 6] along with pseudo labeling so that the
unlabeled data are used only when the predictions are sufficiently confident. Such confidence-based
thresholding also presents in recently proposed UDA [ 11] and FixMatch [ 14] with the difference
being that UDA used sharpened ‘soft’ pseudo labels with a temperature whereas Fixmatch adopted
one-hot ‘hard’ labels. The success of UDA and FixMatch, however, relies heavily on the usage
of strong data augmentations to improve the consistency regularization. ReMixMatch [ 13] also
leveraged such strong augmentations.
The combination of curriculum learning and semi-supervised learning is popular in recent years [ 37–
39]. For multi-model image classification task, [ 37] optimized the learning process of unlabeled
images by judging their reliability and discriminability. In [ 38], the easy image-level properties are
learned first and then used to facilitate segmentation via constrained CNNs. Curriculum learning
is also used to alleviate out-of-distribution problems by picking up in-distribution samples from
unlabeled data according to the out-of-distribution scores [39].
Several researches have investigated on dynamic threshold in related fields such as sentiment anal-
ysis [ 40] and semantic segmentation [ 41]. In [ 40], the threshold was gradually reduced to make
high-quality data selected into labeled data set in the early stage and large-quantity in the later stage.
An extra classifier is added to automate the threshold to deal with domain inconsistency in [ 41]. [42]
introduced curriculum learning to self-training with a steadily increasing threshold and achieved near
state-of-the-art results.
6 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we introduce Curriculum Pseudo Labeling (CPL), a curriculum learning approach of
leveraging unlabeled data for SSL. CPL dramatically improves the performance and convergence
speed of SSL algorithms that involve thresholds while being extremely simple and almost cost-free.
FlexMatch, our improved algorithm of FixMatch, achieves state-of-the-art performance on a variety
of SSL benchmarks. In future work, we would like to improve our method under the long-tail scenario
where the unlabeled data belonging to each class are extremely unbalanced.
9