In this work, we propose Curriculum Pseudo Labeling (CPL) for semi-supervised learning. Our
CPL uses an alternative way to estimate the learning status, which does not introduce additional
inference processes, nor needs an extra validation set. As believed in [ 14], a high threshold that filters
out noisy pseudo labels and leaves only high-quality ones can considerably reduce the confirmation
bias [ 22]. Therefore, our key assumption is that when the threshold is high, the learning effect of
a class can be reflected by the number of samples whose predictions fall into this class and above
the threshold. Namely, the class with fewer samples having their prediction confidence reach the
threshold is considered to have a greater learning difficulty or a worse learning status, formulated as:
σt(c) =NX
n=11(max( pm,t(y|un))> τ)· 1(arg max( pm,t(y|un) =c). (5)
where σt(c)reflects the learning effect of class cat time step t.pm,t(y|un)is the model’s prediction
for unlabeled data unat time step t, andNis the total number of unlabeled data. When the unlabeled
dataset is balanced (i.e., the number of unlabeled data belonging to different classes are equal or close),
larger σt(c)indicates a better estimated learning effect. By applying the following normalization to
σt(c)to make its range between 0to1, it can then be used to scale the fixed threshold τ:
βt(c) =σt(c)
max
cσt, (6)
Tt(c) =βt(c)·τ. (7)
One characteristic of such a normalization approach is that the best-learned class has its βt(c)equal
to1, causing its flexible threshold equal to τ. This is desirable. For classes that are hard to learn, the
thresholds are lowered down, encouraging more training samples in these classes to be learned. This
also improves the data utilization ratio. As learning proceeds, the threshold of a well-learned class is
raised higher to selectively pick up higher-quality samples. Eventually, when all classes have reached
reliable accuracies, the thresholds will all approach τ. Note that the thresholds do not always grow, it
may also decrease if the unlabeled data is classified into a different class in later iterations. This new
threshold is used for calculating the unsupervised loss in FlexMatch, which can be formulated as:
Lu,t=1
µBµBX
b=11(max( qb)>Tt(arg max( qb)))H(ˆqb, pm(y|Ω(ub))), (8)
where qb=pm(y|ω(ub)). The flexible thresholds are updated at each iteration. Finally, we can
formulate the loss in FlexMatch as the weighted combination (by λ) of supervised and unsupervised
loss:
Lt=Ls+λLu,t, (9)
where Lsis the supervised loss on labeled data:
Ls=1
BBX
b=1H(yb, pm(y|ω(xb))). (10)
Note that the cost of introducing CPL is almost free. Practically, every time the prediction confidence
of an unlabeled data unis above the fixed threshold τ, the data, and its predicted class are marked and
will be used for calculating βt(c)at the next time step. Such marking actions are bonus actions each
time the consistency loss is computed. Therefore, FlexMatch does not introduce additional forward
propagation processes for evaluating the model’s learning status, nor new parameters.
3.2 Threshold warm-up
We noticed in our experiments that at the early stage of the training, the model may blindly predict
most unlabeled samples into a certain class depending on the parameter initialization(i.e., more likely
to have confirmation bias). Hence, the estimated learning status may not be reliable at this stage.
Therefore, we introduce a warm-up process by rewriting the denominator in Eq. (6) as:
βt(c) =σt(c)
max
max
cσt, N−P
cσt, (11)
4