Figure 1: Illustration of Curriculum Pseudo Label (CPL). The estimated learning effects of each
class are decided by the number of unlabeled data samples falling into this class and above the fixed
threshold. They are then used to adjust the flexible thresholds to let pass the optimal unlabeled data.
Note that the estimated learning effects do not always grow – they may also decrease if the predictions
of the unlabeled data fall into other classes in later iterations.
where His cross-entropy, τis the pre-defined threshold and ˆpm(y|ω(ub))is the pseudo label that
can either be a ‘hard’ one-hot label [ 4,14] or a sharpened ‘soft’ one [ 11]. The intention of using a
threshold is to mask out noisy unlabeled data that have low prediction confidence.
FixMatch utilizes such consistency regularization with strong augmentation to achieve competitive
performance. For unlabeled data, FixMatch first uses weak augmentation to generate artificial labels.
These labels are then used as the target of strongly-augmented data. The unsupervised loss term in
FixMatch thereby has the form:
1
µBµBX
b=11(max( pm(y|ω(ub)))> τ)H(ˆpm(y|ω(ub)), pm(y|Ω(ub))), (3)
where Ωis a strong augmentation function instead of weak augmentation ω.
Of the aforementioned works, the pre-defined threshold ( τ) is constant. We believe this can be
improved because the data of some classes may be inherently more difficult to learn than others.
Curriculum learning [ 15] is a learning strategy where learning samples are gradually introduced
according to the model’s learning process. In such a way, the model is always optimally challenged.
This technique is widely employed in deep learning research [17–21].
3 FlexMatch
3.1 Curriculum Pseudo Labeling
While current SSL algorithms render pseudo labels of only high-confidence unlabeled data cut off by
a pre-defined threshold, CPL renders the pseudo labels to different classes andat different time steps .
Such a process is realized by adjusting the thresholds according to the model’s learning status of each
class.
However, it is non-trivial to dynamically determine the thresholds according to the learning status.
The most ideal approach would be calculating evaluation accuracies for each class and use them to
scale the threshold, as:
Tt(c) =at(c)·τ, (4)
whereTt(c)is the flexible threshold for class cat time step tandat(c)is the corresponding evaluation
accuracy. In this way, lower accuracy that indicates a less satisfactory learning status of the class will
lead to a lower threshold that encourages more samples of this class to be learned. Since we cannot
use the evaluation set in the model learning process, one may have to separate an extra validation set
from the training set for such accuracy evaluations. However, this practice show two fatal problems:
First, such a labeled validation set separated from the training set is expensive under SSL scenario
as the labeled data are already scarce. Second, to dynamically adjust the thresholds in the training
process, accuracy evaluations must be done continually at each time step t, which will considerably
slow down the training speed.
3