ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Improving optimization of convolutional neural networks through
parameter fine-tuning
Nicholas Becherer1•John Pecarina1•Scott Nykl1•Kenneth Hopkinson1
Received: 16 May 2017 / Accepted: 13 November 2017 / Published online: 25 November 2017
/C211The Author(s) 2017. This article is an open access publication
Abstract
In recent years, convolutional neural networks have achieved state-of-the-art performance in a number of computer vision
problems such as image classiﬁcation. Prior research has shown that a transfer learning technique known as parameter ﬁne-
tuning wherein a network is pre-trained on a different dataset can boost the performance of these networks. However, the
topic of identifying the best source dataset and learning strategy for a given target domain is largely unexplored. Thus, this
research presents and evaluates various transfer learning methods for ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation as well as the effect
on ensemble networks. The results clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of parameter ﬁne-tuning over random initial-
ization. We ﬁnd that training should not be reduced after transferring weights, larger, more similar networks tend to be the
best source task, and parameter ﬁne-tuning can often outperform randomly initialized ensembles. The experimental
framework and ﬁndings will help to train models with improved accuracy.
Keywords Convolutional neural networks /C1Transfer learning /C1Computer vision /C1Parameter ﬁne-tuning
1 Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are machine
learning models that extend the traditional artiﬁcial neural
network by adding increased depth and additional con-
straints to the early layers. Recent work has focused on
tuning their architecture to achieve maximum performance
on benchmarks such as the ImageNet Large Scale Visual
Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) [ 1,2].
CNNs are not a new topic in the ﬁeld of computer
vision. They can trace their origins back to the early 1980s
with Fukushima’s Neocognitron [ 4]. More directly, they
were shown to be highly effective in the 1990s when used
for handwritten digit recognition and eventually in industryfor automated check readers [ 5,6]. They rely on several
successive convolutional layers to extract information from
an image. Since convolution is a shift and slide operation, it
is invariant to translations in the data. Most importantly,
these convolutional layers are fully learnable through the
backprop algorithm, meaning they can identify low- and
high-level patterns through supervised training [ 7]. How-
ever, they fell out of favor in the new millennium because
of their difﬁculty scaling to larger problems [ 8]. Problems
beyond the optical character recognition or low-resolution
imagery were either too computationally expensive or
lacked enough training data to avoid overﬁtting.
Recently, they have stepped back into the spotlight as
these problems have been overcome. In 2012, Krizhevsky
et al. [ 1] leveraged several recent advances to overcome
these issues in the 2012 ILSVRC. First, they used NVI-
DIA’s CUDA programming language to implement their
CNN on a highly parallel GPU, reducing run time by orders
of magnitude [ 9]. Second, the ImageNet competition
included a dataset on the scale of millions of images
automatically sourced from the Internet [ 10]. Combined
with several new techniques such as dropout regularization
[11] and simple data augmentation, they presented a model
dubbed AlexNet that won the competition. Since the&John Pecarina
john.pecarina@us.af.mil
Nicholas Becherer
nbechere@citadel.edu
Scott Nykl
scott.nykl@aﬁt.edu
Kenneth Hopkinson
kenneth.hopkinson@aﬁt.edu
1Air Force Institute of Technology, Dayton, OH 45433, USA
123Neural Computing and Applications (2019) 31:3469–3479
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-017-3285-0