classes and a much larger amount of training data per class.
Data are split 75% for training and 25% for testing. Test
data are never used for training on any network. In order to
normalize the effect of transfer learning and make theeffect comparable across multiple datasets, we use the
following formula to measure the error reduction rate:
Reduction rate ¼1/C0Scratch errors /C0transfer errors ðÞ
Scratch errors:
ð1Þ
There are many parameters that can be adjusted when it
comes to training CNNs. Typically, one would tune eachparameter to ﬁnd the best set for their particular problem.
However, we are interested only in the effect of ﬁne-tun-
ing. In order to isolate this effect, we use the same set ofhyperparameters for all networks. This likely leads to
suboptimal performance for particular datasets, but optimal
performance is not our goal. Unless otherwise noted, theparameters described below are used across all
experiments.
The basic network architecture to be used for this
experiment is the same one as in AlexNet [ 1]. AlexNet has
5 convolutional layers and three fully connected layers
attached to a SoftMax layer at the output that generates a
probability distribution of all possible classes. While other
architectures have been used to achieve better results on theILVSRC challenge, AlexNet is used for several reasons.
First, it is a well-known architecture and has become a
standard architecture for experiments on CNNs themselves[3]. Second, even with high-powered GPUs, training a
CNN takes days, and more complicated models take longer
(the authors of VGG reported that training took 2-3 weekson similar hardware [ 13]). Given the number of CNNs that
need to be trained for this experiment, time is a nontrivial
factor.
There still remains a number of network hyperparame-
ters to be deﬁned. Many of these hyperparameters were
chosen by experimenting until the network began to traineffectively. Large minibatches can lead to slow conver-
gence, while smaller minibatches may lead to suboptimal
convergence. Minibatch size was set to 256. The learn ratewas initially set to .001. It was reduced by half every
25,000 training iterations. It is unlikely that this is the best
learning strategy for every dataset. However, the goal ofthis research is not to ﬁnd the best possible results for each
dataset; rather we are trying to study the effect of ﬁne-
tuning, so we standardized on a schedule of learning ratemultipliers and number of training iterations to measure
affects across the datasets. Tweaking the learning strategy
for every dataset would multiply the amount of trainingrequired, which would have made an experiment on this
scale unfeasible due to time constraints. It takes a 3-4 days
to capture results on a particular setting. Most networksconverged to an optimal solution in less than 100,000
training iterations and then began to overﬁt; however, for
the sake of consistency and thoroughness, all networks
were trained for 200,000 iterations. Training consisted of100 iterations followed by a complete test against the entire
validation set. When a network’s accuracy is reported, it is
the model that had the best accuracy on the validation set.However, the best model was never used for transferring.
The model saved at 200,000 iterations was always the
source model. This is in line with the research done by
Azizpour et al. [ 21], which found that early stopping was
less beneﬁcial than overﬁtting, although the beneﬁt ofoverﬁtting diminishes beyond 200,000 iterations.
All experiments were done using Berkeley Caffe [ 29].
Caffe was chosen because it supports GPU-acceleratedtraining which makes research on this scale feasible. It also
makes it simple to transfer learned weights. Furthermore, it
is very popular and well supported by the community. It isexpected that the same results would be achieved regard-
less of deep learning framework used. The main difference
is the interface and underlying implementation, not thealgorithm.
4 Optimizing learn rate
The ﬁrst experiment was designed to evaluate the claimby Girshick et al. [ 18] that there is some value in
reducing the learning rate during ﬁne-tuning. To test this
claim, we applied a learn rate multiplier to the transferredlayers. By varying our learn rate multiplier from 0 to 1,
we can measure the effect of preserving the initialization.
Using a multiplier of 0 freezes the learning in the trans-ferred layers and absolutely preserves the initialization.
We increase the multiplier to 1 in .2 increments. By the
time we have a multiplier of 1, we have effectivelyeschewed the learn rate multiplier and only use the global
learn rate. A network with no transferred layers is trained
from scratch to serve as a baseline comparison. For thisexperiment, the transferred weights came from pretraining
on the generalist network.
Using the planes subset as the target dataset, Fig. 3
shows the result that using a learning rate multiplier is
suboptimal to simply using the global learning rate.
Completely freezing the initialization led to an accuracy of18.584%. It was omitted from Fig. 3in order to prevent
compressing the scale of the rest of the results shown in the
ﬁgure. Other than that, all other ﬁne-tuned networks out-performed the scratch initialization. The global learning
rate performed the best overall. This contradicts the claim
of Girshick for the situation where the classiﬁcation task isaimed at a straightforward labeling of the designated
dataset.Neural Computing and Applications (2019) 31:3469–3479 3473
123