Recalling the mechanisms of training a CNN that
involve minimizing an optimization problem, the functionto be minimized is the cross-entropy loss function of the
network. Since cross-entropy loss is a nonconvex function,
it may have many local minima that are different from theglobal minima. Relying on a greedy algorithm like
stochastic gradient descent causes convergence to the local
minima rather than the global minima. By choosing a betterinitialization, better minima may be found. Reducing the
learn rate of the network after transferring weights does
nothing to affect the initialization; if anything, it preventsthe valley of the local minima from being efﬁciently tra-
versed. For this reason we recommend the global learning
rate for straightforward labeling tasks. Attempting tointerpret Girshick’s claim another way, it may be possible
to achieve higher classiﬁcation accuracy if a secondary
classiﬁcation task is to be pursued. We hope to approachthat answer in part in the next section.
5 Analyzing effect of the source task
The next experimental question analyzes what type ofdataset may serve as the best source for the labeling task, in
other words, what data should be used in pretraining. An
open question for ﬁne-tuning is which dataset should bechosen for pretraining. As mentioned earlier, our dataset
better allows us to measure the effect of source task. Using
our dataset, we can control for factors such as the type ofsource task, the visual similarity of the source task, and the
amount of training data in the target task. For each major
class in the dataset, we train a specialist network with 5different initializations. The ﬁrst is the scratch or random
initialization. This serves as the control and acts as the
baseline against which all other initializations are com-
pared. The remaining initializations come from transferringweights trained on different conﬁgurations of the entire
dataset. They are the generalist, high-fan, generalist-with-
out, and high-fan-without datasets where the without net-work has had the major class of the target task removed.
These serve as a more visually distant source task com-
pared to the full dataset. With these different initializations,
we can measure the effect source task has on ﬁne-grained
image classiﬁcation as well as the effect that visual simi-larity has. Furthermore, by repeating this experiment on
each major class subset, we can see the effect of increased
amounts of training data, starting with Fig. 4, described
next.
Figure 4shows the results from the ﬁrst ﬁve specialist
networks. All networks showed an improvement overrandom initialization regardless of which source was used
for ﬁne-tuning. The beneﬁt varied from task to task. For
example, both the bird and ﬂower datasets have similaramounts of data in the training set. However, the ﬂower
network had a much larger increase in both absolute and
relative terms of accuracy compared to the bird dataset. Ingeneral, the more distant high-fan-without and generalist-
without networks underperformed their more visually
similar counterparts. The one exception to this trend is thehigh-fan-without initialization for the vegetable network
was the highest performing initialization for that specialist
network.
Figure 5shows the results from the dog and sign net-
works, which seem to be the outliers. The dog specialist
network is noteworthy because the high-fan-without ini-tialization actually underperformed the random scratch
initialization. In the 28 ﬁne-tuned networks trained for this
experiment, this was the only instance of this happening.The other initializations also provided very little beneﬁt
over random initialization, although they did provide some
beneﬁt. The results for the sign specialist network are alsoshown. These are noteworthy due to the high performance
of the scratch network. It was not realized at the time of
data collection, but as of 2013 the signs dataset is con-sidered solved [ 30]. Because it is less difﬁcult and has little
room for improvement, this type of dataset is a poor choice
for incorporation and is not recommended for transferlearning.
Figure 6shows the normalized results for all 7 subsets
of data. Overall, the high-fan initialization was most oftenthe best choice, turning out to be the top performing ini-
tialization 3 out of 7 times. Table 2shows the raw data for
each network as well as the mean of the data. The meanalso indicates that the high-fan initialization generally leads
to the best performance. However, it was noted that the
Fig. 3 The results from varying the learn rate multiplier in the
transferred layers using the planes subset of the dataset. The scratch
network is the control, and the frozen trial was omitted for sake of
clarity3474 Neural Computing and Applications (2019) 31:3469–3479
123