longer is seen as underperforming the generalist-without
networks.
The results also show that the more visually dissimilar
without networks tend to underperform their more similarcousins. This demonstrates that more visually similar tasks
should be chosen as the source task. However, there
doesn’t seem to be a clear connection between the amountof training data available in the target task and the effect onparameter ﬁne-tuning. Both the ﬂower and bird datasets
had very little training data available. The best ﬂowerinitialization leads to an error reduction rate of 52.73%,
while the best bird initialization only had an error reduction
rate of 9.60%. Meanwhile, the dog dataset, which had themost training data, beneﬁted the least from parameter ﬁne-
tuning. The vegetable dataset, which had a similar amount
of training data per class but far fewer classes, had a moretypical beneﬁt.
6 Ensembles of transfer networks
Ensembles of classiﬁers have long been known to outper-form individuals classiﬁers because the propensity of any
single model to overﬁt is reduced [ 5]. Ensembles of CNNs
work by simply passing the same image through eachindividual CNN and taking the mean of each probability
distribution to obtain the ensemble’s probability distribu-
tion of the output. Since ﬁne-tuned networks tend to out-perform networks trained from scratch, it seems intuitive
that an ensemble of ﬁne-tuned networks would outperform
an ensemble of scratch networks. In order to test this, wetrained an additional three scratch networks for each major
class (except for the sign dataset). This allows direct
comparison of 4 scratch networks to the four ﬁne-tunednetworks trained in the above experiment. Figure 7shows
the results for the plane specialist networks. As expected,
Fig. 5 The results for two outlier specialist networks, dog and sign. A sample image from each dataset is shown above the graph for that major
class
Fig. 6 The error reduction rate of every different datasets. This
method normalizes the results and allows us to compare the effectbetween datasets3476 Neural Computing and Applications (2019) 31:3469–3479
123