tuned network outperformed the randomly initialized net-
work. They also provide evidence against the claim made
by Girshick et al. [ 18] by showing that halting the learning
in the transferred layers can greatly reduce the perfor-mance. Lastly, they attempt to see if the effect is still
present when more dissimilar datasets are used relative to
the source. They do this by separating the dataset into man-made and natural subsets. They ﬁnd this delivers less
improvement compared to the original split. However, this
split does not quite capture visual dissimilarity correctly.
Since CNNs operate on visual information, more distant
tasks should be more visually dissimilar. Consider the caseof lemon, tennis ball, and microwave (all classes in the
dataset). Visually, a tennis ball and a lemon are similar
because of similar shape and color. However, microwave isconsidered closer to tennis ball than lemon under the cat-
egorical man-made deﬁnition. The dataset we present
better encapsulates visual dissimilarity.
Another question not currently addressed in the litera-
ture is the effect of ﬁne-tuning on ensembles of CNNs. The
top performing entries of each year’s ILSVRC have allused ensembles of CNNs [ 1,2,12,13]. Any given CNN
may overﬁt to some particular class or classes of data.
Because of the stochastic nature of SGD, however, dif-ferent CNNs trained on the same dataset are unlikely to all
overﬁt exactly the same way. By averaging the output of
each individual CNN, the propensity to overﬁt is reduced,leading to an overall model that is more general [ 22]. The
next section explains the experimental framework used to
address the various gaps in the literature in the area ofparameter ﬁne-tuning.
3 Experimental framework and dataset
Herein we provide an exposition of an experimentalframework and dataset to investigate transfer learning and
parameter ﬁne-tuning. To give context to the reader, Fig. 1
shows a simple example of parameter ﬁne-tuning, depict-ing a network trained on a source task (left) to be applied toa network trained on a target task (right). The source task
network, with green nodes, proceeds through training with
learned weights represented by blue lines and mapped to
two outputs. To transfer the network, a layer is cut off (inthis case only the output layer, but not necessarily so).
However, due to the mismatched nature of the outputs both
in classiﬁcation and number, the weights in the ﬁnalremaining layer must be reinitialized, which is represented
in the ﬁgure by red lines. After transfer, the learned weights
optimize SGD to the target task with three outputs.
To investigate gaps in the topic of parameter ﬁne-tuning,
this paper addresses three open questions:
1. Should learning be reduced in transferred layers?
2. What type of dataset serves as the best source task?
3. Do ensembles of ﬁne-tuned CNNs outperform ensem-
bles of randomly initialized CNNs?
In order to answer these questions, we assembled a
dataset that aggregates seven different ﬁne-grained data-
sets, described in Table 1with a breakdown of the data’s
characteristics. Each dataset has one major classiﬁcationand a number of minor classiﬁcation labels. For example,
the plane dataset has a major class label of simply plane. It
has 78 minor class labels such as Boeing 737 and Spitﬁre.We refer to the major classes as generalist (G) and the
minor as classes as high-fan (HF) for the way they ‘fan out’
the dataset.
This allows us to create several conﬁgurations using the
same aggregated dataset. When a network is trained on the
entirety of the dataset, it is referred to as a superset net-work. Depending on how the data are labeled, the superset
network may either be a generalist or a high-fan network.
A generalist classiﬁes all images at the major class level(e.g., plane vs. bird). A high-fan network classiﬁes every-
thing at the minor class level (e.g., 737 vs. Spitﬁre vs.
Cardinal vs. Crow). Generalist and high-fan networks alsohave a variant where a single subset is removed. For
example, there are the generalist-without-planes (GWP)
and high-fan-without-planes (HFWP). A network trainedonly on a single subset of data is a specialist network.
Fig. 1 Fine-tuning visualized,
where the network on the left istrained on a task similar to the
transfer task. At right the pre-
trained network, the outputlayer is cut off and the ﬁnalweight layer is transferred to a
network with varied outputs
(colour ﬁgure online)Neural Computing and Applications (2019) 31:3469–3479 3471
123