introduction of AlexNet, the winning entries for the Ima-
geNet competition have all been CNNs [ 2,12,13]. These
newer CNNs have largely advanced the ﬁeld by making the
basic CNN architecture deeper. The Oxford VisualGeometry Group’s Visual Geometry Group (VGG) net-
work experimented with 11–19 learnable weight layers,
ﬁnding that 19 was the optimal architecture [ 13]. The
current leading network, GoogLeNet, has 6.7 million
learnable weights across 22 layers [ 2]. Others have focused
on improving the performance of CNNs through data
augmentation and training techniques [ 14]. Yet ultimately,
all techniques still required large amounts of training datato be effective.
The issue compelling the need for large amounts of data
is due to the fact that CNN training is an extremely com-plex optimization problem. They typically use stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) to ﬁnd the minima for a loss
function and this technique uses large labeled trainingdatasets to minimize effectively. Since SGD is a greedy
method, it is not guaranteed to ﬁnd the global minima. This
means that initialization can have an effect on the ﬁnaloutcome. These weights are usually initialized by sampling
from a Gaussian distribution [ 15]. However, it has been
shown that a transfer learning technique known asparameter ﬁne-tuning can improve the performance of a
CNN compared to random initialization (sometimes to a
substantial degree) [ 3].
However, there is a transfer learning technique that can
help overcome a lack of training data. Parameter ﬁne-
tuning is a method wherein a network is pre-trained on adifferent data set and then retrained on the target set.
Research has shown this method boosts the performance of
a network over random initialization [ 3]. However,
research on this topic is still relatively scarce. This paper
will present several gaps in our understanding as well a
framework for investigating them. We investigate threemain areas. The ﬁrst is the optimal learn rate for transferred
layers. The second is to analyze how different source
datasets affect the outcome on a number of target datasets.Lastly, we compare an ensemble of ﬁne-tuned networks to
an ensemble of randomly initialized networks. These
experiments are done through an experimental frameworkthat allows a single variable to be manipulated and studied
across several datasets. Lastly, we apply this methodology
to a unique dataset aggregated from several sources andpresent the results.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2describes
related work in the area of transfer learning for CNNs, andSect. 3exposes our experimental framework. In Sect. 4,
we investigate the claim made by Girshick [ 18] that the
reduction in the learning rate may improve the accuracy ofthe transfer task. We evaluate the use of various source
data sets in Sect. 5, and in Sect. 6we explore the use ofensembles of transfer networks. A conclusion discussion
and suggestion of future work is described in Sect. 7.
2 Related works in transfer learning
for CNNs
Transfer learning is the study of using data gained from one
problem in machine learning and applying it to another
related, yet different, problem. With CNNs, there are twomain ways to apply transfer learning. The ﬁrst is to remove
the output layer of a trained network and use the raw output
of the previous fully connected layer as a generic feature
vector that describes a particular image. These features are
then used in a number of algorithms which were originallydesigned around using SIFT or SURF features [ 16,17].
Since CNNs are inherently only capable of image classi-
ﬁcation, extra algorithmic work is necessary to apply it toanother problem. The second transfer learning technique is
known as parameter ﬁne-tuning, detailed above. This is the
focus of this paper.
After the publication of Krizhevsky’s AlexNet, Girshick
et al. demonstrated both kinds of transfer learning in a
single paper [ 18]. They ﬁne-tuned AlexNet trained on the
ImageNet dataset to target the 2007 PASCAL VOC data-
set. They note that ﬁne-tuning signiﬁcantly increases per-
formance; however, they do not report any numbers. Oneparticular interesting claim made is that they reduce the
learning rate during ﬁne-tuning in order to avoid ‘clob-
bering the initialization’ of the original CNN. They provideno further reasoning or evidence that this is optimal. This
paper investigates this claim and ﬁnds it to be suboptimal.
After ﬁne-tuning, they then pass regions of the imagethrough their CNN and classify the region with SVMs
based on the raw output of the CNN. Their methodology is
extremely similar to an algorithm that relies on SIFT fea-tures, but outperforms it [ 19]. Girshick et al. [ 18] are
among the ﬁrst to demonstrate that CNNs can be used
effectively for other computer vision problems.
The work of both Razavian et al. [ 20] and Azizpour
et al. [ 21] also focuses on applying CNNs to other prob-
lems. In general, they ﬁnd that CNNs coupled with SVMsprovide competitive results to existing state-of-the-art
solutions for many datasets. The paper from Azizpour in
particular identiﬁes all the factors involved in transferlearning. However, they only test two different source
datasets which are similar in nature. This paper provides
and executes an experimental framework for testing dif-ferent source networks on several different target datasets.
Research from Yosinski et al. [ 3] focuses exclusively on
parameter ﬁne-tuning. Yosinski et al. randomly divide theImageNet dataset in half. For each half, they train on one
half and then target the second half. In both cases, the ﬁne-3470 Neural Computing and Applications (2019) 31:3469–3479
123