1317
Human-centered AI: The role of Human-centered Design Research in the development of AIwith the real-world complexity and messiness of the human situation (e.g., Rittel & Webber, 
1973). The design perspective has its strength in the interactions of people with the AI 
system. Figure 1 shows the two perspectives in relation to two main areas of design research. 
Figure 1 Illustrates the spectrum of the rationalistic view and design perspectives. The rationalistic 
perspective focuses on thought and people as a formal symbolic representation and 
focuses on process and product knowledge. The design perspective focuses on knowledge 
creation about the interactions between people and the enveloping environment, 
including technologies when designing and using artifacts. 
2.1 Philosophical perspectives in guiding the principled development of AI 
The rationalists and humanistic designers are approaching the question of ethics and 
the human impact of AI differently. The rationalistic perspective focuses on developing 
aggregated or normative models and principles. The design perspective focuses on examining 
the messiness of the human situation through “enlightened trial and error” (Winograd, 
1996).
Based on the rationalistic perspective, government, non-profit, industry, and research 
organizations have outlined general principles and guidelines of ethical AI (e.g., Jobin et 
al., 2019). These guidelines provide advice on the development (process) and application 
(product) of trustworthy AI. The EC Expert group expressed guidelines such as lawful, ethical, 
and robust (EC, 2019). Firstly, lawful includes that all AI applications need to respect laws 
and regulations. Secondly, trustworthy AI applications need to fulfill ethical principles. Lastly, 
AI applications require to be robust. Robustness requires the safe, secure, and reliable 
performance of the AI, and safeguards should be foreseen to prevent any unintended 
adverse impacts (EC, 2019).
However, such general guidelines do not represent real-world complexity. Firstly, laws and 
policies often evolve slower than technological development. As stated in the EC (2019) 
report, laws are not always up to speed with technological developments, be out of date