1322AUERNHAMMER
having more diverse, and diversity-minded design teams as AI systems themselves can help 
identify gender and racial biases (Daugherty, Wilson, & Chowdhury, 2019). HCD experiments 
that include and consider diverse groups enable identifying and making biases explicit early 
in the design process. Such experiments can include interactions between people and AI 
systems. 
3.5 Interaction Design and Artificial Intelligence research
Interaction design  was first proposed by Bill Moggridge and Bill Verplank (Moggridge, 2007). 
It focuses on understanding and designing human-machine interactions by examining 
people’s behavior, actions, and cognitive processes within the interactions (Norman, 1986, 
2013; Norman & Draper, 1986). Figure 6  visualizes the human-AI system interaction.
Figure 6  Ilustrates the human-design interaction in which AI system designs are altered to create 
a more useful, usable, and meaningful interaction and experience for people. 
This HCD research allows examining human-AI systems interactions through prototyping  
(Browne, 2019; Houde & Hill, 1997). In particular, a reverse Turing Test like prototype 
termed Wizard of Oz is a common research tool in Human-AI interaction research. Such 
prototyping was used in AI interaction research such as autonomous driving interactions 
(e.g., Fu et al., 2019; Rothenbücher, Li, Sirkin, Mok, & Ju, 2015) or human-robot interaction 
(e.g., Martelaro, Nneji, Ju, & Hinds, 2016; Shibata, Tashima, & Tanie, 1999). Human behavior, 
activities, and emotions are directly observed in the interaction with the AI system. These 
observations allow examining the immediate influence of an AI system on people. Similarly, 
Xu (2019) argues that HCI researchers can contribute to ethical AI design and technological 
enhancement. This HCD approach enables identifying potentially harmful interactions and 
creating valuable experiences for people. It can nudge people into an economically healthier 
behavior, as outlined by Thaler & Sunstein (2009). The same approach is utilized to persuade 
people into intended behavior through technology such as AI.
3.6 Persuasive Technology and Artificial Intelligence research
Persuasive Technology  is the approach that attempts to intentionally change human 
attitudes, behavior, or both through technology (Fogg, 2003). Figure 7  illustrates the 
underlying persuasive ability within human-computer interactions. 
 
Figure 7 Illustrates the relationship between the persuasive ability of technology to change 
human behavior and attitudes within the interactions of technology.