1321
Human-centered AI: The role of Human-centered Design Research in the development of AI
 
Figure 4 Illustrates the participatory design approach in which the user and other stakeholders are 
involved in the design process. People co-create the design solution. 
Participatory Design is essential in the design of AI systems (Neuhauser et al., 2013). This 
HCD research approach contributes by informing AI developers and cyberneticians about 
subtle distinctions among sub-groups in society who could benefit from better functional 
access to computing systems and their adoption (Neuhauser & Kreps, 2011). Participatory 
Design can help create ideas for the AI System through diverse methods. However, it only 
represents the design space for the period of the project, and users need to have a basic 
understanding of what AI can do and not do (Bratteteig & Verne, 2018). Participatory Design 
is often limited in real-life participation as participants are often only involved while the 
project is running, power issues are not addressed as management makes final decisions, 
and participation is resource-intensive and often never compensated (Bodker, 1996). 
Participatory Design addresses the perspectives of people involved in the project. Another 
HCD approach that takes a similar view is Inclusive Design. 
3.4 Inclusive Design and Artificial Intelligence research
Inclusive Design  is an approach that includes and considers the needs and behavior of 
diverse groups in the design to make mainstream products, services, and systems accessible, 
usable, and useful for as many people as possible (e.g., Waller, Bradley, Hosking, & Clarkson, 
2015). Figure 5  illustrates the inclusion of diverse groups in the design of AI systems. 
Figure 5 Illustrates the interrelation of including and considering diverse groups in the design and 
development of AI systems. 
This HCD research approach examines the usability, accessibility, and usefulness for specific 
groups of people in the AI design. Inclusive computer system designs enable accessibility and 
usability and have a positive impact on ethical issues (Abascal & Nicolle, 2005). An important 
aspect is the categorization of individual differences such as physiological, psychological, and 
sociological aspects to accommodate differences in the design (Benyon, Crerer, & Wilkinson, 
2000). The choices of whom to include has ethical implications in AI systems. For example, 
excluding specific groups of people when training AI systems result in race and gender bias 
(Garcia, 2016; Leavy, 2018). Developing diverse design teams can prevent machine biases 
in the design of AI systems. Building AI systems that overcome biases is not only a matter of