1327
Human-centered AI: The role of Human-centered Design Research in the development of AIbetween humanism and science (Arnold, 1959; McKim, 1959, 1980; Winograd, 2006). 
There is a great opportunity for the fields of AI and HCD to collaborate to make progress on 
growing concerns around fairness, accountability, and transparency of AI systems (Abdul, 
Vermeulen, Wang, Lim, & Kankanhalli, 2018; Loi, Wolf, Blomberg, Arar, & Brereton, 2019). 
This pan-disciplinary approach requires to bring the strength of the rationalistic approach 
for developing new AI technologies and techniques and the advantage of the humanistic 
design for developing useful, meaningful, and ethical AI systems together. The role of HCD 
research is to examine the human impact of AI systems through various HCD approaches by 
collaborating with and informing AI technologists. Figure 10  illustrates the pan-disciplinary 
approach in comparison to only a rationalistic (technology) and only a design (humanistic) 
approach. 
 
Figure 10 Exemplifies three different approaches to designing and developing AI systems. A – 
Develops new technological solutions, translated into a product, and pushed to people. 
B – Utilizes existing technologies, and re-design them for specific human-needs. C – 
Exemplifies the pan-disciplinary collaboration of rationalistic and humanistic approaches. 
This comprehensive and pan-disciplinary collaboration design can play the role of mitigating 
the AI impact on society through collaborating with policymakers and decision-makers. 
New AI technologies and techniques can be prototyped and experimented through specific 
designs in a specific context. The pan-disciplinary experiments allow informing decision-
makers such as investors and policymakers of the potential human impact of designed AI 
systems at different stages of the design. This pan-disciplinary collaboration is required to 
design and develop human-centered AI systems as well as inform and develop policies and 
guidelines. Figure 11  illustrates this comprehensive design approach. 
In this comprehensive approach, the role of Design Research is to examine the potential 
societal impact of AI technology and systems through “enlightened trial and error.” Design 
Research can help to overcome the problem of the out-of-date law, allows examining ethical 
questions in context-specific cases and can help in identifying unintended consequences 
by learning faster the impacts on people. To be able to contribute to human-centered AI 
in this pan-disciplinary collaboration, design researchers are required to develop design 
experiments and prototypes that can examine various implications of AI systems on the well-
being of individuals and society.