1319
Human-centered AI: The role of Human-centered Design Research in the development of AIHCD approaches provides a valuable perspective when designing for people. The outlined 
approaches were selected to provide different perspectives such as societal, diversity, 
interaction, and human needs in the design of computer systems such as AI. Each HCD 
approach provides an opportunity to research and examine the impact of AI on people from 
a specific lens. The next sections discuss in detail the implication and value of several HCD 
approaches in researching the implications for people of AI systems. 
3.1 Human-centered Systems and Artificial Intelligence research 
The first HCD approach is Human-centered Systems . This HCD approach allows investigating 
the changes in large-scale social structures resulting from the design, implementation, and 
use of computer systems such as AI (Sawyer, 2005). This human-centered perspective views 
technology as interdependent of political, ideological, and cultural assumptions of a society 
that give rise to it (Cooley, 1980; Kling, 1977; Kling & Scacchi, 1980, 1982; Kling & Star, 1998). 
Figure 2  illustrates this interrelation. 
  
Figure 2 Illustrates the relationship between society, including political, cultural, and ideological 
assumptions and AI technology. Examining technology within the social context allows 
identifying socio-economical processes that gave rise to the AI systems as well as the 
influences on society by AI systems.  
This HCD research approach allows examining the impact of AI systems on social organization 
(e.g., Lisetti, Brown, Alvarez, & Marpaung, 2004; Serenko, Ruhi, & Cocosila, 2007). For 
example, Pee, Pan, & Cui (2019) investigated the collaborative knowledge work of the AI 
robotic system and people in the workplace of a hospital. They identified distinct forms 
of knowledge embodiment, as well as the effects of embodiment on social connections 
between people and AI robotic systems. Such studies allow identifying effects produced by 
the design and use of the AI system such as multiple and sometimes paradoxical effects, 
benefit of some groups more than others, moral and ethical consequences, and reciprocal 
relationships with the broader social context (Sawyer, 2005). Another critical aspect of 
Human-centered Systems is the designers’ ideologies and cultural context in the design of 
the work system. Cooley (1980) expressed that ideologies such as Taylor’s (1907) scientific 
management will determine how people are treated within the designed system. The next 
HCD approach addresses this concern. 
3.2 Social Design and Artificial Intelligence research
Social Design  addresses the designers’ ideological issue, as expressed by Cooley (1980). It is 
an HCD design approach that focuses on the designer’s role in society. This approach includes