1318AUERNHAMMER
with ethical norms, or not well-suited addressing context-specific issues. Secondly, ethical 
principles and moral choices are not universal as surveyed and identified in the Moral 
Machine study (Awad et al., 2018). Different cultures have different ethical perspectives. 
General principles and guidelines may not provide the answer in guiding ethical questions 
in context-specific cases such as autonomous driving. Lastly, robustness does not represent 
real-world complexity as the social impact of AI is hard to predict or foresee. Katz (2017) 
expressed that the human species has been excellent in anticipating the consequences of 
failure, but not so good at preparing for the consequences of success. Similarly, Muehlhauser 
& Helm (2012) expressed the potential of unintended consequences in AI. As laws may not 
be up-to-date, universal principles cannot answer context-specific ethical questions, and 
robustness does not prevent unintended consequences, the humanistic design perspective 
may provide a more suitable approach to examine the societal impact of AI. 
In contrast to the rationalistic perspective, the design perspective utilizes interventions 
through methods such as prototyping to examine the emerging ethical dilemmas in 
the interactions between people and AI systems. Methodologies such as Wizard of Oz 
prototyping are ideal for examining experiences of machine learning (Browne, 2019). 
Such prototyping methodologies allow examining human needs, behavior, interactions, 
experience, and cognition in situ (e.g., Martelaro & Ju, 2017a; Norman & Draper, 1986). 
Examining the emerging interaction, behavior, and needs allows assessing the impact 
on people. However, experiments require designers and design researchers to decide 
which ethics perspective is included and how each perspective is assessed and integrated. 
These decisions pose ethical dilemmas with consequences for AI behavior and its societal 
implication (Baum, 2020). The implication of these choices indicates that design researchers 
need to consider various aspects of human implication in the design experiment beyond 
merely paying close attention to human and social factors (Bannon, 2011). As a remedy, 
different HCD approaches provide specific viewpoints in researching human concerns in AI. 
3. Human-centered Design Research in Artificial Intelligence 
HCD is the design approach that centers people and their needs, motivations, emotions, 
behavior, and perspective in the development of a design. However, involving people in 
the design does not necessarily mean that they are “centered.” Language often reveals 
how people are viewed in different approaches. In engineering, people are often perceived 
as “human factors,” an influencing factor in the performance of the technology. In 
management, people are often considered as “human resources” or “human capital.” HCD 
requires viewing humans as people. People with different prior experiences, needs, desires, 
ambitions, interests, irrational decision making, and lifestyles embedded within specific 
cultural contexts. HCD is a shift of viewing humans not as a part of the system but central in 
every aspect of the design. 
Several scholars developed design approaches that center human values in the design (e.g., 
Arnold, 1959; Dreyfuss, 1955; McKim, 1959; Papanek, 1973, 1983). Each of the different