1326AUERNHAMMER
Need-Design 
Response 
(NDR)
 Design and development 
of AI systems for physical, 
intellectual and emotional 
needs of peopleIdentification of unethical 
AI systems design based on 
needs such as addiction(Faste, 1987; 
Gilmore et al., 1999; 
McKim, 1959, 1980)
Interaction Design , Persuasive Technologies , and Human-centered Computing  enable the 
examination of the interaction and behavior of people with the AI system. Examining and 
iteratively developing the human-AI system interactions allows identifying potential harm 
and enables creating safe and secure experiences and solutions for people. For example, in 
the communication between pedestrians and autonomous vehicles, purposefully designed 
signals can improve the interactions (e.g., Moore, Currano, Strack, & Sirkin, 2019). The 
Persuasive Technologies perspective allows examining the motivational strategies that are 
embedded in the system by identifying the resulting attitude and behavior of people when 
using and interacting with the AI system. By incorporating the Human-centered Computing 
philosophy in the design of AI systems, the focus of the design challenges moves away from 
purely technical problems to the enhancement and support of human capabilities through 
the AI system.
The Need-Design Response  approach by McKim (1959, 1980) that has been popularized by 
the term Design Thinking allows identifying human needs in the early phases of the design 
project through practices such as need-finding. Understanding and having a sensitivity for 
which human needs the design of the AI system addresses, can overcome ethical implications 
at the beginning. Need-finding and rapid prototyping techniques allow the identification of, 
e.g., the potential addiction resulting from meeting unhealthy people’s needs through the AI 
system. For example, AI designs that utilize the need for social acceptance in an unhealthy 
way to generate constant user engagement can lead to addictive behavior on social media 
platforms. This HCD research approach allows identifying the relationship between needs 
and AI designs. 
Each of the HCD approaches allows examining specific societal and human implications of 
an AI system design. The ability to examine these implications allows HCD research to play a 
vital role in the design and development of AI systems. 
5. The role of HCD research for Human-centered AI 
The challenge of building AI systems and technologies that are ethical and beneficial for 
society is two challenges in one, the technical (rationalistic) and beneficial technology 
(design) challenge (Baum, 2017). Interestingly, scholars identified that there is little discourse 
between the fields of user experience (design) and machine learning (rationalistic) (Yang, 
Banovic, & Zimmerman, 2018). However, as illustrated in Figures 2 to 9, each HCD approach 
requires the technical side in the design, development, and use of AI systems. For the 
resolution of this disparity, several scholars have proposed a comprehensive design approach 
that incorporates psychology, art, business management, and science to bridge the gap