1316AUERNHAMMER
2019). These commitments indicate that human-centered approaches have a pivotal role in 
the development and use of AI technology for the well-being of people. However, Bannon 
(2011) pointed out that researchers often use the term human-centered in a generic way to 
encompass a range of distinct research themes without any commitment to a philosophy and 
overarching conceptual framework. 
This article discusses two different philosophical perspectives in AI, the rationalistic and 
design perspective (Winograd, 1996). This discussion is followed by examining these 
different perspectives and their implications in guiding the development and application of 
human-centered AI. The article elaborates in more detail the humanistic design perspective 
and discusses several Human-centered Design (HCD) approaches and their role in the 
development of AI. HCD research is the overarching term encompassing various research 
approaches that center people in the design process. The article focuses on the humanistic 
design perspective because of the over-valuing of the rationalistic approach that grew up 
around the advances in pure science and technology of the mid 20th century (Winograd, 
1996). The article concludes that a comprehensive or pan-disciplinary design approach is 
needed to design, develop, and advance human-centered AI. 
2. Background
Artificial Intelligence systems and technologies such as machine learning, natural language 
processing, expert systems, and robotics have evolved over the last 80 years since Alan 
Turing (1950) proposed the Turing-Test (Crevier, 1993; Grudin, 2009). In this evolution, two 
distinct philosophical perspectives have emerged in how humans and computers should 
interact (Grudin, 2009; Lieberman, 2009; Winograd, 2006). These are the “rationalistic” 
and “design” perspectives (Winograd, 1996). The discourse about these two philosophical 
perspectives or cultures of science and humanities is ongoing over decades beyond the 
development of AI (Snow, 1993). This philosophical divide between the two perspectives was 
present in the early developments of AI, represented by John McCarthy (“rationalistic”) and 
Douglas Engelbart (“design”) (Markoff, 2005; Winograd, 2006).
From the rationalistic perspective, the term AI encompasses the theory and development 
of computer systems that mimic human abilities and perform tasks that require human 
intelligence. AI research focuses on mathematical and technological advancement. People 
are seen as “cognitive machines” (Winograd, 2006; Winograd & Flores, 1986). The role of 
this perspective in the research of AI is the advancement of the understanding of statistical 
language, neural networks, and machine learning that form the adaptive mechanisms of AI 
(Winograd, 1996).
The design perspective views AI as a problem-solving tool to advance people’s capabilities 
and improve human conditions. The design perspective focuses on the interaction or 
involvement of the human with the computer (Winograd, 1996; Winograd & Flores, 1986). 
This perspective sees human thought and human physical embodiment as inseparable 
(Dreyfus, 1992; McKim, 1972). The benefit of the design perspective is that it allows coping