1323
Human-centered AI: The role of Human-centered Design Research in the development of AIThis HCD research approach has two directions in the development of AI systems. Companies 
utilize the persuasive ability of AI systems to “hook” users to make highly profitable products 
(Eyal & Hoover, 2014). The other is that this HCD research provides increased knowledge 
about persuasive computers allowing people to adopt such technologies to enhance their 
own lives and recognize when technologies are using tactics to persuade them (Fogg, 
1998). Researchers investigated AI systems such as robotic agents and ambient intelligence 
for the persuasive ability (e.g., Midden & Ham, 2008; Verbeek, 2009). Berdichevsky & 
Neuenschwander (1999) outlined a framework to consider and minimize ethical abuse 
of persuasive technologies. However, to be able to identify actual motivational strategies 
employed in AI technology, studying how the strategies work is required (Orji & Moffatt, 
2016). Researching AI systems through this HCD research approach incorporates the 
examination of the AI system design and people’s behavioral changes within everyday life.
3.7 Human-Centered Computing and Artificial Intelligence research
A move away from human-machine interactions to the design of “interspaces,” as described 
by Winograd (1997), is Human-Centered Computing . Interspaces incorporate people’s 
lifestyles and the system design as present in everyday life of people (Hallnäs & Redström, 
2002). In this approach, intelligence is viewed as an attribute of the combination of human-
machine-context (Ford, Hayes, Glymour, & Allen, 2015; Hoffman, Hayes, & Ford, 2001). 
Figure 8  illustrates this combination. 
 
Figure 8 Illustrates the interrelation of human-computer-context. Artificial intelligence exists only 
within this relationship and not only in the computer or the interactions. 
This HCD research approach requires integrating diverse views including computer science, 
psychology, and design to understand the context and situated cognition and action of 
people using AI systems (Brezillon, 2003; Ford et al., 2015; Hoffman, Roesler, & Moon, 2004; 
Jaimes, Sebe, & Gatica-Perez, 2006). This approach produces better social outcomes than 
traditional conceptions of AI as it complements rather than substitutes human intelligence 
in systems (Hoffman, Hayes, Ford, & Bradshaw, 2012). Research through a Human-centered 
Computing lens contributes by understanding the influences of an AI system in people’s 
everyday life, including their replacement and constraint of their capabilities and freedoms. 
3.8 Need-Design Response and Artificial Intelligence research
The final HCD approach is the Need-Design Response , which is based on the work of 
McKim (1959, 1980). McKim (1959) expressed that every design is a response to a human