1320AUERNHAMMER
the designer’s responsibilities in the design choices made that impact society, as emphasized 
by Papanek (1973). The designer is the translator of societal needs into an AI systems 
design, as illustrated in Figure 3. Examining the socio-economical system as well as the role 
and intent of designers allows identifying underlying values and motivation of specific AI 
solutions. . 
Figure 3 Illustrates the intent and role of designers in the translation of societal needs to an 
AI system. Examining the socio-economical system as well as the role and intent of 
designers allows identifying underlying values and motivation of specific AI solutions. 
Researching AI through this HCD approach allows investigating the intention, decision 
making, and responsibilities of designers in the development and implementation of the 
AI system. This investigation includes the socio-economical processes underpin designers’ 
choices. For example, Facebook’s business model of targeted advertisement drives the 
design and implementation of the AI that generates user engagement by filtering content, 
which impacted democratic elections (Eisenstat, 2019). Such AI systems employed on 
social media platforms have ethical consequences that need to be considered and resolved 
(Kane, 2019). Examining if the AI system and business models aim to replace or enhance 
people provide insights about the values and role of the designer in society (Norman, 2017). 
Examining the socio-economic and political processes in which the designer is embedded, 
as well as the intention choices made, can make underlying motivation and values explicit. 
Designers need to recognize their role, ideology, and socio-economical processes in which 
they are embedded for the design of AI systems beneficial for society. An HCD approach that 
can overcome the isolated viewpoint of the designer is Participatory Design.
3.3 Participatory Design and Artificial Intelligence research
Participatory Design  focuses on the democratization of participation in systems design 
(Bodker, 1996; Ehn & Kyng, 1987). This HCD approach engages in questions of human impact 
such as democracy, power, and control (Ehn, 2017). It enables co-creating with different 
stakeholders (e.g., users, employees, and customers), as illustrated in Figure 4 Illustrates 
the participatory design approach in which the user and other stakeholders are involved in 
the design process. People co-create the design solution. .