1324AUERNHAMMER
need, which is often caused by the natural and cultural environment or context. From this 
perspective, every meaningful AI system design needs to fulfill a need within a specific 
context. This relationship between needs and an AI system in context is illustrated in Figure 
9.
  
Figure 9  Illustrates the “human need design”-relationship. Examining this relationship allows 
understanding the underlying need the AI system addresses.
This HCD research approach allows finding needs and responding through a meaningful 
design (Faste, 1987; McKim, 1959). The approach allows identifying the underlying drivers 
of people’s motivation as described by Maslow (1987) in the use of designed systems such 
as AI. Martelaro & Ju (2017a, 2017b) used a Wizard of Oz prototype to find needs when 
interacting with the AI system in real-world contexts. The need-design relationship reveals 
moral implications in AI. This relationship is assessed as follows: Is the “AI solution,” which 
fulfills the “human need” in the “context” potentially helpful or harmful? For example, 
should a financial AI system fulfill the need  for entertainment  by providing a game-based 
bank account? Such an AI system can easily persuade unhealthy economic behavior. In 
particular, addressing emotional needs can be highly profitable and requires high morality, 
as not all human needs are good needs (McKim, 1959). This HCD research approach enables 
making underlying needs explicit that the AI system design addresses. This approach 
becomes of particular relevance when AI systems are able to model socio-cultural specific 
expectations and behavior of people to predict human needs (Riedl, 2019).
4. HCD research for human-centered Artificial Intelligence  
Each of the outlined HCD research approaches provides a specific perspective and 
contribution to the examination of ethical AI, as outlined in Table 1 .
Human-centered Systems  and Social Design  provide a societal level of analysis. The first 
examines the changes in the social organization resulting from the AI implementation and 
use. Social Design examines the processes that give rise to AI systems, including the role of 
the designer. Both approaches provide an understanding of the political, socio-economical, 
and ideological dynamics in the design, development, and use of specific AI systems. Moral 
considerations include changes in social organization that disadvantage people and business 
models that drive the use of AI out of self-interest. Making these concerns and implications 
explicit and transparent is one aspect of Human-centered AI.
Participatory Design  and Inclusive Design  are approaches that address some of the concerns 
identified in Human-centered Systems and Social Design. The participation of stakeholders