1328AUERNHAMMER
Figure 11 Illustrates a comprehensive design approach that incorporates rationalistic AI technology 
development, humanistic AI design, and legal guidelines for new emergent technologies 
based on the examination of human impact through HCD research. 
6. Conclusion and outlook  
This article provided an overview of different Human-centered Design  approaches and their 
contribution to the development of Human-centered AI. The discussed HCD approaches 
illustrate that human-centered AI has essential to do with people, including the designer, 
user, and other stakeholders and their ideologies, practices, activities, interactions, and 
needs. Pan-disciplinary research that combines fields such as psychology, cognitive science, 
computer science, engineering, business management, law, and design is required to develop 
a genuinely human-centered AI approach.
Educators need to develop pan-disciplinary programs that enable students to understand 
both the humanistic and rationalistic perspective and are able to collaborate by 
understanding the technological, societal, and political and policy perspectives and 
challenges incorporated in the design, development, and use of AI. This educational 
approach has the promise of designing AI systems and technology that create delightful 
experiences for people in their everyday life by developing empathetic and creative designers 
and technologists that combine these viewpoints. 
Pan-disciplinary research holds the opportunity to examine the impact of AI on society as 
well as spark new meaningful innovation for people. For design researchers, an essential 
task is the development of fruitful experiments for each societal concern in the design, 
development, and use of AI systems and technology.
Vitruvius Pollio (1914), in approximately 20-30 BC, believed that an architect should focus 
on three central themes when preparing a design for a building: firmitas (strength), utilitas 
(functionality), and venustas (beauty). Today, Human-centered AI needs to focus on three 
integrated perspectives when designing AI systems: rationalistic (technology), humanistic 
(people), and judicial (policies).