Entropy 2021 ,23, 881 3 of 19
addition, QF=10is regarded in this example as the lowest compression quality accept-
able to humans.) We associate each original image in the ILSVRC 2012 dataset with its
10 compressed versions, each compressed version corresponding to a different QF from
f100, 90, 80, 70, 60, 50, 40, 30, 20, 10 g. For each image, there are now 11 different versions:
1 original version and 10 compressed versions. As shown in Figure 2, for each original im-
ageI, we now have freedom to select one version Ijout of its 11 versions Ii,i=0, 1,, 10,
to be fed into the DNN. Is there any selector that can select, for each original image I, a
suitable version Ijto be fed into the DNN so that both the Top 1 classiﬁcation accuracy and
Top 5 classiﬁcation accuracy of the DNN can be improved signiﬁcantly while the size (in
bits) of the input image to the DNN can be reduced dramatically in general?
SelectorI0=I
JPEG
QF=100
JPEG
QF=90
...
JPEG
QF=10DNNI0
I1
I2
I10Ij P I
Figure 2. Selection of a compressed version of an image as an input to a given DNN, where Pis the
prediction vector of the DNN in response to the chosen Ij.
One of our purposes in this paper is to settle the above question. We show that
the answer to the above question turns out to be positive. Therefore, in contrast to the
conventional understanding, compression, if used in the right manner, actually improves
the classiﬁcation accuracy of a DNN signiﬁcantly while also reducing dramatically the
number of bits needed to be fed into the DNN. Speciﬁcally, a DNN pre-trained with pristine
ImageNet images is ﬁxed. That is, the DNN is trained with the original images in the
training set of the ILSVRC 2012 dataset. Suppose that the ground truth label of each original
image Iis known to the selector in Figure 2, but it is unknown to the DNN. Under this
assumption, we propose a selector called Highest Rank Selector (HRS). For each original
image I, HRS works as follows. Examine the prediction vector Piof the DNN in response
to each version Ii; determine the rank of the ground truth label in the sorted Pi, where
labels in Piare sorted according to their probabilities in descending order with rank 1 being
the highest ranking; and then select the compressed version Ijas the desired input to the
DNN if the rank of the ground truth label in the sorted Pjis the highest among all sorted
Pi, where, in the case of tie, HRS selects the compressed version with the lowest QF. It can
be shown that, among all selectors one could possibly design, HRS achieves the highest
Top 1 and Top 5 classiﬁcation accuracy and hence is optimal. When applied to Inception
V3 and ResNet-50 V2 architectures pre-trained with pristine ImageNet images [ 32,33], HRS
improves, on average, the Top 1 classiﬁcation accuracy by 5.6% and the Top 5 classiﬁcation
accuracy by 1.9% on the whole ImageNet validation set. In addition, compared with the
original image, the compressed version selected by HRS also achieves, on average, the CR
of 8.
When the ground truth label of each input image is unknown to the selector in
Figure 2 as well, HRS is not applicable. To demonstrate that compression still improves the
classiﬁcation accuracy of DL in this case, we propose a new convolutional neural network
(CNN) topology based on a given DNN. Consider the main architecture of the DNN
without its last fully connected layer. As shown in Figure 12, the new CNN topology based
on the given DNN consists of 11 parallel main architectures of the DNN followed by the
last fully connected layer at which the logit blocks from the 11 parallel main architectures
are concatenated. The original image and its 10 compressed versions are inputs to the