Entropy 2021 ,23, 881 2 of 19
and data processing/utilization, the raw data fed into a DL machine are not “raw”; instead,
they are generally compressed in a lossy manner. Since lossy compression is about the
trade-off between compression ratio (CR) and compression quality, many versions of
compressed raw data in the context of DL can be produced with each version having a
different compression ratio and compression quality. This in turn brings forth the following
interesting question to DL:
Question 1 Which version of compressed raw data is good for DL and its related applications?
In practice, images are often compressed by JPEG encoders [ 17–19]. For most practical
applications with JPEG, both the CR and compression quality of a JPEG image are controlled
by a parameter called the quality factor (QF); the higher is the QF, the lower is the CR and
the better is the compression quality. With the maximum value of QF at 100, the majority
of JPEG images in the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) 2012
dataset [ 20,21] have high QF values ranging from 91 to 100, implying that they all have
high compression quality.
In the literature, Question 1 is investigated to some extent on the basis of con-
stant QFs which are the same for all images in a whole set of JPEG images [ 22–27], as
shown in Figure 1 . Speciﬁcally, four deep neural network (DNN) models were tested
byDodge et al. [23] on a subset of the validation set of the ILSVRC 2012 dataset [ 20]. To
evaluate the impact of compression on the classiﬁcation performance of these four DNN
models, all images in the subset were further compressed by JPEG with the same constant
QF. These compressed images with the constant QF were then fed into each of these four
DNN models. Both the Top 1 classiﬁcation accuracy and the Top 5 classiﬁcation accu-
racy were recorded. As the value of the constant QF decreases, the curves of the Top 1
classiﬁcation accuracy vs. QF and the Top 5 classiﬁcation accuracy vs. QF were plotted
byDodge et al. [23] in the QF range from 20 to 2. It was shown by Dodge et al. [23] that
both the Top 1 classiﬁcation accuracy and the Top 5 classiﬁcation accuracy of each of the
four DNN models decay as the value of the constant QF decreases. This phenomenon of
negative impact of compression on the classiﬁcation performance of DNN models was also
reported by Liu et al. [27].
JPEG
Constant
QFDNNOriginal image
IPrediction vector
Figure 1. A DNN with a JPEG compressed version of an image as an input, where QF is a constant.
To alleviate the negative impact of JPEG compression on the classification performance of
DNN models to some extent, several methods were proposed in the literature, including data
augmentation, stability training, and due-channel training with preprocessing [24,27–31] .For
example, stability training was proposed by Zheng et al. [24], where, during the training
stage of a DNN model, both the original image and its distorted version are fed into the
model, and training is performed to minimize a modiﬁed cost function which takes stability
into consideration. Although these methods improve the classiﬁcation robustness of DNN
models against JPEG compression and other types of distortion, there is still a signiﬁcant
degradation (as high as 10%) in the classiﬁcation accuracy when these newly trained DNN
models are applied to low-quality JPEG compressed images. Based on these ﬁndings,
it is generally believed that compression, especially JPEG compression, would hurt the
classiﬁcation accuracy of deep learning in image classiﬁcation.
In this paper, we investigate Question 1 in the context of JPEG compression from
a different perspective. Instead of using a constant QF in JPEG compression for all im-
ages in the ILSVRC 2012 dataset, we would allow each image to be compressed ﬁrst
with a possibly different QF and then fed into a DNN. Speciﬁcally, let QF take values
fromf100, 90, 80, 70, 60, 50, 40, 30, 20, 10 g(This set of QF values is simply used as an ex-
ample. The idea of this paper, however, can be applied to any set of QF values. In