Entropy 2021 ,23, 881 7 of 19
improved. In addition, if a highly compressed version is selected most of the time, then the
size in bits of the input is also reduced dramatically in comparison with the original image.
The question, of course, is how to select such a compressed version, which is addressed in
the next section when the GT label of the image is known to the selector.
3. Highest Rank Selector
With reference to Figure 2, in this section, we assume that the GT label of each original
image is known to the selector, but unknown to the underlying DNN. We present Highest
Rank Selector (HRS) and demonstrate its optimality in the sense of achieving the highest
classiﬁcation accuracy for a given underlying DNN among all possible selectors. We also
provide empirical analysis on the performance of HRS in terms of classiﬁcation accuracy
improvement and compression ratio for Inception V3 and ResNet-50 V2 pre-trained with
the original images in the training set of the ILSVRC 2012 dataset.
3.1. HRS and Its Optimality
An underlying DNN is fixed. As illustrated in Figure 2, each original image Iis
now associated with 11JPEG compressed images (including the original image itself) Ii,
i=0, 1,, 10. Let Pidenote the prediction vector of the underlying DNN in response
to the input Ii. HRS now works as follows:
Step 1 For each 0i10, determine the rank riof the GT label of Iin the sorted Pi,
where labels in Piare sorted according to their probabilities in descending order with
rank 1 being the highest ranking.
Step 2 Select Ijas an input to the underlying DNN if and only if
rj=minfri: 0i10g (1)
where, whenever there are multiple is achieving the above minimum, jis selected to
be the largest among those is.
Example 1. Let the underlying DNN be Inception V3 pre-trained with the original images in the
training set of the ILSVRC 2012 dataset. For Image # 651, in view of Figure 4 , HRS selects I10, the
JPEG compressed image with QF = 10 as an input to the underlying DNN. For Image # 37, the
same is true as well since, for Image # 37, r 10is the smallest, as shown again in Figure 4.
For any selector S, let PS(I)denote the prediction vector at the output of the system
shown in Figure 2 with Sas the selector in response to I. Let rS(I)be the rank of the
GT label of Iin the sorted PS(I). For any set of images A, let AS(k)denote the Top k
classiﬁcation accuracy of the system shown in Figure 2 with Sas the selector on the image
setA. For convenience, AS(k)is referred to as the Top kaccuracy of the selector Son
the image setAas well in the rest of the paper. The following theorem implies that HRS
achieves the highest Top kaccuracy on any image set Aamong all possible selectors, and
hence is optimal.
Theorem 1. For any image setA, any selector S, and any k, the following holds
AHRS(k)AS(k) (2)
Proof of Theorem 1. For any image I2A, it follows from (1) that
rHRS(I)rS(I)
which further implies
fI2A :rHRS(I)kgf I2A :rS(I)kg