Entropy 2021 ,23, 881 14 of 19
to the 1000 classes of ImageNet. To alleviate the over-ﬁtting problem [ 15] and reduce the
training complexity, parameters are shared across the 11 parallel main architectures. In
other words, the 11 parallel main architectures including their weight parameters inside
Figure 12 are identical to each other. This design is also consistent with the architecture in
HRS, where the same underlying DNN is used for all selected inputs, regardless of which
of the original input image and its 10 JPEG compressed versions is selected.
It is worth pointing out the difference between the above design philosophy and data
augmentation. In data augmentation, there is no change in the network architecture itself;
however, the underlying DNN is trained over an augmented training set which includes
original images as well as their JPEG compressed versions. On the other hand, in the
above design, there are fundamental changes in the network architecture; however, the
new network topology is still trained over the original training set which contains only
original images.
Furthermore, it is important to compare between the proposed network design and
Siamese networks. Although both network designs have shared weights in the earlier
architecture layers, there are some differences. The purpose of our proposed network design
is to improve the classiﬁcation accuracy of underlying subsequent DNN by inputting the
the original input image and its 10 JPEG compressed versions as 11 parallel inputs. The
objective function used is the cross entropy loss between the the one hot encoding of
the ground truth label and predicted softmaxed logits. Architecture-wise, the proposed
topology concatenates the embeddings of 11 parallel inputs to classify the input. However,
the purpose of the Siamese network is often comparing different input samples, where the
objective function is not to classify input images but to differentiate between them. This
objective function is typically deﬁned as the Euclidean distance between the outputs of the
sister siamese networks, where embeddings are not concatenated as the proposed topology.
4.2. Training Methodology
We trained our proposed topology with stochastic gradient descent (SGD) utilizing
the TensorFlow machine learning platform [ 34]. Our proposed topology used multi-GPU
training via two NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti GPUs that evenly split a training batch size
of 100 for 20 epochs. We utilized the publicly available pre-trained models for Inception V3
and ResNet-50 V2 [ 32,33] as base models for our proposed CNN topology. For each model,
we initialized the learning rate to 0.01 to train the last logit layer with random weights while
freezing all its previous modules. When the validation error reaches a plateau with the
current learning rate, we stopped the training of the current layer and decayed the learning
rate by a factor of 10. Using this reduced learning rate, we incrementally unfroze modules
and initialized them with pre-trained weights while using the weights of the previously
trained layers. Standard weight decay and batch normalization schemes were applied for
Inception V3 and ResNet-50 V2 architectures [ 9,35]. Inception V3 and ResNet-50 V2 model
evaluations were performed using a running average of the parameters computed over
time. We decided to halt the training process at the fourth block in Inception V3 and at
the second block in ResNet-50 V2 due to limited resources with respect to the amount of
memory required by our topology.
4.3. Experimental Results
Table 3 shows the Top 1 accuracy and the Top 5 accuracy of our proposed new topology
with Inception V3 as its underlying DNN on the whole ImageNet Validation dataset after
our proposed new topology was trained for respective layers. In Table 3, “Default” refers
to Inception V3 pre-trained with the original images in the training set of the ILSVRC 2012
dataset. The corresponding Top 1 accuracy and Top 5 accuracy results of our proposed
new topology with ResNet-50 V2 as its underlying DNN are illustrated in Table 4. Again,
in Table 4, “Default” refers to ResNet-50 V2 pre-trained with the original images in the
training set of the ILSVRC 2012 dataset. Both tables show that our proposed new CNN
topology can consistently improve the Top 1 accuracy of Inception V3 and ResNet-50 V2