Entropy 2021 ,23, 881 17 of 19
Table 8. Compression ratio results of T1K, T5K, and TTK for the whole ImageNet validation dataset
with ResNet-50 V2 as the underlying DNN.
Selector Default Size New Size CR
(GB) (GB)
T1K 6.7 0.76 8.8 
T5K 6.7 1.9 3.5 
TTK 6.7 2.0 3.3 
These results demonstrate the advantage of selectors in Figure 2 in terms of input
storage savings while roughly maintaining the classiﬁcation accuracy of the underlying
DNN. Applications that require long-term storage of multimedia such as image surveillance
will beneﬁt from these selectors.
6. Conclusions
In this paper, we formulate a new framework to investigate the impact of JPEG
compression on deep learning (DL) in image classiﬁcation. An underlying deep neural
network (DNN) pre-trained with pristine ImageNet images is ﬁxed. For any original
image, the framework allows one to select, among many JPEG compressed versions of the
original image including possibly the original image itself, a suitable version as an input
to the underlying DNN. It was demonstrated that, within the framework, a selector can
be designed so that the classiﬁcation accuracy of the underlying DNN can be improved
signiﬁcantly, while the size in bits of the selected input is, on average, reduced dramatically
in comparison with the original image. Therefore, compression, if used in the right manner,
helps DL in image classiﬁcation, which is in contrast to the conventional understanding
that JPEG compression generally degrades the classiﬁcation accuracy of DL.
In the case where the ground truth label of the original image is known to the selector
but unknown to the underlying DNN, a selector called Highest Ranking Selector (HRS) is
presented and shown to be optimal in the sense of achieving the highest Top kaccuracy on
any set of images for any kamong all possible selectors. When the selection is made among
the original image and its 10 JPEG compressed versions with their quality factor (QF) values
ranging from 100 to 10 with a step size of 10, HRS improves, on average, the Top 1 accuracy
and Top 5 accuracy of Inception V3 and ResNet-50 on the whole ImageNet validation set
by 5.6% and 1.9%, respectively, while reducing the input size in bits dramatically—the
compression ratio (CR) between the size of the original images and the size of the selected
input images by HRS is 8 for the whole ImageNet validation dataset.
In the case where the ground truth label of the original image is unknown to the
selector as well, we also propose a new convolutional neural network (CNN) topology
which is based on the underlying DNN and takes the original image and its 10 JPEG
compressed versions as 11 parallel inputs. It was demonstrated that the proposed new
CNN topology, even when partially trained, can consistently improve the Top 1 accuracy of
Inception V3 and ResNet-50 V2 by approximately 0.4% and the Top 5 accuracy of Inception
V3 and ResNet-50 V2 by 0.32% and 0.2%, respectively.
Selectors without the knowledge of the ground truth label of the original image are
also proposed. They maintain the Top 1 accuracy, Top 5 accuracy, or Top 1 and Top 5
accuracy of the underlying DNN. It was shown that, when applied to Inception V3 and
ResNet-50, these selectors achieve CRs of 8.8, 3.3, and 3.1, respectively, for the whole
ImageNet validation dataset.
The results in this paper could motivate further developments in at least two directions.
First, it would be desirable to develop new compression theory and algorithms for DL
to achieve good trade-offs among the compression rate, compression distortion, and
classiﬁcation accuracy, where the compression distortion is for human, and the classiﬁcation
accuracy is for DL machines. Second, the results in this paper imply that the current CNN
classiﬁers are not smart enough and behave as a short-sighted person—if the main features