Fig. 2: A schematic of the manuscript. We discuss all versions of YOLO, with comparative analysis. Applications in
key areas; such as, autonomous vehicles, and security and surveillance are also presented. Challenges in each YOLO
version, with performance enhancements, are also highlighted, we also provide visionary thoughts on the future impact
of YOLO on industry and society.
performance and efficiency. YOLOv6 introduces three main
variants: the standard version, balancing accuracy and speed
for general detection tasks; YOLOv6-Nano, optimized for real-
time applications with a focus on speed and performance on
edge devices; and YOLOv6-Tiny, designed for even faster in-
ference on low-resource hardware, trading off some accuracy.
YOLOv7 [106], [107] introduces advanced techniques like
trainable bag-of-freebies (optimizations that improve accuracy
without increasing inference cost) and dynamic label assign-
ment. It introduces three variants: the standard version, balanc-
ing speed and accuracy; YOLOv7-X, a more powerful variant
optimized for performance but requiring more computational
resources; and YOLOv7-Tiny, a lightweight version designed
for real-time applications on edge devices, prioritizing speed
over accuracy.
YOLOv8 released in 2023 by Ultralytics [108]. It features a
more efficient architecture, enhanced training techniques, and
support for larger datasets. Its user-friendly implementation in
PyTorch makes it accessible for both research and production.
YOLOv8 introduces four variants: YOLOv8-S, optimized for
fast inference on edge devices with some accuracy trade-offs;
YOLOv8-M, balancing accuracy and speed for general tasks;
YOLOv8-L, prioritizing accuracy at the cost of computational
demand; and YOLOv8-Tiny, a lightweight version for real-
time applications.
YOLOv9 [109] proposed the concept of programmablegradient information (PGI) to cope with the various changes
required by deep networks to achieve multiple objectives. PGI
can provide complete input information for the target task to
calculate objective function, so that reliable gradient informa-
tion can be obtained to update network weights. In addition, a
new lightweight network architecture – Generalized Efficient
Layer Aggregation Network (GELAN), based on gradient path
planning is designed. GELAN’s architecture confirms that
PGI has gained superior results on lightweight models. We
verified the proposed GELAN and PGI on MS COCO dataset
based object detection. Its variants are YOLOv9t, YOLOv9s,
YOLOv9m, YOLOv9c, YOLOv9e [110].
YOLOv10 [111], developed by researchers at Tsinghua
University, introduces a novel approach to real-time object
detection, addressing the limitations of both post-processing
and model architecture in previous YOLO versions. By elimi-
nating non-maximum suppression (NMS) and optimizing key
components of the model, YOLOv10 offers significant im-
provements in efficiency and performance. As the penultimate
version in the YOLO series, it introduces six distinct variants
as YOLOv10-N, YOLOv10-S, YOLOv10-M, YOLOv10-B,
YOLOv10-L, and YOLOv10-X [112] Notably, YOLOv10-
N and YOLOv10-S exhibit the lowest latencies at 1.84 ms
and 2.49 ms, respectively, making them highly suitable for
applications requiring low latency. These models outperform
their predecessors, with YOLOv10-X achieving the highest