IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 29, 2021 9
(a)
(b)
Fig. 7. (a) Visualization of bottle-neck features extracted by the BNE in the
proposed BNE-Seq2seqMoL VC approach from the utterance “arctic-a0001”
in the CMU ARCTIC dataset with t-SNE. (b) Details of the dashed red box in
(a), where the number represent sequential order of a frame in the bottle-neck
features.
conversion setting are shown in Table I. We can see that
the proposed BNE-Seq2seqMoL approach achieves the best
performance for all the four objective metrics on average.
The PPG-VC approach has the worst F0-RMSE among the
four approaches, which veriﬁes that conversion by frame-wise
mapping has constrained capability to model prosody during
the conversion. Comparing the NonParaSeq2seq-VC and the
Seq2seqPR-DurIAN approaches, which have similar model
architectures, we can see that the re-designed Seq2seqPR-
DurIAN has superior results for all four metrics on average.
The NonParaSeq2seq-VC has signiﬁcantly worse CER and
WER among the approaches, and preliminary listening test
ﬁnds that there exists repeating, skipping and truncation phe-
nomena in the converted speech. This implies that injecting a
duration model, which provides explicit phone-level durational
information, makes the conversion more robust. Comparingthe results from PPG-VC with those from BNE-Seq2seqMoL
shows that the auto-regressive property of the latter can boost
VC performance across the four objective metrics.
The objective evaluation results in the any-to-any voice
conversion setting are presented in Table II. We can see
that the PPG-VC approach has the best results in terms of
MFC, CER and WER. The proposed BNE-Seq2seqMoL gave
lowest F0-RMSE among the four approaches and obtains good
results for MCD, CER and WER. Note that the models are
trained using a combination of the VCTK training set and
the large LibriTTS (train-clean-100, train-clean-360) dataset,
which contains much more training data than in the any-to-
many setting. This indicates that using more training data
can overcome the deﬁciency of independent prediction across
frames in the PPG-VC approach.
E. Subjective evaluations
Subjective evaluation in terms of both the naturalness and
speaker similarity of converted speech are conducted6. We use
the 5 point Likert scale for testing with mean opinion score
(MOS) (1-bad, 2-poor, 3-fair, 4-good, 5-excellent) regarding
both naturalness and speaker similarity evaluations. In the
MOS tests for evaluating naturalness, each group of stimuli
contains recording samples from the target speakers, which
are randomly shufﬂed with the samples generated by the four
comparative approaches, before they are presented to listeners.
In the MOS similarity tests, converted speech samples are
directly compared with the recording samples of the target
speakers. 10 utterances from the CMU ARCTIC test set are
presented for each conversion pair (i.e., F-M, F-F, M-M and
M-F). We invited 35 raters who are proﬁcient in English to
participate in the evaluations in a quiet room and they were
asked to use headphones during the tests. The raters were
allowed to replay each sample as many times as necessary
and change their ratings of any sample before submitting their
results.
The subjective MOS evaluation results for the any-to-many
voice conversion setting are shown in Table III. We can see
that the proposed BNE-Seq2seqMoL approach achieves the
best average results in terms of both naturalness and speaker
similarity. More speciﬁcally, for the pairs of F-F, M-M, F-M,
the proposed model achieve better performance. While for the
pair of M-F, Seq2seqPR-DurIAN provides better result. The
possible reason might be that the simple linear transformation
in logarithm scale used by the BNE-Seq2seqMoL approach
(see Eq. (13)) can not adequately model the actual male-to-
female pitch conversion; and this can also be reﬂected by the
high F0 RMSE (i.e., 7.18) between the converted and reference
speech as shown in Table I. In any-to-any conversion, we
only conduct MOS tests for the proposed BNE-Seq2seqMoL
approach. The results are presented in Table IV. According
to the absolute MOS values, we can see that the proposed
approach also achieves good VC performance in the one-
shot/few-shot voice conversion setting.
6Audio demo and source codes can be found in https://liusongxiang.github.
io/BNE-Seq2SeqMoL-VC/.