IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 29, 2021 7
for test set, while the remaining utterances are for train set.
The CMU ARCTIC database contains 1132 parallel recordings
of English speakers. Data from four speakers are used: two
female (clb and slt) and two male (bdl and rms). We choose 50
utterances for validation and another 50 utterances for testing.
We randomly choose non-overlapped 250 utterances from the
remaining utterances for each of the four speakers respectively,
such that they do not have parallel utterances during training.
For any-to-any voice conversion, we use LibriSpeech (train-
other-500), V oxCeleb1 [41] and V oxCeleb2 [42] datasets to
train the speaker encoder introduced in Section III-C and
Seciton IV-D. In total, there are more than 8K speakers,
such that we expect the speaker encoder can generalize to
any unseen speaker. LibriTTS (train-clean-100 and train-clean-
360) dataset [43] together with the training set of VCTK
corpus is used to train the synthesis models of the Seq2seqPR-
DurIAN and BNE-Seq2seqMoL approaches. The CMU ARC-
TIC database is used only for the conversion stage in this
setting. That is, the four speakers (bdl, clb, rms and slt) are
all unseen during the training procedure. This simulates voice
conversion from an arbitrary source speaker to an arbitrary
target speaker, which forms a pilot version of any-to-any
conversion.
B. Features and neural vocoder model
Speech signals used in this paper are all re-sampled
to 16kHz if the original sampling rate is different. Spec-
tral features are all 80-dimensional log mel-spectrograms
except that the speaker encoder takes 40-dimensional log
mel-spectrograms as input. The 80-dimensional log mel-
spectrograms are computed using 50ms Hanning window
and 10ms frame shift, while the 40-dimensional ones are
computed using 25ms Hanning window and 10ms frame shift.
We use the PyWorld toolkit2to extract F0s from speech
signals and Log-F0s are obtained by taking logarithm on the
linearly interpolated F0s. We use the open-source Montreal-
forced-aligner (MFA) [44] to obtain the phoneme-level dura-
tional information when training the synthesis model in the
Seq2seqPR-DurIAN approach.
In this paper, the WaveRNN network [45] is used as the
neural vocoder. The speech waveform is -law quantized into
512-way categorical distributions. The open-sourced Pytorch
implementation is used.3Since the mel-spectrograms capture
all of the relevant details needed for high quality speech
synthesis, we simply use ground-truth mel-spectrograms from
multiple speakers to train the WaveRNN, without adding
any speaker identity representations. We only use the VCTK
training set to train the WaveRNN model.
C. Comparisons
Four VC approaches are compared with experiments for
any-to-many conversion, as well as extending to any-to-any
conversion. We compare the proposed Seq2seqPR-DurIAN
and BNE-Seq2seqMoL approaches with another two recently
2https://github.com/JeremyCCHsu/Python-Wrapper-for-World-V ocoder
3https://github.com/fatchord/WaveRNNproposed approaches, namely, the PPG-based VC and the non-
parallel seq2seq VC, as introduced in Section I. The details
of their implementation are presented below.
PPG-VC : This baseline approach has a network architecture
similar to the N10 system [46] in VCC2018 [47]. As shown
in Fig. 1 a, this approach consists of a PPG extractor and a
multi-speaker conversion model. The PPG extractor adopts an
RNN-based model structure, which contains 5 bidirectional
gated recurrent unit (GRU) layers with 512 hidden units
per direction. The multi-speaker conversion model also has
an RNN structure, which consists of 4 bidirectional LSTM
layers with 256 hidden units per direction. In any-to-many
conversion, the speaker identity is presented as an one-hot
vector and an additional speaker embedding table is learned
together with other parts of the conversion model. The speaker
embedding vector has a size of 256, and is concatenated
with PPGs frame-by-frame. The conversion model is trained
with the VCTK and CMU ARCTIC training splits mentioned
in Section V-A. In any-to-any conversion, the same speaker
encoder introduced in Section III-C is used to generate speaker
vectors from mel-spectrograms. This setting is similar to the
one in our prior work [48], except that the i-vectors and
learned speaker embedding vectors are used as speaker identity
representations there. We use LibriTTS (train-clean-100 and
train-clean-360) dataset together with the training set of VCTK
corpus to train the conversion model.
The PPG extractor is obtained from a frame-wise phoneme
recognizer, which is trained with the LibriSpeech dataset
(960 hours). We ﬁrst use the MFA to align the audio and
transcripts at the phoneme level. Then the audio-text alignment
information is used to obtain the frame-to-phoneme correspon-
dence between mel-spectorgrams and phoneme sequences,
with which it is possible to train a frame-wise phoneme
recognizer. We regard the probability vectors after the last
softmax layer as PPG features for one utterance.
NonParaSeq2seq-VC : This baseline approach is proposed
by [13], where disentangled content and speaker representa-
tions are extracted from acoustic features, and voice conver-
sion is achieved by preserving the content representations of
source utterances while replacing the speaker representations
with the target ones. Since there is a speaker encoder which
is jointly trained with the whole model, this approach can
be trivially extended from any-to-many conversion to support
any-to-any conversion. We use the VCTK and CMU ARC-
TIC training splits to train the model for the any-to-many
conversion setting and use the LibriTTS (train-clean-100 and
train-clean-360) dataset together with the training set of VCTK
corpus to train the model for the any-to-any conversion setting.
We use the ofﬁcial implementation released by the authors4in
this study.
D. Objective evaluations
In our experiments, we ﬁnd that the attention alignment
matrices of the MoL attention are nearly diagonal, meaning
that the proposed BNE-Seq2seqMoL system has little model-
ing capacity to effectively transform the duration and speaking
4https://github.com/jxzhanggg/nonparaSeq2seqVC code