IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 29, 2021 1
Any-to-Many V oice Conversion with
Location-Relative Sequence-to-Sequence Modeling
Songxiang Liu, Student Member, IEEE, Yuewen Cao, Student Member, IEEE, Disong
Wang, Student Member, IEEE, Xixin Wu,Member, IEEE, Xunying Liu, Member, IEEE,
and Helen Meng, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —This paper proposes an any-to-many location-
relative, sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq), non-parallel voice con-
version approach, which utilizes text supervision during training.
In this approach, we combine a bottle-neck feature extractor
(BNE) with a seq2seq synthesis module. During the training
stage, an encoder-decoder-based hybrid connectionist-temporal-
classiﬁcation-attention (CTC-attention) phoneme recognizer is
trained, whose encoder has a bottle-neck layer. A BNE is obtained
from the phoneme recognizer and is utilized to extract speaker-
independent, dense and rich spoken content representations from
spectral features. Then a multi-speaker location-relative attention
based seq2seq synthesis model is trained to reconstruct spectral
features from the bottle-neck features, conditioning on speaker
representations for speaker identity control in the generated
speech. To mitigate the difﬁculties of using seq2seq models to
align long sequences, we down-sample the input spectral feature
along the temporal dimension and equip the synthesis model
with a discretized mixture of logistic (MoL) attention mechanism.
Since the phoneme recognizer is trained with large speech
recognition data corpus, the proposed approach can conduct any-
to-many voice conversion. Objective and subjective evaluations
show that the proposed any-to-many approach has superior
voice conversion performance in terms of both naturalness and
speaker similarity. Ablation studies are conducted to conﬁrm the
effectiveness of feature selection and model design strategies in
the proposed approach. The proposed VC approach can readily
be extended to support any-to-any VC (also known as one/few-
shot VC), and achieve high performance according to objective
and subjective evaluations.
Index Terms —any-to-many, voice conversion, location relative
attention, sequence-to-sequence modeling
I. I NTRODUCTION
VOICE conversion (VC) aims to convert the non-linguistic
information of a speech utterance while keeping the
linguistic content unchanged. The non-linguistic information
may refer to speaker identity, emotion, accent or pronuncia-
tion, to name a few. In this paper, we focus on the problem
of speaker identity conversion. Potential applications of VC
techniques include entertainment, personalized text-to-speech,
pronunciation or accent correction, etc.
Based on the number of source speakers and target speakers
that a single VC system can support, we can categorize
This project is partially supported by a grant from the HKSAR Gov-
ernment’s Research Grants Council General Research Fund (Project no.
14208817).
Songxiang Liu, Yuewen Cao, Disong Wang, Xunying Liu and Helen
Meng are with the Human-Computer Communications Laboratory (HCCL),
the Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
Xixin Wu is with Engineering Department, Cambridge University, UK.
* Corresponding author, contact e-mail: xw369@cam.ac.ukcurrent VC approaches into one-to-one VC, many-to-one
VC, many-to-many VC, any-to-many VC and any-to-any VC.
Conventional VC approaches focus on one-to-one VC, which
requires parallel training data between a pair of source-target
speakers. At the training stage of the conventional VC pipeline,
acoustic features are ﬁrst extracted from the source and target
utterances. The acoustic features of parallel utterances are then
aligned frame-by-frame using alignment algorithms, such as
dynamic time warping (DTW) [1]. A conversion model is
trained to learn the mapping function between time-aligned
source and target acoustic features, which can be Gaussian
mixture models (GMMs) [2, 3], artiﬁcial neural networks
(ANNs) [4–7], etc. These approaches perform frame-wise
conversion on spectral features, i.e., the converted speech has
the same duration as the source speech. This restricts the
modeling of the speaking rate and duration. Recent studies
show that the alignment phase can be surpassed through using
sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) model [8, 9] for direct source-
target acoustic modeling, and this approach can achieve better
VC performance. Since one-to-one VC is limited to supporting
only one particular pair of source and target speakers, VC re-
searchers have explored many-to-one VC approaches to extend
the versatility of VC approaches. Among these approaches, the
one based on phonetic posteriorgrams (PPGs) is widely used
[10–12]. PPGs are computed from an ASR acoustic model
and are often assumed to be speaker-independent content
representations. The many-to-one VC approaches concatenate
a PPG extractor with a target-speaker dependent PPG-to-
acoustic synthesis model. Many approaches have been pro-
posed to further extend VC approaches to support many-to-
many conversion. These techniques can be classiﬁed into two
categories. The ﬁrst category requires text supervision during
training stage. This includes the PPG-based methods and the
non-parallel seq2seq methods [13, 14]. The second category
does not require text supervision. This includes the model
using auto-encoders [15], variational auto-encoders [16], gen-
erative adversarial networks [17–20] and their combinations
[21–23].
This paper focuses on developing an any-to-many VC
approach, which is expected to convert a source speech sig-
nal from an arbitrary speaker to a target speaker appearing
in the training set. Few any-to-many VC approaches have
been reported in the literature. Speciﬁc many-to-many VC
approaches, which can directly be adopted for any-to-many
conversion with text supervision during training stage, include
the many-to-many PPG-based approaches and the non-parallelarXiv:2009.02725v3  [eess.AS]  23 May 2021