IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 29, 2021 2
seq2seq approaches. These approaches have the presumption
that the spoken content feature extractor/encoder in the many-
to-many VC approaches can generalize well to source speakers
that are unseen during training process.
The use of PPGs in any-to-many VC concatenates the
speaker-independent PPG extractor and a multi-speaker frame-
wise feed-forward conversion model, as shown in Fig. 1 (a).
Such an approach has several deﬁciencies: First, the PPG
model is usually trained with the HMM-GMM/DNN-based
phonetic alignments with acoustic features. Since posterior
probability values in PPGs are usually bimodal (with highest
values close to one and other values close to zero), if the
alignments are inaccurate, mis-pronunciations will often oc-
cur downstream in the VC pipeline. Second, the conversion
model usually adopts a feed-forward neural network (e.g.,
a bidirectional LSTM model) which maps PPGs framewise
to acoustic features. Conditioned on the input PPGs, these
conversion models predict each acoustic frame independently.
This is unfavorable in terms of VC performance (especially
for scenarios where training data is sparse), because acoustic
frames in an utterance are highly correlated.
To address the aforementioned deﬁciencies of PPG-based
any-to-many VC approaches, this paper proposes the use of a
different content feature extractor from the PPG model and a
seq2seq auto-regressive synthesis model. We ﬁrst train an end-
to-end hybrid connectionist-temporal-classiﬁcation-attention
(CTC-attention) phoneme recognizer, where the encoder has
a bottle-neck layer. A bottle-neck feature extractor (BNE) is
obtained from the phoneme recognizer and is used to extract
bottle-neck features (BNF) as spoken content representations
of speech signals. To mitigate the difﬁculties of using a
seq2seq model to align the content features and spectral
features, we down-sample the input speech features along
the temporal dimension by a factor of four. We then train a
multi-speaker seq2seq BNF-to-spectral synthesis model, where
each speaker is represented as an one-hot vector. To facilitate
seq2seq modeling, the synthesis model is equipped with a
mixture-of-logistic (MoL) location-relative attention module.
We term this VC approach as BNE-Seq2seqMoL below and
details are presented in Section IV.
The synthesis module in the BNE-Seq2seqMoL apporach
uses one-hot vectors to represent speaker identities. This paper
also explores extending this any-to-many VC approach to
support any-to-any conversion. The main idea is to incorporate
speaker representations into the synthesis module with speaker
embedding vectors which can generalize to unseen speakers.
To achieve this, a speaker encoder is utilized to generate a
ﬁxed-dimensional speaker vector from a speech signal.
The contributions of this paper include: (1) We propose a
novel MoL attention-based seq2seq model for any-to-many
voice conversion. The proposed model can achieve high VC
performance in terms of the naturalness of the generated
speech, as well as its speaker similarity; but the model has
a shorter system pipeline and a simpler training procedure
than other analogous systems. (2) We present a straight-
forward methodology to extend the any-to-many VC approach
to support any-to-any conversion.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of (a) the PPG-based and (b) non-parallel seq2seq
VC approaches.
reviews related work. Section III and IV present a baseline
model and the BNE-Seq2seqMoL approach, respectively. Ex-
periments are described in Section V and Section VI concludes
this paper.
II. R ELATED WORK
A. Attention mechanisms in seq2seq models
Sequence-to-sequence models equipped with attention
mechanism have been very popular in VC and TTS tasks.
The BNE-Seq2seqMoL approach proposed in this paper uses
a location-relative attention mechanism, which is ﬁrst intro-
duced by Graves [24]. Inspired by [25], we incorporate a
discretized mixture of logsitics (MoL) distribution [26] to
model the attention weights in each decoding step in the BNE-
Seq2seqMoL approach. Modiﬁcations are applied to make the
alignment process strictly monotonic. Details are presented in
Section IV-B.
B. A Seq2seq baseline model
As described in Section I, the non-parallel seq2seq ap-
proaches are another class of solutions for any-to-many VC.
They usually cascade a seq2seq ASR model and a multi-
speaker seq2seq synthesis model, as shown in Fig. 1 (b).
These approaches also have several drawbacks despite their
strong sequence modeling ability: First, the pipeline is very
long, which means that the model contains many parameters,
resulting in a complicated and slow training process. Second,
the ASR module usually adopts beam search algorithms to re-
duce recognition errors during inference. This slows down the
conversion process. Third, the multi-speaker seq2seq synthesis
model usually uses an attention module to align the hidden
states of the encoder and decoder. There has been evidence
of instability in this attention-based alignment procedure, as
it may introduce missing or repeating words, incomplete
synthesis, or an inability to generalize to longer utterances
[27]. To make the synthesis more robust, our prior work
[28] incorporates a rhythm model, which guides the explicit
temporal expansion process of the hidden representations