IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 29, 2021 5
Bottle-neck 
Feature 
Extractor  
VGG-PrenetAttention Decoder CTC Module
Mel-spectrogramsPhoneme sequence
Bottle-neck Layer
BiLSTM Encoder
Fig. 4. Illustration of the training process of the bottleneck feature extractor
(BNE) used in the proposed BNE-Seq2seqPR VC approach.
IV-B respectively. The conversion procedure and extension to
any-to-any VC are presented in the later parts of this section.
A. Bottle-neck feature extractor
We obtain a bottle-neck feature extractor from an end-to-end
hybrid CTC-attention phoneme recognizer. The phoneme rec-
ognizer has the same network structure as the one introduced
in Section III-A, except that we incorporate an additional
bottle-neck layer into the recognizer, as illustrated in Fig. 4.
The bottle-neck layer is a fully-connected layer with hidden
size of 256. The training objective is the same as that used
in Section III-A (See Eq. 3). After training, we drop the CTC
module and attention decoder from the phoneme recognizer
and use the remaining part as the bottle-neck feature extractor.
The bottle-neck features computed from speech signals are
regarded as spoken content representations and are presumed
to be speaker-invariant [37].
B. Seq2seqMoL synthesis
The training procedure of the seq2seq based synthesis model
is depicted in Fig. 5. A well-trained BNF extractor presented in
Section IV-A is adopted as an off-line content feature extractor.
The synthesis model can be regarded as an encoder-decoder
model, where the encoder contains two simple networks, i.e.,
a bottle-neck feature prenet and a pitch encoder.
1) Bottle-neck feature prenet and pitch encoder: The bottle-
neck feature prenet contains two bidirectional GRU layers,
which have 256 hidden units per direction. The pitch encoder
employs convolution network structure, which takes contin-
uously interpolated logarithmic F0 (Log-F0) and unvoiced-
voiced ﬂags (UV) features as input. Log-F0s and UVs are
computed with the same frame-shift as the one used to ex-
tract mel-spectrograms. Since the bottle-neck feature extractor
down-samples the mel-spectrograms by a factor of 4 along
Mixture-of-Logistic
Attention Decoder
Mel-spectrograms Log F0 & UV
Pitch EncoderBottle-neck 
featuresBottle-neck
Feature Prenet Speaker 
Representation
Bottle-neck
Feature ExtractorConcatenate
Decoder PrenetPostnet
 Predicted
stop tokensPredicted Mel-spectrogramsFig. 5. Schematic illustration of the training stage of the synthesis model in
the proposed BNE-Seq2seqMoL approach.
the time axis, the bottle-neck features only have a quarter of
the frames in the corresponding Log-F0s or UVs. To make
BNFs, Log-F0s and UVs have the same time resolution, we
also down-sample Log-F0 and UVs by a factor of 4 along time
axis. This is achieved by using two 1-dimensional convolution
layers with a stride of 2, where the hidden-dimension is 256.
To remove possible speaker information, we add an instance
normalization layer without afﬁne transformation after each
convolution layer in the pitch encoder.
The outputs of the pitch encoder and the bottle-neck feature
prenet are added element-wise. In any-to-many conversion,
one-hot vectors are used as the speaker representation, and
an additional speaker embedding table is jointly trained with
the whole synthesis network. Speaker vectors are concatenated
to every frame of the encoder output.
2) MoL attention-based decoder: Decoder of the synthesis
model adopts a similar auto-regressive network structure as
the one used in Tacotron 2, except that a location-relative
discretized mixture of logistics (MoL) attention mechanism
is used.
Let us denote the encoder outputs as fhjg~T
j=1, where ~T=
1
4TandTis the number of frames in the mel-spectrograms.
An attention RNN (Eq. 4) produces hidden state siat decoder
stepi. Then the attention mechanism consumes sito produce
the alignment i2R~T(Eq. 5). The context vector, ci, which
is fed to the decoder RNN, is computed using the alignment
ito produce a weighted average of encoder states fhjg~T
j=1
(Eq. 6). The decoder RNN takes siandcias input, whose
outputdiis used together with the context vector cito produce
mel-spectrogram frames at the current decoder step by a linear