IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 29, 2021 4
VGG-PrenetBiLSTM EncoderAttention Decoder CTC Module
Mel-spectrogramsPhoneme sequence
Fig. 2. Hybrid CTC-attention model structure [30] for phoneme recognition.
where2[0;1]is a hyper-parameter weighting the CTC
objective and the attention objective. In this paper, we set 
to be 0:5.
B. DurIAN synthesis model
The DurIAN synthesis model used in this paper is inspired
by [32], which is trained to predict the mel-spectrogram X
from an input phoneme sequence Y, as shown in Fig. 3.
Attention-based seq2seq TTS models such as Tacotron are
error prone in the alignment procedure, which leads to missing
or repeating words, incomplete synthesis or an inability to
generalize to longer utterances. To address this issue, we
incorporate a duration module into the synthesis model. A
similar idea has been used in [33].
A CBHG encoder [34] is adopted to transform phoneme
sequences into hidden representations. In the state expansion
procedure, the hidden representations are expanded by re-
peating along the temporal axis according to the provided
phoneme-level durational information, such that the expanded
representations have the same number of frames as the spectral
features. An auto-regressive RNN-based TTS decoder is used
to generate mel-spectrograms from the expanded spectral
features, conditioned on the speaker representations (e.g.,
one-hot vectors) to support multi-speaker generation. In the
any-to-many VC setting, the speaker identity is represented
with one-hot vectors. A speaker embedding table is jointly
optimized with the remaining parts of the DurIAN model.
Speaker embedding vectors are appended to every frames of
the expanded encoder hidden representations. Note that in the
any-to-any VC setting, speaker vectors generated from a pre-
trained speaker encoder are used to represent speaker identity.
The details are presented in Section III D. The TTS decoder
has similar network structure as the one in Tacotron 1 [34]. The
only difference is that the attention context concatenated with
the decoder prenet output is replaced with the corresponding
encoder state in the expanded hidden representations. Similar
to Tacotron 1, we make the decoder generate rnon-overlapped
mel-spectrogram frames at each decoding step to accelerate the
training and synthesis.
CBHG
 Encoder
Phoneme 
Sequence
Speaker
RepresentationTTS
Decoder
Duration
moduleState
ExpansionDurationTraining stage
Conversion stage
Predicted 
DurationPredicted 
Mel-spectrogramFig. 3. Duration informed attention network (DurIAN) used in the
Seq2seqPR-DurIAN VC approach.
The duration module employs an RNN-based model which
consists of three BiLSTM layers. The input to the duration
module contains the un-expanded hidden states from the
CBHG encoder and speaker identity representation. As in the
TTS decoder, in the any-to-many VC setting, speakers are
presented with one-hot vectors and a speaker embedding table
is jointly learned with the duration module. In the any-to-
any tasks, speaker vectors from the same speaker encoder
are adopted to represent speaker identity. Speaker vectors are
appended to all frames of the CBHG encoder output.
C. Extension to support any-to-any conversion
To extend the Seq2seqPR-DurIAN to support any-to-any
conversion, we use an additional speaker encoder model to
generate the speaker vector, which is used to condition the
DurIAN synthesis module to generate speech with the identity
of an arbitrary target speaker. The speaker encoder takes
acoustic vector sequence with various number of frames com-
puted from a speech signal and outputs a ﬁxed-dimensional
speaker embedding vector. The DurIAN model uses the
speaker embedding vector computed from a desired target
speaker as auxiliary conditioning to control the vocal identity
of the generated speech. As in [35, 36], we train the speaker
encoder to optimize a generalized end-to-end (GE2E) speaker
veriﬁcation loss. Embeddings of utterances from the same
speaker are expected to have high cosine similarity, while those
from different speakers are distant. The speaker encoder adopts
an LSTM-based model structure, which has 3 layers with 256
hidden nodes, followed by a projection layer of 256 units.
L2-normalized hidden state of the last layer is regarded as the
speaker embedding vector.
IV. BNE-S EQ2SEQMOL-BASED VOICE CONVERSION
The proposed BNE-Seq2seqMoL approach combines a
bottle-neck feature extractor (BNE) with a multi-speaker
mixture of logistic (MoL) attention-based seq2seq synthesis
model. The BNE is used to compute dense and rich content
features from mel-spectrograms, while the MoL attention-
based seq2seq model (Seq2seqMoL) is adopted to generate
mel-spectrograms auto-regressively. Details of the BNE and
the Seq2seqMoL model are presented in Section IV-A and