be either the male or the female form. Addition-
ally, in the ﬁeld of MT, training data often con-
sists of both original and translated parallel texts:
large parts of the texts have already been trans-
lated, which, as studied by Mirkin et al. (2015),
does not preserve the original demographic and
psychometric traits of the author, making it very
hard for a Neural MT (NMT) system to determine
the gender of the author.
With this in mind, a ﬁrst step towards the preser-
vation of author traits would be their integration
into an NMT system. As ‘gender’ manifests itself
not only in the agreement with other words in a
sentence, but also in the choice of context-based
words or on the level of syntactic constructions,
the sets of experiments conducted in this paper
focus on the integration of a gender feature into
NMT for multiple language pairs.
The structure of the paper is the following: re-
lated work is described in Section 2; Section 3 de-
scribes and analyses the datasets that were com-
piled; the experimental setup is discussed in Sec-
tion 4; the results are presented in Section 5; ﬁ-
nally, we conclude and provide some ideas for fu-
ture work in Section 6.
2 Related Work
Differences in the language between male and
female speakers have been studied within vari-
ous ﬁelds related to linguistics, including Natural
Language Processing (NLP) for author proﬁling,
conversational agents, recommendation systems
etc. Mirkin et al. (2015) motivated the need for
more personalized MT. Their experiments show
that MT is detrimental to the automatic recogni-
tion of linguistic signals of traits of the original au-
thor/speaker. Their work suggests using domain-
adaptation techniques to make MT more personal-
ized but does not include any actual experiments
on the inclusion of author traits in MT.
Rabinovich et al. (2017) conducted a series of
experiments on preserving original author traits,
focusing particularly on gender. As suggested
by Mirkin et al. (2015), they treat the person-
alization of Statistical MT (SMT) systems as a
domain-adaptation task treating the female and
male gender as two different domains. They
applied two common simple domain-adaptation
techniques in order to create personalized SMT:
(1) using gender-speciﬁc phrase-tables and lan-
guage models, and (2) using a gender-speciﬁc tun-ing set. Although their models did not improve
over the baseline, their work provides a detailed
analysis of gender traits in human and machine
translation.
Our work is, to the best of our knowledge, the
ﬁrst to attempt building a speaker-informed NMT
system. Our approach is similar to the work of
Sennrich et al. (2016) on controlling politeness,
where some sentence of the training data are fol-
lowed with an ‘informal’ or ‘polite’ tag indicating
the level of politeness expressed.
3 Compilation of Datasets
One of the main obstacles for more personalized
MT systems is ﬁnding large enough annotated
parallel datasets with speaker information. Rabi-
novich et al. (2017) published an annotated paral-
lel dataset for EN–FR and EN–DE. However, for
many other language pairs no sufﬁciently large an-
notated datasets are available.
To address the aforementioned problem, we
published online a collection of parallel corpora
licensed under the Creative Commons Attribu-
tion 4.0 International License for 20 language
pairs (Vanmassenhove and Hardmeier, 2018).2
We followed the approach described by Rabi-
novich et al. (2017) and tagged parallel sentences
from Europarl (Koehn, 2005) with speaker infor-
mation (name, gender, age, date of birth, euroID
and date of the session) by retrieving speaker in-
formation provided by tags in the Europarl source
ﬁles. The Europarl source ﬁles contain informa-
tion about the speaker on the paragraph level and
the ﬁlenames contain the data of the session. By
retrieving the names of the speakers together with
meta-information on the members of the Euro-
pean Parliament (MEPs) released by Rabinovich
et al. (2017) (which includes among others name,
country, date of birth and gender predictions per
MEP), we were able to retrieve demographic an-
notations (gender, age, etc.). An overview of the
language pairs as well as the amount of annotated
parallel sentences per language pair is given in Ta-
ble 1.
3.1 Analysis of the EN–FR Annotated
Dataset
We ﬁrst analysed the distribution of male and fe-
male sentence in our data. In the 10 different
2https://github.com/evavnmssnhv/
Europarl-Speaker-Information