score than the baseline system due to differences
in word choices as in (5) and (6), where both trans-
lations are correct, but the gender-informed sys-
tem picks the preferred variant.
The observations with respect to differences in
word preferences between male and female speak-
ers are in accordance with corpus linguistic stud-
ies, which have shown that gender does not only
have an effect on morphological agreement, but
also manifests itself in other ways as males and
females have different preferences when it comes
to different types of constructions, word choices
etc. (Newman et al., 2008; Coates, 2015). This
also implies that, even for languages that do not
mark gender overtly (i.e. grammatically), it can
still be beneﬁcial to take the gender of the au-
thor/speaker into account.
(5)(Ref) Je pense que ...
(BASE) Je crois que...
(TAG) Je pense que...
Although more research is required in order
to draw general conclusions on this matter, from
other linguistic studies, it appears that it is indeed
the case that there is a relation between the use
of the word “pense” (“think”) / “crois” (“believe”)
and the gender of the speaker. To see whether
there is a difference in word choice and whether
this is reﬂected in our data, we compiled a list
of the most frequent French words for the male
data and the female data. Our analysis reveals that
“crois” is, in general, used more by males (hav-
ing position 303 in the most frequent words for
males, but only position 373 for females), while
“pense” is found at a similar position in both lists
(position 151 and 153). These ﬁndings are in ac-
cordance with other linguistic corpus studies on
language and gender stating that women use less
assertive speech (Newman et al., 2008). “Croire”
and “penser” are both verbs of cognition but there
is a difference in the degree of conﬁdence in the
truth value predicated: the verb “croire” denotes
more conﬁdence in the truth of the complement
clause than the verb “penser” does. In the future,
we would like to perform a more detailed analy-
sis of other speciﬁc differences in lexical choices
between males and females on multiple language
pairs.
(6)(Ref) J’ ai plusieurs remarques...
(BASE) J’ ai un nombre de commentaires...
(TAG) J’ ai plusieurs remarques...6 Conclusions and Future Work
In this work, we experimented with the incorpora-
tion of speaker-gender tags during the training of
NMT systems in order to improve morphological
agreement. We focused particularly on language
pairs that express grammatical gender but included
other language pairs as well, as linguistic studies
have shown that the style and syntax of language
used by males and females differs (Coates, 2015).
From the experiments, we see that informing
the NMT system by providing tags indicating the
gender of the speaker can indeed lead to signif-
icant improvements over state-of-the-art baseline
systems, especially for those languages expressing
grammatical gender agreement. However, while
analyzing the EN–FR translations, we observed
that the improvements are not always consistent
and that, apart from morphological agreement, the
gender-aware NMT system differs from the base-
line in terms of word choices.
In the future, we would like to conduct fur-
ther manual evaluation on the translations to fur-
ther analyze the differences with the baseline sys-
tem. Furthermore, we aim to experiment with
other ways of integrating speaker information. We
envisage working on gender classiﬁcation tech-
niques in order to work on other types (more in-
formal) of corpora that are more likely to express
speaker characteristics.
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by COST action
IS1312, the Dublin City University Faculty of En-
gineering & Computing under the Daniel O’Hare
Research Scholarship scheme and by the ADAPT
Centre for Digital Content Technology, which
is funded under the SFI Research Centres Pro-
gramme (Grant 13/RC/2106). Christian Hard-
meier was supported by the Swedish Research
Council under grant 2017-930.
We would also like to thank the anonymous re-
viewers for their insightful comments and feed-
back.
References
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2014. Neural Machine Translation by Jointly
Learning to Align and Translate. In International
Conference on Learning Representations , Banff,
Canada.