Getting Gender Right in Neural Machine Translation
Eva VanmassenhoveChristian Hardmeier
ADAPT, School of Computing, Dublin City University, Dublin, Ireland
firstname.lastname@adaptcentre.ie
Department of Linguistics and Philology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
christian.hardmeier@lingfil.uu.seAndy Way
Abstract
Speakers of different languages must attend
to and encode strikingly different aspects of
the world in order to use their language cor-
rectly (Sapir, 1921; Slobin, 1996). One such
difference is related to the way gender is ex-
pressed in a language. Saying “I am happy”
in English, does not encode any additional
knowledge of the speaker that uttered the sen-
tence. However, many other languages do
have grammatical gender systems and so such
knowledge would be encoded. In order to
correctly translate such a sentence into, say,
French, the inherent gender information needs
to be retained/recovered. The same sentence
would become either “Je suis heureux”, for a
male speaker or “Je suis heureuse” for a fe-
male one. Apart from morphological agree-
ment, demographic factors (gender, age, etc.)
also inﬂuence our use of language in terms of
word choices or even on the level of syntac-
tic constructions (Tannen, 1991; Pennebaker
et al., 2003). We integrate gender information
into NMT systems. Our contribution is two-
fold: (1) the compilation of large datasets with
speaker information for 20 language pairs, and
(2) a simple set of experiments that incorpo-
rate gender information into NMT for multi-
ple language pairs. Our experiments show that
adding a gender feature to an NMT system sig-
niﬁcantly improves the translation quality for
some language pairs.
1 Introduction
In the ﬁeld of linguistics, the differences between
male and female traits within spoken and written
language have been studied both empirically and
theoretically, revealing that the language used by
males and females differs in terms of style and
syntax (Coates, 2015). The increasing amount of
work on automatic author classiﬁcation (or ‘au-
thor proﬁling’) reaching relatively high accuracieson domain-speciﬁc data corroborates these ﬁnd-
ings (Rangel et al., 2013; Santosh et al., 2013).
However, determining the gender of an author
based solely on text is not a solved issue. Like-
wise, the selection of the most informative fea-
tures for gender classiﬁcation remains a difﬁcult
task (Litvinova et al., 2016).
When translating from one language into an-
other, original author traits are partially lost, both
in human and machine translations (Mirkin et al.,
2015; Rabinovich et al., 2017). However, in the
ﬁeld of Machine Translation (MT) one of the most
observable consequences of this missing informa-
tion are morphologically incorrect variants due to
a lack of agreement in number and gender with
the subject. Such errors harm the overall ﬂuency
and adequacy of the translated sentence. Further-
more, gender-related errors are not just harming
the quality of the translation as getting the gender
right is also a matter of basic politeness. Current
systems have a tendency to perpetuate a male bias
which amounts to negative discrimination against
half the population and this has been picked up by
the media.1
Human translators rely on contextual informa-
tion to infer the gender of the speaker in order to
make the correct morphological agreement. How-
ever, most current MT systems do not; they simply
exploit statistical dependencies on the sentence
level that have been learned from large amounts
of parallel data. Furthermore, sentences are trans-
lated in isolation. As a consequence, pieces of
information necessary to determine the gender of
the speakers, might get lost. The MT system will,
in such cases, opt for the statistically most likely
variant, which depending on the training data, will
1https://www.theguardian.
com/technology/2017/apr/
13/ai-programs-exhibit
-racist-and-sexist-biases-researcharXiv:1909.05088v1  [cs.CL]  11 Sep 2019