Page 8 of 12 Subramanian et al. J Transl Med          (2020) 18:472 
without symptoms and increase the risk of stroke. Alive -
Cor developed a system based on deep learning, single-
lead ECG sensor and physical activity via accelerometer 
data [ 126]. The system is integrated with a smart watch 
and it is capable of predicting the occurrence of atrial 
fibrillation every 5 s. AI has also contributed in improv -
ing diagnoses based on cardiovascular imaging such 
as in echocardiography, MRI or ultrasound imaging. A 
comparative study of echocardiography interpretation 
of Ultromics system with cardiologist showed that more 
than 90 percent of the abnormalities found by board cer -
tified cardiologists overlapped with the ones found by the 
AI system [127].
Another example of the use of AI for chronic disease 
management is ResApp Health. The system uses the 
phone microphone to analyze the subject’s breathing. 
The AI algorithm is able to give an assessment of sev -
eral lung conditions with high accuracy such as chronic 
obstructive lung disease, pneumonia or chronic asthma 
[128].
Taken together, while high-throughput data genera -
tion strategies are becoming more advanced, quicker, 
and comparatively more affordable, researchers are 
increasingly gaining access to large amounts of molecular 
knowledge from human cohorts. The volume of poten -
tial data is enormous, and it has been estimated that 
personal lifestyle-based data sum up to 1100 terabytes 
over a lifespan, with genetics and clinical data compris -
ing 6.4 terabytes, which is less than 1% of the total. Omics 
technologies, GWAS, EWAS, smartphone-based digital 
phenotyping, sensors, EHRs, wearable devices to moni -
tor physical activity, geography location data and climate 
data combined with AI have improved the prospect of 
implementing prevention and management strategies 
for chronic diseases [129–132]. Therefore, the use of 
such large multidimensional data requires the establish -
ment of structured collection and big data analytics, as 
well as multidisciplinary integration of high-performance 
computational technologies and integration of ML/AI. 
Hence, AI is quickly becoming a crucial methodology 
in the advancement of precision/personalized medicine 
[133, 134].
Recent developments in the field
One of the first large-scale, population-based, prospec -
tive studies which intended to enable comprehensive 
analyses of the genetic and non-genetic causes of diseases 
for middle and old age was the UK biobank study [115, 
135]. In addition, the most ambitious longitudinal study 
in precision medicine so far, the “ All of Us” Research Pro -
gram, which aims to focus research on the link between 
environment, lifestyle and biology in health and disease 
is ongoing [136]. The All of Us program intends to enroll one million people across America and plans to imple -
ment deep phenotyping by gathering genetic and health 
data (using EHRs, digital health data), geography, and 
biospecimens for biomarker review. Similarly, a project 
called “The Project Baseline Health Study (PBHS)” was 
initiated to map human health by deep phenotyping to 
at least 10,000 individuals. The PBHS study established a 
portal that incorporates and analyzes personalized, lon -
gitudinal, multidimensional data, with a greater focus on 
future than past. It further explore the biological hetero -
geneity of healthy individuals or individuals with chronic 
disease in detail for a longer period of time to create 
reference health status by integrating various aspects of 
health [137].
The Human Exposome Project, 2020 from the Euro -
pean Union is the largest network of research programs 
aiming to address the environmental exposure such as 
diet, lifestyle, occupational and other environmental 
factors impact on human health (https  ://www.human 
expos  ome.eu/). Such data-driven approach to expo -
some reduces the conventional decision-making method 
and it may better determine the influence of chemical 
exposures on particular physiological systems proven 
to be affected. Subsequently this would help to create 
novel chemicals with reduced impact on human health 
and the environment [138]. Over the last two decades, 
omics, wearables, sensors, digital medicine and emerging 
innovative technologies together with AI have all made 
incredible advancements in the field of precision/person -
alized medicine. Furthermore, AI is being implemented 
in precision oncology to help clinicians in decision mak -
ing, with the aim of improving patient outcomes [139]. 
AI-based healthcare practices are already being imple -
mented in high-income countries; for instance, the UK 
and Singapore have recently launched national strategies 
to tackle chronic disease burden using AI. Data driven, 
AI-powered health care has the potential to clarify the 
landscape of findings and enable clinical decisions to dig -
itally identify, treat, and manage chronic conditions.
Data protection and privacy
The frequent collection of personal health and environ -
mental data has been greatly improved through the use of 
decentralized sensors, measurement devices and mobile 
phones. A few decades ago, the measurement of blood 
pressure, glucose level, heart rate could only be done by 
medical experts. Nowadays such information can be con -
tinuously collected through mobile apps. The rapid intro -
duction of AI technology into the precision medicine is 
advantageous, as AI offers an opportunity to increase 
the efficiency of health care delivery and the quality of 
patient care. However, it is necessary to mitigate the ethi -
cal risks of the AI implementation, which could include