Page 4 of 12 Subramanian et al. J Transl Med          (2020) 18:472 
and (4) other natural reactions that affects DNA and pro -
teins within the body (Fig.  1). In addition, social stress, 
phycological stress, and socioeconomic status were all 
linked to inflammation and disease risk [24–26]. Over 
the past decades, extensive efforts have been made and 
continue to be made in pursuit of identifying the risk fac -
tors for chronic diseases [27–29]. The etiology of chronic 
diseases has now been convincingly linked to systemic 
chronic inflammation (SCI). An overwhelming body of 
evidences and a recent critical review have highlighted 
the importance of SCI and its correlation with health and 
chronic diseases [30].
Lifestyle factors: chronic inflammation axis
The April 2002 issue of Science discussed “The puzzle 
of complex diseases” where diet and lifestyle were iden -
tified to be important contributors for major chronic 
diseases [31, 32]. Since then, numerous landmark epi -
demiological and biological studies have recognized 
that lifestyle related choices and behaviors have contrib -
uted significantly to the incidence of chronic diseases. 
Several studies have linked being overweight and obese 
with increased risk of chronic diseases, cancers, includ -
ing breast cancer (in post-menopausal women), endome -
trium, esophagus, pancreas, liver, colorectum and kidney, 
and others [33, 34]. A principal lifestyle factor influenc -
ing the onset of such diseases is the diet and nutrition of 
each individual [35, 36]. Evidences from preclinical inves -
tigations as well as observational and interventional tri -
als indicated that Western-type diet (WD) is a key driver 
of chronic, low-grade metabolic inflammation [37, 38]. 
The consumption of calorie-rich foods: highly processed, 
ultra-processed (formulations of many ingredients), in 
addition to sugar sweetened beverages, fructose-contain -
ing sugars, trans fats and saturated fats, salt, and other 
food additives have been proven to influence inflamma -
tion and lead to chronic diseases [39–43]. In addition, 
WD and other popular diets have been shown to alter 
intestinal microbiome, which in turn helps shape inte -
grated immune responses. Prolonged consumption of 
such diets leads to disruption of the gut-barrier integrity, 
allowing harmful secretion of microbial products that 
can cause inflammation [44–47]. A recent study indicated 
that the consumption of high-fat ketogenic diets can alter 
the microbiome and also reduce the number of intestinal 
pro-inflammatory Th17 cells which are critical for act -
ing against infectious disease [46]. The consumption of 
fructose-rich diet has emerged as a major contributor to 
dyslipidemia, NALFD, insulin resistance, and diabetes. A 
recent elegant study has revealed that intestinal micro -
biota plays a major role in converting the dietary fructose 
to acetate, which in turn activates the hepatic lipogenesis 
[48, 49]. Numerous other dietary factors have also been shown to induce inflammation and lead to SCI. These 
include the consumption of highly processed foods that 
lack essential vitamins and micronutrients and the defi -
ciencies in minerals such as calcium, phosphorus, zinc, 
and magnesium [50–54]. Noteworthy, the recent Lancet 
Commission report on the global syndemic investigated 
how the human-driven methods of food production, food 
supply, consumption and its consequences impacting the 
environment and climate change. In order to counter the 
global syndemic of obesity, undernutrition and climate 
change the commission is urging the governments to 
reconsider the food supply chains, and business models 
[55].
Other lifestyle variables such as physical inactivity, 
lack of sleep, and tobacco smoking, can also activate 
multiple immune-inflammatory pathways leading to 
chronic inflammatory conditions [56]. Inadequate physi -
cal activity is a leading risk factor for chronic diseases 
and mortality. Globally, the age-standardized prevalence 
of insufficient physical activity was 27.5% in 2016 [57]. 
In addition, over 80% of the world’s adolescents are not 
physically active enough. Several studies have linked 
insufficient physical activity with inflammatory condi -
tions; even moderate physical activity has demonstrated 
to possess anti-inflammatory effects, further reducing 
the risk of chronic diseases and improving age-related 
multi-morbidity by strengthening the immune function 
[58, 59]. Tobacco-related morbidity and mortality is sig -
nificant worldwide since smoking increases the risk of 
developing a number of serious inflammatory conditions 
[60]. It has been well established that the nicotine present 
in the tobacco stimulates neutrophils, with subsequent 
release of certain molecules that promote inflammation 
increasing in turn the risk of chronic diseases [61, 62]. 
Excessive alcohol use damages not only gut and liver 
functions, but also multi-organ interactions, contribut -
ing to chronic inflammation and eventually, increasing 
the risk of chronic liver diseases and certain cancers [63]. 
Accumulating evidence suggests that the pathogenesis of 
psychological disorders, such as depression and anxiety, 
are also associated with chronic stress and neuroinflam -
mation [64]. Given the clear linkage of lifestyle factors 
with chronic diseases, their prominence in preventing 
diseases cannot be over-emphasized.
Biological factors: genetics and epigenetics
During recent years, there has been tremendous inter -
est in the discovery of genes that are responsible for 
chronic diseases. Genetic variation consists of differ -
ences in the DNA sequences of individuals manifesting 
as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), insertions 
and deletions, and other structural variations. Genome-
wide association studies (GWAS) that include analyses of