Page 2 of 12 Subramanian et al. J Transl Med          (2020) 18:472 
diseases are the most significant cause of death world -
wide, with over 50% of all deaths due to inflammatory 
conditions. For this review, we collectively refer to the 
following as chronic diseases: type 2 diabetes, obesity, 
cardiovascular disease (CVD), metabolic associated fatty 
liver disease (MAFLD), cancer, chronic lung and kidney 
disease, autoimmune and neurodegenerative diseases [1]. 
Today, our genes function in a world that is completely 
different from the one they were designed for and mod -
ern humans are subjected to an environment that has 
changed tremendously over the past century. The genetic 
predisposition to various diseases differs, from person 
to person and non-genetic factors pose high attributable 
risks, often assessed between 80 and 90% of the total risk 
[2, 3]. The Global Burden of Disease (GBD) study, which 
measured the disease burden of behavioral, environmen -
tal and occupational, and metabolic risks or clusters of 
risks from 1990 to 2016 in 195 countries concluded that 
the modifiable risk factors lead to nearly 60% of deaths 
worldwide [4]. Lifestyle-associated chronic diseases tend 
to have two common characteristics: one is homeosta -
sis disturbance and the second is metaflammation or 
chronic metabolic inflammation. Therefore, the patho -
physiology of chronic diseases points to the physiological 
rationale that connects inflammation with homeostasis 
[5]. It is now widely recognized that pathogenesis of dis -
ease is often the result of interactions between various 
genetic and environmental factors. The sum of environ -
mental exposures (non-genetic) from conception until 
old age, throughout the lifespan is known as the “expo -
some” . The term "exposome" is used to demonstrate the 
complexity and extent of exposures to toxic substances, 
nutrition, psychosocial stressors and physical impacts 
and their associated biological responses. Exposomics is 
the study of the exposome, based on the use of internal 
and external assessment methods [3, 6].
Precision medicine is an emerging field in therapeu -
tics based on an understanding of the genetic make-up, 
personal lifestyle, gene, and surrounding environment 
of an individual. We can use precision medicine to cus -
tomize prevention and treatment strategies for an indi -
vidual by identifying the factors that predispose this 
individual to a specific disease and defining the under -
lying molecular mechanisms that induce the disorder. 
The use of “OMICS” or “EXPOsOMICS” along with 
wearable sensors as measurement/assessment meth -
ods have the potential to generate large amounts of data 
(big-data), thus requiring new digital approaches and 
resources for analyzing, integrating, and interpreting 
the massive amounts of data [7, 8]. Artificial intelligence 
(AI): an emerging field in which computer algorithms 
are equipped to carry out tasks independently of human 
guidance. To create an efficient AI algorithm, computer systems are initially fed data that is usually organized, 
indicating each data point has an algorithm-recognizable 
label or annotation. After sufficient sets of data points 
and their labels are presented to the algorithm, output 
is evaluated to ensure accuracy. Such AI algorithms are 
capable of observing, analyzing vast data and identifying 
patterns with incredible efficiency [9]. Artificial Intelli -
gence that we consider in this context includes machine 
learning (ML), deep learning (DL), and artificial neural 
networks (ANN). When AI is combined with high per -
formance computing approaches, AI allows us to estab -
lish and predict disease risk based on individual’s data 
[10]. Translating such enormous data into clinical knowl -
edge is now in the hands of ML/AI platforms. Promising 
results in predicting disease risk with greater accuracy 
have been shown on these platforms [11–14]. As AI 
enters the world of precision medicine, it can help organ -
izations to capitalize on precision medicine in many ways 
and help deepen our knowledge of the origins and course 
of chronic diseases.
This review article discusses the potential contribu -
tion of lifestyle factors and biological factors -genetic, 
epigenetics and the microbiome to the development and 
progression of chronic inflammation. We will also high -
light the recent findings on the implementation of ML/
AI algorithms in personalized medicine to better manage 
and prevent chronic diseases.
Inflammation—a natural response
In recent years, there has been a substantial improvement 
in our understanding of the inflammatory mechanism 
and its contribution to health and diseases. Inflammation 
is the natural response of the body to harmful pathogens 
and stimuli in an effort to eliminate threat and/or repair 
damaged tissue [5]. However, in the early 1990′s a dif -
ferent type of inflammation was associated with over -
weight and obesity was identified as a persistent and 
maladaptive inflammatory response that had significant 
variations compared to classical inflammation [15]. Such 
systemic inflammation characterized as ‘low-grade’ was 
associated with elevated levels of inflammatory media -
tors and increased immune cell infiltration in peripheral 
tissues without altering the primary function of the tis -
sue [16, 17]. Human exposome can be categorized into 
external and internal. An increasing number of inves -
tigations have been addressing the human exposome, 
and the external exposome factors were well described 
in the recent articles [3, 6]. These factors were classified 
into four categories: (1) Lifestyle factors, such as diet, 
physical activity, sleep, smoking and alcohol; (2) Physi -
cal and chemical factors, such as temperature, pollution, 
pesticides, food contaminants etc.; (3) Ecosystem fac -
tors, such as food systems, climate, global warming, built