Page 6 of 12 Subramanian et al. J Transl Med          (2020) 18:472 
on signaling pathways including energy homeostasis, 
carbohydrate and lipid metabolism, and inhibition of 
inflammatory signals [99, 100].
Moreover, evidence has shown that microbial coloni -
zation of the infant occurs at birth through the vaginal 
canal and also some by breastfeeding and skin-to-skin 
contact. Babies delivered by caesarean section lack some 
strains of gut bacteria [101]. Furthermore, environmental 
exposure early in life has a strong effect on a child’s intes -
tinal microbiome, and studies have linked environmental 
factors during infancy with a subsequent risk of develop -
ing allergies and asthma [102]
Precision medicine
In the last decade, strategies to advance precision medi -
cine have attracted considerable investment in develop -
ing new treatments, understanding more about disease 
mechanisms, and eventually preventing disease. Pre -
cision medicine focused on identifying the effective 
approaches and the tailored treatment based on an indi -
vidual’s genetic, environmental, and lifestyle factors. As 
explained above, we have undeniable evidence of human 
biological diversity in both health and disease, as shown 
by the findings of the Human Functional Genomics Pro -
ject (HFGP) focused on 500 healthy adult subjects [103]. 
A number of studies have illustrated this explicitly by 
analyzing immune cells (cytokine) as an endpoint, show -
ing that the cytokine types and levels vary depending 
on environmental factors (e.g., season driven), genetic history, and intestinal microbiome composition [104]. 
Furthermore, the latest study from the HFGP has shown 
that 11 different kinds of host factors together accounted 
for up to 67% of inter-individual variation in activated 
cytokine production in healthy subjects [105].
Overall, interpersonal variability in diet, lifestyle, sleep, 
stress, socioeconomic status, geography, early life expe -
riences and exercise habits combined with gut microbi -
ome, genetic background, metabolism, inflammatory 
status, are all critical factors in determining an individ -
ual’s heath and risk for disease (Fig.  2). In addition, the 
exposure of individual to environmental hazards is not 
constant and can change throughout their life, and also 
the effect of the exposures can vary depending on an 
individual’s life stage. Environment-wide association 
studies (EWAS) have been proposed to examine new 
environmental factors in disease risk [106]. Therefore, the 
need of every individual is complex and require in-depth 
assessment (deep phenotyping) before interventions can 
be confidently applied (Fig. 2).
Deep phenotyping and artificial intelligence
Precision oncology, AI can be used to develop a drug 
combination centered on a patient’s own biopsy and 
adopt N-of-1 medication recommendations [107]. Across 
multiple specializations, especially in radiology AI-based 
algorithms have already shown improvement in diagnos -
tic accuracy and performance [108–111]. The US Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) has licensed many AI 
Fig. 2 Deep phenotyping and artificial intelligence for health promotion and chronic disease prevention. Deep phenotyping provides an entire 
molecular profile of an individual’s physiological status. When longitudinally tested, the pathways can be tracked to identify the transformation 
from a health to a disease. Various omics technologies along with other physiological measurements will be used to molecularly characterize 
an individual’s risk for disease. Further implementation of a systems approach to the big-data analysis and integration will provide a platform for 
machine learning and artificial intelligence in clinical decision-making for early disease risk identification and prevention