Page 5 of 12
 Subramanian et al. J Transl Med          (2020) 18:472 
 
genetic variants across several human genomes in order 
to detect associations between genotype and phenotype. 
These have facilitated a remarkable range of discoveries 
in the biology of chronic diseases [65]. Several studies 
have found new genetic loci and genes that predispose an 
individual to a number of chronic diseases, such as type 
1 and type 2 diabetes, coronary heart disease, obesity, 
asthma, cancer, bipolar disorder, depression, rheumatoid 
arthritis, Crohn’s disease, and hypertension [66–73]. In 
addition, a recent large-scale GWAS conducted among 
the Japanese population has identified 320 independent 
signals in 276 genetic loci for 27 diseases among which 25 
novel loci, including certain loci specific to, the Japanese 
population [74]. Due to the diversity in genetic make-up 
and associated disease variants across populations, data 
obtained from one population may not be applicable to 
other populations [75]. However, understanding the vari -
ants, genes and mechanisms involved in specific diseases 
unlocks the possibilities for innovative treatments, diag -
nostic approaches and the efficient prevention of dis -
eases. Candidate gene and GWAS studies have identified 
numerous SNPs-genetic susceptibility loci across human 
genome which explain only a fraction of the inter-indi -
vidual variation for chronic diseases. To date, however, it 
has not been shown that solely defined genetic influences 
contribute to a large proportion of chronic disease inci -
dence at population level.
Beyond lifestyle factors and genetic susceptibility, 
another powerful determinant of the health outcome is 
epigenetics. Epigenetic alterations have emerged as sur -
rogate markers for environmental exposure. Recently, 
epigenetic mechanisms have been increasingly recog -
nized as a critical link between environmental exposure 
and disease risk [76]. Evidence indicates that maternally 
regulated environmental modulation of gene expression 
in offspring and gene-environment interactions are sig -
nificant determinants of disease risk in later life [77, 78]. 
In addition, using a unique cohort of more than 700 pairs 
of monozygotic and dizygotic twins, it was demonstrated 
that both genetics and environment-inherited epigenetic 
signatures plays major role in regulating gene expression 
in the offspring [79, 80]. Moreover, changes in epigenet -
ics are the core mechanisms by which early nutritional 
conditions can increase later-life susceptibility to obe -
sity and other chronic diseases [81]. Maternal malnutri -
tion influences altered epigenetic regulation in genes that 
control the metabolism of lipids and carbohydrates and 
those involved in the neural networks of central appetite-
energy homeostasis [82]. This suggests that early experi -
ence may lead to changes in the epigenome influencing 
metabolic and physiological pathways, possibly chang -
ing individual’s phenotypic development and thus hav -
ing critical effect on their health. As stated above, several studies have indicated that dietary components induces 
alterations in the genome and have linked SNPs interac -
tions with the consumption of particular food and die -
tary patterns [83–85]. Nutrients and other environmental 
factors, either directly or indirectly, can impact the levels 
and turnover of epigenetic signatures (DNA methylation, 
acetylation of histones) thereby regulating the expres -
sion of messenger RNAs and non-coding RNAs that have 
been implicated in multiple chronic diseases. In sum -
mary, epigenetic mechanisms have been shown to be 
associated with multiple lifestyle factors or environmen -
tal exposures, including overnutrition, undernutrition, 
physical activity, stress, pollutants, and obesity, which 
have in turn been linked to chronic diseases [86–89].
Gut microbiome
Multiple studies have discovered that the microbiome 
impacts almost every aspect of human health, and that 
the microbial composition, which differs from indi -
vidual to individual, can be a key component in diverse 
manifestations ranging from gaining weight to develop -
ing stress and depression [90]. Some studies on human 
or mice microbiome have indicated that this variability 
begins with variations in host genetics [91, 92]. Several 
other parallel studies have found that the environment 
is dominant over host genetics in the development of 
human intestinal microbiota [93, 94]. A recent study, 
which looked into factors that influence the intestinal 
microbiome composition across nine different primate 
species and four human communities subject to vari -
ous subsistence habit, identified environmental factors 
as the main driver of intestinal microbiome composi -
tion when compared to host species phylogenies [95]. In 
addition, the intestinal bacteria in four Himalayan pop -
ulations (Tharu, Raute, Raji and the Chepang) differed 
according to their dietary lifestyles [96]. Such findings 
show that diet can dominate phylogenetic development 
of gut microbiome composition. Acute dietary changes 
(four days) was sufficient enough to bring about signifi -
cant alteration to the human gut microbiota composition 
[97]. In a recent study that investigated on Irish traveler’s 
intestinal microbiome shown that microbiota is consid -
erably different from that of a non-traveler settled popu -
lation. However, the non-travelers (settled) Irish contain 
microbiota similar to people lives in industrialized soci -
ety with a comparatively higher risk of chronic disease. 
Most travelers contain an ancient of microbiome that 
protects themselves from various chronic inflammatory 
conditions [98]. Moreover, microbiota-accessible carbo -
hydrates (MACs) serve as an energy source for gut bacte -
ria, resulting in the production of short chain fatty acids 
(SCFAs) which benefits the host. Further, these SCFAs 
including butyrate and propionate have multiple effects