Page 7 of 12
 Subramanian et al. J Transl Med          (2020) 18:472 
 
systems to promote medical imaging evaluation, includ -
ing the detection of abnormal lesions that may progress 
to cancer [112]. A recent work highlights how AI and the 
advancement of technologies together are empowering 
the aim of personalized and precision medicine [113].
Machine learning is a key for multi omics data integra -
tion and there are several aspects in which data types are 
combined and their relationships are explored [114]. One 
of the large prospective cohort studies the UK Biobank 
project has collected deep genetic and phenotypic data 
including biological measurements, lifestyle markers, 
blood and urine biomarkers, and brain imaging from 
500,000 individuals. This project has provided research -
ers with opportunities to search for genetic associations 
with disease risk and has resulted in several publications 
[115]. In addition, a precision medicine screening study 
that introduced a platform of deep quantitative multi -
modal phenotyping including genomics, metagenomics, 
advanced imaging, metabolomics, clinical testing and 
family history, provided a comprehensive, predictive, 
and personalized assessment of individuals health and 
chronic disease risk [116].
Further to big data obtained from deep phenotyp -
ing, a recent study empowered its participants with an 
additional behavioral coach. The Pioneer 100 wellness 
project (P100) was an initial effort to obtain and analyze 
large omics data sets to correlate molecular networks 
in 108 healthy individual. This study performed whole 
genome sequencing, proteome, microbiome, metabo -
lome, recorded clinical data, daily physical activity, and 
sleep patterns for every three months over a nine months 
period. The investigators established personal, dense, 
dynamic data clouds for each participant and carried 
out an integrated analysis of six different data types. Fur -
ther, these data-driven insights combined with behavio -
ral coaching significantly improved the wellness of the 
participants with regard to nutrition, inflammation, dia -
betes and CVDs [117]. A similar study performed deep 
longitudinal omics profiling along with wearable moni -
toring for 109 individuals who were at increased risk for 
diabetes. They utilized multi-omics including genome, 
transcriptome, immunome, metabolome, proteome, and 
gut microbiome measured for up to eight years (median, 
2.8  years). Such a deep analysis for this long period of 
time allowed the recognition of 67 clinically action -
able health outcomes, including the cardiovascular dis -
ease risk [118]. Furthermore, in order to understand the 
molecular changes of the ageing process and associated 
disease risk, a recent study performed longitudinal and 
deep multi-omics profiling from 106 healthy individuals 
aged between 29 to 75  years and analyzed how diverse 
types of ‘omics’ results combined with clinical markers, 
correlated with age. This study identified various types of aging patterns called ’ageotypes, ’ based on the types of 
molecular pathways that have evolved over time in a spe -
cific person. Such ageotypes provides new possibilities 
for the design of early diagnosis and treatment interven -
tions that may slow down the aging process depending 
on the particular biology of each individual [119].
Machine learning has been widely applied to the pre -
cision nutrition field to customize a personalized diet 
aimed to prevent or manage diet related diseases [120, 
121]. One landmark study has successfully used a preci -
sion nutrition approach and has created a personalized 
diet to predict blood glucose response by considering 
biochemical, anthropometrics, dietary intake, physical 
activity, and gut microbiota data in an integrated frame -
work. In this study, 800 healthy and prediabetic indi -
viduals were examined and their responses to the food 
were measured a total of 46,898 meals. The investigators 
adopted an ML/AI algorithm that precisely predicted 
postprandial glycemic responses (PPGRs) to meals. The 
ML/AI predictions were validated in an independent 
100-individual cohort. Finally, a blinded, randomized 
controlled intervention based on an algorithm predicted 
diet resulted in significantly lower PPGRs and consist -
ent changes in gut microbiota composition [122]. Recent 
independent similar studies using the personalized nutri -
tion strategy for PPGRs to diet was confirmed in healthy 
individuals in an American population [123, 124]. More -
over, ML/AI is transforming the electronic health record 
(EHR) field and over time EHRs powered with AI were 
shown to reveal more about diseases. The ML/AI, tools 
applied to the health records of patients in EHRs and 
accurately predicted their probability of acquiring or 
developing chronic diseases [125].
AI medical assistants
The management of chronic disease requires regular 
monitoring and recommendations. Virtual medical assis -
tants using AI have recently matured and are being used 
in various products. AI assistants for diabetes have been 
shown useful to control patient conditions. For example, 
Onduo is a company that provides a virtual coaching via 
text messages through a mobile app. It uses AI technol -
ogy for food recognition, glucose sensor and physical 
activities to provide recommendations. Other examples 
of startup companies are Virta, Wellpepper or Accolade. 
Another interesting solution is provided by DayTwo. It 
gives a personalized nutrition recommendation based on 
subject’s gut microbiome. The suggested meals are cho -
sen among a large database of more than 100,000 foods 
to keep the glycemic range under control [123].
For cardiac diseases, AI has shown major progress in 
the diagnosis of atrial fibrillation. The latter is a common 
problem represents a 20 to 30% lifetime risk. It can occur