Page 9 of 12
 Subramanian et al. J Transl Med          (2020) 18:472 
 
data privacy and confidentiality violations, informed 
consent, and patient autonomy. In the world of precision 
medicine, big data and AI, it is of paramount importance 
that data protection legislation is in place that properly 
ensures the privacy of individuals, particularly patients. 
The raise of privacy concerns related to the collection of 
health data has contributed in the significant progress 
on private AI methods such as Federated Learning or 
Differential Privacy in Machine Learning [140]. Coun -
tries around the world introducing laws to protect the 
privacy of their citizens. The Health Insurance Portabil -
ity and Accountability Act (HIPAA) in USA the primary 
federal law to protect the privacy of health data. How -
ever, HIPAA has major gaps in current world because 
it protects only relevant health information produced 
by "covered entities" or their "business associates” [141, 
142]. Whereas in Europe, The General Data Protection 
Regulation (GDPR) has been practical since May 25, 2018 
in all European Union (EU) member states and imple -
mented a new era of extensive data protection law within 
the EU [143, 144]. GDPR regulation has begun a sig -
nificant global shift in data protection, creating political 
campaigns that advocate more privacy for data subjects, 
stricter laws for private corporations and governments 
that control emerging and increasingly evolving technol -
ogy that pose a threat to data security.
Conclusion
Chronic diseases impose a substantial health and eco -
nomic burden worldwide, with nearly one in four adults 
suffering from one or more chronic health conditions. To 
date, the longitudinal cohort studies have set the stage 
for enhancing human health by identifying and defin -
ing the natural history of diseases, identifying their risk 
factors and finding novel biomarkers. Further, the use of 
biosensors and the advances in multi-omics have estab -
lished the foundation for better disease categorization, 
created targeted therapies, and have improved prognosis 
for many diseases. Most importantly, advances in digital 
medicine have helped to determine the underlying causes 
of diseases in individual patients.
Since most chronic diseases are the consequence of 
primary lifestyle factors, individuals can reduce the 
likelihood of developing chronic conditions by making 
healthier lifestyle decisions. Nutrition and lifestyle pref -
erences are affected by a wide variety of socio-economic 
factors including employment, education, geography, 
built environment, social networks, and a climate system. 
Combatting obesity and chronic diseases associated with 
diet needs careful examination of the social determinants 
of food systems, environment and climate change and 
specific public health strategies targeted at minimizing 
health disparities [55, 145, 146].One aim of public health is promoting healthy life -
style and developing novel approaches to prevent, 
detect, and respond to diseases that commonly affect 
people. With the development of precision medicine 
and the advent of AI, it can be misconstrued that medi -
cine and health care is again drifting towards an indi -
vidualistic approach versus a community approach to 
controlling diseases [147]. On the contrary, precision 
medicine, AI, and our deep understanding of disease 
conditions offer a great opportunity to save resources 
for those countries that have practiced a one-size-fits all 
and a piecemeal approach in their public health think -
ing and programming and have not reaped adequate 
return for their investments. Chronic diseases, and 
their multifactorial nature, the advent of technological 
advancements in the form of AI, and the ‘precision’ in 
precision medicine have the potential to redefine and 
replace conventional public health approaches with 
a new holistic paradigm [148]. There remains a huge 
scope for introducing educational programmes, devel -
oping policies, and strengthening systems to capitalize 
on the rapid development in the field and customize 
activities for collectives (persons who share common 
traits and characteristics) rather than communities.
Abbreviations
HPC: High-performance computing; AI: Artificial intelligence; ML: Machine 
learning; DL: Deep learning; ANN: Artificial neural networks; SCI: Systemic 
chronic inflammation; NCDs: Noncommunicable diseases; MAFLD: Metabolic 
associated fatty liver disease; CVDs: Cardiovascular disorders; GBD: Global 
Burden of Disease; WD: Western-type diet; SNPs: Single nucleotide polymor -
phisms; GWAS: Genome-wide association studies; EWAS: Environment-wide 
association studies; MACs: Microbiota-accessible carbohydrates; SCFAs: Short 
chain fatty acids; HFGP: Human Functional Genomics Project; FDA: Food and 
Drug Administration; PPGRs: Postprandial glycemic responses; HER: Electronic 
health record; PBHS: Project Baseline Health Study.
Acknowledgements
Not applicable.
Authors’ contributions
MS and LC developed the concepts of the manuscript and LC, NP and KL 
supervised the manuscript preparation. MS, AW, LF, SB, and JS performed the 
literature search, created the figures contributed to the manuscript writing 
and editing. MS and LC edited the final version of the manuscript. All authors 
read and approved the final manuscript.
Funding
This work was supported by the BMRP Funding of Weill Cornell 
Medicine-Qatar.
Availability of data and materials
Not applicable.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Consent for publication
All the authors have read and approved the manuscript in all respects for 
publication.