8 IntroductionT
able 1.1: Typical characteristics of federated learning settings vs. distributed learning in the datacenter (e.g., [33]). Cross-device
and cross-silo federated learning are two examples of FL domains, but are not intended to be exhaustive. The primary deﬁning
characteristics of FL are highlighted in bold, but the other characteristics are also critical in determining which techniques are
applicable
Datacen
ter Distributed Cross-Silo Federated Cross-Device Federated
Learning Learning Learning
Setting
Training a model on a large but “ﬂat”
dataset. Clients are compute nodes in
a single cluster or datacenter.Training a model on siloed data. Clients
are diﬀerent organizations (e.g.,medical or ﬁnancial) or
geo-distributed datacenters.The clients are a very large number of
mobile or IoT devices.
Data
distributionData is centrally stored and can be
shuﬄed and balanced across clients.
Any client can read any part of the
dataset.Dataisgeneratedlocallyandremainsdecentralized. Eachclientstores
its own data and cannot read the data of other clients. Data is not indepen-
dently or identically distributed.
Orchestration Centrally orchestrated. A central orchestration server/service organizes the training , but
never sees raw data.
Wide-area
communicationNone (fully connected clients in one
datacenter/cluster).Typically a hub-and-spoke topology, with the hub representing a coordinat-
ing service provider (typically without data) and the spokes connecting to
clients.
Data availability
All
clients are almost always available. Only
a fraction of clients are available at
any one time, often with diurnal orother variations.
Distribution
scaleTypically 1–1000 clients. Typically 2–100 clients. Massively parallel, up to 1010clients.
Primary
bottleneckComputation is more often the
bottleneck in the datacenter, where
very fast networks can be assumed.Might be computation or
communication.Communication is often the primary
bottleneck, though it depends on thetask. Generally, cross-device federated
computations use wi-ﬁ or slower
connections.
Continue
d.
Full text available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2200000083