5
data partitioning across a massive number of unreliable devices with
limited communication bandwidth was introduced as the deﬁning set of
challenges.
Signiﬁcant related work predates the introduction of the term feder-
ated learning. A longstanding goal pursued by many research commu-
nities (including cryptography, databases, and machine learning) is to
analyze and learn from data distributed among many owners without
exposing that data. Cryptographic methods for computing on encrypted
data were developed starting in the early 1980s [2], [3], and Agrawal and
Srikant [4] and Vaidya et al.[5] are early examples of work that sought
to learn from local data using a centralized server while preserving
privacy. Conversely, even since the introduction of the term federated
learning, we are aware of no single work that directly addresses the
full set of FL challenges. Thus, the term federated learning provides
a convenient shorthand for a set of characteristics, constraints, and
challenges that often co-occur in applied ML problems on decentralized
data where privacy is paramount.
This monograph originated at the Workshop on Federated Learning
and Analytics held June 17–18th, 2019, hosted at Google’s Seattle oﬃce.
During the course of this two-day event, the need for a broad paper
surveying the many open challenges in the area of federated learning
became clear.1
A key property of many of the problems discussed is that they
are inherently interdisciplinary—solving them likely requires not just
machine learning, but techniques from distributed optimization, cryp-
tography, security, diﬀerential privacy, fairness, compressed sensing,
systems, information theory, statistics, and more. Many of the hardest
problems are at the intersections of these areas, and so we believe
collaboration will be essential to ongoing progress. One of the goals of
this work is to highlight the ways in which techniques from these ﬁelds
can potentially be combined, raising both interesting possibilities as
well as new challenges.
1During the preparation of this work, Li et al.[6] independently released an
excellent but less comprehensive survey.
Full text available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2200000083