14 Introduction
availability these constraints introduce leads directly to open research
challenges which will be discussed subsequently, such as semi-cyclic
data availability and the potential for bias in client selection.
1.2 Federated Learning Research
The remainder of this monograph surveys many open problems that
are motivated by the constraints and challenges of real-world federated
learning settings, from training models on medical data from a hospital
system to training using hundreds of millions of mobile devices. Needless
to say, most researchers working on federated learning problems will
likely not be deploying production FL systems, nor have access to
ﬂeets of millions of real-world devices. This leads to a key distinction
between the practical settings that motivate the work and experiments
conducted in simulation which provide evidence of the suitability of a
given approach to the motivating problem.
This makes FL research somewhat diﬀerent than other ML ﬁelds
fromanexperimentalperspective,leadingtoadditionalconsiderationsin
conducting FL research. In particular, when highlighting open problems,
we have attempted, when possible, to also indicate relevant performance
metrics which can be measured in simulation, the characteristics of
datasets which will make them more representative of real-world per-
formance, etc. The need for simulation also has ramiﬁcations for the
presentation of FL research. While not intended to be authoritative or
absolute, we make the following modest suggestions for presenting FL
research that addresses the open problems we describe:
•As shown in Table 1.1, the FL setting can encompass a wide
range of problems. Compared to ﬁelds where the setting and
goals are well-established, it is important to precisely describe
the details of the particular FL setting of interest, particularly
when the proposed approach makes assumptions that may not be
appropriate in all settings (e.g., stateful clients that participate
in all rounds).
•Of course, details of any simulations should be presented in order
to make the research reproducible. But it is also important to
Full text available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2200000083