1
Deep Q-Network Based Dynamic Movement
Strategy in a UA V-Assisted Network
Xukai Zhong, Yiming Huo, Member, IEEE , Xiaodai Dong, Senior Member, IEEE , and Zhonghua Liang, Senior
Member, IEEE
Abstract —Unmanned aerial vehicle (UA V)-assisted communi-
cations is a promising solution to improve the performance of
future wireless networks, where UA Vs are deployed as base
stations for enhancing the quality of service (QoS) provided
to ground users when traditional terrestrial base stations are
unavailable or not sufﬁcient. An effective framework is proposed
in this paper to manage the dynamic movement of multiple
unmanned aerial vehicles (UA Vs) in response to ground user
mobility, with the objective to maximize the sum data rate of
the ground users. First, we discuss the relationship between the
air-to-ground (A2G) path loss (PL) and the location of UA Vs.
Then a deep Q-network (DQN) based method is proposed to
adjust the locations of UA Vs to maximize the sum data rate of
the user equipment (UE). Finally, simulation results show that
the proposed method is capable of adjusting UA V locations in a
real-time condition to improve the QoS of the entire network.
Index Terms —Unmanned aerial vehicle (UA V), UA V-assisted
network, reinforcement learning, user equipment (UE), quality
of service (QoS).
I. I NTRODUCTION
THE unprecedented demand for high-quality wireless
communications has fueled the evolution of wireless
technologies and communications networks. The unmanned
aerial vehicle (UA V)-assisted network where UA Vs are de-
ployed and function as aerial base stations to assist the
terrestrial base stations is an effective complementary solution
to emergency wireless service recovery after natural disasters
or infrastructure damage [1]. Also, in Internet of Things
(IoT) networks, UA Vs can be used as aerial base stations
to collect data from ground devices, in which building a
complete cellular infrastructure is not affordable [2]. The
authors in [3] proposed a multi-layer UA V network model for
UA V-enabled 5G and beyond applications. Despite advantages
such as ﬂexibility, mobility, cost and time efﬁciency in UA V-
assisted networks, one key design challenge is to determine
the move strategy for UA Vs. Since in realistic situations, the
environment where UA Vs are deployed is highly dynamic,
it is critical for UA Vs to adjust its locations regularly to
cope with varying conditions. Furthermore, utilizing machine
learning techniques for the UA V communication recently has
seen unprecedented growing popularity [4].
X. Zhong, Y . Huo and X. Dong are with the Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC V8P 5C2,
Canada (e-mail: xukaiz@uvic.ca, ymhuo@uvic.ca, xdong@ece.uvic.ca). This
work was supported by Wighton Engineering Product Development Fund.
(corresponding author: Xiaodai Dong )
Z. Liang is with School of Information Engineering, Changan University,
Xian, Shanxi Province, China (e-mail: lzhxjd@hotmail.com). Z. Liangs work
was supported in part by the Natural Science Basic Research Project in
Shaanxi Province of China under Grant 2020JM-242, and in part by the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, CHD under Grant
300102249303.A. Related Work
Regarding the existing research related to the UA Vs deploy-
ment, the authors in [5] modeled the static UA V deployment
problem based on circle packing theory and studied the
relationship between the number of deployed UA Vs and the
coverage time. Moreover, [6] proposed an efﬁcient air-to-
ground (A2G) channel model with probabilistic path loss (PL)
and discussed a method to derive the optimal altitudes of UA Vs
based on the A2G channel model. The work in [7] discussed an
optimization problem in the UA V-assisted network which aims
to maximize the number of covered UEs while minimizing
the interference between UA Vs. Moreover, the movement
control for the UA Vs serving wireless communications has
been studied by reference [8].
Nowadays, machine learning techniques have gained popu-
larity in solving UA V deployment problem and the reinforce-
ment learning algorithm has proved to be an efﬁcient solution
of solving dynamic problem such as UA Vs movement man-
agement in the UA V-assisted network [9]–[11]. In particular, a
machine learning framework based on Gaussian mixture model
(GMM) and a weighted expectation maximization (WEM)
algorithm to predict the locations of UA Vs with the total power
consumption minimized was proposed in [9]. Furthermore,
authors in [10] studied a Q-learning based algorithm to ﬁnd
the optimal trajectory to maximize the sum rates of ﬁxed
location ground users for a single UA V base station (UA V-BS),
assuming a random initial location. Reference [11] proposed
a Q-learning based movement design for multiple UA V-BSs.
In addition, authors in [12] also demonstrated a reinforcement
learning leveraged handover mechanism for cellular-connected
drone system.
B. Our Contribution
Despite aforementioned works, there has been few study
on real-time movement strategy for UA Vs to cope with the
ground UEs’ mobility in a UA V-assisted network, which is
very critical in practical application scenarios. In this research,
we investigate a real-time dynamic UA V movement strategy
design on a deep learning framework called deep Q-network
(DQN) [13] to maximize the sum data rate. Unlike the existing
literature about UA V trajectory planning in which the ground
users are assumed geographically ﬁxed, our contribution for-
mulates the design problem of the UA Vs’ movement strategy
to ﬁnd the optimal locations of UA Vs in every single time
instant, in response to the ground users’ random movement.arXiv:2008.03162v1  [eess.SP]  7 Aug 2020