group of drivers who were knowledgeable about the risks and
uncertainties did not trust the SDC and preferred to override
the system in order to drive the car manually. However, the
other group didn’t override the autonomous system to drive
the car manually and had more trust in the system.
In [41], Howard focused on factors affecting trust in self-
driving cars. The author examined the attitude of average
consumers towards SDCs. This research discovered that most
consumers have positive feelings toward the ease of use
that comes with self-driving cars. In the context of fully
autonomous vehicles, users wouldn’t have to feel frustrated
when driving in heavy trafﬁc or ﬁnding parking in busy areas.
One can imagine that, at some time in the future, commuters
will be able to take naps or watch movies while the car drives
them to wherever they desire. The author also discovered that
most individuals have concerns regarding the cost, liability,
and the potential loss of control in SDCs. Income and gender
are other variables that affect the consumer attitude towards
SDCs. For example, subjects with higher levels of income were
more concerned about liability, but subjects with lower levels
of income were more concerned about loss of control.
Carlson et. al. [42] conducted a statistical analysis in the
domain of autonomous vehicles and autonomous diagnostic
systems. They created an online survey and asked human
subjects about various scenarios related to self-driving cars
and usage of IBM Watson in critical medical situations (e.g.,
to determine types of cancer). It was discovered that most
test subjects had concerns regarding the past performance of
the car, reliability, errors, software/hardware failures, and the
liability of the car manufacturer. Similarly, it was discovered
that top factors that affect trust during the usage of IBM
Watson in critical medical situations are accuracy and past
performance. The result of this study indicated that, regardless
of the domain, most people tend to prioritize safety, efﬁciency,
and failure rates when deciding to trust an autonomous system.Kyriakidis et. al. [43] created an international questionnaire
related to the public opinion of automated driving. Ques-
tions consisted of concerns, acceptance, and willingness to
purchase a self-driving car. Among 5000 participants from
109 countries, most subjects agreed that fully automated cars
have the potential to be very popular among consumers by
2050. However, the majority of subjects were concerned about
safety, malicious activities/hacking, and legal issues related
to autonomous vehicles. The authors also found that most
of the educated subjects had more income and were located
in developed countries. This class of human subjects were
uncomfortable with the self-driving cars transmitting data to
external sources. They were also concerned about the mali-
cious usage of the transmitted data.
The authors in [44] explored the possibilities of developing
trust in self-driving cars using techniques that are currently
available. This study argued that SDCs aim to make our lives
easier and reduce the number of accidents. However, in many
situations such as unpredictable hazards and intense weather
situations, human driver’s reactions are superior and needed.
Testing was discovered to be a critical aspect of determining
if the car is trustworthy enough to be on the road or has the
potential to develop its trust overtime. Self-driving cars utilize
machine learning and image processing techniques to provide
functions like detection of pedestrians or stop signs. It was
argued that many people require a very high accuracy in the
functions of their SDCs (close to 100%), but machine learning
algorithms cannot produce such accurate results.
Butakov and Ioannou [45] suggested that the levels of
comfort and trust of users will increase if the design and
dynamics of autopilot systems in cars are closer to what they
are in regular vehicles. In this study, the authors analyzed and
presented a methodology that allows custom modiﬁcation of
autopilot modes such as adaptive cruise control and automatic
lane change systems based on individual preferences.
TABLE II. T RUST IN HUMAN -ROBOT INTERACTION
Reference Summary Approach Concentration
[24] Success of the rescue robots depend on trust of the victim whom they
are assistingSurvey-based Rescue robots
[25] If robotic systems reduce their failure rates, their reliability will
increaseSimulator based on robot behavior Improving trust by reducing failure rates
[26] Etiquette affects human trust as well as the reliability of autonomous
robotsFlight simulator Impact of etiquette on trust
[27] Unpredictability of robots affects trust Computer simulation based on a ﬁre-
ﬁghting scenarioMilitary and hazardous environments
[29] The appearance of a robot affects human perception and trust Lego Mindstorm NXT robot pro-
grammedTrust and cultural differences
[30] The performance of robots has the highest impact on trust in the
context of human-robot interactionSurvey-based Human-robot interaction
[31] Created a trust measuring tool for human-robot interaction Subject matter experts Trust measurement
[32] To enhance trust in human-robot interaction, a number of design
choices need to be madeVisually impaired person and a guide
dogImproving trust in human-robot interac-
tion
[33] Control on autonomous systems increases or decreases trust depending
on the circumstancesCognitive analysis Trust and artiﬁcial intelligence
[34] If humans trust a robot, its performance will increase YSI EcoMapper autonomous underwa-
ter robotTrust and semi-autonomous robots
[35] Psychophysiological measurements can be used by artiﬁcial intelli-
gence to measure human trustHuman subject study involving 31 hu-
mans using EEG and GSRPsychophysiological measurements and
trust
[36][37] Performance of a robot directly affects trust, satisfaction and frustration Human subject study involving 10 sub-
jects using an assistant robotTrust, satisfaction, and frustration
6