TABLE I. T RUST IN HUMAN -MACHINE INTERACTION
Reference Summary Approach Concentration
[13] User has the responsibility of calibrating their trust based on the
reliability of the decision support systemAnalytical Trust calibration in decision support sys-
tem
[15] Introduced an advanced framework to improve trust overtime Trust framework Decision support systems
[16] Changes in operators’ control strategies and their connections to trust Simulated semi-automatic pasteuriza-
tion plantControl strategies for autonomous sys-
tems
[18] If a user detects the system might be incapable of doing its job, they
would manually take control of the systemSimulated semi-automatic pasteuriza-
tion plantIncompetence of autonomous systems
[19] Investigated the role of self-conﬁdence and trust in teleoperation
systemsA joystick and a computer Trust and teleoperation systems
[20] Theoretical trust models and past experiments were explored and
summarizedSurvey-based Human-machine interaction
[21] Demonstrated the changes in trust based on past failures Simulated pasteurization plant Malfunctioning and its impact on trust
[22] Trust is a critical factor in automation reliance decisions Slides and graphs were shown to test
human subjectsAutomation reliance
[23] Different people have various levels of trust toward an autonomous
system despite of its constancyX-ray screening simulation User perceptions of trust
Fig. 1. Autonomous and semi-autonomous robots used in battleﬁelds [28].
Stormont [27] showed a low level of trust in HRI. The
author investigated the factors that affect trust between humans
and robotic systems. He discovered that one of the reasons for
such a low level of conﬁdence in autonomous systems is due to
their low level of reliability. The author also discovered that un-
predictability is another factor affecting trust between humans
and autonomous systems. He argued that, in various hazardous
circumstances such as battleﬁelds - as shown in Figure 1 -
and rescue missions, the unpredictability of robots becomes
a signiﬁcant problem for human supervisors. Although the
autonomous nature of robots and their quick decision making
are known as positive traits, the problem arises when life and
death of humans will depend on the choices of a robot. Indeed,
questions such as “Should life and death decisions be made by
an autonomous system?” have been in the center of attention
by many researchers. The same study executed a simulation
of robots assisting ﬁreﬁghters in a hazardous ﬁre situation.
The simulation showed that, even though ﬁreﬁghters did not
initially trust these robots, their reliance and trust in the robots
increased as the mission progressed and they became tired. As
a result, they ﬁnally let the robots to extinguish the ﬁre.
The authors in [29] investigated how culture and appear-
ance might have an impact on trust. The team sampled partic-
ipants from China, Germany, and Korea to analyze different
cultural backgrounds. The participants were asked to interact
with a robot that knew the culture of participants’ countries.
The results were scaled based on likeability, engagement, trust,
and satisfaction. The outcomes demonstrated that the robotappeared differently to each participants, thus showing the
need for increased concentration in different areas. Producers
may use this information to create their robots more unique
to speciﬁc regions and cultures to improve trust and demand
within the communities.
Hancock et. al. [30] provided a comprehensive analysis of
factors affecting trust in human-robot interaction. This study
classiﬁed factors affecting trust in HRI into three different
categories, i.e., human, robot, and environment, as shown in
Figure 2. Human-related factors include training, expertise,
situational awareness, and demographic information. Similarly,
robot-related factors are behavior, dependability, reliability,
level of automation, failure rates, false alarms, transparency,
and attribute-based factors such as location, personality, adapt-
ability, robot type, and anthropomorphism (having human
traits). Finally, environmental factors include teamwork, cul-
ture, communication, shared mental models, task type, task
complexity, and multi-tasking. This paper discovered that robot
performance has the highest impact on human trust.
Yagoda and Gillan [31] proposed a new mechanism for
measuring the value of trust in the context of HRI. This
measurement was based on multiple factors such as team
conﬁguration, team processes, context, task, and system. The
proposed trust measuring mechanism was developed using two
experiments. The results of these two studies were combined
to create a new HRI trust measuring tool.
Penders et. al. [32] investigated HRI in “no-visibility”
conditions, which means the human subjects might be visually
impaired or blind. Therefore, they would have to trust the robot
completely. This study analyzed the interactions of visually im-
paired people with their guide-dogs and examined the variables
that could be utilized in the design and behavior of robots for
improvement of human trust. These variables include human
dominance, cooperation overtime, and accountability. It is
worth mentioning that Castelfranchi and Falcone [33] inves-
tigated how “control” affects trust negatively. Their research
discovered that human trust will decrease if a participant is
forced to take control of an autonomous system. We do believe
that this is a prominent issue that should be considered in no-
visibility conditions.
4