Fig. 2. Trust factors identiﬁed by Hancock [30].
Wang et. al. [34] investigated the human-robot trust in the
context of underwater semi-autonomous robots. To increase
the performance of a submarine robot, the operator’s trust
in capabilities of the submarine robot must be established
and sustained. This study proposed a trust model that mainly
deals with recording the robot’s past performance, the human
performance, and the fault rates of humans and robots. A semi-
autonomous robot, known as YSI EcoMapper AUV , was tested
in this study. The authors show the effectiveness of this trust
model through a simulation-based approach.
An essential aspect of improving human trust with respect
to robotic systems is the real-time measurement of the emo-
tional response of human subjects. If the artiﬁcial intelligence
technologies can learn and interpret the emotional states of
human, they will be able to adjust themselves accordingly
to be responsive to those emotional states. Hu et. al. [35]
provided a trust sensor model that utilizes psychophysiological
measurements of human subjects. The objective of this project
was to ﬁnd out if psychological factors of humans captured
through sensors, such as Electroencephalography (EEG) and
Galvanic Skin Response (GSR), can be used to manage trust
in the context of human-robot interaction. After a series of
experimental studies, statistical analyses and classiﬁcation,
this study concluded that psychophysiological measurements
could be used to measure trust in humans. However, the
mean accuracy of this claim was 71 :57%. Therefore, this
method cannot be used for all humans. The authors believe that
consideration should be give to human subjects’ demographic
information in any experimental study.
Finally, due to technological advancement in recent years,
care-giving robots are becoming popular and common in our
lives. As a result, trust in these robotic systems is a prominent
issue from consumers’ perspectives. In a recent study [36],
[37], the authors measured the levels of trust, satisfaction, and
frustration in the context of care-giving robots by designing
several experiments in which human subjects interacted with
a Baxter robot through a sequence of trust-building or trust-
damaging incidents. In this study, various scenarios weretested, for example, delivering an object with different speeds,
accidentally dropping the object, etc. The authors discovered
that performance of the assistant robot affects the human trust,
satisfaction and frustration when a sequenced of structured
incidents are considered.
The summary of this section’s results is shown in Table II.
C. Trust in Self Driving Cars
Autonomous driving has been advancing rapidly in the
recent years due to technological advancements in software and
hardware platforms, artiﬁcial intelligence, and sensor and radar
systems. Car manufacturers along with high tech companies
(e.g., Tesla, Mercedes-Benz, BMW, Porsche, V olvo, Ford,
Waymo, Uber, etc) have already created commercially avail-
able semi-autonomous cars and fully autonomous prototypes.
They intend to mass produce Self-Driving Cars (SDC) in early
2020s [38]. One major challenge in popularizing self-driving
cars in the US and the world is the average consumers’ high
level of distrust in fully automated vehicles.
Uggirala et. al. [39] analyzed trust in a situation in which
the users were given information about the capacity of the
autonomous vehicle. This study aimed to decrease uncertainty
to optimize system performance by having the users to be
knowledgeable about the functions that the autonomous car
can perform. The participants went through training to become
familiar with the system. Subsequently, they had to judge
whether or not the vehicle would be capable of efﬁciently
completing certain functions given reference lines. This study
concluded that, when users are knowledgeable about the sys-
tem, their trust in the system increases.
The authors in [40] conducted a study related to the ability
of self-driving cars in snow conditions. In this study, 59 drivers
were chosen to sit in an autonomous simulator cockpit. One
group of drivers were given information about the risks and
uncertainties of the SDC when driving in heavy snow condi-
tions, whereas the other group of drivers did not know anything
about the ability of the SDC. This experiment indicated that the
5