Dassonville et. al. [19] investigated the issue of trust within
the context of a teleoperation system, which is a type of system
in which human operators control a machine/system from a
distance. The authors ﬁrst analyzed the role of trust in human
relationships and then extended this study to human-machine
systems. They also conducted experiments on the role of self-
conﬁdence in human-machine interactions. A teleoperation
system is simply composed of three components as follows:
1)Master universe : The master universe is the environment
in which the operator resides in. An example of this
would be a military drone operator sitting in a container
in the middle of a desert and controlling a strike drone
somewhere far away in a combat zone.
2)Slave universe : Similarly, the slave universe is the envi-
ronment in which the machinery or the system operates
through the operator’s commands. This universe is com-
posed of hardware and a group of sensors.
3)Space between the master universe and the slave universe :
The space between the master universe and the slave
universe contains data transmission (e.g. Internet), fast
computers, and decision control systems.
In this study, a simulated experiment was performed by
having an operator to use a joystick (master universe) that was
connected to a computer (space in between) to control a cursor
on the screen (slave universe). This experiment was conducted
on two student populations of literature studies and scientiﬁc
studies. The study discovered that the ﬁrst population appeared
more self-conﬁdent in operating the machine, however, both
groups had similar levels of trust in the system.
In [20], Moray and Idnagaekri analyzed how trust in au-
tonomous systems leads to a lower level of human supervision.
They discovered that as human subjects become more reliant
on the system, a decrease in constant monitoring occurs. This
study also scrutinized the situation in which participants overly
trusted a targeted autonomous system, which could lead to
malpractice in some cases.
The authors in [21] conducted a study based on effects of
continuous and discrete malfunctions within autonomous sys-
tems. The study had two parts. The ﬁrst section tested human
participants based on continuous and discrete faults separately,
whereas the second part intertwined two malfunction types.
These experiments found a signiﬁcant decrease in trust after
ﬁve continuous failures. However, there was no signiﬁcant
reduction in trust after one discrete malfunction. The results
of this study demonstrated how trust was dissipated and how
users relied on autonomous systems based on previous faults.
Dzindolet et. al. [22] performed an experiment to improve
trust in autonomous systems. This study involved participants
detecting a soldier camouﬂaged in an area. They had the option
of manually guessing whether the soldier was there, or have
assistance from an automated aid. The ﬁrst study measured
human trust in the system before any interaction with the
system. The results indicated that the operator would trust
the system that had higher approval ratings and fewer errors.
The second study compared the number of mistakes the user
made to the number of errors produced by the system. To
accomplish this, two separate groups were selected. One group
had a system that made twice as many errors as the user, andthe other system made half as many errors as the user. The
result demonstrated that those who had more errors were more
inclined to stick to their decision.
Finally, Merritt [23] examined the importance of consider-
ing differences in human behaviors in the context of human-
automation interaction. The author conducted an empirical
study by providing an experiment related to X-ray screening.
Subjects were asked to use a simulation software to detect
dangerous items such as weapons in luggage. They were given
the options of scanning the x-ray image manually and ﬂagging
it if they spot anything suspicious, or have a ﬁctional au-
tonomous system, called Automatic Weapons Detector (AWD),
to examine the image and, consequently, report any issues.
This study found that the individual differences in subjects
affect the value of trust in autonomous systems, even if the
characteristics of the autonomous system is constant. This
study suggests that future researchers should consider human
characteristics when designing experiments for trust analyses
and measurements.
The summary of this section’s results is shown in Table I.
B. Trust in Human-Robot Interaction
Murphy et. al. [24] investigated the use of autonomous
rescue robots in combat situations as well as cases where
victims were unable to be reached, for instance, victims stuck
in earthquake rubble. In this study, the purpose of the rescue
mission was to ﬁnd the victims, check for vital signs, and help
the victims until they are rescued. The study discovered that
the success of these robots simply depend on victims’ trust. In
other words, it was crucial that the victims allow the robot to
help and collect data for an optimal recovery and assistance,
which could be achieved if a high level of trust was established.
Human trust also depends on the failure rate of the au-
tonomous systems. For instance, a study of commercially avail-
able ruggedized robots operating under ﬁeld conditions showed
aMean-Time-Between-Failures (MTBF) of 12 :26 hours and an
availability rate of 37% [25]. This ﬁnding indicates that if the
robotic systems reduce their failure rates, their reliability will
increase, and subsequently, the conﬁdence in their performance
will increase. It is apparent that, due to recent advancements
in technology, the mean-time-between-failures has been de-
creased in autonomous systems even outside of the robotics.
Parasuraman and Miller [26] investigated the concept of
trust and etiquette in the domain of Human-Robot Interaction
(HRI). Given that respect and etiquette highly affect the level
of trust in many human-to-human social interaction scenarios,
the authors argued that these factors also have impacts on
perception of humans with respect to autonomous robots. In
this study, etiquette is described as a set of prescribed and
proscribed behaviors that permits meaning and intent to be
ascribed to actions. This study also conducted an experiment
related to the role of etiquette in HRI. Human subjects
used a ﬂight simulator software, called Multi-Attribute Task
(MAT), and communicated with the autonomous system using
different communication styles such as interrupting the user,
being impatient, etc. The empirical evidence obtained by this
experiment showed that etiquette affects human trust as well
as the reliability of autonomous robots.
3