Payre et. al. [46] conducted an experiment and analyzed
how alternating levels of trust would affect a driver’s reaction
time. The main objective of this experiment was to measure
time for the Manual Control Recovery (MCR) when emergency
situations arise in fully autonomous cars. These cars are
certiﬁed and eligible to be used by drivers with a standard
driver license. Nonetheless, the drivers are still accountable
for their vehicles, regaining MCR in the case of emergency,
and being in the driver’s seat with their seat-belt buckled at all
times. This study demonstrated that higher trust levels in fully
autonomous cars resulted in slower reaction times, which can
create a hazardous environment for drivers. This experiment
can help companies become more aware of problems that over-
trusting can cause.
Akash et. al. [47] presented a gray-box modeling approach
that has the capability of capturing different variations of hu-
man behavior related to human-machine trust. In an experiment
involving 581 human subjects, the authors utilized a computer
simulation platform by which human subjects were shown
an obstacle detection system (as used in self-driving cars)
and were asked if they trust or distrust the image processing
algorithm used in the system. The study discovered that human
trust signiﬁcantly decreases in faulty scenarios. An observation
of this study was that the amount of trust in the system
slightly increases after around 8 to 10 trials when a negative
experience has already lowered their trust. Additionally, this
study investigated the effects of national origins, culture,
and gender on the level of trust. The results indicated that
Americans usually have less trust in autonomous vehicles
compared to people from other nationalities such as Mexicans
and Indians. This ﬁnding matches previous discoveries in this
domain. The overall conclusion of this study suggests that a
perfect autonomous system should be able to collect data (e.g.,
psychological factors, demographic information, etc.) from its
users and use that data to maintain and improve trust.
Finally, Daziano et. al. [48] investigated the willingness
of consumers to purchase self-driving cars by conducting an
online experiment over 1260 human subjects all around the
world. After analyzing the data, it was estimated that the
average household tends to pay about $3 ;500 more for partial
automation, and $4 ;900 for full automation when purchasing
a new vehicle. This research also found that the preferences
of consumers with regards to different levels of automation
(i.e., low, semi, full) highly varies. A signiﬁcant portion of
participants even preferred to pay more than $10 ;000 extra
for fully automated vehicles. Based on the information from
this study, we can observe a pattern in consumers’ behavior,
which suggests that the public interest in self-driving cars is
increasing rapidly. We believe that this public interest will
spike in the near future as issues such as trust between humans
and self-driving cars as well as reliability of autonomous
technologies are resolved.
The summary of this section’s results is shown in Table III.
D. Trust in Autopilot Systems
In the ﬁnal part of our survey, we mainly focus on human
trust in systems with autopilot capabilities.
de Vries et. al. [49] showed how planned routes in manual
and automatic modes affected trust. This experiment had agroup of participants to plan a route and then choose to
complete it manually and automatically ten times each. The
study proved that automatic failures had more negative impacts
on trust compared to manual failures. Participants were more
likely to forgive themselves for the error they had committed
than the failures that happened during automatic mode. The
results demonstrated a bias towards participants trust in manual
mode as opposed to automatic mode.
In [50], the authors conducted research on human trust
with respect to air trafﬁc management systems. They provided
guidelines and strategies for improving trust in autopilot sys-
tems overtime. They argued that air trafﬁc control operators
currently utilize many automated and semi-automated com-
puter tools and more usage of fully automated systems is
anticipated in the near future. Thus, the operators will have
to trust components of autonomous (or fully autonomous) air
trafﬁc management systems, for instance, radar systems and
communication tools. The procedure to improve the afore-
mentioned issue can be formed through multiple development
phases as follows:
1) Developing systems by experienced air trafﬁc controllers.
2) Providing high-quality simulations.
3) Providing training for the controllers.
4) Transitioning period for the controllers.
5) Keeping the old technology for the case of failures.
Jiang et. al. [51] discovered that there is a direct correlation
between the speciﬁc type of errors that occurs and operators’
trust in the autonomous system. In this study, the participants
were monitored throughout a week. The ﬁrst day was solely
based on training to recognize errors and functions of the
system. During the rest of the trial, the team examined how
participants felt about false alarms, given by high-risk systems.
The results demonstrated that there was a signiﬁcantly greater
decrease in trust towards systems that continuously outputted
false alarms.
In an experimental study [52], the authors investigated the
methods in which human subjects were able to judge the
performance of complex autonomous systems. To accurately
investigate this, the participants were put through training that
would train them on measuring the accuracy and performance
of airplanes. The participants were then asked to analyze an
airplane’s performance and rate it as friendly or hostile based
on the measured speed, altitude, range, and time in the air. The
results of the study were relatively accurate post training, and
they demonstrated that the judgments became accurate when
participants learned what they were looking for in complex
autonomous systems.
Finally, Winter et. al. [53] investigated distrust of humans
with respect to autonomous airplanes. In this study, human sub-
jects were asked if they prefer to be on a commercial airplane
with two pilots (a pilot and a co-pilot), an airplane with a pilot
in the cockpit and a co-pilot working remotely, or an airplane
with both pilots controlling the aircraft remotely. The authors
expressed that the human subjects would have a high degree
of discomfort if they were on a fully autonomous commercial
airplane with both pilots just overseeing the movements and
controlling the airplane remotely. They also mentioned that the
subjects would have a high degree of distrust when only one
7