A Survey on Trust in Autonomous Systems
Shervin Shahrdar, Luiza Menezes, and Mehrdad Nojoumian
Department of Computer & Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL 33431
fsshahrda,lmenezes2014,mnojoumian g@fau.edu
Abstract —As a result of the exponential growth in technology
and computing in recent years, autonomous systems are becoming
more relevant in our daily lives. As these systems evolve and
become more complex, the notion of trust in human-autonomy in-
teraction becomes a prominent issue that affects the performance
of human-autonomy teaming. Prior studies indicate that humans
have low levels of trust in semi and fully autonomous systems.
In this survey, we review a wide range of technical papers and
articles and go over the related experimental techniques in the
literature of trust. We also explain limitations that are present
in existing research works, and discuss open problems in this
domain. It’s apparent that trust management is critical for the
development of future artiﬁcial intelligence technologies.
Keywords —Trust management, autonomous systems; human-
robot interaction; self-driving cars; autopilot systems.
I. I NTRODUCTION
The rapid growth of technology has resulted in automa-
tion of many daily tasks humans had to perform themselves
just decades ago. From industrial robots used in factories
to autopilot systems, automation continues to aid humans
with repetitive, tedious, and monotonous tasks. Every day,
automation introduces newer and more sophisticated concepts
and automated systems in different areas of our lives including,
but not limited to, our homes, daily commute, workplace, etc.
As automated systems evolve and levels of complexity rise
overtime, their presence in various daily activities of humans
leads to the development of new notions in human-autonomy
interaction, e.g., trust, satisfaction, frustration, to name a few.
Studies have indicated that one of the primary challenges for
successful integration of advanced autonomous systems and
artiﬁcial intelligence technologies in human civilization will
be the management and development of mutual trust [1].
The possible misuses and abuses that humans would bring
into automation technologies is another prominent issue in this
domain. According to [2], users can become overly dependent
on an automation technology, attempt to use functions that
are out of the scope of the system, or not monitor the
system properly. These are due to trust or distrust in these
technologies. This highlights the importance of educating those
who intend to purchase an autonomous technology, mainly
with respect to proper use of these technologies.
Furthermore, the usage of information that is given to users
with respect to an autonomous system is also important. In
[2], human subjects were given information sources regarding
usage of an autonomous system with faulty behavior. This
study revealed that, when more errors occur, the participants
will not use the information provided to them due to lack of
trust. Therefore, a proper trust management approach helps the
users to utilize such information even in the presence of errors.Finally, consideration should be given to safety of au-
tonomous systems. Indeed, users tend to be unaware of func-
tions that an autonomous vehicle is capable of carrying out,
often due to the over complexity that appears throughout the
system. The authors in [3] state that safety would increase
with simpliﬁcation and possible training through an interface
between autonomous systems and drivers.
We are therefore interested to further discuss on trust
in autonomous systems. In section II, we will discuss the
deﬁnitions of trust and autonomous systems. In section III,
we will provide a comprehensive analysis and explore the
related literature. We will go over experimental techniques
proposed by researchers in this ﬁeld to understand human-
autonomy trust management. Finally, in section IV, we will
go through the limitations in the current literature and provide
our concluding remarks.
II. B ASIC DEFINITIONS
A. Autonomous Systems
The deﬁnition of an autonomous system continuously
changes [4]. Merriam-Webster dictionary deﬁnes autonomy
as “The quality or state of being self-governing; especially,
the right of self-government.” The concept of autonomy has
existed for thousands of years in many different areas including
philosophy, sociology, and politics. It is worth mentioning that,
the second part of the autonomous term, i.e., nomos , means
lawin Greek. Therefore, an autonomous system is an entity
that creates its own laws [5]. A more speciﬁc deﬁnition would
be, intelligent machines that are capable of performing tasks
by themselves and without explicit human control [6].
Although automation was introduced to human civilization
many years ago and it is widely utilized after the indus-
trial revolution [7], autonomous systems and industrial robots
are relatively new technologies that were introduced merely
decades ago. In this survey, our primary focus will be on
autonomous and semi-autonomous robots or machines, self-
driving cars, and autopilot systems. These are highly ad-
vanced forms of automated technologies. Furthermore, these
autonomous systems have high levels of self-awareness and
are capable of independently performing various tasks.
B. Trust and Its Measurement
Trust is a term that has many different deﬁnitions in
various contexts such as psychology, sociology, economics,
and computer science. Currently, there is no uniform deﬁnition
of trust [8]. Prior research indicates that there are over 300
deﬁnitions in various research areas, and in the context of
human-autonomy interactions, there are too many deﬁnitions
1