Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 6 of 48
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 50  
 “machine learning” are about the same size. Additionally, in the water body extraction 
word cloud, “remote sensing” is featured much more heavily than it is in the water quality 
extraction literature. In our review, the wate r quality papers often involved other types of 
data, including in situ sensors or smaller RS devices (not satellites), whereas the water body extraction literature is dominated by RS imagery. This is related to the scale of pro-
jects in the two domains: water body extraction is usually undertaken across large spatial 
scales, whereas the water quality monitoring lit erature is still focused on smaller, often 
individual, bodies of water. This points to a future research direction in the water quality 
literature that we touch on in our review paper: we need to scale up water quality estima-
tion using RS imagery by matching it with ground-truth water quality measurements. 
 
  
Figure 2. Word cloud visualization of all the reviewed papers ( top), water body papers ( bottom 
left), and water quality papers ( bottom right ). Note that the word clou ds are generated from paper 
titles, abstracts, and keywords. The word clouds pr ovide an informative (gen eral and specific) focus 
Figure 2. Word cloud visualization of all the reviewed papers ( top), water body papers ( bottom left ),
and water quality papers ( bottom right ). Note that the word clouds are generated from paper titles,
abstracts, and keywords. The word clouds provide an informative (general and speciﬁc) focus of
each set of the papers. For example, both water body and water quality papers share the focus on
RS, DL, and neural networks (NN). We can also see that water body extraction tasks tend to focus
on the use of convolutional neural networks (CNN), whereas for water quality modeling the use of
long short-term memory (LSTM) networks is more prevalent. We can also see that there are speciﬁc,
unique keywords for water quality, such as “turbidity”, “chl”, and “algal bloom”.
When we separate the keyword word clouds (see the bottom two word clouds in
Figure 2), this trend becomes clearer. Deep learning is much more common in water body
extraction, whereas in the word cloud for water quality monitoring, “neural network” and
“machine learning” are about the same size. Additionally, in the water body extraction