Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 5 of 48
computed, and then recognize their corresponding water quality, eventually linking the two to allow
water quality monitoring .
Environmental nonproﬁts, government agencies, and water managers need access to
this type of integrated spatial–time series of water body and water quality information
to see how local water resources are changing and plan for future drought conditions.
Collective detection and monitoring of water bodies and their associated water quality
has applications for human health, as well as to private-sector industries including timber,
agriculture, recreation, and tourism. Public policy planners need to be better informed as
they make environmental preservation and restoration decisions based on changing water
availability, and with this data we can be better equipped to monitor water quality that can
quickly change due to ﬂoods, hurricanes, or human-caused pollution, and yet, to date, water
body detection and water quality monitoring research has been historically separate and does not
focus enough on producing intuitive, operational products .
Building on the long-term interest in ML and CV within the RS community, the main
goals of this review paper are to (1) survey recent advances in water body detection and
water quality monitoring from RS data using AI to identify commonly cited challenges
in order to provide suggestions for new research directions, and (2) move towards au-
tomated, synoptic water quantity and quality monitoring to inform more robust water
resource management.
This systematic review is relevant to multiple research domains, including, but not
limited to RS, geographic information science, computer science, data science, information
science, geoscience, hydrology, and water resource management. This paper does not
attempt to review the application of RS to water resources and hydrology more generally;
for recent reviews of these topics, see [ 13,21–24]. A survey of DL applications in hydrology
and water resources can be found in [ 25]; a survey of AI in the water domain can be found
in [26]; and a survey of water quality applications using satellite data solely focused on ML
can be found in [ 27]. This review focuses on investigating recent AI methods, including
its branches ML, DL, and CV , for water information extraction (speciﬁcally water body
detection and/or water quality monitoring) from RS imagery. Our review has a narrowed
scope in water resources and hydrological research, but a wider and deeper scope in
terms of AI methods and metrics used to assess models in both water body detection and
water quality research. By integrating both domains, we hope to develop a basis for effective
computational frameworks for intelligent water monitoring systems using RS and AI.
3. The State of the Art: Advances in Intelligent Waterbody Information Extraction
3.1. General Characteristics of the Reviewed Studies
Note that we only included and reviewed the papers that use both RS and AI/ML/DL/CV
for water body and/or water quality detection (that is, the number of papers cited in our
reference section is much larger than the number of papers we review in this Section 3). A word
cloud visualization of the titles, abstracts, and keywords of the reviewed 56 papers are provided
in Figure 2, where the top figure indicates the word cloud for all reviewed papers. The bottom
left word cloud is for reviewed water body papers, and the bottom right for reviewed water
quality papers.
As we can see from the word cloud for both water body extraction and water quality
(see the top word cloud in Figure 2), “remote sensing”, “deep learning”, “prediction”,
“classiﬁcation”, “extraction”, “machine learning”, “water body”, “water quality”, and
“convolutional neural network” are prominent concepts and words captured by the word
cloud. Our focus is on studies that use RS for water body extraction and water quality
monitoring, so many of the keywords are to be expected. However, it is perhaps surprising
to see DL featured so prominently given that the shift from ML to DL models is a relatively
recent phenomenon.