Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 30 of 48
Convolution: Convolution is one of the most important operations in signal and image
processing. Convolution is a mathematical operation to merge two sets of information.
Convolution provides a way of multiplying together two arrays of numbers, generally of
different sizes, but of the same dimensionality, to produce a third array of numbers of the
same dimensionality. This can be used in image processing to implement operators whose
output pixel values are simple linear combinations of certain input pixel values.
A convolutional ﬁlter (i.e., kernel) is a weight matrix (vector for one-dimensional
and cube for three-dimensional data) which operates through a sliding window on input
data. The convolution is performed by determining the value of a central pixel through
adding the weighted pixel values of all its neighbors together. Speciﬁcally, it is carried
out by sliding the kernel over the input image, generally starting at the top left corner,
so as to move the kernel through all the positions where the kernel ﬁts entirely within
the boundaries of the input image. Each kernel position corresponds to a single output
pixel, the value of which is calculated by multiplying together the kernel value and the
underlying image pixel value for each of the cells in the kernel, and then adding all these
numbers together. The output is a new modiﬁed ﬁltered image. Convolution is a general
purpose ﬁlter effect for images. Depending on the kernel structure, the operation enhances
some features of the input data (e.g., blurring, sharpening, and edge detection).
In the context of a CNN, a convolution is a linear operation that involves the mul-
tiplication of a set of weights with the input. Given that the technique was designed for
two-dimensional input, the multiplication is performed between an array of input data and
a two-dimensional array of weights (i.e., a ﬁlter or a kernel). Technically, note that in CNNs,
although it is referred to as a “convolution” operation, it is actually a “cross-correlation”.
That is, in CNNs, the ﬁlter is not ﬂipped as is required in typical image convolutions; except
for this ﬂip, both operations are identical.
Kernel (i.e., ﬁlter): A kernel is a small matrix used in image convolution, which
slides over the input image from left to right and top to bottom. Differently sized kernels,
which contain different patterns of numbers, produce different results through convolution
operation. The size of a kernel is arbitrary, but 3 3 or 55 is often used. Think of a ﬁlter
similar to a membrane that allows only the desired qualities of the input to pass through it.
Feature map: The feature maps of a CNN capture the application result of the ﬁlters
to an input image (i.e., at each layer, the feature map is the output of that layer). Think of it
as (higher level) representations of the input. The feature map(s) is/are the output image(s)
of each convolutional layer(s). The resultant number of feature maps equals the number
of ﬁlters.
Data augmentation (DA) [124]:
ML (especially DL) model performance often improves with an increase in the amount
of data. The common case in most ML/DL applications, especially in image classiﬁcation
tasks, is that obtaining new training data is not easy. Thus, we need to make good use of the
existing (relatively small) training set. DA is one technique to expand the training dataset
from existing training data in order to improve the performance and generalizability of
DL models. DA enriches (i.e., “augments”) the training data by creating new examples
through random transformation of existing ones. This way, we artiﬁcially boost the size
of the training set, reducing overﬁtting. Thus, to some extent, DA can also be viewed as a
regularization technique.
Image DA is perhaps the most well-known type of DA and involves creating trans-
formed versions of images in the training dataset that belong to the same class as the
original image. The ultimate goal is to expand the training dataset with new, plausible
examples (i.e., variations of the training set images that are most likely to be seen by DL
models). For example, a horizontal ﬂip of a bike photo may make sense, because the photo
could be taken from the left or right. A vertical ﬂip of a bike image does not make sense
and would probably not be appropriate as the model is very unlikely to see a picture of an
upside down bike. Transformations for image DA include a range of operations from the
ﬁeld of image manipulation (e.g., rotation, shifting, resizing, ﬂipping, zooming, exposure