Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 15 of 48
water quality from time series data is essential, but traditional ML models fail to capture
long-term temporal patterns. This causes them to make false predictions in water quality
monitoring applications. An RNN–Dempster–Shafer (RNN–DS) evidence theory hybrid
model was used to make sense of multiple input time series of different time scales [ 63].
While evidence theory did make the predictions more stable, longer-term predictions did
not work very well, even with the improvements to the model. The authors pointed out
one possible reason might have been not taking spatial correlations between water quality
parameters into account.
Economic development and urban growth have posed water quality issues. Wavelet
domain threshold denoising (WDTD) and wavelet mean fusion (WMF) were used to
analyze the output of LSTM predictions for multiple water quality parameters [ 65]. While
multiple wavelet basis functions were used to analyze predictions, the LSTM was not
compared to any other models in this analysis. The authors noted that not having enough
observations was a limitation while training their LSTM model.
Mangrove wetlands provide habitats for many different types of animal species in
addition to preventing coastal erosion. More recent research has focused on monitoring the
water quality in these environments to assess the health of coastal ecosystems. Using water
quality and meteorological time series data, three different submodels were used for each
water quality parameter at different time intervals and fused their output predictions [ 66].
The authors tested this setup with a DNN, a gated recurrent unit (GRU), and an LSTM
model. While the LSTM performed the best, the authors reported that the model is not very
reusable or user-friendly.
Collecting and analyzing water samples is expensive, time-consuming, and labor-
intensive. Thus, many researchers choose to use sensors to remotely monitor water quality
parameters, but the number of parameters they can record are often limited. Ref. [ 69] used a
submerged multiprobe sensor to monitor several important water quality parameters over
the course of 1 year. They found that a CNN–LSTM model performs better than standalone
DL models and traditional ML methods for predicting water quality parameter values;
however, the authors did not use a validation set during NN training and the hybrid model
was able to quickly learn the training and testing set data distributions.
3.3.3. CNN-Based Water Quality Detection and Monitoring
CNNs are the dominant architecture for water body detection (Sections 3.3.1 and 3.3.2)
but are not used as widely for water quality. Here, we review two very interesting but
effective CNN-based methods. In situ water quality measurements work really well but
are very expensive. In addition, things such as total nitrogen and phosphorus, biological
oxygen demand, and dissolved oxygen are hard to measure from satellites because they
have weak optical properties. A CNN was used in [ 59] and showed that TL beats out
traditional ML models when classifying water quality from RS imagery. However, their
dataset was very small, and their focus was narrow (speciﬁcally, only two lakes in China,
no rivers or coastal waters covered). Water bodies are often polluted, or their quality
is affected from far away and thus it is difﬁcult to identify and report on water quality.
Methods for estimating water quality at scale are essential. Turbidity can be a proxy for
total suspended solids (TSS) and suspended sediment concentration (SSC), so [ 72] used
image detection and then applied edge detectors to UAV images of water. They employed
CNNs to detect changes in water color and utilized this to approximate quality. They
showed that image-based turbidity detection is as accurate as actual turbidity meters, but
more importantly represents a very promising method for monitoring water quality at
greater spatial scales.
3.3.4. “Shallow” ML-Based Water Quality Detection and Monitoring
Remote water bodies are hard to monitor for water quality. A simple NN architecture
was designed to estimate several water quality parameters (i.e., chlorophyll-a, turbidity,
phosphorus) both before and after an ecosystem restoration project during both the dry