Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 2 of 48
system function. Each of these variables, they argue, can be thought of as having “planetary
boundary”, a threshold that should not be crossed if we are to maintain the Earth in its
current system state [ 5]. In this sense, the integrity and functioning of freshwater systems
are essential not only in the local scale in which they provide critical ecosystem services;
they also create a “safe operating space” for humanity as a whole, as we seek to achieve
global solutions to the larger environmental challenges we face with climate change and
associated stressors [6].
Responding to climate change challenge impacts on water resources requires adap-
tation strategies at the local, regional, national, and global scales. Countries are urged to
improve their water resources management systems and to identify and implement “no
regrets” strategies in order to be resilient to climate change [ 1]. The changing spatial and
temporal patterns of surface water are important, in both practical and scientiﬁc terms, for
water resources management, biodiversity, emergency response, and climate change [ 9].
More speciﬁcally, automated monitoring of water bodies is critical for adapting to climate
change, water resources, ecosystem services, and the hydrological cycle, as well as for
urban hydrology, which can facilitate timely ﬂood protection planning and water quality
control for public safety and health [ 10–12]. Accurate water quality monitoring is essential
for developing sustainable water resource management strategies and ensuring the health
of communities, ecosystems, and economies [ 13]. However, current knowledge of water
quality is often disconnected in time and space across different measurement techniques
and platforms that may fail to capture dynamic ecosystem changes. This disconnection
indicates an inefﬁciency and redundancy in research and monitoring activities. A major
challenge for water resource management is how to integrate multiple sources of water
quality data and indices into usable and actionable information of environmental, social,
economic, and infrastructural value [13,14].
Geospatial big data are leading to transformative changes in science (with the advent
of data-driven and community science) and in society (with the potential to support the
economy, public health, and other advances). Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), especially its
branches machine learning (ML), deep learning (DL), and computer vision (CV), are central
to leveraging geospatial big data for applications in both domains. Remote sensing (RS)
is the single largest source of geospatial big data and has increased dramatically in terms
of both spatial and temporal resolution. This poses serious challenges for effective and
efﬁcient processing and analysis [ 15]. Meanwhile, recent advances in DL and CV have
signiﬁcantly improved research in RS and geosciences [ 16–18]. These advances, if integrated
in creative and appropriate ways, host potential to enable the automated identiﬁcation and
monitoring of large-scale water bodies and water quality effectively and efﬁciently.
In this article, we argue speciﬁcally that bridging research into extracting important
water information (e.g., water body extent, water quality) from RS imagery will provide
an important computational foundation for the development of smart, RS-enabled water
resource management systems. We review a range of recent developments in the relevant
ﬁelds that can be leveraged to support intelligent automation of water body extraction
and water quality detection and monitoring through RS imagery. An accompanying
interactive web application allows our readers to intuitively track scholars and publications
covered in this review (the web app tool URL and its brief demo video link are provided in
Appendix A).
1.1. Selection Criterion for Reviewed Papers and Brief Graphic Summary
In the literature review process, we performed a systematic search on Google Scholar
with the keywords and search strategy detailed in Table 1. In addition, our search was
restricted to research articles published in English and in peer-reviewed journals or confer-
ence proceedings. For water body detection, we combined the water body keywords with
some combination of the general keywords. The process for ﬁnding publications related
to water quality was the same, only with the water quality keywords list. Beyond the
keywords listed in this table, references (those cited in the papers we reviewed) cited by