Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 12 of 48
Substantial water body detection work has focused on water bodies in urban and
inland settings. Very few focus on tidal ﬂat extraction, where sediment levels are high
and the boundary of the water body itself is blurry. A CNN model called FYOLOv3 was
proposed in [ 51], where the authors compared their model to NDWI, an SVM, a maximum
likelihood classiﬁer, U-Net, and YOLOv3. FYOLOv3 performed the best and is able to detect
tidal ﬂats at different resolutions; however, it depends on a manually-selected similarity
threshold during the training process, which is a source of subjectivity.
Large sets of unlabeled water body data are available and easy to acquire, and semantic
segmentation networks cannot recognize different water body shapes. A recent, very novel
encoder–decoder CNN architecture named MSResNet, proposed in [ 46], is able to overcome
those limitations. MSResNet is able to learn from unlabeled data and can also recognize
water bodies of varying shapes and at multiple resolutions. However, even though their
network outperforms other SOTA architectures without supervised training, their network
has some issues categorizing water bodies, farms, and barren areas.
3.2.2. CNN Hybrid-Based Water Body Detection
CNNs are the SOTA models in water body extraction tasks (detailed in Section 3.2.1
above); however, their output and decisions for why they make the predictions that they
do are largely a black box. Recent studies have integrated CNNs with some ML models.
Interpretability was improved by using a CNN and SVM in parallel to classify wetland
water bodies [ 39]. Wetlands are difﬁcult/complex to identify in high-resolution satellite
imagery with any single ML model. Hybrid models have shown promise in a process called
decision fusion. Here, the authors pick a decision fusion threshold value by performing
cross-validation on the CNN to see when it is sure or not. They then use this threshold
value for the decision fusion predictions (e.g., when the CNN is not that sure, they defer
to the SVM). However, the authors did not explain why they used an SVM and not some
other ML model. The classiﬁer used in [ 32] combines a CNN with a logistic regression (LR)
model to extract water bodies. The authors emphasized that traditional ML methods for
water body extraction need multispectral data and rely on lots of prior knowledge. Thus,
those ML-based methods would not generalize well to different tasks. The authors also
argue that single-band threshold methods are subjective. Their results demonstrated that
the hybrid CNN-LR model works better than an SVM, an ANN, and other CNNs. However,
their method requires segmented RS images as input.
How to accurately extract water bodies from RS images, while continuously updating
the surface water maps, is an active research question. Index methods and active contour
models are popular methods for water body detection tasks but are sensitive to subjective
threshold values and starting conditions. Deep U-Net model was proposed to be used
with a conditional random ﬁeld (CRF) and regional restriction to categorize water versus
non-water in satellite images [ 36], while reducing the blurring of edges that often occurs
from CNNs for image segmentation. Although this network is highly accurate, it takes a
lot of data and computation power to train. Training ML models at a single scale in single
channels can cause errors when generalizing to other scales or types of RS data. Multiscale
RS imagery was used with DeepLabV3+ and a CRF for water body segmentation [ 38]. This
approach works well for training models on data from different scales, and they concluded
that CNNs and CRFs together extract more accurate water boundaries at both large and
small scales than CNNs alone.
3.2.3. ANN, MLP , DNN, and Other DL-Based Methods for Water Body Detection
An NN architecture called a local excitatory globally inhibitory oscillator network
(LEGION) is used in [ 28], where the authors compared the results of LEGION trained
on NDWI and spectral information, respectively. In addition, they employed object-wise
classiﬁcation, instead of pixel-based classiﬁcation used in most other work. The authors
reported that the network is very computationally expensive.