Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 17 of 48
parameters to an entire lake, but they only focused on one lake and did not test their
methods on other bodies of water.
As bodies of water are exposed to increased nutrient loads, harmful algal blooms can
occur, leading to eutrophication. This process can create dead zones that would kill wildlife
and lead to negative economic impacts. Thus, it is important to monitor chlorophyll-a levels
in water bodies and predict algal blooms before they happen. Zhao et al. [ 74] attempted to
address this need by comparing DL models to traditional ML and curve-ﬁtting methods
to predict chlorophyll-a levels using time series measurements paired with RS imagery.
The authors did not have much data as they limited the data collection process to one lake.
Thus, the DL models did not perform well. Additionally, the ML models used in this paper
needed more data and computing than simpler models in order to perform well.
It is often difﬁcult to monitor inland water bodies for quality because of low signal-to-
noise ratios and limitations in resolution. A proximal hyperspectral imager was used in [ 77]
with high spectral and temporal time series data for continuous water quality observations.
The authors found that index-based methods of water quality detection were difﬁcult to
calibrate as thresholding values are subjective, while ML and DL models performed much
better. However, the authors show that their models do not generalize well to other water
bodies with different water quality parameter distributions.
Anthropogenic activities have currently threatened largely coastal ecosystems. Coastal
ecosystems are complex bodies of water but monitoring them is very important. The
performance of an ANN was compared to traditional ML models in [ 62] for predicting
various water quality parameters. In some cases, traditional ML methods outperform the
ANN. More importantly, the authors conducted an analysis of relative variable importance
to show which sets of input data helped the ML models to learn the most. While the relative
variable importance analysis is critically important, the authors only test their method in
cloud-free RS imagery, limiting its utility. Additionally, while biophysical and chemical
water quality parameters were analyzed, little work was carried out with bio-optical data
due to issues with data availability.
While recent advances in RS capabilities for water quality detection are substantial
in the literature, few papers have collected and synthesized the resources available to
researchers. In a paper reviewing recent trends in RS imagery, cloud computing, and ML
methods, [ 67] used time series data from hundreds of water quality parameters and water
samples and combined them with proximal imagery, hyperspectral imagery, and two sets
of data from different satellite data platforms. They showed that DNNs outperform many
other traditional processing and ML techniques for assessing water quality. The authors
conclude that anomaly detection using multisensor data is the most promising method
for algal bloom detection. As is sometimes the case in the water body detection and water
quality monitoring literature, the authors did not have a third holdout set (necessary for
DL projects so that the data is not memorized).
4. Challenges and Opportunities
In this section, we ﬁrst provide a brief summary and discussion of the key themes and
overall insights (Section 4.1) derived from reviewing the range of research discussed above.
In Section 4.2, we provide and discuss some of the major challenges we identiﬁed through
our systematic survey. Speciﬁcally, those challenges shared in both domains are detailed in
Section 4.2.1, those speciﬁc only to water body extraction in Section 4.2.2, and those speciﬁc
to water quality monitoring in Section 4.2.3. Finally, we discuss possible research directions
and related opportunities for water body detection and water quality monitoring using RS
and AI in Section 4.3.
4.1. Summary and Discussion
After introducing the essential terms in AI and RS (Appendix B) and commonly used
evaluation metrics in ML and DL for classiﬁcation, regression, and segmentation tasks