Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 31 of 48
adjustment, contrast change, and much more). This way, a lot of new samples can be
generated from a single training example.
Note that image DA is typically only applied to the training dataset, and NOT to the
validation or test dataset. This is different from data preparation such as image resizing and
pixel scaling; those must be performed consistently across all datasets that interact with the
model. The choice of the speciﬁc DA techniques used for a training dataset must be chosen
carefully and within the context of the training dataset and knowledge of the problem
domain. It can be useful to experiment with DA methods in isolation and in concert to see
if they result in a measurable improvement to model performance, perhaps with a small
prototype dataset, model, and training run.
DeepLabV3+ [125]: DeepLabV3 was ﬁrstly proposed to enable deep CNNs to seg-
ment features in images at multiple scales. ResNet-50 and ResNet-101, two variations on the
popular residual network (ResNet) architecture, are the tested backbones for DeepLabV3.
Through the use of residual blocks, atrous convolution, and a spatial pyramid pooling
module, the authors showed that their new architecture achieved comparable perfor-
mance to other SOTA models in image segmentation tasks without the need for further
post-processing. The authors further improved DeepLabV3 and named the new version
DeepLabV3+ [ 126], which combines atrous spatial pyramid pooling modules with an
encoder–decoder module. This further improved the performance of DeepLabV3 while
sharpening predicted feature boundaries. The DeepLabV3+ architecture is very popular in
the water body extraction literature.
Generative adversarial network (GAN): GAN is a class of unsupervised DL frame-
works in which two neural networks compete with each other. One network, the generator,
tries to create synthetic or false images which fool the discriminator network. The discrim-
inator, in turn, attempts to discern which images coming from the generator are actual
vs. synthetic images [ 127]. GANs use a cooperative zero-sum game framework to learn.
Among many variants of GAN, cycleGAN [ 128] is a technique for training unsupervised
image translation models using the GAN architecture and unpaired collections of images
from two different domains. CycleGAN has been demonstrated on a wide range of applica-
tions, including season translation, object transﬁguration, style transfer, and generating
photos from paintings.
Generalization, overfitting, underfitting and regularization (referenced [123,129,130]):
The prediction results of an ML/DL model sit somewhere between (a) low-bias,
low-variance, (b) low-bias, high-variance, (c) high-bias, low-variance, and (d) high-bias,
high-variance. A low-biased, high-variance model is called overﬁt and a high-biased,
low-variance model is called underﬁt. A trained model achieves the best performance,
through generalization, when the best trade-off between underﬁtting and overﬁtting is
found. Learning with good accuracy is good, but generalization is what matters most.
A good model is supposed to have both low bias and low variance. Overﬁtting and
underﬁtting should both be avoided, where regularization may help.
Generalization: In ML/DL, generalization refers to the ability of a trained ML/DL
model to react to new (i.e., previously unseen) data, drawn from the same distribution as
the training data used to create the model. That is, after being trained on a training set, an
ML/DL model can digest new data and make accurate predictions. The generalizability of
an ML/DL model is central to the success of that model.
Overﬁtting vs. underﬁtting: Variance and bias are two important terms in ML. Vari-
ance refers to the variety of predicted values made by an ML model (target function). Bias
means the distance of the predictions from the actual (true) target values. A high-biased
model means its prediction values (average) are far from the actual values. In addition,
high-variance prediction means the prediction values are highly varied.
If an ML/DL model has been trained too well on training data, it will be unable to
generalize. It will make inaccurate predictions when given new data, making the model
useless even though it is able to make accurate predictions for the training data. This is
called overﬁtting. Underﬁtting happens when a model has not been trained enough on the