Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 28 of 48
TB Tree Bagger
TL Transfer Learning
TN True Negative
TP True Positive
VHR Very High Resolution
UA User’s Accuracy
UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
Appendix A. The Accompanying Interactive Web App Tool for the Literature of
Intelligent Water Information Extraction Using AI
In Section 1.1, we provided a brief map and graphic summary of the papers covered
in this review. To allow readers to obtain more useful and dynamic information and
insights from the papers reviewed, we have developed an interactive web app. Through
the web app, readers can keep track of the major researchers and access an up-to-date list
of publications in the reviewed topics. Updated publications are accessible through (1) a
researcher’s public academic proﬁle on Google Scholar or ResearchGate (see Figure A1a for
an example), and (2) a continuously updated citations count of the papers that we reviewed
in this paper (see Figure A1b for an example: the cited by as of 10 November 2021 is 47,
which is when we ﬁrst entered the data in our data ﬁle when we reviewed the paper, and
then before this paper submission, when we clicked on the cited by URL, the page shows
that the up-to-date citation number is 49). The web app can be accessed publicly, free of
charge at
 Web app tool: https://geoair-lab.github.io/WaterFeatureAI-WebApp/index.html,
accessed on 28 February 2022.
 Brief web app demo video (about 6 min duration): the video link is accessible at the
web app page.
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 30 of 50  
 SVR Support Vector Regression 
SWIR Short Wave Infrared  TB Tree Bagger 
TL Transfer Learning 
TN True Negative TP True Positive 
VHR Very High Resolution 
UA User’s Accuracy 
UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicle 
Appendix A. The Accompanying  Interactive Web App Tool for the Literature of Intel-
ligent Water Information Extraction Using AI 
In Section 1.1, we provided a brief map and graphic summary of the papers covered 
in this review. To allow readers to obtain more useful and dynamic information and in-
sights from the papers reviewed, we have developed an interactive web app. Through the web app, readers can keep track of the major researchers and access an up-to-date list of 
publications in the reviewed topics. Updated publications are accessible through (1) a re-
searcher’s public academic profile on Google Scholar or ResearchGate (see Figure A1a for 
an example), and (2) a continuously updated citations count of the papers that we re-
viewed in this paper (see Figure A1b for an ex ample: the cited by as of 10 November 2021 
is 47, which is when we first entered the data in our data file when we reviewed the paper, 
and then before this paper submission, when we clicked on the cited by URL, the page 
shows that the up-to-date citation number is 49). The web app can be accessed publicly, free of charge  at  
• Web app tool: https://geoair-lab.github.io/WaterFeatureAI-WebApp/index.html, ac-
cessed on 28 February 2022.  
• Brief web app demo video (about 6 min duration ): the video link is accessible at the 
web app page. 
 
(a) 
Figure A1. Cont .