Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 10 of 48
CNN-based methods can overcome the limitations of index-based methods, as reported
above in group (1) [ 34], but they often blur boundaries in segmentation tasks because of the
convolution operation. To sharpen water body detection boundaries, in [ 34], a restricted
receptive field deconvolution network (RRF DeconvNet) and a new loss function called edges
weighting loss were proposed. However, the authors needed to retrain the entire network
(which is very computationally expensive) instead of using transfer learning (TL).
Apart from blurring pixel boundaries, CNNs generally require many training parame-
ters and very large training datasets to be successful. A novel convolution–inception block
in a network, called W-Net, was proposed in [ 48], to extract water bodies from RS imagery.
W-Net is able to train on fewer images compared with other CNN models and still extract
water bodies accurately, and the authors pointed out that less computations are necessary
due to use of inception layers. W-Net outperformed other CNN architectures, although
the authors still needed to go through the time- and labor-intensive process of creating a
dataset of manually annotating images.
3. Addressing resolution and band related challenges
High-resolution optical RS imagery allows for much ﬁner detail in surface water
body extraction. However, clouds and their shadows are often present in optical RS
images [ 78]. The shadows (e.g., cloud shadows and building shadows) and water bodies
share a very similar appearance in optical RS images. Therefore, water body extraction is
not an easy task in the optical high-resolution RS images due to the limited spectral ranges
(including blue, green, red, and near-infrared bands) and the complexity of low-albedo
objects (cloud shadows, vegetation, and building shadows). Higher spatial resolution
imagery often comes at the cost of less spectral channels and thus makes it difﬁcult to
extract features from complex scenes. To address this problem, a dense local feature
compression (DLFC) was proposed [ 52] to extract bodies of water from RS imagery, and
their DLFC outperformed other state-of-the-art (SOTA) CNNs, as well as an SVM and
NDWI thresholding. Their results demonstrated that the DLFC is good at extracting slender
water bodies and distinguishing water bodies from building shadows using multisensor
data from multiple RS platforms.
TL and data augmentation (see Appendix B) are used in [ 37] to extract water bodies
from satellite imagery. The authors showed that a CNN can outperform NDWI and an SVM
in water body detection when the input data is very high resolution. There are tradeoffs,
however, and the authors reported that the difﬁculty of hyperparameter tuning is one
downside to using a CNN. A water body extraction NN, named WBE-NN, was proposed
in [45] to extract water bodies from multispectral imagery at multiple resolutions while
distinguishing water from shadows, and performed much better than NDWI, an SVM,
and several CNN architectures. A self-attention capsule feature pyramid network (SA-
CapsFPN) was proposed in [ 49] to extract water bodies from satellite imagery of different
resolutions. SA-CapsFPN is able to recognize bodies of water across scales and different
shapes and colors, as well as in varying surface and environmental conditions, although it
is still entirely dependent on optical imagery as input to the CNN.
The novel MSResNet proposed in [ 46] learned from a large dataset of unlabeled RS
imagery. MSResNet, in addition to being able to extract water bodies in an unsupervised
manner, is able to recognize water bodies at multiple resolutions and of varying shapes.
However, their network cannot distinguish water bodies from farms and barren areas. In
addition, the CNN-based model name FYOLOv3, proposed in [ 51], is able to detect tidal
ﬂats at different resolutions. However, it does depend on a manually selected similarity
threshold that introduces some subjectivity.
RGB band imagery is the primary focus in substantial research for water body ex-
traction, but many more bands are available in RS imagery. A multichannel water body
detection network (MC-WBDN) was created in [ 47], which fused the infrared and RGB
channels and used them as input data for their CNN architecture. They demonstrated that
when multispectral data is used, model performance for water body detection is increased
and the model is more robust to lighting conditions. The proposed model MC-WBDN is