Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 25 of 48
# Semi-supervised learning methods are able to learn from limited good-quality
labeled samples. DL models do not require feature engineering, and they are
also much better at discovering intricate patterns hidden in big data. How-
ever, pure supervised DL is impractical in some situations, such as those for
which the labeling tasks require domain knowledge from experts. Very few
domain experts have the time and are willing to label very large sets of RS
images [ 84]. An active learning-enabled DL approach that uses a visualization
interface and methods to iteratively collect modest amounts of input from
domain experts and uses that input to reﬁne the DL classiﬁers [ 84] provides
a promising direction to produce well-performing DL models with limited
good-quality datasets.
 From our systematic review, we can easily see that current work on water body
extraction and water quality monitoring using AI and RS are, in general, carried out
separately. We call for a closer integration of water body detection and water quality
monitoring research and more attention focusing on handling massive datasets that
may include information in a variety of formats, of varying quality, and from diverse
sources. This integration is critical as it will provide the essential foundation for
developing real, intelligent water monitoring systems using RS and AI capable of
producing insights used for actionable decision making.
 GEE + AI: as noted in [ 18], GEE is a good solution to address computational costs
and overcome technical challenges of processing RS big data. However, online DL
functionality is still not supported on GEE. To the best of our knowledge, the only
piece of research integration of the Google AI platform with GEE is performed in [ 119];
however, as the authors reported, “data migration and computational demands are
among the main present constraints in deploying these technologies in an operational
setting”. Thus, the ideal solution is to develop DL models directly on the GEE platform.
 Most current ML/DL-based RS research focuses on borrowing or slightly improving
ML/DL/CV models from computer science [ 79,120]. Compared with natural scene
images, RS data are multiresolution, multitemporal, multispectral, multiview, and
multitarget [ 15]. Slight modiﬁcations of ML/DL/CV models simply cannot cope with
the special challenges posed in RS big data. New ML/DL models specialized for RS
big data are thus urgently needed [ 15,18]. We hope our review will draw the attention
of researchers who have a multidisciplinary background to this issue. Looking deep
into the mechanisms of RS and land surface processes, studying the characteristics of
RS imagery would guide the design of specialized ML/DL models for RS big data and
thus further improve RS applications using AI in breadth and depth [15].
5. Conclusions
Building intelligent and synoptic water monitoring systems requires automation of
water body extent detection using RS imagery, from which volume can be computed,
and also automation of their corresponding water quality, eventually linking the two to
allow synoptic water quality monitoring. Yet, to date, water body detection and water
quality monitoring research has been historically separate. Our systematic investigation
indicates the following trends: deep learning is much more commonly used in water
body detection, the dominant data source of which is RS imagery, whereas water quality
literature often involves other types of data sources (e.g., in situ sensors, smaller RS devices
that are not satellites). The trends relate to the scale of projects in the two domains: water
body extraction is usually undertaken across large spatial scales, whereas the water quality
monitoring literature is still only focused on smaller, often individual, bodies of water. This
points to one of the future research directions in the water quality literature that we touch
on above in Section 4.3; that is, we need to scale up water quality estimation using RS
imagery through matching it with ground-truth water quality measurements.
Overall, based on the systematic review above, we contend that RS integrated with
AI/ML/DL/CV methods, along with geovisualization, have great potential to provide