Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 4 of 48
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 50  
  
(d) 
Figure 1. Geospatial distribution and simple statistics  of the reviewed papers. Note that a freely 
accessible interactive version of the charts can be accessed via our web app tool (the web app tool URL and its brief demo video are provided in Appe ndix A). We can easily see that the major coun-
tries are China and the United Stat es and that the number of publis hed papers by year (2011 to 2021) 
has dramatically increased since 2018 and 2019. ( a) Spatial distribution of reviewed papers based on 
the first author’s institution location. ( b) Topic distribution (water body, water quality, both). ( c) 
Country distribution. ( d) Number of published papers by year  from 2011 to 2021 on the relevant 
topics. 
1.2. Roadmap 
Here, we provide a roadmap for the rest of the paper. Section 2 outlines the scope of 
this review and our intended audience. Section 3 is the core of the paper, focused on iden-
tifying important and recent developments and their implications to water body detection 
and water quality monitoring from RS imagery through the leverage of AI/ML/DL/CV. 
Here, we highlight recent advances in several subfields of AI that water domains and RS 
can leverage. Specifically, we provide general characteristics of the reviewed studies using word clouds (Section 3.1). We then examine and appraise key components of influential 
work in water body detection (Section 3.2) and water quality monitoring (Section 3.3). 
Section 4 starts with a brief su mmary (Section 4.1), followed with  a discussion of key tech-
nical challenges (Section 4.2) and opportunities (Section 4.3). The paper concludes in Sec-
tion 5. 
To allow our readers to intuitively and dynamically review the relevant literature, 
we have developed a free-of-charge interact ive web app tool (the web app URL and its 
brief demo video are provided in Appendix A). To provide background for readers (par-ticularly those from water resources and RS) who are new to AI/ML/DL/CV, we introduce 
essential ML terms in Appendix B. As evaluation metrics are essential for measuring the 
performance of AI/ML/DL/CV mo dels, we also provide an in troduction to a set of com-
monly used evaluation metrics in Appendix C. In addition, as there are plenty of acro-
nyms in this paper, we provide a full list of abbreviations right before the appendices. 
2. Audience and Scope 
It is important to know where water is an d how its extent and quality are changing 
over time in a quick and accurate manner. Wa ter quality is a key issue in water supply, 
agriculture, human and animal health, and many other areas [19]. Impaired water quality 
can be caused by natural disasters, but the most common cause is anthropogenic pollu-tion. Pollutants, excessive nutrients from fertil izers, and sediment (e.g., from soil erosion) 
are carried into local lakes and rivers via runoff from urban or agricultural areas [19,20]. 
The quality of water varies from places and from  time to time [19]. Affected surface waters 
are present in RS imagery and can be identified with the help of computational techniques 
such as ML. To make near real-time intelligent water bo dy detection and water quality monitoring 
possible, we need to first detect extent of water bodies from RS imagery, from which volume can be 
Figure 1. Geospatial distribution and simple statistics of the reviewed papers. Note that a freely
accessible interactive version of the charts can be accessed via our web app tool (the web app tool
URL and its brief demo video are provided in Appendix A). We can easily see that the major countries
are China and the United States and that the number of published papers by year (2011 to 2021) has
dramatically increased since 2018 and 2019. ( a) Spatial distribution of reviewed papers based on the
ﬁrst author’s institution location. ( b) Topic distribution (water body, water quality, both). ( c) Country
distribution. ( d) Number of published papers by year from 2011 to 2021 on the relevant topics.
1.2. Roadmap
Here, we provide a roadmap for the rest of the paper. Section 2 outlines the scope of this
review and our intended audience. Section 3 is the core of the paper, focused on identifying
important and recent developments and their implications to water body detection and
water quality monitoring from RS imagery through the leverage of AI/ML/DL/CV . Here,
we highlight recent advances in several subﬁelds of AI that water domains and RS can
leverage. Speciﬁcally, we provide general characteristics of the reviewed studies using
word clouds (Section 3.1). We then examine and appraise key components of inﬂuential
work in water body detection (Section 3.2) and water quality monitoring (Section 3.3).
Section 4 starts with a brief summary (Section 4.1), followed with a discussion of key
technical challenges (Section 4.2) and opportunities (Section 4.3). The paper concludes
in Section 5.
To allow our readers to intuitively and dynamically review the relevant literature, we
have developed a free-of-charge interactive web app tool (the web app URL and its brief
demo video are provided in Appendix A). To provide background for readers (particularly
those from water resources and RS) who are new to AI/ML/DL/CV , we introduce essential
ML terms in Appendix B. As evaluation metrics are essential for measuring the performance
of AI/ML/DL/CV models, we also provide an introduction to a set of commonly used
evaluation metrics in Appendix C. In addition, as there are plenty of acronyms in this paper,
we provide a full list of abbreviations right before the appendices.
2. Audience and Scope
It is important to know where water is and how its extent and quality are changing
over time in a quick and accurate manner. Water quality is a key issue in water supply,
agriculture, human and animal health, and many other areas [ 19]. Impaired water quality
can be caused by natural disasters, but the most common cause is anthropogenic pollution.
Pollutants, excessive nutrients from fertilizers, and sediment (e.g., from soil erosion) are
carried into local lakes and rivers via runoff from urban or agricultural areas [ 19,20]. The
quality of water varies from places and from time to time [ 19]. Affected surface waters are
present in RS imagery and can be identiﬁed with the help of computational techniques
such as ML. To make near real-time intelligent water body detection and water quality monitoring
possible, we need to ﬁrst detect extent of water bodies from RS imagery, from which volume can be