Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 16 of 48
and wet seasons [ 55]. Importantly, their predictions, using seven different input bands for
training the NN, were very close to the actual values.
Finding what data to input into an ML model for water quality monitoring is neither
easy nor straightforward. Different indices are sensitive to different areas and varying
weather and lighting conditions. To address this problem, [ 71] ﬁrst correlated water quality
parameters to different RS bands. These correlations were then used to test four ML models
and their ability to predict a water quality index. Their R2statistics were not high, though.
3.3.5. ANN, MLP , DNN, and Other DL-Based Methods for Water Quality Detection and
Monitoring
Climate change is making droughts and water shortages increasingly worse in arid
regions. It is thus important to develop methods and systems for intelligent and efﬁcient
monitoring of the water resources in those regions. A water quality index for arid regions
was proposed in [ 56] and attempted to ﬁnd which bands and spectral indices are related
to that water quality index. In situ water quality sampling is labor- and cost-intensive
and often suffers from low temporal resolution. As bodies of water around the world are
changing rapidly due to global warming, it is more important than ever to model their
spatial variation through time. A point-centered regression CNN (PSRCNN) was used
in [73] to analyze lake reﬂectance data to model water transparency. The authors concluded
that their model outperformed different band ratios and traditional ML models (KNN, RF,
SVM), although at the cost of generalization. The PSRCNN did not make stable predictions
due to too little data.
There is currently not enough paired RS imagery and in situ water measurement to
meaningfully create robust water quality monitoring applications. The generation of a
synthetic dataset of atmospheric reﬂectances and its suitability for water quality monitoring
were investigated in [ 76]. The synthetic dataset is physics-based and attempts to capture the
natural variability in inland water reﬂectances and chlorophyll-a concentrations. An ANN
outperforms several traditional ML models (KNN, RF, XGBoost) in predicting actual water
quality parameter values when trained on the synthetic dataset, although only the ANN
is validated against unseen data. Still, synthetic data generation is a promising research
direction for water body and water quality detection. Without RS imagery, many water
quality monitoring programs will suffer from lack of spatial coverage due to labor, time, and
cost constraints. Yet while RS is a useful tool for monitoring water quality parameters, it
has not been meaningfully integrated into operational water quality monitoring programs.
Existing water quality time series data were used in [ 75] and assessed the effectiveness of
multiple RS data platforms and ML models in estimating various water quality parameters.
The authors showed that some sensors are poorly correlated with water quality parameters,
while others are more suitable for water quality monitoring tasks. They concluded that
more research needs to be carried out for assessing the suitability of paired RS imagery and
in situ ﬁeld data.
Current water quality monitoring systems are labor-, time-, and cost-intensive to
operate. IoT sensors can monitor water quality parameters in near real time, allowing
for much more data to be recorded with much higher temporal resolution. A wireless
sensor network made up in part of IoT sensors was used in [ 61], and used an MLP to
classify water quality as either good or bad. The authors utilized the MLP predictions to
notify water quality managers via SMS if the water quality drops below a certain threshold
value. However, because of the cost to deploy and run the network, the authors were
not able to include additional water quality parameters from more types of bodies of
water other than rivers. Water quality monitoring data collection is expensive and time
consuming, and there are usually tradeoffs between spatial and temporal resolution when
implementing data collection programs. In addition, several key water quality parameters
(pH, turbidity, temperature) can be estimated directly from optical and infrared RS imagery.
Randrianianina et al. [ 64] used RS imagery and DNNs to model water quality parameters
directly, after which they extend their analysis to map the distributions of water quality