Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 9 of 48
3.2. Recent Advances in Water Body Detection Using AI
From our systematic review (including Table 2), we provide a brief summary here
about the recent advances in water body detection based on AI. (1) The most common
satellite platforms were Landsat, GaoFen, Zi Yuan, WorldView, and Sentinel, although
there were some manually annotated datasets. The use of UAVs and DEMs were noted
but were not as common. (2) Precision, recall, overall accuracy (OA), F1-score, kappa,
and intersection over union (IoU) are the most popular evaluation metrics for water body
detection since it is mainly a classiﬁcation task. (3) Convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
are normally compared to normalized difference water index (NDWI) or another index-
based method, some form of “shallow” ML model (e.g., random forest (RF), support
vector machine (SVM)), or other CNN architectures). Below, we provide a more detailed
review of the methods used for water body detection. As Table 2 and word clouds (see
Figure 2) indicate, the dominant methods used in water body detection with AI are CNNs
(Section 3.2.1). Beyond CNN-based methods, there are other methods including CNN
hybrids (Section 3.2.2), artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN), multilayer perceptrons (MLP),
dense neural networks (DNN), other DL methods (Section 3.2.3), and “shallow” ML based
methods (Section 3.2.4).
3.2.1. CNN-Based Water Body Detection
CNN-based models are the dominant methods for water body detection, but each of
them have addressed different challenges posed in water body detection from RS imagery.
Based on our review, we identify the following ﬁve groups of use cases: (1) Addressing
limitations of index-based methods; (2) sharpening blurred boundaries caused by CNNs;
(3) Addressing spatial and spectral resolution challenges, which covers those methods that
are able to recognize water body across scales, at multiple resolutions, from very high-
resolution imagery, and/or integrating bands beyond RGB channels to use for CNN model
training; (4) Robust detection of small/slender/irregular-shaped water bodies; (5) Others.
1. Addressing limitations of index-based methods:
Index methods (e.g., NDWI) are rule-based and fail to take advantage of context
information. CNNs can overcome this, although they often blur boundaries in segmentation
tasks because of the convolution operation [ 34]. A DenseNet was used in [ 43] for water
feature extraction and the authors compared its performance with NDWI and several
popular CNN architectures. While NDWI methods are quick, they are not as accurate as
CNNs. The authors showed that DenseNet performed the best at distinguishing water
from shadows and clouds. However, the authors argue that clouds often occlude optical
imagery, so one way to improve their method is to combine it with microwave RS imagery.
The authors in [ 31] pointed out that index methods require careful calibration and that
indices differ from place to place. They also suffer from false positives (from snow, ice, rock,
shadows, etc.) and vary in different weather conditions (e.g., clouds). To overcome those
limitations of index-based methods, the authors of [ 31] developed DeepWaterMap, which
can classify water with high accuracy, even distinguishing it from snow, ice, shadow, and
clouds. DeepWaterMap is able to classify land classes that are often misclassiﬁed as water
(or vice versa); thus, it minimizes false positives during the classiﬁcation process. Most
importantly, the DeepWaterMap model also works across different terrains and in different
weather conditions, although it is still affected by clouds. The same authors released a
second version of the model, DeepWaterMap v2, in [ 40]. The major improvement from v1
is that the new version allows users to input large RS scenes without the need for tiling,
and the authors made their network run efﬁciently with constant memory at inference time.
This model should theoretically work across different sensor platforms as long as they have
the visible, near-infrared, and shortwave infrared 1 and 2 bands, but will still sometimes
classify clouds as water.
2. Sharpening blurred boundaries caused by CNNs: