Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 14 of 48
quality monitoring, it is much more common to utilize Internet of Things (IoT) sensors,
smaller probes such as unmanned aerial vehicle (UAVs) and stationary hyperspectral
imagers, as well as government and private water quality time series data. (4) Some studies
do not compare their model to any other models (detailed in Table 3), making it difﬁcult to
fully assess their methodologies.
Below, we provide a more detailed review of the methods used for water quality
detection and monitoring. As our manual investigation (see Table 3) and machine summary
(word cloud, see Figure 1) indicate, the dominant methods used in water quality detection
with AI are LSTMs (Section 3.3.1) and ANNs, MLPs, DNNs, and other DL methods
(Section 3.3.5). Beyond LSTM and ANN-based methods, there are other methods including
LSTM hybrids (Section 3.3.2), CNN-based methods (Section 3.3.3), and “shallow” ML-based
methods (Section 3.3.4).
3.3.1. LSTM-Based Water Quality Detection and Monitoring
Algal blooms cause serious harm to human and animal health and can damage both
environments and economies. Various factors lead to algal blooms and gathering the data
necessary to predict them is time- and cost-intensive. ML models can provide advanced
warning for these events by taking into account time series data of basic water quality
parameters. A linear regression model was compared with an MLP , an RNN, and an LSTM
to predict harmful algae blooms in dammed pools from several rivers [ 57]. While the LSTM
model was the most accurate overall, for several of the dammed pools that the authors
tested, a least-squares regression model outperformed the LSTM. This casts doubt as to
how the LSTM model generalizes and if it is worth the added complexity.
Water pollution is becoming an increasing problem because of rapid rates of devel-
opment and urbanization. Large amounts of water quality parameters can be taken via
IoT sensors, and DL techniques are well suited to ﬁnding patterns in the large quantity of
data. An LSTM was used to predict future values of different water quality parameters [ 60].
Most importantly, the authors only used single-dimensional inputs and outputs (i.e., a 1D
time series of dissolved oxygen as an input to predict dissolved oxygen at some time in the
future). While the results were good, the authors noted that the architecture would beneﬁt
from training on multiple time series at the same time. The authors reported that long-term
predictions on the order of 6 months into the future did not work well. Beyond monitoring
water for different levels of pollutants, it is also important to ﬁnd the sources of pollutants
when they are identiﬁed. Cross-correlation was used to map pollutants to different water
quality parameters [ 58]. They then used an LSTM to match pollutants to nearby polluting
industries using the highly correlated water quality parameters.
Similar to LSTMs, RNNs have been demonstrated to be accurate for times series
prediction but are also often criticized for being difﬁcult to interpret. Meanwhile, process-
based ecological models, although deterministic, fail to capture patterns at longer time
scales. A process-based model was integrated with an RNN to better align predictions of
phosphorus levels in lakes to eliminate outlier predictions. Constraining NN output with
physics-based models better aligns their predictions with ecological principles [68].
Rapid development has led to decreased water quality. In [ 70], water quality parame-
ters can be used to both classify the current water quality index and predict future water
quality index states. However, the authors separately compared DL models for water
quality prediction and ML models for water quality classiﬁcation, making the methods
not directly comparable. A nonlinear autoregressive neural network (NARNET), a type of
ANN, performed better than an LSTM at predicting the water quality index, while an SVM
performed better than other traditional ML models for classiﬁcation.
3.3.2. LSTM Hybrids Water Quality Detection and Monitoring
To further improve model performance, a few recent studies have integrated other
models with LSTMs. Water scarcity and drought are increasingly signiﬁcant environmental
challenges. Increased development is leading to worsening water pollution. Predicting the