Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 3 of 48
the keyword-identiﬁed papers were also retained. A total of 90 papers relevant to the topic
of water body and/or water quality from RS imagery using AI/ML/DL/CV algorithms
were identiﬁed. A total number of 56 highly relevant articles were identiﬁed by applying
the following exclusion criteria: (1) papers related to plastic pollution and sewage/water
treatment plants, (2) precipitation forecasting or groundwater detection (as it is not intuitive
to detect groundwater from RS imagery), and (3) general land use classiﬁcation. Figure 1
shows the spatial distribution and a simple statistics summary of the papers covered in this
review, where (d) shows the number of published papers by year in the reviewed topics
from 2011 to early 2022.
Table 1. Keywords used for article search.
Keyword Category Search Strategy
General keywords1“remote sensing” OR “satellite data” OR “UAV” AND
“computer vision” OR
“machine learning” OR “deep learning” OR “neural
networks” OR “AI”
Water body “water body” AND “detection” OR “extraction”
Water quality “water quality” AND “sensing” OR “monitoring”
1A list of general keywords were combined with either the category of water body or water quality, respectively,
to perform our search.
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 50  
 with some combination of the general keywords. The process for finding publications re-
lated to water quality was the same, only wi th the water quality keywords list. Beyond 
the keywords listed in this table, references (those cited in the papers we reviewed) cited 
by the keyword-identified papers were also re tained. A total of 90 papers relevant to the 
topic of water body and/or water quality from RS imagery using AI/ML/DL/CV algo-
rithms were identified. A total number of 56 highly relevant articles were identified by 
applying the following exclusion criteria: (1) papers related to plastic pollution and sew-age/water treatment plants, (2) precipitation forecasting or groundwater detection (as it is 
not intuitive to detect groundwater from RS imagery), and (3) general land use classifica-
tion. Figure 1 shows the spatial distribution and a simple statistics summary of the papers 
covered in this review, where (d) shows the number of published papers by year in the 
reviewed topics from 2011 to early 2022. 
 
Table 1. Keywords used for article search. 
Keyword Category Search Strategy 
General keywords  1 “remote sensing” OR “satellite data” OR “UAV” AND 
“computer vision” OR  
“machine learning” OR “deep learning” OR “neural net-
works” OR “AI” 
Water body “water body” AND “detection” OR “extraction” 
Water quality “water quality” AND “sensing” OR “monitoring” 
1 A list of general keywords were combined with either the category of water body or water qual-
ity, respectively, to perform our search. 
 
(a) 
  
(b) ( c) 
Figure 1. Cont .