Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 11 of 48
much more accurate than index-based methods such as NDWI, modiﬁed NDWI (MNDWI),
and normalized difference moisture index (NDMI). MC-WBDN also outperforms other
SOTA architectures such as U-Net and DeepLabV3+ for water body detection tasks. How-
ever, this method still relies on preprocessing data to make sure each input image is the
same shape and free of clouds.
4. Robust detection of small/slender/irregular-shaped water bodies
Small water bodies are hard to extract from RS imagery. In [ 33], the authors designed
a CNN (named SAPCNN), which is able to extract high-level features of water bodies
from input data in a complex urban background. NDWI and SVMs cannot distinguish
between water and shadows and their architecture’s performance partly relies on visual
inspection. Ref. [ 53] utilized a modiﬁed DeepLabv3+ architecture to extract bodies of water
at different scales. Their focus is on extracting water bodies in urban RS images. Their
network performed well on small bodies of water, but the model has problems identifying
many of them because they were not properly annotated.
Mask-region-based CNNs (R-CNNs) have demonstrated success in detecting small
and irregular shape water bodies. Song et al. (2020) [ 41] employed an R-CNN for water
body detection from RS imagery, and their model outperforms many traditional ML models
in identifying small water bodies and bodies of water with differing shapes. However, it is
still difﬁcult to deploy a trained NN model into a usable, production-ready form for water
mapping applications. The authors reported that using NN output to create and update a
vector map of water resources for stakeholders is challenging.
Yang et al. (2020) [ 42] also used a mask R-CNN to automate water body extraction.
The authors argued that this allows them to avoid manual feature extraction in complex RS
imagery. They segmented small water bodies and bodies of water with irregular shapes,
although their methods suffer from poor IoU accuracy. This is primarily due to a small
training set, for which DL models are ill-suited, and resulted in their models having
problems identifying multiple bodies of water in RS images.
A self-attention capsule feature pyramid network (SA-CapsFPN) was proposed in [ 49]
to extract water bodies from satellite imagery. SA-CapsFPN is able to recognize bodies of
water across scales and different shapes and colors, as well as utilizing different information
channels. The novel MSResNet proposed in [ 46], learnt from unlabeled large RS imagery, is
also able to recognize water bodies at multiple resolutions and of varying shapes; however,
their network cannot distinguish water bodies from farms and barren areas.
A dense local feature compression (DLFC) was proposed in [ 52] to extract bodies of
water from RS imagery, and their DLFC outperformed other SOTA CNNs, as well as an
SVM and an NDWI. Their results demonstrated that the DLFC is good at extracting slender
water bodies and distinguishing water bodies from building shadows using multisensor
data from multiple RS platforms.
5. Others
Extracting water bodies from RS imagery quickly and reliably is still a difﬁcult task.
Based on U-Net, [ 50] developed a new model called SU-Net to distinguish between water
bodies, shadows, and mixed scenes. However, the authors only focused on water body
extraction in urban areas and only used RGB information during the extraction process.
While SU-Net performed better than an SVM and classic U-Net, it suffered when extracting
water bodies from RS imagery with high reﬂectivity or that contained aquatic plants.
Wetlands are important ecosystems because they can keep ﬂooding at bay and store
carbon; however, they are threatened by development, climate change, and pollution. For
the task of identifying wetlands, [ 44] combined RS imagery with hydrological properties
derived from digital elevation models (DEMs) to identify wetlands. They showed that
an RF performs as well as a CNN, although both models had issues distinguishing roads
and trees from wetlands. This is perhaps due to their small training set. To improve
performance, the authors argued that larger datasets with ﬁner labels should be created for
wetland detection.