Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 18 of 48
(Appendix C), we reviewed recent and inﬂuential research for water body detection and
water quality monitoring using RS and AI (Section 3).
While the research investigated in Section 3 has demonstrated the power of using
RS and AI to detect water bodies and monitor water quality, very few studies thus far
performed integrative research of water body and water quality using the power of RS and
AI. In addition, most existing RS and AI-based work on water bodies and water quality
repeat the same (or very similar) methods in a different research location or on a different
(usually small) dataset. However, real intelligent water resource management applications
will require serious development that goes beyond this type of research. Before operational
applications can be deployed, AI models (especially DL models) need to be trained on
large and representative benchmark datasets with a focus on making models generalizable
and interpretable.
We noticed that most work does not include hardware speciﬁcations (e.g., what
CPU/GPU the authors used to run their models) and/or processing time. To make models
comparable and for the sake of replicability and reproducibility, it is essential to report
such information. This is even true for index-based methods and more traditional ML
models so that researchers can fully evaluate the trade-offs between runtime, accuracy, and
ease of implementation. We hope our review will provide a useful guide to make future
research more replicable and reproducible. From our interactive web app (the web app
tool URL and its brief demo video link are provided in Appendix A), we also noticed that
while most papers have an open access PDF/HTML version of their manuscripts, a sizable
portion of manuscripts (16 out of 56 of reviewed articles) do not. We suggest authors
provide an open access version (e.g., posting the proofreading version after acceptance
to ResearchGate/arXiv) in order to increase the visibility of their research and thus to
accelerate the advancement of scientiﬁc knowledge.
4.2. Identiﬁed Major Challenges
Below, we provide the most commonly posed challenges for water body and water
quality research in the literature we reviewed. Those challenges shared in both domains
are outlined in Section 4.2.1 and those speciﬁc to each domain are detailed in Sections 4.2.2
and 4.2.3, respectively. Here are some speciﬁc issues to water body detection and water
quality monitoring.
4.2.1. Shared Common Challenges in Both Domains
A summary of the shared common challenges and identiﬁed problems in water body
extraction and water quality monitoring using RS and AI are provided below.
 Methods for water body detection and water quality monitoring need to be able to
work quickly and reliably on large spatial and temporal scales, and yet high-resolution
RS imagery is very complex. Index methods rely on subjective threshold values that
can change over time and space depending on weather conditions. Shallow ML models
are more accurate, but do not work at scale. DL models are complex, require very large
datasets to train on, and are very computationally expensive; also, the hyperparameter
tuning process is very tedious and difﬁcult.
 It is difﬁcult to know exactly what data to feed to ML and DL models, and it is
difﬁcult to know what to make of the output predictions. This often requires integra-
tive expertise and/or interdisciplinary collaboration of RS, hydrology, biology, and
CV/ML expertise.
 NNs generally perform the best in water quality and water body detection tasks
but are often the least stable models (i.e., they do not generalize well). This is not
surprising, as the datasets used in RS problem settings are often not large enough
to allow NN models (too many parameters compared with shallow ML models) to
overcome overﬁtting (see Appendix B). Table 4 summarizes the relatively few existing
datasets we identiﬁed through our systematic review.