Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 20 of 48
of data at the same location is critical, as computational methods require such data to
verify their model performance in order to generalize to new water bodies.
 Remote water bodies are difﬁcult to monitor.
 Urbanization, pollution, and drought are having serious effects on the economy,
wildlife, and human health as they deteriorate water quality.
 Ecosystems are complex and their nutrient and pollution budgets are not well understood.
 Some studies do not use a training, validation, and testing set for DL projects (all
three are necessary) or do not use nearly enough data to achieve good results with
DL models.
4.3. Research Directions and Opportunities
Here, we provide ﬁve research directions, each along with its promising opportunities,
from our investigation and based on the posed challenges discussed in Section 4.2 above.
4.3.1. Urgent Need of Large and Comprehensive Benchmark Datasets
Large representative, balanced, and open-access benchmark datasets are critical for
any domain to let AI meaningfully shine [ 84–86]. In computer science, especially for its
branches CV and DL, there are very comprehensive, large, and open-source databases (e.g.,
ImageNet [ 87] for image classiﬁcation tasks, and Microsoft COCO [ 88] for object detection
and segmentation tasks). The availability of big and open-source image repositories has
dramatically boosted recent advances in novel and robust algorithms in DL and CV , as
computer science researchers do not need to worry about collecting datasets. Instead, they
can focus on developing new algorithms and/or methods.
In our systematic review, we identiﬁed an urgent need for more curated, labeled
datasets for intelligent water body extraction and water quality monitoring. We found
some of the few available open-source datasets with water body boundary labels through
our literature review, but also sought out additional datasets. We identiﬁed datasets that
were not used in our literature review but contain water body labels, or datasets that were
used for water body detection or water quality monitoring that did not use ML/DL/CV
but would be useful for benchmarking tasks. Our search results are summarized in Table 4
above. Below, we list a few opportunities in this direction.
(1)More public data and code: currently, most authors do not share their code and/or datasets.
See the two quoted pieces below from [ 25]: (a) “Lack of deep learning-ready datasets
within the water ﬁeld [ . . .] The main problem caused by this absence of many datasets is
that the research community does not build upon previous work in terms of constructing
better neural network architectures and moving the state of art to the next iteration [ . . . ]”;
(b) “[ . . . ] many papers are published that achieve the same task with almost identical
methods but different data.”. Part of this issue is a replication crisis in the water body
detection and water quality monitoring literature, but it stems more broadly from the lack
of public codebases and datasets.
(2) Some promising ways to generate large datasets of good quality
 AI/ML/DL models need large datasets with good quality to guarantee meaningful
(unbiased and generalize well) good to great performance, thus work on obtaining
large but better subsets of data. Quality > quantity is critical and in urgent demand.
See one piece of such evidence reported in [ 44], “[ . . .] site-speciﬁc models improved
as more training data was sampled from the area to be mapped, with the best models
created from the maximum training datasets studied: [ . . .] However, performance
did not improve consistently for sites at the intermediate training data thresholds.
This outcome exempliﬁes that model improvement is an issue of not only increasing
the quantity of training data, but also the quality”.
 Generating synthetic data as in [ 76] (detailed in the second paragraph in Section 3.3.5).
 Downloading RS images from Google Earth Engine (GEE) and annotating accordingly,
or, even better, developing user-friendly interactive interfaces with GEE as a backend
to directly allow researchers (or even citizen science volunteers) to contribute to the