Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 35 of 48
more precise segmentations. The architecture of UNet resembles a “U”, which justiﬁes
its name.
The UNet architecture includes three sections: the contraction, the bottleneck, and the
expansion section. The bottommost layer mediates between the contraction layer and the
expansion layer. The number of expansion blocks is the same as the number of contraction
blocks. Most importantly, UNet uses a novel loss weighting scheme for each pixel such
that there is a higher weight at the border of segmented objects. Speciﬁcally, all pixel-wise
softmax applied on the resultant image is followed by a cross-entropy loss function. Each
pixel is classiﬁed into one of the classes. The idea is that even in segmentation, every
pixel has to lie in some predeﬁned category. Thus, a segmentation problem was converted
into a multiclass classiﬁcation and it performed very well compared to the traditional
loss functions.
Appendix C. Common Evaluation Metrics in AI/ML/DL/CV Classiﬁcation and
Regression, and Segmentation Tasks
Many evaluation criteria have been proposed and are frequently used to assess the
performance of AI/ML/DL/CV models. No single evaluation metric can tell a full story of a
trained model. To better select appropriate evaluation metrics for certain domain problems
and tasks, in this appendix, we provide brief deﬁnitions to some commonly used evaluation
metrics (ordered alphabetically; referenced [ 123,129,130,156,157]) in AI/ML/DL/CV for
classiﬁcation, regression, and segmentation tasks in our review (i.e., those listed in the
ﬁeld of “Evaluation metrics” in Tables 2 and 3). For readability, we group some related
metrics together. In the following formulas, TP refers to true positive, FP to false positive,
FN to false negative, and TN to true negative. TP samples are those that are in the positive
category and are correctly predicted as positive. FPs are not annotated as the positive
category but are incorrectly predicted as positive. TNs are correctly predicted as negative,
while FNs are predicted as negative when they are actually labeled as positive.
Accuracy, overall accuracy (OA), commission error (CE), omission error (OE), pro-
ducer’s accuracy (PA), user’s accuracy (UA), and pixel accuracy (PixA) [31,156,158–161]:
To better understand the metrics in this group, let us use the same confusion matrix
shown below in Figure A2 to calculate the accuracy metrics in this group. Confusion
matrix, also called error matrix, is a table that allows us to visualize the performance of a
classiﬁcation algorithm by comparing the predicted value of the target variable with its
actual value [162].
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 41 of 50  
  
Figure A2. Example confusion matrix. The classified data indicate the ML/DL model predicted re-
sults and the reference data refer to the actual manually annotated data (image source: [166]). 
The kappa statistic can be calculated by the following formula, where Pr(a) repre-
sents the actual observed agreem ent, and Pr(e) represents expe cted (i.e., estimated) chance 
agreement). Thus, Pr(a) = OA. 
Kappa Statistic = (Pr(a) − Pr(e))/(1 − Pr(e))  
Note that the sample size consists of th e number of observations made across which 
raters are compared. Cohen specifically discus sed two raters in his papers. The kappa is 
based on the chi-square table, and the Pr(e ) is obtained through the following formula 
[166], where: cm1, cm2, rm1, rm2 represent column 1 marginal, column 2 marginal, row 1 
marginal, row 2 marginal, respectively, and n represents the number of observations (not 
the number of raters). 
Expected (Chance) Agreement = ൬೎೘భ × ೝ೘భ
೙൰ ା (೎೘మ × ೝ೘మ
೙)
௡ 
Similar to most correlati on statistics, the kappa score can range from −1 to +1. Scores 
above 0.8 are generally considered good agre ement; zero or lower mean no agreement 
(practically random labels). According to the scheme of [165], a value of <0 indicates no 
agreement, 0–0.20 is slight, 0.21–0.40 is fair, 0.41–0.60 is moderate, 0.61–0.80 is substantial, 
and 0.81–1 is almost perfect agreement.  
Kappa is one of the most commonly used statistics to test interrater reliability, but it 
has limitations. Judgments about what level of kappa should be acceptable for health re-
search are questioned. Cohen’s suggested inte rpretation may be too lenient for health-
related studies because it implies that a score as low as 0.41 might be acceptable [166]. Additional measures have been proposed  to make use of the kappa framework. 
For example, in [159], the authors advoca te against the use of kappa and proposed 
the alternative measures of quantity and a llocation disagreement. Quantity disagreement 
(QD) is the disagreement betw een the classification and reference data resulting from a 
difference in proportion of categories. Allo cation disagreement (AD) assesses a difference 
in the spatial location of categories. The tw o measures (i.e., QD and AD) sum to overall 
error (i.e., 1–OA).
 
Figure A2. Example confusion matrix. The classiﬁed data indicate the ML/DL model predicted
results and the reference data refer to the actual manually annotated data (image source: [161]).