Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 26 of 48
smart and intelligent support for water resources monitoring and management. Thus, this
integration has considerable potential to address major scientiﬁc and societal challenges,
such as climate change and natural hazards risk management.
Author Contributions: All authors have contributed to this review paper. L.Y. initiated the review,
contributed to writing and overall organization, identiﬁed selected research to include in the review,
supervised the web app design and development, and coordinated input from other authors. J.D.
took the lead on identifying relevant literature, contributed to writing and editing the text, and
provided the data for the accompanying interactive web app. S.S. contributed to the web app design
and development, word clouds visualization, and editing. Q.W., C.D.L. and M.M. have contributed to
editing and M.M. also contributed to writing part of the introduction section along with identifying
some relevant literature. All authors have revised the manuscript. All authors have read and agreed
to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: This material is partly based upon work supported by the funding support from
the College of Arts and Sciences at University of New Mexico. The authors are also grateful to the
three reviewers for their useful suggestions.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations (in alphabetical order) are used in this manuscript:
AE Autoencoder
AI Artiﬁcial Intelligence
ANN Artiﬁcial Neural Network
ARIMA Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average
BOA Boundary Overall Accuracy
CA Class Accuracy
CART Classiﬁcation and Regression Trees
CB Cubist Regression
CE Commission Error
CNN Convolutional Neural Network
COCO Common Objects in Context
CPU Central Processing Unit
CRF Conditional Random Field
CV Computer Vision
DL Deep Learning
DNN Dense Neural Network
DS Dempster–Shafer Evidence Theory
DT Decision Tree
DEM Digital Elevation Model
ECE Edge Commission Error
ELM Extreme Learning Machine
ELR Extreme Learning Regression
ESA European Space Agency
EOE Edge Omission Error
EOA Edge Overall Accuracy
FN False Negative
FP False Positive
FWIoU Frequency Weighted Intersection over Union
GA Global Accuracy