Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 32 of 48
data. Underﬁtting models are not useful either, as they are not capable of making accurate
predictions, even with the training data.
Low error rates and a high variance are good indicators of overﬁtting. To avoid
overﬁtting, part of the training dataset is typically set aside as the “test set” to check
whether a trained model is overﬁtting. If the training data has a low error rate and the
test data has a high error rate, it signals overﬁtting. An overﬁt model would have very
low training error on seen training data but very high error from unseen datasets (e.g.,
testing dataset and new datasets beyond training and testing data). This is because the
model maps the training set perfectly and any deviation from the training set would result
in errors. An underﬁt model has high training error in training data and testing error in
testing data and thus in new unseen data. This is because the model cannot generalize the
training data correctly. Thus, the model will have a very high training error.
Regularization (also known as shrinkage): When an ML/DL model becomes too
complex, it is most likely to suffer from overﬁtting . To avoid overﬁtting, regularization is a
collection of methods to constrain and make an ML/DL model simpler and less ﬂexible.
Speciﬁcally, regularization methods are used to avoid high variance (i.e., bias/underﬁtting)
and overﬁtting and thus to increase generalization. Intuitively, it follows that the function
the model represents is simpler, less unsteady. Thus, predictions are smoother, and overﬁt-
ting is less likely. Certain approaches are applied to different ML algorithms, for example,
pruning for DT, dropout techniques for NN, and adding a penalty parameter to the cost
function in regression.
Google Earth (GE): GE is a computer software, formerly known as Keyhole Earth-
Viewer, that renders a 3D representation of Earth based primarily on satellite imagery. It
has a web version at https://earth.google.com/web/, accessed on 2 January 2022. Since
GE version 4.3, Google fully integrated Street View into Google Earth. Street View displays
360panoramic street-level photos of select cities and their surroundings. The photos were
taken by cameras mounted on automobiles, can be viewed at different scales and from
many angles, and are navigable by arrow icons imposed on them.
Google Earth Engine (GEE) and Microsoft Planetary Computer (MPC):
GEE and MPC share similar goals (e.g., cloud storage and computing support for geospa-
tial datasets), but have their own primary focus. For example, GEE is the pioneer in the area of
RS cloud computing (launched in 2010, has 495 datasets in total as of 22 December 2021 ), and
MPC, launched in 2020 (contains 17 datasets in total as of 22 December 2021), with a primary
focus on climate change and sustainable environmental studies.
GEE [ 131,132]: GEE is a cloud-based platform for planetary-scale geospatial analysis,
launched in 2010 by Google. GEE combines a multipetabyte catalog of satellite imagery
and geospatial datasets with planetary-scale analysis capabilities. Scientists, researchers,
and developers use GEE to detect changes, map trends, and quantify differences on the
Earth’s surface. GEE brings Google’s massive computational capabilities to bear a variety of
high-impact societal problems (e.g., deforestation, drought, disaster, disease, food security,
water management, climate monitoring, and environmental protection). GEE has been
available for commercial use from 2021 and remains free for academic and research use.
MPC [ 133,134]: The world lacks comprehensive, global environmental data. Microsoft
Chief Environmental Ofﬁcer (CEO), Dr. Lucas Joppa, imagines an international database
that would provide the world with “information about every tree, every species, all of our
natural resources”. Microsoft President Brad Smith further emphasized that “it should be
as easy for anyone in the world to search the state of the planet as it is to search the internet
for driving directions or dining options”, and Microsoft believes technology and AI is the
key to get there, in hopes that this information will allow people to “come together and
solve some of the greatest environmental and sustainability challenges we face today”.
To support sustainability decision-making with the power of cloud computing and
AI, similar to GEE, since December 2020, Microsoft is using ML and computing power
to aggregate global environmental data (contributed by individuals around the world
coupled with machinery placed in water, space, land, and air environments) into a planetary