Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 29 of 48
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 31 of 50  
  
(b) 
Figure A1. Our highly interactive web app (accessible pu blicly at: https://geoair-lab.github.io/Wa-
terFeatureAI-WebApp/index.html, accessed on 5 De cember 2021) provides the track of scholars and 
publications with just a few clicks. See an example on the pop-up. Our readers can access (1) a direct link to the PDF file of the paper (note that if there is no free, publicly available version of the paper, 
we link directly to the journal page of the paper so our readers can obtain the paper if their institu-
tion purchases the journal database), (2) the schol ar profile (Google Scholar/ResearchGate URL) of 
the first author, and (3) “Cited  by” Google Scholar page. ( a) Water body and quality AI literature 
map pop-up. ( b) “Cited by” Google Scholar page co rresponding to the paper shown in ( a). 
Appendix B. Essential AI/ML/DL/CV Terms 
In this appendix, we provide brief definitions to some essential terms (ordered al-
phabetically) in ML/DL/RS in our review. For readability, we group some related concepts 
together. 
Ablation Studies:  In AI, particularly in ML and DL, ablation is the removal of a com-
ponent of an AI system. Ablation studies are crucial for AI, especially for DL research. An 
ablation study investigates the performance of  an AI system by removing certain compo-
nents to understand the contribution of the component to the overall system. The term is 
analogous to ablation in biology (removal of components of an orga nism). Note that ab-
lation studies require th at the systems exhibit graceful degradation (i.e., they continue to 
function even when certain components ar e missing or degraded). The motivation was 
that, while individual components are engineer ed, the contribution of an individual com-
ponent to the overall system performance is not clear; removing components allows this 
analysis. Simpler is better: if we can obtain the same performance with two models, we 
prefer the simpler one.  
Convolution, kern el (i.e., filter), and feature map [121–123]  
Convolutional layers are the major building blocks in CNNs. A convolution is the 
simple application of a filter (i.e., kernel)  to an input that results in an activation. Repeated 
application of the same filter to an input re sults in a map of activations called a feature 
map, indicating the locations and strength of a detected feature in an input (e.g., an im-
age). 
Figure A1. Our highly interactive web app (accessible publicly at: https://geoair-lab.github.io/
WaterFeatureAI-WebApp/index.html, accessed on 5 December 2021) provides the track of scholars
and publications with just a few clicks. See an example on the pop-up. Our readers can access (1) a
direct link to the PDF ﬁle of the paper (note that if there is no free, publicly available version of the
paper, we link directly to the journal page of the paper so our readers can obtain the paper if their
institution purchases the journal database), (2) the scholar proﬁle (Google Scholar/ResearchGate
URL) of the ﬁrst author, and (3) “Cited by” Google Scholar page. ( a) Water body and quality AI
literature map pop-up. ( b) “Cited by” Google Scholar page corresponding to the paper shown in ( a).
Appendix B. Essential AI/ML/DL/CV Terms
In this appendix, we provide brief deﬁnitions to some essential terms (ordered
alphabetically) in ML/DL/RS in our review. For readability, we group some related
concepts together.
Ablation Studies: In AI, particularly in ML and DL, ablation is the removal of a
component of an AI system. Ablation studies are crucial for AI, especially for DL research.
An ablation study investigates the performance of an AI system by removing certain
components to understand the contribution of the component to the overall system. The
term is analogous to ablation in biology (removal of components of an organism). Note that
ablation studies require that the systems exhibit graceful degradation (i.e., they continue to
function even when certain components are missing or degraded). The motivation was that,
while individual components are engineered, the contribution of an individual component
to the overall system performance is not clear; removing components allows this analysis.
Simpler is better: if we can obtain the same performance with two models, we prefer the
simpler one.
Convolution, kernel (i.e., ﬁlter), and feature map [121–123]:
Convolutional layers are the major building blocks in CNNs. A convolution is the
simple application of a ﬁlter (i.e., kernel) to an input that results in an activation. Repeated
application of the same ﬁlter to an input results in a map of activations called a feature
map, indicating the locations and strength of a detected feature in an input (e.g., an image).