Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 13 of 48
Different methods of water body extraction work (or do not work) in different ar-
eas/terrain types. Each needs subjective thresholds and/or hand-crafted features. In addition,
generating large sets of labeled data is difficult and expensive, as high-dimension RS data is
difficult to analyze. Objects such as shadows, clouds, and buildings are hard to distinguish
from water bodies. In [ 29], the authors used an autoencoder for unsupervised training and
concluded that their results are more accurate than for an SVM and traditional NN.
Huang et al., 2015 [ 30] pointed out that not many people have focused on water
body detection in urban settings. This is a problem because water bodies often look
similar to shadows due to buildings at certain times of the day in optical imagery. The
authors employed an extreme learning machine (ELM), an SVM, a tree bagger (TB), and
an RF to detect water bodies. The authors reported that the RF and TB performed much
better than the SVM and ELM. However, their method depends on optical imagery with
subjective thresholds set through trial and error. Speciﬁcally, their method depends on
subjective threshold values in NDWI, normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI), and
morphological shadow index (MSI).
Ref. [ 10] compared MLP , NDWI, and a maximum likelihood model for water body
classiﬁcation and showed that MLP performed the best. However, the maximum likelihood
model could not recognize small bodies of water and thin rivers, whereas NDWI was not
able to distinguish seawater from land. The MLP could identify small bodies of water
better, but the analysis depended on visual assessment.
3.2.4. “Shallow” ML-Based Water Body Detection
Although most of the recent methods for water body detection used DL and/or deeper
neural networks (Sections 3.2.1–3.2.3), a few studies used only “shallow” ML methods (e.g.,
RF and SVM). In [ 35], the authors used band methods (where slope, NDVI, and NDWI
were added as three secondary bands to integrate extra information into ML training), and
then applied an SVM, a decision tree (DT), and an RF to analyze multiband RS data for
water body extraction in the Himalayas. However, while their models worked well for ﬂat
and hilly terrain, they had to parse out high elevations and snow in this method (which
involves extra preprocessing and limits when/where their method can work with optical
data). The authors ran different experiments to analyze which input bands (NDWI vs.
individual input bands from Landsat data) worked the best but could only compare results
visually. The authors concluded that adding single secondary bands is better than adding
multiple in most ML algorithms except for NNs.
Sentinel-1 data and four different ML models (K-nearest neighbors classiﬁer (KNN),
fuzzy-rules classiﬁcation, Haralick’s textural features of dissimilarity, Otsu valley-emphasis)
were employed to classify water bodies in [ 54]. It involved many different ML methods
in tandem (i.e., the output of one ML model was fed into other processing steps), which
complicates interpretability. This method did not have very high accuracy and did not
work well in ﬂooded regions, near buildings, and in the presence of aquatic vegetation.
However, it was an important attempt to use synthetic aperture radar (SAR) data, which is
rare in water body detection literature.
3.3. Recent Advances in Water Quality Monitoring Using AI
From Table 3, we identify the following trends in the use of AI for water quality
monitoring research: (1) Water quality monitoring differs from water body detection in
that it is formulated as both a classiﬁcation and a regression task. Because of this, recurrent
neural networks (RNNs), long short-term memory (LSTMs), and gated recurrent units
(GRUs) are much more prevalent in the water quality literature. (2) Accuracy, precision,
and recall are common metrics, as are some variations of mean squared error (MSE) and
R2. (3) It is important to note that while water body detection papers describe integrating
multiple data sources into one analysis, this practice is much more common in water quality
monitoring research. This primarily takes the form of trying to match up water quality
parameters from time series data or water samples to optical satellite RS imagery. In water