Sensors 2022 ,22, 2416 23 of 48
the quoted text below: “Relative variable importance was also conducted to
investigate the consistency between in situ reﬂectance data and satellite data,
and results show that both datasets are similar. The red band (wavelength
0.665 m) and the product of red and green band ( wavelength0.560 m)
were inﬂuential inputs in both reﬂectance data sets for estimating SS and
turbidity, and the ratio between red and blue band (wavelength 0.490 m) as
well as the ratio between infrared (wavelength 0.865 m) and blue band and
green band proved to be more useful for the estimation of Chl-a concentration,
due to their sensitivity to high turbidity in the coastal waters”.
# The authors in [ 75] utilized existing water quality time series data and assessed
the effectiveness of multiple RS data platforms and ML models in estimating
various water quality parameters. One of their interesting ﬁndings is that some
sensors are poorly correlated with water quality parameters, while others are
more suitable for water quality monitoring tasks. They suggested that more re-
search needs to be carried out for assessing the suitability of paired RS imagery
and in situ ﬁeld data. See the quoted text below: “[ . . .] assess the efﬁcacy of
available sensors to complement the often limited ﬁeld measurements from
such programs and build models that support monitoring tasks [ . . .] We
observed that OLCI Level-2 Products are poorly correlated with the RNMCA
data and it is not feasible to rely only on them to support monitoring operations.
However, OLCI atmospherically corrected data is useful to develop accurate
models using an ELM, particularly for Turbidity (R2= 0.7).” (RNMCA is the
acronym for the Mexican national water quality monitoring system).
 Water quality monitoring will beneﬁt from more research exploring how well a certain
ML/DL model contributes to which water quality parameter(s). See an example
in [67], where the authors investigated how well DNNs could predict certain water
quality parameters.
 Physics-constrained or process-based ML/DL predictions as demonstrated in [ 68,69].
 The need for automatic and visually-based model evaluation metrics that are better
than current visual assessment as an evaluation metric. For example, automatic
assessment of how DL methods are performing in large and complex RS imagery
(e.g., speciﬁcally, Bayesian DL, and Gaussian DL/ML for uncertainty measurement
and visualization).
4.3.4. Ease of Use
As emphasized in [ 13,14], one of the major current challenges for water resource
management is the integration of water quality data and indices from multiple sources into
usable and meaningful insights for actionable management decisions. Geovisualization,
also known as geographic visualization, uses the visual representations of geospatial data
and the use of cartographic techniques to facilitate thinking, understanding, knowledge
construction, and decision support about human and physical environments at geographic
scales of measurement [ 102,103]. Geovisualization is widely utilized in different domains
(e.g., public health [ 104], crisis management [ 105,106], environmental analysis [ 107–109],
and climate change strategies [ 110]) for the exploration and analysis of spatiotemporal
data. To the best of our knowledge, very little research has leveraged geovisualization
in this way for water resources management. The only piece of work similar to this we
noticed is in [ 111], where a web interface powered by GEE allows their expert system,
combined with visual analytics, to be run on any Landsat 5, 7, or 8 imagery to draw bound-
aries for water bodies. Geovisualization through interactive web applications provides a
promising solution to the posed challenge of integrating water quality data and indices
from multiple sources [ 112–115]. We provide a few suggested research opportunities in
this direction below.
 Simply applying (or with minor modiﬁcations) existing AI/ML/CV/DL algorithms/
methods to RS big data imagery-based problems is still very far away from producing