284chine translation. One possibility for the apparent
redundancy in BERT’s attention heads is the use
of attention dropout, which causes some attention
weights to be zeroed-out during training.
7 Related Work
There has been substantial recent work perform-
ing analysis to better understand what neural net-
works learn, especially from language model pre-
training. One line of research examines the out-
puts of language models on carefully chosen in-
put sentences (Linzen et al., 2016; Khandelwal
et al., 2018; Gulordava et al., 2018; Marvin and
Linzen, 2018). For example, the model’s perfor-
mance at subject-verb agreement (generating the
correct number of a verb far away from its sub-
ject) provides a measure of the model’s syntactic
ability, although it does not reveal how that ability
is captured by the network.
Another line of work investigates the internal
vector representations of the model (Adi et al.,
2017; Giulianelli et al., 2018; Zhang and Bow-
man, 2018), often using probing classiﬁers. Prob-
ing classiﬁers are simple neural networks that take
the internal vector representations of a pre-trained
model as input. They are trained to do a supervised
task (e.g., part-of-speech tagging). If a probing
classiﬁer achieves high accuracy, it suggests that
the vector representations reﬂect the correspond-
ing aspect of language (e.g., low-level syntax).
Like our work, some of these studies have also
demonstrated neural networks capturing aspects of
syntactic structures (Shi et al., 2016; Blevins et al.,
2018) or coreference (Tenney et al., 2018, 2019)
without explicitly being trained for the tasks.
With regards to analyzing attention, Vig (2019)
builds a visualization tool for the BERT’s attention
and reports observations about some of the heads’
behaviors, but does not perform any quantitative
analysis. Burns et al. (2018) analyze the attention
of memory networks to understand model perfor-
mance on a question answering dataset; we instead
aim to understand linguistic information captured
in pre-trained models. There has also been some
initial work in correlating attention with syntax.
Raganato and Tiedemann (2018) evaluate the at-
tention heads of a machine translation model on
dependency parsing, but only report overall UAS
scores instead of investigating heads for speciﬁc
syntactic relations or using probing classiﬁers.
Marecek and Rosa (2018) propose heuristic waysof converting attention scores to syntactic trees,
but do not quantitatively evaluate their approach.
Concurrently with our work V oita et al. (2019)
identify syntactic, positional, and rare-word-
sensitive attention heads in machine translation
models. They also demonstrate that many atten-
tion heads can be pruned away without substan-
tially hurting model performance. Interestingly,
the important attention heads that remain after
pruning tend to be ones with identiﬁed behaviors.
Michel et al. (2019) similarly show that many of
BERT’s attention heads can be pruned. Although
our analysis in this paper only found interpretable
behaviors in a subset of BERT’s attention heads,
these recent works suggest that there might not be
much to explain for some attention heads because
they have little effect on model perfomance.
Jain and Wallace (2019) argue that attention of-
ten does not “explain” model predictions. They
show that attention weights frequently do not cor-
relate with other measures of feature importance.
Furthermore, attention weights can often be sub-
stantially changed without altering model predic-
tions. However, our motivation for looking at at-
tention is different: rather than explaining model
predictions, we are seeking to understand infor-
mation learned by the models. For example, if
a particular attention head learns a syntactic rela-
tion, we consider that an important ﬁnding from
an analysis perspective even if that head is not
always used when making predictions for some
downstream task.
8 Conclusion
We have proposed a series of analysis methods for
understanding the attention mechanisms of mod-
els and applied them to BERT. While most recent
work on model analysis for NLP has focused on
probing vector representations or model outputs,
we have shown that a substantial amount of lin-
guistic knowledge can be found not only in the
hidden states, but also in the attention maps. We
think probing attention maps complements these
other model analysis techniques, and should be
part of the toolkit used by researchers to under-
stand what neural networks learn about language.
Acknowledgements
We thank the anonymous reviews for their
thoughtful comments and suggestions. Kevin is
supported by a Google PhD Fellowship.