283Model UAS
Right-branching 26
Distances + GloVe 58
Random Init Attn + GloVe 30
Attn 61
Attn + GloVe 77
Structural probe (Hewitt and
Manning, 2019)80 UUAS*
Table 3: Results of attention-based probing tasks on
dependency parsing. A simple model taking BERT at-
tention maps and GloVe word embeddings as input per-
forms quite well at dependency parsing. *Not directly
comparable to our numbers; see text.
Overall, our results from probing both individ-
ual and combinations of attention heads suggest
that BERT learns some aspects syntax purely as a
by-product of self-supervised training. Other work
has drawn a similar conclusions from examin-
ing BERT’s predictions on agreement tasks (Gold-
berg, 2019) or internal vector representations (He-
witt and Manning, 2019; Liu et al., 2019). Tra-
ditionally, syntax-aware models have been devel-
oped through architecture design (e.g., recursive
neural networks) or from direct supervision from
human-curated treebanks. Our ﬁndings are part of
a growing body of work indicating that indirect
supervision from rich pre-training tasks like lan-
guage modeling can also produce models sensitive
to language’s hierarchical structure.
6 Clustering Attention Heads
Are attention heads in the same layer similar to
each other or different? In general, can attention
heads be clearly grouped by behavior? We inves-
tigate these questions by computing the distances
between all pairs of attention heads. Formally, we
measure the distance between two heads H iand
Hjas:
X
token2dataJS(Hi(token );Hj(token ))
WhereJSis the Jensen-Shannon Divergence be-
tween attention distributions. Using these dis-
tances, we visualize the attention heads by apply-
ing multidimensional scaling (Kruskal, 1964) to
embed each head in two dimensions such that the
euclidean distance between embeddings reﬂects
the Jensen-Shannon distance between the corre-
sponding heads as closely as possible.
Figure 6: BERT attention heads embedded in two-
dimensional space. Distance between points approx-
imately matches the average Jensen-Shannon diver-
gences between the outputs of the corresponding heads.
Heads in the same layer tend to be close together. At-
tention head “behavior” was found through the analysis
methods discussed throughout this paper.
Results are shown in Figure 6. We ﬁnd that
there are several clear clusters of heads that be-
have similarly, often corresponding to behaviors
we have already discussed in this paper. Heads
within the same layer are often fairly close to each
other, meaning that heads within the layer have
similar attention distributions. This ﬁnding is a bit
surprising given that Tu et al. (2018) show that en-
couraging attention heads to have different behav-
iors can improve Transformer performance at ma-