277
 Head 1-1  Attends broadly   Head 3-1  Attends to next token   Head 8-7  Attends to [SEP]   Head 11-6  Attends to periods   Figure 1: Examples of heads exhibiting the patterns discussed in Section 3. The darkness of a line indicates the
strength of the attention weight (some attention weights are so low they are invisible).
Our ﬁndings show that particular heads special-
ize to speciﬁc aspects of syntax. To get a more
overall measure of the attention heads’ syntac-
tic ability, we propose an attention-based probing
classiﬁer that takes attention maps as input. The
classiﬁer achieves 77 UAS at dependency pars-
ing, showing BERT’s attention captures a substan-
tial amount about syntax. Several recent works
have proposed incorporating syntactic information
to improve attention (Eriguchi et al., 2016; Chen
et al., 2018; Strubell et al., 2018). Our work sug-
gests that to an extent this kind of syntax-aware
attention already exists in BERT, which may be
one of the reason for its success.
2 Background: Transformers and BERT
Although our analysis methods are applicable
to any model that uses an attention mechanism,
in this paper we analyze BERT (Devlin et al.,
2019), a large Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)
network. Transformers consist of multiple lay-
ers where each layer contains multiple attention
heads. An attention head takes as input a sequence
of vectorsh= [h1;:::;h n]corresponding to the
ntokens of the input sentence. Each vector hi
is transformed into query, key, and value vectors
qi;ki;vithrough separate linear transformations.
The head computes attention weights between
all pairs of words as softmax-normalized dot prod-
ucts between the query and key vectors. The out-
putoof the attention head is a weighted sum of the
value vectors.
ij=exp (qT
ikj)Pn
l=1exp (qT
ikl)oi=nX
j=1ijvjAttention weights can be viewed as governing how
“important” every other token is when producing
the next representation for the current token.
BERT is pre-trained on 3.3 billion tokens of un-
labeled text to perform two tasks. In the “masked
language modeling” task, the model predicts the
identities of words that have been masked-out of
the input text. In the “next sentence prediction”
task, the model predicts whether the second half
of the input follows the ﬁrst half of the input in
the corpus, or is a completely separate random text
segment. Further training the model on supervised
data results in impressive performance across a va-
riety of tasks ranging from sentiment analysis to
question answering. An important detail of BERT
is the preprocessing used for the input text. A spe-
cial token [CLS] is added to the beginning of the
text and another token [SEP] is added to the end. If
the input consists of multiple separate texts (e.g., a
reading comprehension example consists of a sep-
arate question and context), [SEP] tokens are also
used to separate them. As we show in the next sec-
tion, these special tokens play an important role in
BERT’s attention. We use the “base” sized BERT
model, which has 12 layers containing 12 attention
heads each. We use <layer>-<head number>to
denote a particular attention head.
3 Surface-Level Patterns in Attention
Before looking at speciﬁc linguistic phenomena,
we ﬁrst perform an analysis of surface-level pat-
terns in how BERT’s attention heads behave. Ex-
amples of heads exhibiting these patterns are
shown in Figure 1.