Proceedings of the Second BlackboxNLP Workshop on Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP , pages 276–286
Florence, Italy, August 1, 2019. c
2019 Association for Computational Linguistics276What does BERT look at?
An Analysis of BERT’s Attention
Kevin ClarkyUrvashi KhandelwalyOmer LevyzChristopher D. Manningy
yComputer Science Department, Stanford University
zFacebook AI Research
fkevclark,urvashik,manning g@cs.stanford.edu
omerlevy@fb.com
Abstract
Large pre-trained neural networks such as
BERT have had great recent success in NLP,
motivating a growing body of research investi-
gating what aspects of language they are able
to learn from unlabeled data. Most recent anal-
ysis has focused on model outputs (e.g., lan-
guage model surprisal) or internal vector rep-
resentations (e.g., probing classiﬁers). Com-
plementary to these works, we propose meth-
ods for analyzing the attention mechanisms of
pre-trained models and apply them to BERT.
BERT’s attention heads exhibit patterns such
as attending to delimiter tokens, speciﬁc po-
sitional offsets, or broadly attending over the
whole sentence, with heads in the same layer
often exhibiting similar behaviors. We further
show that certain attention heads correspond
well to linguistic notions of syntax and coref-
erence. For example, we ﬁnd heads that at-
tend to the direct objects of verbs, determiners
of nouns, objects of prepositions, and corefer-
ent mentions with remarkably high accuracy.
Lastly, we propose an attention-based probing
classiﬁer and use it to further demonstrate that
substantial syntactic information is captured in
BERT’s attention.
1 Introduction
Large pre-trained language models achieve very
high accuracy when ﬁne-tuned on supervised tasks
(Dai and Le, 2015; Peters et al., 2018; Radford
et al., 2018), but it is not fully understood why.
The strong results suggest pre-training teaches the
models about the structure of language, but what
speciﬁc linguistic features do they learn?
Recent work has investigated this question by
examining the outputs of language models on
carefully chosen input sentences (Linzen et al.,
2016) or examining the internal vector representa-
tions of the model through methods such as prob-
ing classiﬁers (Adi et al., 2017; Belinkov et al.,
2017). Complementary to these approaches, westudy1theattention maps of a pre-trained model.
Attention (Bahdanau et al., 2015) has been a
highly successful neural network component. It is
naturally interpretable because an attention weight
has a clear meaning: how much a particular word
will be weighted when computing the next repre-
sentation for the current word. Our analysis fo-
cuses on the 144 attention heads in BERT (De-
vlin et al., 2019), a large pre-trained Transformer
(Vaswani et al., 2017) network that has demon-
strated excellent performance on many tasks.
We ﬁrst explore generally how the attention
heads behave. We ﬁnd that there are common pat-
terns in their behavior, such as attending to ﬁxed
positional offsets or attending broadly over the
whole sentence. A surprisingly large amount of
BERT’s attention focuses on the deliminator to-
ken [SEP], which we argue is used by the model
as a sort of no-op. Generally we ﬁnd that attention
heads in the same layer tend to behave similarly.
We next probe each attention head for linguis-
tic phenomena. In particular, we treat each atten-
tion head as a simple no-training-required classi-
ﬁer that, given a word as input, outputs the most-
attended-to other word. We then evaluate the abil-
ity of the heads to classify various syntactic rela-
tions. While no single head performs well at many
relations, we ﬁnd that particular heads correspond
remarkably well to particular relations. For exam-
ple, we ﬁnd heads that ﬁnd direct objects of verbs,
determiners of nouns, objects of prepositions, and
objects of possesive pronouns with >75% accu-
racy. We perform a similar analysis for corefer-
ence resolution, also ﬁnding a BERT head that per-
forms quite well. These results are intriguing be-
cause the behavior of the attention heads emerges
purely from self-supervised training on unlabeled
data, without explicit supervision for syntax or
coreference.
1Code will be released at https://github.com/
clarkkev/attention-analysis .