282Model All Pronoun Proper Nominal
Nearest 27 29 29 19
Head-word
match52 47 67 40
Rule-based 69 70 77 60
Neural coref 83* – – –
Head 5-4 65 64 73 58
*Only roughly comparable because on non-truncated docu-
ments and with different mention detection.
Table 2: Accuracies (%) for different mention types of
systems selecting a correct antecedent given a corefer-
ent mention in the CoNLL-2012 data. One of BERT’s
attention heads performs fairly well at coreference.
we do not back-propagate into BERT and only
train a small number of parameters.
The probing classiﬁers are basically graph-
based dependency parsers. Given an input word,
the classiﬁer produces a probability distribution
over other words in the sentence indicating how
likely each other word is to be the syntactic head
of the current one.
Attention-Only Probe. Our ﬁrst probe learns a
simple linear combination of attention weights.
p(ijj)/expnX
k=1wkk
ij+ukk
ji
wherep(ijj)is the probability of word ibeing
wordj’s syntactic head, k
ijis the attention weight
from wordito wordjproduced by head k, andn
is the number of attention heads. We include both
directions of attention: candidate head to depen-
dent as well as dependent to candidate head. The
weight vectors wanduare trained using standard
supervised learning on the train set.
Attention-and-Words Probe. Given our ﬁnding
that heads specialize to particular syntactic rela-
tions, we believe probing classiﬁers should beneﬁt
from having information about the input words. In
particular, we build a model that sets the weights
of the attention heads based on the GloVe (Pen-
nington et al., 2014) embeddings for the input
words. Intuitively, if the dependent and candi-
date head are “the” and “cat,” the probing classi-
ﬁer should learn to assign most of the weight to
the head 8-11, which achieves excellent perfor-
mance at the determiner relation. The attention-
and-words probing classiﬁer assigns the probabil-ity of wordibeing wordj’s head as
p(ijj)/expnX
k=1Wk;:(vivj)k
ij+
Uk;:(vivj)k
ji
Wherevdenotes GloVe embeddings and de-
notes concatenation. The GloVe embeddings are
held ﬁxed in training, so only the two weight ma-
tricesWandUare learned. The dot product
Wk;:(vivj)produces a word-sensitive weight for
the particular attention head.
Results. We evaluate our methods on the Penn
Treebank dev set annotated with Stanford depen-
dencies. We compare against three baselines:
A right-branching baseline that always pre-
dicts the head is to the dependent’s right.
A simple one-hidden-layer network that takes
as input the GloVe embeddings for the depen-
dent and candidate head as well as a set of
features indicating the distances between the
two words.4
Our attention-and-words probe, but with at-
tention maps from a BERT network with pre-
trained word/positional embeddings but ran-
domly initialized other weights. This kind of
baseline is surprisingly strong at other prob-
ing tasks (Conneau et al., 2018).
Results are shown in Table 3. We ﬁnd the Attn
+ GloVe probing classiﬁer substantially outper-
forms our baselines and achieves a decent UAS
of 77, suggesting BERT’s attention maps have a
fairly thorough representation of English syntax.
As a rough comparison, we also report results
from the structural probe from Hewitt and Man-
ning (2019), which builds a probing classiﬁer on
top of BERT’s vector representations rather than
attention. The scores are not directly compara-
ble because the structural probe only uses a sin-
gle layer of BERT, produces undirected rather than
directed parse trees, and is trained to produce the
syntactic distance between words rather than di-
rectly predicting the tree structure. Nevertheless,
the similarity in score to our Attn + Glove probing
classiﬁer suggests there is not much more syntac-
tic information in BERT’s vector representations
compared to its attention maps.
4indicator features for short distances as well as continu-
ous distance features, with distance ahead/behind treated sep-
arately to capture word order