279hypothesis were true, we would expect attention
heads processing [SEP] to attend broadly over the
whole segment to build up these representations.
However, they instead almost entirely (more than
90%; see bottom of Figure 2) attend to themselves
and the other [SEP] token. Furthermore, qualita-
tive analysis (see Figure 5) shows that heads with
speciﬁc functions attend to [SEP] when the func-
tion is not called for. For example, in head 8-10
direct objects attend to their verbs. For this head,
non-nouns mostly attend to [SEP]. Therefore, we
speculate that attention over these special tokens
might be used as a sort of “no-op” when the atten-
tion head’s function is not applicable.
To further investigate this hypothesis, we ap-
ply gradient-based measures of feature importance
(Sundararajan et al., 2017). In particular, we com-
pute the magnitude of the gradient of the loss from
BERT’s masked language modeling task with re-
spect to each attention weight. Intuitively, this
value measures how much changing the attention
to a token will change BERT’s outputs. Results are
shown in Figure 3. We ﬁnd that starting in layer 5
– the same layer where attention to [SEP] becomes
high – the gradients for attention to [SEP] become
small. This indicates that attending more or less to
[SEP] does not substantially change BERT’s out-
puts, supporting the theory that attention to [SEP]
is used as a no-op for attention heads.
3.3 Focused vs Broad Attention
Lastly, we measure whether attention heads fo-
cus on a few words or attend broadly over many
words. To do this, we compute the average en-
tropy of each head’s attention distribution (see
Figure 4). We ﬁnd that some attention heads, es-
pecially in lower layers, have very broad atten-
tion. These high-entropy attention heads typically
spend at most 10% of their attention mass on any
single word. The output of these heads is roughly
a bag-of-vectors representation of the sentence.
We also measured entropies for all attention
heads from only the [CLS] token. While the av-
erage entropies from [CLS] for most layers are
very close to the ones shown in Figure 4, the
last layer has a high entropy from [CLS] of 3.89
nats, indicating very broad attention. This ﬁnd-
ing makes sense given that the representation for
the [CLS] token is used as input for the “next sen-
tence prediction” task during pre-training, so it at-
tends broadly to aggregate a representation for thewhole input in the last layer.
4 Probing Individual Attention Heads
Next, we investigate individual attention heads to
probe what aspects of language they have learned.
In particular, we evaluate attention heads on la-
beled datasets for tasks like dependency parsing.
An overview of our results is shown in Figure 5.
4.1 Method
We wish to evaluate attention heads at word-level
tasks, but BERT uses byte-pair tokenization (Sen-
nrich et al., 2016), which means some words
(8% in our data) are split up into multiple to-
kens. We therefore convert token-token attention
maps to word-word attention maps. For attention
toa split-up word, we sum up the attention weights
over its tokens. For attention from a split-up word,
we take the mean of the attention weights over its
tokens. These transformations preserve the prop-
erty that the attention from each word sums to
1. For a given attention head and word, we take
whichever other word receives the most attention
weight as that model’s prediction2
4.2 Dependency Syntax
Setup. We extract attention maps from BERT on
the Wall Street Journal portion of the Penn Tree-
bank (Marcus et al., 1993) annotated with Stanford
Dependencies. We evaluate both “directions” of
prediction for each attention head: the head word
attending to the dependent and the dependent at-
tending to the head word. Some dependency rela-
tions are simpler to predict than others: for exam-
ple a noun’s determiner is often the immediately
preceding word. Therefore as a point of compar-
ison, we show predictions from a simple ﬁxed-
offset baseline. For example, a ﬁxed offset of -2
means the word two positions to the left of the de-
pendent is always considered to be the head.
Results. Table 1 shows that there is no single at-
tention head that does well at syntax “overall”; the
best head gets 34.5 UAS, which is not much better
than the right-branching baseline, which gets 26.3
UAS. This ﬁnding is similar to the one reported by
Raganato and Tiedemann (2018), who also evalu-
ate individual attention heads for syntax.
However, we do ﬁnd that certain attention heads
specialize to speciﬁc dependency relations, some-
2We ignore [SEP] and [CLS], although in practice this
does not signiﬁcantly change the accuracies for most heads.