4 Molnar et al.
Fig. 2. Some IML approaches work by assigning meaning to individual model com-
ponents (left), some by analyzing the model predictions for perturbations of the data
(right). The surrogate approach, a mixture of the two other approaches, approximates
the ML model using (perturbed) data and then analyzes the components of the inter-
pretable surrogate model.
4.1 Analyzing Components of Interpretable Models
In order to analyze components of a model, it needs to be decomposable into
parts that we can interpret individually. However, it is not necessarily required
that the user understands the model in its entirety (simulatability [82]). Com-
ponent analysis is always model-specic, because it is tied to the structure of
the model.
Inherently interpretable models are models with (learned) structures and
(learned) parameters which can be assigned a certain interpretation. In this con-
text, linear regression models, decision trees and decision rules are considered
to be interpretable [30,54]. Linear regression models can be interpreted by ana-
lyzing components: The model structure, a weighted sum of features, allows to
interpret the weights as the eects that the features have on the prediction.
Decision trees and other rule-based ML models have a learned structure
(e.g.,\IF feature x1>0 and feature x22 fA; Bg, THEN predict 0.6"). We can
interpret the learned structure to trace how the model makes predictions.
This only works up to a certain point in high-dimensional scenarios. Linear
regression models with hundreds of features and complex interaction terms or
deep decision trees are not that interpretable anymore. Some approaches aim
to reduce the parts to be interpreted. For example, LASSO [98,115] shrinks the
coecients in a linear model so that many of them become zero, and pruning
techniques shorten trees.
4.2 Analyzing Components of More Complex Models
With a bit more eort, we can also analyze components of more complex black-
box models.5For example, the abstract features learned by a deep convolutional
neural network (CNN) can be visualized by nding or generating images that
interpretability is considered at model design and training or after training, leaving
the (black-box) model unchanged. Another category separates model-agnostic and
model-specic methods.
5This blurs the line between an \inherently interpretable" and a \black-box" model.