8 Molnar et al.
5.4 Denition of Interpretability
A lack of denition for the term "interpretability" is a common critique of the
eld [67,22]. How can we decide if a new method explains ML models bet-
ter without a satisfying denition of interpretability? To evaluate the predic-
tive performance of an ML model, we simply compute the prediction error
on test data given the groundtruth label. To evaluate the interpretability of
that same ML model is more dicult. We do not know what the groundtruth
explanation looks like and have no straightforward way to quantify how in-
terpretable a model is or how correct an explanation is. Instead of having
one groundtruth explanation, various quantiable aspects of interpretability are
emerging [87,86,77,46,131,3,102,87,21,31].
The two main ways of evaluating interpretability are objective evaluations,
which are mathematically quantiable metrics, and human-centered evaluations,
which involve studies with either domain experts or lay persons. Examples of
aspects of interpretability are sparsity, interaction strength, delity (how well
an explanation approximates the ML model), sensitivity to perturbations, and
a user's ability to run a model on a given input (simulatability). The challenge
ahead remains to establish a best practice on how to evaluate interpretation
methods and the explanations they produce. Here, we should also look at the
eld of human-computer interaction.
5.5 More Challenges Ahead
We focused mainly on the methodological, mathematical challenges in a rather
static setting, where a trained ML model and the data are assumed as given
and xed. But ML models are usually not used in a static and isolated way,
but are embedded in some process or product, and interact with people. A more
dynamic and holistic view of the entire process, from data collection to the nal
consumption of the explained prediction is needed. This includes thinking how
to explain predictions to individuals with diverse knowledge and backgrounds
and about the need of interpretability on the level of an institution or society in
general. This covers a wide range of elds, such as human-computer interaction,
psychology and sociology. To solve the challenges ahead, we believe that the eld
has to reach out horizontally { to other domains { and vertically { drawing from
the rich research in statistics and computer science.
References
1. Adadi, A., Berrada, M.: Peeking inside the black-box: A survey on explainable
articial intelligence (xai). IEEE Access 6, 52138{52160 (2018)
2. Adebayo, J., Gilmer, J., Muelly, M., Goodfellow, I., Hardt, M., Kim, B.: Sanity
checks for saliency maps. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
pp. 9505{9515 (2018)
3. Akaike, H.: Information theory and an extension of the maximum likelihood prin-
ciple. In: Selected papers of Hirotugu Akaike, pp. 199{213. Springer (1998)