IML - History, Methods, Challenges 5
activate a feature map of the CNN [84]. For the random forest, the minimal
depth distribution [85,55] and the Gini importance [13] analyze the structure of
the trees of the forest and can be used to quantify feature importance. Some
approaches aim to make the parts of a model more interpretable with, for exam-
ple, a monotonicity constraint [106] or a modied loss function for disentangling
concepts learned by a convolutional neural network [130].
If an ML algorithm is well understood and frequently used in a community,
like random forests in ecology research [19], model component analysis can be
the correct tool, but it has the obvious disadvantage that it is tied to that specic
model. And it does not combine well with the common model selection approach
in ML, where one usually searches over a large class of dierent ML models via
cross-validation.
4.3 Explaining Individual Predictions
Methods that study the sensitivity of an ML model are mostly model-agnostic
and work by manipulating input data and analyzing the respective model pre-
dictions. These IML methods often treat the ML model as a closed system that
receives feature values as an input and produces a prediction as output. We
distinguish between local and global explanations.
Local methods explain individual predictions of ML models. Local explana-
tion methods have received much attention and there has been a lot of innova-
tion in the last years. Popular local IML methods are Shapley values [69,112] and
counterfactual explanations [122,20,81,116,118]. Counterfactual explanations ex-
plain predictions in the form of what-if scenarios, which builds on a rich tradition
in philosophy [108]. According to ndings in the social sciences [71], counterfac-
tual explanations are \good" explanations because they are contrastive and focus
on a few reasons. A dierent approach originates from collaborative game the-
ory: The Shapley values [104] provide an answer on how to fairly share a payout
among the players of a collaborative game. The collaborative game idea can be
applied to ML where features (i.e., the players) collaborate to make a prediction
(i.e., the payout) [112,69,68].
Some IML methods rely on model-specic knowledge to analyze how changes
in the input features change the output. Saliency maps, an interpretation method
specic for CNNs, make use of the network gradients to explain individual classi-
cations. The explanations are in the form of heatmaps that show how changing
a pixel can change the classication. The saliency map methods dier in how
they backpropagate [114,69,80,107,105]. Additionally, model-agnostic versions
[95,69,129] exist for analyzing image classiers.
4.4 Explaining Global Model Behavior
Global model-agnostic explanation methods are used to explain the expected
model behavior, i.e., how the model behaves on average for a given dataset.
A useful distinction of global explanations are feature importance and feature
eect.