IML - History, Methods, Challenges 7
In order to infer meaningful properties of the underlying data generating
process, we have to make structural or distributional assumptions. Whether it
is a classical statistical model, an ML algorithm or an IML procedure, these
assumptions should be clearly stated and we need better diagnostic tools to test
them. If we want to prevent statistical testing problems such as p-hacking [48] to
reappear in IML, we have to become more rigorous in studying and quantifying
the uncertainty of IML methods. For example, most IML methods for feature
importance are not adapted for multiple testing, which is a classic mistake in a
statistical analysis.
5.2 Causal Interpretation
Ideally, a model should re
ect the true causal structure of its underlying phe-
nomena, to enable causal interpretations. Arguably, causal interpretation is usu-
ally the goal of modeling if ML is used in science. But most statistical learning
procedures re
ect mere correlation structures between features and analyze the
surface of the data generation process instead of its true inherent structure.
Such causal structures would also make models more robust against adversarial
attacks [101,29], and more useful when used as a basis for decision making. Un-
fortunately, predictive performance and causality can be con
icting goals. For
example, today's weather directly causes tomorrow's weather, but we might only
have access to the feature \wet ground". Using \wet ground" in the prediction
model for \tomorrow's weather" is useful as it has information about \today's
weather", but we are not allowed to interpret it causally, because the confounder
\today's weather" is missing from the ML model. Further research is needed to
understand when we are allowed to make causal interpretations of an ML model.
First steps have been made for permutation feature importance [60] and Shapley
values [70].
5.3 Feature Dependence
Feature dependence introduces problems with attribution and extrapolation.
Attribution of importance and eects of features becomes dicult when fea-
tures are, for example, correlated and therefore share information. Correlated
features in random forests are preferred and attributed a higher importance
[110,51]. Many sensitivity analysis based methods permute features. When the
permuted feature has some dependence with another feature, this association
is broken and the resulting data points extrapolate to areas outside the distri-
bution. The ML model was never trained on such combinations and will likely
not be confronted with similar data points in an application. Therefore, ex-
trapolation can cause misleading interpretations. There have been attempts to
\x" permutation-based methods, by using a conditional permutation scheme
that respects the joint distribution of the data [78,110,28,51]. The change from
unconditional to conditional permutation changes the respective interpretation
method [78,7], or, in worst case, can break it [57,113,62].