Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 12 of 20
4.1.1. Hyperparameter Optimization
The hyperparameters of the proposed MLalgorithms used in this study had to be
tuned, as shown in Table 4. These hyperparameters were modiﬁed depending on the actual
dataset rather than the manual determinations. Thus, the investigation was carried out with
k = 1 to k = 10 for K-fold cross-validation. Each Krepresents the grid search for the optimum
MLmodel selection and hyperparameter tuning. As a result, ﬁve-fold cross-validation had
the best prediction accuracy, as discussed the in the performance evaluation.
Table 4. Results of hyperparameter optimization for the MLmodels.
ML Models Hyperparameters Optimal Values
XGBOOSTNumber of trees 1000
Learning rate 0.08
Maximum depth 12
Number of needed leaves 16
RFNumber of trees 800
Learning rate 0.11
Maximum depth 17
Number of needed leaves 20
DNNNumber of neurons 4
Learning rate 0.13
Batch size 10
Epochs 300
Number of hidden layers 4
Activation function ReLU
4.1.2. Feature Importance Analysis
Pearson’s correlation process was conducted between the selected features and the
cost values of green building projects to assess the inﬂuence of these features on each other
and the observed values, as presented in Figure 9.
Sustainability 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  13 of 21  
  
Figure 9. Heated correlation matrix analyses.  
Better insight and understanding of the model ’s features help decision -makers plan 
and formulate policies effectively. As a result, a feature importance process was carried 
out using the 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑡 , 𝐷𝑁𝑁 , and 𝑅𝐹 techniques to identify the importance degree of 
each feature included in forecasti ng green building cost s. As illustrated in Figure 10, the 
feature scale plot was implemented to calculate a relative score for each variable. In addi-
tion, as presented in Figure 10, the features were ranked in descending order of im-
portance: people, techno logical, technical, and specific requirement s.  
 
Figure 10. Representation of feature importance . 
4.2. Perform ance Evaluation  
After testing the primary model assumptions, it was vital to evaluate the suggested 
models’ usefulness and predictive capability. Thus, the assessment measure ments were 
utilized to evaluate the proposed models ’ proficiency. Four statistical measures (i.e., 
Figure 9. Heated correlation matrix analyses.
Better insight and understanding of the model’s features help decision-makers plan
and formulate policies effectively. As a result, a feature importance process was carried out
using the XGBoost ,DNN , and RFtechniques to identify the importance degree of each