Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 3 of 20
tion exists [ 19–21]. For instance, in Turkey, most contractors who have won construction
bids via a lower-price approach have faced trouble in the construction project delivery.
In one study, about 430 questionnaires were analyzed after being sent to contractors in
Turkey. The results indicated that such consequences have occurred because contractors
are trying to continue in the market regardless of inaccurate bidding and little experience
in contract pricing [22].
Change order costs also increase when the lowest-price approach is adopted, especially
in green building construction. In addition, the “multiattribute” is used at the best price
in the construction industry to achieve the best value [ 23,24]. Another approach utilized
is the average bid, where the winner is selected by applying a single criterion. First, the
price is compared with the average of all the bidders’ prices and then the one that is closest
to the average bid is adopted [ 25–27]. The Peruvian approach has also been applied to
construction project bids by removing outliers’ bid values that have a price increase or
decrease of 10% of the actual average bid price from the submitted list. The new average
is determined in the next step to choose the bidder that meets both conditions closest to
and below the new average price [ 28]. Bidders are classiﬁed based on several aspects,
such as quality, proﬁtability, leverage, and expertise, to determine who is eligible to win
the bid. A neural network technique was employed in the same vein to decide on such
a concept [ 29]. In addition, several experimental methods have been used for bidding
selection. For instance, the non-competitive method was implemented in construction bids,
and various identiﬁcation strategies were evaluated experimentally [ 30]. Additionally, an
analytical model was developed based on game theory to address construction project
claims and opportunistic bidding [26].
Moreover, risk possibility and competition for projects were measured using a case-
based reasoning method [ 31]. Using general regression and classiﬁcation networks, choos-
ing the ﬁttest bid closest to the actual construction project price was studied [ 15]. The bid
scoring formula is a realistic approach to selecting the winner and is still valid for providing
a promotional result that meets the needs of the owner and contractor [32].
Green building bids are converting from traditional contracts in choosing a winner
to smarter contracts that meet all the sustainability requirement changes in public bid-
ding [ 33,34]. The design-build ( DB) approach has been used in green and traditional
buildings. It maintains a high integration of the design stages for sustainability in green
buildings [ 5].DBis a practical approach to incentivize bidders and make them more famil-
iar with maintaining sustainable goals during the construction and design processes [ 35–37].
The dynamic and practical connection between the contractor and the design group is
a signiﬁcant feature of improving the concept of all aspects of green buildings, such as
quality, cost, and time [ 33,38,39]. Compared to the traditional approach, such as the low-bid
approach to choosing a winner, DBseems to have signiﬁcant advantages for sustainable
green building objectives [ 40,41]. Many approaches have been improved since the 1990s to
ﬁnd a rating approach to handle green buildings properly [ 42]. To achieve a comprehensive
vision of all aspects of the bid details and to meet the required conditions written in the
contract to satisfy all parties, when determining the bid winner, it is vital to consider the
quality, environment, technical aspects, reputation, and price. This approach ensures that
more work and effort is put into enforcing adequate and acceptable criteria for choosing
the winner to attain the optimal advantage [ 16,41,42]. Many factors must be considered for
the conceptual phase in the design and planning stages of the green building to acquire
practical work [ 43]. In addition, effective green building design must employ efﬁcient
natural and ecologic resource management processes [ 44]. To fulﬁll such a need, selecting
the best bidder is required.
3. Methodology
The main aim of this study was to develop a forecast model for providing accurate
green building project costs. Data collection, feature selection, machine learning algorithm