Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 17 of 20
attempted to anticipate green construction costs; however, their conclusions were limited to
a single location since only a few relevant features were evaluated [ 2,3,63]. Such problems
prove that decision-making tools are in great demand in the construction industry [64–69].
The contradictory ﬁndings hampered the assessment of green construction costs,
making this a worrying problem. Furthermore, to the best of the authors’ knowledge,
no appropriate model for predicting green construction costs is available in the present
literature. As a result, a general and worldwide model for green cost prediction is required.
The created green building cost prediction models have an advantage over comparable
modeling techniques available in the literature because of their different processing chrono-
logical sequence, where forecasts are less impacted by the number of classes and can be
analyzed consistently. The created models produce fewer discriminant nodes, lowering the
number of class dimensions to be evaluated progressively. The generated prediction models
have been discovered to be expert short-running models with high forecast precision and
low memory consumption with superior performance.
Furthermore, it was discovered that generated models might be classiﬁed as realistic
decision support tools in several sectors of the construction business when compared to
other accessible models. The suggested models may be an integrated, general, practical,
and accurate prediction tool. The current study covers several signiﬁcant traits employed
in bidding and awarding procedures to reduce ﬁnancial and legal concerns among con-
tractual parties. As a result, the proposed models are expected to play a critical role in
reducing potential conﬂict among stakeholders in the green building construction industry,
particularly when decision-makers face signiﬁcant challenges and difﬁculties in estimating
acceptable green building costs that all contractual parties can agree on.
6. Conclusions
Will a green building cost more than a traditional building? Are the costs of the peo-
ple, technological, technical, and other speciﬁc requirements quantiﬁable and predictable?
Is this objective cost function affected by sub-attributes? Do the developed prediction
models consider ambiguity in cost function? Do the developed cost forecasting models
empower practitioners to take effective cost-related decisions? These research questions can
be addressed by developing accurate and robust machine learning-based models for cost
prediction to reduce the cost-related risk. The proposed models have been demonstrated to
provide decision-makers with a support decision tool to forecast the green buildings’ con-
struction costs of new green buildings and pave the road towards having green buildings
LEED-certiﬁed based on economic and sustainable aspects. Four primary green build-
ing cost attributes and twenty sub-features were considered, and different feasible green
construction approaches were investigated utilizing thorough cutting-edge forecasting
models for cost prediction and associated risk minimization. ML-based cost prediction
modeling approaches were utilized to improve decision-making superiority amongst the
best practices. XGBOOST ,DNN , and RFprediction models were designed, and they
were evaluated using MAE ,RMSE ,MAPE , and R2. The evaluation results indicate that
theXGBOOST and DNN prediction performance was superior, where low values for all
performance appraisal measures were evaluated, indicating excellent performance. The
RFhad a lower forecast accuracy, but it still had an acceptable level of precision. The
most accurate green building costs can be predicted based on the embraced machine
learning models.
The current study revealed that green building costs could be accurately predicted via
machine learning approaches and smoothly compared with conventional building costs. In
addition, the key attributes that inﬂuence green building costs were considered. Moreover,
the developed cost prediction models are expected to pave the road toward a smoother
LEED certiﬁcation process. Additionally, decision-makers are provided with support
decision tools that can predict green buildings’ total operational and life cycle costs. Future
research efforts should reﬂect the inclusion of more datasets, more accurate collection,
pre-processing and post-processing, and different types of buildings in various locations.