Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 15 of 20
Sustainability 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  15 of 21  
 Table 6. Performance measure comparison of 𝑀𝐿 models  at 𝑘=5. 
Performance Metrics  Prediction Models  
𝑿𝑮𝑩𝑶𝑶𝑺𝑻  𝑫𝑵𝑵  𝑹𝑭 
𝑀𝐴𝐸  92.0 196.5  378.0  
𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸  132.5  284.0  507.9  
𝑀𝐴𝑃𝐸  19.9 32.4 40.4 
𝑅2 96.0 91.0 87.0 
𝑅𝐴𝑑𝑗𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑑2 95.9 90.9 86.8 
The comparison outcomes show that 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇 and 𝐷𝑁𝑁  had higher 𝑅2 value s 
(more than 0.90) and  lower 𝑀𝐴𝐸 , 𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 , 𝑀𝐴𝑃𝐸  values than the 𝑅𝐹 model in  predict-
ing green building cost s. All assessment metrics results also reveal ed that 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  had 
excellent prediction capability and had the highest 𝑅2 value . Furthermore, 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  
had the lowe r values for the rest of the evaluation metrics (i.e.,  𝑀𝐴𝐸 , 𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 , and 𝑀𝐴𝑃𝐸 ) 
compared to the 𝐷𝑁𝑁  model , as shown in Figure 11. Moreover, the forecasted outputs 
of the 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  model illustrate that its prediction values were very close to the values 
of green building project costs. It is worth noting  the progress of the  𝑅Adjusted2 estimate 
for each developed model. The  𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  ‘s decisive 𝑅2 value was 0.96, implying that 
the 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  model was somewhat mounted to the datasets since it was close to 1.  
Given that the forecast 𝑅2 was considerably superior to th e regular 𝑅Adjusted2, this means 
that the 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  model did forecast new interpretations and fit the existing dataset.  
Therefore, the 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  model ha d a better fit and slight deviation from the actual val-
ues of the green building cost s. Con sequently, the 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  was the most effective and 
competent model for predicting green building cost s. 
 
Figure 11. Evaluation metric comparison between 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  and 𝐷𝑁𝑁 . 
4.3. Experiment al Results  
The current study was designed to expand and augment the literature in forecasting 
green building costs. First, the four main features that affect the cost of green buildings 
were thoroughly investigated and disaggregated into its primary sub -attributes. T hen 
these factors were evaluated according to their acquired data record by developing ma-
chine learning -based prediction models in combination with accuracy evaluation matrices 
Figure 11. Evaluation metric comparison between XGBOOST and DNN .
4.3. Experimental Results
The current study was designed to expand and augment the literature in forecasting
green building costs. First, the four main features that affect the cost of green buildings
were thoroughly investigated and disaggregated into its primary sub-attributes. Then these
factors were evaluated according to their acquired data record by developing machine
learning-based prediction models in combination with accuracy evaluation matrices to
focus on the uncertainty coupled with the cost forecasting. The current research ﬁndings
reveal that people primarily affect green building cost features, followed by technological,
technical, and special requirements, which implies that spreading the “green” culture
amongst involved personnel is critical to minimizing the construction cost. In addition,
green building contractors need to utilize cutting-edge technologies that can facilitate the
deployment of efﬁcient technical approaches necessary for cost objective optimization
purposes, reﬂecting the importance of applying prediction models to produce accurate cost
predictions. In line with the adopted methodology, the results reveal the signiﬁcance of
examined attributes and their sub-categories, such as people, technological, technical, and
other speciﬁc requirements, which demonstrates the consequence of changes in the cost
objective functions of alternatives. For example, the cost function was an average of 88%
compared to the people, technological, technical, and special requirements at 93%, 90%,
96%, and 82%. Furthermore, variation in the cost objective function was analyzed through
various sub-attributes, implying a high dependency and inﬂuencing the proﬁciency of the
decision-making process.
Consequently, the cost prediction models utilize the cost-effective frontline approach
to affect this matter and streamline the proper decision-making process. The established
cost prediction models showed that XGBOOST outperformed the DNN and RFby5%
and 9.4% , respectively. Thus, the XGBOOST prediction model represents the most attrac-
tive alternative for decision-makers from both an economical and sustainable point of
view for the most accurate prediction with the lowest cost objective function and lowest
correlated risk.
5. Discussion
This study’s cost prediction models offer an insightful perception of the correlation
between inﬂuential features and green buildings’ green cost premium. The cost of each