Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 2 of 20
such detailed comprehensiveness makes it complicated for stakeholders to use the rule of
thumb for cost estimation [ 5]. Consequently, various indicators should be considered when
selecting the bid winner, including green building management, environmental aspects,
material use, water use and water protection, land and construction site protection, and
energy use.
The commonly adopted procedure in bid winner selection is the lowest price. Such
an approach may be adopted with minimal adverse impact on traditional building con-
struction, yet it is hazardous to employ such an approach for green building construction
bidding awards. Thus, improving the policy of the public and private sectors for select-
ing bid winners is crucial for maximizing construction quality and the added value [ 6].
Furthermore, adopting robust and accurate cost prediction methodologies is expected to
strengthen the competition between the bidders and enhance the awarding process to
ensure successful green construction. Therefore, effective construction cost forecasting has
positive practical implications on economic, social, and environmental levels.
The inability to appropriately manage the selection of the bid winner results in signif-
icant delays in project delivery; hence, the bid winner must be carefully picked [ 7]. The
current study opens up new possibilities for developing innovative and integrated models
for green building cost prediction that consider various inﬂuencing factors and may be
used in the bidding awarding procedures to reduce the ﬁnancial and legal conﬂicts among
contractual parties for such projects. Construction project delivery techniques are critical
in forecasting bidding costs and, accordingly, in updating the bid winner selection policy
by adhering to regulations, assizes, and guidelines to avoid patronage. Consequently,
in forecasting the total cost of green building construction projects, it is challenging to
establish a suitable balance in the bid cost in anticipation of the actual cost. As a result,
a new method incorporating the primary aspects inﬂuencing the cost of green building
construction should be developed. In this study, a machine learning-based model for
predicting green building construction costs was developed, which is critical for paving the
way to selecting the best bidder to fulﬁll the required conditions, expanding the beneﬁts of
green construction, and accommodating rapid changes along with future change orders.
2. Literature Review
Green buildings are designed to meet current and future generations’ needs in protect-
ing planet Earth. Since the nineteenth century, the demand for such a green construction
approach has become necessary for efﬁcient pollution reduction, dynamic use of materials,
and more social inclusiveness by reducing the ripple effect of the construction process and
maintaining environmentally friendly building operations [ 8]. Several green building de-
sign approaches have been proposed to simplify green building deliveries (e.g., LEED and
the Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method). For instance,
in 2021, LEED -certiﬁed green buildings were up to over 100,000 in the United States and
69,800 in Canada [ 9,10]. Public construction biddings are part of the public procurement
structure that seizes a signiﬁcant portion of the public expense yearly, which is estimated
to be about ten percent of total incomes in most countries in North America [11].
In most traditional bids, the winner is determined based only on the bid price aspect
following the law, which is called the lowest-priced bid. If such a winner cannot perform
the bid, the bid is awarded directly to the second-lowest price [ 12]. This is the second
type of bidding adopted in the market. This approach increases the bid price compared
to the lowest-bid approach [ 13]. These approaches are impractical for the owner as all
bidders try to make their estimate lower than others and lower the actual cost to win the
bid [ 14]. Most private and public ﬁrms adopt such an approach in bidding in the United
States and European countries [ 15,16]. However, applying the lowest price approach
in bidding creates various issues regarding work quality, construction delays, disputes,
and claims [17,18].
Though the lowest price approach is the best for cost reduction purposes and is widely
used in the construction industry, it is a recipe for conﬂict, primarily when intense competi-