Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 9 of 20
Sustainability 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  9 of 21  
 proposed as a one -of-a-kind applied gradient boosting machine, pa rticularly in regression 
and classification trees. The “boosting ” concept is the root of 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇 , which merges 
the forecasting of weak learners with additive training methods to develop a strong 
learner. In addition , this process helps to avoid overfitting and improv es mathematical 
ability. The 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  architecture is shown in Figure 4, where the objective functions 
are simplified by allowing the prediction and regularization terms to be combined while 
preserv ing the fastest possible processing speed. The general function of the forecasting 
is set up at step 𝑝, as shown in Eq uation  (1) 
𝑓𝑖(𝑝)= ∑𝑓𝑘𝑝
𝑘=1(𝑥𝑖)=𝑓𝑖(𝑝−1)+𝑓𝑝(𝑥𝑖) (1) 
where 𝑓𝑝(𝑥𝑖) denotes the learner at step 𝑝, 𝑓𝑖(𝑝) denotes the pred iction at 𝑝, 𝑓𝑖(𝑝−1) de-
notes the prediction at 𝑝−1, and 𝑥𝑖 denotes the input features.  
 
Figure 4. 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  structure of the proposed model . 
To make the overfitting reasonable while reducing the model ’s mathematical speed, 
the analytical formula was created  by 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇 , as shown in Eq uation  (2), to estimate 
the model ’s “goodness ” for the original function.  
𝑂𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒(𝑝)= ∑𝑙(𝑦̅𝑖,𝑦𝑖)+∑𝜎(𝑓𝑖)𝑝
𝑘=1𝑛
𝑘=1 (2) 
where l presents the loss fu nction, n presents the number of observations utilized, and 𝜎 
presents the regularization term as represented in Eq uation  (3).  
𝜎(𝑓)=ϒ𝑇+0.5𝜆‖𝜔‖2 (3) 
where 𝜔 expresses vector scores in leaves, γ expresses the minimal loss necessary to di-
vide the leaf node further, and λ expresses the regularization parameters.  
3.4.2. Deep Neural Network ( 𝐷𝑁𝑁 ) 
Figure 4. XGBOOST structure of the proposed model.
3.4.2. Deep Neural Network ( DNN )
DNN is a subset of deep learning algorithms that employ multi-layered neural net-
work training and testing to learn complex structures and achieve appropriate abstraction
levels. The dataset is directed in one direction within the network, passing the four hid-
den layers [ 57]. Such movement improves the memory of the neural network to process
sequential data naturally. The DNN technique has two stages: The ﬁrst stage (training) is
applied to optimize the network parameters to complete the expected goal (prediction).
The second stage (testing) assesses whether the trained model can process a new dataset.
The six layers in this study (i.e., the input layer, four hidden layers, and the output layer)
were employed to retain the best prediction model accuracy, as presented in Figure 5.
Sustainability 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  10 of 21  
 𝐷𝑁𝑁  is a subset of deep learning algorithms that employ multi -layered neural net-
work training and testing to learn complex structures and achieve appropriate abstraction 
levels. The dataset is directed in one direction within the network, passing the four hid den 
layers [5 7]. Such movement improves the memory of the neural network to process se-
quential data naturally. The 𝐷𝑁𝑁  technique has two stages: The first stage (training) is 
applied to optimize the network parameters to complete the expected goal (pred iction). 
The second stage (testing) assesses whether the trained model can process a new dataset. 
The six layers in this study (i.e., the input layer, four hidden layers, and the output layer) 
were  employed to retain the best prediction model accuracy, as presented in Figure 5.  
 
Figure 5. Deep neural network structure . 
Unique weight s were assigned to the inputs by the activation function (rectified lin-
ear unit ( 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 ) [59]. Then , these weights were  associated with the model ’s variables to 
reduce the error between the observed and predicted values. As a result, the hidden layers 
were employed after the prediction was run to extract a new raw descriptor representa-
tion, as shown in Eq uation  (4).  
𝑥𝑖+1=𝑓(𝑤𝑖𝑥𝑖+𝑏𝑖),   𝑖=1,2,..𝐼 (4) 
where 𝑓 denotes the activation function, 𝑤𝑖 denotes the weight matrix, and 𝑏𝑖 denotes 
the bias of  the 𝑖𝑡ℎ hidden layer . The parameters were chosen based on ( 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 ), as pre-
sented in Figure 6.  
 
Figure 6. Activation function for DNN.  
3.4.3. Random Forest ( 𝑅𝐹) 
Figure 5. Deep neural network structure.
Unique weights were assigned to the inputs by the activation function (rectiﬁed linear
unit ( ReLU ) [59]. Then, these weights were associated with the model’s variables to reduce
the error between the observed and predicted values. As a result, the hidden layers were