Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 11 of 20
Sustainability 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  11 of 21  
 This algorithm has been frequently utilized in data mining applications to cope with 
classification and regression issues [ 60]. The 𝑅𝐹 is a classification and regression tech-
nique that uses a set of classification trees, a bootstrap sample of the data applied to create 
these sets. The variables are chosen at random at each split as the candidate set of variables 
for tree building. Employ ing bagging is the second way that can be used to integrate un-
steady learners successfully. The 𝑅𝐹 is a robust  algorithm with several merits, such as 
forecasting accuracy, dealing with many features, fast simulation speed, high perfor-
mance, and free appl ications [ 58]. In this study, two primary  indicators (i.e., the number 
of grown trees and leaf size) determine d the accuracy and proficiency of the RF. The num-
ber of grown trees and leaf size ranged from 0 to 3000 and 1 to 20, respectively. The model 
became more stable with reliable results in the case of 400 grown trees and two leaf sizes. 
In addition , in this study , “bootstrap samples ” (𝑆1,𝑆2,....𝑆𝑛) were created from the orig-
inal dataset, and then these random samples were used to construct trees (𝑅1,𝑅2,…𝑅𝑛). 
Finally, these trees were combined , as shown in Figure 7.  
 
Figure 7. Flowchart of the RF ’s architecture . 
4. 𝑴𝑳 Model Result s 
4.1. Experimental Setup 
The K -fold cross -validation process was applied to develop the model ’s accuracy by 
examining the 𝑀𝐿 algorithm performance on various datasets. In addition, the model 
hyperparameters were tuned using a K -fold cross -validation technique. First, the database 
must be separated into subsets for training and testing the 𝑀𝐿 modeling process. During 
this process, the training dataset is partitioned into multiple ‘k’ smaller portion s. The term 
‘K-fold’ was coined as a result. Then, testing is d one with K -fold, while training is done 
with k -1. Both are also based on a random dataset.  In addition, the model hyperparame-
ters are tuned using a K -fold cross -validation technique. The prediction model is then fit-
ted to the training set using the best po ssible hyperparameter configuration. Conse-
quently, each fold is only utilized as a validation set once. Finally , the accuracy measures 
for each fold may be compared, and if they are similar, the model is likely to generalize 
well , as shown in Figure 8 . 
Figure 7. Flowchart of the RF’s architecture.
4.MLModel Results
4.1. Experimental Setup
The K-fold cross-validation process was applied to develop the model’s accuracy by
examining the MLalgorithm performance on various datasets. In addition, the model
hyperparameters were tuned using a K-fold cross-validation technique. First, the database
must be separated into subsets for training and testing the MLmodeling process. During
this process, the training dataset is partitioned into multiple ‘k’ smaller portions. The term
‘K-fold’ was coined as a result. Then, testing is done with K-fold, while training is done
with k-1. Both are also based on a random dataset. In addition, the model hyperparameters
are tuned using a K-fold cross-validation technique. The prediction model is then ﬁtted to
the training set using the best possible hyperparameter conﬁguration. Consequently, each
fold is only utilized as a validation set once. Finally, the accuracy measures for each fold
may be compared, and if they are similar, the model is likely to generalize well, as shown
in Figure 8.
Sustainability 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  12 of 21  
  
Figure 8. Five -fold cross -validation technique flowchart . 
4.1.1. Hyperparameter Optimization  
The hyperparameters of the proposed 𝑀𝐿 algorithms used in this study had to be  
tune d, as shown in Table  4 . These hyperparameters were modified depending on the 
actual dataset rather than the manual determinations. Thus, t he investigation was carried 
out with k = 1 to k = 10 for K-fold cross -validation. Each 𝐾 represents the grid search for 
the optimum 𝑀𝐿 model selection and hyperparam eter tuning. As a result, five-fold cross -
validation had the best prediction accuracy , as discussed the in the perform ance evalua-
tion.   
Table 4. Results of hyperparameter optimization for the 𝑀𝐿 models . 
ML Models  Hyperparameters  Optimal Values  
𝑿𝑮𝑩𝑶𝑶𝑺𝑻  Number of trees  1000  
Learning rate  0.08 
Maximum depth  12 
Number of needed lea ves 16 
𝑹𝑭 Number of trees  800 
Learning rate  0.11 
Maximum depth  17 
Number of needed lea ves 20 
𝑫𝑵𝑵  Number of neurons  4 
Learning rate  0.13 
Batch size  10 
Epochs  300 
Number of hidden layers  4 
Activation function  𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈  
4.1.2. Feature Importance Analysis  
Pearson’s correlation process was conducted between the selected features and the 
cost value s of green building project s to assess the influence of these features on each other 
and the observed values, as presented in Figure 9. 
Figure 8. Five-fold cross-validation technique ﬂowchart.