Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 5 of 20
ous sources and fed into the constructed models. Some of the primary data sources for this
study were the websites of green building councils in the United States and Canada [9,10] .
Such data were captured and exported into MS Excel sheets to prepare for the analytical
procedure. The information was gathered between 2010 and 2020. However, about two
years were required to ensure that the obtained data were enough and usable for the ML
approach. Emphasis was placed on quantifying and comparing the economic performance
of each building in the dataset. The data were modiﬁed depending on location to create
consistent results for comparison. Furthermore, the designs of the erected structures were
compared to make future cost forecasts and comparisons.
3.2. Factor Selection
Hard and soft costs are associated with construction projects [ 44]. Land costs are
expenses associated with land ownership, such as the transfer of ownership, land purchase,
and site clearance. In addition, land costs include the actual and direct costs of building
implementation, such as civil and structural works, architectural work, and other physical
construction activities [ 45]. Soft costs are indirect expenses associated with the non-physical
parts of a building project, such as administration, planning, documentation, and market-
ing [ 46]. Soft expenses are linked with activities outside the scope of building costs and
typically vary from 1 to 5% of the total construction costs [ 47]. In summary, hard costs are
associated with construction, while soft costs are associated with design and certiﬁcation
services. Thus, soft expenses are any costs that are not directly related to the building cost.
Various studies have been conducted to determine if the cost of green projects will
increase or decrease when green elements are introduced to fulﬁll green building standards
compared to regular structures [ 48,49]. Green buildings are estimated to cost 5 to 10% more
than regular structures. According to certain studies, the costs of green buildings increase
by 1 to 2%. However, according to another study, the cost of green buildings is raised by
less than 2% compared to typical structures [ 50,51]. The inconsistent ﬁndings complicate
the investigation into green building costs, and therefore, this matter is a concerning issue.
In conclusion, green building costs can be separated into the main types (i.e., hard and soft
costs). These types have been further divided into categories, as shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Categories of green building costs.
Green Building CostsCategoriesHard Soft
Architectural designProfessional engagementMaterial and labor
Building servicesProceduresCivil and structural
Plants and equipmentLegal requirementsBuilding requirements
The factors that inﬂuence the cost of green building projects are listed as follows:
people, technical, technological, and speciﬁc requirements, and external support. For more
detail, Table 2 presents a description of these features. All features impact the total building
project cost in terms of hard and soft costs. In addition, Figure 2 is included to provide a
better view of these features that affect the overall cost of green building projects.