Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 10 of 20
employed after the prediction was run to extract a new raw descriptor representation, as
shown in Equation (4).
xi+1=f(wixi+bi),i=1, 2, . . . I (4)
where fdenotes the activation function, widenotes the weight matrix, and bidenotes the
bias of the ithhidden layer. The parameters were chosen based on ( ReLU ), as presented in
Figure 6.
Sustainability 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  10 of 21  
 𝐷𝑁𝑁  is a subset of deep learning algorithms that employ multi -layered neural net-
work training and testing to learn complex structures and achieve appropriate abstraction 
levels. The dataset is directed in one direction within the network, passing the four hid den 
layers [5 7]. Such movement improves the memory of the neural network to process se-
quential data naturally. The 𝐷𝑁𝑁  technique has two stages: The first stage (training) is 
applied to optimize the network parameters to complete the expected goal (pred iction). 
The second stage (testing) assesses whether the trained model can process a new dataset. 
The six layers in this study (i.e., the input layer, four hidden layers, and the output layer) 
were  employed to retain the best prediction model accuracy, as presented in Figure 5.  
 
Figure 5. Deep neural network structure . 
Unique weight s were assigned to the inputs by the activation function (rectified lin-
ear unit ( 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 ) [59]. Then , these weights were  associated with the model ’s variables to 
reduce the error between the observed and predicted values. As a result, the hidden layers 
were employed after the prediction was run to extract a new raw descriptor representa-
tion, as shown in Eq uation  (4).  
𝑥𝑖+1=𝑓(𝑤𝑖𝑥𝑖+𝑏𝑖),   𝑖=1,2,..𝐼 (4) 
where 𝑓 denotes the activation function, 𝑤𝑖 denotes the weight matrix, and 𝑏𝑖 denotes 
the bias of  the 𝑖𝑡ℎ hidden layer . The parameters were chosen based on ( 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 ), as pre-
sented in Figure 6.  
 
Figure 6. Activation function for DNN.  
3.4.3. Random Forest ( 𝑅𝐹) 
Figure 6. Activation function for DNN.
3.4.3. Random Forest ( RF)
This algorithm has been frequently utilized in data mining applications to cope with
classiﬁcation and regression issues [ 60]. The RFis a classiﬁcation and regression technique
that uses a set of classiﬁcation trees, a bootstrap sample of the data applied to create these
sets. The variables are chosen at random at each split as the candidate set of variables for
tree building. Employing bagging is the second way that can be used to integrate unsteady
learners successfully. The RFis a robust algorithm with several merits, such as forecasting
accuracy, dealing with many features, fast simulation speed, high performance, and free
applications [ 58]. In this study, two primary indicators (i.e., the number of grown trees and
leaf size) determined the accuracy and proﬁciency of the RF. The number of grown trees
and leaf size ranged from 0 to 3000 and 1 to 20, respectively. The model became more stable
with reliable results in the case of 400 grown trees and two leaf sizes. In addition, in this
study, “bootstrap samples” ( S1,S2,. . .Sn)were created from the original dataset, and
then these random samples were used to construct trees ( R1,R2,. . .Rn). Finally, these
trees were combined, as shown in Figure 7.