Citation: Alshboul, O.; Shehadeh, A.;
Almasabha, G.; Almuﬂih, A.S.
Extreme Gradient Boosting-Based
Machine Learning Approach for
Green Building Cost Prediction.
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su14116651
Academic Editor: Ripon
Kumar Chakrabortty
Received: 30 April 2022
Accepted: 25 May 2022
Published: 29 May 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sustainability
Article
Extreme Gradient Boosting-Based Machine Learning Approach
for Green Building Cost Prediction
Odey Alshboul1,*, Ali Shehadeh2
, Ghassan Almasabha1
and Ali Saeed Almuﬂih3
1Department of Civil Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, The Hashemite University, P .O. Box 330127,
Zarqa 13133, Jordan; ghassans@hu.edu.jo
2Department of Civil Engineering, Hijjawi Faculty for Engineering Technology, Yarmouk University,
Shaﬁq Irshidatst, Irbid 21163, Jordan; ali.shehadeh@yu.edu.jo
3Department of Industrial Engineering, King Khalid University, King Fahad St., Guraiger,
Abha 62529, Saudi Arabia; asalmuﬂih@kku.edu.sa
*Correspondence: odey.shboul@hu.edu.jo
Abstract: Accurate building construction cost prediction is critical, especially for sustainable projects
(i.e., green buildings). Green building construction contracts are relatively new to the construction
industry, where stakeholders have limited experience in contract cost estimation. Unlike conventional
building construction, green buildings are designed to utilize new technologies to reduce their
operations’ environmental and societal impacts. Consequently, green buildings’ construction bidding
and awarding processes have become more complicated due to difﬁculties forecasting the initial
construction costs and setting integrated selection criteria for the winning bidders. Thus, robust green
building cost prediction modeling is essential to provide stakeholders with an initial construction
cost benchmark to enhance decision-making. The current study presents machine learning-based
algorithms, including extreme gradient boosting (XGBOOST), deep neural network (DNN), and
random forest (RF), to predict green building costs. The proposed models are designed to consider
the inﬂuence of soft and hard cost-related attributes. Evaluation metrics (i.e., MAE, MSE, MAPE, and
R2) are applied to evaluate and compare the developed algorithms’ accuracy. XGBOOST provided
the highest accuracy of 0.96 compared to 0.91 for the DNN, followed by RF with an accuracy of 0.87.
The proposed machine learning models can be utilized as a decision support tool for construction
project managers and practitioners to advance automation as a coherent ﬁeld of research within the
green construction industry.
Keywords: green buildings; cost prediction; machine learning; extreme gradient boosting ( XGBOOST );
deep neural network (DNN); random forest (RF)
1. Introduction
With the growing demand for green buildings worldwide, it has become necessary
to develop a new adequate research ﬁeld to create practical evaluation approaches for
green building bidders to guarantee that the selected bid winner has practical experience
and knowledge of all the required stages, which are vital to ﬁnish such projects with the
required time, cost, quality, safety, and environmental aspects. In addition, inﬂuential
research ensures the ability to successfully leave space for the green construction industry
to cope with emerging technologies [ 1]. Thus, accurate construction cost prediction models
need to consider all inﬂuential attributes. Considering that evaluating the cost of traditional
buildings is utterly different from that of green buildings designed to be environmentally
friendly through the production of zero greenhouse gases, it is necessary to design cost
forecasting models differently and innovatively [ 2–4]. Although the current literature
contains various cost prediction models for traditional buildings, minimal efforts have
been directed toward green building cost estimation modeling. Green construction cost
biddings contain more detailed requirements when compared to traditional ones. Having
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14116651 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability