Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 16 of 20
building was forecasted via up-to-date machine learning approaches to reﬂect the cost
function variation based on datasets recovered from 283 green building projects that were
examined in North America. The proposed models can be used by green building vendors,
designers, stakeholders, and decision-makers to predict the green cost objective function
of their new green buildings based on the characteristics of the main inﬂuential factors. It
ought to be stated that the scope of the current research is partial to green buildings in the
United States. It is also limited in the quantity of the collected data and the number of the
main attributes considered. Thus, it is critical to consider the impact of governmental and
non-governmental external support.
It should also be explained that the current research was restricted to economic and
sustainable assessments and did not consider social and environmental dimensions. Addi-
tionally, the emphasis of the current research was on comparing the predicted cost objective
function against the actual construction cost without considering the construction life cycle
cost analysis elements or the reimbursement cycle. Therefore, further research is required to
combine the current research with additional data, more attributes, various green buildings,
and recently LEED -accredited green buildings.
Decision-makers are increasingly relying on technological ﬁndings to upgrade and
build policies. The current study develops a robust machine learning framework for pre-
dicting green building construction costs from recorded datasets, which can be utilized as
a general model to simulate all associated characteristics. This provides a good founda-
tion for investigating how different feature interconnectivity might share insight on green
building construction cost forecasting. Furthermore, as contemporary machine learning
algorithms grow, increasingly sophisticated forecast models provide ways to develop more
valuable and exact modeling for green building construction cost prediction, which many
construction business practitioners may then use. Finally, consistent with what is currently
emerging in the construction engineering and management research ﬁelds, the authors
are conﬁdent in the proposed models’ ability to provide stakeholders with more precise
forecasts to ﬁt accessible datasets as advantageous preceding information to feed machine
learning-based models.
The current research aims to minimize the knowledge gap in predicting green building
costs. Thus, the proposed models were designed after an intensive investigation of the
currently available related models. For example, one of the main gaps is the lack of
an integrated representation of how the main attributes affect the green building cost
interconnectedly. One of the main issues with the already available green building cost
prediction models is that they lack integrity. Not considering all of the inﬂuential features
of green building costs has ripple effects on the developed model’s dependability. For
example, some studies have focused on the features of green building technologies while
relaxing the people, technical, and speciﬁc requirements [ 61]. This has a detrimental impact
on the accuracy of green building cost forecasts since a high level of uncertainty frequently
accompanies the major qualities. In addition, little effort has been put into establishing
analytical or machine learning-based models for green construction cost prediction. Many
existing models use survey and questionnaire methodologies to describe the practice
case for green building costs. There is always a need for more quantitative and objective
techniques for projecting green construction costs [3,61].
Some studies have provided models that partially forecast the cost of only green
building-certiﬁed residences [ 2]. In addition, other research papers have focused on the
green certiﬁcation of ofﬁce buildings and the cost of equity capital of green buildings [ 4,62].
Consequently, a holistic model for green building cost estimation is required to provide
reliable forecasting tools for practitioners.
Furthermore, historical green construction cost data are scarce. The established data
gathering processes and dataset comprehensiveness have also been a significant impedi-
ment for researchers in developing reliable and general prediction models, especially for
large-budget building contracts. As a result, building a prediction model that can be used ef-
fectively and independently of the construction cost value is critical. Several academics have