To Appear in 2020 IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture
HyGCN: A GCN Accelerator with Hybrid Architecture
Mingyu Yan† ‡ §,Lei Deng§,Xing Hu§,Ling Liang§,Yujing Feng†,
Xiaochun Ye†*,Zhimin Zhang†,Dongrui Fan† ‡, and Yuan Xie§
†State Key Laboratory of Computer Architecture, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
‡School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
§University of California, Santa Barbara
ABSTRACT
Inspired by the great success of neural networks, graph con-
volutional neural networks (GCNs) are proposed to analyze
graph data. GCNs mainly include two phases with distinct
execution patterns. The Aggregation phase, behaves as graph
processing, showing a dynamic and irregular execution pat-
tern. The Combination phase, acts more like the neural net-
works, presenting a static and regular execution pattern. The
hybrid execution patterns of GCNs require a design that allevi-
ates irregularity and exploits regularity. Moreover, to achieve
higher performance and energy efﬁciency, the design needs
to leverage the high intra-vertex parallelism in Aggregation
phase, the highly reusable inter-vertex data in Combination
phase, and the opportunity to fuse phase-by-phase execution
introduced by the new features of GCNs. However, existing
architectures fail to address these demands.
In this work, we ﬁrst characterize the hybrid execution
patterns of GCNs on Intel Xeon CPU. Guided by the char-
acterization, we design a GCN accelerator, HyGCN , using
a hybrid architecture to efﬁciently perform GCNs. Specif-
ically, ﬁrst, we build a new programming model to exploit
the ﬁne-grained parallelism for our hardware design. Sec-
ond, we propose a hardware design with two efﬁcient pro-
cessing engines to alleviate the irregularity of Aggregation
phase and leverage the regularity of Combination phase. Be-
sides, these engines can exploit various parallelism and reuse
highly reusable data efﬁciently. Third, we optimize the over-
all system via inter-engine pipeline for inter-phase fusion
and priority-based off-chip memory access coordination to
improve off-chip bandwidth utilization. Compared to the
state-of-the-art software framework running on Intel Xeon
CPU and NVIDIA V100 GPU, our work achieves on average
1509speedup with 2500 energy reduction and average
6.5speedup with 10energy reduction, respectively.
1. INTRODUCTION
Inspired by the powerful learning capability of neural net-
works, graph convolutional neural networks (GCNs) are pro-
posed as an effective category of models to represent and
process graph data [38, 45, 46, 47]. GCNs convert the graph
data into a low dimensional space while keeping both the
structure and property information to the maximum extent,
and then construct a neural network for the consequent train-
Corresponding author is Xiaochun Ye and his email is yexi-
aochun@ict.ac.cn.ing and inference. Recently, GCNs attract substantial ef-
forts from both the industrial and academic communities
[3,14,18,20,28,43,44] to solve problems including node clas-
siﬁcation [25], link prediction [14, 16], graph clustering [44],
and recommendation [12]. As a result, GCNs gradually be-
come a new workload family member in data-centers, such
as in Google [13], Facebook [28], and Alibaba [3, 47].
The convolutional layers occupy the major execution time
of GCNs through two primary execution phases: Aggrega-
tionandCombination [15, 40, 47]. The Aggregation phase
maintains most graph processing behaviors. It heavily relies
on the graph structure that is inherently random and sparse.
Processing of each vertex requires aggregating features from
all its source neighbours. Unfortunately, the amount and lo-
cation of these source neighbors vary signiﬁcantly among
vertices. As a result, the computational graph [26] and mem-
ory access pattern in the Aggregation phase of each vertex
are dynamic and irregular. The Combination phase acts more
like the neural networks. It transforms the feature vector
of each vertex to a new one using a multi layer perceptron
(MLP), which is usually expressed by a matrix-vector multi-
plication (MVM). Due to the identical connection pattern of
each neuron within a neural network layer, the computational
graph [26] and memory access pattern in the Combination
phase of each vertex are static and regular. Besides, there
are additional characteristics in these two phases that distin-
guish GCNs from conventional workloads. First, the length
of vertex property is short and ﬁxed in conventional graph
analytics. However, in GCNs, the feature vector of each ver-
tex is quite long and variable across layers, which introduces
high-degree intra-vertex parallelism in Aggregation phase.
Second, the parameters in conventional MLP-based neural
networks are never shared, while they can be fully shared
among vertices in GCNs, which induces abundant highly
reusable inter-vertex data in Combination phase. Third, the
two phases are executed alternatively. An inherent dataﬂow
exists between phases, providing an opportunity to fuse the
phase-by-phase execution.
To achieve high-performance and energy-efﬁcient acceler-
ation of GCNs, aforementioned characteristics have imposed
new requirements on architecture design. First, not only can
the GCN architecture alleviate the irregularity in Aggregation
phase, but it can also exploit the regularity in Combination
phase. Second, it needs to exploit the high-degree intra-vertex
parallelism and highly reusable inter-vertex data. Third, it is
able to efﬁciently fuse the execution of these two phases.arXiv:2001.02514v1  [cs.DC]  7 Jan 2020