datasets. Their execution times differ due to the variable
length of feature vectors and the execution ﬂow of GCNs.
For example, the long feature length of CR and CS datasets
causes more time on Combination phase for GCN and Graph-
Sage. Since GINCov executes Aggregation phase ﬁrst, it
spends more time on Aggregation phase without the reduc-
tion of feature length through Combination phase like the
other two models do.
Hybrid Execution Pattern. TheAggregation phase heavily
relies on the graph structure that is inherently random and
sparse, which results in numerous dynamic computations and
irregular accesses. From Table 2, it is observed that each op-
eration in the Aggregation phase requires much more data to
be accessed from DRAM than Combination phase, resulting
in higher DRAM access energy. Besides, the extremely high
numbers of misses per kilo-instruction (MPKI) of L2 and
L3 caches in the Aggregation phase are caused by the high
randomness of neighbor indices of each vertex. In addition,
the indirect and irregular accesses render the data prefetch-
ing in the Aggregation phase ineffective, since it is difﬁcult
to predict the data addresses without knowing the indices
of neighbors in advance. This causes abundant ineffectual
memory accesses to prefetch data.
TheCombination phase executes a MVM for each vertex
with a shared MLP-based neural network, which performs
static and regular computations and accesses. Table 2 illus-
trates that each operation in the Combination phase requires
only small amount of data to be accessed from DRAM. This
is because the MVMs are very compute-intensive and the
weight matrix of MLP is widely shared between vertices.
Nevertheless, up to 36% of execution time for shared data
copy and synchronization between threads is observed.
Table 2: Quantitative Characterization on CPU.
Aggregation Combination
DRAM Byte per Ops 11.6 0.06
DRAM Access Energy per Ops 170nJ 0.5nJ
L2 Cache MPKI 11 1.5
L3 Cache MPKI 10 0.9
Ratio of Synchronization Time — 36%
Table 3: Different Execution Patterns of Aggregation
Phase and Combination Phase.
Aggregation Combination
Access Pattern Indirect & Irregular Direct & Regular
Data Reusability Low High
Computation Pattern Dynamic & Irregular Static & Regular
Computation Intensity Low High
Execution Bound Memory Compute
According to above analysis, hybrid execution patterns
exist in GCNs, which are summarized in Table 3. The Ag-
gregation phase performs dynamic and irregular execution
pattern, bounded by memory, while the Combination phase
is static and regular, bounded by computation.
Differences from Conventional Workloads. Beside hybrid
execution patterns in GCNs, there are additional characteris-
tics that distinguishes GCNs from conventional workloads.
Speciﬁcally, in the Aggregation phase, the length of feature
vectors is variable rather than ﬁxed as in traditional graphanalytics, which is determined by the input dataset and MLP
structure. Moreover, the length of the feature vectors in each
vertex is usually orders of magnitude longer than that of tra-
ditional graph analytics. This introduces high intra-vertex
parallelism. In the Combination phase, the MLP parameters
are fully shared by all vertices while non-reusable in tradi-
tional MLP models if not using the batching technique. This
induces numerous highly reusable inter-vertex data. Besides,
these two phases are executed alternatively to produce the
ﬁnal result, while conventional workloads iteratively perform
only the graph traversal or the neural network propagation.
3.2 The Need for a GCN Accelerator
GCNs are showing great potential in various tasks [16,
18, 19, 38, 43, 46]. Many companies, such as Google [13],
Facebook [28], and Alibaba [47] have deployed GCNs in
data centers, which reﬂects the increasing importance and
scope of upcoming applications. An efﬁcient architecture
is timely to achieve high performance and stimulate GCN
development. Therefore, given the above characterizations,
we explain our motivation of designing a GCN accelerator.
Design Requirements. Given the characteristics of GCNs,
we present the design requirements to perform GCNs with
high performance and energy efﬁciency. First, Aggregation
phase demands efforts to alleviate the irregularity that de-
grades performance. On the other hand, Combination phase
needs more attention to leverage the regularity to improve
the intensive computations with better parallelism and faster
synchronization. Second, the high-degree intra-vertex paral-
lelism and the highly reusable inter-vertex data need to be
exploited. Third, to achieve higher performance and energy
efﬁciency, the execution of Aggregation phase and Combina-
tionphase need to be efﬁciently fused. Unfortunately, exist-
ing architectures fail to address these requirements, resulting
in the following inefﬁciencies.
Inefﬁciencies of General-Purpose Processors. On CPUs,
the irregularity in Aggregation phase makes GCNs ill-suited
to current cache hierarchy design and data prefetching tech-
niques. Besides, it is hard to efﬁciently reuse the highly
reusable parameter data between compute units [8].
GPUs are inherently optimized for compute-intensive work-
loads with regular execution pattern [29] such as neural net-
works, but handling the Aggregation phase with irregular
memory accesses suffers from low efﬁciency. Besides, the
processing of Combination with strong parameter sharing
needs costly data copy and thread synchronization.
Both CPUs and GPUs lack inter-phase optimization for
GCN execution. To leverage the advantages of hardware-
optimized functions [4, 31], current programming framework
for GCNs usually adopts coarse-grained execution, which
results in phase-by-phase execution. This compromises the
design space with phase interaction, hindering the improve-
ment beyond the individual optimization for each phase.
Inefﬁciencies of Conventional Accelerators. Specialized
accelerators tailored to graph analytics or neural networks
gain signiﬁcant speedup and energy savings compared to
general-purpose processors. Whereas, they are inefﬁcient
in processing GCNs due to following reasons: i) they are
usually only designed to either alleviate irregularity or exploit
regularity, while GCNs need both; ii) they fail to leverage the
4