new kinds of parallelism and data reuse to further improve
performance; iii) single-paradigm design make them hard to
fuse the execution of the two phases.
Opportunities for Customization. Designing a specialized
accelerator for a speciﬁc domain is an efﬁcient and prevalent
solution to address the inefﬁciencies of existing architectures,
since it can tailor the memory hierarchy and computation
unit to the speciﬁc workload. For GCNs, we can build an
accelerator with a hybrid architecture using different opti-
mizations for the two phases. For the Aggregation phase, it
is possible to obtain the knowledge of graph data in advance
and schedule the accesses to alleviate the irregularity. More-
over, the computation for each vertex can also be scheduled
to exploit edge parallelism and intra-vertex parallelism. For
theCombination phase, we draw inspirations from current
neural network accelerators to efﬁciently perform MVMs in
parallel with parameter sharing. Beyond the individual opti-
mizations of the two phases, the serial inter-phase dataﬂow
can be pipelined in ﬁner grain. Moreover, all off-chip mem-
ory accesses can be controlled to improve the overall memory
access efﬁciency. Putting all these together, there are huge
opportunities to design an efﬁcient GCN accelerator with
high performance.
4. ARCHITECTURE DESIGN
In this section, we design HyGCN to support the efﬁcient
execution of GCNs. We ﬁrst introduce the programming
model and then present details of the architecture design.
4.1 Edge- and MVM-Centric PM
The goal of building a programming model (PM) is to
exploit available parallelisms and achieve hardware trans-
parency for programmers [47]. For Aggregation , there are
gather- and scatter-based processing methods. Since the
scatter-based method usually produces large amount of atomic
operations and requires a synchronization after the processing
of all vertices, the degree of parallelism will be degraded [17].
On the contrary, the gather-based method can control the
program behavior easily and preserve the execution paral-
lelism. Therefore, we select the gather-based processing in
our design. Nevertheless, this processing mode leads to in-
tensive memory access and vertex computation. To address
this problem, we employ an edge-centric PM to exploit the
edge-level parallelism. Each vertex possesses many incoming
edges (neighbors), which can be aggregated in an edge-by-
edge pipeline. In this way, workload for each vertex can be
divided into subworkloads and assigned to each computation
unit for processing in parallel. For Combination , the situation
is relatively easier. Since the computation of each vertex acts
like the MLP, we directly focus on the MVM operations.
Our edge- and MVM-centric PM for GCNs is shown in
Algorithm 1. At each vertex v2V, the sampled neighbor
indices are read ﬁrst, which is a subset of all neighbors. Each
index corresponds to an edge connecting vand a neighbor ver-
texu, i.e. e(u;v). By traversing all sampled edges connected
v, all the feature vectors of corresponding neighbors can be
aggregated onto the feature vector of v. Then, a Combine
function can start performing the Combination phase that is
comprised of a series of MVMs. In this PM, the edge-level
and MVM-level parallelism can be exploited.Note that in Algorithm 1 we do not express the Pool
and Readout operations explicitly since they are not always
needed. In fact, the Pool operation can be represented by two
GCNs and additional matrix operations. The GCNs can be
performed entirely by the two engines, the matrix transposes
can be executed by the ﬂexible Aggregation engine, and the
matrix multiplications can be executed by the Combination
engine. The Readout operation can be expressed by an ad-
ditional single vertex that connects all vertices in the graph,
which can be accomplished by the Aggregation engine.
Algorithm 1: Edge- and MVM-centric Programming
Model for Aggregation and Combination Phase
1initial SampleNum ;
2initial SampleIndexArray ;
3foreach node v2Vdo
4 agg_res init();
/Edge-centric Parallelism
5 sample _idxs SampleIndexArray [v:nid];
6 foreach sample_idx in sample_idxs do
7 e(u;v) EdgeArray [sample _idx];
8 agg_res Aggregate (agg_res;u:f eature );
9 end
/MVM-centric Parallelism
10 v:f eature Combine (agg_res;weights ;biases );
11end
4.2 Architecture Overview
Based on the proposed PM, Fig. 3 depicts the architecture
ofHyGCN . We construct the system using a hybrid archi-
tecture, which includes two engines ( Aggregation Engine
andCombination Engine ) and one memory access handler.
A communication interface ( Coordinator ) is introduced to
bridge these two engines. Therefore, the interference between
them is mitigated and their execution pipeline is established.
Combination  Engine
Activate UnitAggrega tion Engine
Weight Buffer Input Buffer
Output Buffer
DRAMPE PE PE
PE PE PEPE PE PE
PE PE PESIMD
SamplereSched
SIMD SIMD
vSched
Edge Buffer
Memory Access Handler
CoordinatorAggregation  Buffer
Sparsity
Eliminator 
Figure 3: Architecture overview of HyGCN .
TheAggregation Engine aims to realize the efﬁcient ex-
ecution of irregular accesses and computations. To exploit
the edge-level parallelism, a task scheduler ( eSched ) is de-
signed to assign the edge processing workloads onto SIMD
cores. To support the Sampling operation, we introduce a
Sampler into the Aggregation Engine . The Sampler selects
edges from the edge list of each vertex using a uniform or
predeﬁned distribution in terms of index interval. The former
indices for edge sampling are based on dynamic generation
while the latter ones are predeﬁned and can be read from
5