First, we measure the overall performance with and with-
out inter-engine pipeline optimization (PP v.s. N-PP). With
the pipeline optimization, the execution time of GCN is re-
duced by 27%-53%, as shown in Fig. 16(a). On one hand, the
Aggregation Engine andCombination Engine work in parallel
with inter-engine pipeline. On the other hand, the DRAM
accesses occupy most of the execution time (see Fig. 16(b)),
therefore the inter-engine pipeline helps improve the perfor-
mance by decreasing DRAM accesses of the intermediate
aggregation results between two engines. It is observed from
Fig. 16(b) that total DRAM accesses are signiﬁcantly reduced
to only 50%-73% with this pipeline optimization.
Second, we compare the vertex latency and energy of
Combination Engine with energy-aware pipeline and latency-
aware pipeline (Epipe v.s. Lpipe). From Fig. 16(c), the
Lpipe reduces the average latency for each vertex by 7%-
29% via the immediate processing without waiting for the
aggregation results of many vertices. By contrast, as shown
in Fig. 16(d), the Epipe saves energy consumption by 35%
via assembling a large group of vertices to process together
for reusing weight parameters aggressively. In practice, the
application requirement determines the pipeline mode.
5.3.3 Memory Coordination Optimization
To show the effect of the memory access coordination, we
present the execution time and bandwidth utilization with
and without coordination in Fig. 17(a) and Fig. 17(b), re-
spectively. With the memory access coordination for address
continuity, the DRAM row buffers are better utilized and
the channel-/bank-level parallelism is better exploited, which
saves 73% of time and improves 4 bandwidth on average.
5.4 Scalability Exploration
The following evaluations are measured in GSC model.
Sparsity Elimination with Sampling. The Sampling oper-
ation increases the sparsity, thus it has the potential to enlarge
the beneﬁts produced by sparsity elimination. In Fig. 18(a)-
(c), horizontal axis sweeps the sampling factor . It indicates
that only1
sampling f actoredges of each vertex are sampled to
perform aggregation. As the increasing sampling factor , the
performance is signiﬁcantly improved on the PB dataset by
reducing the DRAM accesses owing to the higher sparsity.
For other datasets, since many edges have been removed,
theCombination phase gradually dominates the execution
time. Therefore, there is no signiﬁcant speedup. Note that
thesampling factor cannot be too high, as it might harm the
accuracy of applications.
Capacity of Aggregation Buffer. The size of the Aggrega-
tion Buffer affects the execution time, amount of data ac-
cesses, and even the effect of sparsity elimination. As the
capacity of Aggregation Buffer increases from 2 MB to 32
MB, the exeuction time is decreased as shown in Fig. 18(d).
This can be explained from two aspects: i) more intermediate
aggregated feature data can be cached in on-chip buffer, lead-
ing to larger shard width when partitioning the graph and thus
less execution loops; ii) larger shard means that the neighbor
features can be reused more often, leading to less DRAM
accesses (see Fig. 18(e)). However, larger shard also enlarges
the window size during the sparsity elimination, which resultsin higher sparsity that cannot be eliminated (see Fig. 18(f)).
Size of Systolic Module. In this experiment, we ﬁx the
number of total systolic arrays but change the size of each
systolic module, and then to measure the cost of Combina-
tion Engine . Different from the systolic module with 4 128
systolic arrays in Table 6, here we treat 1 128 systolic arrays
as a basic systolic module. Based on the initial 32 systolic
modules, we gradually decrease the number of systolic mod-
ules under the restriction of ﬁxed number of total systolic
arrays. It is observed that longer latency for a vertex is con-
sumed as the partition of systolic modules becomes more
coarse-grained as shown Fig. 18(g)(bar). This is caused by
the longer time to assemble a larger group of vertices to be
processed together. Fortunately, the energy consumption can
be reduced as shown Fig. 18(g)(red line) because the weight
parameters are reused by more vertices within each larger
systolic module. We only present the average energy result
of these datasets for simplicity. In our architecture design, we
set the systolic module with size of 4 128 arrays to achieve
a good trade-off between the latency and energy costs.
6. DISCUSSION
In order to leverage our proposed PM, PyG needs to be
signiﬁcantly modiﬁed for its coarse-grain message-passing
mechanism to stream Aggregation andCombination for each
vertex. Note that although these two phases can be streamed
after modiﬁcation, it also misses the advantage of hardware-
optimized operations, such as matrix multiplication opera-
tion [21,31]. Furthermore, further challenges exist with 1) in-
efﬁcient memory subsystem due to workload-agnosticism [17],
2) difﬁculty in data reuse like systolic arrays [22], and 3) ex-
pensive on-line preprocessing for workload reorganization
and streaming.
Following concerns make training unsuitable as a starting
work to explore GCN hardware. First, training involves three
passes with data dependency: forward, backward, and update,
whose compute and memory patterns are more complex than
that of inference with only the forward pass. Second, the
gradient propagation in graphs is far more complicated than
layer-by-layer propagation in neural networks. However,
training accelerators can leverage our architecture to design
the forward pass, and would need specialized blocks for other
passes and an efﬁcient memory hierarchy to connect them.
7. RELATED WORK
Plenty of software frameworks for graph analytics and neu-
ral networks have been presented to release the programming
efforts while achieving high performance on modern general-
purpose architectures [5,34,35,37]. However, all of them only
work well for the single-pattern workloads. Therefore, a large
number of software frameworks for hybrid-pattern GCNs
are proposed recently [2, 15, 28, 43, 47]. For instance, Py-
Torch Geometric [15] leverages message-passing framework
to enhance its expression ability and the hardware-optimized
operations (e.g. scatter and matrix multiplication) so that
the GCN workloads can be accelerated. Unfortunately, the
distinct execution pattern regarding computation and access
between the Aggregation phase and the Combination phase
produces processing inefﬁciencies on traditional platforms.
GCNs demand specialized architecture design.
12