PE PE PE
PE PE PE
(b) Aggregation  Buffer
PE PE PE
PE PE PE
PE PE PE
PE PE PE
Weight Buffer
Aggregation  Buffer
Weight Buffer
(a)
Module 
1Module 
2Module 
iFigure 6: Combination Engine design: (a) multiple sys-
tolic modules; (b) different dataﬂow patterns.
tions of a small group of vertices, as illustrated in Fig. 7(a).
The weight parameters for each module in this case are di-
rectly accessed from the Weight Buffer and just reused within
module, as depicted in Fig. 6(b). The advantage of this
mode is the lower vertex latency because we can process
theCombination operations of this small group of vertices
immediately once their aggregated features are ready, without
waiting for more vertices. This mode matches well with the
vertex-disperse processing mode of Aggregation Engine in
Fig. 4, where the aggregated features are produced quickly
but sequentially.
Systolic 
Module 1Aggregating Feature 
VectorV1
V2
Systolic 
ArrayV1
V2
V3
V(i+1)
V(i+2)Weight
V(i+1)
V(i+2)Systolic 
Module  iWeight
Weight(a) (b) Aggregating Feature 
Vector
Aggregating Feature 
Vector
Figure 7: Different use of the systolic arrays: (a) inde-
pendent working mode; (b) cooperative working mode.
4.4.2 Cooperative Working Mode
Besides working separately, these systolic modules can be
further assembled together to simultaneously process more
vertices, as shown in Fig. 7(b). Different from the immediate
processing of vertices, this mode requires to assemble the ag-
gregated features of a large group of vertices together before
performing their Combination operations. The advantage is
that, the weight parameters can ﬂow from the Weight Buffer
to the downstream systolic modules and then gradually to the
upstream ones (see Fig. 6(b)), which are greatly reused by all
systolic arrays. This helps reduce the energy consumption.
No matter which working mode is selected in the Combi-
nation Engine , the weights can be reused inherently in Weight
Buffer when processing different vertices. However, in tradi-
tional neural networks, especially MLPs, the weights cannot
be shared without batching technique. The multi-granular
systolic array design is also speciﬁc to our architecture in
order to accommodate different application needs.
4.5 Inter-Engine Optimization
To efﬁciently fuse the phase-by-phase execution, we or-
chestrate the execution pipeline and DRAM access of Aggre-gation engine and Combination engine by the Coordinator .
4.5.1 Latency- or Energy-Aware Pipeline
Ping-Pong Aggregation Buffer. To reuse the aggregation
results produced by the Aggregation engine, we add an Ag-
gregation Buffer between the two engines. This buffer can
be written by the Aggregation Engine and can be read by the
Combination Engine . Before the ﬁnal aggregated results are
generated, the Aggregation Buffer stores the partial results
that will be read by the Aggregation Engine for feature accu-
mulation. In order to increase the parallelism of these two
engines, we implement a ping-pong buffering mechanism
where the Aggregation Buffer is split into two chunks. In
this way, the executions of aggregation and combination are
decoupled, which enables an inter-engine pipeline.
To accommodate the needs of different applications, we
provide two pipeline modes as follows.
Latency-Aware Pipeline. In this pipeline mode, the Com-
bination Engine works in the systolic module independent
mode. The aggregated features are produced vertex by vertex
in the Aggregation Engine , and the following combination
will be processed immediately once the aggregated features
of a small group of vertices are ready. Therefore, the average
processing latency for each vertex can be lower. The overall
timing is illustrated in Fig. 8(a), where Vdenotes the vertices
for aggregation, and Irepresents the neighbor intervals.
Energy-Aware Pipeline. The energy-aware pipeline uses
the systolic module cooperative mode in the Combination
Engine . The vertex-by-vertex processing changes to a burst
mode, where a large group of vertices will be processed
together every time. Although the vertex latency is longer,
the energy consumption can be reduced due to the weight
propagation in the merged systolic arrays without redundant
accesses. Fig. 8(b) presents its timing sequence.
I1
Time V2 V3 V1 V4(a) Aggregation CombinationI2X(k-1)
 Xk
 
 I3
 I4
(b) V1V2V3
V4 V1V3V2
V3
V1V4
V1V4V1
Time V2 V3 V1 V4Xk
 
V1V2V3
V4 V1V3
V1V4
V1V4V3V2V1Small GroupLarge Group V4 V4
Figure 8: Timing illustration of different pipeline modes:
(a) latency-aware pipeline; (b) energy-aware pipeline.
4.5.2 Coordination of Off-chip Memory Access
It is hard to determine the memory bandwidth ratio be-
tween the two engines since the practical workloads usually
vary between Aggregation andCombination . Moreover, the
separation of memory systems will increase the conﬁguration
overheads and cause bandwidth waste. This is the reason why
we use only one off-chip memory.
Edges Input Features Weights Output FeaturesRequest Issue Time
 Time Data in DRAM Row Buffer
 TimeRequest Issue 
(a) 
(b)  Data in DRAM Row Buffer
 Time
Figure 9: Coordination of off-chip memory access.
Both the two engines access this memory at runtime, which
8