fcsAc
ˆAc
fs
ℒ"#ℒ$%&
Ic
Is IoSelf-Attention
Moduleℒ'""
Multi-stroke
FusionMulti-scale
StyleSwap
…
fc
ˆfcsKAttentionFilterStyleEnhancement
StyleEnhancement
StyleEnhancementRelu_4_1
Relu_1_1Relu_2_1Relu_3_1Relu_4_1ˆfcs0fc( )
Figure 2. An overview of our network architecture. We train a self-attention autoencoder for image reconstruction in a style-agnostic
manner. Given a content image Icand a style image Isin the testing phase, we perform multi-stroke style transfer via style swap and
fusion modules under the guidance of attention map ˆAc. Skip connections are introduced to enhance the stylization effects during the
reconstruction process. The black and green lines represent the training and testing phases respectively, while the orange dotted line
denotes the ﬂow of our loss functions.
quences in the self-attention mechanism of the Transformer
model, which improves the translation quality on machine
translation tasks. Zhang et al. [31] demonstrates that the
self-attention model can capture the multi-level dependen-
cies across image regions and draw ﬁne details in the con-
text of GAN framework. Compared with [31], we adapt the
self-attention to introduce a residual feature map to catch
salient characteristics within content images.
3. Proposed Approach
For the task of style transfer, the goal is to generate a styl-
ized image Io, given the content image Icand style image
Is. To satisfy arbitrary style transfer in one feed-forward
pass while integrating images with multiple stroke patterns,
we develop three modules( multi-scale style swap ,multi-
stroke fusion andself-attention module ) in the bottleneck
layer for feature manipulation. The three modules cooper-
ate with each other and form a coupling framework. The
network architecture of our proposed approach is depicted
in Figure 2.
Assume that fcandfsdenote the feature maps extracted
from the encoder correspond to IcandIsrespectively. At
the core of our network, a self-attention module is proposed
to learn the saliency properties by feeding with fc, which
will generate self-attention feature map Acfor any content
Icafter reconstruction training process. During the interme-
diate process of transferring fcinto the domain of fsvia a
WCT transformation in the testing phase, a multi-scale style
swap module is ﬁrst designed to synthesize features of mul-
tiple stroke sizes ˆfk
cs(k= 1,...,K), taking both the con-tent feature fcand style features fsas input. The module
conducts a style-swap procedure for the content feature and
Kstyle features simultaneously. To perform a ﬂexible inte-
gration of the features, a multi-stroke fusion module is pre-
sented to handle controllable blending. The attention map
ˆAcﬁltered from Acis incorporated to guide fusion among
the content feature fc(ˆf0
cs)and theKswapped stroke fea-
turesˆfk
cs(k= 1,...,K), whereKis the user provided clus-
tering number. After the two steps, the synthetic feature fcs
is fed into the trained decoder to generate the stylized im-
ageIoin one feed-forward pass. We further introduce skip
connections to enhance the stylization effects by adapting
multiple level of synthetic features with style features. In
this section, we introduce the three components in details.
3.1. Self­Attention Autoencoder
We employ a self-attention mechanism [31] to catch the
relationships between separated spatial regions. In detail,
letΦe(·)andΦd(·)represent the encoder and decoder re-
spectively. The encoder produces fx= Φe(x)∈RH×W×C
by mapping the input image xinto the intermediate activa-
tion space, with H,W,Cdenoting height, width and channel
number respectively.
Letflat(·)denote the ﬂatten operation along the channel
dimension. We calculate the self-attention feature of fxin
theithlocation as:
Ai
x=HW/summationdisplay
j=1αij∗flat(fx⊗Θh)j, (1)
where⊗denotes the convolution operation and αijis the
1469