MethodExecution Time (sec)
256×256 512×512
AdaIN 0.09 0.17
WCT 0.92 1.05
Style-Swap 1.96 5.77
Avatar-Net 0.78 0.86
Ours (2-stroke) 0.74 0.81
Ours (3-stroke) 0.80 0.94
Ours (4-stroke) 0.92 1.15
Ours (8-stroke) 0.94 1.18
Table 2. Run time performance. We show runtime test of different
stroke numbers with our method and other feedforward methods.
tions. We generate the saliency maps of stylized images and
their corresponding content images using SALGAN [18], a
state-of-the-art saliency prediction method. We then em-
ploy ﬁve metrics to evaluate the degree of visual attention
consistency for 400 content/stylized image pairs. Compari-
son results between the proposed method and AAMS(-SA)
are shown in Table 1. With our AAMS framework, the
attention consistency is dramatically improved for all the
evaluation metrics. The results further verify the ability in
maintaining saliency for style transfer.
Speed Analysis. We show the run time performance of our
method and prior feed-forward methods in Table 2. Re-
sults are obtained with a 12G Tesla M40 GPU and aver-
aged over 400 transfers. Among the patch based methods
(Style-Swap, Avatar-Net), our method achieves comparable
speed even with multi-scale feature processing. Given three
strokes, it takes averagely 0.80 and 0.94 seconds to transfer
images with size 256 ×256 and 512 ×512 respectively.
Since the running time increases with stroke numbers in a
controllable trend, the tradeoff between efﬁciency and de-
tails diversity should be considered.
4.4. Runtime Control
Given the learnt attention map, our method is ﬂexible to
provide different controls on the multi-stroke stylization.
Multi-stroke Fusion Control. One of the advantage to-
wards the prior methods is that our method can effec-
tively integrate multiple stroke patterns with different con-
trol strategies, including the number of stroke sizes and
level of detail control. As discussed in the previous section,
the different scale of high-level style feature will lead to
different statistics after a style swap process with the same
content feature. Given arbitrary number of stroke sizes, our
method allows ﬂexible fusion among these strokes. The left
part of Figure 7 demonstrates three fusion results with dif-
ferent number of stroke sizes. Note that by integrating with
more stroke sizes, the stylized result presents more vary-
ing patterns with different stroke boundaries, the reason for
this is that our clustering algorithm produces different at-
tention distributions for different number of clusters, which
results in varying weight maps. The right part of FigureStrokeSize1 Stroke Size2 Stroke Size3
Content&Style Attention MapMulti-strokeresult
Figure 9. Our method enables automatic spatial stroke size control.
7 shows our ability in regulating level of detail control for
four-stroke fusion. According to eq. (12), the smoothing
factorγdetermines the weight distribution for all stroke
sizes. As shown in Figure 7, the larger it is, the more dis-
criminative for each stroke within corresponding regions.
Automatic Spatial Stroke Size Control. Spatial stroke
size control refers to properly utilizing strokes of differ-
ent sizes to render regions with different levels of detail
in an image. The gist is that for a visually plausible styl-
ized artwork, we usually hope to use stroke of small size for
salient regions ( e.g., objects, humans), while large size for
less salient ones ( e.g., sky, grassland). To this end, pre-
vious method [8] generally employs several hand-crafted
masks and then stylize corresponding regions separately.
Our method, however, empowers spatial control in an auto-
matic way due to the self-attention mechanism. As shown
in Figure 9, three stroke sizes are adopted to render re-
gions of different saliency, i.e., the ﬁne stroke patterns on
the farmer, the middle stroke patterns on the mountain and
coarse stroke patterns on the grass. In particular, these re-
gions are partitioned and integrated automatically under the
guidance of content attention map during our multi-stroke
fusion procedure, thus providing automatic solution for spa-
tial control (which refers to transferring each region with
different styles in the content image) instead of mask con-
trolling methods [6, 13].
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose an attention-aware multi-stroke
style transfer model for arbitrary styles. We employ self-
attention as a residual to obtain the attention map, and then
introduce multi-scale style swap and a ﬂexible stroke fu-
sion strategy to adaptively integrate multiple style patterns
into one stylized image. Experimental results demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method in generating favorable re-
sults in terms of stylization effects and visual consistency
with content image. As a future direction, one may further
explore the relation between the stroke assignment and aes-
thetic factors for enhanced stylization.
Acknowledgements. This work was supported by the Nat-
ural Science Foundation of China (61725204).
1474