of visual attention with the content image and thus mani-
fests distortion in terms of semantic perception.
Stroke textons [33], which are referred to fundamental
micro-structures in natural images, reﬂect perceptual style
patterns. Methods such as [8, 25] are dedicated to learn
stroke control in transfer process. Jing et al. [8] ﬁrst pro-
poses to achieve continuous stroke size control by incorpo-
rating multiple stroke sizes into one single StrokePyramid
model. The StrokePyramid result shown in Figure 1 is pro-
duced by mixing two different stroke sizes. However, due to
the lack of local awareness of content image, they perform
the stroke interpolation in a holistic way regardless of region
diversity, leading to lacking of level of details. In addition,
these methods are inﬂexible to handle arbitrary styles in one
feedforward pass.
To address the aforementioned problems, we propose an
attention-aware multi-stroke (AAMS) model for arbitrary
styles transfer. Our model encourages attention consistency
(which refers to spatial consistency of visual attention dis-
tribution) for corresponding regions between content im-
age and stylized image, and it achieves both scalable multi-
stroke fusion control and automatic spatial stroke size con-
trol in one shot. Speciﬁcally, we introduce self-attention
mechanism as complementary to the autoencoder frame-
work. The self-attention module calculates the response at
a position as a weighted sum of the features at all positions,
which helps to capture long-range dependencies across im-
age regions. By performing a reconstruction training pro-
cess for the self-attention assembled autoencoder, the at-
tention map could grasp salient characteristics within any
content images. As shown in Figure 1, the attention map
of the content image highlights the salient parts while en-
abling consistency of the attention degree for long-range
features. Based on the correlation between receptive ﬁeld
and stroke size, a multi-scale style swap module is proposed
to blend distinct stroke patterns via swapping the content
features with multi-scale style features in high-level repre-
sentations. We inject the attention map into a multi-stroke
fusion module to synthesize distinct stroke patterns harmo-
niously, which achieves automatic spatial stroke size con-
trol. Comprehensive experiments have been conducted to
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, and the model
is capable of generating comparable stylized images with
multiple stroke patterns against the state-of-the-art methods.
The main contributions of this work are:
•We introduce self-attention mechanism to an autoen-
coder network, allowing capturing critical characteris-
tics and long-range region relations of the input image.
•We propose multi-scale style swap to break the limita-
tion of ﬁxed receptive ﬁeld in high-level feature space
and produce multiple feature maps reﬂecting different
stroke patterns.•By combining with attention map, we present a ﬂexi-
ble fusion strategy to integrate multiple stroke patterns
into different spatial regions of the output image har-
moniously, which enables the attention consistency be-
tween the content image and stylized image.
2. Related Work
Neural Style Transfer. Arbitrary-Style-Per-Model meth-
ods (ASPM) [9] have recently been proposed to transfer ar-
bitrary styles through only one single model. The backend
idea is to formulate the style transfer as an image recon-
struction process, with feature statistics fusion between con-
tent and style features at intermediate layers. Chen et al. [2]
ﬁrst proposes to swap the content feature patch with the best
matching style feature patch using a Style-Swap operation.
Huang et al. [7] introduces adaptive instance normalization
(AdaIN) to adjust the mean and variance of the content fea-
ture to match those of the style feature. Li et al. [13] per-
forms the style transfer by integrating the whitening and
coloring transforms (WCT) to match the statistical distribu-
tions and correlations between the features of content and
style. Avatar-Net [21] elevates the feature transfer ability
by matching the normalized counterparts features and ap-
plying a patch-based style decorator. However, the above
methods either locally exchange the closest feature patches
or transfer feature statistics globally, which tends to display
a uniform stroke pattern without attention aware guaranty.
In comparison, our methods perform style transfer to ren-
der visually plausible result with multi-stroke patterns in-
tegrated within the same stylized image. Another related
work is [8], which proposes a StrokePyramid module to
incorporate multiple stroke sizes into one single model, it
empowers distinct stroke sizes in different spatial regions
within the same transformed image. Our approach can au-
tomatically manipulate multiple stroke fusion through the
guidance of attention feature in one shot within ASPM
framework, while [8] achieves spatial stroke size control by
feeding masked content image and need to be retrained for
each new style.
Attention Models. One of the most promising trends in
research is the emergence of incorporating attention mech-
anism into deep learning framework [11, 17]. Rather than
compressing an entire image or a sequence into a static rep-
resentation, attention allows the model to focus on the most
relevant part of images or features as needed. Such mecha-
nism has been proved to be very effective in many vision
tasks including image classiﬁcation [26, 32], image cap-
tioning [28, 30] and visual question answering [27, 29]. In
particular, self-attention [16, 24] has been proposed to cal-
culate the response at a position in a sequence by attending
to all positions within the same sequence. Shaw et al. [20]
proposes to incorporate relative position information for se-
1468