Small Large
Figure 6. Stylized result via different stroke sizes.
Twostrokes Threestrokes Fourstrokes Attention map 𝛾=0 𝛾=5 𝛾= 50
Figure 7. Left: fusion strategy with varying number of stroke sizes, Right: level of detail control via regulating the smoothing factor γ.
We ﬁrst train an autoencoder by removing the self-
attention module. Since no guidance from the attention
map, we apply an average fusion strategy in the multi-
stroke fusion module during the testing phase. We name
this method as AAMS(-SA). Figure 5 shows the compari-
son with our method AAMS. Our stylized result with self-
attention module demonstrates dramatical improvement on
visual effect compared with AAMS(-SA), mainly in two
aspects: 1) Our attention-aware method emphasizes the
salient regions by painting with ﬁne-grained stroke. 2)
The multi-stroke fusion allows abundant integration among
stroke patterns and presents discriminative style patterns lo-
cally without sacriﬁcing the holistic perception.
Apart from the cooperation between self-attention and
multi-stroke fusion module, the multi-scale style swap also
form a compact afﬁliation with the fusion module. Without
the multi-scale style swap module, the style transfer will be
restricted to single stroke pattern. We present the ﬁnal styl-
ized results in Figure 6 with different stroke patterns. The
stroke size is controlled by changing the scaling coefﬁcient
βin eq. (8). From left to right, the larger the stroke size, the
coarser stylized pattern emerges. When multiple stroke pat-
terns are generated together, the multi-stroke fusion module
can integrate them into one stylized image.
4.3. Quantitative Evaluation
User Studies. As artistic style transfer is a highly subjec-
tive task, we resort to user studies to better evaluate the per-
formance of the proposed method. Since Style-Swap [2]
only transfers low-level information, resulting in insufﬁ-
cient stylization effects. We compare the proposed method
to the other three competing methods, i.e., AdaIN [7],
WCT [13] and Avatar-Net [21]. We use 10 content im-
ages and 15 style images collected from the aforementioned
methods and synthesize 150 images for each method, from
which we show 20 randomly chosen content and style com-
binations to each subject.
AdaIN
 WCT
 Avatar-Net
 Ours
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4Preference
Stylization effects
Faithful to contentFigure 8. User study results.
We conduct two user studies on the results in terms of
the stylization effects and faithfulness to content character-
istics. In the ﬁrst study, we ask the participants to select
which stylized image better transfers both color and tex-
ture patterns of style image to content image. In the second
study, we ask the participants to select which stylized image
better preserves the content characters with less distorted ar-
tifacts. In each question, we display the content/style pair
and randomly ordered stylized images by 4 compared meth-
ods and ask the participants to vote the best one according
to the questions. We ﬁnally collect totally 600 votes from
30 subjects and demonstrate the preference results in Fig-
ure 8. The studies show that our method receives most votes
for both stylization and attention consistency. The better
preservation for visual attention enables perceptual promo-
tion for stylization.
Consistency Evaluation. To further evaluate the effec-
tiveness on preserving the attention consistency of our
method, we propose to adopt saliency metrics [1] to mea-
sure the saliency similarity between content and stylized
image pairs. These metrics are widely used to evaluate a
saliency model’s ability to predict ground truth human ﬁxa-
1473