these non-trivial parts in Ac, following by a Gaussian kernel
convolution layer to enhance the regional homogeneity of
the features. The variance of the Gaussian kernel can further
be used to control the salient region’s proportion in content
image. We obtain our attention map ˆAcafter normalizing
into the range [0,1]. Figure 3 shows the visualization image
of the intermediate results. We notice that the attention map
can enlarge the attending inﬂuence of saliency regions while
maintaining the correlations among distant regions.
In addition to the Kswapped features ˆfk
csobtained from
the multi-scale style swap, we introduce the whitened con-
tent feature ˆfcas another entry to character the most signiﬁ-
cant regions, which is known as the ﬁne-grained stroke ˆf0
cs.
Therefore, we have in total of K+1 features for multi-stroke
fusion.
To integrate arbitrary strokes in a scalable framework,
we propose a ﬂexible fusion strategy by ﬁrst dividing the at-
tention map ˆAcinto multiple clusters according to the stroke
number provided. We apply k-means method to cluster our
attention map, the goal is to iteratively ﬁnd K+1 intensity
centers, minimizing the Euclidean distance between center
and elements among each clusters.
argminG=K/summationdisplay
k=0/summationdisplay
ˆaic∈Sk||ˆai
c−mk||2, (10)
where K+1 clusters are generated, and mk∈[0,1]denotes
the mean intensity value of all the attention points ˆai
cin
clusterSk.
The multi-stroke fusion can then be formulated as inte-
grating the content feature with multiple swapped features
under the guidance of attention map.
ˆfcs=K/summationdisplay
k=0ˆAk
cˆfk
cs, (11)
whereˆAk
cis the weight map assigned to the kthstroke size,
andk= 0 denotes the ﬁne-grained stroke. The weight map
is computed by a softmax function:
ˆAk
c=eγ·(1−Dk)
/summationtextK
i=0eγ·(1−Di). (12)
We deﬁne Dk=|ˆAc−mk|to measure the absolute distance
with regard to the center mk, thus1−Dkcan be used to
indicate how much extent each stroke size contributes to
synthesis the feature. The smoothing factor γis used to
control the smoothing degree for fusion.
Before feeding into the decoder to generate the stylized
result, we derive fcsby performing coloring transform with
the syncretic feature ˆfcsto match feature statistics to the
style feature fsfollowing [13].4. Experiments
4.1. Implementation Details
We train our self-attention autoencoder for reconstruc-
tion using MS-COCO dataset [15], which contains roughly
80,000 training examples. We preserve the aspect ratio
of image and rescale the smaller dimension to 512 pixels,
and then randomly crop to 256 ×256 pixels. Our encoder
contains the ﬁrst few layers from VGG-19 model [22] pre-
trained on the ImageNet dataset [3]. The decoder is sym-
metric to the encoder structure. The Relu X1 (X = 1, 2,
3, 4) in the encoder are used to compute the perceptual loss
andλcon,λp,λatt,λtvare set as 1, 10, 6, 10 to balance each
loss. We use three 1 ×1 convolutions for Θh,Θu,Θgin
our self-attention module, and set ˆC=CforΘhandC/2
forΘu,Θg. We train our network using the Adam opti-
mizer and a batch size of 8 for 10k iterations. Although our
method can handle arbitrary number of stroke fusions, we
select three stroke scenario as a default setting in the fol-
lowing experiments, including the ﬁne-grained stroke size
and two coarse stroke sizes (K= 2) whose scale coefﬁ-
cientsβkare 0.5 and 1 respectively. We set the smoothing
factorγas 50 to reveal discriminative patterns for different
stroke. To balance the stylization effects and the attention
consistency, we set the kernel size, mean and deviation in
ourAttention ﬁlter as 3, 6, 5 respectively.
To obtain abundant stylized information, it is advanta-
geous to match features across different levels in the VGG-
19 encoder to fully capture the characteristics of the style
as suggested in [13, 21]. We hence adopt a similar strategy
for our reconstruction process. We use skip connections
to perform style enhancement using adaptive instance nor-
malization [7], feeding with style features extracted from
Relu X1 (X = 1, 2, 3) outputs and the reconstruction fea-
tures in corresponding deconvolution layers.
4.2. Qualitative Evaluation
Comparison With Prior Methods. We evaluate four
state-of-the-art methods for arbitrary style transfer: Style-
Swap [2], AdaIN [7], WCT [13] and Avatar-Net [21]. The
stylized results for various content/style pairs are shown in
Figure 4. Style-Swap simply relies on the patch similarity
between content and style feature, so as to strictly preserve
the content feature, which is validated in its results that only
low-level style patterns ( e.g., colors) are transferred. AdaIN
presents an efﬁcient solution by directly adjusts the content
feature to match the mean and variance of the style feature.
But it usually brings similar texture patterns for all the styl-
ized images ( e.g., the crack pattern in all stylized results)
due to the style-dependent training. WCT holistically ad-
justs the feature covariance of content feature to match that
of style feature, which inevitably brings unseen information
and unconstrained patterns, for example the missing circu-
1471