Content&Style AdaIN WCT Avatar-Net Ours Style-Swap AttentionMap
Figure 4. Results from different ASPM style transfer methods. We evaluate various content images including portraits, animals, landscapes
with distinctive styles. The results of compared methods are obtained by running their codes with default conﬁgurations.
lar patterns in the 6throw and the unexpected textures in the
5throw. Avatar-Net shrinks the domain gap between con-
tent and style features and enhances propagation for feature
alignment. Although concrete style patterns are reﬂected,
it still cannot handle attention-aware feature adaption and
manifest distortion from semantically perception, for exam-
ple the eyes on the ﬁrst row and the farmer on the last row.
By contrast, our method can produce visually plausible
stylized results against the previous methods. The atten-
tion map enables the seamlessly synthesis among multiple
stroke sizes, while demonstrating superior spatial consis-
tency of visual attention between content image and stylized
image. In the last column of Figure 4, the salient regions
in content images such as eyes, candles, house and farmer
still maintain the focus in the stylized image. This vali-
dates the effectiveness of the attention map in the 6thcol-
umn, where salient regions are mainly attributes to the ﬁne-
grained stroke size. In addition, the attention map exhibits
similarity measurement between distant regions, which al-
lows detailed features in distant portions of the image are
consistent with each other.
Content&Style AAMS(-SA)
 AAMS
Figure 5. Comparison results to present the effectiveness of atten-
tion guidance. Regions marked by bounding boxes are zoomed in
for a better visualization.
Method AUC Judd↑ SIM↑ NSS↑ CC↑ KL↓
AAMS(-SA) 0.479 0.677 3.627 0.732 0.458
AAMS 0.484 0.744 4.172 0.834 0.396
Table 1. Quantitative measurements on saliency maps predicted by
SalGAN [18]. The attention consistency is dramatically improved
with our method for all the evaluation metrics [1].
Ablation Studies. We discuss in Section 3 about the contri-
butions of the proposed modules. The self-attention module
is responsible for capturing attention characteristics of con-
tent image, such that the multi-scale style swap module and
the multi-stroke module can work together to integrate mul-
tiple stroke patterns. Several evaluations are performed to
verify the effectiveness of the coupling framework.
1472