Attention-aware Multi-stroke Style Transfer
Yuan Yao1, Jianqiang Ren2, Xuansong Xie2, Weidong Liu1, Yong-Jin Liu1, Jun Wang3
1Tsinghua University,2Alibaba Group,3University College London
Abstract
Neural style transfer has drawn considerable attention
from both academic and industrial ﬁeld. Although visual
effect and efﬁciency have been signiﬁcantly improved, ex-
isting methods are unable to coordinate spatial distribution
of visual attention between the content image and stylized
image, or render diverse level of detail via different brush
strokes. In this paper, we tackle these limitations by devel-
oping an attention-aware multi-stroke style transfer model.
We ﬁrst propose to assemble self-attention mechanism into a
style-agnostic reconstruction autoencoder framework, from
which the attention map of a content image can be derived.
By performing multi-scale style swap on content features
and style features, we produce multiple feature maps re-
ﬂecting different stroke patterns. A ﬂexible fusion strategy is
further presented to incorporate the salient characteristics
from the attention map, which allows integrating multiple
stroke patterns into different spatial regions of the output
image harmoniously. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method, as well as generate comparable stylized im-
ages with multiple stroke patterns against the state-of-the-
art methods.
1. Introduction
Style transfer is a powerful technique for art creation and
image editing that enables recomposing the images in the
style of other images. Recently, inspired by the power of
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) in visual perception
tasks, Gatys et al. [4, 5] opens up a new ﬁeld named Neural
Style Transfer, which ﬁrst introduces neural representations
to separate and recombine content and style of arbitrary im-
ages. They propose to extract the content features and style
correlations (Gram matrix) along the processing hierarchy
of a pretrained network classiﬁer. Based on this work, sev-
eral algorithms have been proposed to accelerate the devel-
opment in terms of the generalization and efﬁciency issues,
through optimization-based methods [5, 14, 19] and feed-
forward networks [10, 12, 23]. The success of style transfer
makes it possible to deploy service upon mobile applica-
tions ( e.g., Prisma, Artify), allowing users to create an art-Content&Style Style- Swap AdaIN WCT
Avatar-NetStrokePyramid Attention MapOurResult
Figure 1. Existing methods are unable to coordinate spatial dis-
tribution of visual attention between content image and stylized
image, misleading the stylized rendering on diverse content re-
gions in an indiscriminate way, resulting in insufﬁcient styliza-
tion (Style-Swap), unexpected patterns (AdaIN, StrokePyramid)
or distorted attention regions (WCT, Avatar-Net). Due to atten-
tion mechanism and multi-stroke fusion strategy, our method can
achieve faithful transfer of style and attention consistency with
content image simultaneously.
work out of a picture they took with their phones.
In spite of signiﬁcant progress already achieved, these
methods suffer from the restricted binding between the
model and speciﬁc styles. Recently, Arbitrary-Style-Per-
Model Fast Style Transfer Methods (ASPM) [9] are pro-
posed to conquer this dilemma. One possible solution is to
coordinate high-level statistical distribution between con-
tent features and style features. Although visual quality and
efﬁciency can be greatly improved, they unexpectedly intro-
duce unexpected or distorted patterns to the stylized result
because of treating diverse image regions in an indiscrim-
inate way, such as AdaIN [7] and WCT [13] in Figure 1.
Another solution is to swap the content feature patch with
the closest style feature patch at the intermediate layer of
a trained autoencoder. However, this method may gener-
ate insufﬁcient stylized results when huge difference ex-
ists between content and style images, such as the Style-
Swap [2] method shown in Figure 1. Compared with Style-
Swap, Avatar-Net [21] further dispels the domain gap be-
tween content and style features, leading to better stylized
results, but it still maintains inconsistent spatial distribution
1467