3.6 Bagging Experiments
Recall from our discussion above, that we use the term bagging to mean a multi-model approach where
the individual models are trained with the same technique and essentially the same parameters, but
different subsets of the data or features. In contrast, we use boosting to refer to multi-model cases
where the data and features are essentially the same and the models are of the same type, with the
model parameters varied.
We will use AdaBoost and XGBoost results to serve as representative examples of boosting. We
also consider bagging experiments (in the sense described in the previous paragraph) involving each of
the HMM, CNN, and LSTM architectures. The results of these three distinct bagging experiments—
in the form of confusion matrices—are given in Figure 3 in the Appendix. In terms of the metrics
discussed above, the results of these experiments are summarized in Section 3.9, below.
3.7 Boosting Experiments
As representative examples of boosting techniques, we consider AdaBoost and XGBoost. In each
case, we experiment with a variety of parameters as listed in Table 6. The parameter selection that
yielded the best results are highlighted in boldface.
Table 6: Parameters for boosting techniques
Technique Parameters Values tested
AdaBoostnestimators [100,200,300,500,800, 1000 ]
learning rate [0.5,1.0,1.5,2.0]
algorithm [SAMME ,SAMME.R]
XGBoosteta [0.05,0.1,0.2, 0.3,0.5]
maxdepth [1,2,3,4]
objective [multi:softprob ,binary:logistic]
steps [1,5,10, 20,50]
Confusion matrices for these two boosting experiments are given in Figure 4 in the Appendix.
The results of these experiments are summarized in Section 3.9, below, in terms of accuracy, balanced
accuracy, and so on.
3.8 Voting Experiments
Since there exists an essentially unlimited number of possible stacking architectures, we have limited
our attention to one of the simplest, namely, voting. These results serve as a lower bound on the
results that can be obtained with stacking architectures.
We consider six different stacking architectures. These stacking experiments can be summarized
as follows.
CNN consists of the plain and bagged CNN models discussed above. The confusion matrix for this
experiment is given in Figure 5 (a).
LSTM consists of the plain and bagged LSTM models discussed above. The confusion matrix for
this experiment is given in Figure 5 (b).
Bagged neural networks combines our bagged CNN and bagged LSTM models. The confusion
matrix for this experiment is given in Figure 5 (c).
Classic techniques combines (via voting) all of the classic models considered above, namely, HMM,
bagged HMM, random forest, AdaBoost, and XGBoost. The confusion matrix for this experi-
ment is given in Figure 5 (d).
All neural networks consists of all of the CNN and LSTM models, bagged and plain. The confusion
matrix for this experiment is given in Figure 5 (e).
All models combines all of the classic and neural network models into one voting scheme. The
confusion matrix for this experiment is given in Figure 5 (f).
In the next section, we present the results for each of the voting experiments discussed in this
section in terms of the our various metrics. These metrics enable us to directly compare all of our
experimental results.
10