2.4.7 HMM with Random Restarts
A hidden Markov model can be viewed as a discrete hill climb technique [37, 38]. As with any hill
climb, when training an HMM we are only assured of a local maximum, and we can often significantly
improve our results by executing the hill climb multiple times with different initial values, selecting
the best of the resulting models. For example, in [51] it is shown that an HMM can be highly effective
for breaking classic substitution ciphers and, furthermore, by using a large number of random restarts,
we can significantly increase the success rate in the most difficult cases. The work in [51] is closely
related to that in [7], where such an approach is used to analyze the unsolved Zodiac 340 cipher.
From the perspective considered in this paper, an HMM with random restarts can be seen as special
case of boosting. If we simply select the best model, then the “combining” function is particularly
simple, and is given by
𝐹(︀
𝑆(𝑥;𝑉,Λ1), 𝑆(𝑥;𝑉,Λ2), . . . , 𝑆 (𝑥;𝑉,Λℓ))︀
= max{𝑆(𝑥;𝑉,Λ𝑖)} (8)
Here, each scoring function is an HMM, where the trained models differ based only on different initial
values. We see that equation (8) is a special case of equation (6). However, the “max” in equation (8)
is the maximum over the HMM model scores, not the maximum over any particular set of input
values. That is, we select the highest scoring model and use it for scoring. Of course, we could use
other combining functions, such as an average or majority vote of the corresponding classifiers. In any
case, since there is a score associated with each model generated by an HMM, any such combining
function is well-defined.
2.4.8 Bagged Perceptron
Like a linear SVM, a perceptron will separate linearly separable data. However, unlike an SVM, a
perceptron will not necessarily produce the optimal separation, in the sense of maximizing the margin.
If we generate multiple perceptrons, each with different random initial weights, and then average
these models, the resulting classifier will tend to be nearer to optimal, in the sense of maximizing the
margin [21, 47]. That is, we construct a classifier
𝐹(︀
𝑆(𝑥;𝑉,Λ1), 𝑆(𝑥;𝑉,Λ2), . . . , 𝑆 (𝑥;𝑉,Λℓ))︀
=1
ℓℓ∑︁
𝑖=1𝑆(𝑥;𝑉,Λ𝑖) (9)
where 𝑆is a perceptron and each 𝑃𝑖represents a set of initial values. We see that equation (9) is a
special case of the averaging example given in equation (7). Also, we note that in this sum, we are
averaging the perceptron models, not the classifications generated by the models.
Although this technique is sometimes referred to as “bagged” perceptrons [47], by our criteria, it
is a boosting scheme. That is, the “bagging” here is done with respect to parameters of the scoring
functions, which is our working definition of boosting.
2.4.9 Bagged Hidden Markov Model
Like the HMM with random restarts example given above, in this case, we generate multiple HMMs.
However, here we leave the model parameters unchanged, and simply train each on a subset of the
data. We could then average the model scores (for example) as a way of combining the HMMs into
a single score, from which we can easily construct a classifier.
2.4.10 Bagged and Boosted Hidden Markov Model
Of course, we could combine both the HMM with random restarts discussed in Section 2.4.7 with
the bagging approach discussed in the previous section. This process would yield an HMM-based
ensemble technique that combines both bagging and boosting.
3 Experiments and Results
In this section, we consider a variety of experiments that illustrate various ensemble techniques.
There experiments involve malware classification, based on a challenging dataset that includes a large
number of samples from a significant number of malware families.
6