Let𝜔1, 𝜔2, . . . , 𝜔 𝑛be training samples, and let 𝑣𝑖be a feature vector of length 𝑚, where the
features that comprise 𝑣𝑖are extracted from sample 𝜔𝑖. We collect the feature vectors for all 𝑛
training samples into an 𝑚×𝑛matrix that we denote as
𝑉=(︀
𝑣1𝑣2··· 𝑣𝑛)︀
(1)
where each 𝑣𝑖is a column of the matrix 𝑉. Note that each row of 𝑉corresponds to a specific feature
type, while column 𝑖of𝑉corresponds to the features extracted from the training sample 𝜔𝑖.
Let𝑆:R𝑚→Rbe a scoring function. Such a scoring function will be determined based on
training data, where this training data is given by a feature matrix 𝑉, as in equation (1). A scoring
function 𝑆will generally also depend on a set of 𝑘parameters that we denote as
Λ =(︀
𝜆1𝜆2. . . 𝜆 𝑘)︀
(2)
The score generated by the scoring function 𝑆when applied to sample 𝑥is given by
𝑆(𝑥;𝑉,Λ)
where we have explicitly included the dependence on the training data 𝑉and the function parame-
ters Λ.
For any scoring function 𝑆, there is a corresponding classification function that we denote as ̂︀𝑆:
R𝑚→{0,1}. That is, once we determine a threshold to apply to the scoring function 𝑆, it provides a
binary classification function that we denote as ̂︀𝑆. As with 𝑆, we explicitly indicate the dependence
on training data 𝑉and the function parameters Λ by writing
̂︀𝑆(𝑥;𝑉,Λ).
For example, each training sample 𝜔𝑖could be a malware executable file, where all of the 𝜔𝑖
belong to the same malware family. Then an example of an extracted feature 𝑣𝑖would be the opcode
histogram, that is, the relative frequencies of the mnemonic opcodes that are obtained when 𝜔𝑖is
disassembled. The scoring function 𝑆could, for example, be based on a hidden Markov model that
is trained on the feature matrix 𝑉as given in equation (1), with the parameters Λ in equation (2)
being the initial values that are selected when training the HMM.
In its most general form, an ensemble method for a binary classification problem can be viewed
as a function 𝐹:Rℓ→{0,1}of the form
𝐹(︀
𝑆1(𝑥;𝑉1,Λ1), 𝑆2(𝑥;𝑉2,Λ2), . . . , 𝑆 ℓ(𝑥;𝑉ℓ,Λℓ))︀
(3)
That is, the ensemble method defined by the function 𝐹produces a classification based on the
scores 𝑆1, 𝑆2, . . . , 𝑆 ℓ, where scoring function 𝑆𝑖is trained using the data 𝑉𝑖and parameters Λ 𝑖.
2.3 Classifying Ensemble Classifiers
From a high level perspective, ensemble classifiers can be categorized as bagging, boosting, stacking,
or some combination thereof [20, 35, 62]. In this section, we briefly introduce each of these general
classes of ensemble methods and give their generic formulation in terms of equation (3).
2.3.1 Bagging
In bootstrap aggregation (i.e., bagging), different subsets of the data or features (or both) are used
to generate different scores. The results are then combined in some way, such as a sum of the scores,
or a majority vote of the corresponding classifications. For bagging we assume that the same scoring
method is used for all scores in the ensemble. For example, bagging is used when generating a random
forest, where each individual scoring function is based on a decision tree structure. One benefit of
bagging is that it reduces overfitting, which is a particular problem for decision trees.
For bagging, the general equation (3) is restricted to
𝐹(︀
𝑆(𝑥;𝑉1,Λ), 𝑆(𝑥;𝑉2,Λ), . . . , 𝑆 (𝑥;𝑉ℓ,Λ))︀
(4)
That is, in bagging, each scoring function is essentially the same, but each is trained on a different
feature set. For example, suppose that we collect all available feature vectors into a matrix 𝑉as in
equation (1). Then bagging based on subsets of samples would correspond to generating 𝑉𝑖by deleting
a subset of the columns of 𝑉. On the other hand, bagging based on features would correspond to
generating 𝑉𝑖by deleting a subset of the rows of 𝑉. Of course, we can easily extend this to bagging
based on both the data and features simultaneously, as in a random forest. In Section 2.4, we discuss
specific examples of bagging.
3