On Ensemble Learning
Mark Stamp∗,SAniket Chandak‡Gavin Wong§Allen Ye¶
Abstract
In this paper, we consider ensemble classifiers, that is, machine learning based classifiers that
utilize a combination of scoring functions. We provide a framework for categorizing such classifiers,
and we outline several ensemble techniques, discussing how each fits into our framework. From this
general introduction, we then pivot to the topic of ensemble learning within the context of malware
analysis. We present a brief survey of some of the ensemble techniques that have been used in malware
(and related) research. We conclude with an extensive set of experiments, where we apply ensemble
techniques to a large and challenging malware dataset. While many of these ensemble techniques
have appeared in the malware literature, previously there has been no way to directly compare results
such as these, as different datasets and different measures of success are typically used. Our common
framework and empirical results are an effort to bring some sense of order to the chaos that is evident
in the evolving field of ensemble learning—both within the narrow confines of the malware analysis
problem, and in the larger realm of machine learning in general.
1 Introduction
In ensemble learning, multiple learning algorithms are combined, with the goal of improved accuracy
as compared to the individual algorithms. Ensemble techniques are widely used, and as a testament
to their strength, ensembles have won numerous machine learning contests in recent years, including
the KDD Cup [15], the Kaggle competition [14], and the Netflix prize [26].
Many such ensembles resemble Frankenstein’s monster [33], in the sense that they are an ag-
glomeration of disparate components, with some of the components being of questionable value—an
“everything and the kitchen sink” approach clearly prevails. This effect can be clearly observed in
the aforementioned machine learning contests, where there is little (if any) incentive to make systems
that are efficient or practical, as accuracy is typically the only criteria for success. In the case of the
Netflix prize, the winning team was awarded $1,000,000, yet Netflix never implement the winning
scheme, since the improvements in accuracy “did not seem to justify the engineering effort needed to
bring them into a production environment” [3]. In real-world systems, practicality and efficiency are
necessarily crucial factors.
In this paper, we provide a straightforward framework for categorizing ensemble techniques. We
then consider specific (and relatively simple) examples of various categories of such ensembles, and
we show how these fit into our framework. For various examples of ensembles, we also provide
experimental results, based on a large and diverse malware dataset.
While many of the techniques that we consider have previously appeared in the malware literature,
we are not aware of any comparable study focused on the effectiveness of various ensembles using
a common dataset and common measures of success. While we believe that these examples are
interesting in their own right, they also provide a basis for discussing various tradeoffs between
measures of accuracy and practical considerations.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we discuss ensemble classifiers,
including our framework for categorizing such classifiers. Section 3 contains our experimental results.
This section also includes a discussion of our dataset, scoring metrics, software used, and so on.
Finally, Section 4 concludes the paper and includes suggestions for future work.
2 Ensemble Classifiers
In this section, we first give a selective survey of some examples of malware (and closely related)
research involving ensemble learning. Then we provide a framework for discussing ensemble classifiers
in general.
∗mark.stamp@sjsu.edu
‡chandakaniket537@gmail.com
§gavinmwong@gmail.com
¶allenye66@gmail.com
SDepartment of Computer Science, San Jose State University, San Jose, California
1arXiv:2103.12521v1  [cs.CR]  7 Mar 2021