2.3.2 Boosting
Boosting is a process whereby distinct classifiers are combined to produce a stronger classifier. Gen-
erally, boosting deals with weak classifiers that are combined in an adaptive or iterative manner so as
to improve the overall classifier. We restrict our definition of boosting to cases where the classifiers
are closely related, in the sense that they differ only in terms of parameters. From this perspective,
boosting can be viewed as “bagging” based on classifiers, rather than data or features. That is, all of
the scoring functions are reparameterized versions of the same scoring technique. Under this definition
of boosting, the general equation (3) becomes
𝐹(︀
𝑆(𝑥;𝑉,Λ1), 𝑆(𝑥;𝑉,Λ2), . . . , 𝑆 (𝑥;𝑉,Λℓ))︀
(5)
That is, the scoring functions differ only by re-parameterization, while the scoring data and features
do not change.
Below, in Section 2.4, we discuss specific examples of boosting; in particular, we discuss the most
popular method of boosting, AdaBoost. In addition, we show that some other popular techniques fit
our definition of boosting.
2.3.3 Stacking
Stacking is an ensemble method that combines disparate scores using a meta-classifier [35]. In this
generic form, stacking is defined by the general case in equation (3), where the scoring functions can
be (and typically are) significantly different. Note that from this perspective, stacking is easily seen
to be a generalization of both bagging and boosting.
Because stacking generalizes both bagging and boosting, it is not surprising that stacking based
ensemble methods can outperform bagging and boosting methods, as evidenced by recent machine
learning competitions, including the KDD Cup [15], the Kaggle competition [14], as well as the
infamous Netflix prize [26]. However, this is not the end of the story, as efficiency and practicality are
often ignored in such competitions, whereas in practice, it is virtually always necessary to consider
such issues. Of course, the appropriate tradeoffs will depend on the specifics of the problem at hand.
Our empirical results in Section 3 provide some insights into these tradeoff issues within the malware
analysis domain.
In the next section, we discuss concrete examples of bagging, boosting, and stacking techniques.
Then in Section 3 we present our experimental results, which include selected bagging, boosting, and
stacking architectures.
2.4 Ensemble Classifier Examples
Here, we consider a variety of ensemble methods and discuss how each fits into the general framework
presented above. We begin with a few fairly generic examples, and then discuss several more specific
examples.
2.4.1 Maximum
In this case, we have
𝐹(︀
𝑆1(𝑥;𝑉1,Λ1), 𝑆2(𝑥;𝑉2,Λ2), . . . , 𝑆 ℓ(𝑥;𝑉ℓ,Λℓ))︀
= max{𝑆𝑖(𝑥;𝑉𝑖,Λ𝑖)} (6)
2.4.2 Averaging
Averaging is defined by
𝐹(︀
𝑆1(𝑥;𝑉1,Λ1), 𝑆2(𝑥;𝑉2,Λ2), . . . , 𝑆 ℓ(𝑥;𝑉ℓ,Λℓ))︀
=1
ℓℓ∑︁
𝑖=1𝑆𝑖(𝑥;𝑉𝑖,Λ𝑖) (7)
2.4.3 Voting
Voting could be used as a form of boosting, provided that no bagging is involved (i.e., the same data
and features are used in each case). Voting is also applicable to stacking, and is generally applied
in such a mode, or at least with significant diversity in the scoring functions, since we want limited
correlation when voting.
4