Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 1 6 of 34
arguments from seven party leaders’ debates during the 2015 UK general election. Their results show
the importance of using voice features, along with textual data, when it comes to extracting claims and
facts from a speech.
2.5. Methods
Generally, the ﬁrst step in text mining (after cleansing the textual data and reducing the noise)
is to represent the text using a proper model. A common text representation model represents a
document as a vector of features. The feature vector represents text with its frequent words or phrases,
or grammatical structure of the sentences [ 47]. Most simple vector representations of text consider
a text as a Bag-of-Words (BOW) or combination of BOW with Bag-of-Characters. More advanced
versions look at the text as a Bag-of-Features [ 48]. Another common text representation method is
to use a graph or a diagram to represent the relation of the words and segments in a document [ 49].
The diagram representation can be used to demonstrate the relation between terms in a text and use
these terms to classify/categorize the text [ 48]. The next problem in text mining is to ﬁnd a similarity
measure and a classiﬁcation function to properly classify the texts. One approach is to employ semantic
similarity measures [ 50]. In addition to similarity measures, one may use machine or statistical learning
models to classify textual data. The logistic regression is a binary classiﬁcation algorithm that applies
the logistic function as the hypothesis. The model subsequently locates the optimal qthat minimizes
the associated cost function Jqthat will then determine a separating sigmoid curve between the two
classes [ 34]. SVM is a statistical classiﬁcation method that was suggested by Cortes and Vapnik [51].
SVM, exploiting the structural risk minimization principle of computational learning theory, seeks
a decision surface to categorize the training data points into two classes and forms decisions based
on the SVMs which are identiﬁed as the only competent elements in the training set. According to
Vinodhini and Chandrasekaran [52], SVMs separate the classes by building a margin in an effort to
minimize the distance between each class and that margin.
NB models learn probabilities based on prior distribution across classes from the training data,
under the assumption that all the features are independent; this speciﬁcally holds true when predicting
a class based on training [34].
Yu et al. [8]tested the party classiﬁers for congressional speech data. They found that the classiﬁers
which were trained on the house speeches are more efﬁcient with processing senate speeches than vice
versa and that the best overall classiﬁer is SVM, which has equally weighted features.
In addition to the application of logistic regression, SVM, and NB, other statistical methods
are also available for classiﬁcation in natural language processing, such as maximum entropy and
maximum likelihood [ 53], which use Candide, an automatic machine translation system developed
by IBM, to test the performance of both the methods. These methods ﬁnd a signiﬁcant efﬁcacy of
maximum entropy techniques for performing context-sensitive modeling.
Other evidence for detectable patterns associated with ideological orientation in the political
speech were found by Diermeier et al. [54], Evans et al. [55], and Laver et al. [56], as these studies
achieve a high classiﬁcation accuracy. Piryani et al. [57] presented an extensive scientometric analysis
of the research work undertaken on opinion mining and sentiment analysis during 2000–2016.
Wilson et al. [22] created a system called the OpinionFinder, which performs a subjectivity analysis.
Thus, it can automatically identify texts with opinions, sentiments, speculations, and other private
states. OpinionFinder seeks to identify subjective sentences and to highlight the various aspects of
subjectivity in these sentences, including the source (holder) of the subjectivity and words that are
included in phrases expressing positive or negative sentiments. It encompasses four components:
1. An NB classiﬁer that applies several lexical and contextual features to distinguish between
subjective and objective sentences [58,59];
2. A component for identifying speech events (e.g., “stated” and “according to”) and directing
subjective expressions (e.g.„ “appalled” and “is sad”);