Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 1 5 of 34
etc.), and suffixes (e.g., “ing”, “ation”, “fy”, “itis”, etc.). Unifying words’ spellings and typesettings (lower
and upper cases) and correcting misspelled words is another step in their pre-processing scheme. The
pre-processing will make the words normalized in the text and reduce the noise in unstructured text data.
Sarkar et al. [38]described a classification algorithm based on a SVM, which allows for 80–89% accuracy .
Sentiment and opinion classiﬁcation is used for classiﬁcation of discussion treads and reviews,
too. Lu et al. [39] used the opinion classiﬁcation methods to automatically discover the opposed
opinion and build an opposing opinion network for a social thread. In order to build the network,
they analyzed the agree/disagree relations between posts in a social network platform (i.e., a forum).
The sentiment and opinion classiﬁcation methods are developed based on machine learning methods
(e.g., SVM, neural networks, naive Bayes, maximum entropy, and stochastic gradient descent) to
classify the large number of online reviews [ 40,41]. Kennedy and Inkpen [40] and Tripathy et al. [41]
applied classiﬁcation methods to classify the Internet Movie Database (IMDB) movie reviews, though
they did not build a network of opinions on the movies.
A challenge in the classiﬁcation of political speeches is that political speeches feature far fewer
sentiment words—typically, adjectives or adverbs—that have been identiﬁed to be most indicative of
opinions, as in the case of movie reviews. Instead, political speeches tend to express opinions in the
choice of the nouns. Moreover, nouns that hold no political connotations in common usage may come
across as heavily-laden with political intentions when expressed in the context of a speciﬁc debate [ 8].
Acharya et al. [34] used classiﬁcation algorithms that, by comparing the performance of logistic
regression, SVM, and naive Bayes models (NB), analyzes the speech of a given United States (U.S.)
presidential candidate from 1996–2016 to predict the candidate’s political party afﬁliation, as well
as the region and year in which the speech was delivered. They found a superior performance of
the logistic regression, followed by SVM and NB methods. These results are supported by the work
conducted by Joachims [42], who found that logistic regression classiﬁes a presidential candidate’s
speech as democratic or republican most accurately. Thus, predicting the candidate’s political party
and the year in which the speech was delivered is relatively easy, while predicting the location in
which the speech was delivered, proves to be signiﬁcantly more difﬁcult.
2.4. Arguments Extraction
As another application, text mining is used to extract facts and arguments, speciﬁcally from
political speeches and documents. An argument, in a certain context, usually consists of two main
parts: a claim and a series of minor and major premises to support the claim. The premises are
known and already proven facts. Argument extraction is closely related to opinion mining and
belief classiﬁcations. Extracting the arguments from a large amount of textual data, not only helps
building a knowledge base for a given subject or a task, it also helps to reexamine different arguments,
with different common bases, and produce new ones in large scale. Extracting arguments requires
distinguishing between the claims and the fact, which will result in extracting the arguments, along
with the underlying facts. The big potential of argument extraction in political textual data has
attracted many researchers in text mining. For instance, Sardianos et al. [43] proposed a supervised
technique, based on conditional random ﬁelds, to extract arguments and their underlying facts.
They applied the method to web pages containing news and tagged speeches. Florou et al. [44]
applied a variate of argument extraction methods to Greek language social media to estimate the
public support for an unannounced (unpublished or unﬁnished) policies. They took into account the
structure of the sentences and discourse markers, like connectives, as well as the tense and mood of
the verbal construction, and showed the importance of verbal construction in argument extraction.
Goudas et al. [45] developed a two-stage approach to extract the arguments made by bloggers and
others in social media related to the arguments made by policymakers, as well as new arguments
in social media. The proposed model is applied to a vast number of Greek language social media
contents. Their method has a high accuracy rate in extracting arguments and building relational links
between arguments and policies. Lippi and Torroni [46] used the machine learning methods to extract