Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 1 10 of 34
email categorization, contact analysis, email network property analysis, and email visualization. Later,
the commonly used techniques for each task were discussed. These included NB, SVMs, rule-based
and content-based models, and random forest (RF), as well as K-nearest neighbour (K-NN) classiﬁers
(pertaining to the classiﬁcation problem in the email content detection) and the K-means algorithm
(pertaining to the semi-supervised clustering problem). The methods based on principal component
analysis (PCA), LDA, and term frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) were presented
as well.
The study by Mujtaba et al. [117] comprehensively reviewed 98 articles published between
2006–2016 on email classiﬁcation from the Web of Science core collection databases and the Scopus
database. In this study, the methodological decision analysis was performed in the following ﬁve
aspects: (1) email classiﬁcation application areas, (2) the datasets used in each application area, (3)
feature space utilized in each application area, (4) email classiﬁcation techniques, and (5) the use of
performance measures.
Sentiment analysis of online text documents has been a ﬂourishing ﬁeld of text mining among
researchers and scholars. In contrast to the content of public data, the real sentiment is often expressed
in personal communications. Emails are frequently used for sending emotional messages that reﬂect
deeply meaningful events in the lives of people [ 118]. On the other hand, sentiment analysis on large
business emails could reveal valuable patterns useful for business intelligence [ 119,120]. The study of
Hangal et al. [118] proposed the use of sentiment analysis techniques on the personal email archives of
users to aid the task of personal reﬂection and analysis. The authors built and publicly released the
Muse email mining system. The system helps users to analyze, mine, and visualize their own long-term
email archives. Moreover, Liu and Lee [120] proposed a framework for email sentiment analysis that
uses a hybrid scheme of algorithms, combined with K-means clustering and SVM classiﬁer, and is to
be applied to the Enron email corpus. The evaluation for the framework is conducted by comparing
three labeling methods, namely, SentiWordNet, K-means, and polarity, and ﬁve classiﬁers, namely,
SVM, NB, logistic regression (LR), decision tree (DT), and OneR. The empirical results indicated that
the combined K-means and SVM algorithm achieved high accuracy compared to other approaches.
In continuation of their previous studies, Liu and Lee [121] conducted sentiment clustering on Enron
email data with a novel sequential viewpoint. This involved the transformation of sentiment features
into a trajectory representation for implementing the trajectory clustering (TRACLUS) algorithm, along
with the combination of sentiment temporal clustering, so as to discover sentiment ﬂow in email
messages in the topical and temporal distribution.
While insider threats in cybersecurity are often associated with malicious activities, insider threat
is one of the most signiﬁcant threats faced in business espionage [ 122]. Chi et al. [123] , focused on
the detection of insider threats by combining linguistic analysis and K-means algorithm to analyze
communications, such as emails, to ascertain whether an employee meets certain personality criteria
and to deduce the risk level for each employee. Soh et al. [124] focused on an aspect-based sentiment
analysis that can provide more detailed information. Moreover, they presented a novel employee
proﬁling framework equipped with deep learning models for insider threat detection, which is based
on aspect-based sentiment and social network information. The authors evaluated the new presented
framework, ASEP , on the dataset of the augmented Enron emails, and demonstrated that the employee
proﬁles retrieved from ASEP can effectively encode the implicit social network information and, more
signiﬁcantly, their aspect-based sentiments.
The continued growth in the number of email users has led to a massive increase in spam emails.
The global average of the daily spam volume for June 2019 was 459.40 billion, while the corresponding
average of the daily (legitimate) email volume was 79.82 billion [ 125]. The large volume of spam emails
moving through computer networks has a debilitating effect on the memory space available to email
servers, communication bandwidth, CPU power, and user time. On the other hand, if we consider
the fact that the majority of cyber attacks start with a phishing email [ 126] into accounts, there can be