Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 1 7 of 34
3. A source identiﬁer combining a conditional random ﬁeld sequence tagging model [ 60] and
extraction pattern learning [ 61] to determine the sources of the speech events and subjective
expressions [62];
4. A component that applies two classiﬁers to identify the words contained in phrases that express
positive or negative sentiments [63].
2.6. Shortcomings
Sentiment analysis, however, faces a predominant challenge with its classiﬁcation of text under
one particular sentiment polarity, whether positive, negative or neutral [ 24,64–67]. In order to solve
this problem, Fang [68] proposed a general process for the categorization of sentiment polarity.
Another ﬁeld of application is the detection of offensive language in the so-called hate speech,
which refers to submitting to stereotypes to express and propagate an ideology of hate [69,70].
A key problem in speech recognition is that transcripts with high word error rate are obtained for
documented speeches in poor audio conditions and spontaneous speech recorded in actual conditions,
as pointed out by the NIST Rich Transcription Meeting program [ 71]. Recordings from Call centers
and telephone surveys are of poor audio quality due to the use of cell phones and/or surrounding
noise, unconstrained speech, variable utterance length, and various disﬂuencies, such as pauses,
repetitions, and rectiﬁcations. Consequently, speech mining is extremely difﬁcult on this type of
corpora [ 72]. Camelin et al. [72] proposed a sampling and information extraction strategy as the
solution to these problems. In order to evaluate the accuracy, as well as the representativeness, of the
extracted information, they suggested several solutions based on the Kullback-Leibler divergence.
3. Blog Mining
Blogs allow authors to maintain entries that are continuing and arranged in reverse chronology for
an audience that can interact with the authors through the comments section. Blogs can belong to a
broad variety of genres, ranging from diaries of personal and mundane musings to corporate business
blogs; however, they tend to be associated with more personal and spontaneous forms of writing. Social
researchers have capitalized on blogs as a source of data in several cases, from performing content
analysis related to gender and language use to determining ethnographic participation in blogging
communities [ 73]. After the creation of the very first blog, Links.net, in 1994 [ 74], the internet became
home to hundreds of millions of blogs. Due to the large numbers of existing blog posts, the blogosphere
content may seem haphazardly and chaotic [ 75]. Consequently, effective mining techniques are required
to aid in the analysis and comprehension of blog data. Webb and Wang [76] reviewed the general
methodological options that are frequently used when studying blogs and micro-blogs; the options
investigated included both quantitative and qualitative analyzes, and the study was undertaken in an
effort to offer practical guidance on how a researcher can reasonably sift through them.
Many of the blog mining techniques are similar to those used for text and web documents;
however, the nature of blog content may lead to various linguistic and computational challenges [77,78] .
Current research in blog mining reﬂects the prominence of news or news-related content and
micro-blogging. Blog mining, furthermore, overlaps with features of social media mining [79,80].
Apart from the text content, blogs also provide other information, such as details regarding the
title and author of the blog, its date and time of publication, and tags or category attributes, among
others. Similar to other social media data, blog content also undergoes changes over time. New posts
are uploaded, novel topics are deliberated over, perceptions change, and new communities spring up
and mature. Identifying and understanding the topics that are trending in the blogosphere can provide
credible information regarding product sales, political views, and potentially attention-garnering social
areas [81,82].
Methods in blog mining that have gained popularity over the years include classiﬁcation and
clustering [ 83], probabilistic latent sentiment analysis (PLSA) or latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA),
mixture models, time series, and stream methods [ 80]. Existing text mining methods and general