Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 1 14 of 34
at adapting its knowledge and structure in a continuous, self-structuring, and interactive manner
in response to the changing environment that is characteristic of phishing websites. Yi et al. [159]
proposed a class of deep neural network, namely the deep belief model (DBN), to detect web phishing.
They evaluated the effectiveness of the detection model on DBN based on the true positive rate (TPR)
with different parameters. The TPR was found to be approximately 90%.
Diverse disciplines have been interested in and have extensively undertaken the analysis of
human behavior. Therefore, a broad theoretical framework is available with remarkable potential for
application in other areas, particularly in the analysis of web user browsing behavior. With respect to
web user browsing behavior, a prominent source of data is web logs that store every website visitor’s
actions [ 160]. A recent study by Apaolaza and Vigo [161] addressed the challenges of mining web
logs and proposed a set of functionalities into workﬂows that addresses these challenges. The study
indicated that assisted pattern mining is perceived to be more useful and can produce more actionable
knowledge for discovering interactive behaviors on the web. The requirement for more accurate and
objective data for describing the navigation and preferences of web users led the researchers to study a
combination of different data sources, from web and biometric data to traditional WUM research or
experiments. Slanzi et al. [162] provided an extensive overview of the biometric information fusion
applied to the WUM ﬁeld.
6. Social Media
With the advent of social media, information related to various issues started going viral. Dealing
with this ﬂow has become an indispensable societal daily routine [ 163]. Moreover, social media creates
new ways for people from various communities to engage with each other [ 164]. Social media is a
perfect platform for the public to transfer opinions, thoughts, and views on any topic in a manner
that signiﬁcantly affects their opinions and decisions. Many companies simultaneously analyze
the information available on social media platforms to collect the opinions of their customers and
implement market research. Additionally, social media has started attracting researchers from several
ﬁelds, including sociology, marketing, ﬁnance, and computer [24].
6.1. Twitter
Twitter is a social media platform where users can share their opinions, follow others, and
comment on their opinions. In recent years, several researchers have focused on Twitter. With over 140
million tweets being posted in a day, Twitter serves as a valuable pool of data for many researchers [ 165].
Studies on topics ranging from the prediction of box ofﬁce results of a movie to the changes in the
stock market are based on Twitter data. Nisar and Yeung [166] collected a sample of 60,000 tweets
made over a six-day period before, during, and after the local elections in the United Kingdom to
investigate the relationship between their content and the changes in the London FTSE100 index [ 166].
Similarly, many other researchers use the information available on Twitter to make stock market
predictions [ 167–175]. Öztürk and Ayvaz [163] studied Turkish and English tweets for evaluating their
sentiments towards the Syrian refugee crisis and found that Turkish tweets are remarkably different
from English tweets [ 163]. A study on the Arabic Twitter feed is proposed by Alkhatib et al. [176] with
the objective of offering a novel framework for events and incidents management in smart [ 176]. Gupta
et al. [177] presented a research framework to examine the cybersecurity attitudes, behavior, and their
relationship by applying sentiment analysis and text mining techniques on tweets for gauging people’s
cybersecurity actions based on what they say in their texts.
Regarding tourist sentiment analysis, Philander and Zhong [178] expounded on the application of
tourist sentiment series from Twitter data for building low-cost and real-time measures of hospitality
customer attitudes/perceptions.
Twitter data has also been studied by researchers from various ﬁelds to analyze (a) the Twitter
usage behaviors of journalists [ 179] and cancer patients [ 180], (b) the sentiments of political tweets
during the 2012 U.S. presidential election [ 181], (c) the effects of Twitter on brand management [ 182]