Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 1 19 of 34
3. Use similarity metrics to demonstrate the relevance between genes, which measures the terms
shared between genes to identiﬁes the possible relations.
4. Summarize the resulting annotation network as a graph.
The method shows its power to identify new possible gene-disease relations and builds possible
hypotheses, as well as extracts the existing knowledge from the abstracts. Although their method is
effective, it cannot be easily used for other applications since it uses an already existing structured
knowledge base (e.g., Uniﬁed Medical Language system) to extract concepts. In many applications,
such a knowledge base either does not exist or is very limited.
Wang et al. [234] used a multilayer network structure to systematically characterize a social
network conversations based on their contents. The study targets a large set of Twitter messages
exchanged between people with Eating Disorder (ED) to determine the type of content discussed on
the online community, determine the ﬂow pattern for different types of contents, and show how the
contents are correlated. Their use of multilayer network provides the ability to represent the nature
of discussion and multiplex interactions (presenting each topic in a separated layer), as well as to
incorporate multidimensional information. Furthermore, analyzing the multilayer networks for a
period of time reveals the structural changes in connections, correlation between topics, etc. Their
results show that engagement in pro-recovery and pro-ED discussion is highly correlated, as well as
the number of entries and exits to a communication when there is pro-ED sharing. The ﬂexibility of
the model developed by Wang et al. [234] provides a powerful tool for extracting knowledge hidden
in social network conversations (messages, comments, etc.).
10. Conclusions
New technologies have facilitated access to immense quantities of digital text, recording an ever
increasing share of human interaction, communication, and culture [ 236]. Text mining provides a
framework to maximize the value of information within large quantities of text; thereby, the use of text
mining technologies has increased steadily in recent years and has become highly diverse.
This study has summarized the academic research efforts on text mining and its applications
by examining the published literature developed over the recent past few years. Figure 1 shows
the methods and applications discussed in this study. More than 200 academic journal articles on
the subject were included and discussed in this review, alongside the state-of-the-art text mining
approaches used for analyzing transcripts and speeches, meeting transcripts, and academic journal
articles, as well as websites, emails, blogs/micro-blogs, and social media networking sites across a
broad range of application areas.
In practice, text mining enables the efﬁcient exploitation of textual data on a broad range of
real-world applications, such as (a) supporting large companies in faster and better decision-making by
providing insights on the performance of marketing/sales strategies, enhancing customer experience,
monitoring and enhancing the product/service, and gaining better customer engagement, (b) analyzing
documents and verbatim transcripts in the economics sector, (c) analyzing political discourse streams
that may provide valuable insights into critical discourse analysis, (d) creating more reliable and
effective ﬁltering methods for emails and websites, and (e) identifying relationships between users
and certain products for social media purpose, as well as examining opinions on particular topics
or sentiments on certain events. At the same time, by mining immense amounts of information in
scientiﬁc literature, researchers can discover patterns and links between resources that cannot be
detected through usual human viewing and reading, provide more meaningful answers to complex
research questions, and even support scientiﬁc discovery in various domains.