Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 1 13 of 34
applications and web attacks. Gupta and Kohli [148,150,151] made experimental attempts to identify
outliers in regression algorithm outputs by using web-based datasets. In fact, various regression
algorithms are extensively adopted by several online portals operating in varying application domains,
especially e-commerce websites [ 148]. Speciﬁcally, Gupta and Kohli [151] formulated a framework with
the help of ordered weighted operators (OWA) as a multicriteria decision-making (MCDM) problem.
The results proved that the proposed framework can aid in considerably reducing the outliers; however,
its testing was restricted to a static purpose and a small dataset and the data were scattered for over
a year. This work was an extension of an earlier study by Gupta and Kohli [150] in which a small
experiment was conducted on a web dataset through the application of an ordered weighted geometric
averaging operator. A recent study by Gupta and Kohli [148] detected outliers based on the principle
of multicriteria decision-making (MCDM) and utilized ordered weighted operators for the purpose
of aggregation.
On a daily basis, news websites feature an overwhelming number of news articles. While several
text mining techniques can be applied to web news articles, the constantly changing data characteristics
and the real-time online learning environment can prove to be challenging.
Two recent studies, conducted by Iglesias et al. [152] and Za’in et al. [153] , proposed a different
approach based on evolving fuzzy systems (EFS). It allows the updating of the structure and parameters
of an evolving classiﬁer, aids in coping with huge volumes of web news, and enables the processing
of data online and in real time, which is essential in real-time web news articles. Iglesias et al. [152]
developed a web news mining based on eClass0 classiﬁer, while Za’in et al. [153] proposed a web
news mining framework built on fuzzy evolving type-2 classiﬁer (eT2Class), which outperforms other
consolidated algorithms.
With the effective use of e-commerce, the internet increases the accessibility of customers from
all over the world without having to deal with any marketplace restrictions. Web mining research is
emerging in many aspects of e-services with the aim of improving online transactions and making
them more transparent and effective [ 154]. The owners of e-commerce websites depend considerably
on the analysis and summarization of customer behaviors so as to invest efforts towards inﬂuencing
user actions and optimizing the success metric. The application of web mining techniques on the web
and e-commerce for the sake of improving proﬁts is not new, and a signiﬁcant amount of research
has been conducted in this ﬁeld, especially pertaining to usage data. Recently, Dias and Ferreira [155]
proposed an all-in-one process, improved by the crossing of data secured from diverse sources, for
collecting and structuring data from an e-commerce website’s content, structure, and users. Finally,
they presented an information model for an e-commerce website which contained the recorded and
structured information resulting from the intersection of various sources and tasks for pattern discovery.
Moreover, Zhou et al. [156] proposed three new types of automatic data acquisition strategies, based on
web crawlers and the Aho-Corasick algorithm, to improve the text matching efﬁciency by considering
the Chinese ofﬁcial websites for agriculture, the wholesale market websites of agricultural products,
and websites for agricultural product e-commerce.
In the current era of vibrant electronic and mobile commerce, the ﬁnancial transactions conducted
online on a daily basis are massive in number, which creates the potential for fraudulent activity. A
common fraudulent activity is website phishing, which involves creating a replica of a trustworthy
website for deceiving users and illegally obtaining their credentials. A report published by Symantec
Corporation Inc. [157] substantiated that the number of malicious websites detected rose by 60%
in 2018 with respect to 2017.
The phishing phenomena, which mostly focused on web-based phishing detection methods than
email-based detection methods, were discussed in detail by the study of Mohammad et al. [158] , which
provided a comprehensive evaluation of the blacklist-based, whitelist-based, and the heuristics-based
detection approaches. The study concluded that, despite only heuristics-based detection approaches
having the ability to recognize these websites, their accuracy may reduce considerably in case of
change in the environmental features. A successful phishing detection model should also be adept