Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 1 9 of 34
and speciﬁc targeted RSS blogs, Sec-Buzzer promptly recognizes the emerging information security
threats and, subsequently, publishes related news, technical reports, and solutions in time.
Applications of blog mining vary and, among others, include opinion mining for agriculture [ 96],
prospective industrial technologies [ 97], decision support in fashion buying processes [ 98], detection of
major events [ 99], retrieval of information regarding popular tourist locations, and travel routes [ 100],
the summarization of popular information from massive tourism blog data [ 101], summarization of
news blogs and detecting the copy and reproduced multi-lingual contents [ 102–104] and detecting the
fake news [105].
4. Email Mining
Email is a convenient and common means of textual communication. It is also intrinsically
connected to the overall internet experience since an email account is required for signing up for
any form of online activity, including to create accounts for social networking platforms and instant
messaging. The Radicati Group, Inc., executive summary of email statistics report 2012–2019 [ 106]
predicts that the total number of business and consumer emails sent and received daily will exceed
293 billion in 2019; this statistic is forecasted to increase to over 347 billion by the end of 2023. To
optimize the use of emails and explore its business potential, email mining has been extensively
undertaken and has observed commendable progress in terms of both research and practice.
Email mining is similar to text mining since they both pertain to textual data. However, speciﬁc
characteristics of email data separate it from text mining. To begin with, email data can be highly noisy.
More speciﬁcally, it may include headers, signatures, quotations, or program codes. It may also carry
extra line breaks or spaces, special character tokens, or spelling and grammar mistakes. Moreover,
spaces and periods may be mistakenly absent from it. Hence, the email data needs to be cleaned in
depth before high quality mining [ 107]. In addition, an email is a data stream targeted towards a
speciﬁc user and the concepts or distributions of the target audiences of the messages may vary over
time with respect to the messages received by that user. It is also problematic to obtain public email
data for experiments due to privacy issues [108].
Emails contain links to a vast social network with data on the person or organization in charge,
thus making email mining more resourceful [ 109]. During email mining, the links can be exploited for
their content and a better understanding of behavior. On the other hand, the techniques currently in
use are not able to effectively handle the vast amount of data. There is heterogeneity, noise, and variety,
and mining techniques cannot be easily modiﬁed to adjust to big data environments [ 110]. Another
challenge in email mining is data visualization, which makes decision-making considerably harder.
Hidden information cannot be extracted or visualized due to the lack of scalable visualization tools.
If the data is not presented more comprehensibly, visualization and decision-making also become
difﬁcult for the data miners [111].
Initial studies on email mining predominantly focused on the existing tools for personal collection
management since large and diverse collections were not accessible for research use [ 112]. That
changed, most notably with the Enron Corporation email collection [ 113]. However, the LingSpam
corpus, compiled by Androutsopoulos et al. [114], was one of the ﬁrst publicly available datasets.
A number of email mining studies have focused on people-related tasks, including name
recognition and reference resolution, contact information extraction, identity modeling and resolution,
role discovery, and expert identiﬁcation, as well as the generation of access to large-scale email archives
from multiple viewpoints by using a faceted search [ 115]. Moreover, some signiﬁcant applications
of email mining include tasks, such as ﬁltering emails based on priority and identifying spam and
phishing emails, as well as automatic answering, thread summarization, contact analysis, email
visualization, network property analysis, and categorization [116,117].
Tang et al. [116] conducted a brief but exhaustive survey on email mining. The authors introduced
the feature-based and social structure-based representation approaches, which are often performed in
the pre-processing phase. Following this, they identiﬁed ﬁve email mining tasks—spam detection,