Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 1 12 of 34
with other similar techniques on the same dataset indicated that the proposed model outperformed
the existing methods.
5. Web Mining
The World Wide Web (or the web) is at present a popular and interactive medium for
disseminating information. The most commonly accessed type of information on websites is textual
data, such as emails, blogs, social media, and web news articles. Web data differs from the data
retrieved from other sources because of certain characteristics that make it more advantageous. In fact,
website information is readily available to the public at large, is cost-effective in terms of access, and
can be extensive with respect to coverage and the volume of data contained [134]. However, locating
information on the web is a daunting and challenging task because of the immense volume of data
and noise contained [135].
Etzioni [136] referred to web mining as the application of data mining techniques to automatically
discover and extract knowledge in a website, while Cooley et al. [137] further highlighted the
importance of considering the behavior and preferences of the users. Web mining has enabled
the analysis of the increasing volume of data accessible on the web. Furthermore, it has indicated
that conventional and traditional statistical approaches are inefﬁcient in undertaking this task [ 138].
Besides, clean and consolidated data is closely connected to the quality and utility of the patterns
discerned through these tools since they are directly dependent on the data to be used [139].
Web usage mining (WUM), web structure mining (WSM), and web content mining (WCM) are
the three predominant categories of web mining [ 136,140,141]. WCM and WSM utilize the primary
web data, while WUM mines the secondary data [136].
WCM adopts the concept and principles of data mining to discover information from the text
and media documents [ 142]. WCM mainly focuses on web text mining and web multimedia mining.
WSM emphasizes the hyperlink structure of the web to link the different objectives together [ 143].
A typical web graph is structured with web pages as nodes and hyperlinks as edges, establishing
a connection between two related pages. WSM primarily works on link mining, internal structure
mining and URL mining. In addition, WSM can be used for categorizing web pages and is useful for
gathering information, such as that pertaining to the similarities and relationships between different
websites. The typical applications of WSM are (a) link-based categorization of web pages, (b) ranking
of web pages through a combination of content and structure, and (c) reverse engineering of website
models [ 144]. Link-based classiﬁcation pertains to the prediction of a web page category, which is
based on the words on the page, links existing between the pages, anchor text, HTML tags, and other
potential attributes on a web page. WUM is the process of applying data mining techniques to the
discovery of usage patterns from the web data [ 145]. When a user interacts with a website, web log
data is generated on a web server in the form of web server log ﬁles. Different types of usage log ﬁles,
such as access log, error log, referrer log, and agent log, are created on a server [ 146]. Web logs are
the type of data that prove the most resourceful when performing a behavioral analysis on a website
user [ 137]. Web usage mining consists of three phases: (1) pre-processing, (2) discovery of usage
patterns, and (3) analysis of the pattern. Typical applications are (a) the ones based on user modeling
techniques, such as web personalization, (b) adaptive web sites, and (c) user modeling [ 144]. However,
this personalization process that contains rebuilding a user’s session has raised important legal and
ethical concerns. Velásquez [139] adopted an integrative approach based on the distinctive attributes
of web mining to identify the harmful techniques.
Analyzing the patterns generated from a typical web user’s complex behavior is a daunting
task since, most of the time, a user is responsible for the spontaneous and dynamic generation of
patterns of data [ 147,148]. The exploration of the web for outliers, such as noise, deviation, incongruent
observations, peculiarities, and exceptions, has received attention in the mining community. Chandola
et al. [149] provided a general and broad overview of the extensive research conducted on anomaly
detection techniques, spanning multiple research areas and application domains, including web