Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 1 18 of 34
Korean and the ICSI meeting corpus. The results indicated that including these factors can enhance
keyword extraction. Furthermore, in a more recent study [ 228], they added the participant factor to
their graph-based keyword extraction method.
Xie end Liu [229] applied a framework on the ICSI meeting corpus to summarize meeting
transcripts. In this framework, only the noteworthy sentences are selected to form the summary.
Therefore, to specify whether a sentence should be included in the summary or not, they used
supervised classiﬁcation. Moreover, various sampling methods were implemented for avoiding the
problem of imbalanced data.
Sharp and Chibelushi [230] presented an algorithm for the text classiﬁcation of meeting transcripts.
This study focused on the analysis of spoken meeting transcripts of discussions on software
development, with the aim to determine the topics discussed in these meetings and, thereby, extract
the decisions made and issues discussed. The authors suggested an algorithm that is appropriate for
segmenting meeting transcripts that are spoken by combining semantically complex lexical relations
with speech cue phrases to build lexical chains in determining topic boundaries. They argue that the
results can help project managers in avoiding rework actions.
9. Knowledge Extraction
As the number of digital documents has grown exponentially, almost on any topic, automated
knowledge extraction methods have become popular in many sections, from science to marketing
and business. Many text mining techniques deal with extracting knowledge authors represented in
their texts, e.g., extracting arguments [ 43–46] and extracting opinions [ 13–16]. Knowledge extraction
is usually concerned with ﬁnding and extracting the key elements from textual data (e.g., articles,
short notes, tweets, blogs, etc.) to extract hidden knowledge or build new hypotheses. For instance, a
set of articles by an author, (or group of authors) contains knowledge about writing style, reasoning
methodology, etc. [ 231–233]. For another example, the set comments on the problem may contain
information about different aspects of an issue and possible (proposed) solutions [ 234]. Extracting such
knowledge requires the modeling of the relational structure of textual data, i.e., the relation between
words, paragraphs, and other fractions of texts. Networks, as a powerful tool, have been used to
demonstrate relational structure of textual data in many knowledge extraction applications.
The idea of using networks to represent the structure of a given text (or set of texts) has been a
practical one in literary analysis. For instance, Amancio et al. [231] used a complex network to quantify
characteristics of a text (e.g., intermittency, burstiness, and words’ co-occurrence) to authorship
attribution. Although the method successfully classiﬁed eight authors from the nineteenth century,
they concluded that the accuracy of the results may depend on the text database, features extracted from
the network, and the attribution algorithm. They suggest that different algorithms and features should
be tested before engaging the real application. Amancio [233] employed the same idea and combined it
with Fuzzy classiﬁcation and traditional stylometry methods to classify texts based on authors’ writing
style. The results show improvement in authorship attribution and genre identiﬁcation when a hybrid
algorithm is used to classify texts. Although Amancio et al. [231] shade light on authorship attribution
using networks and made it possible to think about automated author attribution, their study did not
take the structural changes into account. It is very common among authors to change style over time
due to change in socio-economic characteristics, personal changes, etc. Amancio et al. [232] employed
a similar idea of using networks to detect and model the literary movements through time. The used
the books published between 1590 to 1922 to draw the literary movements in ﬁve centuries.
Nuzzo et al. [235] developed a set of tools to discover new relations between genes and between
genes and diseases so it can be used to build more likely hypotheses on gene-disease associations. In
order to ﬁnd new possibilities, they applied an algorithm with the following steps on the abstracts of
published articles from ”PubMed“ databases:
1. Extract concepts on terms describing genes and diseases from abstracts.
2. Derive genes-disease annotation.