Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 1 3 of 34
There are two types of text mining algorithms: supervised learning and unsupervised learning
(the two terms originated in machine learning methods). Supervised learning algorithms are employed
when there is a set of predictors to predict a target variable. The algorithm uses the target’s observed
values to train a prediction model. Support vector machines (SVMs) are a set of supervised learning
methods used for classiﬁcation and prediction. On the other hand, unsupervised learning methods do
not use a target value to train their models. In other words, the unsupervised learning algorithms use
a set of predictors (features) to reveal hidden structures in the data. Non-negative matrix factorization
is an unsupervised learning method [4].
Transcripts are a written or printed version of material originally presented in another medium,
such as in speeches. Therefore, the analysis of transcripts can be treated in the same manner
as the analysis of speeches, as spoken words need to be pre-processed through, for instance, a
voice-recognition API or manual transcription. Despite its extensive application in transcripts from
other ﬁelds, such as marketing and political science, text mining as a technique in economics has
historically been less explored. Bholat et al. [5]presented a comprehensive overview of the various
text mining techniques used for research topics of interest to central banks for analyzing a corpus of
documents, including, amongst others, the verbatim transcripts of meetings. Recently, three years
of speeches, interviews, and statements of the Secretary General of Organization of the Petroleum
Exporting Countries (OPEC) were analyzed using text-minin techniques [6].
The ideology, as a key factor affecting an individual’s system of beliefs and opinions that controls
their acts, is an important feature in text mining when it comes to political (or religious) textual
data. Ideology provides the “knowledge of what-goes-with-what” [ 7] and shapes each individual’s
perception of any given issue [ 8]. However, the main issue in taking ideology as a feature for text
and opinion mining is that, in many cases, the ideology of the speaker is not very clear, especially
when it comes to politicians. To overcome the issue, one may use the texts with known ideological
background and build a classiﬁcation model to classify ideology behind a text, based on the textual
data. Applying the trained classiﬁcation model to a political text would help understand the ideology
behind the speech or a text and, consequently, the opinion of a person.
Two approaches are extensively used in text mining: opinion classiﬁcation and sentiment
classiﬁcation [9].
2.1. Opinion Classiﬁcation
The main concern in opinion mining is to determine to what extent a text in-hand supports or
opposes a speciﬁc subject. Although opinion mining is vastly used to analyze political texts, from
speeches to short text on Twitter [ 8], it is very useful in other ﬁelds, too. For instance, one may use
opinion mining to determine the opinion of the customers on features of a product, an audience’s
opinion on a movie, or to ﬁnd the people’s favorite asset in a market [ 10–12]. Most applications, in
the context of political speeches, target the curation of general-purpose political opinion classiﬁers,
given their potential and signiﬁcant uses in e-rulemaking and mass media analysis [ 13–16]. The steps
involved in the implementation of opinion mining are as follows [17]:
1. Determining text polarity to decide whether a given text is factual in nature (i.e., it unbiasedly
describes a particular situation or event and refrains from providing a positive or a negative
opinion on it) or not (i.e., it comments on its subject matter and expresses speciﬁc opinions on it),
which amounts to the categorization of binary texts into subjective and objective [18,19].
2. Determining text polarity to decide if a given subjective text posits a positive or negative opinion
on the subject matter [18,20].
3. Determining the extent of text polarity to categorize the positive opinion extended by a text on its
subject matter as weakly positive, mildly positive, or strongly positive [21,22].
The literature related to opinion mining is growing see [ 23,24]. A highly beneﬁcial source for
opinion classiﬁcation is Wordnet [25] by Princeton University, a lexical database of the English language