Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 1 8 of 34
dimensionality reduction methods have been used by a number of studies [ 75,77,84–87] on blog mining;
however, the analysis that can be undertaken with these methods is limited to mono- or bi-dimensional
blog data, while the general dimensionality methods may not be effective in preserving information
retrieved from blogs [ 88]. Tsai [78] applied the tag-topic model for blog data mining. Dimensionality
reduction was performed with the spectral dimensionality reduction technique Isomap to show the
similarity plot of the blog content and tags. Tsai [88] presented an analysis of the multiple dimensions
of blog data by proposing the unsupervised probabilistic blogger-link-topic (BLT) model to address the
challenges in determining the parties most likely to blog about a speciﬁc topic and in identifying the
associated links for a given blog post on a given topic and detect splog. The results indicated that BLT
obtained the highest average precision for blog classiﬁcation with respect to other techniques that used
the blogger-date-topic (BDT), author-topic (AT), and LDA models. In the study of Tsai [89], the AT
model based on the LDA was extended to the analyzes and visualization of blog authors, associated
links, and time of publication, and a framework based on dimensionality reduction was suggested
to visualize the dimensions of content, tags, authors, links, and time of publication. This study was
the ﬁrst to analyze the multiple dimensions of blogs by using dimensionality reduction techniques,
namely multidimensional scaling (MDS), Isomap, locally linear embedding (LLE), and LDA, on a set
of business blogs.
Sandeep and Patil [90], after conducting a brief review of the literature on blog mining, proposed
a multidimensional approach to blog mining by deﬁning a method that combines the blog content
and blog tags to discern blog patterns. However, the proposed method can only be applied to
text-based blogs.
Blogs can be categorized, inﬂuential blogs can be promoted, and new topics can be identiﬁed.
It is also possible to ascertain perspectives or sentiments from the blogosphere through data mining
techniques [ 81]. Although several solutions are available that can effectively handle information in
small volumes, they are static in nature and usually do not scale up accurately owing to their high
complexity. Moreover, such solutions have been designed to run once or in a ﬁxed dataset, which is not
sufﬁcient for processing huge volumes of streamed data. In response to this issue, Tsirakis et al. [91]
suggested a platform focusing on real-time opinion mining from news sites and blogs. Hussein [92]
presented a survey on the challenges relevant to the approaches and techniques of sentiment analysis.
Furthermore, the research of Chen and Chen [93] applied big data and opinion mining approaches to
the analysis of investors’ sentiments in Taiwan. First, the authors reviewed previous studies related
to sentiment mining and selection of features; subsequently, they analyzed ﬁnancial blogs and news
articles available online for creating a public mood dynamic prediction model exclusively for Taiwanese
stock markets by taking into account the views of behavioral ﬁnance and the features of ﬁnancial
communities on the internet.
The ﬁltering of spam blogs is another predominant theme in blog mining, and it can considerably
misrepresent any estimation of the number of blog posts made [ 78] and the evaluation of cybersecurity
threats. Most intelligence analysis studies have focused on analyzing the news or forums for security
incidents, but few have concentrated on blogs. Tsai and Chan [85] analyzed blog posts for identifying
posts made under various categories of cyber security threats related to the detection of cyber attacks,
cybercrime, and terrorism. PLSA was used for detecting keywords from various cyber security blog
entries pertaining to speciﬁc topics. Along similar lines, Tsai and Chan [94] proposed blog data
mining techniques for assessing security threats. They used LDA-based probabilistic methods to
detect keywords from security blogs with respect to speciﬁc topics. The research concluded that
the probabilistic approach can enhance information retrieval related to blog search and keyword
detection. Recognition of cyber threats from open threat intelligence can prove beneﬁcial for incident
response in very early stages. Lee et al. [95] proposed a free web service for examining emerging
cybersecurity topics based on the mining of open threat intelligence, which is dedicated to locating
various emerging topics in cyber threats (i.e., nearly zero-day attacks) and providing possible solutions
for organizations. The demonstration showed that with information collected from experts on Twitter