Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 1 11 of 34
no doubt that phishing is a high-risk attack vector for organizations and even government agencies.
Therefore, a predominant challenge in the email mining process is to identify and isolate spam emails.
Two general approaches are adopted for mail ﬁltering: knowledge engineering (KE) and machine
learning (ML) [ 127]. Spam ﬁltering techniques based on knowledge engineering use a set of predeﬁned
rules. These rules are implemented to identify the basic characteristics of the email message. The
ML techniques construct a classiﬁer by training it with a set of emails called the training dataset.
Several ﬁltering methods based on ML have been extensively adopted when addressing the problem
of email spam.
Bhowmick and Hazarika [128] presented an exhaustive review of some of the frequently used
content-based email spam ﬁltering methods. They mostly focused on ML algorithms for spam ﬁltering.
The authors studied the signiﬁcant concepts, efforts initiated, effectiveness, and trends in spam ﬁltering.
They comprehensively discussed the fundamentals of email spam ﬁltering, the changing nature of
spam, and spammers’ tricks to evade the spam ﬁlters of email service providers (ESPs). Moreover,
they examined the popular machine learning techniques used in combating the menace of spam.
Dada et al. [129] examined the applications of ML techniques to the email spam ﬁltering process
of leading internet service providers (ISPs), such as Gmail, Yahoo, and Outlook, and focused on
revisiting the machine learning techniques used for ﬁltering email spam over the 2004–2018 period,
such as K-NN, NB, Neural Networks (NN), Rough set, SVM, NBTree classiﬁers, ﬁreﬂy algorithm
(FA), C4.5/J48 decision tree algorithms, logistic model tree induction (LMT), and convolutional neural
network (CNN). Stochastic optimization techniques, such as evolutionary algorithms (EAs), have
also been explored by Dada et al. [129] , as the optimization engines are able to enhance feature
selection strategies within the anti-spam methods, such as the genetic algorithm (GA), particle swarm
optimization (PSO), and ant colony algorithm (ACO).
Most of relevant works on this topic classify emails using the term “occurrence” in the email.
Some works, additionally, focus on the semantic properties of the email text. In the study conducted by
Bahgat et al. [130], the email ﬁltering was based on the introduction of semantic modeling to address
the high dimensionality of features by examining the semantic attributes of words. Various classiﬁers
were studied to gauge their performance in segregating emails as spam or ham experiments on the
Enron dataset. Correlation-based feature selection (CFS) which was introduced as a technique for
feature selection, improved the accuracy of RF and radial basis function (RBF) network classiﬁers,
while CFS ensured the accuracy of other classiﬁers, such as SVM and J48.
A phishing attack that uses sophisticated techniques that direct online customers to a new
web page that has not yet been included in the black-list is called a zero-day attack [ 131].
Chowdhury et al. [132] in their overview of the work on the filtering of phishing emails and pruning
techniques, proposed a multilayer hybrid strategy (MHS) for the zero-day filtering of phishing emails that
emerge during a separate time span, which uses the training data collected previously during another time
span. MHS was based on a new pruning method, the multilayer hybrid pruning (MHP). The empirical
study demonstrated that MHS is effective and that the performance of MHP is better than that of other
pruning techniques.
In a newer approach aimed at studying the detection of phishing emails, Smadi et al. [133]
discussed the relevant work on protection techniques, as well as their advantages and disadvantages.
Moreover, they proposed a novel framework that combines a dynamic evolving neural network, based
on reinforcement learning (RL), to detect phishing attacks in the online mode for the ﬁrst time. The
proposed model, phishing email detection system (PEDS), was also the ﬁrst work in this ﬁeld that
used reinforcement learning to detect a zero-day phishing attack. NN was used as the core of the
classiﬁcation model, and a novel algorithm, called the dynamic evolving neural network, which used
reinforcement learning (DENNuRL), was developed to allow the NN to evolve dynamically and build
the best NN capable of solving the problem. It was demonstrated that the proposed technique can
handle zero-day phishing attacks with high levels of performance and accuracy, while comparison