Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 1 17 of 34
modeling on six handpicked papers on emerging technologies related to the subject. Moro et al. [214]
performed text mining over the whole textual contents of papers, excluding only the references and
authors’ afﬁliations, published in a tourism-related journal from 1996 to 2016. In the ﬁeld of agriculture,
Contiero et al. [215] analyzed through text mining the abstracts of 130 peer-reviewed papers that were
published between 1970 and 2017 dealing with the pain issue in pig production and its correlation
with the welfare in pigs.
Text mining was further employed as a tool in literature review-based studies in public health
and medical sciences for various key themes, such as the adolescent substance and depression [ 216],
cognitive rehabilitation and enhancement through neurostimulation [217], the protein factors related
to the different cancer types [218], and diseases and syndromes in neurology [219].
Text mining methods are also employed to extract metadata from published articles. Kayal et al. [220]
developed a method to automatically extract funding information from scientific articles. Yousif et al. [221]
developed a model based on deep learning to extract the purpose of a citation to an article. Coupling this
information with the number of citation and the applications of the articles results gives good measure to
evaluate the efficiency of the funding.
However, text mining comes under the microscope of copyright, contracts, and licenses. Invoking
the fundamental principles of copyright in the context of new technologies, Sag [222] explains that
copying expressive works for non-expressive purposes should not be considered as infringement and
should instead be labeled as fair use. In his article, Sag deals with the U.S.’s current legal framework
and the feasibility of its adjustment to the text data mining processes, especially in the aftermath of
the decisions in the cases of Authors Guild v. HathiTrust and Authors Guild Inc. v. Google. Recently,
the European’s parliament voted in favor of a copyright exception (Directive (EU) 2019/790) on text
and data mining for research purposes, as well as for individuals and institutions with legal access to
protected works [223].
8. Meeting Transcripts
Most of the time, the meeting transcripts are too long, making reading and analyzing the core
content infeasible; therefore, providing a framework that can extract the keywords automatically from
the meeting transcripts is instrumental. Towards this end, Sheeba and Vivekanandan [224] proposed a
model in which the keywords and key phrases are extracted from meeting transcripts. They claimed
that the difﬁculty of this work is tied to the occurrence of synonyms, homonyms, hyponymy, and
polysemy in the transcripts. Keywords were extracted by using the MaxEnt and SVM classiﬁers, and
the extraction of bigram and trigram keywords was ensured through the N-gram-based approach.
The way meeting transcripts are written varies in terms of their style and details compared to the
written text style. Liu et al. [225] presented a list with the differences that could negatively impact a
keyword extraction system, such as the low lexical density, the lack of a perfect structure, the poor
structure, and the varied speaking styles and word usage of a multiplicity of participants.
Liu et al. [225] extended the previous work of [ 226] by proposing a supervised framework for the
extraction of keywords from meeting transcripts based on various features, such as decision-making
sentence features, speech-related features, and summary features, that reﬂect the meeting transcripts
more efﬁciently. The authors conducted experiments using the ICSI meeting corpus for both human
transcripts and different automatic speech recognition (ASR) outputs, and they showed that the
method suggested outperforms the TF-IDF weighting and a predominant state-of-the-art phrase
extraction system.
Song et al. [ 227] published two different articles on the extraction of keywords from meeting
transcripts. The authors proposed a just-in-time keyword extraction method by considering two
factors that make their work different from that of others. These factors are (1) the temporal history
of preceding utterance, which gives more importance to recent utterance, and (2) the topic relevance,
which considers only the preceding utterances that are relevant to the current ones. Their method
was applied on two English and Korean datasets, including the National Assembly transcripts in