Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 1 2 of 34
semi-structured form, such as log ﬁles containing information from servers and networks. As such,
text mining analysis is useful for both unstructured and semi-structured textual data [1].
Data mining and text mining differ on the type of data they handle. While data mining handles
structured data coming from systems, such as databases, spreadsheets, ERP , CRM, and accounting
applications, text mining deals with unstructured data found in documents, emails, social media, and
the web. Thus, the difference between regular data mining and text mining is that in text mining the
patterns are extracted from natural language text rather than from structured databases of facts [ 2].
Since all the written or spoken information can be represented in textual form, data mining requires all
kinds of text mining tools when it comes to the interpretation and analysis of sentences, words, phrases,
speeches, claims, adverts, and statements. This paper conducts an extensive analysis of text mining
applications in big data analytics as used in various commercial ﬁelds and academic studies. While the
vast majority of the literature deals with the optimization of a speciﬁc text mining technique, this paper
seeks to summarize the features of all text mining methods, thereby summarizing the state-of-the-art
practices and approaches in all the possible ﬁelds of application. It is centered around seven key
applications of text mining in transcripts and speeches, meeting transcripts, and academic journal
articles, as well as websites, emails, blogs, and social media networking sites; for each of these, we,
respectively, provide a description of the ﬁeld, their functionality, the most commonly used methods,
the associated problems, and the related and relevant references.
The remaining sections of this paper are organized in the following manner. In the Section 2, we
introduce the topic of text mining in transcripts and speeches. We explain the different classiﬁcation
techniques used in, for instance, the analysis of political speeches that classify opinions or sentiments
in a manner that allows one to infer from a text or speech the ideology that a speaker most probably
espouses. Furthermore, we explain the methods used in classifying transcripts and speeches and
identify the shortcomings of these methods, which are primarily related to the behavioral nature of
human beings, such as ironic or ideological behavior. In the Section 3, we take a closer look at blog
mining, the dominance of news-related content in blogs and micro-blogging, and present the methods
used in this area. Most of the methods applied in blog mining are based on dimensionality reduction,
which is also found in other ﬁelds of text mining applications. Additionally, the relationship between
blog mining and cybersecurity—which is an interesting and novel application of blog mining—is also
covered in this section. In the Section 4, we analyze email mining and the techniques commonly used
in relation to it. A very speciﬁc feature of email mining is its noisy data, which has been discussed
in this section. Moreover, we explain the challenges to the identiﬁcation of the content of the email
body and how email mining is used in business intelligence. The web mining techniques that are used
in screening and analyzing websites are studied in the Section 5. The features of a website, such as
links, links between websites, anchor text, and html tags, are also discussed. Moreover, the difﬁculty
of capturing unexpected and dynamically generated patterns of data is also explored. Additionally,
the importance of pattern recognition and text matching in e-commerce is highlighted. In the Section 6,
we present studies conducted on the use of Twitter and Facebook and explain the role of text mining
in marketing strategies based upon social media, as well as the use of social media platforms for the
prediction of ﬁnancial markets. In Sections 7 and 8, we round up our extensive analysis of text mining
applications by exploring the text mining techniques used for academic journal articles and meeting
transcripts. Section 9 discusses the important issue of extract hidden knowledge from a set of texts and
building hypotheses. Finally, in the concluding section, we highlight the advantages and challenges
related to text mining and discuss its potential beneﬁts to society and individuals.
2. Text Mining in Transcripts and Speeches
Text mining refers to the extraction of information and patterns that are implicit, previously
unknown, and potentially valuable in an automatic or semi-automatic manner from immense
unstructured textual data, such as natural-language texts [3].