Figure 2. Overview of our approach. It consists of three components, i.e., view-graph construction, view-based graph convolutional network
(view-GCN) and traning loss. View-GCN is a hierarchical network deﬁned on gradually coarsened view-graphs.
Figure 3. Neighboring and symmetric views of 3D objects.
3.1. Motivation
As shown in Fig. 3 (a), neighboring views of a chair are
smoothly changed in pose and appearance, while multiple
views of a cup are almost the same. This provides dis-
criminative information for recognition. Moreover, paired
views are also related, e.g., the paired views are symmet-
ric in Fig. 3 (b). These relations among multi-view images
encode latent geometry of objects, providing valuable in-
formation for recognizing 3D objects. It is challenging to
enumerate and model all possible relations among views,
but this phenomenon inspires us to design a graph convolu-
tional network to automatically investigate relations among
views when aggregating multi-view features.
3.2. General pipeline
We design a novel view-based Graph Convolutional Net-
work , dubbed as view-GCN , to hierarchically aggregate
multi-view features considering relations of views by graph
convolution. As illustrated in Fig. 2, our method consists of
three components. First, multi-view features are extracted
by backbone network from multiple views of a 3D object,
and then we build a view-graph with nodes represented by
view features. Second, we design a GCN to hierarchically
aggregate multi-view features on view-graph to generate a
global shape descriptor. Finally, the global shape descrip-tors are taken for shape recognition.
4. From 3D Shape to View-Graph
We now introduce how to construct a view-graph for a
3D shape. We build a directed graph Gwithi-th node as the
i-th view with camera coordinates vi. This graph is termed
asview-graph , then adjacency matrix S∈RN×Nof the
view-graph is
Sij= Φ(gij;θs) (1)
wheregij= [vi,vj,vi−vj,/bardblvi−vj/bardbl2]∈R10represents
the spatial relation of two views and [ ]denotes vectorized
concatenation of elements. Φis a non-linear embedding
with parameters θsfor paired nodes. In implementation, we
setΦas a three-layer MLP with LeakyReLU and 10hidden
units in ﬁrst two layers and it outputs a scalar Sij.
We further use k-nearest neighbor (kNN) to ﬁnd ﬁxed
number of neighboring nodes of each node using coordinate
distance, and only keep edges between neighboring nodes.
Therefore element of sparse adjacency matrix Ais
Aij=Sij·I{vj∈ N(vi)} (2)
whereI(·)is a binary function indicating whether vjis
within the kNN of vi. Obviously, view-graph can represent
different view conﬁgurations, e.g., the circular, dodecahe-
dral, irregular conﬁgurations as shown in Fig. 4, in which
each 3D rectangle represents a view.
5. View-based Graph Convolutional Network
View-GCN is a hierarchical structure deﬁned on multiple
levels of coarsened view-graphs. Initially, the view-graph
G0is deﬁned over all input views, and each view is with an
extracted view feature vector as discussed in Sect. 5.1. As
shown in Fig. 5, at l-th level, the view-graph Glis withNl
nodes, i.e., views. Over the view-graph, we successively up-
date the node features by local graph convolution andnon-
local message passing . Then the graph Glis coarsened by
1852