What Can ResNet Learn Efﬁciently,
Going Beyond Kernels?
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu
Microsoft Research AI
zeyuan@csail.mit.eduYuanzhi Li
Carnegie Mellon University
yuanzhil@andrew.cmu.edu
Abstract
How can neural networks such as ResNet efﬁciently learn CIFAR-10 with test
accuracy more than 96%, while other methods, especially kernel methods, fall
relatively behind? Can we more provide theoretical justiﬁcations for this gap?
Recently, there is an inﬂuential line of work relating neural networks to kernels in
the over-parameterized regime, proving they can learn certain concept class that is
also learnable by kernels with similar test error. Yet, can neural networks provably
learn some concept class better than kernels?
We answer this positively in the distribution-free setting. We prove neural net-
works can efﬁciently learn a notable class of functions, including those deﬁned by
three-layer residual networks with smooth activations, without any distributional
assumption. At the same time, we prove there are simple functions in this class
such that with the same number of training examples, the test error obtained by
neural networks can be much smaller than anykernel method, including neural
tangent kernels (NTK).
The main intuition is that multi-layer neural networks can implicitly perform hi-
erarchical learning using different layers, which reduces the sample complexity
comparing to “one-shot” learning algorithms such as kernel methods. In a follow-
up work [2], this theory of hierarchical learning is further strengthened to incor-
porate the “backward feature correction” process when training deep networks.
In the end, we also prove a computation complexity advantage of ResNet with
respect to other learning methods including linear regression over arbitrary feature
mappings.
1 Introduction
Neural network learning has become a key practical machine learning approach and has achieved
remarkable success in a wide range of real-world domains, such as computer vision, speech recog-
nition, and game playing [18, 19, 22, 31]. On the other hand, from a theoretical standpoint, it is
less understood that how large-scale, non-convex, non-smooth neural networks can be optimized
efﬁciently over the training data and generalize to the test data with relatively few training examples.
There has been a sequence of research trying to address this question, showing that under certain
conditions neural networks can be learned efﬁciently [8–10, 15, 16, 21, 24, 25, 32–35, 37, 40]. These
provable guarantees typically come with strong assumptions and the proofs heavily rely on them.
One common assumption from them is on the input distribution , usually being random Gaussian
or sufﬁciently close to Gaussian. While providing great insights to the optimization side of neural
networks, it is not clear whether these works emphasizing on Gaussian inputs can coincide with
the neural network learning process in practice. Indeed, in nearly all real world data where deep
learning is applied to, the input distributions are not close to Gaussians; even worse, there may be
Full version and future updates can be found on https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.10337 .
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.