Parameter-Efﬁcient Transfer Learning for NLP
Neil Houlsby1Andrei Giurgiu1 *Stanisław Jastrze ¸bski2 *Bruna Morrone1Quentin de Laroussilhe1
Andrea Gesmundo1Mona Attariyan1Sylvain Gelly1
Abstract
Fine-tuning large pre-trained models is an effec-
tive transfer mechanism in NLP. However, in the
presence of many downstream tasks, ﬁne-tuning
is parameter inefﬁcient: an entire new model is
required for every task. As an alternative, we
propose transfer with adapter modules. Adapter
modules yield a compact and extensible model;
they add only a few trainable parameters per task,
and new tasks can be added without revisiting
previous ones. The parameters of the original
network remain ﬁxed, yielding a high degree of
parameter sharing. To demonstrate adapter’s ef-
fectiveness, we transfer the recently proposed
BERT Transformer model to 26diverse text clas-
siﬁcation tasks, including the GLUE benchmark.
Adapters attain near state-of-the-art performance,
whilst adding only a few parameters per task. On
GLUE, we attain within 0:4%of the performance
of full ﬁne-tuning, adding only 3:6%parameters
per task. By contrast, ﬁne-tuning trains 100% of
the parameters per task.
1. Introduction
Transfer from pre-trained models yields strong performance
on many NLP tasks (Dai & Le, 2015; Howard & Ruder,
2018; Radford et al., 2018). BERT, a Transformer network
trained on large text corpora with an unsupervised loss,
attained state-of-the-art performance on text classiﬁcation
and extractive question answering (Devlin et al., 2018).
In this paper we address the online setting, where tasks
arrive in a stream. The goal is to build a system that per-
forms well on all of them, but without training an entire new
model for every new task. A high degree of sharing between
tasks is particularly useful for applications such as cloud
services, where models need to be trained to solve many
*Equal contribution1Google Research2Jagiellonian University.
Correspondence to: Neil Houlsby <neilhoulsby@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
105106107108109
Num trainable parameters / task−25−20−15−10−505Accuracy delta (%)
Adapters (ours)
Fine-tune top layersFigure 1. Trade-off between accuracy and number of trained task-
speciﬁc parameters, for adapter tuning and ﬁne-tuning. The y-axis
is normalized by the performance of full ﬁne-tuning, details in
Section 3. The curves show the 20th,50th, and 80th performance
percentiles across nine tasks from the GLUE benchmark. Adapter-
based tuning attains a similar performance to full ﬁne-tuning with
two orders of magnitude fewer trained parameters.
tasks that arrive from customers in sequence. For this, we
propose a transfer learning strategy that yields compact and
extensible downstream models. Compact models are those
that solve many tasks using a small number of additional
parameters per task. Extensible models can be trained in-
crementally to solve new tasks, without forgetting previous
ones. Our method yields a such models without sacriﬁcing
performance.
The two most common transfer learning techniques in NLP
are feature-based transfer and ﬁne-tuning. Instead, we
present an alternative transfer method based on adapter
modules (Rebufﬁ et al., 2017). Features-based transfer in-
volves pre-training real-valued embeddings vectors. These
embeddings may be at the word (Mikolov et al., 2013), sen-
tence (Cer et al., 2019), or paragraph level (Le & Mikolov,
2014). The embeddings are then fed to custom downstream
models. Fine-tuning involves copying the weights from a
pre-trained network and tuning them on the downstream
task. Recent work shows that ﬁne-tuning often enjoys better
performance than feature-based transfer (Howard & Ruder,
2018).