Parameter-Efﬁcient Transfer Learning for NLP
Both feature-based transfer and ﬁne-tuning require a new
set of weights for each task. Fine-tuning is more parameter
efﬁcient if the lower layers of a network are shared between
tasks. However, our proposed adapter tuning method is even
more parameter efﬁcient. Figure 1 demonstrates this trade-
off. The x-axis shows the number of parameters trained per
task; this corresponds to the marginal increase in the model
size required to solve each additional task. Adapter-based
tuning requires training two orders of magnitude fewer pa-
rameters to ﬁne-tuning, while attaining similar performance.
Adapters are new modules added between layers of a
pre-trained network. Adapter-based tuning differs from
feature-based transfer and ﬁne-tuning in the following way.
Consider a function (neural network) with parameters w:
w(x). Feature-based transfer composes wwith a new
function,v, to yieldv(w(x)). Only the new, task-
speciﬁc, parameters, v, are then trained. Fine-tuning in-
volves adjusting the original parameters, w, for each new
task, limiting compactness. For adapter tuning, a new
function, w;v(x), is deﬁned, where parameters ware
copied over from pre-training. The initial parameters v0
are set such that the new function resembles the original:
 w;v0(x)w(x). During training, only vare tuned.
For deep networks, deﬁning  w;vtypically involves adding
new layers to the original network, w. If one chooses
jvjjwj, the resulting model requires jwjparameters
for many tasks. Since wis ﬁxed, the model can be extended
to new tasks without affecting previous ones.
Adapter-based tuning relates to multi-task andcontinual
learning. Multi-task learning also results in compact models.
However, multi-task learning requires simultaneous access
to all tasks, which adapter-based tuning does not require.
Continual learning systems aim to learn from an endless
stream of tasks. This paradigm is challenging because net-
works forget previous tasks after re-training (McCloskey
& Cohen, 1989; French, 1999). Adapters differ in that the
tasks do not interact and the shared parameters are frozen.
This means that the model has perfect memory of previous
tasks using a small number of task-speciﬁc parameters.
We demonstrate on a large and diverse set of text classiﬁca-
tion tasks that adapters yield parameter-efﬁcient tuning for
NLP. The key innovation is to design an effective adapter
module and its integration with the base model. We propose
a simple yet effective, bottleneck architecture. On the GLUE
benchmark, our strategy almost matches the performance of
the fully ﬁne-tuned BERT, but uses only 3% task-speciﬁc
parameters, while ﬁne-tuning uses 100% task-speciﬁc pa-
rameters. We observe similar results on a further 17public
text datasets, and SQuAD extractive question answering. In
summary, adapter-based tuning yields a single, extensible,
model that attains near state-of-the-art performance in text
classiﬁcation.2. Adapter tuning for NLP
We present a strategy for tuning a large text model on several
downstream tasks. Our strategy has three key properties:
(i) it attains good performance, (ii) it permits training on
tasks sequentially, that is, it does not require simultaneous
access to all datasets, and (iii) it adds only a small number
of additional parameters per task. These properties are
especially useful in the context of cloud services, where
many models need to be trained on a series of downstream
tasks, so a high degree of sharing is desirable.
To achieve these properties, we propose a new bottleneck
adapter module. Tuning with adapter modules involves
adding a small number of new parameters to a model, which
are trained on the downstream task (Rebufﬁ et al., 2017).
When performing vanilla ﬁne-tuning of deep networks, a
modiﬁcation is made to the top layer of the network. This is
required because the label spaces and losses for the upstream
and downstream tasks differ. Adapter modules perform
more general architectural modiﬁcations to re-purpose a pre-
trained network for a downstream task. In particular, the
adapter tuning strategy involves injecting new layers into
the original network. The weights of the original network
are untouched, whilst the new adapter layers are initialized
at random. In standard ﬁne-tuning, the new top-layer and
the original weights are co-trained. In contrast, in adapter-
tuning, the parameters of the original network are frozen
and therefore may be shared by many tasks.
Adapter modules have two main features: a small number
of parameters, and a near-identity initialization. The adapter
modules need to be small compared to the layers of the orig-
inal network. This means that the total model size grows
relatively slowly when more tasks are added. A near-identity
initialization is required for stable training of the adapted
model; we investigate this empirically in Section 3.6. By
initializing the adapters to a near-identity function, original
network is unaffected when training starts. During training,
the adapters may then be activated to change the distribution
of activations throughout the network. The adapter mod-
ules may also be ignored if not required; in Section 3.6 we
observe that some adapters have more inﬂuence on the net-
work than others. We also observe that if the initialization
deviates too far from the identity function, the model may
fail to train.
2.1. Instantiation for Transformer Networks
We instantiate adapter-based tuning for text Transformers.
These models attain state-of-the-art performance in many
NLP tasks, including translation, extractive QA, and text
classiﬁcation problems (Vaswani et al., 2017; Radford et al.,
2018; Devlin et al., 2018). We consider the standard Trans-
former architecture, as proposed in Vaswani et al. (2017).