8 Dimitrios Kollias
4.1 Multi-Task Learning Challenge
The baseline network is a VGG16 network with with fixed convolutional weights
(only the 3 fully connected layers were trained), pre-trained on the VGGFACE
dataset. The output layer consists of 22 units: 2 linear units that give the va-
lence and arousal predictions; 8 units equipped with softmax activation function
that give the expression predictions; 12 units equipped with sigmoid activation
function that give the action unit predictions.
Let us mention here that no data augmentation techniques [53] have been
utilized when training this baseline network with the cropped-aligned version of
s-Aff-Wild2 database. We just normalised all images’ pixel intensity values in
the range [ −1,1].
Table 4 illustrates the performance of the baseline model on the validation
set of s-Aff-Wild2.
Table 4. Multi-Task Learning Challenge: Performance of baseline model on the val-
idation set; evaluation criterion is the sum of each task’s independent performance
metric.
Baseline PMTL
VGGFACE 0.30
4.2 Learning from Synthetic Data Challenge
The baseline network is a ResNet with 50 layers, pre-trained on ImageNet
(ResNet50); its output layer consists of 6 units and is equipped with softmax
activation function that gives the basic expression predictions.
Let us mention here that no data augmentation techniques have been uti-
lized when training this baseline network with the synthetic images. We just
normalised all images’ pixel intensity values in the range [ −1,1].
Table 5 illustrates the performance of the baseline model on the validation
and test sets, which consist of only real data of the Aff-Wild2 database.
Table 5. Learning from Synthetic Data Challenge: Performance of baseline model on
the validation and test sets, which consist of only real data of the Aff-Wild2 database;
evaluation criterion is the average F1 Score of the 6 basic expression categories. The
performance on the validation set is indicated inside the parenthesis.
Baseline PLSD
ResNet50 0.30 (0.50)