2 Dimitrios Kollias
only recently, with the collection of large-scale datasets and powerful machine
learning methods such as deep neural networks, that automatic facial behavior
analysis started to thrive. When it comes to automatically recognising affect in-
the-wild (i.e., in uncontrolled conditions and unconstrained environments), there
exist three iconic tasks, which are: i) recognition of basic expressions (anger, dis-
gust, fear, happiness, sadness, surprise and the neutral state); ii) estimation of
continuous affect (valence -how positive/negative a person is- and arousal -how
active/passive a person is-); iii) detection of facial action units (coding of facial
motion with respect to activation of facial muscles, e.g. upper/inner eyebrows,
nose wrinkles).
Ekman [11] defined the six basic emotions, i.e., Anger, Disgust, Fear, Hap-
piness, Sadness, Surprise and the Neutral State, based on a cross-culture study
[11], which indicated that humans perceive certain basic emotions in the same
way regardless of culture. Nevertheless, advanced research on neuroscience and
psychology argued that the model of six basic emotions are culture-specific and
not universal. Additionally, the affect model based on basic emotions is limited
in the ability to represent the complexity and subtlety of our daily affective dis-
plays. Despite these findings, the categorical model that describes emotions in
terms of discrete basic emotions is still the most popular perspective for Expres-
sion Recognition, due to its pioneering investigations along with the direct and
intuitive definition of facial expressions.
The dimensional model of affect, that is appropriate to represent not only
extreme, but also subtle emotions appearing in everyday human-computer inter-
actions, has also attracted significant attention over the last years. According to
the dimensional approach [12,65,55], affective behavior is described by a number
of latent continuous dimensions. The most commonly used dimensions include
valence (indicating how positive or negative an emotional state is) and arousal
(measuring the power of emotion activation).
Detection of Facial Action Units (AUs) has also attained large attention. The
Facial Action Coding System (FACS) [11,2] provides a standardised taxonomy of
facial muscles’ movements and has been widely adopted as a common standard
towards systematically categorising physical manifestation of complex facial ex-
pressions. Since any facial expression can be represented as a combination of
action units, they constitute a natural physiological basis for face analysis. Con-
sequently, in the last years, there has been a shift of related research towards
the detection of action units. The presence of action units is typically brief and
unconscious, and their detection requires analyzing subtle appearance changes
in the human face. Furthermore, action units do not appear in isolation, but as
elemental units of facial expressions, and hence some AUs co-occur frequently,
while others are mutually exclusive.
The fourth Affective Behavior Analysis in-the-wild (ABAW) Competition,
held in conjunction with the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),