4 Dimitrios Kollias
In the following, we provide a short overview of each Challenge’s dataset along
with a description of the pre-processing steps that we carried out for cropping
and/or aligning the images of Aff-Wild2. These images have been utilized in our
baseline experiments.
2.1 Multi-Task Learning Challenge
A static version of the Aff-Wild2 database has been generated by selecting some
specific frames of the database; this Challenge’s corpora is named s-Aff-Wild2.
In total, 221,928 images are used that contain annotations in terms of: i) va-
lence and arousal; ii) 6 basic expressions (anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sad-
ness, surprise), plus the neutral state, plus the ’other’ category (which denotes
expressions/affective states other than the 6 basic ones); 12 action units.
Figure 1 shows the 2D Valence-Arousal histogram of annotations of s-Aff-
Wild2. Table 1 shows the distribution of the 8 expression annotations of s-Aff-
Wild2. Table 2 shows the name of the 12 action units that have been annotated,
the action that they correspond to and the distribution of their annotations in
s-Aff-Wild2.
The s-Aff-Wild2 database is split into training, validation and test sets. At
first the training and validation sets, along with their corresponding annotations,
are being made public to the participants, so that they can develop their own
methodologies and test them. At a later stage, the test set without annotations
is given to the participants.
The participants are given two versions of s-Aff-Wild2: the cropped and
cropped-aligned ones. At first, all images/frames of s-Aff-Wild2 are passed through
the RetinaFace detector [8] so as to extract, for each image/frame, face bounding
boxes and 5 facial landmarks. The images/frames are then cropped according
the bounding box locations. All cropped-aligned images have the same dimen-
sions 112 ×112×3. These cropped images/frames constitute the cropped ver-
sion of s-Aff-Wild2 that is given to the participants. The 5 facial landmarks
(two eyes, nose and two mouth corners) have then been used to perform sim-
ilarity transformation. The resulting cropped-aligned images/frames constitute
the cropped-aligned version of s-Aff-Wild2 that is given to the participants. The
cropped-aligned version has been utilized in our baseline experiments, described
in Section 4.
Let us note that for the purposes of this Challenge, all participants are al-
lowed to use the provided s-Aff-Wild2 database and/or any publicly available or
private database; the participants are not allowed to use the audiovisual (A/V)
Aff-Wild2 database (images and annotations). Any methodological solution will
be accepted for this Challenge.
2.2 Learning from Synthetic Data Challenge
Some specific cropped images/frames of the Aff-Wild2 database have been se-
lected; these images/frames, which show a face with an arbitrary expression/affective
state, have been used -in a facial expression manipulation manner [28,29,38]- so