ABAW: Learning from Synthetic Data &
Multi-Task Learning Challenges
Dimitrios Kollias
Queen Mary University of London, UK
d.kollias@qmul.ac.uk
Abstract. This paper describes the fourth Affective Behavior Analysis
in-the-wild (ABAW) Competition, held in conjunction with European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2022. The 4th ABAW Com-
petition is a continuation of the Competitions held at IEEE CVPR 2022,
ICCV 2021, IEEE FG 2020 and IEEE CVPR 2017 Conferences, and aims
at automatically analyzing affect. In the previous runs of this Compe-
tition, the Challenges targeted Valence-Arousal Estimation, Expression
Classification and Action Unit Detection. This year the Competition
encompasses two different Challenges: i) a Multi-Task-Learning one in
which the goal is to learn at the same time (i.e., in a multi-task learning
setting) all the three above mentioned tasks; and ii) a Learning from
Synthetic Data one in which the goal is to learn to recognise the basic
expressions from artificially generated data and generalise to real data.
The Aff-Wild2 database is a large scale in-the-wild database and the
first one that contains annotations for valence and arousal, expressions
and action units. This database is the basis for the above Challenges.
In more detail: i) s-Aff-Wild2 -a static version of Aff-Wild2 database-
has been constructed and utilized for the purposes of the Multi-Task-
Learning Challenge; and ii) some specific frames-images from the Aff-
Wild2 database have been used in an expression manipulation manner
for creating the synthetic dataset, which is the basis for the Learning
from Synthetic Data Challenge. In this paper, at first we present the two
Challenges, along with the utilized corpora, then we outline the evalu-
ation metrics and finally present the baseline systems per Challenge, as
well as their derived results. More information regarding the Competi-
tion can be found in the competition’s website: https://ibug.doc.ic.
ac.uk/resources/eccv-2023-4th-abaw/ .
Keywords: multi-task learning, learning from synthetic data, ABAW,
affective behavior analysis in-the-wild, aff-wild2, s-aff-wild2, valence and
arousal estimation, expression recognition, action unit detection
1 Introduction
Automatic facial behavior analysis has a long history of studies in the intersec-
tion of computer vision, physiology and psychology and has applications spread
across a variety of fields, such as medicine, health, or driver fatigue, monitor-
ing, e-learning, marketing, entertainment, lie detection and law. However it isarXiv:2207.01138v2  [cs.CV]  5 Jul 2022