Habitat: A Platform for Embodied AI Research
Manolis Savva1,4*, Abhishek Kadian1*, Oleksandr Maksymets1*, Yili Zhao1,
Erik Wijmans1,2,3, Bhavana Jain1, Julian Straub2, Jia Liu1, Vladlen Koltun5,
Jitendra Malik1,6, Devi Parikh1,3, Dhruv Batra1,3
1Facebook AI Research,2Facebook Reality Labs,3Georgia Institute of Technology,
4Simon Fraser University,5Intel Labs,6UC Berkeley
Abstract
We present Habitat, a platform for research in embodied
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). Habitat enables training embod-
ied agents (virtual robots) in highly efﬁcient photorealistic
3D simulation. Speciﬁcally, Habitat consists of:
(i)Habitat-Sim : a ﬂexible, high-performance 3D sim-
ulator with conﬁgurable agents, sensors, and generic 3D
dataset handling. Habitat-Sim is fast – when rendering
a scene from Matterport3D, it achieves several thousand
frames per second (fps) running single-threaded, and can
reach over 10,000fps multi-process on a single GPU.
(ii)Habitat-API : a modular high-level library for end-to-
end development of embodied AI algorithms – deﬁning tasks
(e.g. navigation, instruction following, question answering),
conﬁguring, training, and benchmarking embodied agents.
These large-scale engineering contributions enable us to
answer scientiﬁc questions requiring experiments that were
till now impracticable or ‘merely’ impractical. Speciﬁcally,
in the context of point-goal navigation: (1) we revisit the
comparison between learning and SLAM approaches from
two recent works [ 19,16] and ﬁnd evidence for the oppo-
site conclusion – that learning outperforms SLAM if scaled
to an order of magnitude more experience than previous
investigations, and (2) we conduct the ﬁrst cross-dataset
generalization experiments {train, test }×{Matterport3D,
Gibson}for multiple sensors {blind, RGB, RGBD, D }and
ﬁnd that only agents with depth (D) sensors generalize across
datasets. We hope that our open-source platform and these
ﬁndings will advance research in embodied AI.
1. Introduction
Imagine walking up to a home robot and asking ‘Hey –
can you go check if my laptop is on my desk? And if so, bring
*Denotes equal contribution.it to me. ’ In order to be successful, such a robot would need
a range of skills – visual perception (to recognize scenes and
objects), language understanding (to translate questions and
instructions into actions), and navigation in complex environ-
ments (to move and ﬁnd things in a changing environment).
While there has been signiﬁcant progress in the vision
and language communities thanks to recent advances in deep
representations [ 14,11], much of this progress has been
on ‘internet AI’ rather than embodied AI. The focus of the
former is pattern recognition in images, videos, and text on
datasets typically curated from the internet [ 10,18,4]. The
focus of the latter is to enable action by an embodied agent
(e.g. a robot) in an environment . This brings to the fore active
perception, long-term planning, learning from interaction,
and holding a dialog grounded in an environment.
A straightforward proposal is to train agents directly in
the physical world – exposing them to all its richness. This
is valuable and will continue to play an important role in the
development of AI. However, we also recognize that train-
ing robots in the real world is slow (the real world runs no
faster than real time and cannot be parallelized), dangerous
(poorly-trained agents can unwittingly injure themselves, the
environment, or others), resource intensive (the robot(s) and
the environment(s) in which they execute demand resources
and time), difﬁcult to control (it is hard to test corner-case
scenarios as these are, by deﬁnition, infrequent and chal-
lenging to recreate), and not easily reproducible (replicating
conditions across experiments and institutions is difﬁcult).
We aim to support a complementary research program:
training embodied agents ( e.g. virtual robots) in rich realistic
simulators and then transferring the learned skills to reality.
Simulations have a long and rich history in science and
engineering (from aerospace to zoology). In the context of
embodied AI, simulators help overcome the aforementioned
challenges – they can run orders of magnitude faster than
real-time and can be parallelized over a cluster; training
in simulation is safe, cheap, and enables fair comparison
9339