4. PointGoal Navigation at Scale
To demonstrate the utility of the Habitat platform de-
sign, we carry out experiments to test for generalization of
goal-directed visual navigation agents between datasets of
different environments and to compare the performance of
learning-based agents against classic agents as the amount
of available training experience is increased.
Task deﬁnition. We use the PointGoal task (as deﬁned by
Anderson et al.[2]) as our experimental testbed. This task is
ostensibly simple to deﬁne – an agent is initialized at a ran-
dom starting position and orientation in an environment and
asked to navigate to target coordinates that are provided rela-
tive to the agent’s position; no ground-truth map is available
and the agent must only use its sensory input to navigate.
However, in the course of experiments, we realized that
this task leaves space for subtle choices that (a) can make a
signiﬁcant difference in experimental outcomes and (b) are
either not speciﬁed or inconsistent across papers, making
comparison difﬁcult. We attempt to be as descriptive as pos-
sible about these seemingly low-level choices; we hope the
Habitat platform will help iron out these inconsistencies.
Agent embodiment and action space. The agent is physi-
cally embodied as a cylindrical primitive shape with diame-
ter0.2mand height 1.5m. The action space consists of four
actions:turn_left ,turn_right ,move_forward ,
andstop . These actions are mapped to idealized actua-
tions that result in 10degree turns for the turning actions
and linear displacement of 0.25mfor themove_forward
action. The stop action allows the agent to signal that it
has reached the goal. Habitat supports noisy actuations but
experiments in this paper are conducted in the noise-free
setting as our analysis focuses on other factors.
Collision dynamics. Some previous works [ 3] use a coarse
irregular navigation graph where an agent effectively ‘tele-
ports’ from one location to another ( 1-2mapart). Others [ 9]
use a ﬁne-grained regular grid ( 0.01mresolution) where the
agent moves on unoccupied cells and there are no collisions
or partial steps. In Habitat and our experiments, we use
a more realistic collision model – the agent navigates in a
continuous state space4and motion can produce collisions
resulting in partial (or no) progress along the direction in-
tended – simply put, it is possible for the agent to ‘slide’
along a wall or obstacle. Crucially, the agent may choose
move_forward (0.25m) and end up in a location that is
not0.25m forward of where it started; thus, odometry is not
trivial even in the absence of actuation noise.
Goal speciﬁcation: static or dynamic? One conspicuous
underspeciﬁcation in the PointGoal task [ 2] is whether the
goal coordinates are static (i.e. provided once at the start of
the episode) or dynamic (i.e. provided at every time step).
4Up to machine precision.The former is more realistic – it is difﬁcult to imagine a real
task where an oracle would provide precise dynamic goal co-
ordinates. However, in the absence of actuation noise and col-
lisions, every step taken by the agent results in a known turn
or translation, and this combined with the initial goal location
is functionally equivalent to dynamic goal speciﬁcation. We
hypothesize that this is why recent works [ 16,19,13] used
dynamic goal speciﬁcation. We follow and prescribe the
following conceptual delineation – as a task, we adopt static
PointGoal navigation; as for the sensor suite , we equip our
agents with an idealized GPS sensor. This orients us towards
a realistic task (static PointGoal navigation), disentangles
simulator design (actuation noise, collision dynamics) from
the task deﬁnition, and allows us to compare techniques by
sensors used (RGB, depth, GPS, compass, contact sensors).
Sensory input. The agents are endowed with a single color
vision sensor placed at a height of 1.5mfrom the center of
the agent’s base and oriented to face ‘forward’. This sensor
provides RGB frames at a resolution of 2562pixels and with
a ﬁeld of view of 90degrees. In addition, an idealized depth
sensor is available, in the same position and orientation as
the color vision sensor. The ﬁeld of view and resolution
of the depth sensor match those of the color vision sensor.
We designate agents that make use of the color sensor by
RGB, agents that make use of the depth sensor by Depth ,
and agents that make use of both by RGBD . Agents that
use neither sensor are denoted as Blind . All agents are
equipped with an idealized GPS and compass – i.e., they
have access to their location coordinates, and implicitly their
orientation relative to the goal position.
Episode speciﬁcation. We initialize the agent at a start-
ing position and orientation that are sampled uniformly at
random from all navigable positions on the ﬂoor of the envi-
ronment. The goal position is chosen such that it lies on the
same ﬂoor and there exists a navigable path from the agent’s
starting position. During the episode, the agent is allowed to
take up to 500actions. This threshold signiﬁcantly exceeds
the number of steps an optimal agent requires to reach all
goals (see the supplement). After each action, the agent
receives a set of observations from the active sensors.
Evaluation. A navigation episode is considered successful
if and only if the agent issues a stop action within 0.2mof
the target coordinates, as measured by a geodesic distance
along the shortest path from the agent’s position to the goal
position. If the agent takes 500actions without the above
condition being met the episode ends and is considered un-
successful. Performance is measured using the ‘Success
weighted by Path Length’ ( SPL) metric [ 2]. For an episode
where the geodesic distance of the shortest path is land the
agent traverses a distance p,SPL is deﬁned as S·l/max(p,l),
whereSis a binary indicator of success.
Episode dataset preparation. We create PointGoal naviga-
9343