trol of the environment conﬁguration in terms of the ob-
jects that are present and their relative layout.
Design overview. The above design requirements cut across
several layers in the ‘software stack’ in Figure 1. A mono-
lithic design is not suitable for addressing requirements at
all levels. We, therefore, structure the Habitat platform to
mirror this multi-layer abstraction.
At the lowest level is Habitat-Sim , a ﬂexible, high-
performance 3D simulator, responsible for loading 3D scenes
into a standardized scene-graph representation, conﬁguring
agents with multiple sensors, simulating agent motion, and
returning sensory data from an agent’s sensor suite. The
sensor abstraction in Habitat allows additional sensors such
as LIDAR and IMU to be easily implemented as plugins.
Generic 3D dataset API using scene graphs.
Habitat-Sim employs a hierarchical scene graph
to represent all supported 3D environment datasets, whether
synthetic or based on real-world reconstructions. The
use of a uniform scene graph representation allows us to
abstract the details of speciﬁc datasets, and to treat them in a
consistent fashion. Scene graphs allow us to compose 3D
environments through procedural scene generation, editing,
or programmatic manipulation.
Rendering engine. TheHabitat-Sim backend module
is implemented in C++ and leverages the Magnum graphics
middleware library2to support cross-platform deployment
on a broad variety of hardware conﬁgurations. The simu-
lator backend employs an efﬁcient rendering pipeline that
implements visual sensor frame rendering using a multi-
attachment ‘uber-shader’ combining outputs for color cam-
era sensors, depth sensors, and semantic mask sensors. By
allowing all outputs to be produced in a single render pass,
we avoid additional overhead when sensor parameters are
shared and the same render pass can be used for all outputs.
Figure 2shows examples of visual sensors rendered in three
different supported datasets. The same agent and sensor
conﬁguration was instantiated in a scene from each of the
three datasets by simply specifying a different input scene.
Performance. Habitat-Sim achieves thousands of
frames per second per simulator thread and is orders of mag-
nitude faster than previous simulators for realistic indoor
environments (which typically operate at tens or hundreds of
frames per second) – see Table 1for a summary and the sup-
plement for more details. By comparison, AI2-THOR [ 17]
and CHALET [ 28] run at tens of fps, MINOS [ 22] and Gib-
son [ 27] run at about a hundred, and House3D [ 26] runs at
about300fps.Habitat-Sim is2-3orders of magnitude
faster. By operating at 10,000frames per second we shift
the bottleneck from simulation to optimization for network
training. Based on TensorFlow benchmarks, many popular
network architectures run at frame rates that are 10-100x
2https://magnum.graphics/1process 5processes
Sensors / Resolution 128 256 512 128 256 512
RGB 4,093 1,987 848 10 ,592 3,574 2,629
RGB + depth 2,050 1,042 423 5 ,223 1,774 1,348
Table 1: Performance of Habitat-Sim in frames per second
for an example Matterport3D scene (id 17DRP5sb8fy) on an Intel
Xeon E5-2690 v4 CPU and Nvidia Titan Xp GPU, measured at
different frame resolutions and with a varying number of concur-
rent simulator processes sharing the GPU. See the supplement for
additional benchmarking results.
lower on a single GPU3. In practice, we have observed that
it is often faster to generate images using Habitat-Sim
than to load images from disk .
Efﬁcient GPU throughput. Currently, frames rendered
byHabitat-Sim are exposed as Python tensors through
shared memory. Future development will focus on even
higher rendering efﬁciency by entirely avoiding GPU-to-
CPU memory copy overhead through the use of CUDA-GL
interoperation and direct sharing of render buffers and tex-
tures as tensors. Our preliminary internal testing suggests
that this can lead to a speedup by a factor of 2.
Above the simulation backend, the Habitat-API layer
is a modular high-level library for end-to-end development
in embodied AI. Setting up an embodied task involves speci-
fying observations that may be used by the agent(s), using
environment information provided by the simulator, and con-
necting the information with a task-speciﬁc episode dataset.
–Task : this class extends the simulator’s
Observations class and action space with task-
speciﬁc ones. The criteria of episode termination and
measures of success are provided by the Task . For
example, in goal-driven navigation, Task provides
the goal and evaluation metric [ 2]. To support this
kind of functionality the Task has read-only access to
Simulator andEpisode-Dataset .
–Episode : a class for episode speciﬁcation that includes
the initial position and orientation of an Agent , scene id,
goal position, and optionally the shortest path to the goal.
An episode is a description of an instance of the task.
–Environment : the fundamental environment concept
for Habitat, abstracting all the information needed for
working on embodied tasks with a simulator.
More details about the architecture of the Habitat plat-
form, performance measurements, and examples of API use
are provided in the supplement.
3https://www.tensorflow.org/guide/performance/
benchmarks
9342