tion episode-datasets for Matterport3D [ 8] and Gibson [ 27]
scenes. For Matterport3D we followed the publicly available
train/val/test splits. Note that as in recent works [ 9,19,16],
there is no overlap between train, val, and test scenes. For
Gibson scenes, we obtained textured 3D surface meshes from
the Gibson authors [ 27], manually annotated each scene on
its reconstruction quality (small/big holes, ﬂoating/irregular
surfaces, poor textures), and curated a subset of 106 scenes
(out of 572); see the supplement for details. An episode is de-
ﬁned by the unique id of the scene, the starting position and
orientation of the agent, and the goal position. Additional
metadata such as the geodesic distance along the shortest
path (GDSP ) from start position to goal position is also in-
cluded. While generating episodes, we restrict the GDSP
to be between 1mand30m. An episode is trivial if there
is an obstacle-free straight line between the start and goal
positions. A good measure of the navigation complexity
of an episode is the ratio of GDSP to Euclidean distance
between start and goal positions (notice that GDSP can only
be larger than or equal to the Euclidean distance). If the
ratio is nearly 1, there are few obstacles and the episode is
easy; if the ratio is much larger than 1, the episode is difﬁcult
because strategic navigation is required. To keep the navi-
gation complexity of the precomputed episodes reasonably
high, we perform rejection sampling for episodes with the
above ratio falling in the range [1,1.1]. Following this, there
is a signiﬁcant decrease in the number of near-straight-line
episodes (episodes with a ratio in [1,1.1]) – from 37% to
10% for the Gibson dataset generation. This step was not
performed in any previous studies. We ﬁnd that without this
ﬁltering, all metrics appear inﬂated. Gibson scenes have
smaller physical dimensions compared to the Matterport3D
scenes. This is reﬂected in the resulting PointGoal dataset –
averageGDSP of episodes in Gibson scenes is smaller than
that of Matterport3D scenes.
Baselines. We compare the following baselines:
–Random chooses an action randomly among
turn_left ,turn_right , andmove_forward
with uniform distribution. The agent calls the stop
action when within 0.2mof the goal (computed using the
difference of static goal and dynamic GPS coordinates).
–Forward only always calls the move_forward action,
and calls the stop action when within 0.2m of the goal.
–Goal follower moves towards the goal direction. If it is
not facing the goal (more than 15degrees off-axis), it
performsturn_left orturn_right to align itself;
otherwise, it calls move_forward . The agent calls the
stop action when within 0.2m of the goal.
–RL (PPO) is an agent trained with reinforcement learn-
ing, speciﬁcally proximal policy optimization [ 23]. We
experiment with RL agents equipped with different visual
sensors: no visual input ( Blind ),RGB input,Depth
input, and RGB with depth ( RGBD ). The model consistsof a CNN that produces an embedding for visual input,
which together with the relative goal vector is used by an
actor (GRU) and a critic (linear layer). The CNN has the
following architecture: {Conv 8×8, ReLU, Conv 4 ×4,
ReLU, Conv 3 ×3, ReLU, Linear, ReLU }(see supplement
for details). Let rtdenote the reward at timestep t,dtbe
the geodesic distance to goal at timestep t,sa success
reward and λa time penalty (to encourage efﬁciency). All
models were trained with the following reward function:
rt=(
s+dt−1−dt+λif goal is reached
dt−1−dt+λ otherwise
In our experiments sis set to10andλis set to−0.01.
Note that rewards are only provided in training environ-
ments; the task is challenging as the agent must generalize
to unseen test environments.
–SLAM [ 19]is an agent implementing a classic robotics
navigation pipeline (including components for localiza-
tion, mapping, and planning), using RGB and depth sen-
sors. We use the classic agent by Mishkin et al.[19] which
leverages the ORB-SLAM2 [ 20] localization pipeline,
with the same parameters as reported in the original work.
Training procedure. When training learning-based agents,
we ﬁrst divide the scenes in the training set equally among
8(Gibson), 6(Matterport3D) concurrently running simula-
tor worker threads. Each thread establishes blocks of 500
training episodes for each scene in its training set partition
and shufﬂes the ordering of these blocks. Training continues
through shufﬂed copies of this array. We do not hardcode the
stop action to retain generality and allow for comparison
with future work that does not assume GPS inputs. For the
experiments reported here, we train until 75million agent
steps are accumulated across all worker threads. This is
15x larger than the experience used in previous investiga-
tions [ 19,16]. Training agents to 75million steps took (in
sum over all three datasets): 320GPU-hours for Blind ,
566GPU-hours for RGB,475GPU-hours for Depth , and
906GPU-hours for RGBD (overall2267 GPU-hours).
5. Results and Findings
We seek to answer two questions: i) how do learning-
based agents compare to classic SLAM and hand-coded
baselines as the amount of training experience increases and
ii) how well do learned agents generalize across 3D datasets.
It should be tacitly understood, but to be explicit – ‘learn-
ing’ and ‘SLAM’ are broad families of techniques (and not
a single method), are not necessarily mutually exclusive,
and are not ‘settled’ in their development. We compare rep-
resentative instances of these families to gain insight into
questions of scaling and generalization, and do not make any
claims about intrinsic superiority of one or the other.
9344