Replica (Straub et al., 201 9)Datasets
Matterport3D (Chang et al., 2017)
 2D-3D-S(Armeni et al., 201 7)
Simulators
AI2-THOR
(Kolve et al., 2017)MINOS
(Savva et al., 2017)
Gibson
(Zamir et al., 2018)
CHALET
(Yan et al., 2018)House3D
(Wu et al., 2017)Habitat Sim
Generic Dataset
SupportHabitat APIHabitat Platform
EmbodiedQA
(Das et al., 2018)Tasks
Interactive QA
(Gordon et al., 2018)
Vision -Language Navigation
(Anderson et al., 2018)
Language grounding
(Hill et al., 2017)Visual Navigation
(Zhu et al., 2017 , Gupta et al., 2017 )
Figure 1: The ‘software stack’ for training embodied agents involves (1) datasets providing 3D assets with semantic annotations, (2)
simulators that render these assets and within which an embodied agent may be simulated, and (3) tasks that deﬁne evaluatable problems that
enable us to benchmark scientiﬁc progress. Prior work (highlighted in blue boxes) has contributed a variety of datasets, simulation software,
and task deﬁnitions. We propose a uniﬁed embodied agent stack with the Habitat platform, including generic dataset support, a highly
performant simulator ( Habitat-Sim ), and a ﬂexible API ( Habitat-API ) allowing the deﬁnition and evaluation of a broad set of tasks.
and benchmarking of progress in a concerted community-
wide effort. Once a promising approach has been developed
and tested in simulation, it can be transferred to physical
platforms that operate in the real world [ 6,15].
Datasets have been a key driver of progress in computer
vision, NLP, and other areas of AI [ 10,18,4,1]. As the
community transitions to embodied AI, we believe that sim-
ulators will assume the role played previously by datasets.
To support this transition, we aim to standardize the entire
‘software stack’ for training embodied agents (Figure 1):
scanning the world and creating photorealistic 3D assets, de-
veloping the next generation of highly efﬁcient and paralleliz-
able simulators, specifying embodied AI tasks that enable
us to benchmark scientiﬁc progress, and releasing modu-
lar high-level libraries for training and deploying embodied
agents. Speciﬁcally, Habitat consists of the following:
1.Habitat-Sim : a ﬂexible, high-performance 3D
simulator with conﬁgurable agents, multiple sensors, and
generic 3D dataset handling (with built-in support for Mat-
terport3D, Gibson, and Replica datasets).
2.Habitat-API : a modular high-level library for end-
to-end development of embodied AI algorithms – deﬁning
embodied AI tasks ( e.g. navigation, instruction following,
question answering), conﬁguring and training embodied
agents (via imitation or reinforcement learning, or via classic
SLAM), and benchmarking using standard metrics [ 2].
The Habitat architecture and implementation combine
modularity and high performance. When rendering a scene
from the Matterport3D dataset, Habitat-Sim achieves
several thousand frames per second (fps) running single-
threaded, and can reach over 10,000fps multi-process ona single GPU, which is orders of magnitude faster than the
closest simulator. Habitat-API allows us to train and
benchmark embodied agents with different classes of meth-
ods and in different 3D scene datasets.
These large-scale engineering contributions enable us to
answer scientiﬁc questions requiring experiments that were
till now impracticable or ‘merely’ impractical. Speciﬁcally,
in the context of point-goal navigation [ 2], we make two
scientiﬁc contributions:
1.We revisit the comparison between learning and
SLAM approaches from two recent works [ 19,16] and ﬁnd
evidence for the opposite conclusion – that learning out-
performs SLAM if scaled to an order of magnitude more
experience than previous investigations.
2.We conduct the ﬁrst cross-dataset generalization exper-
iments{train, test}×{Matterport3D, Gibson }for multiple
sensors{Blind1, RGB, RGBD, D }×{GPS+Compass }and
ﬁnd that only agents with depth ( D) sensors generalize well
across datasets.
We hope that our open-source platform and these ﬁndings
will advance and guide future research in embodied AI.
2. Related Work
The availability of large-scale 3D scene datasets [ 5,24,8]
and community interest in active vision tasks led to a recent
surge of work that resulted in the development of a variety
of simulation platforms for indoor environments [ 17,7,13,
22,26,3,27,28,21]. These platforms vary with respect to
1Blind refers to agents with no visual sensory inputs.
9340