Gibson MP3D
BlindSPL=0.28 RGBSPL=0.57
RGBDSPL=0.91 DepthSPL=0.98BlindSPL=0.35 RGBSPL=0.88
RGBDSPL=0.90 DepthSPL=0.94
Figure 4: Navigation examples for different sensory conﬁgurations
of the RL (PPO) agent, visualizing trials from the Gibson and
MP3D val sets. A blue dot andred dot indicate the starting and
goal positions, and the blue arrow indicates ﬁnal agent position.
Theblue-green-red line is the agent’s trajectory. Color shifts from
blue to red as the maximum number of agent steps is approached.
See the supplemental materials for more example trajectories.
Gibson MP3D
BlindGibson
MP3D
RGBGibson
MP3D
DepthGibson
MP3D
RGBDGibson
MP3D0.250.34
0.280.42
0.300.40
0.250.46
0.540.68
0.560.79
0.420.53
0.440.70
Figure 5: Generalization of agents between datasets. We report
average SPL for a model trained on the source dataset in each row,
as evaluated on test episodes for the target dataset in each column.
dataset speciﬁc or do learned agents generalize across
datasets? We report exhaustive comparisons in Figure 5
– speciﬁcally, average SPL for all combinations of {train,
test}×{Matterport3D, Gibson }for all agents {Blind ,
RGB,RGBD ,Depth}. Rows indicate (agent, train set) pair,
columns indicate test set. We ﬁnd a number of interesting
trends. First, nearly all agents suffer a drop in performance
when trained on one dataset and tested on another, e.g.RGBD
Gibson→Gibson0.70vsRGBD Gibson→Matterport3D 0.53
(drop of 0.17). RGB andRGBD agents suffer a signiﬁcant
performance degradation, while the Blind agent is least
affected (as we would expect).
Second, we ﬁnd a potentially counter-intuitive trend –
agents trained on Gibson consistently outperform their coun-
terparts trained on Matterport3D, even when evaluated on
Matterport3D . We believe the reason is the previously noted
observation that Gibson scenes are smaller and episodes are
shorter (lower GDSP ) than Matterport3D. Gibson agents are
trained on ‘easier’ episodes and encounter positive reward
more easily during random exploration, thus bootstrapping
learning. Consequently, for a ﬁxed computation budget Gib-
son agents are stronger universally (not just on Gibson). Thisﬁnding suggests that visual navigation agents could beneﬁt
from curriculum learning.
These insights are enabled by the engineering of Habitat,
which made these experiments as simple as a change in the
evaluation dataset name.
6. Future Work
We described the design and implementation of the Habi-
tat platform. Our goal is to unify existing community efforts
and to accelerate research into embodied AI. This is a long-
term effort that will succeed only by full engagement of the
broader research community.
Experiments enabled by the generic dataset support and
the high performance of the Habitat stack indicate that
i) learning-based agents can match and exceed the perfor-
mance of classic visual navigation methods when trained
for long enough and ii) learned agents equipped with depth
sensors generalize well between different 3D environment
datasets in comparison to agents equipped with only RGB.
Feature roadmap. Our near-term development roadmap
will focus on incorporating physics simulation and enabling
physics-based interaction between mobile agents and ob-
jects in 3D environments. Habitat-Sim ’s scene graph
representation is well-suited for integration with physics en-
gines, allowing us to directly control the state of individual
objects and agents within a scene graph. Another planned
avenue of future work involves procedural generation of 3D
environments by leveraging a combination of 3D reconstruc-
tion and virtual object datasets. By combining high-quality
reconstructions of large indoor spaces with separately re-
constructed or modelled objects, we can take full advantage
of our hierarchical scene graph representation to introduce
controlled variation in the simulated 3D environments.
Lastly, we plan to focus on distributed simulation settings
that involve large numbers of agents potentially interacting
with one another in competitive or collaborative scenarios.
Acknowledgments. We thank the reviewers for their help-
ful suggestions. The Habitat project would not have been
possible without the support and contributions of many in-
dividuals. We are grateful to Angel Xuan Chang, Devendra
Singh Chaplot, Xinlei Chen, Georgia Gkioxari, Daniel Gor-
don, Leonidas Guibas, Saurabh Gupta, Jerry (Zhi-Yang) He,
Rishabh Jain, Or Litany, Joel Macey, Dmytro Mishkin, Mar-
cus Rohrbach, Amanpreet Singh, Yuandong Tian, Yuxin Wu,
Fei Xia, Deshraj Yadav, Amir Zamir, and Jiazhi Zhang for
their help.
9346