the 3D scene data they use, the embodied agent tasks they
address, and the evaluation protocols they implement.
This surge of activity is both thrilling and alarming. On
the one hand, it is clearly a sign of the interest in embodied
AI across diverse research communities (computer vision,
natural language processing, robotics, machine learning). On
the other hand, the existence of multiple differing simulation
environments can cause fragmentation, replication of effort,
and difﬁculty in reproduction and community-wide progress.
Moreover, existing simulators exhibit several shortcomings:
–Tight coupling of task ( e.g. navigation), simulation plat-
form ( e.g. GibsonEnv), and 3D dataset ( e.g. Gibson). Ex-
periments with multiple tasks or datasets are impractical.
–Hard-coded agent conﬁguration ( e.g. size, action-space).
Ablations of agent parameters and sensor types are not
supported, making results hard to compare.
–Suboptimal rendering and simulation performance. Most
existing indoor simulators operate at relatively low frame
rates (10-100 fps), becoming a bottleneck in training
agents and making large-scale learning infeasible. Take-
away messages from such experiments become unreliable
– has the learning converged to trust the comparisons?
–Limited control of environment state. The structure of the
3D scene in terms of present objects cannot be program-
matically modiﬁed ( e.g. to test the robustness of agents).
Most critically, work built on top of any of the existing
platforms is hard to reproduce independently from the plat-
form, and thus hard to evaluate against work based on a
different platform, even in cases where the target tasks and
datasets are the same. This status quo is undesirable and mo-
tivates the Habitat effort. We aim to learn from the successes
of previous frameworks and develop a unifying platform that
combines their desirable characteristics while addressing
their limitations. A common, unifying platform can sig-
niﬁcantly accelerate research by enabling code re-use and
consistent experimental methodology. Moreover, a common
platform enables us to easily carry out experiments testing
agents based on different paradigms (learned vs. classical)
and generalization of agents between datasets.
The experiments we carry out contrasting learned and
classical approaches to navigation are similar to the recent
work of Mishkin et al. [ 19]. However, the performance
of the Habitat stack relative to MINOS [ 22] used in [ 19]
– thousands vs. one hundred frames per second – allows
us to evaluate agents that have been trained with signiﬁ-
cantly larger amounts of experience (75 million steps vs. ﬁve
million steps). The trends we observe demonstrate that
learned agents can begin to match and outperform classical
approaches when provided with large amounts of training
experience. Other recent work by Koijima and Deng [ 16] has
also compared hand-engineered navigation agents against
learned agents but their focus is on deﬁning additional met-
rics to characterize the performance of agents and to establish
Figure 2: Example rendered sensor observations for three sensors
(color camera, depth sensor, semantic instance mask) in two differ-
ent environment datasets. A Matterport3D [ 8] environment is in
the top row, and a Replica [ 25] environment in the bottom row.
measures of hardness for navigation episodes. To our knowl-
edge, our experiments are the ﬁrst to train navigation agents
provided with multi-month experience in realistic indoor
environments and contrast them against classical methods.
3. Habitat Platform
The development of Habitat is a long-term effort to en-
able the formation of a common task framework [ 12] for
research into embodied agents, thereby supporting system-
atic research progress in this area.
Design requirements. The issues discussed in the previous
section lead us to a set of requirements that we seek to fulﬁll.
–Highly performant rendering engine : resource-
efﬁcient rendering engine that can produce multiple chan-
nels of visual information ( e.g. RGB, depth, semantic
instance segmentation, surface normals, optical ﬂow) for
multiple concurrently operating agents.
–Scene dataset ingestion API : makes the platform agnos-
tic to 3D scene datasets and allows users to use their own
datasets.
–Agent API : allows users to specify parameterized em-
bodied agents with well-deﬁned geometry, physics, and
actuation characteristics.
–Sensor suite API : allows speciﬁcation of arbitrary num-
bers of parameterized sensors ( e.g. RGB, depth, contact,
GPS, compass sensors) attached to each agent.
–Scenario and task API : allows portable deﬁnition of
tasks and their evaluation protocols.
–Implementation : C++ backend with Python API and
interoperation with common learning frameworks, mini-
mizes entry threshold.
–Containerization : enables distributed training in clusters
and remote-server evaluation of user-provided code.
–Humans-as-agents : allows humans to function as agents
in simulation in order to collect human behavior and in-
vestigate human-agent or human-human interactions.
–Environment state manipulation : programmatic con-
9341