Learning General Policies with Policy Gradient Methods
Simon St ˚ahlberg1,Blai Bonet2,Hector Geffner3,1
1Link ¨oping University, Sweden
2Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Spain
3RWTH Aachen University, Germany
simon.stahlberg@liu.com, bonetblai@gmail.com, hector.geffner@ml.rwth-aachen.de
Abstract
While reinforcement learning methods have delivered re-
markable results in a number of settings, generalization, i.e.,
the ability to produce policies that generalize in a reliable
and systematic way, has remained a challenge. The prob-
lem of generalization has been addressed formally in classi-
cal planning where provable correct policies that generalize
over all instances of a given domain have been learned us-
ing combinatorial methods. The aim of this work is to bring
these two research threads together to illuminate the condi-
tions under which (deep) reinforcement learning approaches,
and in particular, policy optimization methods, can be used to
learn policies that generalize like combinatorial methods do.
We draw on lessons learned from previous combinatorial and
deep learning approaches, and extend them in a convenient
way. From the former, we model policies as state transition
classifiers, as (ground) actions are not general and change
from instance to instance. From the latter, we use graph neu-
ral networks (GNNs) adapted to deal with relational struc-
tures for representing value functions over planning states,
and in our case, policies. With these ingredients in place, we
find that actor-critic methods can be used to learn policies
that generalize almost as well as those obtained using combi-
natorial approaches while avoiding the scalability bottleneck
and the use of feature pools. Moreover, the limitations of the
DRL methods on the benchmarks considered have little to
do with deep learning or reinforcement learning algorithms,
and result from the well-understood expressive limitations of
GNNs, and the tradeoff between optimality and generaliza-
tion (general policies cannot be optimal in some domains).
Both of these limitations are addressed without changing the
basic DRL methods by adding derived predicates and an al-
ternative cost structure to optimize.
1 Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has delivered remarkable re-
sults in a number of settings like game playing and robotics
(Mnih et al. 2015; Levine et al. 2016; Silver et al. 2018).
However, generalization, the ability to produce policies that
generalize in a reliable and systematic way, remains a chal-
lenge (Kirk et al. 2023). A basic question, for example,
is whether RL methods can be used to learn policies that
generalize to any instance of a classical planning domain
like Blockworld; namely, instances that feature an arbi-
trary number of objects that must be mapped into an arbi-
trary goal configuration. The power of deep learning fordelivering such policies has been explored in a number of
works (Toyer et al. 2020; Garg, Bajpai, and Mausam 2020;
Rivlin, Hazan, and Karpas 2020); yet these approaches do
not result in nearly perfect general policies.
The problem of learning general policies has been ad-
dressed formally in the KR and planning setting (Srivas-
tava, Immerman, and Zilberstein 2008; Hu and De Giacomo
2011; Bonet and Geffner 2015; Belle and Levesque 2016;
Bonet et al. 2017; Illanes and McIlraith 2019) and some
logical approaches appealing to combinatorial optimization
methods have been used to learn provable correct policies
that generalize over a number of classical planning domains
(Franc `es, Bonet, and Geffner 2021; Drexler, Seipp, and
Geffner 2022). Roughly, the (unsupervised) learning prob-
lem is cast as the joint problem of selecting state features f
from a pool of features Fand classify state transitions (s, s′)
into “good” and “bad”, such that good transitions lead to the
goal with no cycles, and good and bad transitions can be
distinguished by their effects on the selected features. The
use of state transitions (s, s′)to select actions, rather than
selecting the actions directly, is because the set of (ground)
actions changes with the set of objects, while the set of pred-
icates, and hence, the features derived from them, remain
fixed (Mart ´ın and Geffner 2004).
The RL and planning approaches for learning general
policies have different strengths and weaknesses. The deep
RL (DRL) approach does not offer a meaningful formal lan-
guage to encode general policies, nor a meaningful meta-
language to study them, but its strengths are that it does not
require symbolic states (e.g., it can deal with states repre-
sented by pixels), and it does not have a scalability bottle-
neck (stochastic gradient descent is efficient and works sur-
prisingly well). On the other hand, the planning approach of-
fers meaningful languages for representating instances and
domains, and policies and states, while its shortcomings are
its reliance on human-provided domain encodings, and the
computational bottleneck of the combinatorial optimization
methods: training instances must be large enough so that the
resulting policies generalize, and small enough so that the
solvers can solve them optimally.
Works that combine planning languages for representing
states, and deep networks for encoding either value and
policy functions have brought the DRL and planning ap-
proaches closer. St ˚ahlberg, Bonet, and Geffner (2022a) use
Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning
Main Track
647