Algorithm 1 Standard Actor-Critic for generalized plan-
ning: successor states s′sampled with probability π(s′|s).
1:Input: Training MDPs {Mi}i, each with state priors pi
2:Input: Differentiable policy π(s|s′)with parameter θ
3:Input: Diff. value function V(s)with parameter ω
4:Parameters: Step sizes α, β > 0, discount factor γ
5:Initialize parameters θandω
6:Loop forever:
7: Sample MDP index i∈ {1, . . . , N }
8: Sample non-goal state SinMiwith probability pi
9: Sample successor state S′with probability π(S′|S)
10: Letδ= 1 + γV(S′)−V(S)
11: ω←ω+βδ∇V(S) Eq. (14)
12: θ←θ−αδ∇logπ(S′|S) Eq. (8)
13: IfS′is a goal state, ω←ω−βV(S′)∇V(S′)
•The stochastic policies πare not assumed to encode a
probability distribution over the actions in a given state
because the set of actions changes from instance to in-
stance. Policies are assumed instead to map states sinto a
probability distribution π(s′|s)over the set N(s)of pos-
sible successor states s′ofs, and only indirectly, into a
probability distribution over the actions applicable in s.
•The training set is given by a collection {Mi}iof (de-
terministic) MDPs. States sare then sampled at training
time from a sampled Miusing a state prior pi. The distri-
butions over states in Miand over the training MDPs Mi
are assumed to be uniform.
•Action costs are all equal to 1 and thus there are no ex-
plicit sampled costs in the algorithm.
•When a sampled successor state s′is a goal state, the
value function parameters are updated to ensure that the
value of the goal state is zero. This is achieved by min-
imizing the loss function 1/2V(s′)2, which drives the
value at the goal state s′towards zero.
•Finally, no trajectories are sampled; or equivalently, the
only sampled trajectories have length T= 1, correspond-
ing to a single state transition. The reasons for this are
discussed in the experimental section.
The second algorithm, AC-M in Fig. 2, is a small varia-
tion of the first where the seed states Sare sampled but not
the successor states S′. Instead, in the update expressions of
the policy and value function parameters, a sum over all pos-
sible successor states s′is used, which in the case of value
updates, are weighted by the probabilities π(s′|S)and re-
sult in full Bellman updates. Algorithm AC-M is an actor-
critic algorithm that makes use of the training models Mi
and which often converges faster than the model-free ver-
sion AC-1. Notice that for applying the learned policy π
from either AC-1 or AC-M, one must be able to determine
the possible successors s′of a state sin order to assess the
probabilities π(s′|s)that define the stochastic policy. A full
model-free approach for generalized planning would need to
learn this structure as well.Algorithm 2 All-Actions Actor-Critic: all successor states
considered for updating policy and value functions.
1:Input: Training MDPs {Mi}i, each with state priors pi
2:Input: Differentiable policy π(s|s′)with parameter θ
3:Input: Diff. value function V(s)with parameter ω
4:Parameters: Step sizes α, β > 0, discount factor γ
5:Initialize parameters θandω
6:Loop forever:
7: Sample MDP index i∈ {1, . . . , N }
8: Sample non-goal state SinMiwith probability pi
9: LetV′= 1 + γΣs′∈N(S)[π(s′|S)V(s′)]
10: Letb(S) =V′−1be the baseline
11: ω←ω+β(V′−V(S))∇V(S)
12: θ←θ−αΣs′∈N(S)[(V(s′)−b(S))∇π(s′|S)]
13: Ifs′∈N(S)is goal state, ω←ω−βV(s′)∇V(s′)
5 Neural Network Architecture
The value and policy functions, V(s)andπ(s′|s), are rep-
resented using graph neural networks (Scarselli et al. 2008;
Hamilton 2020) adapted for dealing with relational struc-
tures. The GNNs produce object embeddings ϕ(o)that then
feed suitable readout functions. We adopt the GNN archi-
tecture of St ˚ahlberg, Bonet, and Geffner (2022a; 2022b) for
representing value functions over planning states. This ar-
chitecture is a variation of a similar one used for solving
Max-CSP problems (Toenshoff et al. 2021).
5.1 GNNs on Graphs
GNNs represent trainable, parametric, and generalizable
functions over graphs specified by means of aggregate and
combination functions aggiandcomb i, and a readout func-
tionF. The GNN maintains an embedding fi(v)∈Rkfor
each vertex vof the input graph G. Here, iranges from 0
toL, which is the number of iterations or layers. The vertex
embeddings f0(v)are fixed and the embeddings fi+1(v)for
allvare computed from the fiembeddings as:
fi+1(v) :=comb i(fi(v),aggi({ {fi(w)|w∈NG(v)} })) (15)
where NG(v)is the set of neighbors for vertex vinG, and
{ {. . .} }denotes a multiset. This iteration is usually seen as an
exchange of messages among neighbor nodes in the graph.
Aggregation functions aggilike max, sum, or smooth-max,
map arbitrary collections of real vectors of dimension kinto
a single Rkvector. The combination functions comb imap
pairs of Rkvectors into a single Rkvector. The embeddings
fL(v)in the last layer are aggregated and mapped into an
output by means of a readout function. All the functions are
parametrized with weights that are learnable. By design, the
function computed by a GNN is invariant with respect to
graph isomorphisms, and once a GNN is trained, its output
is well defined for graphs Gof any size.
5.2 GNNs for Relational Structures
States sin planning do not represent graphs, but more gen-
eral relational structures. These structures are defined by
a set of objects, a set of domain predicates, and the atoms
Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning
Main Track
651