cause optimal planning in both is NP-hard (Helmert 2003).
Yet RL algorithms aim to learn optimal policies which thus
cannot generalize properly.
In Logistics, the GNN cannot determine whether a ve-
hicle carrying a package is located in the city where the
package needs to be delivered as this requires C3expressive-
ness. For learning a policy with the same GNN architecture,
the states are extended to include (derived) atoms indicat-
ing whether the package is in the correct city, regardless of
whether it is on a plane, a truck, or at an incorrect location
within the same city. This version of Logistics achieved 91%
coverage (with a plan quality of 4.53 = 1612 /356 (18) ),
which we trained using an all-action Actor-Critic and eval-
uated as a deterministic policy. For addressing, the optimal-
ity/generalization tradeoff, we modified the cost structure of
the training MDPs so that the learned policies optimize the
probability of reaching the goal without entering a cycle in-
stead of the expected cost.3Provided with the extra pred-
icate and the new cost structure, a coverage of 100% was
achieved in Logistics with a plan quality of 1.11 = 410/368
(19) using a deterministic policy (we expect to obtain simi-
lar results in Grid with these two extensions, but we have not
achieved them yet because the instance generator produces
too many unsolvable or trivial instances).
The final domain without full coverage is Spanner (Ta-
ble 1), where we observed that the learned policies fail when
given instances with more spanners or nuts than those in the
training instances. There is no logical reason for this fail-
ure since dead-end state detection is possible with C2fea-
tures (St ˚ahlberg, Franc `es, and Seipp 2021). To tackle this
issue, we tested a tabular version of the all-actions Actor-
Critic algorithm where the learned transition probabilities
π(s′|s)are stored and then used to solve the linear Bell-
man equation for Vπ. This approach gives accurate values,
which for dead-end states are always1
1−γwhere γis the dis-
count factor. The learned policy achieved then 100% cover-
age in both modes (stochastic and deterministic) with a plan
quality of 1.09 = 315 /290 (10) , suggesting that the prob-
lem in the two Actor-Critic algorithms is that they do not
sample dead-end states enough. The tabular evaluation of
policies, however, can only deal with small instances, and
for this reason it only worked in one other domain, Visitall.
7 Related Work
General Policies Using Deep (Reinforcement) Learning
DL and DRL methods (Sutton and Barto 2018; Bertsekas
1995; Franc ¸ois-Lavet et al. 2018) have been used to learn
general policies (Kirk et al. 2023). In some cases, the plan-
ning representation of the domains is used (Toyer et al.
2020; Garg, Bajpai, and Mausam 2020; Rivlin, Hazan, and
Karpas 2020); in most cases, it is not (Groshev et al. 2018;
Chevalier-Boisvert et al. 2019; Campero et al. 2021; Cobbe
et al. 2020; K ¨uttler et al. 2020). Also in some cases, the
3We omit the details of the resulting algorithm for lack of space,
but it involves a third parametric function Dthat approximates this
probability. The policy πoptimizes Dπand uses Vto avoid cycles
(the only possible successors of sfor evaluating Dπare those that
decrease Vby more than ϵ. In the experiments, ϵ= 0.75).learning is supervised; in others, it is based on RL. Closest
to our work is the use of GNNs for learning nearly-perfect
general policies in planning domains using supervised and
approximate value iteration methods (St ˚ahlberg, Bonet, and
Geffner 2022a; St ˚ahlberg, Bonet, and Geffner 2022b)
General Policies Using Logical Methods Learning gen-
eral policies has been studied in the planning setting (Srivas-
tava, Immerman, and Zilberstein 2008; Hu and De Giacomo
2011; Belle and Levesque 2016; Illanes and McIlraith 2019;
Segovia, Jim ´enez, and Jonsson 2016) where logical and
combinatorial methods have been used (Khardon 1999;
Mart´ın and Geffner 2004). The representation of such poli-
cies as classifiers for state transition is from Franc `es, Bonet,
and Geffner (2021).
General Policies and Causal Models Causal models
(Pearl 2009) have been used to address the problem of
out-of-distribution generalization in DL (Goyal and Bengio
2020; Sch ¨olkopf et al. 2021), as causal relations are modular
and invariant (remain true after interventions). Recent work
on policy learning has incorporated inductive biases moti-
vated by causal considerations (Zhang et al. 2020; Sonar,
Pacelli, and Majumdar 2021; Wang et al. 2022). Planning
representations are causal too, and action schemas are mod-
ular and invariant in a domain. It is no accident that we learn
policies that generalize well when using the resulting state
languages. Methods for learning the action schemas and the
predicates involved have also been developed (Asai 2019;
Bonet and Geffner 2020; Rodriguez et al. 2021).
8 Conclusions
Deep learning (DL) and deep reinforcement learning (DRL)
have caused a revolution in AI and a significant impact out-
side of AI. Yet, the methods developed in DL and DRL while
incredibly powerful, are not reliable or transparent, and the
research methodology is often too much focused on experi-
mental performance relative to baselines and not on under-
standing. The problem of generalization has been central in
DRL for many years but the analysis is hindered by the lack
of a language to represent states, and a language for repre-
senting classes of problems over which the policies should
generalize. The setting of classical planning gives us both,
and has helped us to understand the power of DRL methods,
and to identify and address limitations, that have little to do
with DL or DRL. Indeed, we have shown that DRL methods
learn nearly-perfect general policies out of the box in six
of the ten domains considered, and that three domains fail
for structural reasons: expressive limitations of GNNs and
the optimality/generalization tradeoff. We have addressed
these limitations as well by extending the states with derived
predicates and by adapting the DRL algorithms to optimize
a different cost measure. Our approach to learning general
plans has its own limitation such as the assumption that a
lifted model of the domains is known, that we and others
have addressed elsewhere. An overall lesson is that there is
no need to choose between crisp AI symbolic models and
data-derived deep (reinforcement) learners. The latter can
be understood as a new powerful class of solvers that are
worth having in the toolbox.
Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning
Main Track
655