•Miconic. Planning for lift that picks and delivers passengers at
different floors. The number of floors and passengers for train-
ing and validation vary between 2-8 and 1-5, resp. The instances
with the largest state space are for validation. For the test set, we
use IPC instances that feature up to 59floors and 29people
•Reward. Move in a grid with obstacles to pick up all rewards.
The instances are from Franc `es, Bonet, and Geffner (2021). The
training, validation, and test sets consist of square grids with
widths in 3-10, 10, and 15-25, resp. The maximum number of
rewards for training and validation is 8, and 23for testing.
•Spanner. The task is to tighten nuts at one end of a corridor with
spanners that need to be collected on the way. The number of
locations varies between 1-20 for training, validation, and test-
ing, with at most 4nuts for training and validation, and 12nuts
for testing. The training and validation sets have no more than 6
spanners, while the test set have up to 24.
•Visitall. The task is to visit all or some cells in a grid with no
obstacles. The grid sizes for training are limited to 3×3,4×2,
and smaller. The validation set uses 5×2grids, while the test
set includes grids of sizes ranging from 4×4to10×10.
Setup The GNN architecture is instantiated with hyper-
parameters k= 64 andL= 30, and the discount factor
γ= 0.999is used in the AC algorithms. The hyperparam-
eterskandLaffect training speed, memory usage, and gen-
eralization (e.g., the GNN cannot compute shortest paths of
length longer than L). The architecture is implemented in
PyTorch (Paszke and et. al. 2019) using Adam with learn-
ing rate of 0.0002 (Kingma and Ba 2015).2The networks are
trained using NVIDIA A100 GPUs for up to 6 hours. Two
models for each domain are trained, and the final model is
the one with the best policy evaluation average on the vali-
dation set. The quality of the plans is determined by com-
paring their length to the length of optimal plans computed
with Fast Downward (FD) (Helmert 2006) using the seq-opt-
merge-and-shrink portfolio with a time limit of 10minutes
and64GB of memory on a Ryzen 9 5900X CPU.
Results We tested the learned policies in two modes. The
first as a stochastic policy that selects actions randomly fol-
lowing the distribution provided by the policy. The second
as adeterministic policy that selects the most probable suc-
cessor state. Stochastic policies have the advantage of being
able to escape cycles eventually. However, this is not pos-
sible with deterministic policies, so we used a closed set to
avoid sampling an already visited successor. Executions are
terminated when the goal is not reached within 10,000 steps.
Table 1 presents the experimental results, divided in two
subtables: learning using the standard, sampled Actor-Critic
algorithm (top), and learning using the all-actions Actor-
Critic (bottom). The left side of each subtable shows the
results obtained with the stochastic policy, while the right
hand side shows the results obtained with the deterministic
policy. We discuss test coverage and analyze the limitations
encountered, which as we will see, have more to do with rep-
resentation and complexity issues than with reinforcement or
deep learning. Indeed, we will use the analysis to address
the limitations in an informed manner. Later, we discuss
2Code and data: https://zenodo.org/record/79938580 2 4 6 8 10 12 1402004006008001,000
Time (minutes)Expected Polic
y Cost1
4
8
12
14
Figure 1: Expected policy cost over the validation set during train-
ing sessions for Gripper with standard Actor-Critic for different
trajectory lengths T= 1,4,8,12,14. Table of results used T= 1
which as seen here, does best. The training set included instances
with up to 7 balls, while the validation instance had 8 balls.
plan quality and the impact of sampled trajectory length on
learning, where the result in the table are all for length 1.
Coverage We got a very high coverage out of the box in
6 out of the 10 domains considered, where the learned pol-
icy either solves all instances or almost all instances. It is
surprising, however, that one of the domains where we got
perfect coverage for is Blocks. This is unexpected because
finding an optimal solution for Blocks instances is an NP-
hard problem, thus there does not exists a compact policy.
In the IPC problems, the goal is to build a single tower. We
tested whether it is possible to learn a policy that does not
rely on this goal structure and can construct any number of
towers instead. We achieved perfect coverage for this ver-
sion, and the results are not due to ”luck” because each suc-
cessor state was selected with 100% probability (rounded
to the nearest integer). As these policies were learned us-
ing actor-critic, we can also define a greedy policy based
on the learned value function (critic), which selects the suc-
cessor state with the lowest value. These policies solved all
but three Blocks problems with eight blocks, for the model
learned using all-actions Actor-Critic, and in these cases, the
critic and the actor disagreed on the best successor state.
Quality The last two columns in Table 1 show the average
(policy evaluation) value over the entire validation set for the
optimal policy and the learned policy. This value represents
the expected number of steps to a goal state from a uniformly
sampled initial state. When the difference between Vπand
V∗is small, we can expect the policy to generalize well and
produce plans that are close to optimal.
Sampling and Length of Sampled Trajectories Algo-
rithms AC-1 and AC-M implicitly assume sampled trajec-
tories of length 1. After sampling a state sfrom a training
MDP with a uniform prior, a successor state s′is sampled
using probability π(s′|s), and the process continues with an-
other state ssampled uniformly. In RL practice, longer tra-
jectories are commonly sampled, involving updating value
and policy functions at each state before sampling another
initial state. In our setting, where we seek general poli-
Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning
Main Track
653