and policy improvement. Starting with an arbitrary policy
π=π0, policy evaluation computes the values Vπ(s)that
encode the expected cost to the goal from swhen following
policy π. These costs are computed by solving the linear
Bellman equation for policy π:
V(s) =
c(a, s) +γX
s′Pa(s′|s)V(s′)
(4)
fora=π(s)andV(s) = 0 for goal states s. If the policy πis
not greedy with respect to the value function V=Vπ, any
policy π′that is greedy with respect to Vπis strictly better
thanπ; i.e., Vπ′(s)≤Vπ(s)for all swith the inequality
being strict for some states. Thus, in the policy improvement
step, PI sets the policy πtoπ′and the process is repeated.
This process finishes after a finite number of iterations when
a policy πis obtained that is greedy relative to the value
function V=Vπ, as such a a policy cannot be improved
and is optimal. The number of iterations is finite because
the number of deterministic policies πthat map states into
actions is finite too.
2.3 General Policies
Generalized planning studies the representation and com-
putation of policies that solve many classical planning in-
stances from the same domain at once (Srivastava, Im-
merman, and Zilberstein 2008; Hu and De Giacomo 2011;
Belle and Levesque 2016; Illanes and McIlraith 2019). A
critical issue is how to represent general policies. Clearly,
they cannot be represented by policies that map states into
(ground) actions because the number and name of the ac-
tions change with the set of objects. One simple represen-
tation of general policies is in terms of general value func-
tions V(Franc `es et al. 2019; St ˚ahlberg, Bonet, and Geffner
2022a). These functions map states sover the instances in
a class Qinto non-negative scalar values V(s)that are zero
only at goal states, and they can be used to define greedy
policies πVthat select the actions that lead to successor
states s′with minimum V(s′)value. If the value of the
child s′is always lower than the value of its parent state
s, the value function Vrepresents a general policy πVthat
is guaranteed to solve any problem in the class Q.
Another simple representation of general policies is as
classifiers of state transitions into two categories, good and
bad (Franc `es, Bonet, and Geffner 2021). If for each non-
goal state s, there is a good state transition (s, s′), and chains
of good transitions do not lead to dead-end states or cycles,
the policy is guaranteed to solve any problem in the class.
A general policy is optimal if it results in shortest trajecto-
ries to the goal, yet optimality for general policies is not nec-
essary and it is often impossible. For example, there are gen-
eral policies for solving arbitraty instances of Blocksworld,
but there are no optimal general policies,1as optimal plan-
ning in Blocksworld, like in many other “easy” classical
planning domains, is intractable.
In this work, we draw on these ideas to represent policies
as state transition classifiers using GNNs that accept state
1Policies that decide what action to apply in polynomial time.pairs sands′and determine whether state transitions (s, s′)
are good or not. The policies are trained without supervision
using policy optimization algorithms, to be discussed next.
3 From Exact DP to Approximate RL
While there are basically two exact model-based DP algo-
rithms, there are many model-free RL/DRL methods. Rather
than jumping directly to the algorithms that we will use, it
will be convenient to understand the latter as suitable ap-
proximations of the former.
3.1 Approximate Prediction: Learning V
The main reason for doing approximation is that the number
of states smay be too large or infinite, as in generalized
planning. We focus on approximating value functions Vπ
since we aim at policy optimization algorithms, yet similar
ideas can be applied for approximating the optimal value
function V∗.
For policy optimization algorithms, it is convenient
to consider stochastic policies πthat assign probabilities
π(a|s)for selecting the action ain state s, rather than de-
terministic policies, as deep neural networks output real val-
ues. The Bellman equation for evaluating a stochastic policy
πis:
V(s) =X
aπ(a|s)
c(a, s) +X
s′Pa(s′|s)V(s′)
.(5)
The solution to this linear system of equations, provided that
V(s) = 0 for goal states, is V=Vπ, and a common method
to solve it is by a form of value iteration that uses the Bell-
man equation for policy πinstead of the optimality equation
(1), with updates of the form:
V(s) :=X
aπ(a|s)
c(a, s) +γX
s′Pa(s′|s)V(s′)
.(6)
Successive updates of this form ensure that Veventually
converges to Vπ. Three common approximations of this pol-
icy evaluation and the resulting value function Vπare:
•Sampling of (seed) states. As in asynchronous VI, states
sare selected for update at each iteration by some form of
stochastic sampling which does not necessarily guarantee
that all states are updated infinitely often.
•Sampling of actions, costs, and successors. Either be-
cause state transition probabilities and action costs are not
known, or because there are too many actions or too many
successor states, samples of the actions a, costs c(a, s),
and successor states s′are used instead of considering all
actions and successors. The resulting sampled updated
are:
V(S) := V(S) +α
C+γV(S′)−V(S)
, (7)
where αis the step size or learning rate, is character-
istic of stochastic approximation methods (Robbins and
Monro 1951; Harold, Kushner, and George 1997). If
the action Ais sampled with probability π(A|S)and
S′with probability PA(S′|S), written A∼π(·|S)and
Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning
Main Track
649