S′∼PA(·|S), the expression C+γV(S′)is an unbiased
estimator of the right-hand side of (6), and hence the sam-
pled backups guarantee that Vconverges to Vπprovided
standard conditions on the step sizes and that all states s
are updated infinitely often.
•Function approximation. Finally, the value function
V(s)can be represented by a deep neural network with
adjustable parameters ω. The updates no longer change
the value of entries in a table (tabular updates) but the
value of the parameters ωfor minimizing the squared loss
of the sampled Bellman residual
1
2
C+γV(S′)−V(S)2
through a step of gradient descent:
ω:=ω+α
C+γV(S′)−V(S)
∇V(S),(8)
where αis the step size, A∼π(·|S)andS′∼PA(·|S),
and∇V(S)is the gradient of the function Vrelative to
ωevaluated at the state S. This update expression fol-
lows from the standard formula for minimizing a function
(locally) using its gradient except that it assumes that the
“target” value V(S′)does not depend on ω, a so-called
“semi-gradient” method (Sutton and Barto 2018).
These three approximations are largely independent of
each other and do not have to be used together. For ex-
ample, Agostinelli et al. (2019) learn an approximation of
the optimal value function V∗for guiding the search in Ru-
bik’s Cube by using value iteration while representing the
value function by a deep net. A similar approach is used
by St ˚ahlberg, Bonet, and Geffner (2022b) for learning gen-
eral value functions from small instances. In the approach
below, however, it is not the value functions that “transfer”
(generalize) to new instances but the learned policy πitself.
3.2 Approximate Control: Learning π
Policy gradient methods make use of approximations of the
value functions Vπfor improving a differentiable policy π
via gradient descent (Williams and Peng 1991; Sutton and
Barto 2018). If the expected cost J(π)of a policy πover an
MDP with prior hover the initial states and parameters θis
J(π) =P
sh(s)Vπ(s), (9)
the gradient of J(π)relative to the vector of parameters θ
satisfies (Sutton and Barto 2018, Policy Gradient Theorem):
∇J(π)∝X
sµ(s)X
aQπ(s, a)∇π(a|s) (10)
where
Qπ(s, a) = c(s, a) +X
s′Pa(s′|s)Vπ(s′) (11)
andµ(s)stands for the fraction of times that executions of
the policy πvisit the state swhen the prior is h(s). The sum
in (10) corresponds to the expectation
∇J(π)∝ES∼µ,A∼π(·|S)
Qπ(S, A)∇lnπ(A|S)
(12)where SandAare random variables that stand for a state
and action sampled according to µandπ(·|S)respectively.
Gradient descent adjusts the parameters θof the policy as:
θ:=θ−α∇J(π). (13)
As before, common approximations of the gradient (12) are:
•Sampling states and actions. Expectation in (12) can be
replaced by the unbiased estimator Qπ(S, A)∇lnπ(A|S)
where state Sand action Aare sampled by executing π.
•Approximating Q- and V-values. TheQπ(S, A)value
can be replaced by the unbiased estimator C+Vπ(S′)
withS′∼PA(·|S)andC∼c(A, S), and Vπ(S′)can be
approximated as discussed above.
•Use of baselines. A term b(S)is decremented from the
Qπ(S, A)value in (12), where b(S)is a function that de-
pends on the state Sbut not on the action Aor the suc-
cessor state S′. It can be shown that this offset does not
affect the value of the expectation but reduces its variance
(Konda and Tsitsiklis 1999).
By combining these approximations, the expression for
the policy parameter update becomes, for example, one of
the standard forms of the actor-critic (AC) RL algorithm
(Konda and Tsitsiklis 1999; Sutton and Barto 2018) where
the policy parameters are updated as:
θ:=θ−α
C+V(S′)−V(S)
∇lnπ(A|S) (14)
where SandAare sampled by executing the policy π,Cis
the sampled cost, Vis an approximation of Vπ(S), and the
successor state S′is sampled with probability S′∼PA(·|S).
In this case, the baseline is b(S) =V(S), and the same sam-
ples for S,AandS′are used for updating Vusing (8).
Other AC variants can be obtained from other approxima-
tions of the “actor’s” gradient ∇J(π)and the “critic” Vπ.
Other RL algorithms are the so-called value-based methods,
like SARSA and Q-learning, that do not consider policies
explicitly, and Monte-Carlo RL methods like REINFORCE,
that do not consider explicit value functions.
4 RL for Generalized Planning
In our setting of generalized planning, states are planning
states represented as sets of ground atoms p(t)where pis
a domain predicate and tis a tuple of objects of the same
arity as p. In addition, for generalizing to arbitrary conjunc-
tive, ground goals, the goals of a planning instance, which
are given by ground atoms p(t), are represented as part of
the state sby using new predicate symbols pG(Mart ´ın and
Geffner 2004; Bonet, Franc `es, and Geffner 2019). Atoms
likeclear (c)andclear G(c)in a state of Blocksworld, for
example, say that the block cis clear in the state and that the
block cmust be clear in the goal, respectively. A goal state
in this representation is a state swhere for each goal atom
pG(t)ins,p(t)is ins.
The two actor-critic algorithms for learning general poli-
cies over classical planning domains using this representa-
tion of states are shown in Figs. 1 and 2.
The first algorithm, AC-1, closely follows the gradient up-
date rule in (14) and the value update rule in (8). It is a stan-
dard AC algorithm where states S, actions A, and successor
states S′are sampled and adapted to the generalized setting.
Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning
Main Track
650