a graph neural network (GNN) for mapping planning states
sinto a value function V(s)that is trained, in a supervised
way, to approximate the optimal value function V∗(s)that
measures the minimum number of steps from sto the goal.
The learned value function Vencodes the greedy policy
πVthat selects successor states s′with lowest V(s′)value.
More recently, the same neural architecture has been used
to learn a value function Vwithout supervision by minimiz-
ing the Bellman errors |V(s)−mins′[1 +V(s′)]|, where s′
ranges over the possible successors of state sand the cost
of actions is assumed to be 1(St˚ahlberg, Bonet, and Geffner
2022b). The resulting method is a form of asynchronous
value iteration where the value function Vis encoded by a
deep net and the error is minimized at selected states sby
stochastic gradient descent.
These works, however, do not answer the question of
whether RL methods can be used to learn policies that gen-
eralize in a systematic manner. We are particularly in-
terested in policy gradient approaches (Williams and Peng
1991; Sutton and Barto 2018) because of their broader
scope. Unlike value-based methods, they can be used
1) when the state and action spaces are continuous, 2) when
the system state is not fully observable, and also 3) when the
system state is not clearly defined, as in ChatGPT (Ouyang
et al. 2022). Additionally, expressing a policy with features
is often “easier” than expressing a value function with the
same features (Sutton and Barto 2018; Franc `es et al. 2019;
Franc `es, Bonet, and Geffner 2021).
Can policy gradient methods and in particular actor-critic
algorithms be used to learn nearly perfect policies for clas-
sical planning benchmark domains? And if so, how are they
to be used and what are their limitations? The literature does
not provide a crisp answer to these questions, as the use of
RL methods has focused on performance relative to base-
lines, and in classical planning, on learning heuristics (Shen,
Trevizan, and Thi ´ebaux 2020; Karia and Srivastava 2021;
Ferber et al. 2022). Approaches that have aimed at nearly
perfect general policies have not relied on RL methods, and
much less on standard RL methods off the shelf. This is
what we aim to do in this work.
The paper is organized as follows. We first provide back-
ground on classical planning, dynamic programming (DP),
and general policies. Then, we review RL algorithms as ap-
proximations of exact DP methods, and adapt them to learn
general policies. We look then at the representation of value
and policy functions in terms of deep networks, present and
analyze the experimental results, discuss related work, and
draw the conclusions.
2 Background
We review classical planning, the two basic dynamic pro-
gramming methods, and general policies.
2.1 Classical Planning
A classical planning problem is a pair P=⟨D, I⟩where
Dis a first-order domain andIcontains information about
the instance (Geffner and Bonet 2013; Ghallab, Nau, and
Traverso 2016; Haslum et al. 2019). The domain Dhas a setof predicate symbols pand a set of action schemas with pre-
conditions and effects given by atoms p(x1, . . . , x k)where p
is a predicate symbol of arity k, and each xiis an argument
of the schema. An instance is a tuple I=⟨O,Init,Goal⟩
where Ois a set of object names ci, and InitandGoal are
sets of ground atoms p(c1, . . . , c k).
A classical problem P=⟨D, I⟩encodes a state model
S(P) =⟨S, s 0, SG,Act, A, f ⟩in compact form where the
states s∈Sare sets of ground atoms from P,s0is the initial
stateI,SGis the set of goal states ssuch that SG⊆s,Act
is the set of ground actions in P,A(s)is the set of ground
actions whose preconditions are (true) in s, and fis the in-
duced transition function where f(a, s), fora∈A(s), rep-
resents the state s′that follows action ain the state s. An
action sequence a0, . . . , a nis applicable in Pifai∈A(si)
andsi+1=f(ai, si), for i= 1, . . . , n , and it is a plan if
sn+1∈SG. The costof a plan is assumed to be given by its
length and a plan is optimal if there is no shorter plan.
2.2 Dynamic Programming
In generalized planning one is interested in plans that reach
the goal from any state sof a large collection of domain in-
stances. Such plans can be represented indirectly in compact
form by means of value V(s)or policy functions π(s)that
map states into real numbers and actions respectively. Dy-
namic programming offers two basic methods for computing
such functions, value and policy iteration, in the more gen-
eral setting of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) where
the deterministic state transition function f(a, s)and uni-
form action costs are replaced by transition probabilities
Pa(s′|s)and costs c(a, s),a∈A(s).
Value Iteration (VI) approximates the optimal value func-
tionV∗(s), that provides the minimum (discounted) cost to
reach the goal from s, by computing an approximate solu-
tion of the Bellman optimality equation
V(s) = min
a∈A(s)
c(a, s) +γX
s′Pa(s′|s)V(s′)
(1)
where V(s) = 0 for goal states and γ∈(0,1)is the discount
factor. This is done by initializing V(s)to zero (although
the initialization for non-goal states can be arbitrary) and
updating the value vector Vover non-goal states sas:
V(s) := min
a∈A(s)
c(a, s) +γX
s′Pa(s′|s)V(s′)
.(2)
In VI, these updates are done in parallel by using two V-
vectors, while in asynchronous VI, a single V-vector is used,
and there is no requirement that all states are updated at each
iteration. In both cases, asymptotic convergence to V∗is
guaranteed provided that all states are updated infinitely of-
ten (Bertsekas 1995). If Vis optimal, i.e., V=V∗, the
policy πVthat is greedy in V, is also optimal, where:
πV(s) = argmin
a∈A(s)
c(a, s) +γX
s′Pa(s′|s)V(s′)
.(3)
Policy Iteration (PI) iterates on policies πrather than on
value vectors V, and consists of two steps: policy evaluation
Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning
Main Track
648