Online Meta-Learning
Algorithm 1 Online Meta-Learning with FTML
1:Input: Performance threshold of proﬁciency, “
2:randomly initialize w1
3:initialize the task buffer as empty, BΩ[]
4:fort=1,... do
5: initialize Dt=ÿ
6: Add BΩB +[Tt]
7: while |DTt|<N do
8: Append batch of nnew datapoints {(x,y)}toDt
9: wtΩMeta-Update (wt,B,t)
10: ˜wtΩUpdate-Procedure (wt,Dt)
11: ifL(Dtest
t,˜wt)<“then
12: Record efﬁciency for task Ttas|Dt|datapoints
13: end if
14: end while
15: Record ﬁnal performance of ˜wton test set Dtest
tfor task t.
16: wt+1Ωwt
17:end forAlgorithm 2 FTML Subroutines
1:Input: Hyperparameters parameters –, ÷
2:function Meta-Update (w,B,t)
3: fornm=1,...,N metasteps do
4: Sample task Tk:k≥‹t(·)// (or a minibatch of tasks)
5: Sample minibatches Dtr
k,Dval
kuniformly from Dk
6: Compute gradient gtusing Dtr
k,Dval
k, and Eq. 5
7: Update parameters wΩw≠÷gt// (or use Adam)
8: end for
9: Return w
10:end function
11:function Update-Procedure (w,D)
12: Initialize ˜wΩw
13: forng=1,...,N gradsteps do
14: ˜wΩ˜w≠–ÒL(D,˜w)
15: end for
16: Return ˜w
17:end function
apply the gradient in Eq. 5, which uses data from all tasks
seen so far. Once all of the data (ﬁnite-size) has arrived for
Tt, we move on to task Tt+1. This procedure is detailed in
Alg. 1, including the evaluation, which we discuss next.
To evaluate performance of the model at any point within
a particular round t, we ﬁrst update the model as using all
of the data ( Dt) seen so far within round t. This is outlined
in the Update-Procedure subroutine of Algorithm 2.
Note that this is different from the update Utused within the
meta-optimization, which uses a ﬁxed-size minibatch since
many-shot meta-learning is computationally expensive and
memory intensive. In practice, we meta-train with update
minibatches of size at-most 25, whereas evaluation may use
hundreds of datapoints for some tasks. After the model is
updated, we measure the performance using held-out data
Dtest
tfrom task Tt. This data is not revealed to the online
meta-learner at any time. Further, we also evaluate task
learning efﬁciency, which corresponds to the size of Dt
required to achieve a speciﬁed performance threshold “,
e.g.“= 90% classiﬁcation accuracy or “corresponds to
a certain loss value. If less data is sufﬁcient to reach the
threshold, then priors learned from previous tasks are being
useful and we have achieved positive transfer.
6. Experimental Evaluation
Our experimental evaluation studies the practical FTML
algorithm (Section 5) in the context of vision-based online
learning problems. These problems include synthetic modiﬁ-
cations of the MNIST dataset, pose detection with synthetic
images based on PASCAL3D+ models ( Xiang et al. ,2014 ),
and online classiﬁcation with the CIFAR-100 dataset. The
aim of our experimental evaluation is to study the following
questions: (1) can online meta-learning (speciﬁcally FTML)
be successfully applied to multiple non-stationary learning
problems? and (2) does online meta-learning (FTML) pro-vide empirical beneﬁts over prior methods? To this end, we
compare to the following: (a) Train on everything ( TOE )
jointly trains a single predictve model on all available data
so far (including Dtat round t). (b) Train from scratch ini-
tializes wtrandomly and trains using Dt. (c) Joint training
with ﬁne-tuning, which at round t, trains jointly until round
t≠1, and then ﬁnetunes it speciﬁcally to round tusing
only Dt. This corresponds to the standard FTL approach,
followed by task-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning.
We note that TOE is a very strong point of comparison, capa-
ble of reusing representations across tasks, as has been pro-
posed in a number of prior continual learning works ( Rusu
et al. ,2016 ;Aljundi et al. ,2017 ;Wang et al. ,2017 ). How-
ever, unlike FTML, TOE does not explicitly learn the struc-
ture across tasks. Thus, it may not be able to fully utilize the
information present in the data, and hence may not be able
to learn new tasks with only a few examples. Further, the
model might incur negative transfer if the new task differs
substantially from previous ones, as has been observed in
prior work ( Parisotto et al. ,2016 ). Training on each task
from scratch avoids negative transfer, but also precludes any
reuse between tasks. When the amount of data for a given
task is large, we may expect training from scratch to perform
well since it can avoid negative transfer and can learn specif-
ically for the particular task. Finally, FTL with ﬁne-tuning
represents a natural online learning comparison, which in
principle should combine the best parts of learning from
scratch and TOE, since this approach adapts speciﬁcally to
each task andbeneﬁts from prior data. However, in contrast
to FTML, this method does not explicitly meta-learn and
hence may not fully utilize any structure in the tasks.
6.1. Rainbow MNIST
In this experiment, we create a sequence of tasks based
on the MNIST dataset. We transform the digits in a num-