Online Meta-Learning
andL2regression over a bounded domain. Assumption 1.3
is a statement about the higher order smoothness of func-
tions which is common in non-convex analysis ( Nesterov
& Polyak ,2006 ;Jin et al. ,2017 ). In our setting, it allows
us to characterize the landscape of the MAML function,
which has a gradient step embedded within it. Importantly,
these assumptions do not trivialize the meta-learning setting.
We can observe a clear difference in performance between
meta-learning and joint training even when fiare quadratic
functions, which correspond to the simplest strongly convex
setting. See Appendix Afor an example illustration.
4.3. Analysis
We analyze the FTML algorithm when the update procedure
is a single step of gradient descent, as in the formulation
of MAML. Concretely, the update procedure we consider
isUt(w)=w≠–Òˆft(w).For this update rule, we ﬁrst
state our main theorem below.
Theorem 1. Suppose fand ˆf:RdæRsatisfy assump-
tions 1 and 2. Let ˜fbe the function evaluated after a one
step gradient update procedure, i.e.
˜f(w):=f!
w≠–Òˆf(w)"
.
If the step size is selected as –Æmin{1
2—,µ
8ﬂG}, then ˜f
is convex. Furthermore, it is also ˜—=9—/8smooth and
˜µ=µ/8strongly convex.
For the proof, see Appendix B. The following corollary is
now immediate.
Corollary 1. (inherited convexity for the MAML objective)
If{fi,ˆfi}K
i=1satisfy assumptions 1 and 2, then the MAML
optimization problem,
minimize
w1
MMÿ
i=1fi!
w≠–Òˆfi(w)"
,
with –Æmin{1
2—,µ
8ﬂG}is convex. Furthermore, it is 9—/8-
smooth and µ/8-strongly convex.
Since the objective function is convex, we may expect ﬁrst-
order optimization methods to be effective, since gradients
can be efﬁciently computed with standard automatic differ-
entiation libraries (as discussed in Finn et al. (2017 )). In
fact, this work provides the ﬁrst set of results (under any as-
sumptions) under which MAML-like objective function can
be provably and efﬁciently optimized. Another immediate
corollary of our main theorem is that FTML now enjoys the
same regret guarantees (up to constant factors) as FTL does
in the comparable setting (with strongly convex losses).
Corollary 2. (inherited regret bound for FTML) Suppose
that for all t,ftand ˆftsatisfy assumptions 1 and 2. Suppose
that the update procedure in FTML (Eq. 4) is chosen as
Ut(w)=w≠–Òˆft(w)with –Æmin{1
2—,µ
8ﬂG}. Then,
FTML enjoys the following regret guarantee
Tÿ
t=1ft!
Ut(wt)"
≠min
wTÿ
t=1ft!
Ut(w)"
=O332G2
µlogT4See Appendix Cfor a proof. More generally, our main
theorem implies that there exists a large family of online
meta-learning algorithms that enjoy sub-linear regret, based
on the inherited smoothness and strong convexity of ˜f(·).
SeeHazan (2016 );Shalev-Shwartz (2012 );Shalev-Shwartz
& Kakade (2008 ) for algorithmic templates to derive sub-
linear regret based algorithms.
5. Practical Online Meta-Learning Algorithm
In the previous section, we derived a theoretically principled
algorithm for convex losses. Many practical problems have
non-convex loss landscales. However, methods developed
for convex losses, such as AdaGrad ( Duchi et al. ,2011 ), of-
ten perform well in non-convex settings. Taking inspiration
from these successes, we describe a practical instantiation
of FTML, and evaluate its performance in Section 6.
The main considerations when adapting the FTML algo-
rithm to few-shot supervised learning with high capacity
neural network models are: (a) the optimization problem
in Eq. ( 4) has no closed form solution, and (b) we do not
have access to the population risk ftbut only a subset of
the data. To overcome both these limitations, we can use
iterative stochastic optimization algorithms. Speciﬁcally,
by adapting the MAML algorithm ( Finn et al. ,2017 ), we
can use stochastic gradient descent with a minibatch Dtr
k
as the update rule, and stochastic gradient descent with an
independently-sampled minibatch Dval
kto optimize the pa-
rameters. The gradient computation is described below:
gt(w)=ÒwEk≥‹tL!
Dval
k,Uk(w)"
,where
Uk(w)©w≠–ÒwL!
Dtr
k,w" (5)
Here, ‹t(·)denotes a sampling distribution for the previ-
ously seen tasks T1,. . . ,Tt. In our experiments, we use the
uniform distribution, ‹t©P(k)=1 /t’k={1,2,...t},
but other sampling distributions can be used if required. Re-
call that L(D,w)is the loss function (e.g. cross-entropy)
averaged over the datapoints (x,y)œDfor the model with
parameters w. Using independently sampled minibatches
DtrandDvalminimizes interaction between the inner gradi-
ent update Utand the outer optimization (Eq. 4), which is
performed using the gradient above ( gt) in conjunction with
Adam ( Kingma & Ba ,2015 ). While Utin Eq. 5includes
only one gradient step, we observed that it is beneﬁcial to
take multiple gradient steps in the inner loop (i.e., in Ut),
which is consistent with prior works ( Finn et al. ,2017 ;Grant
et al.,2018 ;Antoniou et al. ,2018 ;Shaban et al. ,2018 ).
Now that we have derived the gradient, the overall algorithm
proceeds as follows. We ﬁrst initialize a task buffer B=[] .
When presented with a new task at round t, we add task Tt
toBand initialize a task-speciﬁc dataset Dt=[] , which is
appended to as data incrementally arrives for task Tt. As
new data arrives for task Tt, we iteratively compute and