Online Meta-Learning
2017 ), nearly all prior meta-learning algorithms assume
that the meta-training tasks come from a stationary distri-
bution, and does not consider tasks that are presented as a
continuous stream. In contrast, we consider a more ﬂex-
ible approach that allows for adapting all of the model’s
parameters during online meta-training. Recent work has
also considered meta-training with non-stationary distribu-
tions using Dirichlet process mixture models over parame-
ters ( Grant et al. ,2019 ). In contrast, we introduce a simple
extension onto the MAML algorithm without mixtures over
parameters, and provide theoretical guarantees.
Continual learning: Our problem setting is related to con-
tinual, or lifelong learning ( Thrun ,1998 ;Zhao & Schmidhu-
ber,1996 ). A number of papers in this area have focused on
avoiding forgetting or negative backward transfer ( Goodfel-
low et al. ,2013 ;Kirkpatrick et al. ,2017 ;Zenke et al. ,2017 ;
Rebufﬁ et al. ,2017 ;Shin et al. ,2017 ;Shmelkov et al. ,2017 ;
Lopez-Paz et al. ,2017 ;Nguyen et al. ,2017 ;Schmidhuber ,
2013 ), and maintaining a small model capacity as new tasks
are added ( Lee et al. ,2017 ;Mallya & Lazebnik ,2017 ). In
this paper, we sidestep the problem of catastrophic forget-
ting by maintaining a buffer of all the observed data ( Isele
& Cosgun ,2018 ), and instead focus on maximizing the
efﬁciency of learning new tasks within a non-stationary
meta-learning setting. Furthermore, unlike prior works ( Ru-
volo & Eaton ,2013 ;Rusu et al. ,2016 ;Aljundi et al. ,2017 ;
Wang et al. ,2017 ), we focus on the setting where there are
several tens or hundreds of tasks, and therefore more infor-
mation that can be transferred from previous tasks to enable
few-shot acquisition of new concepts.
Online learning: Similar to continual learning, online
learning considers a sequential setting with streaming tasks.
Much of the prior work in this area has focused on com-
putationally cheap algorithms that do not iterate over past
data multiple times ( Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi ,2006 ;Hazan
et al.,2006 ;Zinkevich ,2003 ;Shalev-Shwartz ,2012 ). Again,
we sidestep computational considerations to ﬁrst study the
meta-learning analog of FTL. For this, we derived the FTML
algorithm which has low regret when compared to a power-
ful adaptive comparator class, and demonstrated empirical
gains over strong baselines.
Adaptive notions of regret have been considered in prior
work to overcome limitations of a ﬁxed comparator. In the
dynamic regret setting ( Herbster & Warmuth ,1995 ;Yang
et al.,2016 ;Besbes et al. ,2015 ), the online learner is com-
pared with the sequence of optimal solutions corresponding
to each loss function. Unfortunately, lower bounds ( Yang
et al.,2016 ) suggest that the comparator class is too power-
ful and may not provide for any non-trivial learning in the
general case. To overcome this challenge, prior work has
placed restrictions on how quickly the loss functions or com-
parator model can change ( Hazan & Comandur ,2009 ;Hall& Willett ,2015 ;Herbster & Warmuth ,1995 ). In contrast,
we develop a new notion of adaptive regret where the learner
and comparator both have access to an update procedure.
The update procedures allow the comparator to produce dif-
ferent models for different loss functions, thereby serving
as a powerful comparator class (in comparison to a ﬁxed
model in hindsight). In this setting, we derived sublinear
regret algorithms without placing restrictions on the loss
functions. Concurrent work has also studied algorithms re-
lated to ﬁrst order variants of MAML using theoretical tools
from online learning ( Alquier et al. ,2016 ;Denevi et al. ,
2019 ;Khodak et al. ,2019 ). These works also derive re-
gret and generalization bounds, but the algorithms have not
yet been empirically studied in large scale domains or non-
stationary settings. We believe that our online meta-learning
setting captures the spirit and practice of continual lifelong
learning, and also shows promising empirical results.
8. Discussion and Future Work
We introduced the online meta-learning setting, which pro-
vides a natural perspective on the ideal real-world learning
procedure: an intelligent agent interacting with a constantly
changing environment should utilize streaming experience
to both master the task at hand, and become more proﬁcient
at learning new tasks in the future. We proposed and ana-
lyzed the FTML algorithm to derive regret bounds, and il-
lustrated how FTML can be adapted to a practical algorithm.
Our experiments demonstrate that FTML outperforms prior
methods, learing new tasks more and more efﬁciently over
time. We next outline avenues for future work.
More powerful update procedures. We analyzed the case
where the update Utis one gradient step. However, in
practice, MAML is often used with multiple gradient steps.
Analyzing this case, and potentially higher order update
rules, will make for exciting future work.
Memory and computational constraints. In this work, we
primarily aimed to discern if it is possible to meta-learn in a
sequential setting. As discussed in Section 7, the cost of FTL
(and FTML) grows over time as new tasks and loss functions
are accumulated. Further, in many practical online learn-
ing problems, it is challenging to store all datapoints from
previous tasks. While we showed that our method can effec-
tively learn nearly 100 tasks in sequence without signiﬁcant
burdens on compute or memory, scalability remains a con-
cern. Can a more streaming algorithm like mirror descent
that does not store all the past experiences be successful as
well? Our main theoretical results (Section 4.3) suggests
that there exist a large family of online meta-learning algo-
rithms that enjoy sublinear regret. Tapping into the large
body of work in online learning, particularly mirror descent,
to develop computationally cheaper algorithms would make
for exciting future work.