Online Meta-Learning
Figure 2. Illustration of three tasks for Rainbow MNIST (top) and pose prediction (bottom). CIFAR images not shown. Rainbow MNIST
includes different rotations, scales, and background colors. For pose prediction, the goal is to predict the global pose of the object on the
table. Cross-task variation includes 50 object models within 9 object classes, varying object scales, and different camera viewpoints.
Figure 3. Rainbow MNIST results. Left: amount of data needed to learn each new task. Center: task performance after 100 datapoints on
the current task. Right: The task performance after all 900 datapoints for the current task have been received. Lower is better for all plots,
while shaded regions show standard error over three random seeds. FTML can learn new tasks more and more efﬁciently as each new task
is received, demonstrating effective forward transfer.
ber of ways to create different tasks, including 7 colored
backgrounds, 2 scales (half size and original size), and 4
rotations of 90 degree intervals. As illustrated in Fig. 2,a
task involves correctly classifying digits with a randomly
sampled background, scale, and rotation. This leads to 56
total tasks. We partitioned the MNIST training dataset into
56 batches of examples, each with 900 images and applied
the corresponding task transformation to each batch of im-
ages. The ordering of tasks was selected at random and we
set90% classiﬁcation accuracy as the proﬁciency threshold.
Learning curves in Fig. 3show that FTML learns tasks
more and more quickly, with each new task added. We
also ﬁnd that FTML substantially outperforms the alterna-
tive approaches in both efﬁciency and ﬁnal performance.
FTL performs better than TOE since it uses task-speciﬁc
adaptation, but its performance is still inferior to FTML.
We hypothesize that, while the prior methods improve in
efﬁciency over the course of learning as they see more tasks,
they struggle to prevent negative transfer on each new task.
Lastly, training from scratch does not learn efﬁciently com-
pared to models that incorporate data from other tasks; but,
their ﬁnal performance with 900datapoints is similar.
6.2. Five-Way CIFAR-100
In this experiment, we create a sequence of 5-way classiﬁca-
tion tasks based on the CIFAR-100 dataset, which contains
more challenging and realistic RGB images than MNIST.
Each classiﬁcation problem involves a newly-introducedclass from the 100 classes in CIFAR-100. Thus, different
tasks correspond to different labels spaces. The ordering of
tasks is selected at random, and we measure performance
using classiﬁcation accuracy. Since it is less clear what
the proﬁciency threshold should be for this task, we eval-
uate the accuracy on each task after varying numbers of
datapoints have been seen. Since these tasks are mutually
exclusive (as label space is changing), it makes sense to
train the TOE model with a different ﬁnal layer for each
task. An extremely similar approach to this is to use our
meta-learning approach but to only allow the ﬁnal layer
parameters to be adapted to each task. Further, such a meta-
learning approach is a more direct comparison to our full
FTML method, and the comparison can provide insight into
whether online meta-learning is simply learning features
and performing training on the last layer, or if it is adapting
the features to each task. Thus, we compare to this last layer
online meta-learning approach instead of TOE with multiple
heads. The results (see Figure 4) indicate that FTML learns
more efﬁciently than independent models and a model with
a shared feature space. The results on the right indicate
that training from scratch achieves good performance with
2000 datapoints, reaching similar performance to FTML.
However, the last layer variant of FTML seems to not have
the capacity to reach good performance on all tasks.