Online Meta-Learning
and extract information from the data that both allows us
to succeed on the current task and adapt to new tasks more
quickly. However, typical meta learning approaches assume
that a sufﬁciently large set of tasks are made available up-
front for meta-training. In the real world, tasks are likely
available only sequentially, as the agent is learning in the
world, and also from a non-stationary distribution. By re-
casting meta-learning in a sequential or online setting, that
does not make strong distributional assumptions, we can
enable faster learning on new tasks as they are presented.
Our contributions: In this work, we formulate the online
meta-learning problem setting and present the follow the
meta-leader (FTML) algorithm. This extends the MAML
algorithm to the online meta-learning setting, and is anal-
ogous to follow the leader in online learning. We analyze
FTML and show that it enjoys a O(log T)regret guarantee
when competing with the best meta-learner in hindsight.
In this endeavor, we also provide the ﬁrst set of results
(under any assumptions) where MAML-like objective func-
tions can be provably and efﬁciently optimized. We also
develop a practical form of FTML that can be used effec-
tively with deep neural networks on large scale tasks, and
show that it signiﬁcantly outperforms prior methods. The
experiments involve vision-based sequential learning tasks
with the MNIST, CIFAR-100, and PASCAL 3D+ datasets.
2. Foundations
Before introducing online meta-learning, we brieﬂy summa-
rize the foundations of meta-learning, the model-agnostic
meta-learning (MAML) algorithm, and online learning. To
illustrate the differences in setting and algorithms, we will
use the running example of few-shot learning, which we
describe below ﬁrst. We emphasize that online learning,
MAML, and the online meta-learning formulations have a
broader scope than few-shot supervised learning.
2.1. Few-Shot Learning
In few-shot supervised learning ( Santoro et al. ,2016 ), we
are interested in a family of tasks, where each task Tis asso-
ciated with a notional and inﬁnite-size population of input-
output pairs. Our goal is to learn a new task Tiwhile access-
ing only a small, ﬁnite-size labeled dataset Di:={xi,yi}
corresponding Ti. If we have a predictive model, h(·;w),
with parameters w, the population risk of the model is
fi(w):=E(x,y)≥Ti[¸(x,y,w)],
where the expectation is deﬁned over the task population
and¸is a loss function, such as the square loss or cross-
entropy between the model prediction and the correct label.
An example of ¸corresponding to squared error loss is
¸(x,y,w)=||y≠h(x;w)||2.
LetL(Di,w)represent the average loss on the dataset Di.
Effectively minimizing fi(w)is likely hard if we rely onlyonDidue to the small size of the dataset. However, meta-
learning algorithms aim to perform better by drawing upon
data from many tasks from the family, as we discuss next.
2.2. Meta-Learning and MAML
Meta-learning, or learning to learn, aims to bootstrap from
a set of tasks to learn faster on a new task. Tasks are as-
sumed to be drawn from a ﬁxed distribution, T≥P(T). At
meta-training time, Mtasks {Ti}M
i=1are drawn from this
distribution and datasets corresponding to them are made
available to the agent. At deployment time, we are faced
with a new test task Tj≥P(T), for which we are again pre-
sented with a small dataset Dj:={xj,yj}. Meta-learning
algorithms attempt to ﬁnd a model using the Mtraining
tasks, such that when Djis revealed from the test task, the
model can be quickly updated to minimize fj(w).
Model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) ( Finn et al. ,2017 )
does so by learning an initial set of parameters wMAML,
such that performing a few steps of gradient descent from
wMAML using Djminimizes fj(·). To get such an initial-
ization, MAML solves the optimization problem:
wMAML := arg min
w1
MMÿ
i=1fi!
w≠–Òˆfi(w)"
.(1)
The inner gradient Òˆfi(w)is based on a small mini-batch
from Di. Hence, MAML optimizes for few-shot generaliza-
tion. Finn et al. (2017 ) show that gradient-based methods
can be used to optimize Eq. 1with existing automatic dif-
ferentiation libraries. Stochastic gradient methods are used
since the population risk is not known. At meta-test time, the
solution is ﬁne-tuned as: wjΩwMAML ≠–Òˆfj(wMAML)
with the gradient obtained using Dj. MAML and other
meta-learning algorithms (see Section 7) are not directly
applicable to sequential settings, as they assume a ﬁxed
ﬁxed task distribution and have two distinct-phases, meta-
training and meta-testing. We instead would like to develop
algorithms that work in continuous learning settings with
non-stationary task distributions.
2.3. Online Learning
In online learning, an agent faces a sequence of loss func-
tions {ft}Œ
t=1, one in each round t. These functions need not
be drawn from a ﬁxed distribution, and could even be cho-
sen adversarially over time. The learner must sequentially
decide on model parameters {wt}Œ
t=1that perform well on
the loss sequence. In particular, the goal is to minimize
some notion of regret deﬁned as the difference between
the learner’s loss,qT
t=1ft(wt), and the best performance
achievable by some family of methods (comparator class).
The most standard notion of regret is to compare to the
cumulative loss of the best ﬁxed model in hindsight:
RegretT=Tÿ
t=1ft(wt)≠min
wTÿ
t=1ft(w). (2)