Online Meta-Learning
We would like algorithms for which this regret grows with
Tas slowly as possible. An algorithm whose regret grows
sub-linearly in Tis non-trivially learning and adapting. One
of the simplest algorithms in this setting is follow the leader
(FTL) ( Hannan ,1957 ), which computes parameters as:
wt+1= arg min
wtÿ
k=1fk(w).
FTL enjoys strong performance guarantees depending on the
properties of the loss function. For the few-shot supervised
learning example, FTL would consolidate all the data from
the prior stream of tasks into a single large dataset and ﬁt a
single model to this dataset. As alluded to in Section 1, and
as we ﬁnd in our empirical evaluation in Section 6, such a
“joint training” approach may not learn effective models. To
overcome this issue, we may desire a more adaptive notion
of a comparator class, and algorithms that have low regret
against such a comparator, as we will discuss next.
3. The Online Meta-Learning Problem
We consider a sequential setting where an agent is faced
with tasks one after another. Each task corresponds to a
round , denoted by t. In each round, the goal of the learner
is to determine model parameters wtthat perform well for
the corresponding task at that round. This is monitored by
ft:wœWæ R, which we would like to be minimized.
Crucially, we consider a setting where the agent can perform
some local task-speciﬁc updates to the model before it is
deployed and evaluated in each round. This is realized
through an update procedure, which at round t, is a mapping
Ut:wœWæ ˜wœW. This procedure takes as input w
and returns ˜wthat performs better on ft. One example
forUtis a step of gradient descent ( Finn et al. ,2017 ):
Ut(w)=w≠–Òˆft(w).As speciﬁed in Section 2.2,Òˆft
is potentially an approximate gradient of ft, e.g. obtained
using a mini-batch of data from the task at round t. The
overall protocol is as follows:
1.At round t, the agent chooses a model deﬁned by wt.
2.The world simultaneously chooses task deﬁned by ft.
3.The agent obtains access to the update procedure Ut,
and uses it to update parameters as ˜wt=Ut(wt).
4.The agent incurs loss ft(˜wt). Advance to round t+1.
The goal for the agent is to minimize regret over the rounds.
A highly ambitious comparator is the best meta-learned
model in hindsight. Let {wt}T
t=1be the sequence of models
generated by the algorithm. Then, the regret we consider is:
RegretT=Tÿ
t=1ft!
Ut(wt)"
≠min
wTÿ
t=1ft!
Ut(w)"
.(3)
Notice that we allow the comparator to adapt locally to each
task at hand; thus the comparator has strictly more capabil-
ities than the learning agent, since it is presented with allthe task functions in batch mode. Here, again, achieving
sublinear regret suggests that the agent is improving over
time and is competitive with the best meta-learner in hind-
sight. As discussed earlier, in the batch setting, when faced
with multiple tasks, meta-learning performs signiﬁcantly
better than training a single model for all the tasks. Thus,
we may hope that learning sequentially, but still being com-
petitive with the best meta-learner in hindsight, provides a
signiﬁcant leap in continual learning.
4. Algorithm and Analysis
In this section, we outline the follow the meta leader (FTML)
algorithm and provide an analysis of its behavior.
4.1. Follow the Meta Leader
Taking inspiration from the form of the follow the leader
algorithm ( Hannan ,1957 ;Kalai & Vempala ,2005 ), we
propose the FTML algorithm template which updates model
parameters as:
wt+1= arg min
wtÿ
k=1fk!
Uk(w)"
. (4)
This can be interpreted as the agent playing the best meta-
learner in hindsight if the learning process were to stop at
round t. In the remainder of this section, we will show
that under standard assumptions on the losses, and just
one additional assumption on higher order smoothness, this
algorithm has strong regret guarantees. In practice, we
may not have full access to fk(·), such as when it is the
population risk and we only have a ﬁnite size dataset. In
such cases, we will draw upon stochastic approximation
algorithms to solve the optimization problem in Eq. ( 4).
4.2. Assumptions
We make the following assumptions about each loss function
in the learning problem for all t. Let ◊and„represent two
arbitrary choices of model parameters .
Assumption 1. (C2-smoothness)
1.(Lipschitz in function value) fhas gradients bounded by
G, i.e. ||Òf(◊)|| ÆG’◊. This is equivalent to fbeing
G≠Lipschitz.
2.(Lipschitz gradient) fis—≠smooth, i.e.
||Òf(◊)≠Òf(„)|| Æ—||◊≠„|| ’(◊,„).
3.(Lipschitz Hessian) fhasﬂ≠Lipschitz Hessians, i.e.
||Ò2f(◊)≠Ò2f(„)|| Æﬂ||◊≠„|| ’(◊,„).
Assumption 2. (Strong convexity) Suppose that fis con-
vex. Furthermore, suppose fisµ≠strongly convex, i.e.
||Òf(◊)≠Òf(„)|| Øµ||◊≠„||.
These assumptions are largely standard in online learn-
ing (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi ,2006 ), except 1.3. Examples
where these assumptions hold include logistic regression