measure the performance of the algorithm but are from different aspects. The former one focuses
on the convergence of the algorithm’s final round output, and the latter cares about the overall loss
during the whole algorithm training. The cumulative regret is useful in scenarios such as medical
trials where ill patients are included in the each run and the cost of picking non-optimal treatments
for all subjects shall be measured. This paper chooses to study the cumulative regret, while in the
literature, there were discussions on the relationship between these two [Bubeck et al., 2011a].
Hierarchical partitioning. We use the hierarchical partitioning P={Ph,i}to discretize the
parameter space Xinto nodes, as introduced by Munos [2011], Bubeck et al. [2011b], Valko et al.
[2013]. For any non-negative integer h, the set {Ph,i}partitions the whole space X. At depth h= 0,
a single node P0,1covers the entire space. Every time we increase the level of depth, each node
at the current depth level will be separated into two children; that is, Ph,i=Ph+1,2i−1∪ Ph+1,2i.
Such a hierarchical partition naturally inspires algorithms which explore the space by traversing the
partitions and selecting the nodes with higher rewards to form a tree structure, with P0,1being the
root. We remark that the binary split for each node we consider in this paper is the same as in the
previous works such as Bubeck et al. [2011b], Azar et al. [2014], and it would be easy to extend our
results to the K-nary case [Shang et al., 2019]. Similar to Grill et al. [2015], we refer to the partition
where each node is split into regular, same-sized children as the standard partitioning.
Given the objective function fand hierarchical partition P, we introduce a generalized definition
of near-optimality dimension, which is a natural extension of the notion defined by Grill et al. [2015].
Near-optimality dimension. For any positive constants αandC, and any function ξ(h) that
satisfies ∀h≥1,ξ(h)∈(0,1], we define the near-optimality dimension d=d(α, C, ξ (h)) of fwith
respect to the partition Pand function ξ(h) as
d≡inf{d′>0 :∀h≥0,Nh(αξ(h))≤Cξ(h)−d′} (1)
if exists, where Nh(ϵ) is the number of nodes Ph,ion level hsuch that supx∈Ph,if(x)≥f∗−ϵ.
In other words, for each h > 0,Nh(αξ(h)) is the number of near-optimal regions on level h
that are ( αξ(h))-close to the global maximum so that any algorithm should explore these regions.
d=d(α, C, ξ (h)) controls the polynomial growth of this quantity with respect to the function ξ(h)−1.
It can be observed that this general definition of dcovers the near optimality dimension defined in
Grill et al. [2015] by simply setting ξ(h) = ρhand the coefficient α= 2ν for some constants ν >0
andρ∈(0,1).
The rationale of introducing the generalized notion ξ(h) is that, although the number of nodes in
the partition grows exponentially when hincreases, the number of near-optimal regions Nh(ϵ) of the
objective function fmay not increase as fast, even if the near-optimal gap ϵconverges to 0 slowly.
The particular choice of ξ(h) = ρhin Grill et al. [2015] indicates that Nh(αρh)≤Cρ−dh, which may
be over-pessimistic and makes it a non-ideal setting for analyzing functions that change rapidly and
don’t have exponentially many near-optimal regions.
Such a generalized definition becomes extremely useful when dealing with functions that have
different local smoothness properties, and therefore our framework can successfully analyze a much
larger class of functions. We establish our general regret bound based on this notion of near-optimality
dimension in Theorem 3.1.
It is worth mentioning that taking a slowly decreasing ξ(h), although reduces the number of
near-optimal regions, does not necessarily imply that the function is easier to optimize. As will be
shown in Section 3 and 4, ξ(h) is often taken to be the local smoothness function of the objective.
A slowly decreasing ξ(h) makes the function much more unsmooth than a function with exponential
local smoothness, and hence is still hard to optimize.
Additional Notations. At round t, we use H(t) to represent the maximum depth level explored
in the partition by an algorithm. For each node Ph,i, we use Th,i(t) to denote the number of times
4