(a) Difficult function
 (b) Function 1 + 1 /(lnx)
Figure 1: 1(a): A difficult function proposed by Grill et al. [2015] which has exponentially increasing
(2ν1ρh)-near-optimal regions in the standard partition. 1(b): An example function that violates the
ν1ρhlocal smoothness assumption by Grill et al. [2015] in the standard partition and thus cannot be
analyzed by prior works, but has no local optimum.
by [Auer et al., 2007, Bubeck et al., 2011b]. These algorithms search for the optimum by traversing a
hierarchical partition of the parameter space and look for the best node inside the partition. Existing
results, such as Bubeck et al. [2011b], Grill et al. [2015], Shang et al. [2019], Bartlett et al. [2019], Li
et al. [2022], heavily rely on some specific assumptions of the smoothness of the blackbox objective
and the hierarchical partition. However, their assumptions are only satisfied by a small class of func-
tions and partitions, which limits the scope of their analysis. To be more specific, existing studies
all focus on optimizing “exponentially-local-smooth” functions (see; Eqn. (3)), which can have an
exponentially increasing number of sub-optimums as the parameter space partition proceeds deeper
[Grill et al., 2015, Shang et al., 2019, Bartlett et al., 2019]. For instance, Grill et al. [2015] designed
a difficult function (shown in Figure 1(a)) that can be optimized by many existing algorithms be-
cause it satisfies the exponential local-smooth assumption. However, functions and partitions that
do not satisfy exponential local-smoothness, but with a bounded or polynomially increasing number
of near-optimal regions have been overlooked in the current literature of black-box optimization. A
simple example is Figure 1(b), which is not exponentially smooth but has a trivial unique optimum.
Such a simple example depresses all previous analyses in existing studies due to their dependency
on the exponential local-smoothness assumption. What is worse, different designs of the uncertainty
quantifier can generate different algorithms and thus may require different analyses. Consequently, a
more unified theoretical framework to manage the interaction process between the optimization error
flux and the statistical error flux is desirable and beneficial towards general and efficient black-box
optimization.
In this work, we deliver a generic perspective on the optimum-statistical collaboration inside the
exploration mechanism of black-box optimization. Such a generic perspective holds regardless of the
local smoothness condition of the function or the design of uncertainty quantification, generalizing its
applicability to a larger class of functions (e.g., Figure 1(b)) and algorithms with different uncertainty
quantification methods. Our analysis for the proposed general algorithmic framework only relies on
mild assumptions. It allows us to analyze functions with different levels of smoothness and also
inspired us to propose a variance-adaptive black-box algorithm VHCT.
In summary, our contributions are:
•We identify two decisive components of exploration in black-box optimization: the resolution de-
2