scriptor (Definition 1) and the uncertainty quantifier (Definition 2). Based on the two components,
we introduce the optimum-statistical collaboration (Algorithm 1), a generic framework for collabo-
rated optimism in hierarchical bandits-based black-box optimization.
•We provide a unified analysis of the proposed framework (Theorem 3.1) that is independent of the
specific forms of the resolution descriptor and the uncertainty quantifier. Due to the flexibility of
the resolution descriptor, this analysis includes all black-box functions who satisfy the general local
smoothness assumption (Condition (GLS)) and have a finite near-optimality dimension (Definition
(1)), which are excluded from prior works.
•Furthermore, the framework inspires us to propose a better uncertainty quantifier, namely the
variance-adaptive quantifier (VHCT). It leads to effective exploration and advantages our bandit pol-
icy by utilizing the variance information learnt from past samplers. Theoretically, we show that the
proposed framework secures different regret guarantees in the face of different smoothness assump-
tions, and VHCT leads to a better convergence when the reward noise is small. Our experiments
validate that the proposed variance adaptive quantifier is more efficient than the existing anytime
algorithms on various objectives.
Related Works. Pioneer bandit-based black-box optimization algorithms such as HOO[Bubeck
et al., 2011b] and HCT[Azar et al., 2014] require complicated assumptions of both the the black-
box objective and the parameter partition, including weak lipschitzness assumption. Recently, Grill
et al. [2015] proposed the exponential local smoothness assumption (Eqn. (3)) to simplify the set of
assumptions used in prior works and proposed POOto meta-tune the smoothness parameters. Some
follow-up algorithms such as GPO[Shang et al., 2019] and StroquOOL [Bartlett et al., 2019] are also
proposed. However, both GPOandStroquOOL require the budget number beforehand, and thus they
are not anytime algorithms [Shang et al., 2019, Bartlett et al., 2019]. Also, the analyses of these
algorithms all rely on the exponential local smoothness assumption [Grill et al., 2015].
2 Preliminaries
Problem Formulation. We formulate the problem as optimizing an implicit objective function
f:X /ma√sto→R, where Xis the parameter space. The sampling budget (number of evaluations) is denoted
by an unknown constant n, which is often limited when the cost of evaluating f(x) is expensive. At
each round (evaluation) t, the algorithm selects a xt∈ Xand receives an stochastic feedback rt∈[0,1]
, modeled by
rt≡f(xt) +ϵt,
where the noise ϵtis only assumed to be mean zero, bounded by [ −b
2,b
2] for some constant b >0, and
independent from the historical observed algorithm performance and the path of selected xt’s. Note
that the distributions of ϵtare not necessarily identical. We assume that there exists at least one
point x∗∈ X such that it attains the global maximum f∗, i.e., f∗≡f(x∗)≡supx∈Xf(x). The goal
of a black-box optimization algorithm is to gradually find xnsuch that f(xn) is close to the global
maximum f∗within the limited budget.
Regret Analysis Framework. We measure the performance of different algorithms using the
cumulative regret. With respect to the optimal value f∗, the cumulative regret is defined as
Rn≡nf∗−n/summationdisplay
t=1rt.
It is worth noting that an alternative measure of performance widely used in the literature [e.g., Shang
et al., 2019, Bartlett et al., 2019] is the simple regret St≡f∗−rt. Both simple and cumulative regrets
3