(a) Garland
 (b) Landmine
 (c) MNIST
Figure 3: Cumulative regret of different algorithms on evaluating the Garland function and tuning
hyperparameters of training SVM on Landmine data and neural networks on MNIST data.
that the proposed variance-adaptive uncertainty quantifier can make the convergence of VHCT faster
than non-adaptive algorithms. We run every algorithm for 20 independent trials in each experiment
and plot the average cumulative regret with 1-standard deviation error bounds. The experimental
details and additional numerical results on other objectives are provided in Appendix E.
We use a noisy Garland function as the synthetic objective, which is a typical blackbox objective
used by many works such as Shang et al. [2019] and has multiple local minimums and thus very
hard to optimize. For the real-life experiments, we use hyperparameter tuning of machine learning
algorithms as the blackbox objectives. We tune the RBF kernel and the L2 regularization parameters
when training Support Vector Machine (SVM) on the Landmine dataset [Liu et al., 2007], and the
batch size, the learning rate, and the weight decay when training neural networks on the MNIST
dataset [Deng, 2012]. As shown in Figure 3, the new choice of SEmakes VHCT the fastest algorithm
among the existing ones. All the experimental results validate our theoretical claims in Section 4.
6 Conclusions
The proposed optimum-statistical collaboration framework reveals and utilizes the fundamental
interplay of resolution and uncertainty to design more general and efficient black-box optimization
algorithms. Our analysis shows that different regret guarantees can be obtained for functions and
partitions with different local smoothness assumptions, and algorithms that have different uncertainty
quantifiers. Based on the framework, we show that functions that satisfy the general local smoothness
property can be optimized and analyzed, which is a much larger class of functions compared with
prior works. Also, we propose a new algorithm VHCT that can adapt to different noises and analyze
its performance under different assumptions of the smoothness of the function.
There are still some limitations of our work. For example, VHCT still needs the prior knowledge
of the smoothness function ϕ(h) to achieve its best performance. Also, the analyses in Theorem 4.1
and 4.2 are smoothness-specific. Therefore, our framework also introduces many interesting future
working directions, for example, (1) whether a unified regret upper bound for different ϕ(h)-local
smooth functions could be derived for one particular algorithm; (2) whether the regret bound obtained
in Theorem 4.2 is minimax-optimal for those ϕ(h); (3) whether there exists an algorithm that is truly
smoothness-agnostic, i.e., it does not need the smoothness property of the objective function.
11