partition that has a well defined d(a, C, OEh−1) with resolution OEh, and any algorithm that satisfies
the algorithmic framework. The requirement f∗−f(xht,it)≤a·max{SE ht,it(T, t), OEht}is mild and
natural in the sense that it indicates the π(S) selects a “good” node to pull at each time tthat is at
least close to the optimum relatively with respect to OEorSE, with probability P(Et). Note that with
a good choice of π,Ec
tcan reduce to a subset of Ac
t, hence/summationtextn
t=1I(Ec
t) is bounded in L1. The terms
that involve SEand OEare random due to H(n), but can still be explicitly bounded when the they
are well designed. Specific regret bounds for different choices of OEand a new SEare provided in the
next section.
4 Implementation of Optimum-statistical Collaboration
Provided the optimum-statistical collaboration framework and its analysis, we discuss the some
specific forms of the resolution descriptor and the uncertainty quantifier and elaborate the roles these
definitions played in the optimization process. We then introduce a novel VHCT algorithm based on
one variance-adaptive choice of SE, which is a better quantifier of the statistical uncertainty.
4.1 The Resolution Descriptor (Definition 1)
The resolution descriptor OEis often measured by the global or local smoothness of the objective
function [Azar et al., 2014, Grill et al., 2015]. We first discuss the local smoothness assumption used
by prior works and show its limitations, and then introduce a generalized local smoothness condition.
Local Smoothness. Grill et al. [2015] assumed that there exist two constants ν1>0, ρ∈(0,1)
s.t.
∀h≥0,∀x∈ Ph,i∗
h, f(x)≥f∗−ν1ρh. (3)
The above equation states that the function fisν1ρh-smooth around the maximum at each level h.
It has been considered in many prior works such as Shang et al. [2019], Bartlett et al. [2019]. The
resolution descriptor is naturally taken to be OEh=ν1ρh.
However, such a choice of local smoothness is too restrictive as it requires that the function fand
the partition Pare both “well-behaved” so that the function value becomes exponentially closer to the
optimum when as hincreases. A simple counter-example is the function g(x) = 1+1 /(lnx) defined on
the domain [0, 1/e] with g(0) defined to be 0 (as shown in Figure 1(b)). Under the standard binary
partition, it is easily to prove that it doesn’t satisfy Eqn. (3) for any given constants ν0>0, ρ0∈(0,1).
It might be possible to design a particular partition for g(x) such that Eqn. (3) holds. However, such
a partition is defined in hindsight since one have no knowledge of the objective function before the
optimization. Beyond the above example, it is also easy to design other non-monotone difficult-to-
optimize functions that cannot be analyzed by prior works. It thus inspires us to introduce a more
general ϕ(h)-local smoothness condition for the objective to analyze functions and partitions that
have different levels of local smoothness.
General Local Smoothness. Assume that there exists a function ϕ(h) : N→(0,1] s.t.
∀h≥0,∀x∈ Ph,i∗
h, f(x)≥f(x∗)−ϕ(h) (GLS)
In the same example g(x) = 1 + 1 /(lnx), it can be shown that g(x) satisfies Condition (GLS) with
ϕ(h) = 2 /h. Therefore, it fits in our framework by setting OEh= 2/h and a valid regret bound can be
obtained for g(x) given a properly chosen SEh,i, since d(2, C, 1/h) <∞in this case (refer to details in
Subsection 4.4). In general, we can simply set OEh=ϕ(h) within the optimum-statistical collaboration
framework, and Theorem 3.1 can be utilized to analyze functions and partitions that satisfy Condition
7