Optimum-statistical Collaboration Towards General and
Efficient Black-box Optimization
Wenjie Li∗1, Chi-Hua Wang *1, Guang Cheng2, and Qifan Song1
1Department of Statistics, Purdue University
2Department of Statistics, University of California Los Angeles
Abstract
In this paper, we make the key delineation on the roles of resolution and statistical uncertainty
in hierarchical bandits-based black-box optimization algorithms, guiding a more general analysis
and a more efficient algorithm design. We introduce the optimum-statistical collaboration , an
algorithm framework of managing the interaction between optimization error flux and statistical
error flux evolving in the optimization process. We provide a general analysis of this framework
without specifying the forms of statistical error and uncertainty quantifier. Our framework and its
analysis, due to their generality, can be applied to a large family of functions and partitions that
satisfy different local smoothness assumptions and have different numbers of local optimums,
which is much richer than the class of functions studied in prior works. Our framework also
inspires us to propose a better measure of the statistical uncertainty and consequently a variance-
adaptive algorithm VHCT. In theory, we prove the algorithm enjoys rate-optimal regret bounds
under different local smoothness assumptions; in experiments, we show the algorithm outperforms
prior efforts in different settings.
1 Introduction
Black-box optimization has gained more and more attention nowadays because of its applications
in a large number of research topics such as tuning the hyper-parameters of optimization algorithms,
designing the hidden structure of a deep neural network, and resource investments [Li et al., 2018,
Komljenovic et al., 2019]. Yet, the task of optimizing a black-box system often has a limited budget for
evaluations due to its expensiveness, especially when the objective function is nonconvex and can only
be evaluated by an estimate with uncertainty [Bubeck et al., 2011b, Grill et al., 2015]. Such limitation
haunts practitioners’ deployment of machine learning systems and invites scientists’ investigation for
the authentic roles of resolution (optimization error) and uncertainty (statistical error) in black-box
optimization. Indeed, it raises a question of optimum-statistical trade-off: how can we better
balance resolution and uncertainty along the search path to create efficient black-box
optimization algorithms?
Among different categories of black-box optimization methods such as Bayesian algorithms [Shahri-
ari et al., 2016, Kandasamy et al., 2018] and convex black-box algorithms [Duchi et al., 2015, Shamir,
2015], this paper focuses on the class of hierarchical bandits-based optimization algorithms introduced
∗The two authors have contributed equally to this paper
1arXiv:2106.09215v5  [stat.ML]  31 May 2023