Algorithm 2 VHCT Algorithm (Short Version)
1:Input: known smoothness function ϕ(h), partition P.
2:Run Algorithm 1 with partition Pand other required inputs as:
OEh:=ϕ(h), SEh,i(T, t) := Eqn. (4) , π(S) := argmaxPh,i∈SBh,i(t)
to different noises. Algorithm 2 provides the short version of the pseudo-code and the complete algo-
rithm is provided in Appendix B.
The proposed VHCT, similar to HCT, also maintains an upper-bound Uh,i(t) for each node to decide
collaborative optimism. In particular, for any node Ph,i, the upper-bound Uh,i(t) is computed directly
from the average observed reward for pulling xh,ias
Uh,i(t)≡/hatwideµh,i(t) + OEh+SEh,i(T, t)
with SEh,i(T, t) defined as in Eqn. (4) and OEhtuned by the input. Note that Uh,i(t) =∞for unvisited
nodes. To better utilize the tree structure in the algorithm, we also define the tighter upper bounds
Bh,i(t). Since the maximum upper bound of one node cannot be greater than the maximum of its
children, Bh,i(t) is defined to be
Bh,i(t) = min/braceleftbigg
Uh,i(t),max
j=0,1{Bh+1,2i−j(t)}/bracerightbigg
.
The quantities Uh,i(t) and Bh,i(t) serve a similar role of the upper confidence bound in UCB bandit
algorithm [Bubeck et al., 2011b], and the selection policy π(S) of VHCT is simply selecting the node
with the highest Bh,i(t) in the given set S, which is shown in Algorithm 2. We prove that selection
policy guarantees that f∗−f(xht,it)≤3 max{SE ht,it(T, t), OEht}with high probability in Appendix
B, as we required in Theorem 3.1.
Follow the notation of Azar et al. [2014], we define a threshold value τh,i(t) for each node Ph,ito
represent the minimal number of times it has been pulled, such that the algorithm can explore its
children nodes, i.e.,
τh,i(t) = inf
T∈N/braceleftBig
SEh,i(T, t)≤OEh/bracerightBig
.
Only when Tht,it(t)≥τht,it(t), we expand the search into Pht,it’s children. This notation helps to
compare the exploration power of VHCT with HCT. Note that when the variances of the nodes are small,
SEh,i(T, t) of VHCT would be inversely proportional to Th,i(t) and thus smaller than that of HCT. As
a consequence, the thresholds τh,i(t) is smaller in VHCT than in HCT, and thus VHCT explores more
efficiently in low noise regimes.
4.4 Regret Bound Examples
We now provide upper bounds on the expected cumulative regret of VHCT, which serve as instances
of our general Theorem 3.1 when OEand SEare specified. Note that some technical adaptions are
made to obtain a L1bound for the regret. The regret bounds depend on the upper bound of variance
in history across all the nodes that have been pulled, meaning max {h,i,t|T h,i(t)≥1}/hatwideVh,i(t)≤Vmaxfor a
constant Vmax>0. Since the noise ϵtis bounded, such a notation is always well defined and bounded
above. The Vmaxrepresents our knowledge of the noise variance after searching and exploring the
objective function, which can be more accurate than the trivial choice b2/4, e.g., when the true
9