SUPPORT  VECTOR  MACHINE  FOR   
MODELLING  AND  SIMULATION   OF  HEAT  EXCHANGERS  
by 
Sivaprakash MUTHUKRISHNAN  a*, Haribabu KRISHNASWAMY  b,  
Sathish THANIKODI  c, Dinesh SUNDARESAN  d, and Vijayan VENKATRAMAN  d 
a Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stella Marys College of Engin eering,  
Aruthenganvilai, Kanyakumari, Tamilnadu , India  
b Department of Mechanical Engineering, SCAD College of Engienering and Technology, 
Cheranmahadevi, Tirunelveli, Tamilnadu , India  
c Department of Mechanical Engineering,  Saveetha School of  Engineering, SIMATS,  
Chennai, Tamil nadu, India  
d Department of Mechanical Engineering, K. Ramakarishnan College of Technology,  
Tamilnadu , India  
Original scientific paper  
https://doi.org/ 10.2298/TSCI 190419398M  
Manufacturing simulation is an encouraging field in every manufacturing industr y. 
The manufacturing simulation facilitate to virtually analysis the performance of 
the product before manufacturing. So for most of the manufacturing activities are 
simulated effective and researchers have developed adequate tool for the simula-
tion of var ious activities of manufacturing. Heat exchanger is one of the important 
devices used for the purposes including medical, food processing, air conditioning 
system , etc. Performance of these heat exchangers also important for achieving 
better performance in  those fields. So simulation of heat exchanger gives more 
beneficial to the engineers to analysis its performance before manufacturing. 
Hence in this paper, a machine learning approach for the modelling and simula-
tion of heat exchanger is proposed. The pro posed technique uses support vector 
machine technique for the prediction of performance of the heat exchanger. The 
performance of the proposed technique is validated in terms of prediction accu-
racy. Ultimately the analysis proves that the proposed techniqu e is more beneficial 
for the modelling of heat exchanger.  
Key words: simulation in manufacturing, machine learning technique,  
heat exchanger, heat transfer rate prediction,  
support vector machine  
Introduction  
Heat exchangers are used in various filed to convert heat from one substance to an-
other. The heat exchangers are normally contains tubes which allow fluid from one medium to 
another to transfer the heat [1]. These devices can either used to heat or cool down a substance. 
These exchangers contains con tainment vessels, which are used to cool or heat a liquid by 
transferring heat from one liquid to another. The heat exchangers are widely used in the fields 
such as oil and gas, food and beverage, paper and plumb, pharmaceuticals, refrigeration, power 
gene ration , and chemical [2]. The heat exchangers are in four main types, such as shell and 
––––––––––––––  
* Corresponding author, e-mail: sivaprakash147@gmail.com