tube, plate, double pipe and condensers, evaporators, and boilers. The first shell and tube  type 
of heat exchangers are used in many applications. This type of heat exchangers are constructed 
with is a vessel or cylindrical pressure vessel using single or series of parallel tubes. These 
exchangers uses minimum of two fluids, in which one fluid i s allowed to flow inside the tube 
and another fluid is flow outside the tube within the vessel [3].  
Double pipe heat exchangers is also a variant of shell and tube  type exchanger, in 
which the exchanger contains the cylindrical tube or pipe. The transfer of heat take place from 
the fuel in tube one to fuel in tube two. The plate type heat exchangers are constructed by 
bundling the corrugated plates together. In the bundle of plates each pair of plates form a chan-
nel to allow a fluid for the transfer of hea t [4]. The last type of heat exchanger is condensers, 
evaporators, and boilers, this type of exchanger are used in the home appliances and automobile 
vehicular system. These type of heat exchangers mostly employ two phase heat transfer mech-
anism [5]. In th e two phase heat transfer mechanism, the heat transfer occurred by converting 
a liquid to gas or gas to liquid. The condensers are used in air cooling system in which a hot 
gas or vapor is cooled to condensed to liquid state. Some other heat exchangers typ es are used 
in industries for the wide application especially air cooled and fan cooled heat exchangers are 
famous [6]. Heat exchangers having wide application, but design of these devices are compli-
cated and expensive. Due to the usage of costly material and liquid [7]. Now a days every 
engineering process is analy zed to verify the performance before manufacturing it. Manufac-
turing simulation is a separate field emerged in industries to computationally analysis the be-
havior of mechanical component before m anufacturing. Most of the manufacturing processes 
are simulated effectively and obtained very close result in real time simulation [8].  
Simulation of heat exchanger become a complex task, so it is essential to develop a 
suitable simulator for the simulation of heat exchanger. In some research the authors have effec-
tively used the neural network for the forecasting the internal computation engine performance 
[9]. But the prediction or forecasting of heat exchanger performance using machine learning tech-
nique is a challenging task. Hence in this paper, we are planned to propose a novel machine 
learning technique for the prediction of heat tra nsfer rate of shell and tube heat exchanger. Wang 
et al.  [10] have initiated this idea and presented a technique using ANN for the prediction of heat 
transfer rate. But the performance of ANN is not fulfilled due to the usage of normal back prop-
agation alg orithm for the learning purpose [11, 12]. Thus in this paper we are using a support 
vector machine (SVM) for the effective predic-
tion of performance of heat exchanger by reduc-
ing the error. The proposed technique is tested us-
ing the experimental data used in [10].  
Experimentation and data collection  
In this work we used the data presented in 
[10]. In the referred paper, the authors described 
an experimentation, which is briefly described 
in this section. In the experimentation two heat 
exchangers which wer e named HX1 and HX2. 
The schematic of the heat exchanger for the data 
collection is shown in fig . 1 [9].  
The geometric parameters considered in 
this work are total tube number , Nt, baffle pitch , 
Sb, total baffle number , Nb, and cent er diameter ,  
Figure 1. Schematic of heat exchanger for data 
collection