overallfunctionalformiscorrect. Itisalsosuperiorto
numerically checking expressions, as overcomplicated
but accurate expressions can be correctly penalized.
For this analysis, each Pareto front was assigned
to one of four categories: (1) correctif the Pareto
front contained the true expression, (2) almostif one
of the expressions in the Pareto front was oﬀ of the
true expression by a constant factor somewhere, (3)
failed, if the search produced no results (e.g., due to
numerical instability, segmentation fault, domain er-
rors, etc.), and (4) incorrect if the true expression was
not found in the Pareto front. All raw data with all
discovered Pareto fronts for this analysis is available
online at github.com/MilesCranmer/pysr_paper .
We emphasize that the stability of an SR algorithm
and software implementation itself has central impor-
tance to practical use in science, and therefore, un-
stablerunswhicheitherproduceanundeﬁnedexpres-
sion, or crash, are included in the results dataset and
theprimaryscore. However,oneshouldalsonotethat
because we are the authors of PySR, we are there-
fore more likely to be running in a stable environment
than, say, a package which we are unfamiliar with.
For example, as seen in table 3, DSR sees improved
results if one ignores the failed runs, although there
were still some expressions it struggled on. Thus,
detailed itemization of these results is given in ta-
ble 3, to allow for a more nuanced understanding of
the results. Also note that this benchmark does not
explicitly measure other metrics which are considered
in other benchmarks, such as number of evaluations
(where, e.g., genetic algorithms are very ineﬃcient),
nor does it consider the numerical accuracy of the
expressions.
3.3 Discussion
It is also very important to note that these results are
from the datasets speciﬁc to this competition. Many
ofthesealgorithmsmaydoverywellagainstsynthetic
datasets generated for each expression. For example,
Hubble’s law is simply a linear relation, so it could be
surprising that many algorithms are not able to ﬁnd
it. However, to perform well at the benchmark, each
algorithm must ﬁnd these expressions from the noisy
and sometimes biased datasets shown in ﬁg. 5.
What is also interesting is that the two pure deep
learning approaches, EQL and SR-Transformer, re-
covered the fewest expressions out of all tested al-gorithms. One of these, EQL, learns the expres-
sion in an online fashion, while SR-Transformer per-
forms fast inference based on pre-trained weights.
SR-Transformer, in particular, is pre-trained on bil-
lions of randomly-generated synthetic expressions on
a cluster of GPUs for weeks. However, the “un-
trained” algorithms written using classic heuristics:
PySR,Operon,DSR,andQLattice,allout-performed
these modern deep learning models. Perhaps this is
an insight into the diﬃculty of preparing deep learn-
ing systems for real-world data and unexpected “long-
tail” examples, whereas handwritten standard algo-
rithms will often perform just as well on unexpected
examples. In SR especially, the space of potential
expressions is so massive and nonlinear that inter-
polation techniques might suﬀer; consider that x=y
andxyare just a single mutation away, but in-
ﬁnitely distinct in their data representation. In spite
of this, while pure deep learning strategies appears
to require improvements in architecture or training
to be useful in a real world SR setting, its success
in, e.g., [23, 27, 30] shows there is indeed strong po-
tential long-term for such hybrid methods, and these
directions should continue to be pursued.
4 Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented PySR, an open-
source library for practical symbolic regression. We
have developed PySRwith the aim of democratizing
and popularizing symbolic regression in the sciences.
By leveraging a powerful multi-population evolu-
tionary algorithm, a unique evolve-simplify-optimize
loop, ahigh-performancedistributedbackend, andin-
tegration with deep learning packages, PySRis ca-
pable of accelerating the discovery of interpretable
symbolic models from data.
Furthermore, through the introduction of a new
benchmark, EmpiricalBench, we have provided a
means to quantitatively evaluate the performance of
symbolic regression algorithms in scientiﬁc applica-
tions.
Our results indicate that, despite advances in
deep learning, classic algorithms build on evolution
and other untrained symbolic techniques such as
PySR, Operon, DSR, and QLattice, still outperform
pure deep-learning-based approaches, EQL and SR-
Transformer, in discovering historical empirical equa-
17