models is that the generated expressions make use
of operators which are common in a particular ﬁeld,
and a domain scientist may be able to see connections
with existing models. In some ways, this process re-
lates to language: black box machine learning models
represent functions in a language uninterpretable to
a scientist, whereas SR uses the language in place.
Furthermore, due to the modular nature of scientiﬁc
modelling—many complex models are built on-top of
existing simple models for particular subsystems—
it also makes sense from a standpoint of improving
model accuracy to make use of common operators
(for an interesting explicit example of this, see [26]).
PySRdoesnot, perse, haveanybuilt-inoperators.
Due to the just-in-time compiled nature of Julia, any
realscalarfunctionfromtheentiretyoftheJuliaBase
language is available, and can be compiled into the
searchcodeatruntime. Thisincludescommonly-used
operators such as +,-,*,/,^,exp,log,sin,cos,
tan,abs, and many others.
Furthermore, since many domains of science have
operators that are unique to their ﬁeld, it is possible
to pass an arbitrary Julia function as an operator,
whether it be a binary operator (with two arguments)
or a unary operator (with one argument). Any func-
tion of the form f:R!RorR2!R, whether
continuous or not, can be used as a user-deﬁned op-
erator. The function need only be designed for scalar
input and output, and PySR will use Julia to auto-
matically compile and vectorize it, generating SIMD
(Single Instruction, Multiple Data) instructions when
possible. In PySR, an example of this would be:
op = "special(x, y) = cos(x) *(x + y)"
model = PySRRegressor(binary_operators=[op])
where the string special(x, y) = cos(x) *(x
+ y)is Julia code giving a function deﬁnition.
This would deﬁne a binary operator special that
would be compiled into the search code. To enable
custom operators to be deﬁned in the various
export functionality, the user must also deﬁne
equivalent operators in SymPy (here, lambda x,
y: sympy.cos(x) *(x + y) ), as well as JAX
or PyTorch versions if the user wishes to export to
those frameworks as well.
As an example in science, it is very common in
astrophysics to see “broken power laws”: power laws
whose exponent takes on diﬀerent values in the pa-rameter space. This could be deﬁned in PySR
by enabling the power law operator ^, and then
giving the string cond(x, y) = x < 0 ? 0 : y ,
which deﬁnes a conditional branch of an expression
given some expression deﬁned in the xvariable (us-
ing the ternary operator condition ? value1 :
value2). For example, pow(x, cond(x - 5, 3.4)
- 2.1)would deﬁne the broken power law:
x5; x1:3
x<5; x4:5:
The importance of deﬁning custom operators is that
there is no standard set of operators which the library
is speciﬁcally tuned for; any operator common in a
particular ﬁeld is feasible to implement (so long as it
can take 1-2 scalar arguments).
2.5 Custom Losses
In many machine learning toy datasets for bench-
marking regression algorithms, Mean-Square-Error
(MSE orL2loss) is typically used as a learning ob-
jective [72]. In a Bayesian framework, MSE is equiv-
alent to assuming every data point is Gaussian dis-
tributed, with equal variance per point. Minimizing
MSE is equivalent to maximizing the Gaussian log-
likelihood. However, in science, one typically works
with a likelihood that is very speciﬁc to a particular
problem, and this is often non-Gaussian. Therefore,
it is important for an SR package to allow for cus-
tom loss functions. PySRimplements this in a way
that is very similar to that of custom operators (see
section 2.4). Given a string such as “ loss(x, y) =
abs(x - y) ”,PySRwill pass this to the Julia back-
end, which will automatically vectorize it and use it
as a loss function throughout the search process. In
a Bayesian context, this would allow one to deﬁne ar-
bitrary likelihoods, even for very complex branching
logic. This also works for weighted losses, such as
“loss(x, y, w) = abs(x - y) *w”
3 Evaluation
In section 1, we discussed practical issues with dis-
covering symbolic expressions in the sciences. Here,
we present a comparison of PySRwith existing tools
in terms of addressing these concerns.
11