devPySR & SymbolicRegression.jl github.com/MilesCranmer/pysr_paper
Interpretable Machine Learning for Science
with PySR and SymbolicRegression.jl
Miles Cranmer1,2
1Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA
2Flatiron Institute, New York, NY, USA
May 2, 2023
PySR3is an open-source library for practical symbolic regression , a type of machine learning
which aims to discover human-interpretable symbolic models. PySRwas developed to democra-
tize and popularize symbolic regression for the sciences, and is built on a high-performance dis-
tributed backend, a ﬂexible search algorithm, and interfaces with several deep learning packages.
PySR’s internal search algorithm is a multi-population evolutionary algorithm, which consists
of a unique evolve-simplify-optimize loop, designed for optimization of unknown scalar constants
in newly-discovered empirical expressions. PySR’s backend is an extremely optimized Julia li-
brary SymbolicRegression.jl4, which can be used directly from Julia. It is capable of fusing
user-deﬁned operators into SIMD kernels at runtime, performing automatic diﬀerentiation, and
distributing populations of expressions to thousands of cores across a cluster. In describing this
software, we also introduce a new benchmark, “ EmpiricalBench ,” to quantify the applicability of
symbolic regression algorithms in science. This benchmark measures recovery of historical empirical
equations from original and synthetic datasets.
1 Introduction
Johannes Kepler discovered his famous third law of
planetarymotion, (period)2/(radius)3, fromsearch-
ing for patterns in thirty years of data produced by
Tycho Brahe’s unaided eye. Kepler did not discover
thisbysearchingthroughallconceivablerelationships
with a genetic algorithm on a computer, but by his
owngeometricalintuition. “AnditwasKepler’sThird
Law, not an apple, that led Isaac Newton to discover
the law of gravitation” [1]. Likewise, Planck’s law was
not derived from ﬁrst principles, but was a symbolic
form ﬁt to data [2]. This symbolic relationship would
inspire the development of Quantum Mechanics.
Now, this ﬁrst step—discovering empirical rela-
3github.com/MilesCranmer/PySR
4github.com/MilesCranmer/SymbolicRegression.jltionships from data or based on human intuition—
is both diﬃcult and time-consuming, even for low-
dimensional data where it has been shown to be NP-
hard [3]. In modern, high-dimensional datasets, it
seems an impossible task to discover simple symbolic
relationships without the use of automated tools.
This brings us to an optimization problem known
as “symbolic regression,” or SR. In this paper, we de-
scribe an algorithm for performing SR, and describe
software dedicated to equation discovery in the sci-
ences.
Symbolic Regression. SR describes a supervised
learning task where the model space is spanned by
analytic expressions. This is commonly solved in a
multi-objective optimization framework, jointly min-
1arXiv:2305.01582v3  [astro-ph.IM]  5 May 2023