possible expressions considered by some SR
algorithms such as [31]: operators, integers,
and variables—is discrete and ﬁnite up to a
given max size. This set is even searchable
with brute force, as is used in [31] in com-
bination with a symmetry and dimensional
analysis module. However, with arbitrary
real constants, the set of equations one must
search is uncountably inﬁnite. The diﬃculty
of searching this set is further compounded
by several factors:
2. The discovered equation must provide in-
sight into the nature of the problem. The
equation which often holds the most insight,
and is therefore adopted by scientists, is not
always the most accurate (many other ML
algorithms could be used instead for accu-
racy), but is instead an equation which bal-
ances accuracy with simplicity.
3. An empirical equation in science is discov-
ered from data containing noise, which often
has heteroscedastic structure.
4. Many empirical equations are not diﬀeren-
tiable, instead being composed of diﬀerent
expressions active in only parts of parame-
ter space (e.g., exp(x)forx<0andx2+ 1
forx0).
5. Discovered expressions in science must sat-
isfy known constraints, e.g., mass conserva-
tion.
6. Empirical relations are frequently comprised
of operators which are unique to one partic-
ular ﬁeld of science, so the equation search
strategy must allow for custom operators.
7. Observational data is often high-
dimensional, and the SR algorithm must
either manage this internally, or be layered
with a feature selection algorithm.
8. The search tool must be capable of ﬁnding
relationships in non-tabular datasets, such
assequences,grids,andgraphs(forexample,
by using aggregation operators such asP).
9. Finally, and most importantly, any SR pack-
age useful to scientists must be open-source,
cross-platform, easy-to-use, and interface
with common tools. For more discussion,
being reduced, as the relationship with fundamental con-
stants to derived constants might be arbitrarily complex.the references [53, 54] consider this from the
point of view of the astrophysics community.
Contribution. In this paper, we introduce PySR,
a Python and Julia package for Scientiﬁc Symbolic
Regression. The Python package is available under
pysron PyPI and Conda6and the Julia library un-
derSymbolicRegression7on the Julia package reg-
istry. Every part of PySRis written with scientiﬁc
discovery in mind, as the entire point of creating this
package was to enable the authors of this paper to
use this tool in their own ﬁeld for equation discovery.
All of the requirements of discovering an empirical
equation for science, as listed above, are satisﬁed by
PySR. We discuss this in detail in the following sec-
tions.
2 Methods
First, we give an in-depth discussion of the internal
algorithm in PySRin section 2.1, and then describe
the software implementation in section 2.2. We then
discuss a few additional implementation features in
section 2.3, section 2.4, and section 2.5.
2.1 Algorithm
PySRis a multi-population evolutionary algorithm
with multiple evolutions performed asynchronously.
The main loop of PySR, operating on each popula-
tionindependently, isaclassicevolutionaryalgorithm
basedontournamentselectionforindividualselection
(ﬁrst introduced in the thesis of [55] and generalized
in [56]), and several mutations and crossovers for gen-
erating new individuals. Evolutionary algorithms for
SRwasﬁrstpopularizedin[9], andhasdominatedthe
development of ﬂexible SR algorithms since. PySR
makes several modiﬁcations to this classic approach,
someofwhicharemotivatedbyresultsinrecentwork.
A simple evolutionary algorithm proceeds as fol-
lows:
1. Assume one has a population of individuals,
a ﬁtness function, and a set of mutation op-
erators.
2. Randomly select an ns-sized subset of indi-
viduals from the population (e.g., classical
6github.com/MilesCranmer/PySR
7github.com/MilesCranmer/SymbolicRegression.jl
3