Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
50 100 150 20000:511:5LSTM
Mogrifier
(a) 10M model parameters with vocabulary size 1k.50 100 150 200024LSTM
Mogrifier
(b) 24M model parameters with vocabulary size 10k.
Figure 4: Cross-entropy vs sequence length in the reverse copy task with i.i.d. tokens. Lower is better. The
Mogriﬁer is better than the LSTM even in this synthetic task with no resemblance to natural language.
(Wmxx)(Wmhhprev). In this formulation, the differences are readily apparent. First, the mLSTM
allows for multiplicative interaction between xandhprev, but it only overrides hprev, while in the
Mogriﬁer the interaction is two-way, which – as the ablation study showed – is important. Second,
the mLSTM can change not only the magnitude but also the sign of values in hprev, something with
which we experimented in the Mogriﬁer, but could not get to work. Furthermore, in the deﬁnition of
hm
prev, the unsquashed linearities and their elementwise product make the mLSTM more sensitive to
initialization and unstable during optimization.
On the Enwik8 dataset, we greatly improved on the published results of the mLSTM (Krause et al.
2016). In fact, even our LSTM baseline outperformed the mLSTM by 0.03 bpc. We also conducted
experiments on PTB based on our reimplementation of the mLSTM following the same methodology
as the ablation study and found that the mLSTM did not improve on the LSTM (see Table 3).
Krause et al. (2016) posit and verify the recovery hypothesis which says that having just suffered
a large loss, the loss on the next time step will be smaller on average for the mLSTM than for the
LSTM. This was found not to be the case for the Mogriﬁer. Neither did we observe a signiﬁcant
change in the gap between the LSTM and the Mogriﬁer in the tied and untied embeddings settings,
which would be expected if recovery was affected by xandhprevbeing in different domains.
4.3 T HEREVERSE COPY TASK
Our original motivation for the Mogriﬁer was to allow the context to amplify salient and attenuate
nuisance features in the input embeddings. We conduct a simple experiment to support this point
of view. Consider the reverse copy task where the network reads an input sequence of tokens and
a marker token after which it has to repeat the input in reverse order. In this simple sequence-to-
sequence learning (Sutskever et al. 2014) setup, the reversal is intended to avoid the minimal time lag
problem (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), which is not our focus here.
The experimental setup is as follows. For the training set, we generate 500 000 examples by uniformly
sampling a given number of tokens from a vocabulary of size 1000 . The validation and test sets
are constructed similarly, and contain 10 000 examples. The model consists of an independent,
unidirectional encoder and a decoder, whose total number of parameters is 10million. The decoder
is initialized from the last state of the encoder. Since overﬁtting is not an issue here, no dropout is
necessary, and we only tune the learning rate, the l2 penalty, and the embedding size for the LSTM.
For the Mogriﬁer, the number of rounds rand the rank kof the low-rank approximation are also
tuned.
We compare the case where both the encoder and decoder are LSTMs to where both are Mogriﬁers.
Fig. 4a shows that, for sequences of length 50 and 100, both models can solve the task perfectly. At
higher lengths though, the Mogriﬁer has a considerable advantage. Examining the best hyperparameter
settings found, the embedding/hidden sizes for the LSTM and Mogriﬁer are 498/787 vs 41/1054 at
150 steps, and 493/790 vs 181/961 at 200 steps. Clearly, the Mogriﬁer was able to work with a much
smaller embedding size than the LSTM, which is in line with our expectations for a model with a
more ﬂexible interaction between the input and recurrent state. We also conducted experiments with
a larger model and vocabulary size, and found the effect even more pronounced (see Fig. 4b).
7