Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
4.4 W HAT THE MOGRIFIER IS NOT
The results on the reverse copy task support our hypothesis that input embeddings are enriched by
the Mogriﬁer architecture, but that cannot be the full explanation as the results of the ablation study
indicate. In the following, we consider a number of hypotheses about where the advantage of the
Mogriﬁer lies and the experiments that provide evidence against them.
EHypothesis: the beneﬁt is in scaling xandhprev.We veriﬁed that data dependency is a crucial
feature by adding a learnable scaling factor to the LSTM inputs. We observed no improvement.
Also, at extremely low-rank (less than 5) settings where the amount of information in its gating is
small, the Mogriﬁer loses its advantage.
EHypothesis: the beneﬁt is in making optimization easier. We performed experiments with different
optimizers (SGD, RMSProp), with intra-layer batch normalization and layer normalization on
the LSTM gates. While we cannot rule out an effect on optimization difﬁculty, in all of these
experiments the gap between the LSTM and the Mogriﬁer was the same.
EHypothesis: exact tying of embeddings is too constraining, the beneﬁt is in making this rela-
tionship less strict. Experiments conducted with untied embeddings and character-based models
demonstrate improvements of similar magnitude.
EHypothesis: the beneﬁt is in the low-rank factorization of Qi;Riimplicitly imposing structure on
the LSTM weight matrices. We observed that the full-rank Mogriﬁer also performed better than
the plain LSTM. We conducted additional experiments where the LSTM’s gate matrices were
factorized and observed no improvement.
EHypothesis: the beneﬁt comes from better performance on rare words. The observed advantage
on character-based modelling is harder to explain based on frequency. Also, in the reverse copy
experiments, a large number of tokens were sampled uniformly, so there were no rare words at all.
EHypothesis: the beneﬁt is speciﬁc to the English language. This is directly contradicted by the
Finnish MWC and the reverse copy experiments.
EHypothesis: the beneﬁt is in handling long-range dependencies better. Experiments in the episodic
setting (i.e. sentence-level language modelling) exhibited the same gap as the non-episodic ones.
EHypothesis: the scaling up of inputs saturates the downstream LSTM gates. The idea here is that
saturated gates may make states more stable over time. We observed the opposite: the means
of the standard LSTM gates in the Mogriﬁer were very close between the two models, but their
variance was smaller in the Mogriﬁer.
5 C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We presented the Mogriﬁer LSTM, an extension to the LSTM, with state-of-the-art results on
several language modelling tasks. Our original motivation for this work was that the context-free
representation of input tokens may be a bottleneck in language models and by conditioning the
input embedding on the recurrent state some beneﬁt was indeed derived. While it may be part of the
explanation, this interpretation clearly does not account for the improvements brought by conditioning
the recurrent state on the input and especially the applicability to character-level datasets. Positioning
our work on the Multiplicative RNN line of research offers a more compelling perspective.
To give more credence to this interpretation, in the analysis we highlighted a number of possible
alternative explanations, and ruled them all out to varying degrees. In particular, the connection
to the mLSTM is weaker than expected as the Mogriﬁer does not exhibit improved recovery (see
Section 4.2), and on PTB the mLSTM works only as well as the LSTM. At the same time, the
evidence against easier optimization is weak, and the Mogriﬁer establishing some kind of sharing
between otherwise independent LSTM weight matrices is a distinct possibility.
Finally, note that as shown by Fig. 1 and Eq. 1-2, the Mogriﬁer is a series of preprocessing steps
composed with the LSTM function, but other architectures, such as Mogriﬁer GRU or Mogriﬁer
Elman Network are possible. We also leave investigations into other forms of parameterization of
context-dependent transitions for future work.
8