Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
MOGRIFIER LSTM
Gábor Melisy, Tomáš Ko ˇciskýy, Phil Blunsomyz
{melisgl,tkocisky,pblunsom}@google.com
yDeepMind, London, UK
zUniversity of Oxford
ABSTRACT
Many advances in Natural Language Processing have been based upon more expres-
sive models for how inputs interact with the context in which they occur. Recurrent
networks, which have enjoyed a modicum of success, still lack the generalization
and systematicity ultimately required for modelling language. In this work, we
propose an extension to the venerable Long Short-Term Memory in the form of
mutual gating of the current input and the previous output. This mechanism affords
the modelling of a richer space of interactions between inputs and their context.
Equivalently, our model can be viewed as making the transition function given
by the LSTM context-dependent. Experiments demonstrate markedly improved
generalization on language modelling in the range of 3–4 perplexity points on Penn
Treebank and Wikitext-2, and 0.01–0.05 bpc on four character-based datasets. We
establish a new state of the art on all datasets with the exception of Enwik8, where
we close a large gap between the LSTM and Transformer models.
1 I NTRODUCTION
The domination of Natural Language Processing by neural models is hampered only by their limited
ability to generalize and questionable sample complexity (Belinkov and Bisk 2017; Jia and Liang
2017; Iyyer et al. 2018; Moosavi and Strube 2017; Agrawal et al. 2016), their poor grasp of grammar
(Linzen et al. 2016; Kuncoro et al. 2018), and their inability to chunk input sequences into meaningful
units (Wang et al. 2017). While direct attacks on the latter are possible, in this paper, we take a
language-agnostic approach to improving Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN, Rumelhart et al. (1988)),
which brought about many advances in tasks such as language modelling, semantic parsing, machine
translation, with no shortage of non-NLP applications either (Bakker 2002; Mayer et al. 2008). Many
neural models are built from RNNs including the sequence-to-sequence family (Sutskever et al. 2014)
and its attention-based branch (Bahdanau et al. 2014). Thus, innovations in RNN architecture tend to
have a trickle-down effect from language modelling, where evaluation is often the easiest and data
the most readily available, to many other tasks, a trend greatly strengthened by ULMFiT (Howard
and Ruder 2018), ELMo (Peters et al. 2018) and BERT (Devlin et al. 2018), which promote language
models from architectural blueprints to pretrained building blocks.
To improve the generalization ability of language models, we propose an extension to the LSTM
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), where the LSTM’s input xis gated conditioned on the output of
the previous step hprev. Next, the gated input is used in a similar manner to gate the output of the
previous time step. After a couple of rounds of this mutual gating, the last updated xandhprevare
fed to an LSTM. By introducing these additional of gating operations, in one sense, our model joins
the long list of recurrent architectures with gating structures of varying complexity which followed
the invention of Elman Networks (Elman 1990). Examples include the LSTM, the GRU (Chung et al.
2015), and even designs by Neural Architecture Search (Zoph and Le 2016).
Intuitively, in the lowermost layer, the ﬁrst gating step scales the input embedding (itself a representa-
tion of the average context in which the token occurs) depending on the actual context, resulting in a
contextualized representation of the input. While intuitive, as Section 4 shows, this interpretation
cannot account for all the observed phenomena.
In a more encompassing view, our model can be seen as enriching the mostly additive dynamics of
recurrent transitions placing it in the company of the Input Switched Afﬁne Network (Foerster et al.
1arXiv:1909.01792v2  [cs.CL]  29 Jan 2020