8
Vol:.(1234567890) Scientific Reports  |         (2023) 13:5279  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-32032-6
www.nature.com/scientificreports/ODM. As expected, correction of RTOE with GLoGD architecture helps to maintain the monotonic relationship 
between the outcome probability and daily dose fractionation and in turn helped ARCliDS in making better 
recommendation.
Our framework has some limitations. Clinically, RT dose adaptation can be performed in different ways: (1) 
change dose per fractions, and (2) change the number of fractions. For SBRT, the former is suitable, however 
for some diseases and modalities the latter may be more appropriate. For instance, when RT is combined with 
chemotherapy, increasing the number of fractions is preferred. Our framework only covers the former. ARCliDS 
uses several biomarkers such as cytokines as predictors. Due to the lack of standardization, biomarker levels of 
the same blood sample measured in two labs can be quite different also known as batch effect. So, biomarker 
levels of external dataset must be carefully examined before applying ARCliDS. For dosimetric predictor, we 
have used gEUD, however, for lung and liver, mean dose could also be applied. Another limitation is the number 
of NTCPs considered in ARCliDS. In practice there may be more than 1 normal tissues of interest. For NSCLC, 
heart and lungs are the dose-limiting organs at risk (OAR). For HCC, although liver is usually the main OAR, 
in some patients, who had tumors near the intestine, the intestine is also considered during designing the treat-
ment plan. Finally, beside data-related shortcomings, ARCliDS prediction and recommendation uncertainty, 
which is based on statistical ensembles, can be improved by training more models; however, this will require 
more computational power and time. Although we have the largest dataset of its kind, a larger sample size and 
balanced dataset will improve ARCliDS performance. We dedicate subsequent paragraphs to discuss data-related 
limitations, methods we implemented to overcome those limitations, and other possible solutions.
The learning of an environment model is the bottle neck of ARCliDS. For learning a good ARTE, a sufficient 
sample size and a balanced dataset are necessary. In the adaptive HCC patient’s cohort, only 1 patient did not 
achieve local control. As a result, RTOE for TCP had an unusually high AUROCC uncertainty. Although we 
applied class-imbalance correction techniques such as SMOTE and weighted loss function, we witnessed that 
such techniques fall short in correcting a highly imbalanced dataset. In addition, the toxicity count was also 
low—there were only 7 patients that showed toxicity. While this is a clinically desirable result, it hinders the 
learning process and hampers model generalizability. To make the matter worse, patients with highest liver gEUD 
didn’t show toxicity as shown in Fig. S19. This reflects inter-patient heterogeneity, where some patients have poor 
pre-treatment liver function, who are at a higher risk of toxicity for lower dose. Nevertheless, we performed a 
hyperparameter search for maximizing the generalizability of ARTE.
High noise-to-signal ratio due to inter-patient heterogeneity becomes even more pronounced with a small 
sample size. The medical field is especially doomed with a small sample size primarily due to the privacy  issue26. 
Such issues make it difficult to learn correct trends in purely data-driven learning. We found that Single-GNN 
RTOE predicted unphysical trends between daily dose fractionation and TCP/NTCP . For correction, we applied 
a GLoGD-GNN architecture to infuse prior knowledge into the data-driven technique. We found that it cor -
rects the trend and can also increase the model predictability. Alternatively, distributive learning features such 
as federated learning can be added to ARCliDS to overcome the small sample size issue. In federated learning 
approach only the model parameters are shared and data stays within the firewall of individual  institutions27.
Sample size issues in training ODM can also be overcome by using synthetic patients. Since ODM of ARCliDS 
learns via model-based reinforcement learning, computationally the task of ODM is to learn ARTE. This can be 
considered as an interpolation problem in a continuous feature space. This problem can be tackled using brute-
force by exhaustively selecting patient’s state. However, this assumes a uniform distribution which is generally 
not true. Therefore, we applied generative adversarial network (GAN) to learn the underlying patient’s feature 
distribution, as shown in SM and generated synthetic patient states for training the ODM. In principle, a con-
ditional  GAN28 can be applied to generate patients states distribution along with the outcome, however, a low 
sample size coupled with severe class-imbalance makes it impossible to correctly learn the underlying conditional 
probability distribution.
We found that the RMSD values for adaptive SBRT in HCC was higher than adaptive RT in NSCLC. There 
are three reasons for the higher RMSD value: (i) A larger range of adaptive dose values was explored for SBRT, 
i.e., 1 to 15 Gy/frac compared to 1.5 to 4 Gy/frac; given that the sample sizes are comparable, the datapoints for 
HCC are much sparser resulting in higher interpolation error; (ii) most of the patients with a clinically nega-
tive outcome for SBRT received a lower adaptive dose than the positive case; this can confuse the RTOE, which 
assumes higher doses results in higher TCP and NTCP; (iii) due to class-imbalance, the corrected GLoGD-GNN 
RTOE yielded a flatter monotonic relation than expected that did not spanned the whole probability space; we 
observed that the AI agent failed to satisfy a population-based goal of TCP > 90% and NTCP < 25%. So, we 
set the computation goal of TCP > 50% and NTCP < 50%. A smaller RMSD value can be achieved with a large 
sample size and well-balanced dataset.
In conclusion, we have built a user-friendly software for AI-assisted clinical decision-making and demon-
strated its performance in adaptive RT. The underlying technology behind the software is generalizable to other 
sequential decision-making tasks in oncology. We employed GNNs to exploit the inter-feature relationship. We 
trained and validated our software in two different treatment types for two different diseases. We repeated the 
training and validation for 2 different models to test our hypothesis of improved model performance. The results 
confirmed our hypothesis. Statistical Ensemble was adopted to assess the model uncertainty.
Methods
Graphical user interface. We have designed ARCliDS as a Web Application (app) using R Shiny as shown 
in Fig.  4. The app consists of 4 main panels: Data Input Panel, Outcome Space, Population Distribution Plot, and 
Report Print. Beside these, there are accessibility tools such as help information, user guide, documentation, 
zooming, and printing option.