3
Vol.:(0123456789) Scientific Reports  |         (2023) 13:5279  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-32032-6
www.nature.com/scientificreports/redundancies. From another perspective, information from one feature only goes to its neighboring features. 
In this work, we have borrowed the feature graph from Luo et al. ’s work on multi-objective Bayesian  Network21 
which identified the most important features related to RT outcome of interest by finding the Markov Blanket 
of the outcomes. Details of feature selection procedure are presented in SM Sect. S1. For both NSCLC and HCC, 
we were able to (coincidentally) select 13 important features.
The important highlights of our work as as follows. ARTE is composed of transition function (TF), RT out -
come estimator (RTOE) and Reward Function (RF). To define patients state, we carried out feature selection via 
multi-objective Markov Blanket feature selection process. In this work, we have proposed a linear-quadratic-
linear (LQL) type TF. This is an improvement from Niraula et al.5 work which employed a linear-quadratic (LQ) 
type function. LQL model is a generalization of LQ model that covers both RT and SBRT. For RTOE, we applied 
GNN to general logistic function guided double NN architecture, which was developed by Niraula et al.5 To 
Figure 1.  (a) Knowledge Based Response-Adaptive Radiotherapy (KBR-ART). In KBR-ART, a pre-treatment 
assessment is conducted in phase 0 and appropriate treatment plan is tailored. Then patients’ treatment response 
is evaluated in Phase 1, and an optimal treatment adaptation is planned and executed in Phase 2. (b). ARCliDS 
Blueprint. ARCliDS is composed of two AI components: (1) Artificial Radiotherapy Environment (ARTE) and 
(2) Optimal Decision-Maker (ODM). ARCLiDS learns ARTE via supervised learning. ARTE is then utilized in 
planning and teaching ODM via reinforcement learning. In the operation mode, ARTE outputs State Dynamics 
and RT Outcome estimates while ODM outputs the optimal dose adaptation recommendation. Both ARTE 
and ODM present uncertainty estimates. The 3D human shape image in red color is obtained from http://www.
humanshape.org/ and printed with the developer’s permission under a CC BY open access license.