12
Vol:.(1234567890) Scientific Reports  |         (2023) 13:5279  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-32032-6
www.nature.com/scientificreports/Uncertainty estimate via statistical ensemble. Model uncertainty is estimated using Statistical 
Ensembling. The statistical ensemble technique trains several identical models and finds averages and deviations 
of the prediction. This method estimates uncertainty purely based on the trained model. Additionally, this also 
helps with desensitizing ARCliDS to the noise associated with the stochastic optimization algorithm used by 
NNs. NNs utilize a large number of randomly initiated weights and as a result, learned weights are different from 
model to  model32. ARCliDS presents the average prediction µ as an expected value, and the covariance cov  as an 
uncertainty estimation as shown in Fig. 6b. For ODM, standard deviation σ is used as the uncertainty estimate.
Training and validation. A complete information on 67 NSCLC patients and 71 HCC patients were avail-
able for training and validation. A detailed description is provided in SM S7.1 and S8.1. We applied the 10-fold 
stratified shuffle for validation and hyper-parameter tuning of RTOE. The data set was split into 80–20% for 
training and for validation, respectively. We applied SMOTE and weighted loss function for correcting class 
imbalance. Basic hyper parameters—optimizer learning rate, number of neural network nodes, and training 
epoch—were tuned with the grid search algorithm. For further evaluation, we found Y ouden J-score and optimal 
Figure 6.  (a) Workflow of Optimal Decision-Maker (ODM). ODM is composed of a deep Q-network (DQN) 
and decision selector. Given a state (st,c) , DQN yields a q (quality) value for the range of adaptive dose. The 
selector greedily selects the dose with the highest q-value. The ODM is trained by following the model-based 
reinforcement learning paradigm. In the Planning Phase, the ODM saves next states {st+1} and associated 
rewards {rt+1} for all patient’s state {(s t,c)} and the range of adaptive dose {dt} . In the Learning phase, a double 
DQN algorithm is applied on the memory. (b) Model Uncertainty via Statistical Ensemble. We trained n 
identical models. The mean and covariance (or standard deviation) of the output distribution captures the 
model output and model uncertainty. For RTOE’s probability outputs, we present the uncertainty estimates as 
the covariance and for ODM dose recommendations, we present the uncertainty estimates as the standard error 
of mean.