2
Vol:.(1234567890) Scientific Reports  |         (2023) 13:5279  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-32032-6
www.nature.com/scientificreports/Optimal decision-making in Knowledge Based Response-Adaptive Radiotherapy (KBR-ART) is a difficult  task1. 
The difficulties arise from a slew of factors, such as, involvement of many variables, uncertainty in treatment 
response, and inter-patient  heterogeneity2. In the absence of a quantitative framework, clinical decisions are 
primarily influenced by physician’s professional experiences, which may result in inter-physician variability. 
Thus, there is a need for a robust and user-friendly clinical decision-support tool for objective decision-making 
in KBR-ART that is data-driven and  consistent3.
Adaptive Radiotherapy Clinical Decision Support (ARCliDS) is a web-based software tool for AI-assisted 
optimal decision-making in KBR-ART  4–6 and potentially other oncology applications involving dynamic treat -
ment regime (DTR)7,8. ARCliDS provides a quantitative approach to overcome the decision-making difficulties 
via a set of data analytics algorithms, which includes feature selection of important variables, statistical ensemble 
for representing uncertainties of treatment response, and, most importantly, integration of information-rich 
dense multi-omics datasets for capturing inter-patient  heterogeneity9–11. ARCliDS combines all the above data 
analytics capabilities and presents a user-friendly interface for evaluating relevant clinical use cases. Moreover, 
it is complementary to the current treatment planning system; the integration may facilitate an introduction of 
multi-omics information into the treatment planning workflow.
DTR including adaptive RT (ART)12 are designed for treatment personalization. A popular ART paradigm 
and implementation is to adapt treatment plans to accommodate during-treatment anatomical changes due to 
weight loss, tumor regression and/or diminution of the volume of surrounding normal tissue and organ at risk 
(OAR). A complementary ART paradigm is KBR-ART which provides a response-based adaptive framework 
for personalizing RT as shown in Fig.  1a, where the response assessment is not limited to observing anatomical 
changes. It is divided into three phases: Pre-Treatment Assessment, Treatment Response Evaluation (evalua-
tion phase) and Treatment Adaptation (adaptation phase). In the pre-treatment phase, a patient’s disease and 
condition is assessed and a treatment plan is tailored. In the evaluation phase, a patient’s treatment response 
is evaluated by comparing pre and mid treatment multi-omics information changes. Based on the treatment 
responses, the patient’s associated outcome probabilities are estimated. In the adaptation phase, treatment plan-
ning is adapted for a personalized and an optimal outcome. Two endpoints are considered: tumor control and 
normal tissue complication. The goal of KBR-ART is to maximize tumor control probability (TCP) and minimize 
normal tissue complication probability (NTCP).
To demonstrate the potential of ARCliDS, two clinical use cases are presented. In both studies, the evaluation 
time was around 1 month. The first use case is based on the UMCC (University of Michigan Cancer Center) 
2007-123 phase II dose escalation clinical trial  NCT0119052713, where inoperable or unresectable non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC) patients were administered with 30 daily dose fractions. The patients received roughly 50 
Gy [Gray = J/Kg] equivalent dose in 2 Gy fractions (EQD2) in the evaluation phase and up to a total dose of 92 
Gy EQD2 in the adaptation phase. The evaluation phase lasted for roughly two-thirds of the 6-week treatment 
period. In the second clinical use case, patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) received adaptive SBRT in 
clinical trials NCT01519219, NCT01522937, and  NCT024608351414. In the evaluation phase, patients received 
3 daily dose fractions followed by 1 month break, and in the adaptation phase, a suitable sub-population of the 
patients received 2 additional daily doses.
A large sample size that is representative of the true population is preferred for all data driven and statistical 
modeling applications. However, due to financial, feasibility, and ethical reasons, obtaining a large dataset in 
medical field is often impractical. In our case, a dataset of size 117 and 292 were available for NSCLC patients 
and HCC patients, respectively. Dense multi-omics data with 297 features were available for only 67 NSCLC 
patients and 110 features for 71 HCC patients. These datasets, albeit on the smaller size, are unique as KBR-ART 
is still in its clinical trial phase and hence among the largest multi-omics datasets for KBR-ART. The multi-omics 
data consists of clinical, dosimetric, radiomics, and molecular biomarkers, such as genomics (single nucleotide 
polymorphisms), transcriptomics (micro-RNA), and proteomics (cytokines).
Under the current United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) definition and guidelines, ARCliDS 
is categorized as a Software as a Medical Device (SaMD)6. SaMD is defined as software intended to be used for 
medical purposes independently in contrast to software intended to drive a hardware medical device (software 
in a medical device). This definition was recently adopted by FDA to include AI  software15,16 which can automati-
cally learn from user cases and continuously update after deployment, as opposed to traditional software, which 
stays fixed after deployment (excluding version update). Therefore, ARCliDS also has two modes of operation: 
Operation Mode and Learning Mode as shown in Fig.  1b. After the initial training, both modes can run simul -
taneously (online learning) in the clinic.
ARCliDS is composed of two main AI components. The first component is the Artificial Radiotherapy Envi-
ronment (ARTE) for estimating the predicted outcome and the second component is the Optimal Decision-
Maker (ODM) for decision-making. In Operation Mode, ARCliDS asks for a patient’s pre and mid treatment 
multi-omics information, and current treatment plan. It feeds that information into ARTE and ODM, and obtains 
outcome estimates, state dynamics, and the optimal dose adaptation value. All of the estimated results come 
with associated uncertainty. The results are presented in two main plots: outcome space spanned by TCP and 
NTCP , and population distribution plots as further explained in the Graphical User Interface (GUI). During the 
Learning Mode, ARTE is trained first on the available data, and then ODM is trained on the ARTE. The details 
of the training are presented in the “ Methods ” section and Supplementary Materials (SM).
ARCliDS presents a significant improvement to Tseng et al.17 and Niraula et al.5 methods. The improvement 
comes from the graphical representation of patients’ features. Convolution neural networks (CNNs) are known 
to perform well because they exploit the feature locality of  images18. In other words, pixels at neighboring areas of 
an image are correlated, and CNN architectures can capture those correlations. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) 
are similar except they can also exploit the non-local relationship between feature  values19,20. Computationally, 
GNNs use fewer network connections compared to fully connected NNs, which help in learning by reducing