3.3. Minimax Optimization Problem
With the aforementioned derivation, we now formulate
our ﬁnal model, Example Transfer Network (ETN). We unify
the transferability weighting framework in Equations (2)–
(3)and the example transferability quantiﬁcation in Equa-
tions (6)–(9). Denoting by θ˜ythe parameters of the auxiliary
label predictor ˜Gy, the proposed ETN model can be solved
by a minimax optimization problem that ﬁnds saddle-point
solutions ˆθf,ˆθy,ˆθdandˆθ˜yto model parameters as follows,
(ˆθf,ˆθy) = argmin
θf,θyEGy−EGd,
(ˆθd) = argmin
θdEGd,
(ˆθ˜y) = argmin
θ˜yE˜Gy+E˜Gd.(10)
ETN enhances partial domain adaptation by learning to
transfer relevant examples and diminish outlier examples for
both source classiﬁer Gyand domain discriminator Gd. It
exploits progressive weighting schemes w(xs
i)from the aux-
iliary domain discriminator ˜Gdand auxiliary label predictor
˜Gy, well quantifying the transferability of source examples.
4. Experiments
We conduct experiments to evaluate our approach with
state-of-the-art (partial) domain adaptation methods. Codes
and datasets will be available at github.com/thuml .
4.1. Setup
Ofﬁce-31 [32] isde facto for domain adaptation. It is rela-
tively small with 4,652 images in 31 classes. Three domains,
namely A, D, W , are collected by downloading from ama-
zon.com (A), taking from DSLR (D) and from web camera
(W). Following the protocol in [ 5], we select images from
the 10 categories shared by Ofﬁce-31 andCaltech-256 to
build new target domain, creating six partial domain adapta-
tion tasks: A→W,D→W,W→D,A→D,D→AandW→A.
Note that there are 31 categories in the source domain and
10 categories in the target domain.
Ofﬁce-Home [40] is a larger dataset, with 4 domains of dis-
tinct styles: Artistic ,Clip Art ,Product andReal-World .
Each domain contains images of 65 object categories. De-
noting them as Ar,Cl,Pr,Rw, we obtain twelve partial do-
main adaptation tasks: Ar→Cl,Ar→Pr,Ar→Rw,Cl→Ar,
Cl→Pr,Cl→Rw,Pr→Ar,Pr→Cl,Pr→Rw,Rw→Ar,
Rw→Cl, and Rw→Pr. For PDA, we use images from the
ﬁrst 25 classes in alphabetical order as the target domain and
images from all 65 classes as the source domain.
ImageNet-Caltech is a large dataset built with ImageNet-
1K[31] and Caltech-256 . They share 84 classes, and thus
we form two partial domain adaptation tasks: ImageNet
(1000)→Caltech (84) andCaltech (256)→ImageNet (84) .As most networks are trained on the training set of ImageNet,
we use images from ImageNet validation set as target domain
forCaltech (256)→ImageNet (84) task.
We compare the proposed ETN model with state-of-the-
art deep learning and (partial) domain adaptation methods:
ResNet-50 [15], Deep Adaptation Network ( DAN ) [21],
Domain-Adversarial Neural Networks ( DANN ) [10], Ad-
versarial Discriminative Domain Adaptation ( ADDA ) [37],
Residual Transfer Networks ( RTN ) [22], Selective Adver-
sarial Network ( SAN ) [5], Importance Weighted Adversar-
ial Network ( IWAN ) [43] and Partial Adversarial Domain
Adaptation ( PADA ) [6].
Besides ResNet-50 [ 15], we also evaluate ETN and some
methods based on VGG [34] on the Ofﬁce-31 dataset. We
perform ablation study to justify the example transfer mech-
anism, by evaluating two ETN variants: 1) ETN w/o classi-
ﬁeris the variant without weights on the source classiﬁer; 2)
ETN w/o auxiliary is the variant without the auxiliary label
predictor on the auxiliary domain discriminator.
We implement all methods based on PyTorch , and ﬁne-
tune ResNet-50 [ 15] and VGG [ 34] pre-trained on ImageNet.
New layers are trained from scratch, and their learning rates
are 10 times that of the ﬁne-tuned layers. We use mini-
batch SGD with momentum of 0.9 and the learning rate
decay strategy implemented in DANN [ 10]: the learning
rate is adjusted during SGD using ηp=η0
(1+αp)β, wherep
is the training progress linearly changing from 0to1. The
ﬂip-coefﬁcient of the gradient reversal layer is increased
gradually from 0to1as DANN [ 10]. Hyper-parameters are
optimized with importance weighted cross-validation [ 35].
4.2. Results
The classiﬁcation results based on ResNet-50 on the the
twelve tasks of Ofﬁce-Home , six tasks of Ofﬁce-31 and the
two large-scale tasks of ImageNet-Caltech are shown in
Tables 1and2. We also compare all methods on Ofﬁce-31
with VGG backbone in Table 3. ETN outperforms all other
methods w.r.t average accuracy, showing that ETN performs
well with different base networks on different datasets.
Speciﬁcally, we have several observations. 1)ADDA,
DANN, and DAN outperform ResNet only on some tasks,
implying that they suffer from the negative transfer issue. 2)
RTN exploits the entropy minimization criterion to amend
itself with semi-supervised learning. Thus, it has some im-
provement over ResNet but still suffers from negative trans-
fer for some tasks. 3)Partial domain adaptation methods
(SAN [ 5] and IWAN [ 43]) perform better than ResNet and
other domain adaptation methods on most tasks, due to their
weighting mechanism to mitigate negative transfer caused by
outlier classes and promote positive transfer among shared
classes. 4)ETN outperforms SAN and IWAN on most tasks,
showing its power to discriminate the outlier classes from the
shared classes accurately and to transfer relevant examples.
2990