A major line of the existing domain adaptation meth-
ods bridge different domains by learning domain-invariant
feature representations in the absence of target labels, i.e.,
unsupervised domain adaptation. Existing methods assume
that the source and target domains share the same set of
class labels [ 32,12], which is crucial for directly applying
the source-trained classiﬁer to the target domain. Recent
studies in deep learning reveal that deep networks can dis-
entangle explanatory factors of variations behind domains
[8,42], thus learning more transferable features to improve
domain adaptation signiﬁcantly. These deep domain adapta-
tion methods typically embed distribution matching modules,
including moment matching [ 38,21,22,23] and adversar-
ial training [ 10,39,37,24,17], into deep architectures for
end-to-end learning of transferable representations.
Although existing methods can reduce the feature-level
domain shift, they assume label spaces across domains are
identical. In real-world applications, it is often formidable to
ﬁnd a relevant dataset with the label space identical to the tar-
get dataset of interest which is often unlabeled. A more prac-
tical scenario is Partial Domain Adaptation (PDA) [ 5,43,6],
which assumes that the source label space is a superspace
of the target label space, relaxing the constraint of identi-
cal label spaces. PDA enables knowledge transfer from a
big domain of many labels to a small domain of few labels.
With the emergence of Big Data, large-scale labeled datasets
such as ImageNet-1K [ 31] and Google Open Images [ 19]
are readily accessible to empower data-driven artiﬁcial intel-
ligence. These repositories are almost universal to subsume
categories of the target domain, making PDA feasible to
many applications. PDA can also work in the regime where
target data are in limited categories. For example, functions
of protein are limited. A large database of known protein
structures can be collected, which includes all functions. For
a new species, proteins have different structures, but their
functions are contained in the database. Predicting protein
functions for new species falls into the PDA problem.
As a generalization to standard domain adaptation, partial
domain adaptation is more challenging: the target labels
are unknown at training, and there must be many “outlier”
source classes that are useless for the target task. This tech-
nical challenge is intuitively illustrated in Figure 1, where
the target classes (like purple ‘ ◦’ and orange ‘ ▽’) will be
forcefully aligned to the outlier source classes (like ‘+’) by
existing domain adaptation methods. As a result, negative
transfer will happen because the learner migrates harmful
knowledge from the source domain to the target domain.
Negative transfer is the principal obstacle to the application
of domain adaptation techniques [ 29].
Thus, matching the whole source and target domains as
previous methods [ 21,10] is not a safe solution to the PDA
problem. We need to develop algorithms versatile enough to
transfer useful examples from the many-class dataset (sourcedomain) to the few-class dataset (target domain) while robust
enough to irrelevant or outlier examples. Three approaches
to partial domain adaptation [ 5,43,6] address the PDA by
weighing each data point in the domain-adversarial networks,
where a domain discriminator is learned to distinguish the
source and target. While decreasing the impact of irrele-
vant examples on domain alignment, they do not undo the
negative effect of the outlier classes on the source classiﬁer.
Moreover, they evaluate the transferability of source samples
without considering the underlying discriminative and multi-
modal structures. As a result, it is still vulnerable that they
may align the features of outlier source classes and target
classes, giving way to negative transfer.
Towards a safe approach to partial domain adaptation,
we present the Example Transfer Network (ETN), which
improves the previous work [ 5,43,6] by learning to transfer
useful examples. ETN automatically evaluates the transfer-
ability of source examples with a transferability quantiﬁer
based on their similarities to the target domain, which is used
to weigh their contributions to both the source classiﬁer and
the domain discriminator. In particular, ETN improves the
weight quality over previous work [ 43] by further revealing
the discriminative structure to the transferability quantiﬁer.
By this means, irrelevant source examples can be better de-
tected and ﬁltered out. Another key improvement of ETN
over the previous methods is the capability to simultaneously
conﬁne the source classiﬁer and the domain-adversarial net-
work within the auto-discovered shared label space, thus
promoting the positive transfer of relevant examples and
mitigating negative transfer of irrelevant examples. Compre-
hensive experiments demonstrate that our model achieves
state-of-the-art results on several benchmark datasets, includ-
ing Ofﬁce-31, Ofﬁce-Home, ImageNet-1K, and Caltech-256.
2. Related Work
Domain Adaptation Domain adaptation, a special sce-
nario of transfer learning [ 29], bridges domains of differ-
ent distributions to mitigate the burden of annotating target
data for machine learning [ 28,9,44,41], computer vision
[32,12,16] and natural language processing [ 7]. The main
technical difﬁculty of domain adaptation is to formally re-
duce the distribution discrepancy across different domains.
Deep networks can learn representations that suppress ex-
planatory factors of variations behind data [ 3] and manifest
invariant factors across different populations. These invariant
factors enable knowledge transfer across relevant domains
[42]. Deep networks have been extensively explored for do-
main adaptation [ 27,16], yielding signiﬁcant performance
gains against shallow domain adaptation methods.
While deep representations can disentangle complex data
distributions, recent advances show that they can only reduce,
but not remove, the cross-domain discrepancy [ 38]. Thus
deep learning alone cannot bound the generalization risk for
2986