the target task [ 25,1]. Recent works bridge deep learning
and domain adaptation [ 38,21,10,39,22]. They extend
deep networks to domain adaptation by adding adaptation
layers through which high-order statistics of distributions
are explicitly matched [ 38,21,22], or by adding a domain
discriminator to distinguish features of the source and tar-
get domains, while the features are learned adversarially to
deceive the discriminator in a minimax game [ 10,39].
Partial Domain Adaptation While the standard domain
adaptation advances rapidly, it still needs the vanilla assump-
tion that the source and target domains share the same label
space. This assumption does not hold in partial domain
adaptation (PDA), which transfers models from many-class
domains to few-class domains. There are three valuable
efforts towards the PDA problem. Selective Adversarial
Network (SAN) [ 5] adopts multiple adversarial networks
with a weighting mechanism to select out source examples
in the outlier classes. Partial Adversarial Domain Adapta-
tion [ 6] improves SAN by employing only one adversarial
network and further adding the class-level weight to the
source classiﬁer. Importance Weighted Adversarial Nets
(IWAN) [ 43] uses the Sigmoid output of an auxiliary domain
classiﬁer (not involved in domain-adversarial training) to
derive the probability of a source example belonging to the
target domain, which is used to weigh source examples in the
domain-adversarial network. These pioneering approaches
achieve dramatical performance gains over standard methods
in partial domain adaptation tasks.
These efforts mitigate negative transfer caused by outlier
source classes and promote positive transfer among shared
classes. However, as outlier classes are only selected out for
the domain discriminators, the source classiﬁer is still trained
with all classes [ 5], whose performance for shared classes
may be distracted by outlier classes. Further, the domain
discriminator of IWAN [ 43] for obtaining the importance
weights distinguishes the source and target domains only
based on the feature representations, without exploiting the
discriminative information in the source domain. This will re-
sult in non-discriminative importance weights to distinguish
shared classes from outlier classes. This paper proposes an
Example Transfer Network (ETN) that down-weights the
irrelevant examples of outlier classes further on the source
classiﬁer and adopts a discriminative domain discriminator
to quantify the example transferability.
Open-Set Domain Adaptation On par with domain adap-
tation, research has been dedicated to open set recognition,
with the goal to reject outliers while correctly recognizing
inliers during testing. Open Set SVM [ 18] trains a proba-
bilistic SVM and rejects unknown samples by a threshold.
Open Set Neural Network [ 2] generalizes deep neural net-
works to open set recognition by introducing an OpenMax
layer, which estimates the probability of an input from an
unknown class and rejects the unknown point by a threshold.Open Set Domain Adaptation (OSDA) [ 4,33] tackles the
setting when the training and testing data are from different
distributions and label spaces. OSDA methods often assume
which classes are shared by the source and target domains
are known at training. Unlike OSDA, in our scenario, target
classes are entirely unknown at training. It is interesting to
extend our work to the open set scenario under the generic
assumption that all target classes are unknown.
3. Example Transfer Network
The scenario of partial domain adaptation (PDA) [ 5] con-
stitutes a source domain Ds={(xs
i,ys
i)}ns
i=1ofnslabeled
examples associated with |Cs|classes and a target domain
Dt={xt
j}nt
j=1ofntunlabeled examples drawn from |Ct|
classes. Note that in PDA the source domain label space
Csis a superspace of the target domain label space Cti.e.
Cs⊃Ct. The source and target domains are drawn from dif-
ferent probability distributions pandqrespectively. Besides
p/\e}atio\slash=qas in standard domain adaptation, we further have
pCt/\e}atio\slash=qin partial domain adaptation, where pCtdenotes
the distribution of the source domain data in label space Ct.
The goal of PDA is to learn a deep network that enables
end-to-end training of a transferable feature extractor Gf
and an adaptive classiﬁer Gyto sufﬁciently close the distri-
bution discrepancy across domains and bound the target risk
Pr(x,y)∼q[Gy(Gf(x))/\e}atio\slash=y].
We incur deteriorated performance when directly apply-
ing the source classiﬁer Gytrained with standard domain
adaptation methods to the target domain. In partial domain
adaptation, it is difﬁcult to identify which part of the source
label spaceCsis shared with the target label space Ctbe-
cause the target domain is fully unlabeled and Ctis unknown
at the training stage. Under this condition, most of existing
deep domain adaptation methods [ 21,10,39,22] are prone
tonegative transfer , a degenerated case where the classi-
ﬁer with adaptation performs even worse than the classiﬁer
without adaptation. The negative transfer happens since they
assume that the source and target domains have identical la-
bel space and match whole distributions pandqeven though
pCs\Ctandqare non-overlapping and cannot be matched in
principle. Thus, decreasing the negative effect of the source
examples in outlier label space Cs\Ctis the key to mitigating
negative transfer in partial domain adaptation. Besides, we
also need to reduce the distribution shift across pCtandq
to enhance positive transfer in the shared label space Ctas
before. Note that the irrelevant source examples may come
from both outlier classes and shared classes, thus requiring a
versatile algorithm to identify them.
3.1. Transferability Weighting Framework
The key technical problem of domain adaptation is to
reduce the distribution shift between the source and target
domains. Domain adversarial networks [ 10,39] tackle this
2987