JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS OF SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 13, NO. 2, MAY 2019, PP. 206–219 8
the size and diversity of available datasets for developing
systems is more limited in comparison to speech and music
datasets. Most of the open data has been published in the
context of annual DCASE challenges. Because of the limited
size of annotated environmental datasets, data augmentation
is a commonly used technique in the ﬁeld, and it has been
found highly effective.
4) Localization and Tracking: Multichannel audio allows
for the localization and tracking of sound sources, i.e. deter-
mining their spatial locations, and tracking them over time
and can, for example, be used as a part of a source separation
or speech enhancement system to separate a source from
the estimated source direction, or in a diarization system to
estimate the activity of multiple speakers.
A single microphone array consisting of multiple micro-
phones can be used to infer the direction of a sound source,
either in the azimuth, or in both azimuth and elevation.
By combining information from multiple microphone arrays,
directions can be merged to obtain source locations. Given a
microphone array signal from multiple microphones, direction
estimation can be formulated in two ways: 1) by forming
a ﬁxed grid of possible directions, and by using multilabel
classiﬁcation to predict if there is an active source in a
speciﬁc direction [115], or 2) by using regression to predict the
directions [116] or spatial coordinates [117] of target sources.
In addition to this categorization, differences in various deep
learning methods for localization lie in the input features used,
the network topology, and whether one or more sources are
localized.
Commonly used input features that have been used for
deep learning based localization include phase spectrum [115],
magnitude spectrum [118], and generalized cross-correlation
between channels [117]. In general, source localization re-
quires the use of interchannel information, which can also be
learned by a deep neural network with a suitable topology
from within-channel features, for example by convolutional
layers [118] where the kernels span multiple channels.
B. Synthesis and Transformation
1) Source Separation: Source separation is the process of
extracting the signal corresponding to individual sources from
a mixture of multiple sources; this is important in audio signal
processing, since in realistic environments, often multiple
sources are present which sum to a mixture signal, nega-
tively affecting downstream signal processing tasks. Example
application areas related to source separation include music
editing and remixing, preprocessing for robust classiﬁcation of
speech and other sounds, or preprocessing to improve speech
intelligibility.
Source separation can be formulated as the process of
extracting source signals sm;i(n)from the acoustic mixture
xm(n) =IX
i=1sm;i(n); (1)
where iis the source index, Iis the number of sources,
andnis the sample index. In general, multiple microphones
may be used to capture the audio, in which case mis themicrophone index and sm;i(n)is the spatial image of ith
source in microphone m.
State-of-the-art source separation methods typically take the
route of estimating masking operations in the time-frequency
domain (even though there are approaches that operate directly
on time-domain signals and use a DNN to learn a suitable
representation from it, see e.g. [119]). The reason for time-
frequency processing stems mainly from three factors: 1)
the structure of natural sound sources is more prominent
in the time-frequency domain, which allows modeling them
more easily than time-domain signals, 2) convolutional mixing
which involves an acoustic transfer function from a source to
a microphone which can be approximated as instantaneous
mixing in the frequency domain, simplifying the processing,
and 3) natural sound sources are sparse in the time-frequency
domain which facilitates their separation in that domain.
Masking in the time-frequency domain may be formulated
as a multiplication of the mixture signal spectrum Xm(f; t)
at time tand frequency fby a separation mask Mm;i(f; t)to
obtain an estimate of the separated source signal spectrum of
theith source in the mth microphone channel as
^Sm;i(f; t) =Mm;i(f; t)Xm(f; t): (2)
The spectrum Xm(f; t)is typically calculated using the
short-time-Fourier transform (STFT) because it can be imple-
mented efﬁciently using the fast Fourier transform algorithm,
and also because the STFT can be easily inverted. The use of
other time-frequency representations is also possible, such as
constant-Q or mel spectrograms. The use of these has however
become less common since they reduce output quality, and
deep learning does not require a compact input representation
that they would provide in comparison to the STFT.
Deep learning approaches operating on only one micro-
phone rely on modeling the spectral structure of sources. They
can be roughly divided in two categories: 1) methods that
aim to predict the separation mask Mi(f; t)based on the
mixture input X(f; t)(here the microphone index is omitted,
since only one microphone is assumed), and 2) methods
that aim to predict the source signal spectrum Si(f; t)from
the mixture input. Deep learning in these cases is based on
supervised learning based on the relation between the input
mixture spectrum X(f; t)and the target output as either
theoracle mask or the clean signal spectrum [120]. The
oracle mask takes either binary values, or continuous values
between 0 and 1. Various deep neural network architectures
are applicable in the above settings, including the use of
standard methods such as convolutional [121] and recurrent
[122] layers. The conventional mean-square error loss is not
optimal for subjective separation quality, and therefore custom
loss functions have been developed to improve intelligibility
[123].
A recent approach based on deep clustering [124] uses
supervised deep learning to estimate embedding vectors for
each time-frequency point, which are then clustered in an
unsupervised manner. This approach allows separation of
sources that were not present in the training set. This approach
can be further extended to a deep attractor network, which is
based on estimating a single attractor vector for each source,