JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS OF SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 13, NO. 2, MAY 2019, PP. 206–219 5
functions) in a DNN may be extended to the complex domain
[69].
When using raw waveform as input representation, for an
analysis task, one of the difﬁculties is that perceptually and
semantically identical sounds may appear at distinct phase
shifts, so using a representation that is invariant to small phase
shifts is critical. To achieve phase invariance researchers have
usually used convolutional layers which pool in time [20],
[21], [23] or DNN layers with large, potentially overcomplete,
hidden units [22], which are able to capture the same ﬁlter
shape at a variety of phases. Raw audio as input representation
is often used in synthesis tasks, e.g. when autoregressive
models are used [25].
D. Data
Deep learning is known to be most proﬁtable when applied
to large training datasets. For the break-through of deep
learning in computer vision, the availability of ImageNet [70],
a database of 14 million (2019) hand-labeled images, was a
major factor. However, there is no such a well labeled dataset
that can be shared across domains including speech, music,
and environmental sounds. For speech recognition, there are
large datasets [71], for English in particular. For music se-
quence classiﬁcation or music similarity, there is the Million
Song Dataset [72], whereas MusicNet [73] addresses note-by-
note sequence labeling. Datasets for higher-level musical se-
quence labeling, such as chord, beat, or structural analysis are
often much smaller [74]. For environmental sound sequence
classiﬁcation, the AudioSet [9] of more than 2 million audio
snippets is available.
Especially in image processing, tasks with limited labeled
data are solved with transfer learning : using large amounts
of similar data labeled for another task and adapting the
knowledge learned from it to the target domain. For example,
deep neural networks trained on the ImageNet dataset can be
adapted to other classiﬁcation problems using small amounts
of task-speciﬁc data by retraining the last layers or ﬁnetuning
the weights with a small learning rate. In speech recognition,
a model can be pretrained on languages with more transcribed
data and then adapted to a low-resource language [75] or
domains [76].
Data generation and data augmentation are other ways
of addressing the limited training data problem. For some
tasks, data resembling real data can be generated, with known
synthesis parameters and labels. A controlled gradual increase
in complexity of the generated data eases understanding,
debugging, and improving of machine learning methods. How-
ever, the performance of an algorithm on real data may be poor
if trained on generated data only. Data augmentation generates
additional training data by manipulating existing examples to
cover a wider range of possible inputs. For ASR, [77] and [78]
independently proposed to transform speech excerpts by pitch
shifting (termed vocal tract perturbation ) and time stretching.
For far-ﬁeld ASR, single-channel speech data can be passed
through room simulators to generate multi-channel noisy and
reverberant speech [79]. Pitch shifting has also been shown
useful for chord recognition [80], and combined with timestretching and spectral ﬁltering for singing voice detection [81]
and instrument recognition [82]. For environmental sounds,
linearly combining training examples along with their labels
improves generalization [83]. For source separation, models
can be trained successfully using datasets that are synthesized
by mixing separated tracks.
E. Evaluation
Evaluation criteria vary across tasks. For speech recognition
systems, the performance is usually evaluated with word error
rates (WER). WER counts the fraction of word errors after
aligning the reference and hypothesis word strings and consists
of insertion, deletion and substitution rates which are the
number of insertions, deletions and substitutions divided by
the number of reference words. Both in music and in acoustic
scene classiﬁcation, accuracy is a commonly used metric.
To evaluate binary classiﬁcation without a ﬁxed classiﬁcation
threshold, the area under the receiver operating characteristic
curve (AUROC) is an alternative to accuracy as a performance
metric. The design of a performance metric may take into
account semantic relationships between the classes. E.g., the
loss for a chord detection task can be designed to be smaller
if the detected and the actual chord are harmonically closely
related. In event detection, performance is typically measured
using equal error rate or F-score, where the true positives,
false positives and false negatives are calculated either in
ﬁxed-length segments or per event [84], [85]. Objective source
separation quality is typically measured with metrics such
as signal-to-distortion ratio, signal-to-interference ratio, and
signal-to-artifacts ratio [86]. The mean opinion score (MOS) is
a subjective test for evaluating quality of synthesized audio, in
particular speech. A Turing test can also provide an evaluation
measure for audio generation.
III. A PPLICATIONS
To lay the foundation for cross-domain comparisons, we
will now look at concrete applications of the methods
discussed, ﬁrst for analyzing speech (Sec. III-A1), music
(Sec. III-A2) and environmental sound (Sec. III-A3), and then
for synthesis and transformation of audio: source separation
(Sec. III-B1), speech enhancement (Sec. III-B2), and audio
generation (Sec. III-B3).
A. Analysis
1) Speech: Using voice to access information and to inter-
act with the environment is a deeply entrenched and instinctive
form of communication for humans. Speech recognition –
converting speech audio into sequences of words – is a pre-
requisite to any speech-based interaction. Efforts in building
automatic speech recognition systems date back more than half
a century [87]. However the vast adoption of such systems in
real-world applications has only occurred in the recent years.
For decades, the triphone-state Gaussian mixture model
(GMM) / hidden Markov model (HMM) was the dominant
choice for modeling speech. These models have many ad-
vantages, including their mathematical elegance, which leads