JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS OF SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 13, NO. 2, MAY 2019, PP. 206–219 1
Deep Learning for Audio Signal Processing
Hendrik Purwins, Bo Li, Tuomas Virtanen, Jan Schlüter, Shuo-yiin Chang, Tara Sainath
Abstract —Given the recent surge in developments of deep
learning, this article provides a review of the state-of-the-art
deep learning techniques for audio signal processing. Speech,
music, and environmental sound processing are considered side-
by-side, in order to point out similarities and differences between
the domains, highlighting general methods, problems, key refer-
ences, and potential for cross-fertilization between areas. The
dominant feature representations (in particular, log-mel spectra
and raw waveform) and deep learning models are reviewed,
including convolutional neural networks, variants of the long
short-term memory architecture, as well as more audio-speciﬁc
neural network models. Subsequently, prominent deep learning
application areas are covered, i.e. audio recognition (automatic
speech recognition, music information retrieval, environmental
sound detection, localization and tracking) and synthesis and
transformation (source separation, audio enhancement, genera-
tive models for speech, sound, and music synthesis). Finally, key
issues and future questions regarding deep learning applied to
audio signal processing are identiﬁed.
Index Terms —. deep learning, connectionist temporal memory,
automatic speech recognition, music information retrieval, source
separation, audio enhancement, environmental sounds
I. I NTRODUCTION
ARTIFICIAL neural networks have gained widespread
attention in three waves so far, triggered by 1) the percep-
tron algorithm [1] in 1957, 2) the backpropagation algorithm
[2] in 1986, and ﬁnally 3) the success of deep learning in
speech recognition [3] and image classiﬁcation [4] in 2012,
leading to a renaissance of deep learning, involving e.g. deep
feedforward neural networks [3], [5], convolutional neural
networks (CNNs, [6]) and long short-term memory (LSTM,
[7]). In this "deep" paradigm, architectures with a large number
of parameters are trained to learn from a massive amount of
data leveraging recent advances in machine parallelism (e.g.
cloud computing, GPUs or TPUs [8]). The recent surge in
interest in deep learning has enabled practical applications in
many areas of signal processing, often outperforming tradi-
tional signal processing on a large scale. In this most recent
wave, deep learning ﬁrst gained traction in image processing
[4], but was then widely adopted in speech processing, music
and environmental sound processing, as well as numerous
additional ﬁelds such as genomics, quantum chemistry, drug
H. Purwins, B. Li, T. Virtanen, and J. Schlüter contributed equally to this
paper.
H. Purwins is with Department of Architecture, Design & Media Technol-
ogy, Aalborg University Copenhagen, e-mail: hpurwins@gmail.com.
B. Li, S.-y. Chang and T. Sainath are with Google, e-mail:
{boboli,shuoyiin,tsainath}@google.com
T. Virtanen is with Tampere University, e-mail: tuomas.virtanen@tuni.ﬁ
J. Schlüter is with CNRS LIS, Université de Toulon and Austrian Research
Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, e-mail: jan.schlueter@ofai.at.
Great thanks to Duncan Blythe for proof-reading.
Manuscript received October 11, 2018
This is a PREPRINT
input sequence
single global label
label per time step
label sequence{x =
y ={=single class
set of classes
numeric value2.71828Figure 1. Audio signal analysis tasks can be categorized along two properties:
The number of labels to be predicted ( left), and the type of each label ( right ).
discovery, natural language processing and recommendation
systems. As a result, previously used methods in audio signal
processing, such as Gaussian mixture models, hidden Markov
models and non-negative matrix factorization, have often been
outperformed by deep learning models, in applications where
sufﬁcient data is available.
While many deep learning methods have been adopted from
image processing, there are important differences between the
domains that warrant a speciﬁc look at audio. Raw audio
samples form a one-dimensional time series signal, which is
fundamentally different from two-dimensional images. Audio
signals are commonly transformed into two-dimensional time-
frequency representations for processing, but the two axes,
time and frequency, are not homogeneous as horizontal and
vertical axes in an image. Images are instantaneous snapshots
of a target and often analyzed as a whole or in patches
with little order constraints; however audio signals have to be
studied sequentially in chronological order. These properties
gave rise to audio-speciﬁc solutions.
II. M ETHODS
To set the stage, we give a conceptual overview of audio
analysis and synthesis problems (II-A), the input representa-
tions commonly used to address them (II-B), and the models
shared between different application ﬁelds (II-C). We will then
brieﬂy look at data (II-D) and evaluation methods (II-E).
A. Problem Categorization
The tasks considered in this survey can be divided into
different categories depending on the kind of target to be
predicted from the input, which is always a time series of audio
samples.1This division encompasses two independent axes (cf.
Fig. 1): For one, the target can either be a single global label,
1While the audio signal will often be processed into a sequence of features,
we consider this part of the solution, not of the task.