JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS OF SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 13, NO. 2, MAY 2019, PP. 206–219 6
to many principled solutions to practical problems such as
speaker or task adaptation. Around 1990, discriminative train-
ing was found to yield better performance than models trained
using maximum likelihood. Neural network based hybrid
models were proposed to replace GMMs [88]–[90]. However,
recently in 2012, DNNs with millions of parameters trained
on thousands of hours of data were shown to reduce the word
error rate (WER) dramatically on various speech recognition
tasks [3]. In addition to the great success of deep feedforward
and convolutional networks [91], LSTMs and GRUs have
been shown to outperform feedforward DNNs [92]. Later,
a cascade of convolutional, LSTM and feedforward layers,
i.e. the convolutional, long short-term memory deep neural
network (CLDNN) model, was further shown to outperform
LSTM-only models [93]. In CLDNNs, a window of input
frames is ﬁrst processed by two convolutional layers with max-
pooling layers to reduce the frequency variance in the signal,
then projected down to a lower-dimensional feature space for
the following LSTM layers to model the temporal correlations,
and ﬁnally passed through a few feedforward layers and an
output softmax layer.
With the adoption of RNNs for speech modeling, the condi-
tional independence assumption of the output targets incurred
by the traditional HMM-based phone state modeling is no
longer necessary and the research ﬁeld shifted towards full
sequence-to-sequence models. There has been large interest
in learning a purely neural sequence-to-sequence model, such
as CTC and LAS. In [45], Soltau et al. trained a CTC-based
model with word output targets, which was shown to outper-
form a state-of-the-art CD-phoneme baseline on a YouTube
video captioning task. The listen, attend and spell (LAS) model
is a single neural network that includes an encoder which
is analogous to a conventional acoustic model, an attention
module that acts as an alignment model, and a decoder that
is analogous to the language model in a conventional system.
Despite the architectural simplicity and empirical performance
of such sequence-to-sequence models, further improvements
in both model structure and optimization process have been
proposed to outperform conventional models [94].
With dramatic improvements in speech recognition per-
formance, it is robust enough for real world applications.
Virtual assistants, such as Google Home, Amazon Alexa and
Microsoft Cortana, all adopt voice as the main interaction
modality. Speech transcriptions also ﬁnd their way to vari-
ous applications for retrieving information from multimedia,
such as YouTube speech captioning. With increasing adoption
of speech based applications, extending speech support for
more speakers and languages has become more important.
Transfer learning has been used to boost the performance of
ASR systems on low resource languages with data from rich
resource languages [75]. With the success of deep learning
models in ASR, other speech related tasks also embraces
deep learning techniques, such as voice activity detection [95],
speaker recognition [96], language recognition [97] and speech
translation [98].
2) Music: Compared to speech, music recordings typically
contain a wider variety of sound sources of interest. In many
kinds of music, their occurrence follows common constraintsin terms of time and frequency, creating complex dependencies
within and between sources. This opens up a wide set of
possibilities for automatic description of music recordings.
Tasks encompass low-level analysis (onset and offset detec-
tion, fundamental frequency estimation), rhythm analysis (beat
tracking, meter identiﬁcation, downbeat tracking, tempo esti-
mation), harmonic analysis (key detection, melody extraction,
chord estimation), high-level analysis (instrument detection,
instrument separation, transcription, structural segmentation,
artist recognition, genre classiﬁcation, mood classiﬁcation)
and high-level comparison (discovery of repeated themes,
cover song identiﬁcation, music similarity estimation, score
alignment). Each of these has originally been approached with
hand-designed algorithms or features combined with shallow
classiﬁers, but is now tackled with deep learning. Here a few
chosen examples are highlighted, covering various tasks and
methods. Please refer to [99] for a more extensive list.
Several tasks can be framed as binary event detection prob-
lems. The most low-level one is onset detection, predicting
which positions in a recording are starting points of musically
relevant events such as notes, without further categorization.
It saw the ﬁrst application of neural networks to music audio:
In 2006, Lacoste and Eck [84] trained a small MLP on
200 ms-excerpts of a constant-Q log-magnitude spectrogram
to predict whether there is an onset in or near the center. They
obtained better results than existing hand-designed methods,
and better than using an STFT, and observed no improvement
from including phases. Eyben et al. [100] improved over
this method, applying a bidirectional LSTM to spectrograms
processed with a time difference ﬁlter, albeit using a larger
dataset for training. Schlüter et al. [16] further improved
results with a CNN processing 15-frame log-mel excerpts of
the same dataset. Onset detection used to form the basis for
beat and downbeat tracking [101], but recent systems tackle
the latter more directly. Durand et al. [102] apply CNNs and
Böck et al. [103] train an RNN on spectrograms to directly
track beats and downbeats. Both studies rely on additional
post-processing with a temporal model ensuring longer-term
coherence than captured by the networks, either in the form of
an HMM [102] or Dynamic Bayesian Network (DBN) [103].
Fuentes et al. [104] propose a CRNN that does not require
post-processing, but also relies on a beat tracker. A higher-
level event detection task is to predict boundaries between
musical segments. Ullrich et al. [105] solved it with a CNN,
using a receptive ﬁeld of up to 60 s on strongly downsampled
spectrograms. Comparing approaches, both CNNs with ﬁxed-
size temporal context and RNNs with potentially unlimited
context are used successfully for event detection. Interestingly,
for the former, it seems critical to blur training targets in time
[16], [84], [105].
An example for a multi-class sequence labelling problem is
chord recognition, the task of assigning each time step in a
(Western) music recording a root note and chord class. Typical
hand-designed methods rely on folding multiple octaves of a
spectral representation into a 12-semitone chromagram [13],
smoothing in time, and matching against predeﬁned chord tem-
plates. Humphrey and Bello [80] note the resemblance to the
operations of a CNN, and demonstrate good performance with