JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS OF SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 13, NO. 2, MAY 2019, PP. 206–219 3
C. Models
The audio signal, represented as a sequence of either
frames of raw audio or human engineered feature vectors (e.g.
log-mel/constant-Q/complex spectra), matrices (e.g. spectro-
grams), or tensors (e.g. stacked spectrograms), can be analyzed
by various deep learning models. Similar to other domains like
image processing, for audio, multiple feedforward, convolu-
tional, and recurrent (e.g. LSTM) layers are usually stacked
to increase the modeling capability. A deep neural network is
a neural network with many stacked layers [26].
a) Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs): CNNs are
based on convolving their input with learnable kernels. In the
case of spectral input features, a 1-d temporal convolution
or a 2-d time-frequency convolution is commonly adopted,
whereas a time-domain 1-d convolution is applied for raw
waveform inputs. A convolutional layer typically computes
multiple feature maps ( channels ), each from its corresponding
kernel. Pooling layers added on top of these convolutional
layers can be used to downsample the learned feature maps.
A CNN often consists of a series of convolutional layers
interleaved with pooling layers, followed by one or more dense
layers. For sequence labeling, the dense layers can be omitted
to obtain a fully-convolutional network (FCN).
The receptive ﬁeld (the number of samples or spectra
involved in computing a prediction) of a CNN is ﬁxed by
its architecture. It can be increased by using larger kernels
or stacking more layers. Especially for raw waveform inputs
with a high sample rate, reaching a sufﬁcient receptive ﬁeld
size may result in a large number of parameters of the CNN
and high computational complexity. Alternatively, a dilated
convolution (also called atrous , or convolution with holes)
[25], [27]–[29] can be used, which applies the convolutional
ﬁlter over an area larger than its ﬁlter length by inserting zeros
between ﬁlter coefﬁcients. A stack of dilated convolutions
enables networks to obtain very large receptive ﬁelds with
just a few layers, while preserving the input resolution as well
as computational efﬁciency.
Operational and validated theories on how to determine
the optimal CNN architecture (size of kernels, pooling and
feature maps, number of channels and consecutive layers) for
a given task are not available at the time of writing (see
also [30]). Currently therefore, the architecture of a CNN
is largely chosen experimentally based on a validation error,
which has led to some rule-of-thumb guidelines, such as fewer
parameters for less data [31], increasing channel numbers with
decreasing sizes of feature maps in subsequent convolutional
layers, considering the necessary size of temporal context, and
task-related design (e.g. analysis or synthesis/transformation).
b) Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs): The effective
context size that can be modeled by CNNs is limited, even
when using dilated convolutions. RNNs follow a different ap-
proach for modeling sequences [32]: They compute the output
for a time step from both the input at that step and their hidden
state at the previous step. This inherently models the temporal
dependency in the inputs, and allows the receptive ﬁeld to
extend indeﬁnitely into the past. For ofﬂine applications,
bidirectional RNNs employ a second recurrence in reverse
order, extending the receptive ﬁeld into the future. In contrastto conventional HMMs, with linear growth of the number of
recurrent hidden units in RNNs with all-to-all kernels, the
number of representable states grows exponentially, whereas
training or inference time grows only quadratically at most
[33]. RNNs can suffer from vanishing/exploding gradients dur-
ing training. Many variations have been developed to address
this. Long short term memory (LSTM) [7] utilizes a gating
mechanism and memory cells to mitigate the information ﬂow
and alleviate gradient problems. Stacking of recurrent layers
[34] and sparse recurrent networks [35] have been found useful
in audio synthesis.
Besides the use for modeling temporal sequences, LSTMs
have been extended to model audio signals across both time
and frequency domains. Frequency LSTMs (F-LSTM) [36]
and Time-Frequency LSTMs (TF-LSTM) [37]–[39] have been
introduced as alternatives to CNNs to model correlations in
frequency. Distinctly from CNNs, F-LSTMs capture transla-
tional invariance through local ﬁlters and recurrent connec-
tions. They do not require pooling operations and are more
adaptable to a range of types of input features. TF-LSTMs
are unrolled across both time and frequency, and may be
used to model both spectral and temporal variations through
local ﬁlters and recurrent connections. TF-LSTMs outperform
CNNs on certain tasks [39], but are less parallelizable and
therefore slower.
Alternatively, RNNs can process the output of a CNN,
forming a Convolutional Recurrent Neural Network (CRNN) .
In this case, convolutional layers extract local information, and
recurrent layers combine it over a longer temporal context.
Various ways to process temporal context are visualized in
Fig. 2.
c) Sequence-to-Sequence Models: A sequence-to-
sequence model transduces an input sequence into an output
sequence directly. Many audio processing tasks are essentially
sequence-to-sequence transduction tasks. However, due to
the large complexity involved in audio processing tasks,
conventional systems usually divide the task into series of
sub-tasks and solve each task independently. Taking speech
recognition as an example, the ultimate task entails converting
the input temporal audio signals into the output sequence
of words. But traditional ASR systems comprise separate
acoustic, pronunciation, and language modeling components
that are normally trained independently [40], [41].
With the larger modeling capacity of deep learning models,
there has been growing interest in building end-to-end trained
systems that directly map the input audio signal to the target
sequences [42]–[47]. These systems are trained to optimize
criteria that are related to the ﬁnal evaluation metric (such
as word error rate for ASR systems). Such sequence-to-
sequence models are fully neural, and do not use ﬁnite state
transducers, a lexicon, or text normalization modules. The
acoustic, pronunciation, and language modeling components
are trained jointly in a single system. This greatly simpliﬁes
training compared to conventional systems: it does not require
bootstrapping from decision trees or time alignments generated
from a separate system. Furthermore, since the models are
trained to directly predict target sequences, the process of
decoding is also simpliﬁed.