JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS OF SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 13, NO. 2, MAY 2019, PP. 206–219 10
normalized log-mel spectra, diversity can be measured as
the average Euclidean distance between the sounds and their
nearest neighbors. Originality can be measured as the average
Euclidean distance between a generated samples to their near-
est neighbor in the real training set [140]. A Turing test, asking
a human to distinguish between real and synthesized audio
examples, is a hard test for a model, since passing the Turing
test requires that there is no perceivable difference between
an example being real or being synthesized. The WaveNet,
for example, yields a higher MOS than concatenative or
parametric methods, which represented the previous state of
the art [25].
IV. D ISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this section, we look at deep learning across the dif-
ferent audio domains, regarding the following aspects: fea-
tures (Sec. IV-A), models (Sec. IV-B), data requirements
(Sec. IV-C), computational complexity (Sec. IV-D), inter-
pretability and adaptability (Sec. IV-E). For each aspect, we
highlight differences and similarities between the domains, and
note common challenges worthwhile to work on.
A. Features
Whereas MFCCs are the most common representation in
traditional audio signal processing, log-mel spectrograms are
the dominant feature in deep learning, followed by raw
waveforms or complex spectrograms. Raw waveforms avoid
hand-designed features, which should allow to better exploit
the improved modeling capability of deep learning models,
learning representations optimized for a task. However, this
incurs higher computational costs and data requirements, and
beneﬁts may be hard to realize in practice. For analysis tasks,
such as ASR, MIR, or environmental sound recognition, log-
mel spectrograms provide a more compact representation,
and methods using these features usually need less data and
training to achieve results that are, at the current state of the
art, comparable in classiﬁcation performance to a setup where
raw audio is used. In a task where the aim is to synthesize
a sound of high audio quality, such as in source separation,
audio enhancement, TTS, or sound morphing, using (log-mel)
magnitude spectrograms poses the challenge to reconstruct the
phase. In that case, raw waveforms or complex spectrograms
are generally preferred as the input representation.
However, some works report improvements using raw wave-
forms for analysis tasks [25], [146], [147], and some attempt
to ﬁnd a way in between by designing and/or initializing the
ﬁrst layers of a deep learning system to mimic engineered
representations [18], [19], [23], [24]. So there are still several
open research questions: Are mel spectrograms indeed the best
representation for audio analysis? Under what circumstances
is it better to use the raw waveform? Can we do better by
exploring the middle ground, a spectrogram with learnable
hyperparameters? If we learn a representation from the raw
waveform, does it still generalize between tasks or domains?
B. Models
On a historical note, in ASR, MIR, and environmental
sound analysis, deep models have replaced support vectormachines for sequence classiﬁcation, and GMM-HMMs for
sequence transduction. In audio enhancement / denoising and
source separation, deep learning has solved tasks previously
addressed by non-negative matrix factorization and Wiener
methods, respectively. In audio synthesis, concatenative syn-
thesis has been replaced e.g. by Wavenet, SampleRNN, Wav-
eRNN.
Across the domains, CNNs, RNNs and CRNNs are em-
ployed successfully, with no clear preference. All three can
model temporal sequences, and solve sequence classiﬁcation,
sequence labelling and sequence transduction tasks. CNNs
have a ﬁxed receptive ﬁeld, which limits the temporal context
taken into account for a prediction, but at the same time
makes it very easy to widen or narrow the context used.
RNNs can, theoretically, base their predictions on an unlimited
temporal context, but ﬁrst need to learn to do so, which may
require adaptations to the model (such as LSTM) and prevents
direct control over the context size. Furthermore, they require
processing the input sequentially, making them slower to train
and evaluate on modern hardware than CNNs. CRNNs offer
a compromise in between, inheriting both CNNs and RNNs
advantages and disadvantages.
Thus, it is an open research question which model is
superior in which setting. From existing literature, this is very
hard to answer, since different research groups yield state-of-
the-art results with different models. This may be due to each
research group’s specialized informal knowledge about how to
effectively design and tune a particular architecture type.
C. Data Requirements
With the possible exception of speech recognition, in indus-
try, for the most widespread languages, all tasks in all audio
domains face relatively small datasets, posing a limit on the
size and complexity of deep learning models trained on them.
In computer vision, a shortage of labeled data for a par-
ticular task is offset by the widespread availability of models
trained on the ImageNet dataset [70]: To distinguish a thou-
sand object categories, these models learned transformations of
the raw input images that form a good starting point for many
other vision tasks. Similarly, in neural language processing,
word prediction models trained on large text corpora have
shown to yield good model initializations for other language
processing tasks [148], [149]. However, no comparable task
and dataset – and models pretrained on it – exists for the
audio domain.
This leaves several research questions. What would be
an equivalent task for the audio domain? Can there be an
audio dataset covering speech, music, and environmental
sounds, used for transfer learning, solving a great range of
audio classiﬁcation problems? How may pre-trained audio
recognition models be ﬂexibly adapted to new tasks using a
minimal amount of data, i.e. to out-of-vocabulary words, new
languages, new musical styles and new acoustic environments?
It is well possible that this has to be answered separately
for each domain, rather than across audio domains. Even
just within the music domain, while transfer learning might
work for global labels like artists and genres, individual tasks