JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS OF SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 13, NO. 2, MAY 2019, PP. 206–219 2
a local label per time step, or a free-length sequence of labels
(i.e., of a length that is not a function of the input length).
Secondly, each label can be a single class, a set of classes,
or a numeric value. In the following, we will name and give
examples for the different combinations considered.
Predicting a single global class label is termed sequence
classiﬁcation . Such a class label can be a predicted language,
speaker, musical key or acoustic scene, taken from a predeﬁned
set of possible classes. In multi-label sequence classiﬁcation ,
the target is a subset of the set of possible classes. For example,
the target can comprise several acoustical events, such as in
the weakly-labelled AudioSet dataset [9], or a set of musical
pitches. Multi-label classiﬁcation can be particularly efﬁcient
when classes depend on each other. In sequence regression ,
the target is a value from a continuous range. Estimating
musical tempo or predicting the next audio sample can be
formulated as such. Note that regression problems can always
be discretized and turned into classiﬁcation problems: e.g.,
when the audio sample is quantized into 8 bits, predicting the
sample poses a classiﬁcation problem with 256 classes.
When predicting a label per time step, each time step can
encompass a constant number of audio samples, so the target
sequence length is a fraction of the input sequence length.
Again, we can distinguish different cases. Classiﬁcation per
time step is referred to as sequence labeling here. Examples
are chord annotation and vocal activity detection. Event de-
tection aims to predict time points of event occurrences, such
as speaker changes or note onsets, which can be formulated
as a binary sequence labeling task: at each step, distinguish
presence and absence of the event. Regression per time step
generates continuous predictions, which may be the distance
to a moving sound source or the pitch of a voice, or source
separation.
Insequence transduction , the length of the target sequence
is not a function of the input length. There are no established
terms to distinguish classiﬁcation, multi-label classiﬁcation
and regression. Examples comprise speech-to-text, music tran-
scription, or language translation.
Finally, we also consider some tasks that do not start from
an audio signal: Audio synthesis can be cast as a sequence
transduction or regression task that predicts audio samples
from a sequence of conditional variables. Audio similarity
estimation is a regression problem where a continuous value is
assigned to a pair of audio signals of possibly different length.
B. Audio Features
Building an appropriate feature representation and designing
an appropriate classiﬁer for these features have often been
treated as separate problems in audio processing. One draw-
back of this approach is that the designed features might
not be optimal for the classiﬁcation objective at hand. Deep
neural networks (DNNs) can be thought of as performing
feature extraction jointly with objective optimization such as
classiﬁcation. For example, for speech recognition, Mohamed
et al. [10] showed that the activations at lower layers of
DNNs can be thought of as speaker-adapted features, while
the activations of the upper layers of DNNs can be thought of
as performing class-based discrimination.For decades, mel frequency cepstral coefﬁcients (MFCCs)
[11] have been used as the dominant acoustic feature represen-
tation for audio analysis tasks. These are magnitude spectra
projected to a reduced set of frequency bands, converted
to logarithmic magnitudes, and approximately whitened and
compressed with a discrete cosine transform (DCT). With deep
learning models, the latter has been shown to be unnecessary
or unwanted, since it removes information and destroys spatial
relations. Omitting it yields the log-mel spectrum , a popular
feature across audio domains.
The mel ﬁlter bank for projecting frequencies is inspired
by the human auditory system and physiological ﬁndings on
speech perception [12]. For some tasks, it is preferable to use
a representation which captures transpositions as translations.
Transposing a tone consists of scaling the base frequency
and overtones by a common factor, which becomes a shift
in a logarithmic frequency scale. The constant-Q spectrum
achieves such a frequency scale with a suitable ﬁlter bank
[13].
A (log-mel, or constant-Q) spectrogram is a temporal se-
quence of spectra. As in natural images, the neighboring
spectrogram bins of natural sounds in time and frequency
are correlated. However, due to the physics of sound pro-
duction, there are additional correlations for frequencies that
are multiples of the same base frequency (harmonics). To
allow a spatially local model (e.g., a CNN) to take these into
account, a third dimension can be added that directly yields
the magnitudes of the harmonic series [14], [15]. Furthermore,
in contrast to images, value distributions differ signiﬁcantly
between frequency bands. To counter this, spectrograms can
be standardized separately per band.
The window size for computing spectra trades temporal
resolution (short windows) against frequential resolution (long
windows). Both for log-mel and constant-Q spectra, it is
possible to use shorter windows for higher frequencies, but this
results in inhomogeneously blurred spectrograms unsuitable
for spatially local models. Alternatives include computing
spectra with different window lengths, projected down to the
same frequency bands, and treated as separate channels [16].
In [17] the authors also investigated combinations of different
spectral features.
To avoid relying on a designed ﬁlter bank, various methods
have been proposed to further simplify the feature extraction
process and defer it to data-driven statistical model learning.
Instead of mel-spaced triangular ﬁlters, data-driven ﬁlters have
been learned and used. [18] and [19] use a full-resolution
magnitude spectrum, [20]–[23] directly use a raw waveform
representation of the audio signals as inputs and learn data-
driven ﬁlters jointly with the rest of the network for the target
tasks. In this way, the learned ﬁlters are directly optimized
for the target objective in mind. In [24], the lower layers
of the model are designed to mimic the log-mel spectrum
computation but with all the ﬁlter parameters learned from the
data. In [25], the notion of a ﬁlter bank is discarded, learning a
causal regression model of the time-domain waveform samples
without any human prior knowledge.