JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS OF SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 13, NO. 2, MAY 2019, PP. 206–219 7
a CNN trained on constant-Q, linear-magnitude spectrograms
preprocessed with contrast normalization and augmented with
pitch shifting. Modern systems integrate temporal modelling,
and extend the set of distinguishable chords. As a recent
example, McFee and Bello [106] apply a CRNN (a 2D
convolution learning spectrotemporal features, followed by
a 1D convolution integrating information across frequencies,
followed by a bidirectional GRU) and use side targets to
incorporate relationships between a detailed set of 170 chord
classes. Taking a different route, Korzeniowski et al. [107]
train CNNs on log-frequency spectrograms to not only predict
chords, but derive an improved chromagram representation
useful for tasks beyond chord estimation.
Regarding sequence classiﬁcation, one of the lowest-level
tasks is to estimate the global tempo of a piece. A natural
solution is to base it on beat and downbeat tracking: downbeat
tracking may integrate tempo estimation to constrain downbeat
positions [102], [103]. However, just as beat tracking can
be done without onset detection, Schreiber and Müller [108]
showed that CNNs can be trained to directly estimate the
tempo from 12-second spectrogram excerpts, achieving better
results and allowing to cope with tempo changes or drift
within a recording. As a broader sequence classiﬁcation task
encompassing many others, tag prediction aims to predict
which labels from a restricted vocabulary users would attach
to a given music piece. Tags can refer to the instrumentation,
tempo, genre, and others, but always apply to a full recording,
without timing information. Bridging the gap from an input
sequence to global labels has been approached in different
ways, which are instructive to compare. Dieleman et al. [109]
train a CNN with short 1D convolutions (i.e., convolving over
time only) on 3-second log-mel spectrograms, and averaged
predictions over consecutive excerpts to obtain a global label.
For comparison, they train a CNN on raw samples, with
the ﬁrst-layer ﬁlter size chosen to match typical spectrogram
frames, but achieve worse results. Choi et al. [110] use a FCN
of33convolutions interleaved with max-pooling such that
a 29-second log-mel spectrogram is reduced to a 11feature
map and classiﬁed. Compared to FCNs in computer vision
which employ average pooling in later layers of the network,
max-pooling was chosen to ensure that local detections of
vocals are elevated to global predictions. Lee et al. [111] train
a CNN on raw samples, using only short ﬁlters (size 2 to
4) interleaved with max-pooling, matching the performance
of log-mel spectrograms. Like Dieleman et al., they train on
3-second excerpts and average predictions at test time.
To summarize, deep learning has been applied successfully
to numerous music processing tasks, and drives industrial
applications with automatic descriptions for browsing large
catalogues, with content-based music recommendations in the
absence of usage data, and also profanely with automatically
derived chords for a song to play along with. However, on
the research side, neither within nor across tasks is there
a consensus on what input representation to use (log-mel
spectrogram, constant-Q, raw audio) and what architecture to
employ (CNNs or RNNs or both, 2D or 1D convolutions,
small square or large rectangular ﬁlters), leaving numerous
open questions for further research.3) Environmental Sounds: In addition to speech and music
signals, other sounds also carry a wealth of relevant infor-
mation about our environments. Computational analysis of
environmental sounds has several applications, for example
in context-aware devices, acoustic surveillance, or multimedia
indexing and retrieval. It is typically done with three basic
approaches: a) acoustic scene classiﬁcation, b) acoustic event
detection, and c) tagging.
Acoustic scene classiﬁcation aims to label a whole audio
recording with a single scene label. Possible scene labels
include for example "home", "street", "in car", "restaurant",
etc. The set of scene labels is deﬁned in advance, rendering
this a multinomial classiﬁcation problem. Training material
should be available from each of the scene classes.
Acoustic event detection aims to estimate the start and end
times of individual sound events such as footsteps, trafﬁc light
acoustic signalling, dogs barking, and assign them an event
label. The set of possible event classes should be deﬁned
in advance. A simple and efﬁcient way to apply supervised
machine learning to do detection is to predict the activity of
each event class in short time segments using a supervised
classiﬁer. Usually, the supervised classiﬁer used to do de-
tection will use contextual information, i.e., acoustic features
computed from the signal outside the segment to be classiﬁed.
A simple way to do so is to concatenate acoustic features
from multiple context frames around the target frame, as done
in the baseline method for the public DCASE (Detection
and Classiﬁcation of Acoustic Events and Scenes) evaluation
campaign in 2016 [112]. Alternatively, classiﬁer architectures
which model temporal information may be used: for example,
recurrent neural networks may be applied to map a sequence
of frame-wise acoustic features to a sequence of binary vectors
representing event class activities [113]. Similarly to other
supervised learning tasks, convolutional neural networks can
be highly effective, but in order to be able to output an event
activity vector at a sufﬁciently high temporal resolution, the
degree of max pooling or stride over time should not be too
large – if a large receptive ﬁeld is desired, dilated convolution
and dilated pooling can be used instead [114].
Tagging aims to predict the activity of multiple (possibly
simultaneous) sound classes, without temporal information. In
both tagging and event detection, multiple event classes can
be targeted that can be active simultaneously. In the context of
event detection, this is called polyphonic event detection. In
this approach, the activity of each class can be represented
by a binary vector where each entry corresponds to each
event class, ones represent active classes, and zeros inactive
classes. If overlapping classes are permitted, the problem is a
multilabel classiﬁcation problem, where more than one entry
in the binary vector can have value one.
It has been found out that using a multilabel classiﬁer to
jointly predict the activity of multiple classes at once produces
better results, instead of using a single-class classiﬁers for
each class separately. This might be for example due to the
multiclass classiﬁer being able to model the interaction of
simultaneously active classes.
Since the analysis of environmental sounds is a less es-
tablished research ﬁeld in comparison to speech and music,