Reformat 
Input (3)DMA Load 
(4)Kernel 
Comp. (5)DMA Read 
(6)Reformat 
Output (7)
Reformat 
Input (3)DMA Load 
(4)Kernel 
Comp. (5)DMA Read 
(6)Reformat 
Output (7)
Reformat 
Input (3)DMA Load 
(4)Kernel 
Comp. (5)DMA Read 
(6)Reformat 
Output (7)
…FPGA 
Node
……Non-CNN 
Comp. (8 )
Non-CNN 
Comp. (8 )
Figure 8: The overview of the Process Graph stage.
Images Results
IntegratorInstruction 
GeneratorDSE
Engine
AcceleratorNetwork 
ConfigFPGA 
Resources
HW
Config
Network 
Inst.Compilation
System
Figure 9: Compilation system overview.
1, 2, 9, and 10 are overlapped with FPGA-related steps. The overall
performance is determined by the stage with the longest latency.
To further improve the performance, we fully pipeline the com-
municationandcomputationofFPGA,whichconsistsofstep3to7.
Thisbuildsthesecondlevelofpipeline.Toallowpipelining,abatch
of images are sent to FPGA. For a certain batch size, the additional
latency incurred by batch processing is dissolved when the first
level of the pipeline is applied. After the FPGA finishes processing
thebatch,theresultsarepassedbacktoTensorFlowandthenon-
CNN computations are done in parallel for all the images. Figure 8
depicts the redefined graph that we use to achieve such a pipeline.
With this optimization, the data movement steps are overlapped
with kernel computation and the latency for non-CNN computa-
tion (Step 8) is amortized for the whole batch. Note that such deep
software+hardwarepipeliningtechniqueswerealsousedin[ 5,9]
for integrating FPGA accelerators to Spark-based applications.
5 FLEXCNN COMPILATION SYSTEM
Figure 9 depicts the overview of our compilation system, which
is composed of three modules: design space exploration engine,
instruction generator, and integrator.
•Design spaceexploration engine. TheCNN networkde-
scriptionfileparsedfromTensorFlowandtheavailabletarget
FPGA resources are fed into the design space exploration
engine to search for the optimal hardware configuration pa-
rameters. Once found, these parameters are then used for
generatingtheaccelerator.TheDSEprocesswasexplained
in Section 3.1.1
•Instructiongenerator. Theinstructiongeneratortakesthe
CNN network description file and accelerator hardware de-
scription file as the inputs and creates one instruction for
each CNN layer. The non-convolutional layers (e.g., bias,
ReLU(6)) are fused with adjacent convolutional layers to im-
prove the computation efficiency. The instruction generator
produces one VLIW-like instruction for each of these fused
layers.Thisinstructioncontainstheenablesignalforeachof
the modules, the layer configurations, and tiling factors. An
RBB contains two convolutional layers in one block. As we
onlyhaveoneconvolutionmoduleintheaccelerator,wewillTable 2: Frequency and resource utilization.
Precision Frequency LUTFFBRAM URAM DSP
float 32-bit 242.9MHz 43%40% 60% 15% 50%
Table 3: Performance on OpenPose-V2.
Model Precision Frequency Runtime (ms)
(MHz) (1) (2)
All Uniform float 32-bit 237 57.7 41.5
All Dynamic float 32-bit 242.9 35.6 24.7
(2): With applying DRAM organization for concatenation layers
(1): Without applying DRAM organization for concatenation layers
divide this block into two layers. The first layer performs
the first convolutionand the next one computesthe rest of
the block.
•Integrator. The integrator takes in the FPGA accelerator
andintegratesitintotheTensorFlowframework,performing
the end-to-end processing task. The optimizations on the
integrator were covered in Section 4.
6 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
6.1 Experiment Setup
TheFlexCNNarchitectureisdescribedusingVivadoHLSC[ 24].The
targetplatformisXilinxVirtexUltrascale+VCU1525.Thedesign
issynthesizedandimplementedusingXilinxSDAccel2018.3.We
use OpenPose-V2 network explained in Section 2 to test our work.
The accelerator can get any input size. For this section, we have
configuredittotakeanRGBimageof384 ×384withfloating-point
precision as inputs.
6.2 Hardware Optimization
The target FPGA platform comes with four DDR banks. In our
implementation,weusetwoDDRbanks,assigningfeaturemaps
and weights (including bias) to two separate DDR banks. All the
architecture choices are parameterizable and can be adjusted based
on the target FPGA. We found the following configurations that
workbestfortheOpenPose-V2applicationonXilinxVCU1525.The
systolicarrayforourstandardconvmoduleisorganizedasan8 ×8
array with SIMD factor of 8. For the rest of the modules we use the
same SIMD factor. The maximal tiling factors for Tn,Tm,Th,Tw
are64,64,12,and96,respectively.Table2showsthefrequencyand
resource utilization under this configuration.
Table 3 shows the benefits of dynamic tiling and data layout
transformation.Wecanseethattheseoptimizationsincreasethe
performance by 2 .3×. Figure 1 depicts the performance gain of
usingdynamictilinginalayer-by-layerfashionforthefirst24con-
volutional layers. Table 4 shows how applying dynamic tiling and
dynamicdatalayoutaffectsthetilingfactorsandeffectiveDRAM
bandwidth (BW) for the first layer of the last RBB in OpenPose-V2compared to a design without these optimizations. The kernel size
for this layer is 1 ×1 which means it can use the optimized data
layout withburst lengthof Tn(k)×Tw(k)×Th(k)as describedin
Section 3.2. This data layout, along with the best tiling factor used
forthislayerincreasestheeffectiveDRAMBWandCTCratioby
2.8×. This results in 6 .1×performance improvement.
We further test the DSP efficiency of our design on a given con-
volution layer. Of all the DSPs, 78.7% of them are used in Standard
Session: Deep Learning I
 
FPGA ’20, February 23–25, 2020, Seaside, CA, USA
137