Loader
LoaderDepth Conv
ReLU(6) Standard Conv
ReLU(6)
Add
Pool
 Upsample
WriterInter. Results
S
Figure 4: Accelerator overview.
Table 1: Design parameters and explanations.
Design Parameters Explanation
Th(k),Tw(k),Tn(k),Tm(k)Tiling factors for H,W,N, andMfor layer k
SIMD SIMD lanes for all modules
SA_ROW ,SA_COL Rows and columns of the systolic array kernel
step. The DSC splits this step into two phases. The first phase,
depthwise convolution (DW), does the filtering, and the second
phase,pointwiseconvolution(PW),combinestheproducedfiltered
feature maps using 1 ×1 kernels.
Aconvlayertakes Nfeaturemapsastheinput,eachofsize H×W.
Ituses M×N×K×Kkernels,toproduceMchannelsfortheoutput.
Thetotalcomputationcostforthislayeris M×N×H×W×K×K.
However,aDSCuses N×K×KkernelsforDWand M×N×1×1
kernelsforPW.Byapplyingthischange,theamountofcomputation
is reduced by a factor of1
M+1
K2[11].
2.2.2 Residual Bottleneck Block. Google introduced RBB in Mo-
bileNetV2 [ 17] to reduce the computation cost. It consists of a 1x1
conv followed by a 3x3 DW and then another 1x1 conv, each of
which is followed by ReLU and a batch normalization layer. The
1x1convolutionsareusedfordimensionreductionorrestoration.
Thenatureofthisblockallowsustoreducethenumberofinput
andoutputchannels.Thisreducesthecomputationintensityand
makes the network more efficient.
3 THE FLEXCNN ARCHITECTURE
The basic layers in different CNNs are convolution, DW, ReLU,
bias/batch normalization, downsampling/pooling, upsampling, and
add. The rest of the building blocks are a combination of these
layers. Thus the FlexCNN architecture has these components as
building blocks and uses them to compose different parts of the
network. This strategy can improve the hardware utilization on
FPGA.
Figure 4 depicts the detailed architecture of the FlexCNN. It
implements the dataflow architecture to process the network layer
bylayer.Eachlayercanloaduptotwosetsofinputfeaturemaps,
those from the current layer and the previous layer. Loading thefeature maps from the previous layer is required for supporting
convolutional layers like RBB where the results of the current and
previous layers need to be added together.
Theloadedfeaturemapswillpassthroughmodulesincludingthe
depth-wise convolution module ( Depth Conv ), ReLU(6)1module,
standard convolution module (Standard Conv ), ReLU(6) module,
add module, max-pooling module (Pool ), and bi-linear upsampling
module ( Upsample ). The final results will be written out to DRAM
viaWriter. The operations in batch normalization layer and bias
1ReLU6 outputs the minimum of the value 6 and a normal ReLU.layer are fused into ReLU(6) modules. Each of the convolutional
operationsmaybefollowedbyanyoftheReLU(6)ornormalization
layers. Hence, we put the ReLU(6) module after both the Depth
Conv and Standard Conv modules.
ForStandardConv,thesystolicarray(SA)architectureisused.
It is generated using the SA compiler in [ 8]. It can compute a stan-
dard convolutionlayer with anygiven kernel size.Weimplement
line-buffer-based streaming architectures for Depth Conv, ReLU(6),
Add, Pool, and Upsample modules using a similar stencil-based ar-
chitecture asin [ 7]. Allthese modules areparameterized by factors
as shown in Table 1, which will be explored by the design space
exploration(DSE)enginecoveredinsection3.1.1,fortheoptimal
performance.
Note that all the modules can be bypassed if not being used
foraspecificlayer.WeapplydoublebufferinginboththeLoader
modules and the Writer module. Furthermore, if the outputs of the
whole layer can fit into the on-chip buffer, the data will be pushed
into on-chip buffers and directly fetched by the Loader to save the
off-chip communication time.
3.1 Dynamic Tiling
Tilingisappliedwhenprocessingthenetworkforimprovingthe
data localityand minimizing the communication. Table 1summa-
rizesthetilingfactorsemployedinFlexCNN.Whenthetilingfactors
are notsub-multiples of thetiled dimensions, redundantcomputa-
tionisintroducedwhichdegradestheperformanceofthedesign.
AsexplainedinSection1,inanormalCNNnetwork,thetypesand
configurations of different layers vary from each other. Therefore,
theoptimaltilingfactorswillbedifferentfromeachotheraswell.
We have observed that using uniform tiling factor for the whole
networkwillleadtoupto1.7 ×performanceslowdowncomparedto
the ideal case using different tiling factors across layers. Therefore,
in this work, we apply the dynamic tiling by re-configuring thetiling factors of the accelerators on-the-fly for different layers to
maximizetheperformance.Thiswillbringthehardwareoverheads
tosupportthedynamictiling.However,suchoverheadsarenegligi-
blecomparedtotheperformanceimprovement.Section6evaluates
the impacts of this technique in detail.
Previous works such as [ 18,22,28] have also emphasized the
need fordifferenttiling factorsacross layers.Our architecturedis-
tinguishesfromthepreviousworkbychangingallthetilingfactors
acrosseachlayerdynamically,whereaspreviousworkonlyadjusted
part of the tiling factors or used several accelerators, each with dis-
tinct uniform tiling factors on-chip. Eq. 1 shows the restriction on
the tiling factors.
Tw(k)=c1×SA_COL
Tm(k)=c2×SA_ROW
Tn(k)=c3×SIMD
Tm(k)=Tn(k+1)(1)
In FlexCNN, the width and output channels of the feature maps
are mapped to columns and rows of the SA respectively. As a re-
sult,foreachlayer, Tw(k)andTm(k)shouldbemultiplesoftheir
respective SA dimension. The reduction of multiple input channels
iscomputedinparallelinsideeachPEoftheSA,whichisdefined
astheSIMDlane.Thisimpliesthat Tn(k)shouldbeamultipleof
Session: Deep Learning I
 
FPGA ’20, February 23–25, 2020, Seaside, CA, USA
135