compartment membranes and the cytoplasm.22Membrane-
bound PRRs and PRRs in the cytoplasm are basically composed
of ligand recognition domains, intermediate domains, and effectordomains.23,24PRRs activate downstream signaling pathways
through recognition of their ligands. The activation of down-
stream signaling pathways can produce many effects: recruiting
and releasing cytokines, chemokines, hormones, and growthfactors; inducing chronic in ﬂammation; forming an in ﬂammatory
microenvironment; initiating innate immune killing and subse-
quent acquired immune response,9maintaining the balance of
host microecology; and eliminating dead or mutated cells.
PAMPs are the speci ﬁc and highly conserved molecular
structures shared by the same kind of pathogenic microorgan-
isms,25,26including lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids, such as
lipopolysaccharides (LPS), lipoteichoic acid (LTA), and bacterialDNA.27,28PAMPs are essential for pathogen survival and usually
have unique molecular or subcellular characteristics that are not
found in host cells. Therefore, innate immune cells can recognizePAMPs via PRRs, distinguish “self”and “non-self, ”29and respond to
pathogens and their products. However, the host will produce
some proteins and metabolites after being stimulated by its own
tissue damage, cell necrosis, and other factors.30These molecules
are called damage-associated molecular pattern (DAMP).31PRRs
can also recognize such molecules, activate natural immunity, and
cause in ﬂammation.32
With advances in research on PRRs structure and distribution at
different levels, the role of PRRs in the innate immune regulatory
network has become clearer. The recognition and binding of PRRs
to their ligands is critical in initiating the innate immune response.Therefore, the study of PRR-mediated pattern recognitionmechanisms will help to elucidate the signaling pathways and
mechanisms of disease and provide new targets and methods for
the treatment of diseases. In this review, we describe the structuralcharacteristics, ligand recognition mechanism, the signalingpathway, the related disease, new drugs in clinical trials, and
clinical therapy of different types of PRRs in detail. We focus on the
different domains and ligand recognition mechanisms betweenPRRs, which can not only provide new ideas for the de ﬁnition, role,
and clinical application of PRRs but also promote the study of the
role of the innate immune system in related diseases and eventumors.PRRS AND LIGAND-RECOGNITION MECHANISMS
Toll-like receptors
TLRs are membrane-bound signal receptors and are importantPRRs in the innate immune system of vertebrates.
15,33Such
receptor molecules usually have two functions, one is to bind
speci ﬁcally to the ligand, and the other is to transmit signals. The
corresponding signal transduction will amplify the effect of anti-pathogen infection, so that the immune cells active in theinﬂammatory response can be activated through the transcription
of genes, and produce and secrete a variety of pro-in ﬂammatory
and antiviral factors.
34–36Up to now, 10 functional TLRs (TLR1 –10)
have been found in humans and 12 (TLR1 –9 and TLR11 –13) in
mice.37–41TLR10 in mice is not functional due to the insertion of
reverse transcriptase.42TLRs recognize PAMPs in different
subcellular structures. The cellular localization of TLRs determinesthe types of ligands and the recognition mechanism. Some TLRs
(TLR1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 10) are expressed on the surface of immune cells
in the form of heterodimers or homodimers, mainly recognizingthe membrane components of pathogenic microorganisms, suchas lipids, lipoproteins, and proteins; others (TLR3, 7, 8, 9) are
expressed in the form of homodimers, which mainly recognize the
nucleic acids of microorganisms (Fig. 1).
43
TLRs are type I transmembrane glycoproteins and are com-
posed of an extracellular region, a transmembrane region, and an
intracellular region.44The extracellular region contains leucine-rich
repeats (LRRs), which are responsible for the recognition ofspeci ﬁc ligands and perform extracellular pattern recognition. The
intracellular domain contains the same Toll/IL-1R (TIR) domain as
IL-1R, which plays a role in signal transduction. The extracellularregion of TLRs contains LRRs, which mediate the patternrecognition of TLRs (Fig. 1).
45In 2007, researchers used X-ray
crystal diffraction to analyze and determine the structure of the
TLR–ligand complex,46which provided a deeper understanding of
the LRR domain. The LRR domain is shaped like a horseshoe, andeach module consists of a conserved leucine motif and a variable
region. The “LxxLxLxxN (L leucine, x any amino acid, N
asparagine) ”motif is composed of 20 –30 amino acids and is on
the concave surface of the horseshoe-like structure.47–50The
horseshoe-shaped N-terminus and C-terminus contain disul ﬁde
bridges formed by cysteine clusters51,52to protect the hydro-
phobic core. After TLRs recognize and bind the corresponding
Fig. 1 The signal transduction pathways and structure of TLR-binding ligand complex. TLRs can recognize one or more PAMPs through LRR
domain. They usually dimerize themselves and recruit adaptor molecules with the same TIR domain to transmit signalsPattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
3
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291