molecular weight chemical compound quinazoline, can also block
ligand-induced activation of TLR7, 8, and 9.462FP7 is a synthetic
glycolipid, which can be used as TLR4 inhibitor to treat septic
shock.466Studies have found that inhibitory ODN-containing
phosphorothioate modi ﬁcations of the backbone have potential
therapeutic effects for SLE and rheumatoid arthritis. ODN1411
directly binds to the extracellular domain of TLR8 and competi-
tively inhibits its signal transduction.467
In the NLR family, the NLRP3 in ﬂammasome is closely related to
the pathophysiology of a variety of in ﬂammatory diseases, so it is
usually used as an inhibitor target.298,304,305MCC950 is a speci ﬁc
NLRP3 antagonist, which can prevent its activation or maintain itsactivation state.468β-Carotene has been shown to directly bind to
the PYD of NLRP3, thereby blocking the association between
NLRP3 and its adaptor protein and ultimately inhibiting the
activation of NLRP3 in ﬂammasomes.469This result further
complements the new pharmacological strategy to prevent NLRP3
inﬂammasome-driven gouty arthritis. The development of small
molecule inhibitors for NLRP3 has been in full swing.470,471Dai
et al. reported a series of tetrahydroquinoline inhibitors. In furtherstudies in vitro, it was found that compound 6 directly binds to the
NACHT domain of NLRP3 but not to the PYD or LRR domains,
which inhibits the assembly and activation of NLRP3 in ﬂamma-
somes. In vivo, compound 6 can signi ﬁcantly inhibit the
expression of IL-1 βand alleviate the symptoms of colitis.472
Agarwal et al. identi ﬁed alkenyl sulfonylurea derivatives as a novel,
oral, and biologically effective NLRP3 inhibitor. Compound 7 ofalkenyl sulfonylurea derivatives has good pharmacokinetic char-
acteristics and high oral bioavailability.473
Other potential therapies via PRRs
Emerging evidence suggests that the interaction between miRNA
and PRR pathway and immunoregulation are intimately inter-
woven.438The interaction between the two is particularly
signi ﬁcant in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).474,475
RA is a common autoimmune disease, which is characterized by
synovial hyperplasia and irreversible bone destruction caused by
chronic synovitis. Rheumatoid arthritis synovial ﬁbroblast (RASF)
plays a central role in this process.476–478The expression of miR-
146a and miR-155 is upregulated in RASF. miR-146a inhibits the
expression of TRAF-6 and IRAK-1 in the TLR signaling pathway,
thereby inhibiting the production of key adaptor moleculesdownstream of TLRs in RA.479And miR-155 negatively regulates
the activation of TLRs/IL-1R in ﬂammatory pathway. Both of them
will eventually reduce RA in ﬂammation.480In addition, miR19a/b,
miR-20a, and miR-10a are downregulated in RASF. DownregulatedmiR19a/b directly targets TLR2 to increase its expression481; miR-
20a inhibits the expression of ASK1, a key component of the TLR4
pathway482; miR-10a targets IRAK4 and TAK1 to accelerate I κB
degradation and NF- κB activation.483These effects promote the
inﬂammatory response of RA. All these evidences indicate that
miRNAs can surpass their conventional functions and act as
physiological ligands for TLRs, thereby regulating the expressionof cytokines in the in ﬂammatory response. miRNA can also target
other PRRs. miR-485 can target RIG-I mRNA for degradation,
leading to enhancement of virus replication and inhibition ofantiviral response.
484miRNA-155 can aggravate the brain tissue
inﬂammation in neonatal rats with hypoxia and ischemia by
regulating the NOD1/NF- κB signaling pathway, thereby causing
hypoxia and ischemic brain damage in neonatal rats.485,486
In addition, exosomes are also involved in the complex immune
regulatory network of miRNA and PRRs.487Exosomes are small
membrane vesicles containing complex RNA and protein. A
variety of cells can secrete exosomes under normal andpathological conditions.488,489There is evidence that exosomes
can regulate innate immunity by combining with TLRs, which
provides a new method for the body to resist pathogens and treatdiseases.487Brain exosomes are rich in amyloid-beta (A β), themain component of neuritic plaques, which can activate TLR2,
TLR4, and TLR9 signaling, thus alleviating the early symptoms of
Alzheimer ’s disease.490It was found that the expression of miR-
216a-5p in the plasma of patients with syphilis is negativelycorrelated with the expression of in ﬂammatory cytokines.
Exosomes containing miR-216a-5p inhibit the in ﬂammatory
response induced by recombinant Tp17 by targeting the
TLR4 –MyD88 pathway.491Melphalan, a genotoxic agent, can
enhance the ability of multiple myeloma (MM) cells to releaseexosomes in MM. Hsp70 on the surface of MM-derived exosomes
activates TLR2 in NK cells, thereby inducing the production of
INFγ.492This enlightens us that exosomes with signi ﬁcant
exposure to DAMPs can link chemotherapy with antitumor innateimmune response.
However, whether they are therapeutic agents, adjuvants, or
others, it still needs a long time to further improve the researchin vitro and in vivo before clinical application in tumor
treatment.
493
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVESThe innate immune system has multiple recognition mechanisms
in different cell types with different subcellular structures.Recently, great progress has been made in the study of theinteraction between PRRs and ligands. A preliminary under-
standing of the crystal structure of some PRRs and the
commonalities and differences in the structural composition ofdifferent types of PRRs has been made. We understand the
existing forms of PRRs alone in solution and after binding to
ligands, as well as the molecules involved in the process of PRRidenti ﬁcation and ligand binding. As the initiation step of the
innate immune response and antiviral response, PRR recognition
and binding of ligands is critical. PRRs recognize targets through
their respective ligand-recognition domains: LRRs, CTDs, CTLDs,and a variety of DNA- or RNA-binding domains. Ligand bindinginduces activation and transmission of the signal, which is
transmitted through cascade ampli ﬁcation by their respective
domains —TIR domain, protein interaction domain, CARD, ITAM,
and PYD. In some cases, one kind of PRRs can recognize multiplePAMPs, and one kind of PAMPs can also be recognized by
different PRRs, which can induce an in ﬂammatory response and
adaptive immune response in a synergistic manner.
494
PRRs that are dif ﬁcult to ﬁnd and identify and complex ligand-
recognition mechanisms have hindered the study of the role of
the innate immune system in related diseases and even tumors. Inprevious studies, computational modeling and mutational analysisof human TLR10 showed that the structure of TLR10 was modeled
with the explicit inclusion of TLR2 and lipopeptide structures.
495
Recently, RRGPredictor, a tool mainly based on text mining and set
theory to predict new plant PRRs, makes the identi ﬁcation of PRRs
more effective, speci ﬁc, and sensitive than other available tools.496
And a random forest-based method was proposed to identify
PRRs, which is superior to other machine learning methods forPRRs. This method constructs a benchmark database, uses the
amino acid composition and the composition transition distribu-
tion to formulate the sequences in the dataset, and then uses themaximum relevance maximum distance to select the bestfeatures. However, due to the small amount of data and the low
sensitivity of the method, the identi ﬁcation results for PRRs are still
unsatisfactory.
497Therefore, the ability to develop a vertebrate
PRR predictor based on protein domain similarity and homologymodeling is becoming an important part of this story. In addition,
the future studies on the how membrane PRRs are secreted into
body ﬂuids and act as soluble PRRs will undoubtedly further our
understandings of their roles in antimicrobial immune defense
and autoimmune and autoin ﬂammatory disorders. Therefore, the
study of PRR-mediated pattern recognition mechanisms will helpto elucidate the signaling pathways and mechanisms of disease,Pattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
15
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291