have similar structures and functions, and the signals they
transmit are cross-talking, which can converge into several
common signaling pathways.
The NF- κB signaling
The transcription factor NF- κB is named after it was ﬁrst
discovered to be involved in the transcription of B cell κchain
genes.250NF-κB is a heterodimer composed of two molecules, p50
and p65, and is inactive due to binding to the inhibitory protein
IκB under normal conditions. NF- κB plays a key role in the process
of cellular in ﬂammation and immune response,251,252and its
mediated signal pathways are commonly seen in the activation ofvarious immune cells, including signal transduction initiated by
PRRs in innate immunity (Fig. 5).253
In the signal transduction initiated by TLRs,45after TLRs
recognize and bind the corresponding PAMPs and DAMPs, theTIR domains conduct signals by binding to different receptor
adaptor proteins in the cytoplasmic region.254,255Depending on
the different adaptor proteins, TLR signaling can be divided intoMyD88-dependent and MyD88-independent pathways.256MyD88
has a TIR domain at the C-terminus and a death domain at the N-
terminus and is the linker molecule in most TLR signal transductionpathways.257The current research indicated that, in the MyD88-
dependent pathway, MyD88 signaling mainly leads to the
production of pro-in ﬂammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis
factor (TNF), IL-6, IL-1, and chemokines.258–260The C-terminus of
MyD88 binds to the intracellular TIR domain of TLRs, and the N-terminus of MyD88 recruits IL-1R-related kinase 4 (IRAK4)261and
activates IRAK1 and IRAK2 through autophosphorylation of its
central kinase domain. Then ubiquitin ligase TNF receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) is recruited to form a complex with
transforming growth factor (TGF)- β-activated kinase 1 (TAK1) and
two TAK-binding proteins (TAB1 and TAB4). TRAF6 is degraded dueto its own ubiquitination.
262,263The TAK1 –TAB1 –TAB4 complex
activates the I κB kinase (IKK) complex through phosphorylation.
The latter phosphorylates I κB and degrades itself by ubiquitination.
NF-κB is released and translocated to the nucleus, thereby
regulating the transcription of in ﬂammatory genes.264,265
In the signal pathway mediated by NLRs, when the bacterial
component invades the cell, NOD1 and NOD2 recognize the
bacterial iE-DAP and MDP, respectively.266,267And then NOD-likereceptors are activated, self-dimerize, and recruit downstream
receptor-interacting serine –threonine protein 2 (RIP2) through its
CARD.268Activated RIP2 gathers downstream TAK1, TAK1-binding
protein 1, and the NF- κB essential modulator/IKK α/IKKβcomplex,
and the former activates IKK α/IKKβ,269thereby activating the
transcription of NF- κB and promoting the release of pro-
inﬂammatory factors.
When virus invades cells, RIG-I and MDA5 recognize the
corresponding viral RNA through the CTD and undergo con-
formation changes.270Activated RIG-I and MDA-5 induce down-
stream signal transduction by binding with mitochondrial antiviralsignaling protein (MAVS). MAVS is an important adaptor proteinfor downstream signal transduction. The N-terminus contains a
CARD-like domain, which binds to RIG-I and MDA-5 through the
CARD –CARD interaction.
271,272The proline-enriched domain in
MAVS can interact with a series of downstream signalingmolecules, such as TRAF3 and 6,273and activate the protein
kinase IKK, which causes phosphorylation of I κB,265and then I κBi s
ubiquitinated and degraded by proteases, activating the NF- κB
pathway.274
Different from other typical PRR-mediated signaling pathways,
spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) can be activated by associating withthe phosphorylated ITAM motif of CLRs.275In the Dectin-1/Syk
pathway, Syk activates protein kinase C- δ, which mediates the
phosphorylation of CARD9.276This allows CARD9 to bind to B cell
lymphoma 10277and para-aspase mucosa-associated lymphoid
tissue lymphoma translocation protein 1, forming a threemolecular structure that can typically activate NF- κB.278
The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling
MAPK is a group of serine –threonine protein kinases that can be
activated by different extracellular stimuli,279such as cytokines,
neurotransmitters, hormones, cell stress, and cell adhesion. TheMAPK pathway is one of the common intersections of signaltransduction pathways, such as cell proliferation, stress, in ﬂamma-
tion, differentiation, functional synchronization, transformation,
and apoptosis.
280,281It is an important transmitter of signals from
the cell surface to the inside of the nucleus.
In the MyD88-dependent pathway of TLRs, IRAK-1 is activated
by phosphorylation and interacts with TRAF6. In addition to
activating the IKK complex, it can also cause the activation of
Fig. 5 Pattern recognition receptor-mediated NF- κB signaling. The NF- κB protein can regulate gene expression and affect various biological
processes, including innate and adaptive immunity, in ﬂammation, stress response, B cell development, and lymphoid organ formation. TLRs,
NLRs, RLRs, and CLRs can generally phosphorylate I κB protein, which inhibits the activation of NF- κB protein, thereby promoting the
transcription and activation of in ﬂammatory genesPattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
8
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291