Innate immunity not only plays a role in controlling the
infection and spread of pathogens in the early stage of infectionbut also plays an important role in initiating and regulatingadaptive immunity.
12,307Innate immune cells produce different
types of cytokines through signal transduction initiated after PRRs
recognize PAMPs, which directly affect the differentiation of Thelper type 1 (Th1), Th2, Th17, and other subgroups in adaptiveimmunity.
15For example, pathogenic microorganisms activate
macrophages to secrete IL-6, TGF- β, IL-23, and other cytokines,
which promote Th17 response, leading to excessive immune-inﬂammatory effects and tissue damage, or activate NK cells to
secrete IFN- γ, and then activate macrophages to secrete IL-12,
promote the differentiation of Th0 into Th1, promote cellularimmune response, and effectively eliminate viral infections.
13,308
Therefore, the immune system is a system of mutual in ﬂuence.
Any anti-infection process is completed by mutually activating or
inhibiting of different components. These components are assmall as each cytokine and as large as the immune system.
PRR-RELATED DISEASES
PRRs and cancers
The in ﬂammatory microenvironment of tumor constitutes the
b a r r i e rf o rt u m o rg r o w t h ,w h i c hi s conducive to tumor formation
and development.309PRRs are widely expressed in a variety of
tumor tissues, such as colon cancer, lung cancer, breast cancer,
gastric cancer, melanoma, and so on.310,311The activation of
PRRs on the surface of tumor cells can induce the expression ofa large number of cytokines, chemokines, hormones, and
vascular-promoting factors, which is one of the important
factors to induce the formation of tumor in ﬂammatory micro-
environment and promote the development of tumor.312,313At
the same time, the activation of PRRs on immune cells caninduce antigen-presenting cells including DCs, tumor-associated
macrophages, and B cells to activate tumor-speci ﬁcTc e l l
responses or enhance the antitumor effects of phagocytes.These also indicate that the role of PRRs in immunotherapy
against tumors is very important and might represent a new
strategy for patients with tumors.
314,315We can see from the data in GEPIA316(http://gepia.cancer-pku.
cn/) that TLR level is signi ﬁcantly increased in tumors, including
glioblastoma multiforme, brain lower-grade glioma, kidney renalclear cell carcinoma, acute myeloid leukemia (AML), and
pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAAD). NOD1/2 are highly expressed
in AML and PAAD, while RLRs are highly expressed in AML, PAAD,diffuse large B cell lymphoma, head and neck squamous cellcarcinoma, and thymoma.
Colorectal cancer (CRC) . CRC, including colon cancer and rectal
cancer, is one of the most common gastrointestinal malignancies
in clinical practice, and it is also one of the cancers that seriously
endanger human health.
317,318Intestinal mucosal epithelial cells
and immune cells recognize intestinal microorganisms and theirproducts through TLRs.319–322TLR2 can recognize peptidoglycans
and lipopeptides that infect intestinal epithelial bacteria and
produce anti-infection and other immune-protective effects.323
Studies have shown that the expression level of TLR2 protein incolon cancer is signi ﬁcantly upregulated compared with normal
epithelial tissues,324and the use of TLR2 agonists signi ﬁcantly
enhances the proliferation, migration, and invasion capabilities ofcolon cancer cells.325TLR4 is highly expressed on the surface of
colon cancer cells. After stimulation and activation, it can induce a
variety of immunosuppressive factors, thus promoting theproliferation and immune escape of colon cancer cells.326First,
TLR4 can produce trophic factors and vascular growth factors
through the TLR4/MyD88/NF- κB signaling pathway, thereby
promoting tumor cell invasion.327,328Second, TLR4 can promote
tumor proliferation through TLR4/Cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2)/prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). PGE2 is an important cell growth and
regulatory factor. After binding to speci ﬁc receptors, it plays a key
role in mediating a series of cell activities, such as cell proliferation,differentiation, and apoptosis, and has immunosuppressive andanti-in ﬂammatory effects. COX2 is the rate-limiting enzyme of
prostaglandin synthesis, and it is also highly expressed in
inﬂammation, tumor, and other pathological states.
329Hsu
et al.330found that knocking out the mouse TLR4 gene
signi ﬁcantly reduced the expression of COX2 and PGE2 in the
intestinal mucosa; after administration of PGE2, the expression of
Fig. 7 Pattern recognition receptor-mediated in ﬂammasome signaling. One way for pathogenic microorganisms to induce in ﬂammation is by
activating in ﬂammasomes, which are multi-protein complexes assembled by PRRs in the cytoplasm and activate caspase-1 and subsequent
activation of pro-in ﬂammatory cytokines IL-1 βand IL-18. The in ﬂammasome complex usually contains cytoplasmic PRRs, adaptor protein
(ASC), and pro-caspase-1. Many different in ﬂammasome complexes have been detected, each with unique PRRs and activation triggersPattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
10
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291