COX2 in the intestinal mucosa increased signi ﬁcantly and
promoted the occurrence of intestinal tumors. After administra-
tion of PGE2, the expression of COX2 in the intestinal mucosa
increased signi ﬁcantly and promoted the occurrence of intestinal
tumors. At the same time, it has also been found to promote theexpression of amphiregulin and epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) in the intestinal mucosa. Finally, the study showed that the
abnormal expression of TLR4 in CRC caused by chronic in ﬂamma-
tion of the intestine can signi ﬁcantly enhance the expression of
PGE2, the upregulation of COX2, and the phosphorylation of EGFR
in intestinal mucosal cells, thereby positive feedback promotes the
proliferation of tumor cells. TLR5 also plays an important role intumor immunotherapy.
331In mouse xenograft models of human
colon cancer, ﬂagellin around the tumor activates TLR5 to inhibit
tumor growth and promote tumor apoptosis.332In addition,
TLR9 is expressed on the surface of the mesentery, whichmaintains intestinal homeostasis and repairs intestinal damage
by generating an immune response.333TLR9 relies on the MyD88
pathway to induce downstream signals to recruit many in ﬂam-
matory factors, such as IL-8, TGF- β, PGE2, and other immunosup-
pressive molecules,334leading to the continuous development of
inﬂammation, resulting in immune escape, and promoting the
unlimited proliferation of tumor cells. After TLR9 recognizes theexogenous ligand, it upregulates the expression of NF- κB signaling
factor. Once this pathway is opened, it may induce the secretion
of matrix metalloproteinase-13 (MMP-13) and the activation of
intercellular adhesion molecule-1, thus promoting the metastasisof tumor cells.
335,336At the same time, the metastatic tumor cells
are better adapted and combined with the cell matrix at the
metastasis, and the stability of tumor cell metastasis is enhanced.Although TLRs have been shown to enhance colon cancermetastasis, inhibiting these receptors cannot completely hinder
tumor progression. Surprisingly, NOD1 is highly expressed in
human CRC and its cell lines. After being activated by C12-iE-DAP,it mainly enhances the adhesion, migration, and metastasis of CRCcells through the p38 MAPK pathway.
337
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) . HCC is the most common type of
primary liver cancer. Among its many in ﬂuencing factors,
inﬂammation is one of the main reasons that induce liver
cancer.338The expression of TLR2 in liver cancer tissues is
signiﬁcantly higher than that in normal liver tissues, and the
expression of TLR2 protein is related to some mutant genes that
lead to the occurrence of HCC, such as p53, PIK3CA, and
β-catenin.339–342In addition, Chew et al. revealed that the
expression of TLR3 has independent effects on tumor parenchymaand in ﬁltrating NK cells, and the expression of these two parts is
related to inhibiting tumor cell proliferation, promoting tumor cell
death, and prolonging the survival rate of patients.343This
indicates that TLR3 may directly act on tumor parenchymal cells,promote the recruitment and activation of NK cells, and exert
antitumor effects. More and more evidences show that LPS plays a
role in the development of HCC. Zhou et al.344found that LPS
activates the TLR4 –AKT–SOX2 signaling pathway of liver cancer cell
lines to improve the ability of cancer stem cells; Lin et al.345found
that there is a positive feedback loop of COX-2/PGE2/signaltransducer and activator of transcription factor 3 (STAT3) activatedby LPS in liver cancer cells, which regulates the expression of genes
related to tumor proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. In the
latest research on the treatment of liver cancer, it is found that theantitumor effect of TLR9 agonist combined with anti-PD-1 antibodyor anti-PD-L1 is signi ﬁcantly better than single-agent therapy.
346
The activation of TLR9 inherent in liver cancer cells regulates the
autoarylation and ubiquitination of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1and the phosphorylation of STAT3, which together upregulate the
expression of PD-L1 and eventually induce immune escape.
Although TLRs have been reported to be associated with chronicinﬂammation of the liver, whether they promote the developmentof HCC remains uncertain. Song et al.
347found that the de ﬁciency
of TLR4, TLR9, and their downstream molecule MyD88 in a mouse
model characterized by hepatic deletion of TAK1 could block the
liver in ﬂammation –ﬁbrosis –cancer axis and reduce liver injury and
tumor growth. For TLR3, the downregulation of TLR3 in HCCpatients leads to poor prognosis (e.g., defective immune cell
recruitment and lack of killing of transformed hepatocytes), leading
to protection of transformed hepatocytes from apoptosis, therebypromoting the occurrence of liver cancer.
348Therefore, the
expression of TLR3 may become a useful clinical treatment
monitoring marker.
In addition to the above reasons, there is now more and more
evidence that the imbalance of the gut –hepatic axis may also play
a role in the occurrence of HCC.349Zhou et al.350discovered that
NOD2 acts as a bacterial sensor, linking gut-derived microorgan-
isms to the occurrence of HCC through a known mechanism and anewly discovered mechanism. The known mechanism is that
NOD2 activates NF- κB, JAK2/STAT3, and MAPK pathways in a RIP2-
dependent manner, leading to liver in ﬂammation.351It is worth
noting that activated NOD2 can also act as the initiator of thenuclear autophagy pathway that does not depend on RIP2, thereby
promoting the degradation of the nuclear component lamin A/C,
leading to damage to DNA damage repair mechanisms andincreased genomic instability, which eventually leads to theoccurrence of HCC.
350Meanwhile, the study found that the
expression of ALRs was negatively correlated with tumor volume,
stage, and metastasis of HCC patients. The researchers proposedthat overexpression of ALRs in HCC cells could increase the
expression of caspase-1 and IL-1a, and the release of lactate
dehydrogenase was also observed,352which was a marker of the
initiation of apoptosis. Thus, ALRs may play an antitumor role bypromoting tumor cell apoptosis.
Breast cancer . Breast cancer is one of the most common
malignant tumors in the female population. It has a strong abilityto invade and metastasize.
353It can metastasize to the liver, lung,
brain, bone, and other organs, forming complications and
increasing the dif ﬁculty of treatment. Studies have shown that
the promotion of the TLR2 signaling pathway on the metastasisand invasion ability of human breast cancer cells is achieved by
upregulating the secretion of in ﬂammatory cytokines.354LTA, a
TLR2 speci ﬁc ligand, can signi ﬁcantly promote the secretion of
tumor metastasis-related factors IL-6, TGF- β, and vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in breast cancer cells,355thereby
promoting the proliferation and metastatic invasion of breastcancer cells, and this promotion is related to the level of TLR2expression.
356,357In addition, the activation of TLR4 can increase
the secretion of IL-6 and IL-10 of cancer cells and induce the
production of more MMP-2, MMP-9, and VEGF,358,359which can
signi ﬁcantly enhance the invasion ability of breast cancer. It has
been reported that activation of TLR4 on metastatic breast cancer
cells can regulate the expression of integrin, which can promote
its adhesion and invasion.360
Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma . Squamous cell carci-
noma, also known as epidermal carcinoma, is a malignant tumoroccurring in the epidermis or adnexal cells.361,362It is more
common in the parts covered by squamous epithelium, such as
skin, mouth, lip, esophagus, cervix, vagina, etc.363,364TLR2, TLR4,
and TLR9 are expressed in primary tumors, neck metastases, andrecurrent tumors of oral tongue squamous cell carcinoma(OTSCC), and their expression varies from the tumor surface to
the invasive front, which may be one of the important factors to
promote the invasion of OTSCC.
365,366NOD1 and NOD2 genes are
expressed in the human oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cell
line YD-10B, and they may trigger immune responses through the
MAPK pathway. Surprisingly, the study revealed that stimulationby the NOD2 agonist MDP can inhibit cell growth by inducingPattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
11
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291