REVIEW ARTICLE OPEN
Pattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Danyang Li1,2and Minghua Wu1,2
Pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) are a class of receptors that can directly recognize the speci ﬁc molecular structures on the surface
of pathogens, apoptotic host cells, and damaged senescent cells. PRRs bridge nonspeci ﬁc immunity and speci ﬁc immunity. Through
the recognition and binding of ligands, PRRs can produce nonspeci ﬁc anti-infection, antitumor, and other immunoprotective effects.
Most PRRs in the innate immune system of vertebrates can be classi ﬁed into the following ﬁve types based on protein domain
homology: Toll-like receptors (TLRs), nucleotide oligomerization domain (NOD)-like receptors (NLRs), retinoic acid-inducible gene-I(RIG-I)-like receptors (RLRs), C-type lectin receptors (CLRs), and absent in melanoma-2 (AIM2)-like receptors (ALRs). PRRs are basically
composed of ligand recognition domains, intermediate domains, and effector domains. PRRs recognize and bind their respective
ligands and recruit adaptor molecules with the same structure through their effector domains, initiating downstream signalingpathways to exert effects. In recent years, the increased researches on the recognition and binding of PRRs and their ligands havegreatly promoted the understanding of different PRRs signaling pathways and provided ideas for the treatment of immune-related
diseases and even tumors. This review describes in detail the history, the structural characteristics, ligand recognition mechanism, the
signaling pathway, the related disease, new drugs in clinical trials and clinical therapy of different types of PRRs, and discusses thesigniﬁcance of the research on pattern recognition mechanism for the treatment of PRR-related diseases.
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-021-00687-0
INTRODUCTION
Theﬁrst line of defense against pathogens that gradually evolved
in organisms is innate immunity,
1which is divided into two levels:
ﬁrst, the skin, mucosal tissue, blood –brain barrier, and chemical
barrier (e.g. fatty acid, pH, enzyme, and complement system) of
the host can effectively resist the invasion of general pathogenic
microorganisms;2–4second, the innate immune system of
vertebrates protects the organism through nonspeci ﬁc immune
defense and surveillance by innate immune cells. Innate immune
cells mainly include monocytes, neutrophils, macrophages,
dendritic cells, natural killer (NK) cells, mast cells, eosinophils,and basophils.5,6Unlike T cells and B cells, which have high
speci ﬁcity, innate immune cells do not express speci ﬁc antigen
recognition receptors. Through the recognition and binding of
some common molecules on the surface of pathogens, apoptotichost cells, and damaged senescent cells, pattern recognition
receptors (PRRs) induce immunoprotective effects, such as anti-
infection and antitumor effects, and participate in the initiationand effect process of speci ﬁc immune response.
7–9
In the 1990s, the hypothesis of pathogen-associated molecular
patterns (PAMPs) and PRRs that recognize PAMPs was proposed
by Janeway, which was of epoch-making signi ﬁcance and
changed research on innate immunity.10The main point of this
hypothesis is the connection between the innate immune signal
and the initiation of the adaptive immune response. Some unique
and conserved components of pathogenic microorganisms caninduce the second signal required to activate T cells, so as tocontrol the adaptive immunity from being activated under normal
conditions.
11,12In addition, there are a class of receptors in thehost that can recognize pathogenic microorganisms and activate
the second signal in time, which are independent of gene
rearrangement. In vertebrates, innate immunity recognizes
pathogenic microorganisms and assists in the activation andexpression of second signals that activate the adaptive
immunity.13
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are one of the earliest PRRs discovered
in the innate immune system, which plays an important role ininﬂammatory responses.14,15Therefore, here is a brief description
of the development history of PRRs with TLRs as a representative.
TLRs were ﬁrst found in Drosophila in the form of genes in 1994.
Studies have shown that the function of this gene is related to theformation of the dorsal –ventral axis during the embryonic
development of Drosophila.16In 1988, Hashimoto et al. discovered
that the Toll gene encodes a transmembrane protein and clari ﬁed
the structure of the Toll protein.17In 1991, Gay et al. found that
Toll protein had structural homology with interleukin-1 (IL-1), a
natural immune molecule in mammals, suggesting that thefunction of Toll may be related to immunity.18In 1996, Hoffmann
team found that Toll plays a role in the resistance of Drosophila to
fungal infection. Toll-activated mutants persistently express
antifungal peptides, while Toll-deletion mutants, on the contrary,lose their ability to arrest fungal infection. It has been found thatToll can recognize spatzle (an important protein in the develop-
ment of the dorsal and abdomen of Drosophila) and initiate a
series of signal transduction to activate the expression ofantifungal peptide.
19In 1997, Janeway et al. cloned human
TLR4. TLR4 can induce the activation of nuclear factor (NF)- κB and
the expression of the co-stimulatory molecule CD80. This proves
Received: 1 September 2020 Revised: 23 May 2021 Accepted: 22 June 2021
1Hunan Provincial Tumor Hospital and the Af ﬁliated Tumor Hospital of Xiangya Medical School, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China and2The Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis of the Chinese Ministry of Health, The Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion of the Chinese Ministry of Education, Can cer Research Institute,
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, ChinaCorrespondence: Minghua Wu (wuminghua554@aliyun.com)www.nature.com/sigtrans Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy
©The Author(s) 20211234567890();,: