PAMPs and endogenous ligands, the TIR domains conduct signals
by binding to different receptor adaptor proteins in thecytoplasmic region.53,54The TIR domain has three conserved
amino acid sequences, which are called 1,2,3 cassettes. Depending
on the different adaptor proteins, TLRs signaling can be divided
into myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88)-dependent andMyD88-independent pathways (Fig. 1).55,56
Exploring the pattern recognition mechanisms of TLRs is very
valuable for understanding innate immunity and some tumor-
igenesis mechanisms. Therefore, researchers used X-ray crystaldiffraction to determine the crystallographic structure of the
extracellular domain of TLRs and the ligand complex. Although
the ligand complexes have different structures, all thesecomplexes have similar M-type crystal structures (Fig. 2).
50,51
TLR1 or TLR6 can form TLR1/TLR2 and TLR6/TLR2 heterodimers
with TLR2 to recognize tri-acylated lipopeptide and di-acylated
lipopeptide,57respectively. After recognizing the appropriate
ligands, TLR2 can form an M-type structure with the extracellularregion of TLR1 and TLR6, and the pocket structure formed binds to
the ligand.58–61The crystal structure of TLR1 –TLR2 –tri-acylated
lipopeptide complex is similar to that of TLR2 –TLR6 –di-acylated
lipopeptide complex, but there are important structural differ-
ences between TLR1 and TLR6 in the ligand-binding site and
dimerization surface. The ligand-binding pocket of TLR1 –TLR2 is
located in the interface between the central and C-terminaldomain, and TLR1 –TLR2 –tri-acylated lipopeptide is stabilized by
non-covalent bonds such as hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic
interactions, and ionic interactions near the ligand-bindingpocket.
62In TLR6, the side chains of amino acid residues block
the ligand-binding pocket, resulting in a pocket less than half the
length of TLR1. In addition, the TLR2 –TLR6 heterodimer is mainly
regulated by the surface exposed residues of the LRR11 –14module (Fig. 2a, b).63Researches on the structure of ligand
complexes can signi ﬁcantly promote the discovery of small
molecule agonists/antagonists targeting PRRs. A recent studyrevealed the activation mechanism of atypical agonists for
TLR1 –TLR2. Diprovocim is a recently found small molecule
activator for TLR1 –TLR2, but it has no structural similarity with
the tri-acylated lipopeptide complex. It also interacts withTLR1 –TLR2 in the same binding pocket as typical lipopeptide
ligand.
64Crystal structure analysis revealed that double-stranded
RNA (dsRNA) binds to the LRR domains of the N-terminus and C-terminus of TLR3.65,66Different from the way that other TLRs
directly recognize ligands,67–69TLR4 speci ﬁcally recognizes LPS in
combination with two auxiliary molecules, myeloid differentiationfactor 2 (MD2) and the LRR structural protein CD14. LPS istransported by LPS-binding protein to CD14 on the cell membrane
of monocytes and macrophages to form a complex and then
interacts with TLR4/MD2.
70After LPS binds with the TLR4/MD2
complex, the hydrophobic pocket of MD2 is used to bridge thetwo TLR4 –MD2 –LPS complexes to form a spatially symmetrical M-
type TLR4 –MD2 –LPS dimer,71and then conformational changes
affect their respective functional domains and transmit signals(Fig. 2c). In addition to binding to LPS, TLR4 is also involved in the
recognition of natural products (carnosic acid, paclitaxel) and
pneumolysin.72–74TLR5 is the most conserved and important PRR,
which is usually stimulated by bacterial ﬂagellin. In the form of
homodimer, TLR5 plays a major role in the primary defense of
invasive pathogens and immune homeostasis regulation.75
Although the heterodimeric structure of TLR5a –TLR5b in zebra ﬁsh
and the crystallographic structure of TLR5 –ﬂagellin complex has
been clearly reported, the lack of biochemical and structural
information of ﬁsh TLR hinders the understanding of ﬂagellin-
based therapies. In the future, experimental TLR5 –ﬂagellin
Fig. 2 Crystal structure of TLRs with ligands. aCrystal structure of the TLR1 –TLR2 heterodimer induced by binding of a tri-acylated
lipopeptide (PDB 2Z7X). TLR2 initiates immune responses by recognizing di-acylated and tri-acylated lipopeptides. The ligand speci ﬁcity of
TLR2 is controlled by whether it heterodimerizes with TLR1 or TLR6. Binding of the tri-acylated lipopeptide (red) induced the formation of M-type crystal structures of the TLR1 (pale yellow) and TLR2 (slate) ectodomains. bCrystal structure of TLR2 –TLR6 –Pam2CSK4 complex (PDB
3A79). Binding of the di-acylated lipopeptide, Pam2CSK4 (red), induced the formation of M-type crystal structures of the TLR2 (slate) and TLR6
(pale green) ectodomains. cCrystal structure of mouse TLR4/MD2/LPS complex (PDB 3VQ2). After LPS (red) binds with the TLR4 (yellow)/MD2
(gray) complex, the hydrophobic pocket of MD2 is used to bridge the two TLR4 –MD2 –LPS complexes to form a spatially symmetrical M-type
structure. Mouse TLR4/MD2/LPS exhibited an complex similar to the human TLR4/MD2/LPS complex. dCrystal structure of the N-terminal
fragment of zebra ﬁsh TLR5 in complex with Salmonella ﬂagellin (PDB 3V47). Two TLR5 (cyan) –ﬂagellin ( ﬁrebrick) 1:1 heterodimers assemble
into a 2:2 tail-to-tail signaling complex to functionPattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
4
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291