complex structure modeling and computational simulation should
be used to study ﬂagellin-mediated interactions between various
pathogens and host immune receptors (Fig. 2d).76It has been
reported that TLR1 –6 each exist as monomers in solution, and
dimerization occurs only when the ligand is bound; in contrast,
TLR8 and TLR9 exist as preformed dimers, and the binding ofligands induces conformational changes in preformed dimers (Fig.1).
49,77,78Lee revealed that TLR10 binds dsRNA in vitro at
endosomal pH, indicating that dsRNA is a ligand of TLR10. The
recognition of dsRNA by TLR10 recruits MyD88, thereby transdu-cing signals and inhibiting interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7)-dependent type I interferon (IFN) production.
79In mice, TLR11 and
TLR12 are the main effector molecules to recognize Toxoplasma
gondii . The recognition of T. gondii proﬁlin by TLR11 depends on
the parasite-speci ﬁc, surface-exposed motif in TgPRF consisting of
an acidic loop and a β-hairpin.80–82
NOD-like receptors
The growth cycle of some pathogenic microorganisms involves
infection of the cytoplasm. For example, viral genes are often
transcribed and translated in the cytoplasm, and virus particles areassembled. In addition, some bacteria and parasites have a seriesof escape mechanisms, such as making holes in the phagosome
membrane and entering the cytoplasm. Therefore, pathogens and
their components, as well as other components produced byinfection and injury, will appear in the cytoplasm,
83which requires
the recognition of PRRs in the body. NLRs are intracellular PRRs,
composed of three domains:84,85one is the central nucleotide-
binding domain (NBD), also known as the NACHT domain(synthesized by the abbreviations of the following four kinds of
NLR members: NAIP, CIITA, HETE, TP1), which is shared by the NLR
family and is very important for nucleic acid binding andoligomerization of NLRs (Fig. 3); LRRs at the C-terminus, which
are used to identify ligands; and the N-terminal effector domain,
which is the protein interaction domain, such as the caspase
activation and recruitment domain (CARD) or the pyrin domain(PYD).
86–89According to the different N-terminal effector domains,
the NLRs family can be divided into ﬁve subfamilies: the NLRC
subfamily, which contain CARDs; the NLRP subfamily, whichcontain PYDs; the NLRB subfamily, which contain baculovirusinhibitor of apoptosis protein repeats; the NLRA subfamily, which
contain acidic activation domains; and the NLRX subfamily
containing other NLR effector domains.
85
Among the NLRs family, the most in-depth study has focused
on NOD1 and NOD2 proteins. NOD1 mainly recognizes the
diaminopimelic acid ( γ-D-glu-meso-diaminopimelic acid (iE-DAP))
of the cell wall of Gram-negative bacteria.90,91In addition to
recognizing muramyl dipeptide (MDP) in all bacterial cell walls,NOD2 can also recognize single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) of the virus,but it must be a complete viral ssRNA.92The basic process of
NOD2 activation and signal transduction is as follows: after
pathogenic bacteria are phagocytosed by macrophages, they ﬁrst
form phagosomes, and then fuse with lysosomes to becomephagolysosomes. Under the action of lysosomal enzymes,bacterial cell wall components are decomposed into peptidogly-
can, which can be degraded into a cell wall peptide with
immunomodulatory activity and enter the cytosol, therebyactivating NOD2.
93In general, the LRR domain of the NLR
molecule folds to form a U-shaped con ﬁguration with the central
NACHT domain, which inhibits its multimerization and makes the
NLRs inactive.94Once PAMPs directly or indirectly bind to
the LRRs, the NLR molecule change their conformation, exposingthe NACHT oligomerization domain, which triggers oligomeriza-
tion, and the NLR molecule is activated.95At the same time, the N-
terminal effector domain is exposed, and through homotypicinteractions, downstream adaptor molecules and signaling
proteins with the same structure are recruited to initiate the
corresponding signal transduction (Fig. 3).96Although NOD1 and
NOD2 do not have transmembrane domains, studies have shownthat they are recruited into the plasma membrane and endosomal
membrane, which is necessary for signal transduction.97In this
process, palmitoylation plays a vital role. The modi ﬁcation of
NOD1/2 protein under the action of palmitoyltransferase ZDHHC5,which makes NOD1/2, possess the characteristics of rapid and
reversible localization changes, which is necessary for membrane
recruitment and in ﬂammatory signal transduction.98This study
gives us a good enlightenment that the modi ﬁcation of PRRs may
play a key role in the regulation of host innate immune signal.
RIG-I-like receptors
RLRs are also intracellular PRRs. In innate antiviral immunity, in
addition to the recognition of viral nucleic acids by TLR7 and TLR9,
most other types of cells recognize viral nucleic acids throughRLRs to induce antiviral immune responses.99,100The currently
discovered RLR family members mainly include three: RIG-I,
melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5), and labora-
tory of genetics and physiology 2 (LGP2) (Fig. 4).101
RIG-I was ﬁrst discovered in acute promyelocytic leukemia cells
induced by retinoic acid. In 2004, it was found that RIG-I could
induce the expression of a reporter gene in the IFN- βpromoter
region, which con ﬁrmed its antiviral activity.102The structure of
the RIG-I protein consists of three parts.103–105The middle part is
the DexD/H helicase domain, which is the common domain of the
RLR family, and has ATPase and helicase activities.106–108The N-
terminus of the RIG-I protein is composed of two caspaseactivation and recruitment domains in series,109which are
responsible for transmitting signals downstream.110The C-
terminus is composed of the repressor domain (RD) and the C-terminal domain (CTD), which can regulate its own state.106,111The
former can inhibit the activation of the receptor, and the latter is
responsible for the recognition of viral RNA.112,113In the resting
state, CARD, CTD, and the helicase domain are folded, and RIG-I isin a self-inhibited state. During viral infection, the CTD of RIG-I
recognizes viral RNA and undergoes a conformational change.114
RIG-I uses ATP hydrolase activity to expose and activate the CARD
and multimerize, thereby recruiting downstream signaling linkermolecules (Fig. 4).115–117
The structure and functions of MDA5 are similar to those of RIG-I,
with the DexD/H helicase domain in the middle, two CARD at theN-terminus, and a CTD at the C-terminus; however, MDA5 lacks theRD, and so it does not have self-inhibitory functions. In contrast to
other RLRs, LGP2 does not have CARD,
118,119and so it cannot
recruit molecules of the same structure to transmit signals, but itcan regulate the recognition of viral nucleic acids by RIG-I and
MDA5, thereby preventing RLR-mediated resistance.120–123LGP2
can negatively regulate RIG-I-mediated recognition of viral dsRNA,reduce the production of IFNs and in ﬂammatory factors, and
Fig. 3 The ligand recognition mechanism of NLRs. The combination
of PAMP and LRR changes the conformation of NLRs from self-inhibition to activationPattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
5
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291