main shift problem in FL-based MRI reconstruction. As
shown in Fig. 3, for a source siteDk
s, we leverage the en-
coder part of the reconstruction networks ( Ek
s) to project
input onto the latent space zk
s. Similarly, we can obtain zt
for the target siteDt. For each (Dk
s,Dt) source-target do-
main pair, we introduce an adversarial domain identiﬁer Ck
to align the latent space distribution between the source do-
main and the target domain. Ckis trained in an adversarial
manner. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst train Ckto identify which site
the latent features come from. We then train the encoder
part of the reconstruction networks to confuse Ck. It should
be noted thatCkonly has access to the output latent fea-
tures from Ek
sandEt, to maintain data sharing regulations.
Given the k-th source site data Dk
sand the target site data
Dt, the loss function for Ckcan be deﬁned as follows
LadvCk=−Exk
s∼Dk
s[logCk(zk
s)]
−Ext∼Dt[log(1−Ck(zt))],(5)
wherezk
s=Ek
s(xk
s)andzt=Et(xt). The loss function
for encoders can be deﬁned as follows
LadvEk=−Exks∼Dks[logCk(zk
s)]−Ext∼Dt[logCk(zt)].
(6)
The overall loss function used for training the k-th source
site with dataDk
sconsists of the reconstruction and adver-
sarial losses. It is deﬁned as follows
LDk
s=Lrecon+λadv(LadvCk+LadvEk), (7)
whereλadvis a constant which controls the contribution of
the adversarial loss. The detailed training procedure of FL-
MRCM in a source site is presented in Algorithm 2. In
supplementary material, we also provide the schematics of
training FL-MRCM in a global view.
3.3. Training and Implementation Details
We use U-Net [ 32] style encoder-decoder architecture
for the reconstruction networks. Details of the network ar-
chitecture are provided in supplementary material. λadvis
set equal to 1. Acceleration factor (AF) is set equal to 4. The
network is trained using the Adam optimizer with the fol-
lowing hyperparameters: constant learning rate of 1×10−4
for the ﬁrst 40 global epochs then 1×10−5for the last
global 10 epochs; 50 maximum global epochs; 2 maximum
local epochs; batch size of 16. Hyperparameter selection is
performed on the IXI validation dataset [ 3]. During train-
ing, the cross-sectional images are zero-padded or cropped
to the size of 256×256.
4. Experiments and Results
In this section, we present the details of the datasets and
various experiments conducted to demonstrate the effective-
ness of the proposed framework. Speciﬁcally, we conductAlgorithm 2: FL-MR with Cross-site Modeling
Input:Ds={D1
s,D2
s,...,DK
s}, data from the K
source institutions; Dt, data from the target
institution; P, the number of local epoches; Q, the
number of global epoches; γ, learning rate;
ΘG1s,...,ΘGKs, parameters of the local models in
the source sites; ΘC1,...,ΘCK, domain identiﬁers;
ΘG, the global model; ΘEt, the encoder part of G
in the target site.
⊲parameters initialization
forq = 0 to Q do
fork = 0 to K in parallel do
⊲deploy weights to local model
forp = 0 to P do
Reconstruction:
⊲compute reconstruction loss Lrecon
using Eq. 2
Cross-site Modeling:
⊲compute adverisal loss LadvCkand
LadvEk
susing Eq. 5and Eq. 6
⊲compute the total loss using Eq. 7and
updateΘGk
s,ΘCk, andΘEt
end
⊲upload weights to the central server
end
⊲update the global model using Eq. 4
end
returnΘQ
G
experiments under two scenarios. Fig. 4gives an overview
of different training and evaluation strategies involved in
the two scenarios. In Scenario 1, we analyze the effective-
ness of improving the generalizability of the trained mod-
els using the proposed methods and other alternative strate-
gies. Thus, the performance of a trained model is evaluated
against a dataset that is not directly observed during train-
ing. In particular, we choose one dataset at a time to emu-
late the role of the user institution and consider data from
other sites for training. This scenario is common in clinical
practice. MRI scanners are usually equipped with acceler-
ated acquisition techniques, so the user institution might not
have access to fully-sampled data for training. In Scenario
2, we evaluate the proposed method by training it on the
data from all available institutions to demonstrate the bene-
ﬁts of collaboration under the setting of federated learning.
Rather than assuming that user institution does not have ac-
cess to fully-sampled data, the training data split of user
institution is also involved as a part of collaborations.
4.1. Datasets
fastMRI [13] (F for short): T1-weighted images corre-
sponding to 3443 subjects are used for conducting exper-
2427