to produce superior performance on MR image reconstruc-
tion from partial k-space observations [ 20,38,39].
However, deep networks usually require large amounts
of diversity-rich paired data which can be labor-intensive
and prohibitively expensive to collect. In addition, one has
to deal with patient privacy issues when storing them, mak-
ing it difﬁcult to share data with other institutions. Although
deidentiﬁcation [ 33] might provide a solution, building a
large scale centralized dataset at a particular institution is
still a challenging task.
The recently introduced federated learning (FL) frame-
work [ 25,36,15] addresses this issue by allowing collab-
orative and decentralized training of deep learning-based
methods. In particular, there is a server that periodically
communicates with each institution to aggregate a global
model and then shares it with all institutions. Each insti-
tution utilizes and stores its own private data. It is worth
noting that instead of directly transferring data for training,
the communication in FL algorithms only involves model
parameters or update gradients, which resolves the privacy
concerns. Hence, FL methods intrinsically facilitate multi-
institutional collaborations between data centers (e.g., hos-
pitals in the context of medical images).
However, the generalizability of models trained with
the FL setting can still be suboptimal due to domain
shift, which results from the data collected at multiple
institutions with different sensors, disease types, and ac-
quisition protocols, etc. This can be clearly seen from
Fig.1where we show fully-sampled (Fig. 1(a)) and under-
sampled (Fig. 1(b)) images from four different datasets.
In Fig. 1(d), we visualize latent features corresponding to
images from these datasets using t-Distributed Stochas-
tic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) plot [ 23]. As can be
seen from Fig. 1(d), features from a particular dataset are
grouped together in a cluster indicating that each dataset
has its own bias. As a result, we can see four different clus-
ters of latent features. In order to make use of these datasets
in the FL framework, one needs to align these features and
remove the domain shift among the datasets. To circumvent
this challenge, we propose a cross-site model for MR im-
age reconstruction in which the learned intermediate latent
features among different source sites are aligned with the
distribution of the latent features at the target site. Speciﬁ-
cally, the proposed method involves two optimization steps.
In the ﬁrst step, local reconstruction networks are trained
on private data. In the second step, the intermediate latent
features of the target domain data are transferred to other
local source entities. An adversarial domain identiﬁer is
then trained to align the latent space distribution between
the source domain and the target domain. Hence, minimiz-
ing the loss of adversarial domain identiﬁer results in the re-
construction network weights being automatically adapted
to the target domain. Fig. 1(e) and (c) show the distribu-tion of aligned features and the corresponding reconstructed
images in four datasets. The proposed cross-site modeling
allows us to leverage datasets from various institutions for
obtaining improved reconstructions.
To summarize, this paper makes the following contribu-
tions:
• A method called Federated Learning-based Magnetic
Resonance Imaging Reconstruction (FL-MR) is pro-
posed which enables multi-institutional collaborations
for MRI reconstruction in a privacy-preserving man-
ner.
• To address the domain shift issue among different
sites, FL-MR with Cross-site Modeling (FL-MRCM)
is proposed to align the latent space distribution be-
tween the source domain and the target domain.
• Extensive experiments are conducted to provide vari-
ous insights about FL for MR image reconstruction.
2. Related Work
Reconstruction of MR images from under-sampled k-
space data is an ill-posed inverse problem. In order to ob-
tain a regularized solution, some priors are often used. CS-
based methods make use of sparsity priors for recovering
the image [ 21,22] from partial k-space observations. In re-
cent years, deep learning-based methods have been shown
to produce superior performance on MR image reconstruc-
tion [ 12,18,31,24,40]. Some deep learning-based meth-
ods approach the problem by directly learning a mapping
from the under-sampled data to the fully-sampled data in
the image domain [ 38,39,14,30]. Methods that learn a
mapping in the k-space domain have also been proposed in
the literature [ 1,8].
Federated learning is a decentralized learning framework
which allows multiple institutions to collaboratively learn a
shared machine learning model without sharing their local
training data [ 2,25,27]. The FL training process consists
of the following steps: (1) All institutions locally compute
gradients and send locally trained network parameters to
the server. (2) The server performs aggregation over the
uploaded parameters from Kinstitutions. (3) The server
broadcasts the aggregated parameters to Kinstitutions. (4)
All institutions update their respective models with aggre-
gated parameters and test the performance of the updated
models. The institutions collaboratively learn a machine
learning model with the help of a central cloud server [ 42].
After a sufﬁcient number of local training and update ex-
changes between the institutions and the server, a global
optimal learned model can be obtained.
McMahan et al. [25] proposed FedAvg, which learns a
global model by averaging model parameters from local
entities. FedAvg [ 25] is one of the most commonly used
2424