Multi-institutional Collaborations for Improving Deep Learning-based Magnetic
Resonance Image Reconstruction Using Federated Learning
Pengfei Guo Puyang Wang Jinyuan Zhou Shanshan Jiang Vishal M. Patel
Johns Hopkins University
{pguo4,pwang47 }@jhu.edu, {jzhou2,sjiang21 }@jhmi.edu, vpatel36@jhu.edu
Abstract
Fast and accurate reconstruction of magnetic resonance
(MR) images from under-sampled data is important in many
clinical applications. In recent years, deep learning-based
methods have been shown to produce superior performance
on MR image reconstruction. However, these methods re-
quire large amounts of data which is difﬁcult to collect and
share due to the high cost of acquisition and medical data
privacy regulations. In order to overcome this challenge, we
propose a federated learning (FL) based solution in which
we take advantage of the MR data available at different
institutions while preserving patients’ privacy. However,
the generalizability of models trained with the FL setting
can still be suboptimal due to domain shift, which results
from the data collected at multiple institutions with differ-
ent sensors, disease types, and acquisition protocols, etc.
With the motivation of circumventing this challenge, we pro-
pose a cross-site modeling for MR image reconstruction in
which the learned intermediate latent features among dif-
ferent source sites are aligned with the distribution of the
latent features at the target site. Extensive experiments are
conducted to provide various insights about FL for MR im-
age reconstruction. Experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed framework is a promising direction to uti-
lize multi-institutional data without compromising patients’
privacy for achieving improved MR image reconstruction.
Our code is available at https://github.com/guopengf/FL-
MRCM.
1. Introduction
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is one of the most
widely used imaging techniques in clinical applications. It
is non-invasive and can be customized with different pulse
sequences to capture different kinds of tissues. For instance,
fat tissues are bright in T1-weighted images, which can
clearly show gray and white matter tissues in the brain. The
radiofrequency pulse sequences used to make T2-weighted
Figure 1. Top row : (a) ground truth, (b) zero-ﬁlled images, and (c)
reconstructed images from the fastMRI [ 13], HPKS [ 10], IXI [ 3],
and BraTS [ 26] datasets from left to right, respectively. Bottom
row: t-SNE plots. The distribution of (d) latent features without
cross-site modeling, and (e) latent features corresponding to the
proposed cross-site modeling. In each plot, green, blue, yellow,
and red dots represent data from fastMRI [ 13], HPKS [ 10], IXI [ 3],
and BraTS [ 26] datasets, respectively.
images can delineate ﬂuid from cortical tissue [ 11]. How-
ever, to increase the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), clinical
scanning usually involves the usage of multiple saturation
frequencies and repeating acquisitions, which results in rel-
atively long scan time. Various compressed sensing (CS)
based methods have been proposed in the literature for ac-
celerating the MRI sampling process by undersampling in
thek-space during acquisition [ 4,21,22]. In recent years,
data driven deep learning-based methods have been shown
2423