Figure 2. An overview of the proposed FL-MR framework. Through several rounds of communication between data centers and server, the
collaboratively trained global model parameterized by Θq
Gcan be obtained in a data privacy-preserving manner.
frameworks for FL. FedProx [ 34] and Agnostic Federated
Learning (AFL) [ 28] are extensions of FedAvg which at-
tempt to address the learning bias issue of the global mod-
els for local entities. Recently, Sheller et al. [28] and Li
et al. [16] proposed medical image segmentation models
based on the FL framework. Peng et al. [29] proposed the
federated adversarial alignment to mitigate the domain shift
problem in image classiﬁcation. In [ 17], Li et al. formu-
lated a privacy-preserving pipeline for multi-institutional
functional MRI classiﬁcation and investigated different as-
pects of the communication frequency in federated models
and privacy-preserving mechanisms. Although these meth-
ods [ 29,17] achieved promising results to overcome domain
shift in classiﬁcation, due to the differences in network ar-
chitectures, one cannot directly utilize them for MR image
reconstruction. It is worth noting that the multi-institutional
collaborative approach based on FL for MR image recon-
struction has not been well studied in the literature.
3. Methodology
Similar to [ 38,39,14,30], the proposed method ad-
dresses the MR image reconstruction problem by directly
learning a mapping from the under-sampled data to the
fully-sampled data in the image domain. The MR imagereconstruction process can be formulated as follows
x=F−1(Fdy+ǫ),
x,y∈CN,(1)
wherexdenotes the observed under-sampled image, yis the
fully-sampled image, and ǫdenotes noise. Here, FandF−1
denote the Fourier transform matrix and its inverse, respec-
tively.Fdrepresents the undersampling Fourier encoding
matrix that is deﬁned as the multiplication of the Fourier
transform matrix Fwith a binary undersampling mask ma-
trix. The acceleration factor (AF) controls the ratio of the
amount of k-space data required for a fully-sampled image
to the amount collected in an accelerated acquisition. The
goal is to estimate yfrom the observed under-sampled im-
agex.
3.1. FL­based MRI Reconstruction
The proposed FL-MR framework is presented in Fig. 2
and Algorithm 1. LetD1,D2,...,DKdenote the MR im-
age reconstruction datasets from Kdifferent institutions.
Each local dataset Dkcontains pairs of under-sampled and
fully-sampled images. At each institution, a local model
is trained using its own data by iteratively minimizing the
following loss
Lrecon=/summationdisplay
(x,y)∼Dk/ba∇dblGk(x)−y/ba∇dbl1,(2)
2425