Algorithm 1: FL-based MRI Reconstruction
Input:D={D1,D2,...,DK}, datasets from K
institution; P, the number of local epoches; Q, the
number of global epoches; γ, learning rate;
G1,G2,...,GK, local models parameterized by
ΘG1,ΘG2,...,ΘGK;G, the global model
parameterized by ΘG.
Output: well-trained global model G
⊲parameters initialization;
forq = 1 to Q do
fork = 1 to K in parallel do
⊲deploy weights to local model;
forp = 1 to P do
⊲compute reconstruction loss Lrecon
with Eq. 2and update parameters ΘGk;
end
⊲upload weights to server;
end
⊲update global model with Eq. 4;
end
returnΘQ
G
whereGkcorresponds to the local model at site kand is
parameterized by ΘGk.Gk(x)corresponds to the recon-
structed image ˆy. After optimization with several local
epochs (i.e. Pepochs) via
Θ(p+1)
Gk←Θ(p)
Gk−γ∇L recon, (3)
each institution can obtain the trained FL-MR reconstruc-
tion model with the updated model parameters. Since each
institution has its own data which may be collected by a par-
ticular sensor, disease type, and acquisition protocol, each
Dkhas a certain characteristic. Thus, when a local model is
trained using its own data, it introduces a bias and does not
generalize well to MR images from another institutions (see
Fig. 1). One way to overcome this issue would be to train
the network on a diverse multi-domain dataset by combin-
ing data from Kinstitutions asD={D1∪D2∪···∪DK}
[7,6,5,35,41]. However, as discussed earlier, due to
privacy concerns, this solution is not feasible and impedes
multi-institutional collaborations in practice.
To tackle this limitation and allow various sites to collab-
oratively train a MR image reconstruction model, we pro-
pose the FL-MR framework based on FedA VG [ 25]. With-
out accessing private data in each site, the proposed FL-MR
method leverages a central server to utilize the information
from other institutions by aggregating local model updates.
The central server performs the aggregation of model up-
dates by averaging the updated parameters from all local
Figure 3. An overview of the proposed FL-MR framework with
cross-site modeling in a source site.
models as follows
Θq
G=1
KK/summationdisplay
k=1Θq
Gk, (4)
whereqrepresents the q-th global epoch. After Qrounds
of communication between local sites and central server,
the trained global model parameterized by ΘQ
G, can lever-
age multi-domain information without directly accessing
the private data in each institution.
3.2. FL­MR with Cross­site Modeling
Domain shift among datasets inevitably degrades the
performance of machine learning models [ 19]. Existing
works [ 9,37] achieve superior performance by leveraging
adversarial training. However, such methods require direct
access to the source and target data, which is not allowed
in FL-MR. Since we have multiple source domains and the
data are stored in local institutions, training a single model
that has access to source domains and target domain simul-
taneously is not feasible. Inspired by federated adversarial
alignment [ 29] in classiﬁcation tasks, we propose FL-MR
with Cross-site Modeling (FL-MRCM) to address the do-
2426