5
technique. There are various over-sampling algorithms, such as
SMOTE, Borderline-SMOTE, and Safe-Level-SMOTE, just to
name a few. The mentioned methods create synthetic samples
based on the nearest neighbour approach and can be negatively
impacted by the over-generalization issue. To overcome these
problems in this work, a density-based SMOTE [37]- [38]
technique is utilized and by synthetically adding Failure class
instances we make the distribution more balanced. It is an
over-sampling method in which the Failure class is over-
sampled by generating its synthetic instances.
C. Feature Selection
As stated, the data set consists of nearly 600 features. Data
sets with high dimensions can cause serious challenges such as
overﬁtting in learning processes, known as the curse of dimen-
sionality. To address these challenges the dimensionality needs
to be reduced and different approaches have been proposed
in the literature. Generally speaking, dimensionality reduction
can be considered as an approach to eliminate redundant (or
noisy) features. It can be divided into two categories, feature
extraction and feature selection . The former refers to those
methods (PCA and LDA) that map original features to a new
feature space with lower dimensionality while the latter aims
to select a subset of features such that the trained model (based
on the selected features) minimizes redundancy and maximizes
relevance to the target feature. PCA (a classic approach to
dimensionality reduction), Multidimensional Scaling, and In-
dependent Component Analysis (ICA) all suffer from a global
linearity issue. To address the mentioned shortcoming, non-
linear techniques have been proposed: kernel PCA, Laplacian
eigenmaps and semideﬁnite embedding. Since reconstructing
observations (after the projection phase) in these nonlinear
methods is not a trivial task, ﬁnding the corresponding pattern
is sometimes impractical. In a feature extraction approach,
observations are projected into another space where there is no
physical meaning between newly generated features and the
original ones. Hence, feature selection methods are superior
in terms of readability and interpretability in this sense.
Therefore, to avoid complexity and uncertainty that feature
extraction techniques bring, a feature selection approach has
been opted for in this work. To this end, we have proposed an
integrated approach, consisting of a metaheuristic algorithm
(GA) and an Artiﬁcial Neural Network. GA is a heuristic
search method and inspired by Charles Darwin’s theory of
natural evolution. Since selecting features can be considered
as a binary problem, we have developed our model based on
binary GA that treated candidate features (chromosomes in
GA terminology) as bit-strings.
GA relies on a population of individuals to explore a search
space. Each individual is a set of chromosomes, encoded as
strings of 0(if the corresponding feature is not selected) and
1(if the feature is selected). GA utilizes an initial population
and some genetic operators, e.g., crossover and mutation,
to generate a new generation by recombining a population’s
chromosomes. Then, ﬁtter individuals are selected according
to a cost-function (objective-function) in a reproduction phase.
GA maintains its effectiveness from two sources: ExplorationandExploitation . The former can be considered as a process
of exploring a search space (by genetic search operators,
e.g. crossover operation), while the latter is the process of
employing a mutation operator and modifying offsprings’
chromosomes. A balance between the mentioned abilities
(Exploration and Exploitation) should be maintained. To that
end, beneﬁcial aspects of existing solutions (individuals with
lower costs) should be exploited. Moreover, exploring the
feature space in order to ﬁnd an optimal solution (optimal
features) is crucial. While a crossover operation is the main
search operator, a mutation operator is employed to avoid
premature convergence. The level of exploration/exploitation
can be controlled by selection processes, e.g. selection pressure
parameter. Selecting an appropriate pressure measurement ( 
in this work) can maintain a balance between exploration
and exploitation. Such discussion is provided in Section IV.
Parameterhas been used in the parent selection stage and
candidate individuals have been taken into account in the
generation production. This operation, iteratively, has been
repeated until the termination criteria (number of iterations
or number of function evaluations (NFE)) are met. The best
individual (the one with the minimum cost) is selected and in
this way optimal features are then identiﬁed. Fig. 2 displays
our proposed feature selection model.
IV. F EATURE SELECTION MODEL
As mentioned earlier, our objective is to modify the output
of each iteration (a subset of features) by searching feature
space and ﬁnding proper values for the input features such that
the measured cost is minimized. Given Fig. 2, our proposed
feature selection model consists of different phases. It starts
with deﬁning an initial population, i.e., individuals including
m-dimensional chromosomes.
= (v1;v1;:::;vm)
whereviis either 1or0, and corresponds to the status of the
ithvariable (feature), selected or not. While some individuals
are admitted to the new generation unchanged, others may be
subject to some genetic operators (crossover and mutation).
The cost related to each individual is evaluated by the ANN
in the second phase to be presented in Section IV. These
costs are utilized (in the parent selection phase) to determine
which offsprings are used to create a new generation. The
objective is to select two individuals (with lower costs) from
the population such that newly created offsprings would inherit
such patterns from their parents. Generally speaking, there are
several approaches to select parents such as Random Selec-
tion, Rank Selection, Stochastic Universal Sampling (SUS),
Tournament Selection, and Boltzmann Selection. There is no
selection pressure parameter in the Random Selection method,
and hence it is usually avoided. Rank Selection and SUS suffer
from premature convergence and applying such approaches
may easily result in a local optimum. To avoid the mentioned
situation and maintain good diversity we have employed the
Boltzmann Selection method which is inspired by Simulated
Annealing. The probability of an individual being selected is
calculated according to the below Boltzmann probability: