8
Fig. 4: Cost function value versus Number of Function Eval-
uations (NFE)
Some statistical results (e.g., the percentage of correct
predictions) have been also provided in Table I. Given the
results demonstrated, Gaussian SVM has been selected as the
classiﬁcation model. Some other feature selection methods
are also utilized to compare their results with our proposed
approach. The discussion regarding it is presented next.
C. Conventional Methods
As discussed in the previous sections, most studies regard-
ing manufacturing data analysis have considered PCA-based
approaches which aim to detect the directions of most varia-
tion. Together with PCA, we have tested most popular algo-
rithms, e.g., Family-Wise Error Rate (FWE), False Discovery
Rate (FDR), Sequential Forward Selection (SFS), Sequential
Backward Selection (SBS), Filtration Feature Selection (FFS),
Correlation-based Feature Selection (CFS), Lasso Regression
and Ensemble methods, for feature extraction [41]. We have
implemented these traditional methods to reduce the dimen-
sionality of our data set and compared the results. To do so, the
extracted features are used as the input for the chosen classiﬁer.
Fig. 6 displays the analysis based on the Lasso Regression
method.
The experimental results (Table II) show that our proposed
model is superior over those conventional ones. The corre-
sponding accuracy rate of the proposed model is over 90%.
An ROC comparison between our method and two of the
traditional techniques is demonstrated in Fig. 7.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The goal of manufacturing enterprises is to develop cost-
effective and competitive products. Manufacturing Intelligence
can signiﬁcantly improve effectiveness by bridging business
and manufacturing models with the help of low-cost sensor
data. It aims to achieve a high level of intelligence with
the latest appropriate technology-based computing, advanced
analytics, and new levels of Internet connectivity. The land-
scape of Industry 4.0 includes achieving visibility on real-timeprocesses, mutual recognition, and establishing an effective
relationship among the workforce, equipment, and products.
Most work in the area of manufacturing data analysis are based
on PCA-based approaches. They are not able to recognize
nonlinear relationships among features and extract complex
pattern. To address this concern, we have proposed a dynamic
feature selection method based on GA and ANN. We have
compared the results achieved in this work with traditional
approaches to prove the effectiveness of our proposed solution.
As a part of our future work, we plan to consider other
MOEAs, e.g., dominance-based algorithms, for solving our
optimization problem in a way that both feature selections ob-
jective functions are optimized simultaneously. Moreover, we
will also compare the current model with other evolutionary
algorithms proposed for feature selection.
APPENDIX A
PSEUDO -CODE FOR THE FEATURE SELECTION MODEL
GA has different parameters and the performance of a GA-
based model depends on these parameters. We have discussed
how they have been selected throughout this work. Table III
reveals the impacts of different parameter setting.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Jeschke, C. Brecher, T. Meisen, D. Ozdemir, and T. Eschert, ”Industrial
Internet of Things and Cyber Manufacturing Systems,” Industrial Internet
of Things, Springer Series in Wireless Technology , Springer, Cham, pp.
3-19, 2017.
[2] T. Lojka, M. Miskuf M., and I. Zolotova, ”Industrial IoT Gateway
with Machine Learning for Smart Manufacturing,” IFIP Advances in
Information and Communication Technology , pp. 759-766, 2017.
[3] M. Ghahramani, M. Zhou and G. Wang, ”Urban sensing based on
mobile phone data: approaches, applications, and challenges,” IEEE/CAA
Journal of Automatica Sinica , vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 627-637, May 2020, doi:
10.1109/JAS.2020.1003120.
[4] J. Tavcar and I. Horvath, ”A Review of the Principles of Designing Smart
Cyber-Physical Systems for Run-Time Adaptation: Learned Lessons and
Open Issues,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics:
Systems , vol. 49, pp. 145-158, 2019.
[5] B. Chen, D. W. C. Ho, W. Zhang, and L. Yu, ”Distributed Dimensionality
Reduction Fusion Estimation for Cyber-Physical Systems Under DoS
Attacks,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems ,
vol. 49, pp. 455-468, 2019.
[6] P. Palensky, E. Widl, and A. Elsheikh, ”Simulating Cyber-Physical Energy
Systems: Challenges, Tools and Methods,” IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics: Systems , vol. 44, pp. 318-326, 2014.
[7] Y . Liu, Y . Peng, B. Wang, S. Yao, and Z. Liu, ”Review on cyber-physical
systems,” IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica , vol. 4, pp. 27-40,
2017.
[8] G. Fortino, F. Messina, D. Rosaci, G. M. Sarne, and C. Savaglio,
”A Trust-based Team Formation Framework for Mobile Intelligence in
Smart Factories,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics , 2020, doi:
10.1109/TII.2020.2963910.
[9] M. Ghahramani, M. C. Zhou, and C. T. Hon, ”Analysis of mobile
phone data under a cloud computing framework,” in Proc. of 14th IEEE
International Conference on Networking, Sensing and Control (ICNSC) ,
Calabria, Italy, 2017.
[10] M. Ghahramani, M. C. Zhou, and C. T. Hon, ”Extracting Signiﬁcant
Mobile Phone Interaction Patterns Based on Community Structures,”
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 20, pp.
1031-1041, 2019.
[11] M. Ghahramani, M. C. Zhou, and C. T. Hon, ”Mobile Phone Data Anal-
ysis: A Spatial Exploration toward Hotspot Detection,” IEEE Transactions
on Automation Science and Engineering , vol. 16, pp. 351-362, 2019.
[12] M. H. Ghahramani, M. C. Zhou, and C. T. Hon, ”Toward cloud com-
puting QoS architecture: analysis of cloud systems and cloud services,”
IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica , vol. 4, pp. 6-18, 2017.