3
perceptron that is considered as an embedded part of a feature
selection algorithm. GA consists of different phases, i.e. parent
selection, crossover, mutation, and creating ﬁnal population
(the selected features) [17]. Parent Selection is a crucial
part of GA and consists of a ﬁnite repetition of different
operations, i.e., selection of parent strings, recombination, and
mutation. The objective in a reproductive phase is to select
cost-efﬁcient chromosomes from the population, which create
offsprings for the next generation. To address the exploration
and exploitation and to avoid premature convergence, we have
proposed a selection scheme by combining different crossover
operations. The mentioned issue is heavily related to the loss
of diversity. The proposed solution also eliminates the cost
scaling issue and adjusts the selection pressure throughout the
selection phase. We adjust the balance between exploration
and exploitation by recombining crossover operators with
adjustment of their probabilities. A discussion for determining
exploration and exploitation rate is presented in the following
sections. Consequently, offsprings are created by adjusting
such probabilities throughout the mating pool by establishing a
hybrid roulette-tournament pick operator. Selected features are
fed to a predictive model to determine fault status. It is worth
mentioning that the algorithm considers two major conﬂicting
objectives: minimizing the number of features and maximizing
the classiﬁcation performance. Consequently, the result of the
proposed model are compared with traditional approaches. The
experiments have veriﬁed the effectiveness and efﬁciency of
our approach as compared to those in the literature. In sum-
mary, the overall objective is to propose an AI-based multi-
objective feature selection method together with an efﬁcient
classiﬁcation algorithm to scrutinise manufacturing processes.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: some
related work about manufacturing processes, feature extraction
and application of AI is described in Section II; a prepro-
cessing procedure is discussed in Section III; the proposed
approach with its associated discussions is given in Section
IV; the experimental settings and the classiﬁcation results are
shown in Section V; and the future work and conclusions are
presented in Section VI.
II. R ELATED WORK
Recently, the rapid evolution of high-throughput technolo-
gies has resulted in the exponential growth of manufacturing
data [18]. Since traditional approaches toward data manage-
ment are impractical due to high dimensionality, proposing
an effective and efﬁcient data management strategy has be-
come crucial. To do so, ML can help develop strategies to
automatically identify patterns from high dimensional datasets.
The key to leveraging manufacturing data lies in constant
monitoring of processes, which can be associated with dif-
ferent issues, e.g., noisy signals. Dimensionality reduction and
feature selection/extraction methods, e.g. Principal Component
Analysis (PCA), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), and
Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA), play a critical role
in dealing with noise and redundant features and must be
considered as a preprocessing stage of manufacturing data
analysis, which leads to better insights and robust decisions[19]. Some previous manufacturing fault detection studies have
focused on utilizing the mentioned techniques for extracting
the most relevant features and classiﬁcation. Feature selection
methods can be divided into three main categories, i.e., ﬁlter,
wrapper, and embedded methods. The ﬁlter methods act based
on ranking the features. In wrapper methods, features are
selected based on the performance of predictors. Finally,
embedded methods include variable selection as part of the
training process without splitting the data into training and
testing sets.
In [20], the authors have utilized PCA to extract features
to decrease the computational cost and complexity. Given the
extracted features, they have implemented a classiﬁcation al-
gorithm to infer whether a semiconductor device is a defective
or normal sample. To that end, they have adopted a k-nearest
neighbors (KNN) classiﬁcation method. Cherry et al. have
conducted another model based on a multiway PCA (MPCA)
to monitor stream data [21]. A decision tree algorithm has been
developed in [22] to explore various types of defective devices.
A KNN method has been utilized in [23], and Euclidean
distance has been considered to measure similarities among
features. Verdier et al. have improved the performance of a
KNN algorithm tailored for fault detection in semiconductor
manufacturing by deﬁning similarity measurement based on
Mahalanobis distance [24]. A support vector machine (SVM)
is used to detect semiconductor failures in [25]. The authors
have developed their approach based on an RBF kernel to
address the high dimensionality issue. In [26], an incremental
clustering method is adopted for fault detection. A Bayesian
model has been proposed to infer a manufacturing process.
The authors have considered the root causes of manufactur-
ing problems. However, their approach heavily relies on an
expert’s knowledge regarding the related ﬁeld. Zheng et al.
have proposed a convolution neural network [27]. They have
decomposed multivariate time-series datasets into univariate
ones. Then, features have been extracted and an MLP-based
method has been implemented for data classiﬁcation. Lee et
al. have compared the performance of different fault detection
models, including feature extraction algorithms and classiﬁ-
cation approaches [28]. They have revealed that developing
an algorithm based on features that are not suitable for a
speciﬁc model can deteriorate the performance of classiﬁers
signiﬁcantly. Therefore, it is desirable to consider both feature
extraction and classiﬁcation stages simultaneously to maxi-
mize a model’s performance.
Most studies in the literature have focused on using PCA
and KNN algorithms for manufacturing data classiﬁcation.
However, PCA-based approaches project features to another
space based on a linear combination of original features.
Therefore they cannot be interpreted in the original feature
space [29]. Moreover, most of the PCA-related work has
considered linear PCA, which is not efﬁcient in exploring non-
linear patterns. Although these techniques try to cover max-
imum variance among manufacturing variables, inappropriate
selection of parameters, e.g., principal components, may result
in great data loss. KNN is a memory-based classiﬁer. Hence, in
cases of high dimensional data sets, its performance degrades
dramatically with data size. To overcome the mentioned con-