2
optimal system, i.e., one that is adaptive and intelligent, is not
a trivial task; however, embedding intelligent algorithms in
automation and semiconductor production could be beneﬁcial
for both reducing cost and enhancing quality of products. The
main focus of smart manufacturing studies is on the product
life-cycle management, manufacturing process management,
industry-speciﬁc communication protocols, and manufacturing
strategies. Recent advances in technology-based solutions,
e.g., IoT, cloud/fog computing, and big data, can expedite
and simplify the production process and make new devel-
opment of manufacturing possible [9]–[15]. These advances
should drive the evolution of manufacturing architectures into
integrated networks of automation devices and enable the
smart characteristics of being self-adaptive, self-sensing, and
self-organizing. Providing such solutions includes addressing
several challenges, e.g., data volume, data quality and data
merging.
Traditional fault detection and diagnosis systems interpret
sensory signals as single values [16]. Then, these values are
fed into a model to verify product status. The main drawback
of this approach is that it fails to determine the most important
features/operations involved in semiconductor production and
may result in the loss of sensory data. Moreover, sensory data
might consist of noise, outliers, and missing values and can
be characterized by heterogeneous structures. To address these
concerns, our goal is to propose an intelligent and dynamic
algorithm consisting of a feature extraction mode. Generally
speaking, predicting the quality of products is an imbalanced
classiﬁcation problem and semiconductor manufacturing is not
an exception. To be speciﬁc, the dataset is imbalanced because
the defective rate in manufacturing processes is quite low in
practice. To address this potential issue, a proper imbalanced
technique needs to be taken into account to improve model
performance. Such implementation is discussed in the follow-
ing sections. Moreover, we propose an integrated algorithm to
solve a multiobjective problem based on a Artiﬁcial Neural
Network (ANN) and Genetic Algorithm (GA), to establish
a fault diagnosis solution by extracting the most relevant
features and then using these features as an input for classi-
ﬁers. It should be mentioned that Multiobjective Evolutionary
Algorithms (MOEA) is divided into different categories, i.e.,
decomposition-based and dominance-based methods. In this
work, a decomposition method (weighted sum technique)
based on a binary GA and ANN is proposed. This approach
is practicable for all kinds of manufacturing analyses in the
context of feature extraction/selection, dynamic optimization,
and fault detection. Speciﬁcally, we investigate the following:
1) how a hybrid model based on an Evolutionary algorithm
combined with ANN can be proposed to model nonlin-
earity;
2) how to integrate the capabilities of ML combined with
AI to implement a highly ﬂexible and personalized smart
manufacturing environment;
3) whether combining ML with AI can outperform the
traditional methods;
Given the extracted features, various classiﬁcation methods
are tested and the one with the minimum classiﬁcation errorrate are selected. Also, a comparison between the proposed
solution and traditional methods is presented. The integrated
approach is shown to outperform the others in terms of
the accuracy and performance of a manufacturing system.
This model can be also useful for fault detection without
requiring specialized knowledge. In this implementation, we
have encountered several issues, e.g., handling imbalanced
data, exploration, and exploitation in an optimization process.
To address such concerns, various scenarios are discussed
throughout the paper.
Research Methodology and Contributions
Modern embedded systems, an emerging area of ML, AI,
and IoT, can be a promising solution for efﬁcient, cost-
effective manufacturing production. Semiconductor manufac-
turing is a highly interdisciplinary process, complex and costly
including various phases. Failures during the manufacturing
phases result in faulty products. Hence, detecting the causes
of failures is crucial for effective policy-making and is a
challenging task in the Business Planning stage as demon-
strated in Fig. 1. This can be achieved by fully exploring
production phases and extracting relevant manufacturing fea-
tures involved in the production. Therefore, fault detection and
feature extraction are of much importance. Accordingly, we
deal with implementing a model for feature extraction and
classiﬁcation in semiconductor manufacturing. The solution
involves developing a model for monitoring processes based
on ML and AI algorithms to enhance the overall output
of manufacturing processes by extracting the most relevant
features. Interpreting these features (manufacturing processes),
consequently, provides us with the ability to quickly identify
the root cause of a defect. One such efﬁcient model contributes
to cost reduction and productivity improvement.
While the greatest challenge in this work is a feature ex-
traction/feature selection task, some other data-related issues,
such as imbalanced data and outliers, should ﬁrst be addressed.
These data preparation steps aim to transform raw data into
meaningful and useful ones that can be used to distinguish data
patterns and consequently enable us to implement effective
strategies. To solve the imbalanced classiﬁcation issue, we
have adopted a synthetic minority over-sampling algorithm
to boost the small number of defective cases and assign a
higher cost to the misclassiﬁcation of defective products than
that of normal products. A conﬁdence interval is deﬁned and
outliers have been identiﬁed based on this measurement and
eliminated. Then, the initial set of data is fed into a feature
selection algorithm. Feature extraction aims to project high-
dimensional data sets into lower-dimensional ones in which
relevant features can be preserved. These features, then, are
used to distinguish patterns.
The proposed dynamic feature selection model is based
on an integrated algorithm including a meta-heuristic method
(GA) and artiﬁcial neural network. We have implemented a
binary GA to determine the optimal number of features and its
relevant cost which are used to create a predictive model. Our
goal is a solution with low-cost values in a search process.
The cost function has been deﬁned by using a multilayer