1
AI-based Modeling and Data-driven Evaluation for
Smart Manufacturing Processes
Mohammadhossein Ghahramani, Member, IEEE, Yan Qiao, Member, IEEE,
MengChu Zhou, Fellow, IEEE , Adrian O’Hagan, and James Sweeney
Abstract —Smart Manufacturing refers to optimization tech-
niques that are implemented in production operations by utilizing
advanced analytics approaches. With the widespread increase
in deploying Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) sensors in
manufacturing processes, there is a progressive need for opti-
mal and effective approaches to data management. Embracing
Machine Learning and Artiﬁcial Intelligence to take advantage
of manufacturing data can lead to efﬁcient and intelligent
automation. In this paper, we conduct a comprehensive analysis
based on Evolutionary Computing and Deep Learning algo-
rithms toward making semiconductor manufacturing smart. We
propose a dynamic algorithm for gaining useful insights about
semiconductor manufacturing processes and to address various
challenges. We elaborate on the utilization of a Genetic Algorithm
and Neural Network to propose an intelligent feature selection
algorithm. Our objective is to provide an advanced solution for
controlling manufacturing processes and to gain perspective on
various dimensions that enable manufacturers to access effective
predictive technologies.
Index Terms —Smart Manufacturing, Feature Selection, Ge-
netic Algorithms (GA), Machine Learning, Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AI), Neural Network (NN), Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT),
Cyber Physical Systems.
I. I NTRODUCTION
OVER recent decades, the manufacturing industry wit-
nessed tremendous advances in the form of four major
paradigm shifts. In the latest industrial revolution, Industry 4.0,
manufacturing has embraced the Industrial Internet of Things
(IIoT) [1]–[3] and Machine Learning (ML) to enable ma-
chinery to boost performance through self-optimization [4]–
[8]. Employing computer control over manufacturing phases
can make industry processes smart. Broadly speaking, Smart
Manufacturing (SM) can be deﬁned as a data-driven approach
that leverages IoT devices and various monitoring sensors.
Deploying modern technologies, e.g., IoT coupled with Cloud
This work was supported by in part by Science and Technology develop-
ment fund (FDCT) of Macau under Grant 011/2017/A, and in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61803397.
M. Ghahramani is with University College Dublin, Ireland, (e-mail:
sphr.ghahramani@gmail.com, sepehr.ghahramani@ucd.ie).
Y . Qiao is with the Institute of Systems Engineering, Macau University of
Science and Technology, Macau, (e-mail: yqiao@must.edu.mo).
M. C. Zhou is with the Helen and John C. Hartmann Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, New Jersey Institute of Technology,
Newark, NJ 07102, USA (e-mail: zhou@njit.edu).
A. O’Hagan is with University College Dublin, Ireland, (e-mail:
adrian.ohagan@ucd.ie).
J. Sweeney is with the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland (RCSI), Dublin,
Ireland, (e-mail: james.sweeney@ucd.ie).
Fig. 1: Different levels of automation and their
corresponding data analytics (ERP=Enterprise Resource
Planning; MES=Manufacturing Execution Systems;
SCADA=Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition;
HMI=Human Machine Interface; PLC=Programmable
Logic Controller; CNC=Computer Numerical Control;
RTU=Remote Terminal Unit).
Computing, in manufacturing, provides access to valuable data
at different levels, i.e., manufacturing enterprise, manufactur-
ing equipment, and manufacturing processes. With the prodi-
gious amount of manufacturing data at hand, Computational
Intelligence (CI) enables us to transform data into real-time
manufacturing insights. Manufacturing, then, can be controlled
by leading-edge CI and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), and tasks
are modelled based on experimental observations, to enhance
productivity while reducing costs.
Cost-effective and sustainable manufacturing has become
the focus of academia and industry. In doing so, it is of so
great importance to identify which factors play a pivotal role in
process outcomes. An integrated model based on manufactur-
ing processes and data analytics is demonstrated in Fig. 1. The
model has been divided into different layers and can be con-
sidered as a Computer-Integrated Manufacturing (CIM) model
from which computational intelligence can take control of the
entire production processes. At the Business Planning level, all
decisions regarding the end product are made. The operational
decisions related to optimizing processes are managed in
the Operation Management level. On the Monitoring Level,
different sensor-based monitoring approaches, e.g., anomaly
detection methods, are employed. Finally, data acquisition and
real-time processing are performed at the Production Process
level and Sensing level, respectively.
The approach implemented in this work aims to mitigate
cost and production risks and promoting sustainable devel-
opment of semiconductor manufacturing. Moving towards anarXiv:2008.12987v1  [cs.LG]  29 Aug 2020