13
MengChu Zhou (S’88-M’90-SM’93-F’03) received
his B.S. degree in Control Engineering from Nan-
jing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing,
China in 1983, M.S. degree in Automatic Control
from Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
in 1986, and Ph. D. degree in Computer and Systems
Engineering from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute,
Troy, NY in 1990. He joined New Jersey Institute
of Technology (NJIT), Newark, NJ in 1990, and
is now a Distinguished Professor of Electrical and
Computer Engineering. His research interests are in
Petri nets, intelligent automation, Internet of Things, big data, web services,
and intelligent transportation. He has over 800 publications including 12
books, over 500 journal papers (over 400 in IEEE transactions), 12 patents and
29 book-chapters. He is the founding Editor of IEEE Press Book Series on
Systems Science and Engineering and Editor-in-Chief of IEEE/CAA Journal
of Automatica Sinica. He is a recipient of Humboldt Research Award for
US Senior Scientists from Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, Franklin V .
Taylor Memorial Award and the Norbert Wiener Award from IEEE Systems,
Man and Cybernetics Society. He is a life member of the Chinese Association
for Science and Technology-USA and served as its President in 1999. He is
a Fellow of International Federation of Automatic Control (IFAC), American
Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) and Chinese Association
of Automation (CAA).
Adrian O Hagan is a lecturer and researcher in
Statistics and Actuarial Science at University Col-
lege Dublin (UCD). He holds a degree in Actuarial
Science and an MSc and PhD in Statistics from
UCD. He uses cutting edge statistical and data
analytics techniques to solve real industrial problems
in modelling and pricing risk, working with leading
insurers and ﬁnancial institutions. He currently su-
pervises PhD students in Statistical Genetics with
Actuarial Applications and Statistics and Actuarial
Science, and is currently expanding his research
group in the FinTech space. He serves as an examiner for the Institute and
faculty of Actuaries and is a referee for several leading Statistics journals.
James Sweeney is a lecturer and researcher in
Statistics at the Royal College of Surgeons Ire-
land (RCSI), with a PhD in Statistical Climatology.
His research interests range across the ﬁelds of
spatial analysis, high performance computing and
simulation, and statistical applications in medicine
and agriculture. Dr. Sweeney’s core strengths are in
the analysis of extremely large datasets, particularly
those comprised of multivariate, spatially indexed
data with practical applications including the mod-
elling of house price information in Dublin, as well
as evaluating the speed and cost of abrupt climate change.