a concatenated set of evidence allows a classi-
ﬁer to simply guess whether the hypothesis is true
and supported somewhere, rather than having to
consider the relationship between hypothesis and
premise. For example, it is possible to classify
67% of SNLI examples correctly without read-
ing the premise ( Gururangan et al. ,2018 ). As we
show in Table 2, for ESIM, we ﬁnd that this kind
of guessing makes the FEVER Title Five Oracle
performance better than FEVER Title Five. The
Transformer model is accurate enough that oracle
guessing does not help. Both models perform best
when classifying each bit of evidence separately
and then aggregating.
4 Improving retrieval
Regardless of how strong the entailment classiﬁer
is, FEVER score is limited by whether the docu-
ment and sentence retrieval modules, which pro-
duce the input to the entailment classiﬁer, ﬁnd the
right evidence. In Table 3, we examine the per-
centage of claims for which correct evidence is re-
trieved, before ﬁltering with the entailment classi-
ﬁer. For this calculation, we skip any claim with
an evidence group with multiple statements, and
count a claim as succesfully retrieved if it is not
veriﬁable or if the statement in one of the evidence
groups is retrieved. The baseline system retrieves
the ﬁve articles with the highest TFIDF score,
and then extracts the ﬁve sentences from that col-
lection with the highest TFIDF score against the
claim. It achieves 66.1% evidence retrieval.
Our ﬁrst modiﬁcation simply adds the title
to each premise statement when computing its
TFIDF against the claim, so that statements from a
relevant article get credit even if the subject is not
repeated. This raises evidence retrieval to 68.3%.
A more signiﬁcant boost comes from re-
trieving additional Wikipedia pages based on
named entity recognition (NER). We start with
phrases tagged as named entities by SpaCy
(Honnibal and Johnson ,2015 ), but these tags are
not very reliable, so we include various capitalized
phrases. We retrieve Wikipedia pages whose title
exactly matches one of these phrases.
The named entity retrieval strategy boosts the
evidence retrieval rate to 80.8%, while less than
doubling the processing time. However, some-
times the named entity page thus retrieved is only a
Wikipedia disambiguation page with no useful in-
formation. Noticing a lot of questions about ﬁlmsin the development set, we modify the strategy
to also retrieve a page titled “X (ﬁlm)” if it ex-
ists, whenever “X” is retrieved. The ﬁlm retrievals
raise evidence retrieval to 81.2%.
Finally, we eliminate the TFIDF sentence rank-
ing to expand sentence retrieval from ﬁve sen-
tences to entire articles, up to the ﬁrst ﬁfty sen-
tences from each. Thus we obtain 2.6 million
statements to classify regarding the 19,998 claims
in the shared task development set, for an aver-
age of 128 premises per claim. The evidence re-
trieval rate, including all these premises, increases
to 90.1%. We continue to apply the entailment
module trained with only ﬁve premise retrievals.
Running the entailment module on this batch us-
ing a machine with three NVIDIA GeForce GTX
1080Ti GPU cards takes on the order of six hours.
Retrieving more than ﬁve sentences means that
we can no longer submit all retrieved evidence as
support for the claims. Instead, we follow the ag-
gregation strategy from Section 3to decide the
claim label, and only submit statements whose
classiﬁcation matches. Limiting evidence in this
way when only ﬁve statements are retrieved (“nar-
row evidence” in Table 4) pushes FEVER score
down very little, to .5550 from .5617 on the devel-
opment set, so we have conﬁdence that the extra
retrieval will make up for the loss. Indeed, when
the system reviews the extra evidence, FEVER
score goes up to .5844 on the development set.
Table 4compares the end-to-end performance
of systems that evaluate ﬁve retrieved statements
together, evaluate ﬁve retrieved statements sepa-
rately, and evaluate all statements from entire ar-
ticles separately. Evaluating the statements sep-
arately gives better performance. We submit the
systems that retrieve ﬁve statements and entire ar-
ticles for evaluation on the test set, achieving pre-
liminary FEVER scores of .5539 and .5736 re-
spectively (label accuracy of .5754 and .6108, ev-
idence recall of .6245 and .5002, evidence F1 of
.2542 and .6485). In preliminary standings, the
latter system ranks fourth in FEVER score and
ﬁrst in evidence F1.
5 Discussion
Our approach to FEVER involves a minimum of
heuristics and relies mainly on the strength of the
Transformer Network based entailment classiﬁca-
tion. The main performance gains come from
adding retrievals that resolve named entities rather