arXiv:1901.02534v1  [cs.CL]  8 Jan 2019Team Papelo: Transformer Networks at FEVER
Christopher Malon
NEC Laboratories America
malon@nec-labs.com
Abstract
We develop a system for the FEVER fact ex-
traction and veriﬁcation challenge that uses
a high precision entailment classiﬁer based
on transformer networks pretrained with lan-
guage modeling, to classify a broad set of po-
tential evidence. The precision of the entail-
ment classiﬁer allows us to enhance recall by
considering every statement from several arti-
cles to decide upon each claim. We include
not only the articles best matching the claim
text by TFIDF score, but read additional ar-
ticles whose titles match named entities and
capitalized expressions occurring in the claim
text. The entailment module evaluates poten-
tial evidence one statement at a time, together
with the title of the page the evidence came
from (providing a hint about possible pronoun
antecedents). In preliminary evaluation, the
system achieves .5736 FEVER score, .6108
label accuracy, and .6485 evidence F1 on the
FEVER shared task test set.
1 Introduction
The release of the FEVER fact extraction and ver-
iﬁcation dataset ( Thorne et al. ,2018 ) provides a
large-scale challenge that tests a combination of
retrieval and textual entailment capabilities. To
verify a claim in the dataset as supported, refuted,
or undecided, a system must retrieve relevant arti-
cles and sentences from Wikipedia. Then it must
decide whether each of those sentences, or some
combination of them, entails or refutes the claim,
which is an entailment problem. Systems are eval-
uated on the accuracy of the claim predictions,
with credit only given when correct evidence is
submitted.
As entailment data, premises in FEVER data
differ substantially from those in the image cap-
tion data used as the basis for the Stanford Nat-
ural Language Inference (SNLI) ( Bowman et al. ,2015 ) dataset. Sentences are longer (31 compared
to 14 words on average), vocabulary is more ab-
stract, and the prevalence of named entities and
out-of-vocabulary terms is higher.
The retrieval aspect of FEVER is not straight-
forward either. A claim may have small word
overlap with the relevant evidence, especially if
the claim is refuted by the evidence.
Our approach to FEVER is to ﬁx the most
obvious shortcomings of the baseline approaches
to retrieval and entailment, and to train a sharp
entailment classiﬁer that can be used to ﬁlter a
broad set of retrieved potential evidence. For
the entailment classiﬁer we compare Decompos-
able Attention ( Parikh et al. ,2016 ;Gardner et al. ,
2017 ) as implemented in the ofﬁcial baseline,
ESIM ( Chen et al. ,2017 ), and a transformer net-
work with pre-trained weights ( Radford et al. ,
2018 ). The transformer network naturally sup-
ports out-of-vocabulary words and gives substan-
tially higher performance than the other methods.
2 Transformer network
The core of our system is an entailment module
based on a transformer network. Transformer net-
works ( Vaswani et al. ,2017 ) are deep networks
applied to sequential input data, with each layer
implementing multiple heads of scaled dot product
attention. This attention mechanism allows deep
features to be compared across positions in the in-
put.
Many entailment networks have two sequence
inputs, but the transformer is designed with just
one. A separator token divides the premise from
the hypothesis.
We use a speciﬁc transformer network released
by OpenAI ( Radford et al. ,2018 ) that has been
pre-trained for language modeling.1The network
1https://github.com/cdmalon/ﬁnetune-transformer-lm