consists of twelve blocks. Each block consists of a
multi-head masked self-attention layer, layer nor-
malization ( Ba et al. ,2016 ), a feed forward net-
work, and another layer normalization. After the
twelfth block, two branches exist. In one branch,
matrix multiplication and softmax layers are ap-
plied at the terminal sequence position to predict
the entailment classiﬁcation. In the other branch,
a hidden state is multiplied by each token embed-
ding and a softmax is taken to predict the next
token. The language modeling branch has been
pre-trained on the BookCorpus dataset ( Zhu et al. ,
2015 ). We take the pre-trained model and train
both branches on examples from FEVER.
3 Reframing entailment
The baseline FEVER system ( Thorne et al. ,
2018 ) ran the AllenNLP ( Gardner et al. ,2017 )
implementation of Decomposable Attention
(Parikh et al. ,2016 ) to classify a group of ﬁve
premise statements concatenated together against
the claim. These ﬁve premise statements were
ﬁxed by the retrieval module and not considered
individually. In our system, premise statements
are individually evaluated.
We collect training data as the ﬁve sentences
with the highest TFIDF score against the claim,
taken from the Wikipedia pages selected by the re-
trieval module. If any ground truth evidence group
for a claim requires more than one sentence, the
claim is dropped from the training set. Otherwise,
each sentence is labeled with the truth value of
the claim if it is in the ground truth evidence set,
and labeled as neutral if not. The resulting data
forms an entailment problem that we call “FEVER
One.” For comparison, we form “FEVER Five”
and “FEVER Five Oracle” by concatenating all
ﬁve retrieved sentences, as in the baseline. In
FEVER Five Oracle, the ground truth is the claim
ground truth (if veriﬁable), but in FEVER Five,
ground truth depends on whether the retrieved ev-
idence is in the ground truth evidence set.
Several FEVER claims require multiple state-
ments as evidence in order to be supported or re-
futed. The number of such claims is relatively
small: in the ﬁrst half of the development set, only
623 of 9999 claims were veriﬁable and had no
singleton evidence groups. Furthermore, we dis-
agreed with many of these annotations and thought
that less evidence should have sufﬁced. Thus we
chose not to develop a strategy for multiple evi-dence statements.
To compare results on FEVER Five to FEVER
One, we must aggregate decisions about individ-
ual sentences of possible evidence to a decision
about the claim. We do this by applying the fol-
lowing rules:
1. If any piece of evidence supports the claim,
we classify the claim as supported.
2. If any piece of evidence refutes the claim, but
no piece of evidence supports it, we classify
the claim as refuted.
3. If no piece of evidence supports or refutes
the claim, we classify the claim as not hav-
ing enough information.
We resolve conﬂicts between supporting and re-
futing information in favor of the supporting in-
formation, because we observed cases in the de-
velopment data where information was retrieved
for different entities with the same name. For ex-
ample, Ann Richards appeared both as a governor
of Texas and as an Australian actress. Informa-
tion that would be a contradiction regarding the
actress should not stop evidence that would sup-
port a claim about the politician.
Even if a sentence is in the evidence set, it might
not be possible for the classiﬁer to correctly deter-
mine whether it supports the claim, because the
sentence could have pronouns with antecedents
outside the given sentence. Ideally, a coreference
resolution system could add this information to the
sentence, but running one could be time consum-
ing and introduce its own errors. As a cheap al-
ternative, we make the classiﬁer aware of the title
of the Wikipedia page. We convert any undersores
in the page title to spaces, and insert the title be-
tween brackets before the rest of each premise sen-
tence. The dataset constructed in this way is called
“FEVER Title One.”
The FEVER baseline system works by solving
FEVER Five Oracle. Using Decomposable Atten-
tion, it achieves .505 accuracy on the test half of
the development set. Swapping in the Enhanced
Sequential Inference Model (ESIM) ( Chen et al. ,
2017 ) to solve FEVER Five Oracle results in an
accuracy of .561. Because ESIM uses a single
out-of-vocabulary (OOV) token for all unknown
words, we expect it to confuse named entities.
Thus we extend the model by allocating 10,000 in-
dices for out-of-vocabulary words with randomly