Feature extractor Θ
(pre-trained & frozen)
feature
Scaling & Shifting Param Φ
(meta-learner)Classifier
θsoftmax loss 
(epi-training)
Meta transferring of neuron weights
epi-test
epi-training 
 element-wise 
product
(neuron-level )
softmax loss 
(epi-test)
Training phase
     Test phase
accuracy
(epi-test)
meta  gradient back-prop. (once)
Difficulty 
predictor
θ’
L2 loss
Regularization, useful??? meta  gradient back-prop. (once)(only in the last epi-training epoch)Feature Extractor 
Base-learnerall-class
train samplesN HT
meta-batchesFeature Extractor
Meta-learner SSN 
Base-learner FT Nclassifier fine-tuning
unseen task
(train samples)unseen task
(test samples)
Feature Extractor
Meta-learner SS N 
Base-learner FT N+1final evaluation
Acc.
(b) meta-transfer learning (c) meta-test (a) large-scale DNN trainingwhole training phase
Feature Extractor
Meta-learner SS N 
Base-learner FT N+1D {T1∼k}1∼N T (tr
unseen)T(te
unseen)Figure 2. The pipeline of our proposed few-shot learning method, including three phases: (a) DNN training on large-scale data, i.e. using
all training datapoints (Section 4.1); (b) Meta-transfer learning (MTL) that learns the parameters of Scaling andShifting (SS), based on the
pre-trained feature extractor (Section 4.2). Learning is scheduled by the proposed HT meta-batch (Section 4.3); and (c) meta-test is done
for an unseen task which consists of a base-learner (classiﬁer) Fine-Tuning (FT) stage and a ﬁnal evaluation stage, described in the last
paragraph in Section 3. Input data are along with arrows. Modules with names in bold get updated at corresponding phases. Speciﬁcally,
SSparameters are learned by meta-training but ﬁxed during meta-test. Base-learner parameters are optimized for every task.
Scaling andShifting indicate how to transfer. Similar op-
erations have been used to modulating the per-feature-map
distribution of activations for visual reasoning [ 36].
Some few-shot learning methods have been proposed to
use pre-trained weights as initialization [ 20,29,37,44,40].
Typically, weights are ﬁne-tuned for each task, while we
learn a meta-transfer learner through all tasks, which is dif-
ferent in terms of the underlying learning paradigm.
Curriculum learning & Hard sample mining Curriculum
learning was proposed by Bengio et al. [3] and is popular
for multi-task learning [ 35,42,55,14]. They showed that
instead of observing samples at random it is better to orga-
nize samples in a meaningful way so that fast convergence,
effective learning and better generalization can be achieved.
Pentina et al. [35] use adaptive SVM classiﬁers to evaluate
task difﬁculty for later organization. Differently, our MTL
method does task evaluation online at the phase of episode
test, without needing any auxiliary model.
Hard sample mining was proposed by Shrivastava et
al. [46] for object detection. It treats image proposals over-
lapped with ground truth as hard negative samples. Training
on more confusing data enables the model to achieve higher
robustness and better performance [ 4,15,7]. Inspired by
this, we sample harder tasks online and make our MTL
learner “grow faster and stronger through more hardness”.
In our experiments, we show that this can be generalized to
enhance other meta-learning methods, e.g. MAML [ 9].
3. Preliminary
We introduce the problem setup and notations of meta-
learning, following related work [ 52,38,9,33].
Meta-learning consists of two phases: meta-train and
meta-test. A meta-training example is a classiﬁcation task
Tsampled from a distribution p(T).Tis called episode,
including a training split T(tr)to optimize the base-learner,
and a test splitT(te)to optimize the meta-learner. In partic-
ular, meta-training aims to learn from a number of episodes
{T} sampled from p(T). An unseen taskTunseen in meta-
test will start from that experience of the meta-learner andadapt the base-learner. The ﬁnal evaluation is done by test-
ing a set of unseen datapoints T(te)
unseen .
Meta-training phase. This phase aims to learn a meta-
learner from multiple episodes. In each episode, meta-
training has a two-stage optimization. Stage-1 is called
base-learning, where the cross-entropy loss is used to opti-
mize the parameters of the base-learner. Stage-2 contains a
feed-forward test on episode test datapoints. The test loss is
used to optimize the parameters of the meta-learner. Specif-
ically, given an episode T ∈p(T), the base-learner θTis
learned from episode training data T(tr)and its correspond-
ing lossLT(θT,T(tr)). After optimizing this loss, the base-
learner has parameters ˜θT. Then, the meta-learner is up-
dated using test loss LT(˜θT,T(te)). After meta-training
on all episodes, the meta-learner is optimized by test losses
{LT(˜θT,T(te))}T ∈p(T). Therefore, the number of meta-
learner updates equals to the number of episodes.
Meta-test phase. This phase aims to test the performance
of the trained meta-learner for fast adaptation to unseen
task. GivenTunseen , the meta-learner ˜θTteaches the base-
learnerθTunseen to adapt to the objective of Tunseen by
some means, e.g. through initialization [ 9]. Then, the test
result onT(te)
unseen is used to evaluate the meta-learning ap-
proach. If there are multiple unseen tasks {Tunseen}, the
average result on{T(te)
unseen}will be the ﬁnal evaluation.
4. Methodology
As shown in Figure 2, our method consists of three
phases. First, we train a DNN on large-scale data, e.g. on
miniImageNet ( 64-class,600-shot) [ 52], and then ﬁx the
low-level layers as Feature Extractor (Section 4.1). Second,
in the meta-transfer learning phase, MTL learns the Scal-
ingandShifting (SS) parameters for the Feature Extractor
neurons, enabling fast adaptation to few-shot tasks (Sec-
tion 4.2). For improved overall learning, we use our HT
meta-batch strategy (Section 4.3). The training steps are
detailed in Algorithm 1in Section 4.4. Finally, the typical
meta-test phase is performed, as introduced in Section 3.
405