underperform when trained on few-shot data [ 1]. An alter-
native is to merge data from multiple tasks which, however,
is not effective due to variances of the data across tasks [ 53].
In contrast to data-augmentation methods, meta-learning
is a task-level learning method [ 2,32,51]. Meta-learning
aims to accumulate experience from learning multiple tasks
[9,38,47,30,13], while base-learning focuses on model-
ing the data distribution of a single task. A state-of-the-
art representative of this, namely Model-Agnostic Meta-
Learning (MAML), learns to search for the optimal initial-
ization state to fast adapt a base-learner to a new task [ 9].
Its task-agnostic property makes it possible to generalize to
few-shot supervised learning as well as unsupervised rein-
forcement learning [ 13,10]. However, in our view, there
are two main limitations of this type of approaches lim-
iting their effectiveness: i) these methods usually require
a large number of similar tasks for meta-training which is
costly; and ii) each task is typically modeled by a low-
complexity base learner (such as a shallow neural network)
to avoid model overﬁtting, thus being unable to use deeper
and more powerful architectures. For example, for the mini-
ImageNet dataset [ 52], MAML uses a shallow CNN with
only4CONV layers and its optimal performance was ob-
tained learning on 240ktasks.
In this paper, we propose a novel meta-learning method
called meta-transfer learning (MTL) leveraging the ad-
vantages of both transfer and meta learning (see concep-
tual comparison of related methods in Figure 1). In a nut-
shell, MTL is a novel learning method that helps deep neu-
ral nets converge faster while reducing the probability to
overﬁt when using few labeled training data only. In partic-
ular, “transfer” means that DNN weights trained on large-
scale data can be used in other tasks by two light-weight
neuron operations: Scaling andShifting (SS), i.e.αX+β.
“Meta” means that the parameters of these operations can
be viewed as hyper-parameters trained on few-shot learn-
ing tasks [ 30,25]. Large-scale trained DNN weights of-
fer a good initialization, enabling fast convergence of meta-
transfer learning with fewer tasks, e.g. only 8ktasks for
miniImageNet [ 52],30times fewer than MAML [ 9]. Light-
weight operations on DNN neurons have less parameters to
learn, e.g. less than2
49if considering neurons of size 7×7
(1
49forαand<1
49forβ), reducing the chance of overﬁt-
ting. In addition, these operations keep those trained DNN
weights unchanged, and thus avoid the problem of “catas-
trophic forgetting” which means forgetting general patterns
when adapting to a speciﬁc task [ 26,27].
The second main contribution of this paper is an effec-
tive meta-training curriculum. Curriculum learning [ 3] and
hard negative mining [ 46] both suggest that faster conver-
gence and stronger performance can be achieved by a better
arrangement of training data. Inspired by these ideas, we
design our hard task (HT) meta-batch strategy to offer achallenging but effective learning curriculum. As shown in
the bottom rows of Figure 1, a conventional meta-batch con-
tains a number of random tasks [ 9], but our HT meta-batch
online re-samples harder ones according to past failure tasks
with lowest validation accuracy.
Our overall contribution is thus three-fold: i) we pro-
pose a novel MTL method that learns to transfer large-
scale pre-trained DNN weights for solving few-shot learn-
ing tasks; ii) we propose a novel HT meta-batch learn-
ing strategy that forces meta-transfer to “grow faster and
stronger through hardship”; and iii) we conduct extensive
experiments on two few-shot learning benchmarks, namely
miniImageNet [ 52] and Fewshot-CIFAR100 (FC100) [ 33],
and achieve the state-of-the-art performance.
2. Related work
Few-shot learning Research literature on few-shot learning
exhibits great diversity. In this section, we focus on meth-
ods using the supervised meta-learning paradigm [ 12,51,9]
most relevant to ours and compared to in the experiments.
We can divide these methods into three categories. 1) Met-
ric learning methods [ 52,47,50] learn a similarity space in
which learning is efﬁcient for few-shot examples. 2) Mem-
ory network methods [ 30,41,33,29] learn to store “ex-
perience” when learning seen tasks and then generalize
that to unseen tasks. 3) Gradient descent based methods
[9,38,23,13,59] have a speciﬁc meta-learner that learns
to adapt a speciﬁc base-learner (to few-shot examples)
through different tasks. E.g. MAML [ 9] uses a meta-learner
that learns to effectively initialize a base-learner for a new
learning task. Meta-learner optimization is done by gra-
dient descent using the validation loss of the base-learner.
Our method is closely related. An important difference is
that our MTL approach leverages transfer learning and ben-
eﬁts from referencing neuron knowledge in pre-trained deep
nets. Although MAML can start from a pre-trained net-
work, its element-wise ﬁne-tuning makes it hard to learn
deep nets without overﬁtting (validated in our experiments).
Transfer learning What andhow to transfer are key issues
to be addressed in transfer learning, as different methods are
applied to different source-target domains and bridge differ-
ent transfer knowledge [ 34,56,54,58]. For deep models,
a powerful transfer method is adapting a pre-trained model
for a new task, often called ﬁne-tuning (FT). Models pre-
trained on large-scale datasets have proven to generalize
better than randomly initialized ones [ 8]. Another popu-
lar transfer method is taking pre-trained networks as back-
bone and adding high-level functions, e.g. for object de-
tection and recognition [ 18,49,48] and image segmenta-
tion [ 16,5]. Our meta-transfer learning leverages the idea
of transferring pre-trained weights and aims to meta-learn
how to effectively transfer. In this paper, large-scale trained
DNN weights are what to transfer, and the operations of
404