7
Wasserstein distance through its dual formulation can result
in improved training stability, a technique that several AIL
methods have implemented [77], [79]. Given these develop-
ments, exploring new similarity measures holds the potential
to discover novel AIL methods.
Most AIL methods, just like GANs (generative adversarial
networks) [80], use a min-max optimization approach to
minimize the distance between the state-action distributions of
the expert and agent, while maximizing a reward signal derived
from the discriminator’s confusion. However, this approach
can be challenging to train due to issues such as vanishing
gradients and convergence failure [28]. To overcome these
challenges, methods such as primal wasserstein IL (PWIL)
[29] have been developed, which approximates Wasserstein
distances through a primal-dual approach.
V. I MITATION FROM OBSERVATION
The prevailing paradigm in IL assumes that the learner
has access to both states and actions demonstrated by an
expert [81]. However, this often necessitates collecting data
explicitly for IL purposes [81]. In robotics, for instance, the
expert must teleoperate the robot or move its joints manually
(kinesthetic learning) [82], and in gaming, the expert may
require a special software stack. In both cases, considerable
operator expertise is required, and useful demonstrations are
limited to those recorded under artificial conditions. These
limiting factors have motivated recent efforts in IfO [83],
where the expert’s actions are unknown. In contrast to previous
methods, imitation from observation is a more natural way
to learn from experts and is more in tune with how humans
and animals approach imitation in general. It is common for
humans to learn new behaviors by observing other humans
without being aware of their low-level actions (e.g., mus-
cle commands). Humans learn a wide range of tasks, from
weaving to swimming to playing games, by watching videos
online. While there may be huge gaps in body shapes, sensing
modalities, and timing, they show an incredible ability to apply
the knowledge gained from online demonstrations [9].
Enabling agents to learn from demonstrations without the
action information makes a large number of previously inap-
plicable resources, such as videos on the Internet, available
for learning [84]. Additionally, it opens up the possibility
of learning from agents with different embodiments whose
actions are unknown or cannot be matched. The use of state-
only demonstrations for IL is not new [85]. However, recent
deep learning and visual recognition developments [86] have
equipped researchers with more powerful tools to approach
the problem, particularly when dealing with raw visual obser-
vations [48].
Liu et al. [83] propose an imitation from observation method
that learns an imitator policy from raw videos using context-
aware translation. Their algorithm utilizes a context translation
model that converts demonstrations from the expert’s context
(e.g., a third-person viewpoint) to the agent’s context (e.g.,
a first-person viewpoint). The model is then used to predict
the expert behavior in the context of the robot (Fig. 5). Using
the predicted observations, a reward function is defined that is
Fig. 5. A context translation model is trained on several videos of expert
demonstrations [83]. The robot observes the context of the task it must perform
during the learning process. The model then determines what an expert would
do in the context of the robot.
made up of a penalty for deviating from the expert’s translated
features – encoded from input observations – and a penalty for
encountering observations that are different from the translated
observations. RL is then used to optimize the derived reward
function. There are two drawbacks that limit the applicability
of this method. First, it is assumed that demonstrations from
different contexts are aligned in time which is rarely the case
in the real world [87]. Second, learning the translation model
requires a large number of demonstrations [83]. A further
limitation is that it cannot address systematic domain shifts,
such as differences in embodiment [83].
Sermanet et al. [88] introduce a self-supervised representa-
tion learning method using time-contrastive networks (TCN)
that is invariant to different viewpoints and embodiments.
TCN trains a neural network to learn an embedding of each
video frame to extract features invariant to context differences,
such as the camera angle. By using a triplet loss function,
two frames occurring at the same time but with different
modalities (i.e., viewpoints) are brought closer together in the
embedding space while the frames from distant time-steps but
with a visually similar frame are pushed apart (Fig. 6). In
order to construct the reward function, Euclidean distance is
calculated between the embedding of a demonstration and the
embedding of an agent’s camera images. RL techniques are
used to optimize the reward function for learning imitation
policies. A limitation of this technique is that it requires multi-
viewpoint video for training, which is not readily available
(e.g., over the Internet).
BC from observation (BCO) [89] aims to minimize the
amount of post-demonstration environment interactions re-
quired for training RL algorithms of prior methods by taking
a behavior cloning approach. BCO first learns an inverse
dynamics model by letting an agent, who initially follows a
random policy, interact with its environment and collect data
[81]. After that, the model is used to infer the missing actions
of the expert demonstrations. A BC algorithm is then used to
map the states to the inferred actions and solve the problem
as a regular IL problem. Using this approach, it is necessary
to gather large amounts of data to learn the dynamics model