2
Fig. 1. A historical timeline of IL research illustrating key achievements in the field.
survey aims to consolidate the vast amount of research on IL,
making it easier for researchers and practitioners to navigate.
Moreover, we aim to identify gaps and challenges in the
current research, providing a clear direction for future work.
Lastly, we aim to make the concepts and techniques of IL
more accessible to a wider audience, including researchers
from related fields, to enhance the understanding of this
area. Overall, we strongly believe that our survey will make
significant contributions to advancing the field of IL and guide
future research in this exciting area.
The objective of this survey paper is to present a compre-
hensive overview of the field of IL. To achieve this, we will
organize our discussion of IL approaches based on historical
and logical reasons. Initially, we will introduce the two broad
categories of approaches to IL: behavioral cloning (BC) and
inverse reinforcement learning (IRL). We will discuss their
formulations, developments, strengths, and limitations. Addi-
tionally, we will explore how adversarial imitation learning
(AIL) extends IRL by introducing an adversarial context to the
learning process. We will underscore the benefits of integrating
adversarial training into IL and assess the current progress
in the AIL field. Furthermore, we will introduce imitation
from observation (IfO) as a novel technique that aims to learn
from state-only (no actions) demonstrations. We will discuss
the significance of IfO and how it incorporates and extends
the previous categories of BC, IRL, and AIL in different
methods to tackle the challenge of learning from state-only
observations. Finally, we will discuss the challenges that IL
techniques encounter in real-world scenarios, such as sub-
optimal demonstrations and domain discrepancies between the
expert and the learner. We will conclude with a discussion of
the different approaches to IL, their limitations, and future
research directions that can be taken to address them.
II. B EHAVIORAL CLONING
BC is an IL technique that treats the problem of learning a
behavior as a supervised learning task [13], [14]. BC involvestraining a model to mimic an expert’s behavior by learning to
map the state of the environment to the corresponding expert
action. The expert’s behavior is recorded as a set of state-
action pairs, also known as demonstrations. During the training
process, the model is provided with these demonstrations as
inputs and is trained to learn a function that maps the current
state to the corresponding expert action. Once the model is
trained, it can use the learned function to generate actions for
new states that it has not encountered before.
One advantage of BC is that it requires no knowledge of
the underlying dynamics of the environment [13]. Instead,
it relies solely on the provided demonstrations to learn the
behavior. Additionally, BC is computationally efficient since
it involves training a supervised learning model, which is a
well-studied problem in machine learning.
Despite its simplicity, the BC approach has a significant
drawback - the covariate shift problem [15]. This problem
arises because during training, the learner is trained on states
generated by the expert policy, but during testing, the learner
is tested on states induced by its action [16]. As a result, the
state distribution observed during testing can differ from that
observed during training. The problem with BC supervised
approach is that the agent does not know how to return
to the demonstrated states when it drifts and encounters
out-of-distribution states [17]. Covariate shift is particularly
dangerous in safety-critical situations such as driving [18], as
the agent may encounter novel situations that it has not seen
during training, and its ability to recover from mistakes can
be critical to avoid accidents. To address the covariate shift
problem and improve the robustness of the BC approach, three
broad research areas have been identified (Fig. 2).
The first and most popular area is interactive IL. Algorithms
of this type are based on the assumption that the agent has
access to an online expert who can be consulted during
training. Dataset aggregation (DAgger) [14] is the earliest
interactive IL method and proposes to train the agent on
its own state distribution to resolve the train and test time