3
mismatch problem. DAgger queries the expert to relabel the
data collected by the agent with the appropriate action that
should have been taken. However, due to frequent queries, the
human expert is subjected to a significant cognitive burden,
resulting in inaccurate or delayed feedback that adversely
affects the training process [19]. Consequently, determining
when and how to engage human subjects is one of the key
challenges of interactive IL algorithms [20].
Rather than providing continuous feedback, “human-gated”
interactive IL algorithms [21], [22] extend DAgger to allow the
expert to decide when to provide the corrective interventions.
For example, human-gated DAgger (HG-DAgger) [21] rolls
out the agent trajectory until the expert determines that the
agent has reached an unsafe region of the state space. In this
case, the human expert intervenes by taking control of the
system and guiding the agent back to a safe state. Using this
method, no constraints limit the amount of human intervention.
Li et al. [19] propose a method that learns to minimize hu-
man intervention and adaptively maximize automation during
training. To accomplish this, when the human expert issues
intervention, it incurs a cost to the agent, which the agent
learns to minimize during its training process.
However, the use of these algorithms depends on human
experts constantly monitoring the agent to decide when to
intervene, which imposes a significant burden on them. To
tackle this challenge, there has been an increasing interest in
“robot-gated” algorithms [20], [23]–[25] that allow robots to
actively ask humans for intervention. For example, SafeDAg-
ger [23] uses an auxiliary safety policy, which determines the
likelihood of the agent deviating from the expert’s trajectory,
as a signal for the agent to transfer control over to the expert.
LazyDAgger [24] extends SafeDAgger to reduce the number
of context switches between the expert and autonomous con-
trol. A recent robot-gated approach called ThriftyDAgger [20]
aims to intervene only when states are sufficiently novel (out-
of-distribution) or risky (prone to result in task failure). In
addition, the intervention burden is reduced by limiting the
total number of interventions to a budget specified by the user.
The second area of research addressing the covariate shift
problem consists of algorithms that estimate the support of
the expert occupancy measure and then specify a reward that
encourages the agent to remain on the support of the expert
[17], [26], [27]. The reward function is then optimized using
RL. Unlike interactive IL, these algorithms do not assume
access to an online expert and only rely on demonstrations
and further interactions with the environment. The most
popular algorithms are based on IRL, which addresses the
covariate shift by training an RL agent to consistently match
the demonstrations over time. A detailed discussion of these
methods will be provided in section III and IV . However,
these methods often use complex and unstable approximation
techniques involving adversarial training to learn a reward
function from demonstrations [17], [28]. In this section, a
recent alternative line of research is reviewed that also employs
RL, but instead of learning a reward function, it uses a simple
fixed reward function. The key idea is to incentivize the agent
to consistently remain on the support of the expert policy over
time by encouraging it to return to demonstrated states when
Fig. 2. A categorization of methods addressing the covariate shift problem.
Interactive IL assumes access to an online expert. DAgger like algorithms
require the expert to provide corrective labels for each action taken by the
agent. On the other hand, human-gated and robot-gated methods provide
corrective labels only when they are requested by the expert or agent,
respectively. Unlike interactive IL, IRL methods do not require access to
an online expert. These methods require an underlying RL algoirthm to
optimize a reward function (either learned from demonstrations or fixed).
Lastly, by constraining the agent to known regions of the space covered by
demonstrations, constrained IL attempts to address covariate shift problems
that cannot be expressed or solved using the other two categories.
facing new states outside the expert’s support [29].
Wang et al. [26] estimate the support of the expert policy
using a kernelized version of principal component analysis.
The support estimation process produces a score that increases
as a state-action pair moves closer to the support of the expert
policy. The score is then used to construct an intrinsic reward
function.
Reddy et al. [17] propose soft Q IL (SQIL). SQIL encour-
ages the agent to imitate the expert in demonstrated states by
using an extremely sparse reward function – assigns a constant
reward of +1 to transitions inside expert demonstrations and
a constant reward of 0 to all other transitions. The reward
function encourages the agent to return to demonstrated states
after encountering out-of-distribution states. The proposed
model outperforms simple BC and shows good performance
even with a limited number of demonstrations.
Brantley et al. [27] use expert demonstrations to train an
ensemble of policies, with the variance of their predictions
used as the cost. Inherently, the variance (cost) outside of
expert support would be higher since ensemble policies will be
more likely to disagree on states not seen in the demonstra-
tions. An RL algorithm minimizes this cost in combination
with a supervised BC cost. As a result, the RL cost assists
the agent in returning to the expert distribution, whereas the
supervised cost ensures that the agent mimics the expert within
the expert’s distribution.
Lastly, the third area of algorithms aims to constrain the
agent to known regions of the space covered by the demon-
strator without relying on an interactive expert or leveraging
RL. These methods are particularly beneficial and practical
for real-world applications where safety constraints must be
met, such as in healthcare, autonomous driving, and industrial