11
Fig. 7. For the path in (a), t-SNE projections [92] of trajectories using the proposed embedding (c) and raw pixels (d) are shown [9]. In b, an example
frame of MONTEZUMA’S REVENGE is compared using four different domains: the Arcade Learning Environment, and three YouTube videos. Based on
the embedding space, it can be seen that the four trajectories are well-aligned.
[2]. However, this assumption is too restrictive when it comes
to learning from demonstrations in a variety of cases [2].
Firstly, it can be difficult to obtain large numbers of high-
quality demonstrations from human experts [109], [110]. In
many real-world tasks, this would be impossible for humans
due to the amount of time and effort required. Additionally,
humans are prone to making mistakes for various reasons,
such as the presence of distractions, or limited observability
of the environment [99], [100]. Secondly, it is necessary to
leverage the scale and diversity of crowd-sourced datasets to
learn robust effective IL policies [111]. However, a crowd-
sourced dataset will inevitably have a wide range of behavior
optimality since it is collected from users with varying levels
of expertise.
The naive solution to imperfect demonstrations would be
to discard the non-optimal ones. However, this screening
process is often impractical since it requires significant human
effort [100]. Therefore, researchers have been increasingly
interested in developing methods that can learn from imperfect
demonstrations.
Wu et al. [99] present two general approaches to address im-
perfect demonstrations by utilizing both confidence-scored and
unlabeled data: two-step importance weighting IL (2IWIL) and
generative adversarial IL with imperfect demonstration and
confidence (IC-GAIL). Both approaches assume that a fraction
of demonstrations are annotated with confidence scores (i.e.
the probability that a given trajectory is optimal). 2IWIL is a
two-step approach that first uses a semi-supervised classifier to
generate confidence scores for the unlabeled demonstrations,
and then performs standard GAIL with reweighted distribution
[102]. To avoid error accumulation in two steps, IC-GAIL
forgoes learning a classifier and performs occupancy measure
matching with unlabeled demonstrations.
Sasaki et al. [100] propose an offline BC algorithm to
learn from noisy demonstrations, obtained from a noisy expert,
without any screening or annotations associated with the non-
optimal demonstrations. The key idea is to leverage the learned
policy to reweight the samples in the next iteration of weighted
BC. The noisy expert action distribution is assumed to be a
weighted mixture of two distributions: the action distribution
of an optimal expert and a non-optimal one. The goal is tochange the weights so that the noisy expert action distribution
mode gets closer to the optimal expert action distribution
mode. This is achieved by reusing the old policy (i.e. the
policy optimized in the previous iteration) as the weights for
action samples in the weighted BC objective. However, this
approach only converges to the optimal policy when optimal
demonstrations constitute the majority of the data.
Wang et al. [101] investigate how to weight imperfect
demonstrations in GAIL without requiring auxiliary informa-
tion from an oracle. An automatic weight prediction method
is proposed to assess the quality and significance of each
demonstration for training. They demonstrate that the weight
can be accurately estimated using both the discriminator and
the agent policy in GAIL. In the training procedure, the weight
estimation is conducted first to determine weight for each
demonstration. Using weighted GAIL, the agent policy is then
trained with weighted demonstrations. These two procedures
interact alternately and are optimized as a whole.
Kim et al. [102] aim to overcome the distributional shift
problem caused by the lack of sufficient expert demonstra-
tions by using supplementary imperfect demonstrations with
unknown optimality levels. They regularize a distribution-
matching objective of IL by a KL divergence between the
agent distribution and a mixture of expert and imperfect distri-
butions. An optimal state-action distribution of this regularized
objective is obtained using a dual-program technique [112].
Given the optimal state-action distribution, the expert policy
is extracted by performing weighted BC.
Beliaev et al. [103] introduce IL by Estimating Expertise
of Demonstrators (ILEED). It leverages information about
demonstrators’ identities to infer their expertise levels in an
unsupervised manner. Each demonstrator is assigned a state-
dependent expertise value, which indicates which demon-
strators perform better in specific states, allowing them to
combine their strengths in different states. ILEED develops
and optimizes a joint model over a learned policy and expertise
levels. As a result, the model is able to learn from the optimal
behavior of each demonstrator and filter out the suboptimal
behavior. Expertise levels are modeled by the inner product
of two embeddings: an state embedding, and a demonstrator
embedding. Each dimension of the embeddings vector corre-