4
Fig. 3. Left: BC might learn a shortcut from prior observations that outputs the
previous action as the current action. Right: a copycat-free memory extraction
module. The shortcut is no longer available using historical information [34].
processes [30]. In [31], the authors attempt to overcome the
covariate shift problem in autonomous driving by augmenting
the imitation loss with additional losses to discourage bad
driving. Moreover, additional data is provided to the agent in
the form of synthetic perturbations to the expert’s trajectory.
The perturbations expose the model to non-expert behavior
such as collisions and provide an important signal for the
added losses to avoid these behaviors.
Wong et al. [32] propose a learned error detection system
to indicate when an agent is in a potential failure state. In this
way, the error detector can constrain the policy to execute
only on states seen previously in the demonstrations and
prevent potentially unstable behavior by resetting the agent to
a well-known configuration or terminating the execution. [33]
considers an offline IL setting where the agent is provided with
two datasets: one small dataset of expert policy state-action
pairs and one large dataset of state-action-next state transitions
from a potentially suboptimal behavior policy. Their solution
to the covariate shift problem consists of training a dynamics
model on the sub-optimal demonstrations and applying a high
penalty in regions of the state-action space that are not well
covered by the data.
It is difficult for the supervised learning approach used in
behavioral cloned policies to identify the underlying causes
of expert actions, leading to a phenomenon known as “causal
misidentification” [35]. In the training procedure, the causal
structure of the interaction between the expert and the envi-
ronment is not taken into account. Therefore, cloned policies
might fail to distinguish nuisance correlates from the true
causes of expert actions [35]. When training and testing
distributions are the same, ignoring nuisance correlates might
not pose a problem as they continue to hold in the test dataset.
In BC, however, ignoring causality is particularly problematic
because of the distributional shift [35]. The causal structure of
the underlying sequential decision process in IL further exac-
erbates this problem. This is because the causal structure–past
actions influence future observations–often creates additional
complex nuisance correlates. To address this problem, [35]
learns a mapping from causal graphs to policies and then uses
targeted interventions–either expert queries or environment
interactions–to find the optimal policy. Subsequent work by
Wen et al. [36] explores a prominent class of causal confusion
problems known as “the copycat problem.” This problem
happens when the expert actions are highly correlated overtime. In this scenario, the agent learns to cheat by copying
the expert’s previous actions. To address the copycat problem,
[36] proposes an adversarial approach for learning a feature
representation that ignores the information about the known
nuisance correlates–the previous actions–while retaining the
necessary information to predict the next action. Chuang et
al. [34] extend [36] to high-dimensional image observations.
Using a memory extraction module, they attempt to extract
historical features from observation histories while removing
as much information as possible regarding previous actions
(Fig. 3).
Traditionally, BC involves training an explicit neural net-
work [37]. Unfortunately, conventional explicit models strug-
gle to model discontinuities, making policies incapable of
switching decisively between different behaviors. This is-
sue arises because explicit models are unable to represent
discontinuities with neural networks built with continuous
activation functions, which is almost always the case with
neural networks [37]. In contrast, implicit models are capa-
ble of representing sharp discontinuities, despite only having
continuous layers in the network [37].
The implicit BC model presented in [38] turns BC into
an energy-based modeling problem [39] by training a neural
network that takes both observations and actions as input and
outputs a single value that is low for expert actions and high for
non-expert actions [37]. A trained implicit BC policy selects
the action input with the lowest score for a given observation.
This method requires more computation than explicit BC
models, both during training and during inference. However,
the results demonstrate that it can often outperform traditional
explicit baselines in robotic manipulation tasks, both in the
real world and in simulation.
III. I NVERSE REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
In addition to behavioral cloning, another key approach to
imitation learning is IRL [40]. IRL involves an apprentice
agent that aims to infer the reward function underlying the
observed demonstrations, which are assumed to come from
an expert who acts optimally [41]. Once the reward function
is inferred, it is optimized to train an apprentice policy through
RL [42].
RL agents, unlike the agents in BC, learn by continually
interacting with their environment, observing the consequences
of their actions, and altering their behavior to maximize long-
term cumulative reward [43], [44]. This process involves us-
ing reinforcement signals to learn the long-term consequences
of each action, allowing the agent to recover from mistakes
[27]. Because of this capability, IRL is less sensitive to
covariate shift compared to BC [14].
IRL has been widely used in a variety of applications,
such as robotics manipulation, autonomous navigation, game
playing, and natural language processing [45]–[47]. Nonethe-
less, devising an effective IRL algorithm for learning from
demonstrations is a challenging task, mainly due to two major
reasons.
Firstly, IRL can be computationally expensive and resource-
intensive. In part, this is due to the fact that the agent must