6
Fig. 4. A low-dimensional state feature embedding is pre-trained using ranked demonstrations [66]. A linear combination of learned features is used to derive
the reward function. A pairwise ranking likelihood is used by MCMC proposal evaluations to estimate the likelihood of preferences over demonstrations
given a proposal ( w). Utilizing the pre-computed embeddings of the ranked demonstrations makes MCMC sampling highly efficient; There is no need for
data collection during inference or an MDP solver.
erates samples from the posterior distribution without using
an MDP solver by proposing an alternative likelihood for-
mulation that leverages preference labels over demonstrations
(Fig. 4). Another approach to address the scalability issue
is approximate variational reward IL (A VRIL) [67]. This
approach simultaneously learns an imitating policy and an
approximate posterior distribution over the reward in an offline
setting. Unlike traditional sampling or MAP-based techniques,
A VRIL relies on variational inference to estimate the posterior
distribution accurately.
Most existing IRL algorithms rely on the unrealistic as-
sumption that the transition model, and sometimes the expert’s
policy, are known beforehand [47], [50], [54], [65]. However,
in real-world scenarios, the agent often has to estimate the
expert policy and transition dynamics from samples, leading
to errors in the recovered reward function [68], [69]. In their
analysis, [69] breaks down this error into components from
estimating the expert policy and transition model. Based on
their analysis (in a tabular setting), they propose an efficient
sampling strategy focused on transferring the learned reward
function to a fully known target environment. It is assumed,
however, that the agent can query the transition dynamics for
arbitrary states and actions. To remove this assumption, active
exploration for IRL (AceIRL) [68] focuses on developing an
efficient exploration strategy. This strategy aims to explore
both the environment dynamics and the expert policy such
that an arbitrary IRL algorithm can infer the reward function
as effectively as possible. By utilizing previous observations,
AceIRL builds confidence intervals that capture feasible re-
ward functions and find exploration policies that prioritize the
most relevant regions of the environment.
IV. A DVERSARIAL IMITATION LEARNING
Scaling IRL algorithms to larger environments has been a
major challenge despite their success in generating policies
that replicate expert behavior [62], [70], [71]. This challenge
arises due to the computational complexity of many IRL
algorithms, which often require RL to be executed in an
inner loop [46]. AIL offers a promising solution to the
computational challenges of IRL by searching for the optimalpolicy without fully solving an RL sub-problem at each
iteration [46]. AIL involves a two-player game between an
agent and an adversary (discriminator) where the adversary
attempts to distinguish agent trajectories from expert trajecto-
ries [72]. The agent, on the other hand, endeavors to deceive
the adversary by generating trajectories that closely resemble
expert trajectories. Through this adversarial process, the agent
gradually improves its imitation of the expert’s behavior until it
converges to a policy that closely resembles the expert’s policy.
AIL has demonstrated statistically significant improvements
over existing methods in multiple benchmark environments,
including robotics, autonomous driving, and game playing
[46], [73], [74].
The effectiveness of AIL in addressing the limitations of
IRL has spurred continued research in this area. The first
AIL method that gained prominence is known as generative
AIL (GAIL) [46]. In GAIL, the reward function measures
the ability of the agent to imitate the expert’s behavior. To
do this, GAIL utilizes a discriminator network trained to
distinguish between the expert’s behavior and the agent’s
generated trajectories. The reward signal is then derived from
the confusion of the discriminator, reflecting how difficult it
is to tell whether a given trajectory is generated by the agent
or the expert. By maximizing this reward signal, the agent
is incentivized to generate trajectories that closely resemble
the expert’s behavior. Over the years, numerous improvements
have been proposed to the original algorithm to improve its
sample efficiency, scalability, and robustness [75], including
changes to the discriminator’s loss function [76] and switch-
ing from on-policy to off-policy agents [77].
In AIL, the objective is to enable the agent to generate
trajectories that are similar to those of the expert. This involves
the use of distance measures to quantify the similarity between
the two. Different AIL methods employ various similarity
measures to match the distribution over states and actions
encountered by the agent with that of the expert [29]. For
example, GAIL makes use of the Shannon-Jensen divergence,
while some methods, such as AIRL [76], use the Kullback-
Leibler divergence. However, recent research by Arjovsky
et al. [78] has shown that replacing f-divergences with the