5
interact repeatedly with its environment to accurately estimate
the reward function [19], [48]. Additionally, the nature of this
process can be inherently unsafe, particularly when dealing
with high-risk applications such as autonomous driving or
aircraft control [49].
Furthermore, a typical IRL approach follows an iterative
process that involves alternating between reward estimation
and policy training, which results in poor sample efficiency
[46], [47], [50]. Consequently, there has been significant re-
search aimed at addressing these issues to enhance the sample
efficiency of IRL algorithms while maintaining the safety and
accuracy of the learned policy. Some of these approaches
include methods that utilize human guidance to reduce the
number of interactions required to estimate the reward function
accurately [51].
The second major challenge of IRL arises due to the
inherent ambiguity in the relationship between the policy and
the reward function. Specifically, a policy can be optimal with
respect to an infinite number of reward functions [50], [52].
To address this challenge, researchers have proposed various
methods to introduce additional structure into the reward
function. There are roughly three categories of IRL methods
that aim to address this ambiguity [53].
The first category is maximum-margin methods. The key
idea in maximum-margin methods is to infer a reward function
that explains the optimal policy more thoroughly than all other
policies by a margin. These methods address the discussed
ambiguity problem by converging on a solution that maximizes
some margin. A foundational method in this category is the
work of Ng et al. [50]. They estimate the reward function
for which the given policy is optimal using a linear program
while maximizing a margin. Another major work is maximum
margin planning (MMP) [54] which seeks to find a weighted
linear mapping of features to rewards so that the estimated
policy is “close” to the demonstrated behaviors. [55], [56]
build on and extend MMP to nonlinear hypothesis spaces by
utilizing a family of functional gradient techniques.
The adoption of feature-based reward functions gave rise to
a variety of approaches making use of feature expectations for
margin optimization. Abbeel and Ng [45] propose two foun-
dational methods (max-margin and projection) for maximizing
the feature expectation loss margin without assuming access
to the expert’s policy. As with many other IRL methods, these
methods have the drawback of limiting the agent’s perfor-
mance to the quality of the expert. To address this limitation,
Syed and Schapire [57] propose a game-theoretic approach
capable of training a policy with superior performance to an
expert.
The second category of IRL algorithms aims to solve the
ambiguity problem by maximizing the entropy of the resulting
policy. MaxEntIRL [47] was the first IRL method to utilize
maximum entropy. Ziebart’s work [47] demonstrates that the
maximum entropy paradigm is capable of handling expert
suboptimality and stochasticity by using the distribution over
possible trajectories. Subsequent works [58], [59] extend the
MaxEntIRL algorithm to continuous state-action spaces using
path integral methods. Optimizing a full forward Markov
Decision Process (MDP) iteratively becomes intractable inhigh-dimensional continuous state-action spaces. To overcome
this complexity, these studies exploit the local optimality of
demonstrated trajectories.
In many prior methods, detailed features are manually
extracted using domain knowledge, which can be linearly
combined into a reward, such as the distance between the
ball and the cup for a robotic ball-in-cup game [60]. While
linear representations are sufficient in many domains, they
may be overly simplistic for complex real-world tasks, partic-
ularly when reward values are derived from raw sensory data.
Wulfmeier et al. [61] propose maximum entropy deep IRL,
a generalization of MaxEntIRL that utilizes neural networks
to model complex, nonlinear reward functions. In addition,
instead of using pre-extracted features, the deep architecture is
further extended to learn features through Convolution layers.
This is an important step towards automating the learning
process [12]. A further study by Fin et al. [62] proposes guided
cost learning (GCL), which improves the sampling efficiency
of [61] since [61] relies on a large number of expert transitions
to estimate the reward function. GCL learns a nonlinear reward
function in the inner loop of a policy optimization (in contrast
to early IRL methods). This allows it to scale effectively
to complex control problems. A further advantage of this
method is that it utilizes the raw state of the system instead
of predefined features to construct the reward function, which
reduces the engineering burden.
Bayesian algorithms constitute the third category of IRL
algorithms. Methods under this category use the expert’s ac-
tions as the evidence for updating the reward function estimate.
A posterior distribution over candidate reward functions is
derived from a prior distribution over the rewards and a like-
lihood of the reward hypothesis. Various models of likelihood
have been proposed over the years. BIRL [63] is the earliest
Bayesian IRL technique, based on a Boltzmann distribution for
modeling the likelihood. A variety of distributions can be used
as the prior over the reward functions [63]. For example, a Beta
distribution is appropriate for planning problems with large
rewards dichotomy. Analytically obtaining the posterior in the
continuous space of reward functions is extremely difficult.
To address this issue, [63] uses Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) to derive a sample-based estimate of the posterior
mean. Instead of computing the posterior mean, [64] computes
the maximum a posteriori (MAP) reward function. [64] argues
that the posterior mean is not the most suitable approach
for reward inference as it integrates over the entire reward
space, even those not consistent with the observed behavior,
in the loss function. Levine et al. [65] propose a Bayesian IRL
algorithm that uses a nonlinear function of features to represent
the reward. They use a Gaussian process prior on reward
values and a kernel function to determine the structure of the
reward. The kernel’s hyperparameters are learned through the
Bayesian GP framework, leading to the learning of the reward
structure.
Classical BIRL algorithms are computationally intractable
in complex high-dimensional environments since generating
each posterior sample requires solving an entire MDP. This
limitation has prevented these methods from scaling beyond
small tabular settings. To overcome this limitation, [66] gen-