8
Fig. 6. The embedding space encourages co-occurring frames from different
viewpoints to be in close proximity to each other, while images captured from
the same viewpoint but at different times should be far apart [88].
online, especially in high-dimensional problems.
Subsequent work by [81] attempts to reduce the number
of environment interactions required in BCO by learning a
latent forward dynamics model in an offline manner [48].
The underlying assumption in this work is that predictable,
though unknown, causes describe the classes of observed
state transitions. The goal is to enable an agent to predict
and imitate these latent causes [81]. To achieve this, a latent
policy is learned, which estimates the probability that a latent
action would be taken in an observed state. They then use a
limited number of interactions with the environment to learn
a mapping between the real-world actions the agent can take
and latent actions identified by the model.
Generative adversarial imitation from observation (GAIfO)
[84] adapts the GAIL objective to IfO by matching the expert
and agent’s state-transition distributions. By adopting an adver-
sarial approach, this method can overcome the covariate shift
problem encountered in the previous approaches [81], [89]. In
addition, it is capable of handling demonstrations that are not
time-aligned, unlike previous approaches. Using this approach
is most successful when the expert and the agent operate in
the same environment, under the same dynamics. However, it
becomes more challenging to match state-transition distribu-
tions when dynamics differ since the expert’s state transitions
might not even be feasible in the agent’s environment [90].
Jaegle et al. [91] introduce a non-adversarial IRL from
observations approach using likelihood-based generative mod-
els. In this method, conditional state transition probabilities
are matched between expert and learner. According to the
authors’ findings, their approach of matching conditional
state transition probabilities tends to focus less on irrelevant
differences between the expert and the learner settings than
adversarial approaches such as GAIfO, which matches joint
state-next-state probabilities. In particular, they argue that
conditional state probabilities are less prone to erroneously
penalize features that are not present in the demonstrations
but lead to correct transitions.Raychaudhuri et al. [87] propose a framework that learns
state maps across the source and target domain from un-
paired, unaligned demonstrations. This approach addresses
embodiment, viewpoint, and dynamics mismatch. In order
to preserve MDP dynamics during domain transformation,
local and global alignments are performed. In local alignment,
adversarial training is used to minimize divergence between
the state-transition distributions of the true and transferred
trajectories. Meanwhile, a learned temporal position function
is used to enforce global alignment to ensure that states
are placed in a consistent temporal position across the two
domains. Finally, given the set of transferred demonstrations,
BCO is used to learn the final policy. As with [83], this method
relies on proxy tasks, i.e., expert demonstrations from both
domains, which limits its application.
Aytar et al. [9] present a novel self-supervised framework
for learning to play hard exploration Atari games without ever
being explicitly exposed to the Atari environment by watching
YouTube videos (Fig. 7). Learning from YouTube videos poses
several challenges due to the existence of domain-specific
variations (e.g., in color or resolution), and a lack of frame-
by-frame alignment. To address these challenges, they first
use self-supervised classification tasks, constructed over both
vision and audio to map unaligned videos from multiple
sources to a common representation. Then, a single YouTube
video is embedded in this representation, and a sequence of
checkpoints are placed along the embedding. This is used to
create a reward function that encourages the agent to imitate
human gameplay. During policy training, the agent is rewarded
only when it reaches these checkpoints.
Brown et al. [97] introduce an IRL from observation tech-
nique for extrapolating the expert’s intent from suboptimal
ranked demonstrations. This work aims to improve the per-
formance over a suboptimal expert in high-dimensional tasks
by inferring the expert’s intentions. They learn a state-based
reward function such that a greater total return is assigned to
higher-ranked trajectories. Utilizing ranking to construct a re-
ward function in this way enables identifying features that are
correlated with rankings, allowing for potentially better-than-
demonstrator performance. Given the learned reward function,
RL is used to optimize a policy.
Utilizing large amounts of navigation data from YouTube,
[98] proposes a framework for learning scalable driving. First,
a model is trained on a small labeled dataset to map monocular
images to Bird’s Eye View (BEV), facilitating learning from
the unconstrained nature of YouTube videos (e.g. in viewpoints
or camera parameters). Since many publicly available driving
datasets include action labels, this assumption is reasonable.
This trained model is used to generate pseudo-labels over a
large unlabeled dataset. Lastly, a generalized policy is trained
on the pseudo-labeled dataset and fine-tuned on the clean
labels of the small labeled dataset.
VI. C HALLENGES AND LIMITATIONS
A. Imperfect Demonstrations
A common assumption in IL methods is that the demon-
strations will be optimal, performed by an expert demonstrator