1
A Survey of Imitation Learning: Algorithms, Recent
Developments, and Challenges
Maryam Zare∗, Parham M. Kebria, Member, IEEE, Abbas Khosravi, Senior Member, IEEE,
and Saeid Nahavandi, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —In recent years, the development of robotics and
artificial intelligence (AI) systems has been nothing short of
remarkable. As these systems continue to evolve, they are being
utilized in increasingly complex and unstructured environments,
such as autonomous driving, aerial robotics, and natural language
processing. As a consequence, programming their behaviors
manually or defining their behavior through reward functions
(as done in reinforcement learning (RL)) has become exceedingly
difficult. This is because such environments require a high degree
of flexibility and adaptability, making it challenging to specify
an optimal set of rules or reward signals that can account for
all possible situations. In such environments, learning from an
expert’s behavior through imitation is often more appealing. This
is where imitation learning (IL) comes into play - a process where
desired behavior is learned by imitating an expert’s behavior,
which is provided through demonstrations.
This paper aims to provide an introduction to IL and an
overview of its underlying assumptions and approaches. It also
offers a detailed description of recent advances and emerging
areas of research in the field. Additionally, the paper discusses
how researchers have addressed common challenges associated
with IL and provides potential directions for future research.
Overall, the goal of the paper is to provide a comprehensive
guide to the growing field of IL in robotics and AI.
Index Terms —Imitation learning, learning from demonstra-
tions, reinforcement learning, survey, robotics
I. I NTRODUCTION
Traditionally, machines and robots have been manually
programmed to learn autonomous behavior [1]. Traditional
methods require experts to provide specific, hard-coded rules
regarding the actions that a machine must perform, as well as
the characteristics of the environment in which the machine
operates. However, developing such rules requires consider-
able time and coding expertise [2]. In order to automate
the tedious manual hard-coding of every behavior, a learning
approach is required [3]. Imitation learning provides an avenue
for teaching the desired behavior by demonstrating it. IL
techniques have the potential to reduce the problem of teaching
a task to that of providing demonstrations, thus eliminating the
Maryam Zare, Parham M. Kebria, and Abbas Khosravi are with the
Institute for Intelligent Systems Research and Innovation (IISRI), Deakin
University, Waurn Ponds, 3216 VIC, Australia (∗Corresponding author:
mzare@deakin.edu.au ).
Saeid Nahavandi is with the Institute for Intelligent Systems Research and
Innovation (IISRI), Deakin University, Waurn Ponds, 3216 VIC, Australia, and
also with the Harvard Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
Harvard University, Allston, MA 02134 USA.
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright
may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be
accessible.need for explicit programming or the development of task-
specific reward functions [3]. The concept of IL is based on
the premise that human experts are capable of demonstrating
the desired behavior even when they are unable to program it
into a machine or robot. As such, IL can be leveraged in any
system that requires autonomous behavior similar to that of a
human expert [1].
The main purpose of IL is to enable agents to learn to
perform a specific task or behavior by imitating an expert
through the provision of demonstrations [4]. Demonstrations
are used to train learning agents to perform a task by learning
a mapping between observations and actions. By utilizing IL,
agents are able to transition from repeating simple predeter-
mined behaviors in constrained environments to taking optimal
autonomous actions in unstructured environments, without
imposing too much burden on the expert [2]. As a result,
IL approaches have the potential to offer significant benefits
to a wide range of industries, including manufacturing [5],
health care [6], autonomous vehicles [7], [8], and the gaming
industry [9]. In these applications, IL allows subject-matter
experts, who may not possess coding skills or knowledge of
the system, to program autonomous behavior in machines or
robots efficiently. Although the idea of learning by imitation
has been around for some time, recent achievements in com-
puting and sensing, along with a growing demand for artificial
intelligence applications, have increased the significance of IL
[10], [11]. Consequently, the number of publications in the
field has increased significantly in recent years.
Multiple surveys of IL have been published over the past
two decades, each focusing on different aspects of the field’s
development (Fig. 1). Schaal [3] presented the first survey of
IL, focusing on IL as a route to create humanoid robots. More
recently, Osa et al. [1] provided an algorithmic perspective
on IL, while Hussein et al. [12] provided a comprehensive
review of the design options for each stage of the IL process.
Most recently, Le Mero et al. [7] provided a comprehensive
overview of IL-based techniques for end-to-end autonomous
driving systems.
Despite the existence of a large number of surveys on IL, a
new survey is necessary to capture the latest advances in this
rapidly evolving field and provide an up-to-date overview of
the state of the art. With the field gaining increasing interest
and having diverse applications, a comprehensive survey could
serve as an essential reference for newcomers, as well as
provide an overview of different use cases. We acknowledge
that IL is a constantly evolving field, with new algorithms,
techniques, and applications being developed. Therefore, ourarXiv:2309.02473v1  [cs.LG]  5 Sep 2023