𝒁𝑡 𝟏    𝒁𝑡 𝒍  
𝒁𝑐𝑡 𝟏   𝒁𝑐𝑡 𝒍  
𝒁𝑐𝑓 𝟏   𝒁𝑐𝑓 𝒍  
𝒁𝑓 𝟏   𝒁𝑓 𝒍  
𝑾𝑐 𝟏  
𝑾𝑐 𝒍+𝟏  
 
 
𝒁𝑻 
𝒁𝑪𝑭 
𝒁𝑭 
𝓛𝒄 
Attention
Specific Convolution
Specific Convolution
Parameter 
Sharing
Topology 
Graph
Feature 
Graph
Common Convolution
𝓛𝒅 
𝒁 
𝒀  
𝑨,𝑿 
𝒁𝑪𝑻 
𝓛𝒅 
Figure 1: The framework of AM-GCN model. Node feature X
is to construct a feature graph. AM-GCN consists of two spe-
cific convolution modules , one common convolution module
and the attention mechanism .
topological structure, we employ the Stochastic Blockmodel (SBM) [ 12]
to split nodes into 3 communities (nodes 0-299, 300-599, 600-899,
respectively). Within each community, the probability of building
an edge is set to 0.03, and the probability of building an edge be-
tween nodes in different communities is set to 0.0015. In this data
set, the node labels are determined by the communities, i.e., nodes
in the same community have the same label.
Again we apply GCN to this network. We also apply Deep-
Walk [ 22] to the topology of the network, that is, the features
are ignored by DeepWalk. The classification accuracies of GCN and
DeepWalk are 87%and100% , respectively.
DeepWalk performs well because it models network topological
structures thoroughly. GCN extracts information from both the
node features and the topological structures, but cannot adaptively
fuse them to avoid the interference from node features. It cannot
match the high performance of DeepWalk.
Summary . These cases show that the current fusion mechanism
of GCN [ 14] is distant from optimal or even satisfactory. Even the
correlation between node label with network topology or node
features is very high, the current GCN cannot make full use of the
supervision by node label to adaptively extract the most correlated
information. However, the situation is more complex in reality,
because it is hard to know whether the topology or the node features
are more correlated with the final task, which prompts us to rethink
the current mechanism of GCN.
3 AM-GCN: THE PROPOSED MODEL
Problem Settings: We focus on semi-supervised node classifica-
tion in an attributed graph G=(A,X), where A∈Rn×nis thesymmetric adjacency matrix with nnodes and X∈Rn×dis the
node feature matrix, and dis the dimension of node features. Specif-
ically, Aij=1represents there is an edge between nodes iandj,
otherwise, Aij=0. We suppose each node belongs to one out of C
classes.
The overall framework of AM-GCN is shown in Figure 1. The
key idea is that AM-GCN permits node features to propagate not
only in topology space, but also in feature space, and the most cor-
related information with node label should be extracted from both
of these two spaces. To this end, we construct a feature graph based
on node features X. Then with two specific convolution modules,
Xis able to propagate over both of feature graph and topology
graph to learn two specific embeddings ZFandZT, respectively.
Further, considering that the information in these two spaces have
common characteristics, we design a common convolution module
with parameter sharing strategy to learn the common embedding
ZCFandZCT, also, a consistency constraint Lcis employed to
enhance the "common" property of ZCFandZCT. Besides, a dispar-
ity constraintLdis to ensure the independence between ZFand
ZCF, as well as ZTandZCT. Considering that node label may be
correlated with topology or feature or both, AM-GCN utilizes an
attention mechanism to adaptively fuse these embeddings with the
learned weights, so as to extract the most correlated information Z
for the final classification task.
3.1 Specific Convolution Module
Firstly, in order to capture the underlying structure of nodes in
feature space, we construct a k-nearest neighbor ( kNN) graph Gf=
(Af,X)based on node feature matrix X, where Afis the adjacency
matrix of kNN graph. Specifically, we first calculate the similarity
matrix S∈Rn×namong nnodes. Actually, there are many ways to
obtain S, and we list two popular ones here, in which xiandxjare
feature vectors of nodes iandj:
1)Cosine Similarity : It uses the cosine value of the angle be-
tween two vectors to measure the similarity:
Sij=xi·xj
|xi||xj|. (1)
2)Heat Kernel : The similarity is calculated by the Eq. (2)where
tis the time parameter in heat conduction equation and we set
t=2.
Sij=e−∥xi−xj∥2
t . (2)
Here we uniformly choose the Cosine Similarity to obtain the sim-
ilarity matrix S, and then we choose top ksimilar node pairs for
each node to set edges and finally get the adjacency matrix Af.
Then with the input graph (Af,X)in feature space, the l-th layer
output Z(l)
fcan be represented as:
Z(l)
f=ReLU(˜D−1
2
f˜Af˜D−1
2
fZ(l-1)
fW(l)
f), (3)
where W(l)
fis the weight matrix of the l-th layer in GCN, ReLU is
the Relu activation function and the initial Z(0)
f=X. Specifically, we
have ˜Af=Af+Ifand ˜Dfis the diagonal degree matrix of ˜Af. We
denote the last layer output embedding as ZF. In this way, we can