learn the node embedding which captures the specific information
ZFin feature space.
As for the topology space, we have the original input graph
Gt=(At,Xt)where At=AandXt=X. Then the learned output
embedding ZTbased on topology graph can be calculated in the
same way as in feature space. Therefore, the specific information
encoded in topology space can be extracted.
3.2 Common Convolution Module
In reality, the feature and topology spaces are not completely irrele-
vant. Basically, the node classification task, may be correlated with
the information either in feature space or in topology space or in
both of them, which is difficult to know beforehand. Therefore, we
not only need to extract the node specific embedding in these two
spaces, but also to extract the common information shared by the
two spaces. In this way, it will become more flexible for the task
to determine which part of information is the most correlated. To
address this, we design a Common -GCN with parameter sharing
strategy to get the embedding shared in two spaces.
First, we utilize Common -GCN to extract the node embedding
Z(l)
ctfrom topology graph ( At,X) as follows
Z(l)
ct=ReLU(˜D−1
2
t˜At˜D−1
2
tZ(l-1)
ctW(l)
c), (4)
where W(l)
cis the l-th layer weight matrix of Common -GCN and
Z(l-1)
ctis the node embedding in the (l−1)th layer and Z(0)
ct=X.
When utilizing Common -GCN to learn the node embedding from
feature graph ( Af,X), in order to extract the shared information, we
share the same weight matrix W(l)
cfor every layer of Common -GCN
as follows:
Z(l)
cf=ReLU(˜D−1
2
f˜Af˜D−1
2
fZ(l-1)
cfW(l)
c), (5)
where Z(l)
cfis the l-layer output embedding and Z(0)
cf=X. The
shared weight matrix can filter out the shared characteristics from
two spaces. According to different input graphs, we can get two
output embedding ZCTandZCFand the common embedding ZC
of the two spaces is:
ZC=(ZCT+ZCF)/2. (6)
3.3 Attention Mechanism
Now we have two specific embeddings ZTandZF, and one com-
mon embedding ZC. Considering the node label can be correlated
with one of them or even their combinations, we use the attention
mechanism att(ZT,ZC,ZF)to learn their corresponding impor-
tance(αt,αc,αf)as follows:
(αt,αc,αf)=att(ZT,ZC,ZF), (7)
hereαt,αc,αf∈Rn×1indicate the attention values of nnodes
with embeddings ZT,ZC,ZF, respectively.
Here we focus on node i, where its embedding in ZTiszi
T∈
R1×h(i.e., the i-th row of ZT). We firstly transform the embed-
ding through a nonlinear transformation, and then use one shared
attention vector q∈Rh′×1to get the attention value ωi
Tas follows:
ωi
T=qT·tanh(W·(zi
T)T+b). (8)Here W∈Rh′×his the weight matrix and b∈Rh′×1is the bias
vector. Similarly, we can get the attention values ωi
Candωi
Ffor
node iin embedding matrices ZCandZF, respectively. We then
normalize the attention values ωi
T,ωi
C,ωi
Fwith softmax function
to get the final weight:
αi
T=sof tmax(ωi
T)=exp(ωi
T)
exp(ωi
T)+exp(ωi
C)+exp(ωi
F).(9)
Largerαi
Timplies the corresponding embedding is more important.
Similarly,αi
C=sof tmax(ωi
C)andαi
F=sof tmax(ωi
F). For all the
nnodes, we have the learned weights αt=[αi
T],αc=[αi
C],αf=
[αi
F] ∈Rn×1, and denote αT=diaд(αt),αC=diaд(αc)and
αF=diaд(αf). Then we combine these three embeddings to obtain
the final embedding Z:
Z=αT·ZT+αC·ZC+αF·ZF. (10)
3.4 Objective Function
3.4.1 Consistency Constraint .For the two output embeddings
ZCTandZCFofCommon -GCN, despite the Common -GCN has the
shared weight matrix, here we design a consistency constraint to
further enhance their commonality.
Firstly, we use L2-normalization to normalize the embedding
matrix as ZCT nor ,ZCFnor . Then, the two normalized matrix can
be used to capture the similarity of nnodes as STandSFas follows:
ST=ZCT nor·ZT
CT nor,
SF=ZCFnor·ZT
CFnor.(11)
The consistency implies that the two similarity matrices should
be similar, which gives rise to the following constraint:
Lc=∥ST−SF∥2
F. (12)
3.4.2 Disparity Constraint .Here because embeddings ZTand
ZCTare learned from the same graph Gt=(At,Xt), to ensure they
can capture different information, we employ the Hilbert-Schmidt
Independence Criterion (HSIC) [ 24], a simple but effective measure
of independence, to enhance the disparity of these two embeddings.
Due to its simplicity and neat theoretical properties, HSIC has been
applied to several machine learning tasks [ 10,19]. Formally, the
HSIC constraint of ZTandZCTis defined as:
HSIC(ZT,ZCT)=(n−1)−2tr(RKTRKCT), (13)
where KTandKCTare the Gram matrices with kT,ij=kT(zi
T,zj
T)
andkCT ,ij=kCT(zi
CT,zj
CT). And R=I−1
neeT, where Iis an
identity matrix and eis an all-one column vector. In our imple-
mentation, we use the inner product kernel function for KTand
KCT.
Similarly, considering the embeddings ZFandZCFare also
learned from the same graph (Af,X), their disparity should also
be enhanced by HSIC:
HSIC(ZF,ZCF)=(n−1)−2tr(RKFRKCF). (14)
Then we set the disparity constraint as Ldwhere:
Ld=HSIC(ZT,ZCT)+HSIC(ZF,ZCF). (15)