AM-GCN: Adaptive Multi-channel Graph Convolutional
Networks
Xiao Wang
Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications
xiaowang@bupt.edu.cnMeiqi Zhu
Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications
zhumeiqi@bupt.edu.cnDeyu Bo
Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications
bodeyu@bupt.edu.cn
Peng Cui
Tsinghua University
cuip@tsinghua.edu.cnChuan Shi∗
Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications
shichuan@bupt.edu.cnJian Pei
Simon Fraser University
jpei@cs.sfu.ca
ABSTRACT
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) have gained great popular-
ity in tackling various analytics tasks on graph and network data.
However, some recent studies raise concerns about whether GCNs
can optimally integrate node features and topological structures in a
complex graph with rich information. In this paper, we first present
an experimental investigation. Surprisingly, our experimental re-
sults clearly show that the capability of the state-of-the-art GCNs
in fusing node features and topological structures is distant from
optimal or even satisfactory. The weakness may severely hinder the
capability of GCNs in some classification tasks, since GCNs may not
be able to adaptively learn some deep correlation information be-
tween topological structures and node features. Can we remedy the
weakness and design a new type of GCNs that can retain the advan-
tages of the state-of-the-art GCNs and, at the same time, enhance
the capability of fusing topological structures and node features
substantially? We tackle the challenge and propose an adaptive
multi-channel graph convolutional networks for semi-supervised
classification (AM-GCN). The central idea is that we extract the
specific and common embeddings from node features, topological
structures, and their combinations simultaneously, and use the at-
tention mechanism to learn adaptive importance weights of the
embeddings. Our extensive experiments on benchmark data sets
clearly show that AM-GCN extracts the most correlated information
from both node features and topological structures substantially,
and improves the classification accuracy with a clear margin.
KEYWORDS
Graph convolutional networks, network representation learning,
deep learning
∗Corresponding author
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
KDD ’20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
©2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7998-4/20/08. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3394486.3403177ACM Reference Format:
Xiao Wang, Meiqi Zhu, Deyu Bo, Peng Cui, Chuan Shi, and Jian Pei. 2020.
AM-GCN: Adaptive Multi-channel Graph Convolutional Networks. In Pro-
ceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining USB Stick (KDD ’20), August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3394486.3403177
1 INTRODUCTION
Network data is ubiquitous, such as social networks, biology net-
works, and citation networks. Recently, Graph Convolutional Net-
works (GCNs), a class of neural networks designed to learn graph
data, have shown great popularity in tackling graph analytics prob-
lems, such as node classification [ 1,31], graph classification [ 7,37],
link prediction [13, 36] and recommendation [6, 34].
The typical GCN [ 14] and its variants [ 11,16,27,30,36] usually
follow a message-passing manner. A key step is feature aggrega-
tion, i.e., a node aggregates feature information from its topological
neighbors in each convolutional layer. In this way, feature infor-
mation propagates over network topology to node embedding, and
then node embedding learned as such is used in classification tasks.
The whole process is supervised partially by the node labels. The
enormous success of GCN is partially thanks to that GCN provides
a fusion strategy on topological structures and node features to
learn node embedding, and the fusion process is supervised by an
end-to-end learning framework.
Some recent studies, however, disclose certain weakness of the
state-of-the-art GCNs in fusing node features and topological struc-
tures. For example, Li et al. [15] show that GCNs actually per-
form the Laplacian smoothing on node features, and make the
node embedding in the whole network gradually converge. Nt and
Maehara [ 20] and Wu et al. [30] prove that topological structures
play the role of low-pass filtering on node features when the fea-
ture information propagates over network topological structure.
Gao et al. [8] design a Conditional Random Field (CRF) layer in
GCN to explicitly preserve connectivity between nodes.
What information do GCNs really learn and fuse from topological
structures and node features? This is a fundamental question since
GCNs are often used as an end-to-end learning framework. A well
informed answer to this question can help us understand the capa-
bility and limitations of GCNs in a principled way. This motivates
our study immediately.arXiv:2007.02265v2  [cs.LG]  11 Jul 2020