As the first contribution of this study, we present experiments
assessing the capability of GCNs in fusing topological structures
and node features. Surprisingly, our experiments clearly show that
the fusion capability of GCNs on network topological structures and
node features is clearly distant from optimal or even satisfactory.
Even under some simple situations that the correlation between
node features/topology with node label is very clear, GCNs still
cannot adequately fuse node features and topological structures
to extract the most correlated information (shown in Section 2).
The weakness may severely hinder the capability of GCNs in some
classification tasks, since GCNs may not be able to adaptively learn
some correlation information between topological structures and
node features.
Once the weakness of the state-of-the-art GCNs in fusion is
identified, a natural question is, “ Can we remedy the weakness and
design a new type of GCNs that can retain the advantages of the
state-of-the-art GCNs and, at the same time, enhance the capability
of fusing topological structures and node features substantially? ”
A good fusion capability of GCNs should substantially extract
and fuse the most correlated information for classification task,
however, one biggest obstacle in reality is that the correlation be-
tween network data and classification task is usually very complex
and agnostic. The classification can be correlated with either the
topology, or node features, or their combinations. This paper tackles
the challenge and proposes an adaptive multi-channel graph con-
volutional networks for semi-supervised classification (AM-GCN).
The central idea is that we learn the node embedding based on
node features, topological structures, and their combinations si-
multaneously. The rationale is that the similarity between features
and that inferred by topological structures are complementary to
each other and can be fused adaptively to derive deeper correlation
information for classification tasks.
Technically, in order to fully exploit the information in feature
space, we derive the k-nearest neighbor graph generated from node
features as the feature structural graph. With the feature graph and
the topology graph, we propagate node features over both topology
space and feature space, so as to extract two specific embeddings
in these two spaces with two specific convolution modules. Consid-
ering the common characteristics between two spaces, we design a
common convolution module with a parameter sharing strategy to
extract the common embedding shared by them. We further utilize
the attention mechanism to automatically learn the importance
weights for different embeddings, so as to adaptively fuse them. In
this way, node labels are able to supervise the learning process to
adaptively adjust the weight to extract the most correlated informa-
tion. Moreover, we design the consistency and disparity constraints
to ensure the consistency and disparity of the learned embeddings.
We summarize our main contributions as follows:
•We present experiments assessing the capability of GCNs in
fusing topological structures and node features and identify
the weakness of GCN. We further study the important prob-
lem, i.e., how to substantially enhance the fusion capability
of GCN for classification.
•We propose a novel adaptive multi-channel GCN framework,
AM-GCN, which performs graph convolution operation over
both topology and feature spaces. Combined with attention
mechanism, different information can be adequately fused.•Our extensive experiments on a series of benchmark data
sets clearly show that AM-GCN outperforms the state-of-
the-art GCNs and extracts the most correlation information
from both node features and topological structures nicely
for challenging classifcation tasks.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we
experimentally investigate the capability of GCNs in fusing node
features and topology. In Section 3, we develop AM-GCN. We re-
port experimental results in Section 4, and review related work in
Section 5. We conclude the paper in Section 6.
2 FUSION CAPABILITY OF GCNS: AN
EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION
In this section, we use two simple yet intuitive cases to examine
whether the state-of-the-art GCNs can adaptively learn from node
features and topological structures in graphs and fuse them suffi-
ciently for classification tasks. The main idea is that we will clearly
establish the high correlation between node label with network
topology and node features, respectively, then we will check the
performance of GCN on these two simple cases. A good fusion
capability of GCN should adaptively extract the correlated infor-
mation with the supervision of node label, providing a good result.
However, if the performance drops sharply in comparison with
baselines, this will demonstrate that GCN cannot adaptively extract
information from node features and topological structures, even
there is a high correlation between node features or topological
structures with the node label.
2.1 Case 1: Random Topology and Correlated
Node Features
We generate a random network consisting of 900 nodes, where the
probability of building an edge betweean any two nodes is 0.03.
Each node has a feature vector of 50 dimensions. To generate node
features, we randomly assign 3 labels to the 900 nodes, and for
the nodes with the same label, we use one Gaussian distribution
to generate the node features. The Gaussian distributions for the
three classes of nodes have the same covariance matrix, but three
different centers far away from each other. In this data set, the
node labels are highly correlated with the node features, but not
the topological structures.
We apply GCN [ 14] to train this network. For each class we
randomly select 20 nodes for training and another 200 nodes for
testing. We carefully tune the hyper-parameters to report the best
performance and avoid over smoothing. Also, we apply MLP [ 21]
to the node features only. The classification accuracies of GCN and
MLP are 75 .2%and100% , respectively.
The results meet the expectation. Since the node features are
highly correlated with the node labels, MLP shows excellent per-
formance. GCN extracts information from both the node features
and the topological structures, but cannot adaptively fuse them to
avoid the interference from topological structures. It cannot match
the high performance of MLP.
2.2 Case 2: Correlated Topology and Random
Node Features
We generate another network with 900 nodes. This time, the node
features, each of 50 dimensions, are randomly generated. For the