environment, as 3D object quality relies heavily on professional
modeling knowledge and experience, as described in Section 3.2.
To address this issue, we designed and implemented an easy-to-
use UGC editing tool, as shown in Figure 4b. With this editor,
an untrained user can learn to make their imaginary 3D items
with voxels in minutes, as in creating architectures in Minecraft.
Then the UGC editing tool will apply AI-based technologies to
assist the UGC creation process, e.g., using generative algorithms
to generate 3D items based on the voxels made by users. Moreover,
the 3D items could automatically be transformed to a low-poly style
model, which better fits the artistic style of the CUHKSZ Metaverse.
Afterward, the created voxel model will be built as an NFT for more
usage (e.g., trading and collection). In the next phase of CUHKSZ
Metaverse, we intend to expand the UGC scope, e.g., allow users to
create pets with AI-driven actions and emotions.
5.3 Ecosystem
5.3.1 Token-driven Ecosystem. For a modern metaverse, a token-
driven ecosystem is a key element. CUHKSZ metaverse employs
blockchain-based tokens to feature a fair and transparent ecosys-
tem, which are considered to be monetary representations for the
community. In our current implementation, all residents can contin-
uously claim tokens via smart contracts, which specify the number
of tokens the users can collect in a certain period of time. According
to the predefined rules, the token’s production rate may be varied
for each user, subject to residents’ actions and performance in both
the virtual and physical worlds, e.g. location-based incentive mech-
anism, which is discussed in 5.2.2. The tokens can be utilized in
various activities, such as trading in an official store, trading UGCs
with other players, voting, etc.
5.3.2 Autonomous Governance. As discussed in Section 2.3, a well-
designed democratic system may improve equality for the social
good. CUHKSZ Metaverse enforces autonomous governance by in-
troducing a Delegated Proof of Stake (DPoS) voting protocol for any
motions or proposals to revise predefined rules, as described in Sec-
tion 3.3. According to the characteristics of an university, CUHKSZ
Metaverse encourages students to establish a student union and
elect a virtual committee, which could efficiently make decisions for
matters representing users. For convenient discussion, we have also
implemented an online forum to build the user community. This
(a) Trade and Purchase Services
 (b) Billboard on Campus
Figure 5: Ecosystem Layer in CUHKSZ Metaverseseries of work assures autonomous governance and maintains the
normal operation of society in the CUHKSZ Metaverse. Moreover,
the iteration of CUHKSZ Metaverse is also based on the proposals
of autonomous governance.
5.3.3 UGC Display and Trading. In CUHKSZ Metaverse, we pro-
vide a UGC creator that allows users to create almost anything,
which is discussed in 5.2.3. In the current stage, metaverse residents
can trade UGCs with others, wear them as ornaments, or display
them in their personal rooms. In addition, the billboard system
provides a channel for users to give full play to their personalities
in public. As illustrated in Figure 5b, a user may rent a certain area
in the virtual campus and set their customized billboard, which
may display their information or links to their personal room.
5.3.4 AI-driven Metaverse Observer. Different from the Metaverse
Viewer, to observe and track key events of CUHKSZ Metaverse, we
develop an AI-driven Metaverse Observer, as shown in Figure 3.
This Metaverse Observer has a wider and higher vision that could
cover an area of CUHKSZ Metaverse. Moreover, by tracking and
analyzing real-time operation data from the Metaverse, this AI-
driven Metaverse Observer can automatically recommend ongoing
intriguing events to users, in which events with a high flow of
users or approved by officials are more likely to be recommended.
Therefore, the Metaverse Observer can provide global information
for users and audiences, to better capture timely events.
6 CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we propose a three-layer architecture for metaverse,
including infrastructure, interaction, and ecosystem, and the key
components in each layer are discussed in detail, where a set of open
research questions are summarized for each component. Afterward,
we journey through the development of metaverse, describing both
pioneering work and the novel metaverse examples. For intuitive
illustration, a timeline of notable metaverse examples is drawn
based on their release time, and a table is concluded to show the
features of the representative metaverse. Lastly, the implemented
blockchain-driven university campus prototype, CUHKSZ Meta-
verse, is illustrated, which could effectively enrich the campus life
of university students and university faculties.
According to the representative applications, the metaverse sig-
nificantly reflects the vision of human-centered computing, which
is highly beneficial for the society in terms of accessibility, diversity,
equality, and humanity. In the future, we will continuously improve
our prototype and continue conducting metaverse-related studies.
Not limited to the proposed questions, there are many research
topics in the metaverse that are imperative to be studied. The core
motivation of this paper is to direct more attention to the metaverse,
and together, make a better society.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper is supported in part by Project 61902333 from National
Natural Science Foundation of China, and Project AC01202101038
from Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for
Society. Thanks for other developers of CUHKSZ Metaverse: Hong-
hao Chen, Nanjun Yao, Qiuhong Chen, Tong Chen, Xiangyu Xu,
Yifan Zhao, Yiyan Hu, Yuyang Liang, Zexin Lin, Zhen Ren.