Ethereum [ 4], which introduces a smart contract for autonomous
and transparent program execution, with thousands of novel decen-
tralized applications (DApps) developed [ 5], e.g. blockchain games
[15]. Specifically, decentralized finance (DeFi) could ensure that
digital properties are unique, persistent, and tradable. Evidently,
the metaverse, as an interactive multimedia community relying on
massive numbers of online users, may benefit from the technical
advances of blockchain to build a fair, free and sustainable society.
Realistic demands and the prospect of feasibly constructing the
metaverse motivate the industry, which has been working hard to
prepare with fervor. For example, The Sandbox1is a blockchain-
based virtual sandbox game that obtained more than $2 million in
financing in 2020. Similarly, Roblox2, an online game platform and
creation system, reached more than $40 billion in value at its peak.
For industrial applications, NVIDIA has built a platform named
Omniverse to support real-time virtual collaboration in industrial
design and visualization. In addition, there are many giant com-
panies that are preparing to join the metaverse venture. Facebook
purchased VR device manufacturer Oculus for deeper development
of VR and augmented reality (AR) technologies. Epic Games claimed
they raised $1 billion to put toward building the metaverse, and
Sony also invested $200 million to support Epic’s vision. More-
over, many giants (Tencent, Bytedance) have paid a great deal of
attention to constructing metaverse-related applications.
The exploding focus and investments in metaverse from indus-
try would speed up the development and breakthrough of related
technologies, but this rapid progress also leads to many problems.
Thus, academia has a responsibility to study related problems and
give advice to instruct on the development of the metaverse. In re-
cent years, some papers focused on the metaverse have been made
available to the public. In 2013, Dionisio et al. [ 7] published a survey
about 3D virtual worlds and the metaverse. This paper describes
five phases of virtual world development and specifies four features
of a viable metaverse, including realism, ubiquity, interoperability,
and scalability, and looks forward to the future evolution of each
phase. In 2016, Nevelsteen [ 17] sampled a list of technologies using
grounded theory to classify technologies that implement a virtual
world, and provided a detailed definition of a "virtual world". The
above-mentioned two papers clearly explain the concept of the
metaverse and its relationship with the virtual world, and guide
subsequent research on the metaverse.
However, with rapid technology development, especially block-
chain-related technology, many novel metaverse applications have
matured, but are not included in the existing surveys. On the other
hand, there is a lack of related discussion about the metaverse archi-
tecture. Therefore, focusing on the above situation, we summarize
the main contributions of this paper as follows:
•We propose a three-layer architecture of the metaverse from
a macro point of view, including (from bottom to top): in-
frastructure, interaction, and ecosystem. Specifically, we in-
troduce the decentralized ecosystem based on blockchain as
a novel trend in metaverse development.
•We raise open research questions based on the proposed
architecture of metaverse that are imperative to solve.
1https://www.sandbox.game/
2https://www.roblox.com/•We review existing novel and representative metaverse appli-
cations, most of which are not included in previous surveys,
and systematically conclude their attributes.
•We implement a blockchain-driven metaverse prototype of
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHKSZ),
in which we are continuously constructing the system and
conducting user studies for further research.
2 METAVERSE FOR SOCIAL GOOD
Although the metaverse is a virtual world, regarded as human-
centered computing, it indeed shows a significantly positive impact
on the real world, especially in terms of accessibility, diversity,
equality, and humanity. In this section, we list some representative
applications that reflect metaverse for social good.
2.1 Accessibility
Currently, global communication and cooperation among countries
has become more and more frequent with the rise of globaliza-
tion, but geographical distance is an objective obstacle that would
increase costs during the process. Moreover, influenced by the
COVID-19 pandemic, many events are suspended due to pandemic
prevention requirements. However, the metaverse could provide
great accessibility to serve different social requirements. For exam-
ple, many events have been converted to virtual form, supported
by the metaverse. In 2020, UC Berkeley held its graduation cere-
mony on Minecraft3. Moreover, on Fortnite4, there are many virtual
events held every day, such as a Travis Scott concert. According
to the above-mentioned examples, the metaverse has already be-
come an extension of our daily lives, which could satisfy our social
requirements, with lower costs and higher security.
2.2 Diversity
Restricted to physical limitations (such as geography, language, etc.),
the real world cannot integrate various elements in one place to sat-
isfy the requirements of different people. However, the metaverse
has unlimited extension space and seamless scene transformation,
which could effectively achieve diversity. There are various inter-
esting scenarios that can be held in the metaverse. For example,
Animal Crossing5held a presidential campaign for Joe Biden, and
students at Stanford University exhibited their posters in Second
Life6. Not limited by the above examples, various activities can be
found in the metaverse, such as education, shopping, political cam-
paign, artwork, pets, haunted houses, etc. Therefore, the diversity
requirements of physical society have been greatly satisfied.
2.3 Equality
Equality is a spiritual pursuit for human beings, but, in reality,
there are many factors that influence equality, such as race, gen-
der, disability, and property. In metaverse, everyone can control
customized avatars and exercise their power to build a fair and
sustainable society. For example, as an autonomous ecosystem, the
metaverse includes an attribute of democracy, allowing participants
3https://www.minecraft.net
4https://www.epicgames.com/fortnite/en-US/home
5https://animal-crossing.com/
6https://secondlife.com/