Metaverse for Social Good: A University Campus Prototype
Haihan Duan
The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shenzhen
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial
Intelligence and Robotics for Society
Shenzhen, China
haihanduan@link.cuhk.edu.cnJiaye Li
The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shenzhen
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial
Intelligence and Robotics for Society
Shenzhen, China
jiayeli@link.cuhk.edu.cnSizheng Fan
The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shenzhen
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial
Intelligence and Robotics for Society
Shenzhen, China
sizhengfan@link.cuhk.edu.cn
Zhonghao Lin
The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shenzhen
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial
Intelligence and Robotics for Society
Shenzhen, China
zhonghaolin@link.cuhk.edu.cnXiao Wu
White Matrix Inc.
Nanjing, China
wuxiao@whitematrix.ioWei Cai∗
The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shenzhen
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial
Intelligence and Robotics for Society
Shenzhen, China
caiwei@cuhk.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
In recent years, the metaverse has attracted enormous attention
from around the world with the development of related technolo-
gies. The expected metaverse should be a realistic society with more
direct and physical interactions, while the concepts of race, gender,
and even physical disability would be weakened, which would be
highly beneficial for society. However, the development of meta-
verse is still in its infancy, with great potential for improvement.
Regarding metaverse’s huge potential, industry has already come
forward with advance preparation, accompanied by feverish invest-
ment, but there are few discussions about metaverse in academia
to scientifically guide its development. In this paper, we highlight
the representative applications for social good. Then we propose
a three-layer metaverse architecture from a macro perspective,
containing infrastructure, interaction, and ecosystem. Moreover,
we journey toward both a historical and novel metaverse with a
detailed timeline and table of specific attributes. Lastly, we illus-
trate our implemented blockchain-driven metaverse prototype of a
university campus and discuss the prototype design and insights.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Human-centered computing →Interactive systems and to-
ols;Collaborative and social computing systems and tools ;•Soft-
ware and its engineering →Software system structures.
KEYWORDS
Metaverse; Multimedia; Blockchain; Human-centered Computing
∗Wei Cai is the corresponding author (caiwei@cuhk.edu.cn).
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
MM ’21, October 20–24, 2021, Virtual Event, China
©2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8651-7/21/10. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3474085.3479238ACM Reference Format:
Haihan Duan, Jiaye Li, Sizheng Fan, Zhonghao Lin, Xiao Wu, and Wei
Cai. 2021. Metaverse for Social Good: A University Campus Prototype. In
Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Multimedia (MM
’21), October 20–24, 2021, Virtual Event, China. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
9 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3474085.3479238
1 INTRODUCTION
The term “metaverse" originates from the science fiction novel, Snow
Crash [25], written by Neal Stephenson. Metaverse is a combination
of “meta" (meaning beyond) and the stem “verse" from "universe",
denoting the next-generation Internet in which the users, as avatars,
can interact with each other and software applications in a three-
dimensional (3D) virtual space. There has been approximately 30
years’ development behind the evolution of this term. In 2018, the
success of the film Ready Player One [24] brought the concept of
metaverse back to the forefront of cutting-edge discussions. This
film describes a virtual world named "OASIS", in which everyone
could connect to the virtual world, act as their own customized
avatar, and do everything they wanted to, based on the basic rules.
The film Ready Player One shows many seemingly reachable tech-
nologies, e.g. head-mounted display (HMD) for virtual reality (VR)
rendering, ubiquitous sensing, haptic feedback, and modeling of
the physical world, which brings the public feasible opportunities
to achieve the metaverse.
However, progress in the development of multimedia technolo-
gies (VR/AR, etc.) alone cannot solve all of the problems in the
development of the metaverse, since multimedia technologies can-
not ensure the digital economy is transparent, stable, and sustain-
able. For example, the current digital economy is maintained by
centralized operators (e.g., large companies), which means that
digital properties actually belong to the operators, rather than the
users. Fortunately, recent explosive blockchain-related technolo-
gies [ 3] can be helpful. First proposed by Chaum [ 6], blockchain
applications in tamper-resistant decentralized ledgers [ 18] have
attracted tremendous attention due to the success of Bitcoin [ 16].
In 2013, Vitalik Buterin proposed a decentralized platform namedarXiv:2108.08985v1  [cs.MM]  20 Aug 2021