the blockchain adopt to support the sustainable economics of the meta-
verse? (3) How to reasonably allocate and coordinate data stored in
mass storage and the blockchain?
3.2 Interaction
In this subsection, we emphasize the immersive user experience,
digital twins, and content creation, which are important parts in
the interaction layer that bridges the physical and virtual worlds.
Immersive user experience. To achieve an immersive user
experience, there are two main components that should be con-
sidered in interactions between users and the metaverse. First, the
metaverse should receive data from the physical world so that
users could control their avatars to finish corresponding actions. As
shown in the film Ready Player One [24], the lead character stands
on a treadmill-like machine and wears HMD, gloves, and a special
suit so that all user actions could be captured. Second, real-time 3D
rendering-related technologies like VR/AR are regarded as the main
interaction interface. Moreover, haptic feedback is also necessary,
which has already equipped most game controllers, like Nintendo
Switch9. However, existing technologies can only support specific
areas, but cannot provide an immersive user experience, which
formulates the following research questions: (1) How to understand
the affections of users and enhance their experience during interac-
tions with the metaverse? (2) How to integrate the input and output
modalities to build a holistic user experience during interactions?
Digital twins. With the exception of metaverse users, other
objects or things in the physical world could also interact with the
metaverse, presented as digital twins [ 8] in the virtual world. The
parameters of physical devices can be collected by ubiquitous sens-
ing technologies to maintain the same states as their corresponding
digital twins. This is an interdisciplinary area that should cover a
large number of related subjects, such as material science, signal
processing, Internet of Things (IoT), pattern recognition, etc. [ 9,21].
On the contrary, after operation and processing in metaverse, the
parameters in virtual environments can be sent back to physical
devices and their real world states can be changed. However, the
development of digital twins in the metaverse is still in its early
stages, and the following research questions deserve further study:
(1) What in the physical world should be mapped as digital twins
within the metaverse? (2) How to use digital twins in the metaverse
to effectively benefit the real world?
Content creation interface. The metaverse is a evolving vir-
tual world with unlimited scalability and interoperability. The op-
erators need to construct the basic elements, while innovative
user-generated content (UGC) fulfill the universe through users.
Therefore, high efficiency content creation is another significant
component for interactions between users and the metaverse. For
buildings, objects, and environments that exist in the physical world,
we can apply 3D reconstruction approaches to build digital twins
in the metaverse [ 14]. To generate 3D models, users can utilize
3D modeling software, such as 3ds Max10, Blender11, or Maya12,
but these modeling systems are highly dependent on professional
9https://www.nintendo.com/switch/
10https://www.autodesk.com/products/3ds-max/overview
11https://www.blender.org/
12https://www.autodesk.com/products/maya/overviewknowledge and experience, which is difficult for amateurs to repli-
cate. So we summarize the following open research questions: (1)
How to accurately reconstruct existing objects and their physical at-
tributes in the virtual world? (2) How can the existing interaction
modalities facilitate content creation to enhance the user experience?
3.3 Ecosystem
The ecosystem can provide a breathing and parallel living world
that continuously serves all of the world’s inhabitants. Specifically,
people may have social experiences that are completely different
from the real world in activities, like befriending AI-driven non-
player character (NPC). In this paper, we mainly discuss three parts
consisting of the ecosystem layer: UGC, economics, and AI.
User-generated content. The UGC is any form of content that
has been created by users rather than the developers/operators of
online platforms [ 12,15]. Different from traditional game commu-
nities like Steam Workshop13, players’ goals are not to follow the
developer’s rules, but rather to explore freely and create content in
their own style. Hence, UGC in the metaverse tends to be heteroge-
neous and requires ownership. Blockchain-based Non-Fungible To-
ken (NFT) provides a new approach to UGC in the metaverse, which
could certify a digital asset to be unique and not interchangeable.
Specifically, users can store their UGC as an NFT on the blockchain,
and trade UGC through smart contracts to achieve liquidity. The
free creation of UGCs can motivate the innovation of users, but it
also brings some open research questions: (1) How to design more
UGC-based applications to reflect and promote the value of UGCs? (2)
How to design a reasonable mechanism to guarantee the uniqueness
and reduce the malicious duplication of UGCs?
Economics. Economics is an important factor considered in the
ecosystem, which could offer rich content and a vibrant community
in the metaverse. Decentralized Finance, based on smart contracts
and Fungible Token (FT), offers a way to innovate economic models
in the metaverse. Existing successful solutions, such as Uniswap
[1], a Decentralized Exchange (DEX) on Ethereum, automatically
provide users with liquidity for their tokens. At present, the main
economic activities in the metaverse mainly include the auction of
virtual assets, such as land, scarce items and precious real estate,
development and leasing of land, rewards for finishing game tasks,
and profits from investing in cryptocurrency. So the metaverse
invokes a new form of funding that draws inspiration from both
the real world and virtual world. However, the implementation of
smart contract applications has the potential for external attacks,
and the metaverse lacks decentralized financial applications. Hence,
we summarize the research questions as follows: (1) How to design
immutable yet sustainable smart contacts to maintain a balanced
economic system for the metaverse? (2) How to design efficient DeFi
models to improve the liquidity of NFTs in the metaverse?
Artificial intelligence. AI facilitates our physical lives in many
areas, including intelligent transportation [ 20], smart healthcare
[26], environmental monitoring [ 19], and public safety [ 13]. Mean-
while, the key concept in the metaverse lies in its sophisticated data
analytics for understanding, monitoring, regulating, and planning.
Apart from the above-mentioned applications, AI-driven NPCs will
be an indispensable part of our metaverse. Specifically, NPCs are
13https://steamcommunity.com/workshop/