Figure 2: Brief Timeline of the Metaverse Development
computer-operated characters who act as enemies, partners, and
support characters to provide challenges, offer assistance, and sup-
port the storyline. State-of-the-art AI mostly uses deep learning
(DL) and reinforcement learning (RL), and achieves breakthrough
progress in computer vision (CV) and natural language process
(NLP). To give users a better user experience with NPCs, we for-
mulate the following research questions: (1) How to facilitate users’
operation using AI technology to enhance user experience in the meta-
verse? (2) What kind of AI technology can be used to effectively im-
prove the comprehension and communication ability of NPCs?
4 JOURNEY TOWARDS THE METAVERSE
In fact, we are still on the way to exploring the metaverse, although
this concept has been proposed for more than 30 years, as men-
tioned in Section 1. Referring to fictional literature, such as True
Names [27],Neuromancer [10] and Snow Crash [25], they could
help us picture a promising future about the metaverse. However,
although there is no perfect example that meets all of the require-
ments of an ideal metaverse, various existing works possess several
features that are worthy of summary. In this section, we will briefly
introduce some remarkable metaverse forerunners, and illustrate a
brief timeline, as shown in Figure 2.
4.1 Pioneering Work
4.1.1 Text-based Interactive Games. Text-based interactive game is
the primary category of pioneering metaverse [ 7], which uses rules
like the famous board game Dungeons & Dragons for reference.
The typical examples are MUDs (originally multi-user dungeon,
with later variants, multi-user dimension and multi-user domain
[2,11]) and MUSHs (Multi-User Shared Hallucination) [ 23]. Text-
based interactive games build an online platform where players can
communicate in real-time through texts and play collaboratively.
After that, MUDs andMUSHs gradually evolved into different ver-
sions, such as AberMUD ,TinyMUD ,LPMud andDikuMUD with
more features. Among them, TinyMUD allows the user to create
a game world for other players to explore, which marks the ap-
pearance of the UGC. The above-mentioned works represent the
beginning of building the metaverse. We have selected Colossal
Cave Adventure as the representative prototype. Colossal CaveAdventure, Between 1975 and 1977 :Colossal Cave Adventure is
a role-playing and rogue-like game where players can move and
interact with items through text commands, which describes the
environment in text and gives results for certain actions.
4.1.2 Virtual Open Worlds. In the 1990s, with rapid advances in
computational power and computer graphics, people were no longer
satisfied with text-based interactions. Virtual worlds equipped with
3D graphics and more open-ended socialization appeared at that
time. Those virtual worlds built an online 3D virtual environment
where people can log in as their corresponding avatar, who can cre-
ate and construct UGCs in these worlds. Communication methods
are also enriched to both text and voice for people to better share
their experiences. Here are some typical examples: Web World,
1994; Worlds Inc., 1994; Active Worlds, 1995 : This is a series of
virtual worlds with the development of graphic technologies from
2.5D to 3D. Thereinto, Active Worlds allows users to travel among
3D virtual worlds and environments built by others.
4.2 Modern Prototypes of the Metaverse
In this section, we will introduce some existing and promising
works that have representative features of the metaverse. Com-
pared to the pioneers, these works are more technologically so-
phisticated and involve a larger group of users. According to their
characteristics, we divide them into two categories as follows.
4.2.1 Massive Multiplayer Online Video Games. Massive multi-
player online (MMO) video games are probably the most popular
version of metaverse today. These games enable a massive amount
of people to interact with each other in highly sophisticated 3D envi-
ronments with convenient communication, UGC creation, economy,
VR/AR, and so on. We list some representative examples of MMO
video games as follows. Note that others like Grand Theft Auto
Online ,Pokemon Go ,Animal Crossing andSuper Mario Maker 2 are
also considered but not listed, due to limited space. Second Life,
2003 :Second Life is an online virtual world with a large amount
of UGCs, with its own virtual currency, the Linden Dollar, which
can be exchanged with real-world currency. Roblox, 2006 :Roblox
is a platform where players can play games created by others. In
Roblox , players can use Roblox Studio to create games and virtual
items, such as clothes, body parts, and gears, which can be bought