5 CAMPUS METAVERSE PROTOTYPE
To achieve our goals and vision toward metaverse for social good,
this section presents The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shen-
zhen (CUHKSZ) Metaverse, our early-stage prototype, as a blockch-
ain-driven exemplary system for demonstration and future social
experiments. The proposed system aims to provide our on-campus
students with an interactive metaverse, a mixed environment where
students’ actions in the real world could correspondingly affect the
virtual world, and vice versa. As shown in Figure 3, we illustrate a
corner of CUHKSZ metaverse through the implemented Metaverse
Observer. In the following subsections, we will introduce the key
concepts of our system in detail.
Figure 3: A corner at CUHKSZ through Metaverse Observer
5.1 Infrastructure
The proposed CUHKSZ Metaverse is developed on Unity15, a cross-
platform development engine, thus the application can be deployed
on smartphones, PCs, and browser-based cloud streaming, etc. With
the support of the development platform, thousands of users from
both cable and mobile network are all allowed to communicate and
interact with each other in the CUHKSZ Metaverse. Further, the
3D models are constructed using Blender. More importantly, the
CUHKSZ Metaverse applies blockchain with smart contract to sup-
port the ecosystem, including tokens, DAO, and trading system, etc.
In the current version, we choose FISCO-BCOS16, which is an open-
source high-performance financial-grade consortium blockchain
platform, to deploy CUHKSZ Metaverse. FISCO-BCOS can provide
rich features including group architecture, pluggable consensus
mechanisms, privacy protection algorithms, etc. Also, Solidity17is
utilized as the smart contract programming language to support
the blockchain-based ecosystem. The introduction of consortium
blockchain in CUHKSZ Metaverse benefits the system operation
and test in the early stages, and avoids the high cost of transactions
in the public blockchain. In the next phase, we intend to connect
the current consortium blockchain with the public blockchain, e.g.,
deploy and synchronize the data and smart contract to the public
blockchain (such as Ethereum).
15https://unity.com/
16http://fisco-bcos.org/
17https://github.com/ethereum/solidity5.2 Interaction
5.2.1 Metaverse Viewer. The Metaverse Viewer is built for users
to interact with CUHKSZ Metaverse, which provides both a first-
person and a third-person perspective, as shown in Figure 5b. To
implement the Metaverse Viewer, we envision a cross-platform
future that various devices would connect to CUHKSZ Metaverse,
including smartphones, PCs, browser-based cloud streaming, etc.
In the current prototype, we adopt the smartphone as the inaugural
platform for the following reasons: (1) it is convenient to promote
the metaverse concept to our target users, as most are heavy mo-
bile phone users; (2) smartphones provide continuous access to the
metaverse, especially in a mobile environment; (3) smartphones
make it easy to acquire physical data from our users through sen-
sors, cameras, and GPS modules built into the smartphone, which
retains considerable potential for innovation with interactive ap-
proaches. However, the conventional smartphone is not yet to the
ideal metaverse device. In the next phase, we envision providing
an extension of a VR/AR interface to enhance the immersive user
experience utilizing specific sensors, such as LiDAR.
5.2.2 Ubiquitous Sensing-based Service. Most of the existing meta-
verse enables interactions with traditional keyboards and mouses,
which lack accurate control of the avatar and immersive user experi-
ence. The current version of our CUHKSZ Metaverse Viewer utilizes
localization information as a source of sensing input. For instance,
we feature a location-based incentive mechanism to maximize the
social welfare of on-campus students: the students may start the
Metaverse Viewer in Power-Saving mode and voluntarily report
their GPS location for higher token production rates. As depicted in
Figure 4a, the student is now physically studying in the University
Library, thus, he/she will automatically join the University Library
chat room to chat with nearby students through the correspond-
ing metaverse channel, while earning tokens in high-speed mode.
Apparently, this approach may encourage students to leave their
dormitories and study at the library during the day. In the next
phase of CUHKSZ Metaverse, we intend to leverage more sensing
modalities, e.g. eye-tracking, to improve the user experience.
5.2.3 Content Creation. As envisioned in Section 4.3, UGC is a
fundamental element in a metaverse. In CUHKSZ Metaverse, we
also adopt UGC as the core user mechanism. However, it is still a
challenge for an average user to create customized items in a 3D
(a) Location-based Services
 (b) Editor for Content Creation
Figure 4: Interaction Layer in CUHKSZ Metaverse