to maintain order and normal operation. In Decentraland7, there
is a Decentralized Autonomous Organization (DAO) where users
could propose and vote on the policies created to determine how
the world behaves (e.g., what kinds of wearable items are allowed).
The Axie Infinity8, a Pokémon-inspired universe where anyone
can earn tokens through skilled gameplay and contributions to the
ecosystem, also introduces a decentralized organization mechanism,
in which Axie Infinity Shards (AXS) holders can stake their tokens
through a staking dashboard and participate in governance votes.
2.4 Humanity
Humanistic spirit is a kind of universal human self-care, which is
manifested in the maintenance, pursuit, and concern for human
dignity, value, and destiny. In society, humanity cherishes various
spiritual and cultural phenomena left behind by previous genera-
tions as a legacy for humanity. The metaverse could be an excellent
approach for cultural communication and protection. For example,
the metaverse has included cultural relics protection. Experiencing
years of weathering, cultural relics in the physical world are fragile
and likely easily broken by manmade damage or natural disasters.
The Notre Dame de Paris caught fire in 2019, sustaining serious
damage to the cathedral’s wooden sections. Fortunately, Ubisoft
reconstructed the Notre Dame de Paris as a digital 3D model in
Assassin’s Creed Unity , which will be utilized to support its recon-
struction. In China, the National architects & Cthuwork have made
great efforts to reconstruct Chinese cultural relics as 3D voxel mod-
els in Minecraft , containing buildings, like the Forbidden City, and
famous paintings, such as Qingming Shanghe Tu (Ascending the
River at Qingming Festival). In the metaverse, the digital recon-
struction of cultural relics not only takes place anywhere in the
world, but can also provide evidence for relic restoration.
3 ARCHITECTURE OF THE METAVERSE
Currently, the development of metaverse is still in the early stages,
so its architecture does not have a consistent definition in either
academia or industry. For example, Jon Radoff proposed a seven-
layer metaverse architecture, where the layers from bottom to
top are: infrastructure, human interface, decentralization, spatial
computing, creator economy, discovery, and experience [ 22]. This
architecture is built from an industrial division based on the value
chain of the expected market. In contrast, we intend to conclude
the architecture of metaverse from a more macro perspective, so a
three-layer architecture is proposed, as shown in Figure 1, including
(from bottom to top): infrastructure, interaction, and ecosystem.
For the metaverse’s fundamental requirements, we consider that
the architecture should cross from the physical world to the virtual
world. In Figure 1, the left two circles denote the virtual world and
physical world, and there is an intersection between the two worlds.
The structure of these two circles corresponds to three layers in
the central part of Figure 1, named infrastructure, interaction, and
ecosystem from bottom to top. And we list some key components of
each layer right beside the layer name in Figure 1. Note that the key
components listed will be discussed in this paper, but there are other
components in each layer that we will not emphasize, due to this
7https://decentraland.org/
8https://axieinfinity.com/
Figure 1: Three-layer Architecture of the Metaverse
paper’s limited purpose and scope. The proposed three-layer archi-
tecture of metaverse can effectively embrace the components that
constitute a metaverse, and the details and open research questions
of each layer will be discussed further in the following subsections.
3.1 Infrastructure
The infrastructure layer contains the fundamental requirements for
supporting the operation of a virtual world, including computation,
communication, blockchain and storage.
Computation and communication. The metaverse is a large-
scale multimedia system, so its operation requires huge compu-
tational costs. On the other hand, since the expected metaverse
should be accessible at any time and any place, communication
technologies are another basic support. In fact, improvements in
computation and communication are always cutting-edge research
topics, which is not limited to the metaverse. Therefore, in this
paper, we pay more attention to how the development of computa-
tion and communication could enhance the user experience of the
metaverse. We summarize the following open research questions
for developing computation and communication for the metaverse
as follows: (1) How to design specific computational devices to sup-
port the huge computational consumption of the metaverse? (2) How
to coordinate different computational resources, such as cloud com-
puting or mobile devices, to enhance the user experience in different
terminals? (3) What kind of data structure or encoding method could
effectively present and transmit large-scale data of the metaverse?
Blockchain and storage. The expectations for the metaverse
are that it will connect everyone around the world, so an enor-
mous amount of data, such as maps, roles, etc., would be generated
and stored in mass storage, which is another basic infrastructure.
More importantly, to guarantee decentralization and fairness, the
blockchain must be introduced to support sustainable ecosystem
operation in the metaverse [ 3,5]. Advanced blockchain systems,
like Ethereum [ 4], introduce a smart contract that could support
the operation of DApps, which greatly extend the blockchain’s
application scope, and make it feasible for metaverse to construct
a decentralized social ecosystem [ 5]. In this paper, we regard the
blockchain as an infrastructure component of the metaverse, since
the essence of blockchain is a distributed ledger, a special kind of
storage [ 6], and the detailed usability of blockchain in the ecosys-
tem layer will be introduced in Section 3.3. We list the following
open research questions that should be considered when building
the metaverse: (1) How to effectively store and retrieve the enormous
amount of data in the metaverse? (2) What consensus model should