p1
p2𝑓𝐴2𝑓𝐴1
p1
p2𝑓𝐵2𝑓𝐵1Figure 3: Illustration of the learning confusion issue in mask
head. The rotated rectangles and dotted boxes denote differ-
ent instances and the corresponding proposals generated by
RPN.𝑓1
𝐴and𝑓1
𝐵denote the closest feature vector to reference
point p1 in the RoI feature 𝐹𝐴and𝐹𝐵.𝑓2
𝐴and𝑓2
𝐵denote the
closest feature vector to reference point p2 in the RoI fea-
ture𝐹𝐴and𝐹𝐵. Spatial closed feature pairs ( 𝑓1
𝐴,𝑓1
𝐵), (𝑓2
𝐴,𝑓2
𝐵)
are likely to have very similar features but associated with
opposite labels.
3.1.2 Learning Confusion When Mask R-CNN Meets Dense Texts.
Despite powerful representation for arbitrary-shaped text, Mask R-
CNN can not handle dense texts well. We find that the performance
degradation is caused by the learning confusion issue in mask
learning. As illustrated in Fig. 3, given two close text instances A
and B, we denote the RoI features encoded by the mask encoder for
the two instances as 𝐹𝐴,𝐹𝐵∈R𝑁×𝑁×𝐶.𝑁and𝐶are the dimensions
of the spatial output and channel respectively. The mask decoder
requires to classify each feature vector 𝑓𝐴,𝑓𝐵∈R𝐶in𝐹𝐴,𝐹𝐵to
text or non-text. We introduce two reference points p1 and p2 that
fall into text A and B respectively. Given p1 and p2, 𝑓1
𝐴and𝑓2
𝐴
denote the nearest feature vectors in 𝐹𝐴. Analogously, 𝑓1
𝐵and𝑓2
𝐵
denote the nearest feature vectors to the two points in 𝐹𝐵. Since
the spatial positions of feature pairs ( 𝑓1
𝐴,𝑓1
𝐵) and (𝑓2
𝐴,𝑓2
𝐵) are quite
close, they are likely to have very similar features. When training
with𝐹𝐴,𝑓1
𝐴and𝑓2
𝐴are taken as positive and negative respectively.
When training with 𝐹𝐵,𝑓1
𝐵and𝑓2
𝐵are taken as negative and positive
respectively. The labels are opposite when training with the pairs,
resulting in the learning confusion issue and degrading the overall
performance.
3.1.3 MLP Mask Decoder. As a basic component in deep neural
networks, convolution is popular and widely used due to the bene-
fits of weight sharing and local connectivity. However, we find it
harmful to use a convolution classifier for pixel-wise binary classifi-
cation when detecting dense texts. The learning confusion issue, as
mentioned in the last subsection, is magnified by the convolution
classifier. The weight sharing makes the weights update more fre-
quently and reduces the discrimination performance of the classifier.
To alleviate the learning confusion issue, we design two variants,
called locally connected (LC) predictor and fully connected (FC)
predictor. Both of them discard weight sharing, while FC predictor
makes use of global context information. The predictors of different
types are illustrated in Fig. 4.
As shown in Tab. 1, without weight sharing, the composed mask
decoder with LC predictor (deconv-LC) outperforms the “deconv-
conv” decoder by 2.8% F-measure. When we further replace the
(a) Convolution (b) Locally Connected (c) Fully ConnectedFigure 4: Illustration of different mask predictors. The solid
lines denote the data flow. The dotted lines represent shar-
ing weights.
LC predictor with the FC predictor (deconv-FC) in which more
contexts are used to predict the mask, another 0.9% F-measure
increase is obtained. Compared with using more contexts, the dis-
carding of weight sharing brings more obvious improvement with
fewer parameters. The reason may be that the RoI features have
already obtained a certain extent of receptive field with the mask
encoder. The FC predictor also brings in more parameters and com-
putations. In practice, we replace the deconvolution layer with a
fully connected with 1024 dimensions (FC-FC) for speed/accuracy
trade-off and fair comparison. The computation overhead of the
composed two-layer MLP decoder (5.3 GFLOPS) is comparable with
the “deconv-conv” decoder (5.2 GFLOPS) considering 100 proposals.
The head architecture is shown in Fig. 2 (c).
Table 1: Performance with different decoders on DAST1500.
Where “R”, “P”, “F” mean recall, precision, and F-measure re-
spectively. “deconv”, “conv”, “LC” and “FC” are short for de-
convolution, convolution, locally connected, and fully con-
nected.
Decoder R P F
deconv-conv 79.8 86.7 83.1
deconv-LC 84.0 87.9 85.9
deconv-FC 84.6 89.1 86.8
FC-FC 85.5 87.8 86.6
3.2 Instance-Aware Mask Learning
With the proposed MLP mask decoder, the robustness of the mask
head is significantly improved. The separated weights and more
contexts with the whole RoI features can alleviate the learning
confusion issue. However, the issue still exists in the standard pixel-
aligned mask learning manner.
To eliminate the issue, we alternatively propose instance-aware
mask learning in which the mask branch learns a global instance-
aware mask. Instead of classifying pixels into foreground and back-
ground in pixel-aligned mask learning, the mask head learns a
global representation of how the mask is distributed in the nor-
malized subdivision grids as illustrated in Fig. 5. Compared with
the standard pixel-aligned mask learning, the IAML is more like
the bounding box regression task, in which a more detailed global
shape mask is learned as the coarse bounding box presentation is
learned in fast R-CNN branch. We also use the MLP decoder archi-
tecture in IMAL since the IAML naturally requires global modeling.
In IAML, the learning targets are independent of the proposal boxes
and are identical if associated with the same ground-truths.