document analysis. Though great progress has been achieved with
CNN-based methods inspired by general object detection and seg-
mentation frameworks like Faster R-CNN [ 44], Mask R-CNN [ 10],
and FCN [ 29], STD remains challenging due to large variations in
scale, orientation, and aspect ratio, as well as arbitrary shape.
Mask R-CNN, as one of the most powerful detectors for general
object detection and instance segmentation, is widely adopted as
a strong baseline for arbitrary-shaped scene text detection and
spotting [ 15,16,21,24,26,33,41,57,60,70]. Though excellent
performance has been achieved with Mask R-CNN based methods,
there are still two challenges to be addressed in dense and arbitrary-
shaped scene text detection.
The first challenge is dense text case, which is not received
enough attention in previous works [ 35,47] and is regarded as one
of the key bottlenecks for Mask R-CNN based scene text detection
frameworks. Mask R-CNN can not well handle dense text case
which may result in multiple instances falling in one proposal as
shown in Fig. 1 (a). Liao et al. [ 16] propose to integrate segmentation-
based methods [ 18,53,54] to generate proposals in a bottom-up
manner, which can avoid this issue and achieve robust text reading.
However, the segmentation proposal network requires sequentially
finding connected regions, slowing down the training and inference
process. It also suffers from the accumulated errors from the text
kernel localization. Different from it, we handle this problem from
a top-down perspective. As shown in Fig. 1, our motivation comes
from an observation: though a box contains multiple text instances,
the box branch can localize texts accurately with an axis-aligned
rectangle bounding box. Since the RoI feature representation is able
to decode the information of the instance in the box branch, it may
have considerable representation to recover the whole instance in
the mask branch. Thus it is reasonable to delve into the mask branch.
We revisit the mask learning process and find the performance
degradation is caused by the learning confusion issue in the training
process.
The second challenge is that the manually pre-designed an-
chors cannot easily match text instances of extreme aspect ratios.
TextBoxes++ [ 17] and RRD [ 19] places 5+ and 10+ anchors with dif-
ferent aspect ratios for short text and long text detection, resulting
in a large amount of computational redundancy and long inference
time. Anchor clustering is performed in SD [ 59] to better match the
aspect ratios. However, the computed anchors depend on specific
datasets. Different from these methods of designing complicated
anchors, we turn to the perspective of label assignment since the
core reason is few or even no positive samples matching to text
instances with extreme aspect ratios.
In this paper, an accurate text detector named MAYOR is pro-
posed to solve these two problems. First, we introduce the learning
confusion issue in the mask branch which commonly exists in Mask
R-CNN based frameworks. Two ways are proposed to improve the
mask branch: (1) We propose to use an MLP decoder instead of the
“deconv-conv” decoder in the mask head, which alleviates the issue
and promotes robustness significantly. (2) We propose instance-
aware mask learning (IAML) in which the mask head learns to
predict the shape of the whole instance rather than classify each
pixel to text or non-text. As shown in Fig. 1 (b), the quality of the
predicted masks is largely promoted with the two proposed tech-
niques. In addition, to meet the demand for large variations of scaleand aspect ratio in RPN, we propose a two-step label assignment,
namely adaptive label assignment (ALA), in which more positive
samples are involved in the pre-assignment process and then 𝑘
high-quality samples for each ground-truth are selected as the final
positive samples according to the matching quality.
The contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
•We analyze the performance degradation when Mask R-CNN
based frameworks meet dense text detection and argue that
the failure originates from the learning confusion issue in
the mask head.
•A two-layer MLP decoder is proposed to replace the “deconv-
conv” decoder in the standard mask head, which alleviates
the learning confusion issue and promotes robustness sig-
nificantly.
•We propose instance-aware mask learning in which the
mask head learns to predict the shape of the whole instance
rather than classify each pixel to text or non-text in the
pixel-aligned mask learning.
•An adaptive label assignment is proposed in RPN, which
brings robust hyper-parameter selection, simple anchor set-
ting, as well as better performance.
•Experiments on five public datasets including DAST1500,
MSRA-TD500, ICDAR2015, CTW1500, and Total-Text demon-
strate the effectiveness of the proposed method. The experi-
mental results also show that the proposed method does not
rely on extra pretraining datasets and runs fast in inference.
Results on the general instance segmentation task illustrate
the generalization of the proposed method.
2 RELATED WORK
According to different perspectives for modeling scene text, scene
text detection can be roughly divided into bottom-up and top-down
methods. Compared with general objects, the text objects are typi-
cally long which require a larger receptive field.
Bottom-Up Methods alleviate the demand by detecting lo-
cal boxes or pixels and then grouping them into text instances.
Segmentation-based methods [ 6,18,49,53,54,58,62] predict text
or non-text segmentation and other attributes (e.g. similarity embed-
dings [ 49,54], shrink kernels [ 53,54]) to group pixels into different
instances. Though flexible in the representation of text instances,
these methods are sensitive to text-like noise and rely on post-
processing. Component-based methods [ 1,3,7,30,36,45,47,48,73,
78] predict local units and linkages between the components. Lyu et
al. [34] propose to first localize corners of text bounding boxes then
group the corners into different instances with a position-aware
segmentation score. Bottom-up methods could localize local units
accurately. However, due to the lack of holistically instance-level
supervision, the methods suffer from accumulated errors.
Top-Down Methods directly perform instance-aware predic-
tion, typically comprising one or several stages in a coarse-to-fine
manner. These methods adopt global modeling with general object
detection frameworks in which multiple detections are generated
and Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) is used to suppress the re-
dundant detections. In regression-based methods, geometry of text
is directly predicted from convolutional features [ 2,11,12,17,19,
22,23,42,50–52,56,77] or RoI features [ 25,37,55,72], and then