Fast R -CNN
(b) Standard Mask Head28×28×1conv×4
maskclass
box
RPN
Mask branch
(c) Proposed Mask Head784maskdeconv conv
Flatten14×14×256 Encoder
EncoderDecoder
Decoder
(a) Overall Pipeline14×14×256 
28×28×256 
28×28×1conv×4RoI
14×14×256 14×14×256 RoIRoIAlign
1024ReshapeMLPFigure 2: (a) The overall pipeline of MAYOR. (b) and (c) are the architectures of the standard mask head in Mask R-CNN and
the proposed mask head.
used to decode to produce the predicted results based on given
reference points or boxes. In instance segmentation based methods,
typically, Mask R-CNN based methods [ 28,33,43,57,59,60], an
extra branch is added to a detection framework. The results are
achieved via instance segmentation, getting rids of learning target
confusion problem [ 26,61] which exists in regression-based meth-
ods. LOMO [ 71] is similar to Mask R-CNN on the whole framework,
but differs on quadrilateral proposals and a shape expression mod-
ule to achieve accurate instance-level bounding boxes. These kinds
of methods usually consist of multiple stages, the final instance
segmentation results rely heavily on the quality of the detected
bounding boxes.
Hybrid Methods. In addition to the above two types of meth-
ods, another trend is to collaborate the bottom-up methods with the
top-down frameworks, which can benefit from two modeling per-
spectives. Liao et al. [ 16] propose a segmentation proposal network
to replace the original RPN in [ 15], which make the network robust
for text spotting. However, it also suffers from the shortcomings of
the segmentation framework. The localization errors from the ker-
nel segmentation degrade the accuracy of the bounding boxes and
the discriminant ability of the classifier in the fast R-CNN branch.
Detection in Crowded Scenes. There may be multiple instances
falling into a bounding box in crowded scenes, making it difficult
to distinguish different instances. Mask R-CNN settles this by class-
aware mask prediction. Since the number of dense objects of the
same category is relatively rare in typical object detection bench-
marks like COCO, this issue does not catch extensive attention of
the object detection community. However, it is quite noteworthy in
dense text detection which only has a single class. Though difficulty
also exists in localizing highly overlapped boxes [ 5], we find that
with sufficient rotation data augmentation, text instances can be
well localized with axis-aligned bounding boxes. The focus of this
work is learning masks and generating proposals accurately.
In this work, from a top-down perspective, we delve into mask
learning and point out the learning confusion issue in the mask
head when detecting dense texts. Benefiting from the proposedMLP mask decoder, IAML, and ALA in RPN, our methods effectively
handle the learning confusion issue and large aspect ratio variance
problem, achieving more accurate mask predictions compared with
previous methods.
3 PROPOSED METHOD
In this section, we describe the proposed method in detail. First, we
revisit Mask R-CNN for dense scene text detection and introduce
the learning confusion issue in pixel-aligned mask learning. An
MLP mask decoder is proposed to alleviate it. Next, the concept
of instance-aware learning is elaborated. Then we describe the
adaptive label assignment. Finally, the optimization is presented.
3.1 Scene Text Detection with Mask R-CNN
3.1.1 Revisiting Pixel-Aligned Mask Learning. As shown in Fig. 2
(a), the proposed method follows the overall framework of Mask
R-CNN and consists of four modules: a ResNet50-FPN backbone
[20] for feature extraction, an RPN module for proposal generation,
a fast R-CNN module for refining proposals, and a mask branch for
accurate detection. The architecture of the standard mask branch is
illustrated in Fig. 2 (b), which can be viewed as an encoder-decoder
structure: four convolutions for feature encoding and a deconvolu-
tion layer with a convolution predictor for mask decoding.
Given proposals generated by RPN and multi-scale features gen-
erated by FPN, the RoI features are obtained by the RoIAlign oper-
ation [ 10]. The mask predictions are produced via the mask branch.
In training, binary mask labels are first cropped based on the propos-
als and then resized to the shape of mask predictions (e.g., 28×28)
to produce the learning targets. In standard Mask R-CNN, the mask
predictions are supervised by the corresponding targets in a pixel-
aligned manner as shown in Fig. 5. Though the whole modeling
follows a top-down perspective, the mask branch is trained to distin-
guish each pixel belong to text or non-text locally. During inference,
the predicted masks are resized according to the predicted boxes
and then pasted to the original image.