Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 19
where αcontrols the amount of Dice term contribution in the loss function L, andβ∈[0,1]
controls the level of model penalization for false positives/negatives: when βis set to a
value smaller than 0.5, FPare penalized more than FN as the term (1−ti) ln (1 −pi)is
weighted more heavily, and vice versa. In their implementation, to prevent division by zero,
the authors perform add-one smoothing (a specific instance of the additive/Laplace/Lidstone
smoothing; Russell and Norvig (2016)), i.e., they add unity constant Sto both the denomi-
nator and numerator of the Dice term.
The majority of the methods discussed in Section 5 have attempted to handle the class
imbalance issue in the input images i.e., small foreground versus large background with
providing weights/penalty terms in the loss function. Other approaches consist of first iden-
tifying the object of interest, cropping around this object, and then performing the task (e.g.,
segmentation) with better-balanced classes. This type of cascade approach has been applied
for the segmentation of multiple sclerosis lesions in the spinal cord (Gros et al., 2019).
6 Image Synthesis based Methods
Deep CNNs are heavily reliant on big data to avoid overfitting and class imbalance issues,
and therefore this section focuses on data augmentation, a data-space solution to the problem
of limited data. Apart from standard online image augmentation methods such as geomet-
ric transformations (LeCun et al., 1998; Simard et al., 2003; Cires ¸an et al., 2011, 2012;
Krizhevsky et al., 2012), color space augmentations (Galdran et al., 2017; Yuan, 2017; Ab-
hishek et al., 2020), etc., in this section, we discuss image synthesis methods, the output
of which are novel images rather than modifications to existing images. GANs based aug-
mentation techniques for segmentation tasks have been used for a wide variety of problems
- from remote sensing imagery (Mohajerani et al., 2019) to filamentary anatomical struc-
tures (Zhao et al., 2017a). For a more detailed review of image augmentation strategies in
deep learning, we direct the interested readers to Shorten and Khoshgoftaar (2019).
6.1 Image Synthesis based Methods Applied to Natural Image Segmentation
Neff et al. (2018) trained a Wasserstein GAN with gradient penalty (Gulrajani et al., 2017)
to generate labeled image data in the form of image-segmenation mask pairs. They eval-
uated their approach on a dataset of chest X-ray images and the Cityscapes dataset, and
found that the WGAN-GP was able to generate images with sufficient variety and that a
segmentation model trained using GAN-based augmentation only was able to perform bet-
ter than a model trained with geometric transformation based augmentation. Cherian and
Sullivan (2019) proposed to incorporate semantic consistency in image-to-image transla-
tion task by introducing segmentation functions in the GAN architecture and showed that
the semantic segmentation models trained with synthetic images led to considerable per-
formance improvements. Other works include GAN-based data augmentation for domain
adaptation (Huang et al., 2018; Choi et al., 2019) and panoptic data augmentation (Liu
et al., 2019c). However, the majority of GAN based data augmentation has been applied to
medical images (Shorten and Khoshgoftaar, 2019). Next, we discuss the GAN based image
synthesis for augmentation in the field of medical image analysis.