22 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
8.2 Multi-Task Models Applied to Medical Images
Chaichulee et al. (2017) extended the VGG16 architecture (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014)
to include a global average pooling layer for patient detection and a fully convolutional net-
work for skin segmentation. The proposed model was evaluated on images from a clinical
study conducted at a neonatal intensive care unit, and was robust to changes in lighting, skin
tone, and pose. He et al. (2019) trained a U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015)-like encoder-
decoder architecture to simultaneously segment thoracic organs from CT scans and perform
global slice classification. Ke et al. (2019) trained a multi-task U-Net architecture to solve
three tasks - separating wrongly connected objects, detecting class instances, and pixel-
wise labeling for each object, and evaluated it on a food microscopy image dataset. Other
multi-task models have also been proposed for segmentation and classification for detecting
manipulated faces in images and video (Nguyen et al., 2019) and diagnosis of breast biopsy
images (Mehta et al., 2018) and mammograms (Le et al., 2019).
Mask R-CNN has also been used for segmentation tasks in medical image analysis such
as automatically segmenting and tracking cell migration in phase-contrast microscopy (Tsai
et al., 2019), detecting and segmenting nuclei from histological and microscopic images (John-
son, 2018; Vuola et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019a,b), detecting and segmenting oral dis-
eases (Anantharaman et al., 2018), segmenting neuropathic ulcers (Gamage et al., 2019),
and labeling and segmenting ribs in chest X-rays (Wessel et al., 2019). Mask R-CNN has
also been extended to work with 3D volumes and has been evaluated on lung nodule de-
tection and segmentation from CT scans and breast lesion detection and categorization on
diffusion MR images (Jaeger et al., 2018; Kopelowitz and Engelhard, 2019).
9 Segmentation Evaluation Metrics and Datasets
9.1 Evaluation Metrics
The quantitative evaluation of segmentation models can be performed using pixel-wise and
overlap based measures. For binary segmentation, pixel-wise measures involve the construc-
tion of a confusion matrix to calculate the number of true positive (TP), true negative (TN),
false positive (FP), and false negative (FN) pixels, and then calculate various metrics such
as precision, recall (also known as sensitivity), specificity, and overall pixel-wise accuracy.
They are defined as follows:
Precision =TP
TP+FP, (32)
Recall or Sensitivity =TP
TP+FN, (33)
Specificity =TN
TN+FP,and, (34)
Accuracy =TP+TN
TP+TN+FP+FN. (35)
Two popular overlap-based measures used to evaluate segmentation performance are the
Sørensen–Dice coefficient (also known as the Dice coefficient) and the Jaccard index (also
known as the intersection over union or IoU). Given two sets AandB, these metrics are
defined as: