30 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
object should be. Some researchers resort to traditional computer vision methods such as
conditional random fields (CRFs) to overcome this problem, which however, add more
computation time to the models.
–Studying the causes for some models and datasets being prone to false positive and
false negative predictions in the image segmentation context as found by Berman et al.
(2018b) and Taghanaki et al. (2019e).
–Exploring segmentation-free approaches (Zhen and Li, 2015; Hussain et al., 2017; Taghanaki
et al., 2018; Mukherjee et al., 2019; Proenca and Neves, 2019), i.e., bypassing the seg-
mentation step according to the target problem.
–Weakly supervised segmentation using image-level labels versus a few images with seg-
mentation annotations. Most new weakly supervised localization methods apply atten-
tion maps or region proposals in a multiple instance learning formulations. While atten-
tion maps can be noisy, leading to erroneously highlighted regions, it is not simple to
decide on an optimal window or bag size for multiple instance learning approaches.
–While most deep segmentation models for medical image analysis rely on only clinical
images for their predictions, there is often multi-modal patient data in the form of other
imaging modalities as well as patient metadata that can provide valuable information,
which most deep segmentation models do not use. Therefore, a valuable research direc-
tion for improving segmentation performance of medical images would be to develop
models which are able to leverage multi-modal patient data.
–Modifying input instead of the model, loss function, and adding more train data. Drozdzal
et al. (2018) showed that attaching a pre-processing module at the beginning of a seg-
mentation network improves the network performance. Taghanaki et al. (2019b) lever-
aged the gradients of a trained segmentation network with respect to the input to transfer
it to a new space where the segmentation accuracy improves.
–Deep neural networks are trained using error backpropagation (Rumelhart et al., 1986)
and gradient descent for optimizing the network weights. However, there have been
many neural network optimization techniques which do not rely on backpropagation,
such as credit assignment (Bengio and Frasconi, 1994), neuroevolution (Stanley and
Miikkulainen, 2002), difference target propagation (Lee et al., 2015), training with local
error signals (Nøkland and Eidnes, 2019) and several other techniques (Amit, 2019;
Bellec et al., 2019; Ma et al., 2019). Exploring these and similar other techniques to
optimize deep neural networks for semantic segmentation would be another valuable
research direction.
References
Abdulla W (2017) Mask R-CNN for object detection and instance segmentation on Keras
and TensorFlow. https://github.com/matterport/Mask_RCNN
Abhishek K, Hamarneh G (2019) Mask2Lesion: Mask-constrained adversarial skin lesion
image synthesis. Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention Work-
shop on Simulation and Synthesis in Medical Imaging pp 71–80
Abhishek K, Hamarneh G, Drew MS (2020) Illumination-based transformations improve
skin lesion segmentation in dermoscopic images. arXiv preprint arXiv:200310111
Adams RA, Fournier JJ (2003) Sobolev spaces. Elsevier
Afshari S, BenTaieb A, Mirikharaji Z, Hamarneh G (2019) Weakly supervised fully convo-
lutional network for PET lesion segmentation. In: Medical Imaging 2019: Image Process-
ing, International Society for Optics and Photonics, vol 10949, p 109491K