4 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
(x, y) Input Space 
ŷModel Architecture 
Sections 2, 3 
Optimization Functions 
Sections 4, 5 (x, y) (x’, y’) Synthesis-based Methods 
Section 6 
(x, y) 
Pixel level 
annotations 
Supervised 
Learning Image level 
annotations 
Bounding box 
annotations 
Semi-supervised 
Learning No annotations 
Unsupervised 
Learning 
Weakly Supervised Methods 
Section 7 Multi-Task Models 
Section 8 
Fig. 2: A typical deep neural network based semantic segmentation pipeline. Each compo-
nent in the pipeline indicates the section of this paper that covers the corresponding contri-
butions.
In the following sections, we discuss deep semantic image segmentation improvements
under different categories visualized in Figure 1. For each category, we first review the im-
provements on non-medical datasets, and in a subsequent section, we survey the improve-
ments for medical images.
2 Network Architectural Improvements
This section discusses the advancements in semantic image segmentation using convolu-
tional neural networks (CNNs), which have been applied to interpretation tasks on both nat-
ural and medical images (Garcia-Garcia et al., 2018; Litjens et al., 2017). Although artificial
neural network-based image segmentation approaches have been explored in the past using
shallow networks (Reddick et al., 1997; Kuntimad and Ranganath, 1999) as well as works
which relied on superpixel segmentation maps to generate pixelwise predictions (Couprie
et al., 2013), in this work, we focus on deep neural network based image segmentation
models which are end-to-end trainable. The improvements are mostly attributed to explor-
ing new neural architectures (with varying depths, widths, and connectivity or topology) or
designing new types of components or layers.
2.1 Fully Convolutional Neural Networks for Semantic Segmentation
As one of the first high impact CNN-based segmentation models, Long et al. (2015) pro-
posed fully convolutional networks for pixel-wise labeling. They proposed up-sampling (de-
convolving) the output activation maps from which the pixel-wise output can be calculated.
The overall architecture of the network is visualized in Figure 3.
In order to preserve the contextual spatial information within an image as the filtered
input data progresses deeper into the network, Long et al. (2015) proposed to fuse the output
with shallower layers’ output. The fusion step is visualized in Figure 4.