26 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
ing automobile’s perspective, along with pixel-wise semantic segmentation annotations
for 701 frames and 32 object classes.
Table 2 lists a summary of selected papers from this review, the nature of their proposed
contributions, and the datasets that they were evaluated on. For the papers that evaluated
their models on the PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset (Everingham et al., 2012), one of the most
popular image semantic segmentation dataset for natural images, we also list their reported
mean IoU scores. As can be seen in Table 2, the focus has been mostly on architectural im-
provements. Comparing the first deep learning-based model (i.e., FCN (Long et al., 2015))
to the state-of-the-art model (i.e., DeepLabV3+ (Chen et al., 2018b)) there is a large im-
provement (i.e. ∼27% , i.e., 62.2% to 89.0% ) in terms of mean IoU. The latter model
leverages a more sophisticated decoder, dilated convolutions, and feature pyramid pooling.
9.3 Semantic Segmentation Datasets for Medical Images
In contrast to natural images, it is difficult to tabulate and summarize the performance of
medical image segmentation methods because of the vast number of (a) medical imaging
modalities and (b) medical image segmentation datasets. Figure 15 presents a breakdown
of the various attributes of the medical image segmentation papers surveyed in this review,
color coded similar to Figure 1. As shown in Figure 15 (b), the papers covered in this review
use 13 medical imaging modalities. Figure 15 (c) shows the distribution of the number of
samples across datasets from multiple modalities. We observe that modalities which are
expensive to acquire and annotate (such as electron microscopy (EM), PET, and MRI) have
smaller dataset sizes than relative cheaper to acquire modalities such as RGB images (e.g.,
skin lesion images), ultrasound (US) and X-ray images. We also present a summary of the
popular medical image segmentation papers in Table 3 and include the entire table in the
Supplementary Material.
A similar observation can be made by looking at the medical image segmentation com-
petitions. Grand Challenges in Biomedical Image Analysis (Challenge, 2020) provides a
comprehensive but not exhaustive list of publicly available medical image segmentation
challenges, and since 2007, there have been 94 segmentation challenges for medical images
and volumes from as many as 12 imaging modalities. Figure 16 shows the number of these
challenges for every year since 2007, and it can be seen that this number has been on the
rise in the past few years.
10 Discussion and Future Directions
In the following sections, we discuss in detail the potential future research directions for
semantic segmentation of natural and medical images.
10.1 Architectures
Encoder-decoder networks with long and short skip connections are the winning architec-
tures according to the state-of-the-art methods. Skip connections in deep networks have
improved both segmentation and classification performance by facilitating the training of
deeper network architectures and reducing the risks for vanishing gradients. They equip