Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 21
7.2 Weakly Supervised Methods Applied to Medical Images
The scarcity of richly annotated medical images is limiting supervised deep learning-based
solutions to medical image analysis tasks (Perone and Cohen-Adad, 2019), such as local-
izing discriminatory radiomic disease signatures. Therefore, it is desirable to leverage un-
supervised and weakly supervised models. Kervadec et al. (2019b) introduced a differen-
tiable term in the loss function for datasets with weakly supervised labels, which reduced
the computational demand for training while also achieving almost similar performance to
full supervision for segmentation of cardiac images. Afshari et al. (2019) used a fully con-
volutional architecture along with a Mumford-Shah functional Mumford and Shah (1989)
inspired loss function to segment lesions from PET scans using only bounding box anno-
tations as supervision. Mirikharaji et al. (2019) proposed to learn spatially adaptive weight
maps to account for spatial variations in pixel-level annotations and used noisy annotations
to train a segmentation model for skin lesions. Taghanaki et al. (2019d) proposed to learn
spatial masks using only image-level labels with minimizing mutual information between
the input and masks, and at the same time maximizing the mutual information between
the masks and image labels. Peng et al. (2019) proposed an approach to train a CNN with
discrete constraints and regularization priors based on the alternating direction method of
multipliers (ADMM). Perone and Cohen-Adad (2018) expanded the semi-supervised mean
teacher (Tarvainen and Valpola, 2017) approach to segmentation tasks on MRI data, and
show that it can bring important improvements in a realistic small data regime. In another
work, Perone et al. (2019) extended the method of unsupervised domain adaptation using
self-ensembling for the semantic segmentation task. They showed how this approach could
improve the generalization of the models even when using a small amount of unlabeled data.
8 Multi-Task Models
Multi-task learning (Caruana, 1997) refers to a machine learning approach where multiple
tasks are learned simultaneously, and the learning efficiency and the model performance
on each of the tasks are improved because of the existing commonalities across the tasks.
For visual recognition tasks, it has been shown that there exist relations between various
tasks in the task space (Zamir et al., 2018), and multi-task models can help exploit these
relationships to improve performance on the related tasks.
8.1 Multi-Task Models Applied to Natural Images
Bischke et al. (2019) proposed a cascaded multi-task loss to preserve boundary information
from segmentation masks for segmenting building footprints and achieved state-of-the-art
performance on an aerial image labeling task. He et al. (2017) extended Faster R-CNN (Ren
et al., 2015) by adding a new branch to predict the object mask along with a class label
and a bounding box, and the proposed model was called Mask R-CNN. Mask R-CNN has
been used extensively for multi-task segmentation models for a wide range of application
areas (Abdulla, 2017), such as adding sports fields to OpenStreetMap (Remillard, 2018), de-
tection and segmentation for surgery robots (SUYEgit, 2018), understanding climate change
patterns from aerial imagery of the Arctic (Zhang et al., 2018a), converting satellite imagery
to maps (Mohanty, 2018), detecting image forgeries (Wang et al., 2019d), and segmenting
tree canopy (Zhao et al., 2018).