Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 29
search mentioned above. Similarly, gradient based optimizations based on Sobolev (Adams
and Fournier, 2003) gradients (Czarnecki et al., 2017), such as the works of Goceri (2019b,
2020) are an interesting research direction.
10.4 Other Potential Directions
–Going beyond pixel intensity-based scene understanding by incorporating prior knowl-
edge, which have been an active area of research for the past several decades (Nosrati
and Hamarneh, 2016; Xie et al., 2020). Encoding prior knowledge in medical image
analysis models is generally more possible as compared to natural images. Currently,
deep models receive matrices of intensity values, and usually, they are not forced to
learn prior information. Without explicit reinforcement, the models might still learn ob-
ject relations to some extent. However, it is difficult to interpret a learned strategy.
–Because of the large number of imaging modalities, the significant signal noise present
in imaging modalities such as PET and ultrasound, and the limited amount of medical
imaging data mainly because of high acquisition cost compounded by legal, ethical,
and privacy issues, it is difficult to develop universal solutions that yield acceptable
performances across various imaging modalities. Therefore, a proper research direction
would be along the work of Raghu et al. (2019) on image classification models, studying
the risks of using non-medical pre-trained models for medical image segmentation.
–Creating large 2D and 3D publicly available medical benchmark datasets for seman-
tic image segmentation such as the Medical Segmentation Decathlon (Simpson et al.,
2019). Medical imaging datasets are typically much smaller in size than natural image
datasets (Jin et al., 2020), and the curation of larger public datasets for medical imaging
modalities will allow researchers to accurately compare proposed approaches and make
incremental improvements for specific datasets and problems.
–A possible solution to address the paucity of sufficient annotated medical data is the
development and use of physics based imaging simulators, the outputs of which can
be used to train segmentation models and augment existing segmentation datasets. Sev-
eral platforms (Marion et al., 2011; Glatard et al., 2013) as well as simulators already
exist for various imaging modalities such as SIMRI (Benoit-Cattin et al., 2005) and
POSSUM (Drobnjak et al., 2006, 2010) for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), PET-
SORTEO (Reilhac et al., 2005) and SimSET (Harrison and Lewellen, 2012) for emis-
sion tomography, SINDBAD (Tabary et al., 2007) for computed tomography (CT), and
FIELD-II (Jensen and Svendsen, 1992; Jensen, 1996) and SIMUS (Shahriari and Gar-
cia, 2018) for ultrasound imaging as well as anatomical regions of interest such as Vas-
cuSynth (Hamarneh and Jassi, 2010) for vascular trees.
–Medical images, both 2D and volumetric, have in general, larger file sizes than natural
images, which inhibits the ability to load them entirely onto the memory for processing.
As such, they need to be processed either as patches or sub-volumes, making it difficult
for the segmentation models to capture spatial relationships in order to perform accurate
segmentation. Therefore, an interesting and potentially very useful research direction
would be coming up with architectures and training methods that can incorporate spatial
relationships from large medical images and volumes in the models.
–Exploring reinforcement learning approaches similar to Song et al. (2018) and Wang
et al. (2018c) for semantic (medical) image segmentation to mimic the way humans
delineate objects of interest. Deep CNNs are successful in extracting features of different
classes of objects, but they lose the local spatial information of where the borders of an