28 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
Fig. 16: The number of medical image segmentation challenges every year since 2007 listed
on Grand Challenges (Challenge, 2020), along with a imaging modality-wise breakdown.
Note that for many challenges, the data is multi-modal, and therefore the breakdown takes
that into account.
10.2 Sequenced Models
For image segmentation, sequenced models can be used to segment temporal data such as
videos. These models have also been applied to 3D medical datasets, however the advantage
of processing volumetric data using 3D convolutions versus the processing the volume slice
by slice using 2D sequenced models. Ideally, seeing the whole object of interest in a 3D
volume might help to capture the geometrical information of the object, which might be
missed in processing a 3D volume slice by slice. Therefore a future direction in this area can
be through analysis of sequenced models versus volumetric convolution-based approaches.
10.3 Optimization Functions
In medical image segmentation works, researchers have converged toward using classical
cross-entropy loss functions along with a second distance or overlap based functions. Incor-
porating domain/prior knowledge (such as coding the location of different organs explicitly
in a deep model) is more sensible in the medical datasets. As shown in Taghanaki et al.
(2019e), when only a distance-based or overlap-based loss function is used in a network, and
the final layer applies sigmoid function, the risk of gradient vanishing increases. Although
overlap based loss function are used in case of a class imbalance (small foregrounds), in
Figure 13, we show how using ( only) overlap based loss functions as the main term can
be problematic for smooth optimization where they highly penalize a model under/over-
segmenting a small foreground. However, the cross-entropy loss returns a reasonable score
for the same cases. Besides using integrated cross-entropy based loss functions, future work
can be exploring a single loss function that follows the behavior of the cross-entropy and at
the same time, offers more features such capturing contour distance. This can be achieved by
revisiting the current distance and overlap based loss functions. Another future path can be
exploring auto loss function (or regularization term) search similar to the neural architecture