16 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
Foreground Background False Negative False Positive
Fig. 12: A comparison of seven loss functions for different extends of overlaps for a large
(left) and a small (right) object.
A significant problem in image segmentation (particularly in medical images) is to over-
come class imbalance for which overlap measure based methods have shown reasonably
good performance in overcoming the imbalance. In Section 5, we summarize the approaches
which use new loss functions, particularly for medical image segmentation or use the (mod-
ified) loss functions mentioned above.
In Figure 12, we visualize the behavior of different loss functions for segmenting large
and small objects. For the parameters of the loss functions, we use the same parameters as
reported by the authors in their respective papers. Therefore, we use β= 0.3in Eqn. 11,
α= 0.25andγ= 2 in Eqn. 7, and γD=γCE= 1,weld= 0.8, and wwece= 0.2in
Eqn. 12. Moving from the left to the right for each plot, the overlap of the predictions and
ground truth mask becomes progressively smaller, i.e., producing more false positives and
false negatives. Ideally, the loss value should monotonically increase as more false positives,
and negatives are predicted. For large objects, almost all the functions follow this assump-
tion; however, for the small objects (right plot), only combo loss and focal loss penalize
monotonically more for larger errors. In other words, the overlap-based functions highly
fluctuate while segmenting small and large objects (also see Figure 13), which results in un-
stable optimization. The loss functions which use cross-entropy as the base and the overlap
measure functions as a weighted regularizer show more stability during training.
5 Optimization Function based Improvements Applied to Medical Images
The standard CE loss function and its weighted versions, as discussed in Section 4, have been
applied to numerous medical image segmentation problems (Isensee et al., 2019; Li et al.,
2019b; Lian et al., 2018; Ni et al., 2019; Nie et al., 2018; Oktay et al., 2018; Schlemper et al.,
2019). However, Milletari et al. (2016) found that optimizing CNNs for DL (Eqn. 10) in
some cases, e.g., in the case of having very small foreground objects in a large background,
works better than the original cross-entropy.
Li et al. (2019c) proposed adding the following regularization term to the cross entropy
loss function to encourage smooth segmentation outputs.