Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 5
Fig. 3: Fully convolutional networks can efficiently learn to make dense predictions for per-
pixel tasks like semantic segmentation (Long et al., 2015).
Pool3Pool4Pool532x up-sampled prediction (FCN-32s)16x up-sampled prediction (FCN-32s)8x up-sampled prediction (FCN-32s)2x up-sampled prediction2x up-sampled prediction
Fig. 4: Upsampling and fusion step of the fully convolution networks (Long et al., 2015).
2.2 Encoder-decoder Semantic Image Segmentation Networks
Next, encoder-decoder segmentation networks (Noh et al., 2015) such as SegNet, were in-
troduced (Badrinarayanan et al., 2015). The role of the decoder network is to map the low-
resolution encoder feature to full input resolution feature maps for pixel-wise classification.
The novelty of SegNet lies in the manner in which the decoder upsamples the lower resolu-
tion input feature maps. Specifically, the decoder uses pooling indices (Figure 5) computed
in the max-pooling step of the corresponding encoder to perform non-linear upsampling.
The architecture (Figure 5) consists of a sequence of non-linear processing layers (encoder)
and a corresponding set of decoder layers followed by a pixel-wise classifier. Typically, each
encoder consists of one or more convolutional layers with batch normalization and a ReLU
non-linearity, followed by non-overlapping max-pooling and sub-sampling. The sparse en-
coding due to the pooling process is upsampled in the decoder using the max-pooling indices
in the encoding sequence.
Ronneberger et al. (2015) proposed an architecture (U-Net; Figure 6) consisting of a
contracting path to capture context and a symmetric expanding path that enables precise lo-
calization. Similar to the image recognition (He et al., 2016) and keypoint detection (Honari
et al., 2016), Ronneberger et al. (2015) added skip connections to the encoder-decoder image
segmentation networks, e.g., SegNet, which improved the model’s accuracy and addressed
the problem of vanishing gradients.
Milletari et al. (2016) proposed a similar architecture (V-Net; Figure 7) which added
residual connections and replaced 2D operations with their 3D counterparts in order to pro-
cess volumetric images. Milletari et al. also proposed optimizing for a widely used segmen-
tation metric, i.e., Dice, which will be discussed in more detail in the section 4.
J´egou et al. (2017) developed a segmentation version of the densely connected networks
architecture (DenseNet (Huang et al. (2017)) by adapting the U-Net like encoder-decoder
skeleton. In Figure 8, the detailed architecture of the network is visualized.