20 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
6.2 Image Synthesis based Methods Applied to Medical Image Segmentation
Chartsias et al. (2017) used a conditional GAN to generate cardiac MR images from CT
images. They showed that utilizing the synthetic data increased the segmentation accuracy
and that using only the synthetic data led to only a marginal decrease in the segmentation
accuracy. Similarly, Zhang et al. (2018c) proposed a GAN based volume-to-volume trans-
lation for generating MR volumes from corresponding CT volumes and vice versa. They
showed that synthetic data improve segmentation performance on cardiovascular MRI vol-
umes. Huo et al. (2018) proposed an end-to-end synthesis and segmentation network called
EssNet to simultaneously synthesize CT images from unpaired MR images and to segment
CT splenomegaly on unlabeled CT images and showed that their approach yielded better
segmentation performance than even segmentation obtained using models trained using the
manual CT labels. Abhishek and Hamarneh (2019) trained a conditional GAN to generate
skin lesion images from and confined to binary masks, and showed that using the synthe-
sized images led to a higher skin lesion segmentation accuracy. Zhang et al. (2018b) trained
a GAN for translating between digitally reconstructed radiographs and X-ray images and
achieved similar accuracy as supervised training in multi-organ segmentation. Shin et al.
(2018) proposed a method to generate synthetic abnormal MRI images with brain tumors
by training a GAN using two publicly available data sets of brain MRI. Similarly, other
works (Han et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2018a) have leveraged GANs to syn-
thesize brain MR images.
7 Weakly Supervised Methods
Collecting large-scale accurate pixel-level annotation is time-consuming and financially ex-
pensive. However, unlabeled and weakly-labeled images can be collected in large amounts
in a relatively fast and cheap manner. As shown in Figure 2, varying levels of supervision
are possible when training deep segmentation models, from pixel-wise annotations (super-
vised learning) and image-level and bounding box annotations (semi-supervised learning)
to no annotations at all (unsupervised learning), the last two of which comprise weak su-
pervision. Therefore, a promising direction for semantic image segmentation is to develop
weakly supervised segmentation models.
7.1 Weakly Supervised Methods Applied to Natural Images
Kim and Hwang (2016) proposed a weakly supervised semantic segmentation network using
unpooling and deconvolution operations, and used feature maps from the deconvolutions
layers to learn scale-invariant features, and evaluated their model on the PASCAL VOC
and chest X-ray image datasets. Lee et al. (2019) used dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014)
to choose features at random during training and inference and combine the many different
localization maps to generate a single localization map, effectively discovering relationships
between locations in an image, and evaluated their proposed approach on the PASCAL VOC
dataset.