2 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
“the partition of an image into a set of nonoverlapping regions whose union is the entire
image” (Haralick and Shapiro, 1992). A plethora of deep learning approaches for medical
image segmentation have been introduced in the literature for different medical imaging
modalities, including X-ray, visible-light imaging (e.g. colour dermoscopic images), mag-
netic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission tomography (PET), computerized tomog-
raphy (CT), and ultrasound (e.g. echocardiographic scans). Deep architectural improvement
has been a focus of many researchers for different purposes, e.g., tackling gradient vanishing
and exploding of deep models, model compression for efficient small yet accurate models,
while other works have tried to improve the performance of deep networks by introducing
new optimization functions.
Guo et al. (2018) provided a review of deep learning based semantic segmentation of
images, and divided the literature into three categories: region-based, fully convolutional
network (FCN)-based, and weakly supervised segmentation methods. Hu et al. (2018b)
summarized the most commonly used RGB-D datasets for semantic segmentation as well
as traditional machine learning based methods and deep learning-based network architec-
tures for RGB-D segmentation. Lateef and Ruichek (2019) presented an extensive survey of
deep learning architectures, datasets, and evaluation methods for the semantic segmentation
of natural images using deep neural networks. Similarly, for medical imaging, Goceri and
Goceri (2017) presented an high-level overview of deep learning-based medical image anal-
ysis techniques and application areas. Hesamian et al. (2019) presented an overview of the
state-of-the-art methods in medical image segmentation using deep learning by covering the
literature related to network structures and model training techniques. Karimi et al. (2019)
reviewed the literature on techniques to handle label noise in deep learning based medi-
cal image analysis and evaluated existing approaches on three medical imaging datasets for
segmentation and classification tasks. Zhou et al. (2019b) presented a review of techniques
proposed for fusion of medical images from multiple modalities for medical image segmen-
tation. Goceri (2019a) discussed the fully supervised, weakly supervised and transfer learn-
ing techniques for training deep neural networks for segmentation of medical images, and
also discussed the existing methods for addressing the problems of lack of data and class im-
balance. Zhang et al. (2019) presented a review of the approaches to address the problem of
small sample sizes in medical image analysis, and divided the literature into five categories
including explanation, weakly supervised, transfer learning, and active learning techniques.
Tajbakhsh et al. (2020) presented a review of the literature for addressing the challenges of
scarce annotations as well as weak annotations (e.g., noisy annotations, image-level labels,
sparse annotations, etc.) in medical image segmentation. Similarly, there are several surveys
covering the literature on the task of object detection (Wang et al., 2019c; Zou et al., 2019;
Borji et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019b; Zhao et al., 2019), which can also be used to obtain what
can be termed as rough localizations of the object(s) of interest. In contrast to the existing
surveys, we make the following contributions in this review:
–We provide comprehensive coverage of research contributions in the field of semantic
segmentation of natural and medical images. In terms of medical imaging modalities,
we cover the literature pertaining to both 2D (RGB and grayscale) as well as volumetric
medical images.
–We group the semantic image segmentation literature into six different categories based
on the nature of their contributions: architectural improvements, optimization function
based improvements, data synthesis based improvements, weakly supervised models,
sequenced models, and multi-task models. Figure 1 indicates the categories we cover
in this review, along with a timeline of the most influential papers in the respective