10 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
nal. Wang et al. (2017a) added an attention module to the deep residual network (ResNet) for
image classification. Their proposed attention module consists of several encoding-decoding
layers. Hu et al. (2018a) proposed a selection mechanism where feature maps are first ag-
gregated using global average pooling and reduced to a single channel descriptor. Then an
activation gate is used to highlight the most discriminative features. Wang et al. (2018b)
proposed non-local operation blocks for encoding long range spatio-temporal dependencies
with deep neural networks that can be plugged into existing architectures. Fu et al. (2019a)
proposed dual attention networks that apply both spatial and channel-based attention opera-
tions.
Li et al. (2018) proposed a pyramid attention based network, for semantic segmentation.
They combined an attention mechanism and a spatial pyramid to extract precise dense fea-
tures for pixel labeling instead of complicated dilated convolution and artificially designed
decoder networks. Chen et al. (2016) applied attention to DeepLab (Chen et al., 2017a)
which takes multi-scale inputs.
2.5 Adversarial Semantic Image Segmentation
Goodfellow et al. (2014) proposed an adversarial approach to learn deep generative models.
Their generative adversarial networks (GANs) take samples zfrom a fixed (e.g., standard
Gaussian) distribution pz(z), and transform them using a deterministic differentiable deep
network p(.)to approximate the distribution of training samples x. Inspired by adversarial
learning, Luc et al. (2016) trained a convolutional semantic segmentation network along
with an adversarial network that discriminates segmentation maps coming either from the
ground truth or from the segmentation network. Their loss function is defined as
ℓ(θs,θa) =NX
n=1ℓmce(s(xn),yn)
−λ[ℓbce(a(xn,yn),1) +ℓbce(a(xn, s(xn)),0)],(1)
where θsandθadenote the parameters of the segmentation and adversarial model, respec-
tively. lbceandlmce are binary and multi-class cross-entropy losses, respectively. In this
setup, the segmentor tries to produce segmentation maps that are close to the ground truth,
i.e., which look more realistic.
The main models being used for image segmentation mostly follow encoder-decoder
architectures as U-Net. Recent approaches have shown that dilated convolutions and feature
pyramid pooling can improve the U-Net style networks. In Section 3, we summarize how
these methods and their modified counterparts have been applied to medical images.
3 Architectural Improvements Applied to Medical Images
In this section, we review the different architectural based improvements for deep learning-
based 2D and volumetric medical image segmentation.