which is diﬀerent from zero as long as ab/ne}ationslash= 0. In this example, all the potential outcome functions
Y∗
i(·) are ﬂat as a function of x, so all unit-level causal eﬀects of the type Y∗
i(u)−Y∗
i(u′) are
zero, and yet the causal least squares estimand can be positive or negative depending on the
values ofaandb. /square
Table 3: An Artiﬁcial Example
UnitY∗
i(u)ZiE[Ui] var(Ui)
1a−1b 1
2 0 0 −2b 1
3 2a 1b 1
3.4 The Asymptotic Distribution of The Least Squares Estima tor
In this section we present the main result of the article, describing t he properties of the least
squares estimator viewed as an estimator of the causal estimands and, separately, viewed as an
estimator of the descriptive estimand. In contrast to Section 2, w e do not have exact results,
relying instead on asymptotic results based on sequences of popula tions.
First, we deﬁne the population residuals, denoted by εn,i, relative to the population causal
estimands,
εn,i=Yn,i−X′
n,iθcausal
n−Z′
n,iγcausal
n. (3.7)
Comment 8. The deﬁnition of the residuals, εn,1,...,ε n,n, mirrors that in conventional regres-
sion analysis, but their properties are conceptually diﬀerent. For in stance, the residuals need
not be stochastic. If they are stochastic, they are so because o f their dependence on Xn./square
Comment 9. We deﬁne the residuals here with respect to the population causal p arameters
θcausal
n andγcausal
n. Because we focus here on asymptotic results, the diﬀerence bet ween the causal
and descriptive parameters vanishes, and so deﬁning the residuals in terms of the descriptive
parameters would lead to the same results. /square
Under the assumption that the Xn,iare jointly independent (but not necessarily identically
distributed), the nproductsXn,iεn,iare also jointly independent but not identically distributed.
Most importantly, in general the expectations E[Xn,iεn,i] may vary across i, and need not all
be zero. However, as shown in Section 3.2, the averages of these expectations over the entire
17