Assumption 7 looks very diﬀerent from conventional exogeneity or unconfoundedness con-
ditions, where the residuals are assumed to be (mean-) independen t of the regressors, and so
it merits some discussion. First, note that if the treatment Un,iis randomly assigned E[Un,i]
is constant and Assumption 7( i) and (ii) are automatically satisﬁed as long as Zn,iincludes an
intercept.
Formally, Assumption 7 relaxes the completely randomized assignmen t setting by allowing
the distribution of Un,ito depend on the attributes. However, this dependence is restric ted in
that the mean of Un,iis linear in Zn,i. For example, Assumption 7 holds automatically when
Un,1,...,U n,nare identically distributed and Zn,icontains a saturated set of indicators for all
possible values of the attributes.
In the special case where the treatment is binary and E[Un,i] is the propensity score, the
assumption amounts to combination of an unconfoundedness assu mption that the treatment
assignment does not depend on the potential outcomes and a linear model for the propensity
score.
Later in this section, we will show that under a set of conditions that includes Assumption
7, the two estimands θcausal
n andθcausal,samplecan be interpreted as weighted averages of unit-level
causal eﬀects. The connection between linearity in the propensity score (Rosenbaum and Rubin
(1983)), in our analysis represented by E[Un,i] =BnZn,i, and the interpretation of population
regression coeﬃcients as weighted averages of heterogeneous c ausal eﬀects has been previously
noticed in related contexts (see Angrist, 1998; Angrist and Pischk e, 2008; Aronow and Samii,
2016; S/suppress loczy´ nski, 2017).
Assumption 8. (Linearity of Potential Outcomes) For allu,
Y∗
n,i(u) =u′θn,i+ξn,i, (3.6)
whereθn,iandξn,iare non-stochastic.
In this formulation, any dependence of the potential outcomes Y∗
n,i(u) on observed or unob-
served attributes is subsumed by θn,iandξn,i, which are non-stochastic. Each element of the
vectorθn,irepresents the causal eﬀect of increasing the corresponding va lue ofUn,iby one unit.
The linearity in Assumption 8 is a strong restriction in many settings. H owever, in some
leading cases – in particular, when the causal variable is binary or, mo re generally when the
causal variable takes on only a ﬁnite number of values – one can ensu re that this assumption
15