arXiv:1706.01778v2  [math.ST]  21 Jun 2019Sampling-based vs.Design-based Uncertainty in
Regression Analysis∗
Alberto Abadie†Susan Athey‡Guido W. Imbens§
Jeﬀrey M. Wooldridge¶
Current version June 2019 – First version September 2013
Abstract
Consider a researcher estimating the parameters of a regres sion function based on data for
all 50 states in the United States or on data for all visits to a website. What is the inter-
pretation of the estimated parameters and the standard erro rs? In practice, researchers
typically assume that the sample is randomly drawn from a lar ge population of interest and
report standard errors that are designed to capture samplin g variation. This is common
even in applications where it is diﬃcult to articulate what t hat population of interest is,
and how it diﬀers from the sample. In this article, we explore a n alternative approach to
inference, which is partly design-based. In a design-based setting, the values of some of
the regressors can be manipulated, perhaps through a policy intervention. Design-based
uncertainty emanates from lack of knowledge about the value s that the regression outcome
would have taken under alternative interventions. We deriv e standard errors that account
for design-based uncertainty instead of, or in addition to, sampling-based uncertainty. We
show that our standard errors in general are smaller than the usual inﬁnite-population
sampling-based standard errors and provide conditions und er which they coincide.
∗We are grateful for comments by Daron Acemoglu, Joshua Angri st, Matias Cattaneo, Alex Lenk,
Jonas Metzger, Evan Munro, Michael Pollmann, Jim Poterba, K arthik Rajkumar, Tymon S/suppress loczy´ nski,
Bas Werker, and seminar participants at Microsoft Research , Michigan, Brown University, MIT, Stan-
ford, Princeton, NYU, Columbia, Tilburg University, the Ti nbergen Institute, American University,
Montreal, Michigan State, Maryland, Pompeu Fabra, Carlos I II, and University College London, three
referees, and especially for discussions with Gary Chamber lain. An earlier version of this paper circu-
lated under the title “Finite Population Causal Standard Er rors” (Abadie et al. (2014)).
†Professor of Economics, Massachusetts Institute of Techno logy, and NBER, abadie@mit.edu.
‡Professor of Economics, Graduate School of Business, Stanf ord University, and NBER,
athey@stanford.edu.
§Professor of Economics, Graduate School of Business, and De partment of Economics, Stanford
University, and NBER, imbens@stanford.edu.
¶University Distinguished Professor, Department of Econom ics, Michigan State University,
wooldri1@msu.edu