1 Introduction
In the dominant approach to inference in the social sciences uncer tainty about population pa-
rameters is induced by random sampling from the population. Moreov er, it is typically assumed
that the sample comprises only a small fraction of the population of in terest. This perspective
is a natural and attractive one in many instances. For example, if on e analyzes individual-level
data from the U.S. Current Population Survey, the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, or the
one percent public-use sample from the U.S. Census, it is natural to regard the sample as a
small random subset of the population of interest. In many other s ettings, however, this sam-
pling perspective is less appropriate. For example, Manski and Pepp er (2018) write “Random
sampling assumptions, however, are not natural when considering states or counties as units
of observation.” In this article, we provide an alternative framewor k for the interpretation of
uncertainty in regression analysis regardless of whether a substa ntial fraction of the population
or even the entire population is included in the sample. While our framew ork accommodates
sampling-based uncertainty, it also takes into account design-bas ed uncertainty, which arises
when the parameter of interest is deﬁned in terms of the unobserv ed outcomes that some units
would attain under a certain intervention. Design-based uncertain ty is often explicitly accounted
for in the analysis of randomized experiments where it is the basis of r andomization inference
(Neyman, 1990; Rosenbaum, 2002; Imbens and Rubin, 2015), but it is rarely explicitly acknowl-
edged in regression analyses or, more generally, in observational s tudies (exceptions include
Samii and Aronow, 2012; Freedman, 2008; Lu, 2016; Lin, 2013).
To illustrate the diﬀerences between sampling-based inference and design-based inference,
consider two simple examples. In the example of Table 1, there is a ﬁnit e population consisting of
nunits with each unit characterized by a pair of variables, YiandZi. Consider an estimand that
is function of the full set of pairs {(Yi,Zi)}n
i=1. Uncertainty about such an estimand arises when
we observe the values ( Yi,Zi) only for a sample, that is, for a subset of the population. In Table
1, inclusion of unit iin a sample is coded by the binary variable Ri∈ {0,1}. An estimator is a
function of the observed data, {(Ri,RiYi,RiZi)}n
i=1. Sampling-based inference uses information
about the process that determines the sampling indicators R1,...,R nto assess the variability
of estimators across diﬀerent samples. The second and third sets of columns in Table 1 depicts
such alternative samples. Table 2 depicts a diﬀerent scenario in which we observe for each unit
in the population the value of one of two potential outcome variables , eitherY∗
i(1) orY∗
i(0),
1