uncertainty stems solely from not observing all units in the populatio n of interest, and causal
estimands, where the uncertainty stems, at least partially, from u nobservability of some of the
potential outcomes.
The main formal contribution of this article is to generalize the result s for the approximate
variance for multiple linear regression estimators associated with th e work by Eicker (1967),
Huber (1967), and White (1980a,b, 1982), EHW from hereon, in two ways. First, our frame-
work allows for sampling from a ﬁnite population, whereas the EHW res ults assume random
sampling from an inﬁnite population. Second, our framework explicitly takes into account
design-based uncertainty. Incorporating these generalizations requires developing a new frame-
work for regression analysis, nesting as special cases the Neyman (1990) analysis of randomized
experiments with binary treatments, as well as the generalizations to randomized experiments
with additional regressors in Samii and Aronow (2012), Freedman ( 2008), and Lin (2013). We
show that in large samples the widely used EHW robust standard erro rs are conservative, and
only correct in special cases. Moreover, we show that the presen ce of attributes – that is, char-
acteristics of the units ﬁxed in our repeated sampling thought expe riments – can be exploited
to improve on the EHW variance estimator, and we propose variance estimators that do so.
Another advantage of the formal separation into sampling-based and design-based uncertainty
is that it allows us to clarify the distinction between the assumptions n eeded for internal and ex-
ternal validity (Shadish et al., 2002; Manski, 2013; Deaton, 2010) in terms of these two sources
of uncertainty.
Our results are relevant in empirical settings where researchers h ave a random sample from a
ﬁnite population and the ratio of the sample size to the population size is suﬃciently large so that
the proposed ﬁnite-population correction matters. Examples of s uch settings include large-scale
experiments (see Muralidharan and Niehaus, 2017), settings wher e the cost of data acquisition
motivates the use of random samples (see, e.g., Keels et al., 2005), a s well as analyses based
on public-use census samples, like the 2010 Integrated Public Use Mic rodata Series (IPUMS)
data (which is a 10 percent sample of the U.S. Census). More importa ntly in our view, our
results are relevant in empirical settings where it is not natural to t hink of the data as a random
sample from a well-deﬁned population. Instead the researcher may have the entire population,
e.g., states or counties as in the Manski and Pepper (2018) quote, or the set of all visits to
a website, or the researcher may have a convenience sample. In th at case our design-based
approach to uncertainty provides a coherent interpretation for sampling-based standard errors.
3