be intepreted as implicitly taking into account design-uncertainty by focusing on the inﬁnite
population case.
We could also estimate the variance using resampling methods, which w ould give us variance
estimates close to /hatwideVehw. To be precise, suppose we use the bootstrap where we draw N1bootstrap
observations from the N1treated units and N0bootstrap units from the N0control units. In
that case the bootstrap variance would in expectation (over the b ootstrap replications) be equal
to/hatwideVehw.
Comment 6. Can We Improve on the EHW variance Estimator?
The diﬀerence between E[/tildewideVehw|N1,N0](or the Neyman variance) and the total variance is equal
toS2
θ/n. The term S2
θis diﬃcult to estimate because it depends on the unobserved diﬀeren ces
Y∗
i(1)−Y∗
i(0). As a result, S2
θ/nis typically ignored in analyses of randomized experiments
(see Imbens and Rubin, 2015). In particular, the EHW variance est imator implicitly sets the
estimator of S2
θto be equal to zero, resulting in conservative inference. For the c ase of a
randomized experiment with a binary treatment Aronow et al. (2014 ) provide a lower bound for
S2
θbased on the Fr´ echet-Hoeﬀfding inequality. In Section 3, we prop ose an improved variance
estimator that exploits the presence of ﬁxed attributes. /square
The appendix contains a Bayesian version of the analysis ofthe exam ple from this section.
Similar to the results in this section we show that, when the estimand o f interest is deﬁned
for a ﬁnite population, the posterior variance depends not only on t he sample sizes for treated
and non-treated but also on the respective population sizes. Also s imilar to the analysis of this
section, the posterior variance formula depends on whether the e stimand is descriptive or causal.
3 The General Case
This section contains the main formal results in the article. We focus on a regression setting
where we estimate a linear regression function for a scalar outcome and a number of regressors.
The setting we consider here allows for the presence of two types o f regressors. First, regressors
that are causal, in the sense that they generate potential outco mes. Second, regressors that are
attributes, in the sense that they are kept ﬁxed for each unit in th e thought experiment that
provides the basis for inference. Which regressors are viewed as c ausal and which are viewed
as attributes depends on the interpretation we wish to give to the r egression estimates. If we
9