wish to give a coeﬃcient a causal interpretation, the correspondin g regressor must be a cause.
If a regressor is an attribute, the corresponding coeﬃcient is simp ly estimating a population
diﬀerence between subpopulations of units. For example, if we regr ess earnings on years of
education, years of education may be the causal variable of intere st. On the other hand, if
we regress earnings on an indicator for participation in a job search program, age, and years
of education, then the indicator for the program participation may be viewed as the causal
variable of interest and age and years of education may be viewed as attributes. Because the
repeated sampling thought experiment treats causes diﬀerent fr om attributes, the variance of
the regression estimator will depend on this designation.
3.1 Set Up
Consider a sequence of ﬁnite populations indexed by population size, n. Unitiin population
nis characterized by a set of ﬁxed attributes Zn,i(including an intercept) and by a potential
outcome function, Y∗
n,i(·), which maps causes, Un,i, into outcomes, with the realized outcome
denoted by Yn,i=Y∗
n,i(Un,i).Zn,iandUn,iare real-valued column vectors, and Yn,iis scalar.
We do not place restrictions on the types of the variables: they can be continuous, discrete, or
mixed. The attributes and potential outcome functions remain ﬁxe d in our repeated sampling
thought experiments. The realized outcomes in the sample vary fro m sample to sample because
the units in the sample and the values of the causal variables change .
There is a sequence of samples associated with the sequence of pop ulations. We will use
Rn,i= 1 to indicate that unit iof population nis sampled, and Rn,i= 0 to indicate that it
is not sampled. For each unit in sample n, we observe the triple, ( Yn,i,Un,i,Zn,i). Relative to
Section 2 we now allow for more complicated assignment mechanisms. I n particular, we relax
the assumption that the causes have identical distributions.
Assumption 3. (Assignment Mechanism) The assignments Un,1,...,U n,nare jointly inde-
pendent, and independent of Rn,1,...,R n,n, but not (necessarily) identically distributed (i.n.i.d. ).
This assumption assumes independence of the treatment assignme nts. This is somewhat in
contrast to the example in Section 2, where we ﬁxed the marginal dis tribution of the regressor,
allowing us to obtain exact ﬁnite sample results. We do not need this he re because we are focused
on asymptotic results. We can allow for some dependence in the assig nment mechanism, e.g.,
clustering of the type analyzed in Abadie et al. (2017).
10