to 10000, so that the average sample size is 100. In the fourth des ign, we change the population
size to 1000 and the sampling rate, ρ, to one. In the ﬁfth design, we impose ψ′ψ= 0, which
makes the treatment eﬀect unrelated to the regressors, Zn,i. In the sixth design, we set σ2
θ= 0,
which removes the stochastic part of the treatment eﬀect. In th e last design, ψ′ψ= 0 and
σ2
θ= 0, so the treatment eﬀect is constant. The ﬁrst panel of Table 4 provides the parameters
of each of the seven simulation designs.
The second panel of Table 4 reports the standard deviations of ( /hatwideθn−θdescr
n), (/hatwideθn−θcausal,sample
n )
and (/hatwideθn−θcausal
n) across simulation iterations. The remaining panels report feasible s tandard
errors based on the estimators of Section 4 as well as bootstrap s tandard errors, along with
coverage rates of the corresponding 95 percent conﬁdence inte rvals. We employ 50000 iterations
for the simulations and 1000 bootstrap samples. The coverage rat es in each of the panels of the
table are based on the adding and subtracting 1.96 times the standa rd errors in the ﬁrst row of
that panel.
For the basic design in the ﬁrst column of Table 4, ρ= 0.01 is very small, and EHW and
bootstrap standard errors provide accurate estimates of the s tandard deviations of ( /hatwideθn−θdescr
n)
and (/hatwideθn−θcausal
n). However, the standard deviation of ( /hatwideθn−θcausal,sample
n ) is substantially smaller
than that of ( /hatwideθn−θdescr
n) and (/hatwideθn−θcausal
n), and the EHW and bootstrap variance estimators
are very conservative for the sample average causal eﬀect, θcausal,sample
n . The variance estimator
based on/hatwideVcausal,sample
n is substantially smaller, and still has more than correct coverage fo r
θcausal,sample. Increasing the number of regressors in the second design leaves the result virtually
unaﬀected. The same patterns of results appear in the third colum n, albeit with less precise
variance estimators due to much smaller sample sizes. In the fourth design,ρ= 1 and, as
predicted by the results in section 4, EHW standard errors greatly overestimate the variability
of (/hatwideθn−θdescr
n). The same is true for bootstrap standard errors. In the ﬁfth, design we go back to
the small sampling rate, ρ= 0.01 and this time ψ′ψ= 0, so regressors do not explain variation in
treatment eﬀects, and ∆Z= ∆ehw. As suggested by the results in sections 3 and 4, all variance
estimators produce similar results in this design. In the sixth design, where regressors explain
all the variation in treatment eﬀects, ∆Z= ∆condand standard errors based on /hatwideVcausal,sample
n
and/hatwideVcausal
n closely approximate the standard deviations of ( /hatwideθn−θcausal,sample
n ) and (/hatwideθn−θcausal
n),
respectively. In the ﬁnal design with a constant treatment eﬀect , all the variances are similar.
25