It also provides methods that exploit the presence of attributes t o calculate improved (i.e., less
conservative) standard errors.
2 A Simple Example
In this section we set the stage for the problems discussed in the cu rrent article by discussing
least squares estimation in a simple example with a single binary regress or. We make four
points. First, we show how design-based uncertainty aﬀects the v ariance of regression estimators.
Second, we show that the standard Eicker-Huber-White (EHW) va riance estimator remains
conservative when we take into account design-based uncertaint y. Third, we show that there is a
simple ﬁnite-population correction to the EHW variance estimator fo r descriptive estimands but
not for causal estimands. Fourth, we discuss the relation betwee n the two sources of uncertainty
and the notions of internal and external validity. Proofs of the re sults in this section are in a
supplementary appendix.
We focus on a setting with a ﬁnite population of size n. We sample Nunits from this
population, with Ri∈ {0,1}indicating whether a unit was sampled ( Ri= 1) or not ( Ri= 0),
so thatN=/summationtextn
i=1Ri. There is a single binary regressor, Xi∈ {0,1}, andnx(resp.Nx) is the
number of units in the population (resp. the sample) with Xi=x. Units could be U.S. states
and the binary regressor Xicould be an indicator for a state regulation, say the state having a
right-to-carry law (RTC), as in Manski and Pepper (2018) and Don ohue et al. (2017). We view
the regressor Xinot as a ﬁxed attribute or characteristic of each unit, but as a cau se or policy
variable whose value could have been diﬀerent from the observed va lue. This generates missing
data of the type shown in Table 2, where only some of the states of t he world are observed,
implying that there is design-based uncertainty. Formally, using the Rubin causal model or
potential outcome framework (Neyman, 1990; Rubin, 1974; Hollan d, 1986; Imbens and Rubin,
2015), we postulate the existence of two potential outcomes for each unit, denoted by Y∗
i(1)
andY∗
i(0). For the RTC example, Y∗
i(1) andY∗
i(0) could be state-level crime rates with and
without RTC. The realized outcome is
Yi=Y∗
i(Xi) =/braceleftbigg
Y∗
i(1) ifXi= 1,
Y∗
i(0) ifXi= 0,
which is the observed state-level crime rate in the RTC example.
In our setting, potential outcomes are viewed as non-stochastic attributes for unit i, irre-
4