Comment 11. (The Case with ρ= 0)The standard setting where we have a random sample
from a large population, is covered by the result in Theorem 3, part ( i) or part (iii) with ρ= 0.
For example, when we analyze data from the CPS or PSID, this seems a reasonable perspective.
Even if the sampling from the US population is not completely random, it is approximately so,
and the sample is certainly small relative to the population. In that ca se we do not need to
worry about whether we are interested in a causal estimand becau se the standard methods are
valid. /square
Comment 12. (The Case with ρ= 1)The case where we observe all units in the population
of interest, covered by the result in Theorem 3, part (i) with ρ= 1, or part (ii)) is also common.
For example, we may have all the states in the US, or all the countrie s in the world, or all the
individuals in the population of interest. In that case taking account of the causal nature of
the estimand is important, because a descriptive perspective would suggest the standard errors
should be zero. This covers the case discussed in Manski and Peppe r (2018). /square
Comment 13. (A Convenience Sample) The setting where we have a convenience sample,
where the relationship between the sample and the population is murk y, is more complicated.
For example, we may have all internet searches during a particular d ay, or all shopping trips to
a single supermarket for a given week. This is in our view an important a nd common setting.
In such settings researchers often analyze the data, and repor t standard errors based on the
sampling perspective, as if the sample is a random sample from a large p opulation. Typically
they do so implicitly, by simply using standard methods without explicitly describing a sampling
process. It seems a stretch to view the sample of shopping trips to a particular supermarket on
a particular day as a random sample from the population of interest. At best it is a systematic
sample from the population of interest, e.g., all individuals going to tha t particular supermarket,
rather than a random sample from the population of individuals. Howe ver, there is no way to
quantify the uncertainty arising from that sampling scheme without data from other periods
or other supermarkets. In that case we recommend to analyze th e uncertainty relative to the
causal sample estimand, and to be clear about what that estimand is in order to provide a
conceptually precise measure of uncertainty. /square
Comment 14. (The case with ρ∈(0,1))While there are clearly many cases in practice
where we do observe the entire population of interest, there are a lso settings where the following
three things hold, at least approximately: ( a) the population of interest is ﬁnite, ( b) the sample
19