ﬁne-grained high resolution features for reliable localiza-
tion and classiﬁcation.
To address this challenge, we proposed a novel frame-
work that consists of two level of adaptation modules cou-
pled with a feature pairing mechanism and a strong regu-
larization for stable adaptation. The pairing process pairs
feature samples into two groups to effectively augment lim-
ited target domain data, pairs in ﬁrst group consist of one
sample from target domain and one from the source do-
main, and pairs in the second group are both from the source
domain. Similar approach has been used in [31] for aug-
menting image samples, while we augment local feature
patches and object features in the two adaptation module
respectively. With the introduced pairing mechanism, the
image-level module uniformly extracts and aligns paired
multi-grained patch features to address the global domain-
shift like illumination; the instance-level module semanti-
cally matches paired object features while avoids confu-
sion between classes as well as reduced discrimination abil-
ity. Both of these two modules are trained with a domain-
adversarial learning method. We further propose a strong
regularization method, termed source model feature reg-
ularization (SMFR), to stabilize training and avoid over-
adaptation by imposing consistency between source and
adapted models on feature response of foreground anchor
locations. The bi-level adaptation modules combined with
SMFR can robustly adapt source trained detection model to
new target domain with only few target sample data. The re-
sulted framework, termed few shot adaptive Faster R-CNN
(FAFRCNN), offers a number of advantages:
•Fast adaptation. For a source trained model, our
framework empirically only needs hundreds step of
adaptation updates to reach desirable performance un-
der all established scenarios. In contrast previous
methods under UDA setting [43, 5] requires tens of
thousands of steps to train.
•Less data collection cost. With only few represen-
tative data sample, the FAFRCNN model can greatly
boost source detector on target domain, drastically mit-
igating data collection cost. Under the devised loosely
annotation process, the amount of human annotating
time is reduced signiﬁcantly.
•Training stability. Fine-tuning with limited target
data sample can lead to severe over-ﬁtting. Also, do-
main adaptation approaches relying on adversarial ob-
jective might be unstable and sensitive to initialization
of model parameters. This issue greatly limits their ap-
plicability. The proposed SMFR approach enables the
model to avoid over-ﬁtting and beneﬁt from the few
target data samples. For the two adversarial adapta-
tion modules, although imposing SMFR could not sig-
niﬁcantly boost their performance, the variance overdifferent runs is drastically reduced. Thus SMFR pro-
vides much more stable and reliable model adaptation.
To demonstrate the efﬁcacy of the proposed FAFR-
CNN for cross-domain object detection, we conduct the
few-shot adaptation experiments under various scenarios
constructed with multiple datasets including Cityscapes,
SIM10K, Udacity self-driving and Foggy Cityscapes. Our
model signiﬁcantly surpasses compared methods and out-
performs state-of-art method using full target domain data.
When applied to UDA setting, our method generates new
state-of-art result for various scenarios.
2. Related Work
Object Detection Recent years have witnessed remark-
able progress on object detection with deep CNNs and
various large-scale datasets. Previous detection architec-
tures are grouped into two- or multi-stage models like
R-CNN [15], Fast R-CNN [14], Faster R-CNN [37] and
Cascaded R-CNN [3], as well as single-stage models like
YOLO [35], YOLOv2 [36], SSD [28] and Retinanet [27].
However, all of them require a large amount of training data
with careful annotations, thus are not directly applicable to
object detection in unseen domains.
Cross-domain Object Detection Recent works on do-
main adaptation with CNNs mainly address the simple task
of classiﬁcation [29, 11, 13, 2, 26, 18, 30], and only a few
consider object detection. [45] proposed a framework to
mitigate the domain shift problem of deformable part-based
model (DPM). [34] developed subspace alignment based
domain adaptation for the R-CNN model. A recent work
[20] used a two-stage iterative domain transfer and pseudo-
labeling approach to tackle cross-domain weakly super-
vised object detection. [5] designed three modules for un-
supervised domain adaptation of the object detector. In this
work, we aim at adapting object detectors with a few target
image samples and build a framework for robust adaptation
of state-of-the-art Faster R-CNN models under this setting.
Few-shot Learning Few-shot learning [9] was proposed
to learn a new category with only a few examples, just
as humans do. Many works are based on Bayesian infer-
ence [25, 24], and some leverage memory machines [17,
41]. Later, [19] proposed to transfer the base class feature
to a new class; a recent work [10] proposed a meta learn-
ing based approach which achieves state-of-the-art. Incor-
porating few-shot learning into object detection was pre-
viously explored. [8] proposed to learn an object detector
with a large pool of unlabeled images and only a few anno-
tated images per category, termed few-shot object detection
(FSOD); [4] tackled the setting of few-shot object detection
with a low-shot transfer detector (LSTD) coupled with de-
signed regularization. Our FDA setting differs in that target
7174