Regression Head
Classification Head
RPN
ROI_PoolingROI_Pooling
Source & Target Data
Source DataSMFR
Instance Roi 
SamplingSP_Pooling
Object-level 
domain 
classifierPairing,
SamplingSource carsTarget cars Target persons
Source personsSharing ParametersPairing,
SamplingImage-level 
domain 
classifier
Figure 2. Framework of the proposed few shot adversarial adaptive Faster R-CNN model(FAFRCNN). We address the domain shift with
image level and instance level adaptation modules, the former with different grid size adapts multi-grained feature patches and latter seman-
tically aligns independent object appearance, the modules augmented with the proposed pairing mechanism result in effective alignment
of feature representation in such few shot scenario(refer to Section 3 for details), we further developed source model feature regulariza-
tion(SMFR) which dramatically stabilizes the adaptation process.
discriminator’s objective is to minimize:
Limd=Lspsd+Lspmd+Lspld,
and the feature generator’s objective is to maximize Limd.
3.3. Instance­level Adaptation
To mitigate object instance level domain shift, we pro-
pose the instance-level adaptation module which semanti-
cally aligns paired object features .
Speciﬁcally, we extend the Faster R-CNN ROI sampling
to instance ROI sampling. The Faster R-CNN ROI sam-
pling scheme samples ROIs to create training data for clas-
siﬁcation and regression heads. It by default separates fore-
ground and background ROIs with an IOU threshold of
0.5 and samples them at a speciﬁc ratio ( e.g., 1:3). Dif-
ferently, our proposed instance ROI sampling keeps all the
foreground ROIs with higher IOU threshold ( i.e., 0.7 in our
implementation) to ensure the ROIs are closer to real ob-
ject regions and suitable for alignment. The foreground
ROI features of source and target domain images, accord-
ing to their class, are passed through the intermediate layers
(i.e., the layers after ROI pooling but before classiﬁcation
and regression heads) to get sets of source object features
Oisand target object features Oit. Herei∈[0,C]is the
class label and Cis the total number of classes. Then they
are further paired into two groups the same way as image
level patch features, resulting in Ni1={(nis,nis)}and
Ni2={(nis,nit)}. Herenis∼Oisandnit∼Oit. The
multi-way instance-level discriminator Dinshas2×Cout-puts with a following objective to minimize:
Linsd=C/summationdisplay
i=1−Ex∼Ni1[logDins(x)i1]
−Ey∼Ni2[logDins(y)i2].
HereDins(x)i1denotes discriminator output over the i-th
class of ﬁrst group. Correspondingly, the objective of fea-
ture generator is to minimize
Linsg=C/summationdisplay
i=1−Ex∼Ni1[logDins(x)i2]
−Ey∼Ni2[logDins(y)i1],
which aims to confuse the discriminator between two do-
mains while avoid misclassiﬁcation to other classes.
3.4. Source Model Feature Regularization
Training instability is a common issue for adversarial
learning and is more severe for cases of insufﬁcient training
data, which may result in over-adaptation. Fine-tuning with
limited target data would also unavoidably lead to overﬁt-
ting. We resort to a strong regularization to address the in-
stability by forcing the adapted model to produce consistent
feature response on source input with the source model in
the sense of ℓ2difference. The purpose is to avoid over-
updating learned representation towards limited target sam-
ples that degrades the performance. A similar form of ℓ2
penalty on the feature map was used in image to image
translation method [1, 21] to constrain content change.
Formally, Let fsandftbe the feature extractors of the
source model and the adapted model respectively. Then the
7176