Few-shot Adaptive Faster R-CNN
Tao Wang1Xiaopeng Zhang1,2Li Yuan1Jiashi Feng1
1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore
2Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Shanghai, China
twangnh@gmail.com zhangxiaopeng12@huawei.com ylustcnus@gmail.com elefjia@nus.edu.sg
Abstract
To mitigate the detection performance drop caused by
domain shift, we aim to develop a novel few-shot adapta-
tion approach that requires only a few target domain im-
ages with limited bounding box annotations. To this end,
we ﬁrst observe several signiﬁcant challenges. First, the
target domain data is highly insufﬁcient, making most ex-
isting domain adaptation methods ineffective. Second, ob-
ject detection involves simultaneous localization and clas-
siﬁcation, further complicating the model adaptation pro-
cess. Third, the model suffers from over-adaptation (similar
to overﬁtting when training with a few data example) and
instability risk that may lead to degraded detection perfor-
mance in the target domain. To address these challenges,
we ﬁrst introduce a pairing mechanism over source and tar-
get features to alleviate the issue of insufﬁcient target do-
main samples. We then propose a bi-level module to adapt
the source trained detector to the target domain: 1) the split
pooling based image level adaptation module uniformly ex-
tracts and aligns paired local patch features over loca-
tions, with different scale and aspect ratio; 2) the instance
level adaptation module semantically aligns paired object
features while avoids inter-class confusion. Meanwhile, a
source model feature regularization (SMFR) is applied to
stabilize the adaptation process of the two modules. Com-
bining these contributions gives a novel few-shot adaptive
Faster-RCNN framework, termed FAFRCNN, which effec-
tively adapts to target domain with a few labeled samples.
Experiments with multiple datasets show that our model
achieves new state-of-the-art performance under both the
interested few-shot domain adaptation(FDA) and unsuper-
vised domain adaptation(UDA) setting.
1. Introduction
Humans can easily recognize familiar objects from new
domains, while current object detection models suffer sig-
niﬁcant performance drop in unseen environments due to
domain shift. Poor adaptability to new domains severely
limits the applicability and efﬁcacy of these models. Pre-
Image level shift
Instance level shift
Figure 1. Illustration of our main idea. Middle row shows two
images from Cityscapes and Foggy Cityscapes respectively. Top
row shows background patches reﬂecting image level domain shift
and bottom row shows independent objects (cars) reﬂecting object
instance level domain shift.
vious works tackling domain shift issues for deep CNN
models [12, 42, 29, 1] are mainly targeted at the unsuper-
vised domain adaptation (UDA) setting, which requires a
large amount of target domain data and comparatively long
adaptation time. Only a few works consider the supervised
domain adaptation (SDA) [39, 7, 32] setting. However, as
UDA methods, they mainly focus on the simple task of clas-
siﬁcation, and may not apply well to more complex tasks
like object detection that involves localizing and classifying
all individual objects over high resolution inputs.
In this paper, we explore the possibility of adapting an
object detector trained with source domain data to target
domain with only a few loosely annotated target image sam-
ples (not all object instances are annotated). This is based
on our key observation that limited target samples can still
largely reﬂect major domain characteristics, e.g. illumina-
tion, weather condition, individual object appearance, as
shown in Fig. 1. Also, the setting is appealing in practice
as collecting a few representative data from a new domain
needs negligible effort, meanwhile can reduce the inevitable
noise brought by large amount of samples. However, it is
very challenging to learn domain invariant representation
with only a few target data samples, and detectors require
7173