data distribution changed but task remain the same, while
few-shot learning aims at a new tasks.
3. Method
In this section, we elaborate on our proposed few-shot
domain adaptation approach for detection. To tackle the
issue brought by insufﬁcient target domain samples, we in-
troduce a novel feature pairing mechanism built upon fea-
tures sampled by split pooling and instance ROI sampling.
Our proposed approach performs domain adaptation over
the paired features at both image and object-instance levels
through domain-adversarial learning, where the ﬁrst level
alleviates global domain shift and the second level seman-
tically aligns object appearance shift while avoiding con-
fusion between classes. To stabilize the training and avoid
over-adaptation, we ﬁnally introduce the source model fea-
ture regurgitation technique. We apply these three novel
techniques to Faster R-CNN model and obtain the few-shot
adaptive Faster-RCNN (FAFRCNN), which is able to adapt
to novel domains with only a few target domain examples.
3.1. Problem Setup
Suppose we have a large set of source domain training
data(XS,YS)and a very small set of target data (XT,YT),
whereXSandXTare input images, YSdenotes complete
bounding box annotation for XS, andYTdenotes loose an-
notation for XT. With only a few object instances in the
target domain images annotated, our goal is to adapt a de-
tection model trained on source training data to the target
domain with minimal performance drop. We only consider
loose bounding box annotation to reduce annotation effort.
3.2. Image­level Adaptation
Inspired by the superior result of the patch based domain
classiﬁer compared to its full image counterpart in previous
seminal works [21, 46] for image to image translation. We
propose split pooling (SP) to uniformly extract local feature
patches across locations with different aspect ratio and scale
for domain adversarial alignment.
Speciﬁcally, given grid width wand height h, the pro-
posed split pooling ﬁrst generates random offsets sxandsy
forx- andy-axis ranging from 0to the full grid width wand
heighthrespectively ( i.e.,0<sx<w,0<sy<h,sx,sy∈N),
as shown in the top left panel of Fig. 2. A random grid is
formed on the input image with the offset of (sx,sy)start-
ing from the top left corner of the input image. This random
sampling scheme gives a trade-off between static grid that
may generate biased sampling, and exhausting all grid loca-
tions that suffers redundancy and over-sampling.
The grid window width wand height hare set with scales
and ratios as anchor boxes in Faster R-CNN. We empiri-
cally choose 3 scales (large scale 256, medium scale 160,
and small scale 96, corresponding to feature size 16, 10and 6 on relu 53 of VGG16 network) and 3 aspect ratios
(0.5, 1, 2), resulting in 9 pairs of wandh. For each pair,
gird is generated then non-border rectangles in the grid are
pooled into ﬁxed sized features with ROI pooling. Pooling
enables different sized grids to be compatible with a single
domain classiﬁer without changing the patch-wise charac-
teristics of the extracted features. Formally, let fbe the
feature extractor and Xbe the set of input images. We
perform split pooling at three scales, result in the features
spl(f(X)),spm(f(X)), andsps(f(X))respectively. We
separate them according to scales as we want to investigate
the contribution of different scales independently. These lo-
cal patch features can reﬂect image-level domain shifts like
varied illumination, weather change, etc. Since those shifts
spread on the whole image, the phenomenon is more evi-
dent for object detection as input images are usually large.
We then develop image-level adaptation module which
performs multi-scale alignment with paired local fea-
tures . Speciﬁcally, it tackles image-level shift by ﬁrst pair-
ing the extracted local features from split pooling to form
two groups for each of the three scales. e.g., for the small
scale patch, Gs1={(gs,gs)},Gs2={(gs,gt)}, where
gs∼sps(f(XS))andgt∼sps(f(XT)). Here the pairs
within the ﬁrst group Gs1consist of samples from the
source domain only, and pairs within the second group Gs2
consist of one sample from source and another from the tar-
get domain. Such a pairing scheme effectively augments the
limited target domain feature samples.
To adapt the detection model, domain-adversarial learn-
ing objective is imposed to align the constructed two groups
of features. The domain-adversarial learning [11, 42, 43]
employs the principle in generative adversarial learning [16]
to minimize an approximated domain discrepancy distance
through adversarial objective on feature generator and do-
main discriminator. Thus the data distribution is aligned
and source task network can be employed for the target do-
main. Speciﬁcally the domain discriminator tries to classify
the feature to source and target domain while the feature
generator tries to confuse the discriminator. The learning
objective of small scale discriminator Dspsis to minimize
Lspsd=−Ex∼Gs1[logDsps(x)]
−Ex∼Gs2[log(1−Dsps(x))],
such that the discriminator can tell clearly the source-source
feature pairs apart from source-target feature pairs. The ob-
jective of the generator is to transform the features from
both domains such that they are not distinguishable to the
discriminator, by maximizing the above loss.
We can similarly get losses for medium and large scale
discriminator as LspmdandLspld. We use 3 separate dis-
criminators for each scale. In addition, this module operates
requiring no supervision. Thus it can be used for unsuper-
vised domain adaptation (UDA). Together, the image level
7175