source model feature regularization (SMFR) term is
Lreg=Exs∼XS1
wh||fs(xs)−ft(xs)||2
2,
wherewandhare the width and height of the feature map.
However, object detection cares more about local fore-
ground feature regions while background area is usually
unfavorably dominant and noisy. We ﬁnd directly impos-
ing the regularization on global feature map leads to severe
deterioration when adapting to the target domain. Thus we
propose to estimate those foreground regions on the fea-
ture map as the anchor locations that have IOU with ground
truth boxes larger than a threshold (0.5 is used in implemen-
tation). Denote Mas the estimated foreground mask. Then
we modify the proposed regularization as follows:
Lreg=Exs∼XS1
k||(fs(xs)−ft(xs))∗M||2
2,
wherekis the number of positive mask locations. This is
partially inspired by the “content-similarity loss” from [1]
that employs available rendering information to impose ℓ2
penalty on foreground regions of the generated image.
3.5. Training of FAFRCNN
The framework is initialized with the source model
and optimized by alternating between following objectives:
Step 1 . Minimize the following loss w.r.t. full detection
model:Lg=α(Limg+Linsg)+βLdet+λLreg, whereLdet
denotes Faster R-CNN detection training loss on source
data,α,βandλare balancing hyperparameters controlling
interaction between losses. Step 2 . Minimize following
loss w.r.t. domain discriminators: Ld=Limd+Linsd.
4. Experiments
In this section, we present evaluation results of the pro-
posed method on adaptation scenarios capturing different
domain shift constructed with multiple datasets. In experi-
ments, VGG16 network based Faster-RCNN is used as the
detection model.
4.1. Datasets and Setting
Datasets We adopt following four datasets to establish the
cross-domain adaptation scenarios for evaluating the adap-
tation ability of our model and comparing methods. The
SIM10K [23] dataset contains 10k synthetic images with
bounding box annotation for car, motorbike and person.
The Cityscapes dataset contains around 5000 accurately
annotated real world images with pixel-level category la-
bels. Following [5], we take box envelope of instance mask
for bounding box annotations. The Foggy Cityscapes [40]
dataset is generated from Cityscapes with simulated fog.
The Udacity self-driving dataset (Udacity for short) [44]
is an open source dataset collected with different illumina-
tion, camera condition and surroundings as Cityscapes.Evaluation scenarios The established cross-domain
adaptation scenarios include Scenario-1 : SIM10K to
Udacity (S →U);Scenario-2 : SIM10K to Cityscapes
(S→C);Scenario-3 : Cityscapes to Udacity (C →U);
Scenario-4 : Udacity to Cityscapes (U →C);Scenario-5 :
Cityscapes to Foggy Cityscapes (C →F). The ﬁrst two sce-
narios capture synthetic to real data domain shift, which is
important as learning from synthetic data is very promising
way to address the lack of labeled training data [6, 38, 33];
Scenario-3 and Scenario-4 constructed with both real
world collected datasets mainly aim for domain shift like
illumination, camera condition, etc., which is important for
practical applications; And the last scenario captures the
extreme weather change of normal to foggy condition. We
sample from target train set and test on target val set, the
source model is trained with full source dataset.
Baselines We compare our method with following base-
lines: (1) Source training model. The model trained with
source data only and directly evaluated on target domain
data. (2) ADDA [43]. ADDA is a general framework for ad-
dressing unsupervised adversarial domain adaptation. Last
feature map is aligned in experiments. (3) Domain trans-
fer and Fine-tuning (DT+FT). The method has been used
as a module in [20] for adapting object detector to target
domain. In UDA setting, we use CycleGAN [46] to train
and transform source image to target domain. In FDA set-
ting, since very few target domain samples are available,
we employ method in [22] that needs only one target style
image to train the transformation. This baseline is denoted
as DTf+FT. (4) Domain Adaptive Faster R-CNN [5]. The
method is deliberately developed for unsupervised domain
adaptation, denoted as FRCNN UDA.
4.2. Quantitative Results
We evaluate the proposed method by conducting exten-
sive experiments on the established scenarios. To quantify
the relative effect of each step, the performances of are ex-
amined with different conﬁgurations. We also evaluate pro-
posed split pooling based image level adaptation in the un-
supervised domain adaptation (UDA) setting, where large
amount of unlabeled target images are available.
Speciﬁcally, for the few-shot domain adaptation (FDA)
setting, we perform the following steps for each run: (1)
Randomly sample ﬁxed number of target domain images,
ensure that needed class are presented; (2) Simulate loosely
annotating process to get annotated target domain images,
i.e., only randomly annotate ﬁxed number of object in-
stances; (3) Gradually combine each component of our
method, run the adaptation and record performance (AP);
(4) Run compared methods on the same sampled images
and record performance. For the UDA setting, only pro-
posed split pooling based adaptation component is used as
no annotation is available in the target domain.
7177