U N I Q : U N I F O R M NO I S E IN J E C T I O N F O R
NO N- UN I F O R M QU A N T I Z AT I O N O F NE U R A L NE T W O R K S
Chaim Baskin* 1Eli Schwartz* 2Evgenii Zheltonozhskii1Natan Liss1Raja Giryes2Alex Bronstein1
Avi Mendelson1
AB S T R A C T
We present a novel method for neural network quantization that emulates a non-uniform k-quantile quantizer,
which adapts to the distribution of the quantized parameters. Our approach provides a novel alternative to the
existing uniform quantization techniques for neural networks. We suggest to compare the results as a function of
the bit-operations (BOPS) performed, assuming a look-up table availability for the non-uniform case. In this setup,
we show the advantages of our strategy in the low computational budget regime. While the proposed solution is
harder to implement in hardware, we believe it sets a basis for new alternatives to neural networks quantization.
1 I N T R O D U C T I O N
Deep neural networks are widely used in many ﬁelds today
including computer vision, signal processing, computational
imaging, image processing, and speech and language pro-
cessing (Hinton et al., 2012; Lai et al., 2015; Chen et al.,
2016). Yet, a major drawback of these deep learning models
is their storage and computational cost. Typical deep net-
works comprise millions of parameters and require billions
of multiply-accumulate (MAC) operations. In many cases,
this cost renders them infeasible for running on mobile de-
vices with limited resources. While some applications allow
moving the inference to the cloud, such an architecture still
incurs signiﬁcant bandwidth and latency limitations.
A recent trend in research focuses on developing lighter
deep models, both in their memory footprint and computa-
tional complexity. The main focus of most of these works,
including this one, is on alleviating complexity at inference
time rather than simplifying training. While training a deep
model requires even more resources and time, it is usually
done ofﬂine with large computational resources.
One way of reducing computational cost is quantization
of weights and activations. Quantization of weights also
reduces storage size and memory access. The bit widths
of activations and weights affect linearly the amount of re-
quired hardware logic; reducing both bitwidths by a factor
*Equal contribution1Department of Computer Science, Tech-
nion, Haifa, Israel2School of Electrical Engineering, Tel-
Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel. Correspondence to: Ev-
genii Zheltonozhskii <evgeniizh@campus.technion.ac.il >, Eli
Schwartz <eliyahus@mail.tau.ac.il >.
Under review by the Systems and Machine Learning (SysML)
Conference.of two reduces the amount of hardware by roughly a factor
of four. (A more accurate analysis of the effects of quanti-
zation is presented in Section 4.2). Quantization allows to
ﬁt bigger networks into a device, which is especially crit-
ical for embedded devices and custom hardware. On the
other hand, activations are passed between layers, and thus,
if different layers are processed separately, activation size
reduction reduces communication overheads.
Deep neural networks are usually trained and operate with
both the weights and the activations represented in single-
precision ( 32-bit) ﬂoating point. A straightforward uniform
quantization of the pre-trained weights to 16-bit ﬁxed point
representation has been shown to have a negligible effect
on the model accuracy (Gupta et al., 2015). In the majority
of the applications, further reduction of precision quickly
degrades performance; hence, nontrivial techniques are re-
quired to carry it out.
Contribution. Most previous quantization solution for neu-
ral networks assume a uniform distribution of the weights,
which is non-optimal due to the fact these rather have bell-
shaped distributions (Han et al., 2016). To facilitate this
deﬁciency, we propose a k-quantile quantization method
with balanced (equal probability mass) bins, which is partic-
ularly suitable for neural networks, where outliers or long
tails of the bell curve are less important. We also show
a simple and efﬁcient way of reformulating this quantizer
using a “uniformization trick”.
In addition, since most existing solutions for quantization
struggle with training networks with quantized weights,
we introduce a novel method for training a network that
performs well with quantized values. This is achieved by
adding noise (at training time) to emulate the quantizationarXiv:1804.10969v3  [cs.LG]  2 Oct 2018