UNIQ: Uniform Noise Injection for Quantization
Accuracy vs. number of quantization stages. We found
that injecting noise to all layers simultaneously does not
perform well for deeper networks. As described in Section
3.3, we suggest splitting the training into Nstages, such
that at each stage the noise is injected only into a subset of
layers.
To determine the optimal number of stages, we ﬁne-tuned
ResNet-18 on CIFAR-10 with a ﬁxed 18epoch budget. Bit
width was set to 4for both the weights and the activations.
Figure 2 reports the classiﬁcation accuracy as a function of
the number of quantization stages. Based on these results,
we conclude that the best strategy is injecting noise to a
single layer at each stage. We follow this strategy in all
ResNet-18 experiments conducted in this paper. For Mo-
bileNet, since it is deeper and includes 28layers, we chose
to inject noise to 2consecutive layers at every stage.
2 4 8 16
Number of stages90.290.390.490.590.690.790.8Accuracy [%]
Figure 2. Classiﬁcation accuracy on CIFAR-10 of the ResNet-18
architecture quantized using UNIQ with different number of quan-
tization stages during training.
Weight distribution. We have veriﬁed that neural net-
works weights follow Gaussian distribution. We observed
this is true for most of the layers with Shapiro-Wilk test
statistic higher than 0:82for all of the layers, as can be seen
in Figure 3.
5 C O N C L U S I O N
We introduced UNIQ – a training scheme for quantized
neural networks. The scheme is based on the uniformization
of the distribution of the quantized parameters, injection of
additive uniform noise, followed by the de-uniformization
of the obtained result. The scheme is amenable to efﬁcient
training by back propagation in full precision arithmetic, and
achieves maximum efﬁciency with the k-quantile (balanced)quantizer that was investigated in this paper.
To set a common basis for comparison, we have suggested
measuring the complexity of each method by BOPs. In this
case, we achieved improved results for quantized neural
networks on ImageNet. Our solution outperforms any other
quantized network in terms of accuracy in the low com-
putational range ( <400GBOPs). Our MobileNet based
solution achieves 66% accuracy with slightly more compu-
tational resources compared to the 50% achieved with ex-
tremely quantized XNOR networks (Rastegari et al., 2016)
and QNN (Hubara et al., 2016b).
While this paper considered a setting in which all parameters
have the same bitwidth, more complicated bit allocations
will be explored in following studies. The proposed scheme
is not restricted to the k-quantile quantizer discussed in this
paper, but rather applies to any quantizer. In the general
case, the noise injected into each bin is uniform, but its
variance changes with the bin width.
RE F E R E N C E S
Anderson, A. G. and Berg, C. P. The high-dimensional
geometry of binary neural networks. International Con-
ference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2018.
Baskin, C., Liss, N., Chai, Y ., Zheltonozhkii, E., Schwartz,
E., Giryes, R., Mendelson, A., and Bronstein, A. M.
NICE: Noise Injection and Clamping Estimation for Neu-
ral Network Quantization. ArXiv e-prints , September
2018.
Blundell, C., Cornebise, J., Kavukcuoglu, K., and Wierstra,
D. Weight uncertainty in neural network. In International
Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 1613–1622, 2015.
Cai, Z., He, X., Sun, J., and Vasconcelos, N. Deep learning
with low precision by half-wave gaussian quantization. In
IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , 2017.
Chen, L., Papandreou, G., Kokkinos, I., Murphy, K., and
Yuille, A. L. Deeplab: Semantic image segmentation
with deep convolutional nets, atrous convolution, and
fully connected crfs. CoRR , abs/1606.00915, 2016. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.00915 .
Dong, Y ., Ni, R., Li, J., Chen, Y ., Zhu, J., and Su, H. Learn-
ing accurate low-bit deep neural networks with stochas-
tic quantization. In British Machine Vision Conference
(BMVC’17) , 2017.
Gray, R. M. and Neuhoff, D. L. Quantization. IEEE trans-
actions on information theory , 44(6):2325–2383, 1998.
Gupta, S., Agrawal, A., Gopalakrishnan, K., and Narayanan,
P. Deep learning with limited numerical precision. In