made to construct deeper GNNs [ 19,23,10]. As the num-
ber of layers increases, the reductions on the memory con-
sumptions will become much larger and this contribution
will become more signiﬁcant.
5.2. Data Size Compression
Currently, the loaded data tends to contribute the major-
ity of the memory consumptions. In the commonly em-
ployed datasets, the node features tends to contribute the
majority of the loaded data. Thus, a binarization of the
loaded node features can largely reduce the memory con-
sumptions when GNNs process the datasets. Note that the
data size of the node features is employed as an approxi-
mation of the entire loaded data size in this paper, because
the edges in commonly processed attribute graph is usually
sparse and the size of the division mask is also small.
Let the loaded node features be denoted as X∈RN×d,
whereNis the number of nodes and dis the number of
features per node. Then, the full-precision XcontainsN×d
ﬂoating-point values. In our Bi-GCN, the loaded data Xcan
be binarized, and N×dbinary values and Nﬂoating-point
values can be obtained. Thus, the size of the loaded data X
can be reduced by a factor of
DC=32Nd
Nd+32N=32d
d+32. (17)
According to Eq. 17, the compression ratio of the loaded
data size is depending on the dimension of the node fea-
tures. In practical, Bi-GCN can achieve an average reduc-
tion of memory consumption with a factor of ∼30x, which
indicates that a much bigger attributed graph can be en-
tirely loaded with identical memory consumption. For some
inductive datasets, we can then successfully load the en-
tire graph or use a bigger sub-graph than that in the full-
precision GCN. The results of data size compression can be
found in Tables 2and3.
5.3. Acceleration
After the analysis of memory consumptions, the analy-
sis of acceleration of our Bi-GCN, compared to GCN, is
performed. Let the input matrix and the parameters of the
l-th layer possess the dimensions N×d(l)
inandd(l)
in×d(l)
out,
respectively. The original feature extraction step in GCN
requiresNd(l)
ind(l)
outaddition and Nd(l)
ind(l)
outmultiplication
operations. On the contrary, the binarized feature extraction
step in our Bi-GCN only requires Nd(l)
ind(l)
outbinary opera-
tions and 2Ndoutﬂoating-point multiplication operations.
According to [ 22], the processing time of performing one
cycle operation, which contains one multiplication and one
addition, can be utilized to perform 64 binary operations.
Then, the acceleration ratio for the feature extraction stepof thel-th layer can be calculated as
S(l)
fe=Nd(l)
ind(l)
out
1
64Nd(l)
ind(l)
out+2Nd(l)
out=64d(l)
in
d(l)
in+128. (18)
As can be observed from Eq. 18, the dimension of the node
featuresd(l)
indetermines the acceleration efﬁciency for the
feature extraction step.
For the aggregation step, the sparse matrix multiplica-
tion contains |E|d(l)
outﬂoating-point addition and |E|d(l)
out
ﬂoating-point multiplication operations. If we let the av-
erage degree of the nodes be deg, then|E|=Ndeg/2.
Then, the complete acceleration ratio of the l-th graph
convolutional layer can be approximately computed via
S(l)
full=Nd(l)
ind(l)
out+|E|d(l)
out
1
64Nd(l)
ind(l)
out+2Nd(l)
out+|E|d(l)
out
=64d(l)
in+32deg
d(l)
in+128+32 deg.(19)
Note that the average degree deg is usually small in the
benchmark datasets, e.g., deg≈2.0in the Cora dataset.
When processing a graph with a low average node degree,
the computational cost for the aggregation step, i.e., 32deg,
usually possesses negligible effect on the acceleration ratio.
Thus, the acceleration ratio of the l-th layer can be approx-
imately computed via
S(l)
full≈S(l)
fe. (20)
Therefore, when degis small, the acceleration ratio mainly
depends on the input dimension of the binarized graph con-
volutional layers, according to Eqs. 18and20. The input di-
mension of the ﬁrst graph convolutional layer equals to the
dimension of the node features in the input graph. The input
dimensions of the other graph convolutional layers equal to
the dimensions of the hidden layers. Since the dimension of
the input node features is usually large, the acceleration ra-
tio tends to be high for the ﬁrst layer, e.g., ∼59x on the Cora
dataset. In general, the layer with a larger input dimension
tends to require more calculations and can thus save more
calculations with our binarization. For example, the accel-
eration ratio of a 2-layered Bi-GCN on the Cora dataset can
achieve∼59x acceleration ratio for the ﬁrst layer and ∼21x
for the second layer. In total, our 2-layered Bi-GCN can
achieve∼53x acceleration ratio on the Cora dataset.
6. Evaluations
In this section, we evaluate the proposed binarization ap-
proach and our Bi-GCN on benchmark datasets for the node
classiﬁcation task1. Note that the memory consumptions
1More experiments can be found in the supplimentary material.
1566