Table 1. Datasets
Dataset Nodes Edges Classes Features
Cora 2,708 5,429 7 1,433
PubMed 19,711 44,338 3 500
Flickr 89,250 899,756 7 500
Reddit 232,965 11,606,919 41 602
(a)
 (b)
Figure 3. Comparisons of accuracy and validation loss on Cora.
(a)
 (b)
Figure 4. Comparisons of memory consumption and inference
speed on Cora.
and the number of cycle operations are ideally estimated
based on the speciﬁc settings of the methods and datasets.
6.1. Datasets
We conduct our experiments on four commonly em-
ployed datasets. For the transductive learning task,
two commonly utilized citation networks, i.e., Cora and
PubMed [ 25], which are also employed by GCN [ 18], are
utilized. We adopt the same data division strategy as [ 32].
For the inductive learning task, Flickr and Reddit are em-
ployed. We adopt the same data division strategy as Graph-
SAINT [ 32] for Flickr and GraphSAGE [ 12] for Reddit.
The datasets are summarized in Table 1.
6.2. Setups
For the transductive learning task, we select a 2-layered
GCN [ 18] with 64 neurons in the hidden layer as the base-
line. Our Bi-GCN is obtained by binarizing this GCN. The
evaluation protocol in [ 18] is applied. In the training pro-
cess, GCN and Bi-GCN are both trained for a maximum of
1000 epochs with an early stopping condition at 100 epochs,
by using the Adam [ 17] optimizer with a learning rate of
0.001. The dropout layers are utilized in the training pro-
cess with a dropout rate of 0.4, after binarizing the input
of the intermediate layer. We initialize the full-precision
weights by Xavier initialization [ 11]. A standard batch nor-malization [ 16] (with zero mean and variance being one) is
applied to the input feature vectors in Bi-GCN. Note that
we also investigate the inﬂuences of different model depths
on classiﬁcation performance. All the hyperparameters are
set to be identical to the 2-layered case.
For the inductive learning task, we select the inductive
GCN [ 12], GraphSAGE [ 12] and GraphSAINT [ 34] as our
baselines. Note that a 2-layered GraphSAINT model is em-
ployed for fair comparisons. The settings from their own
literatures are employed. We will binarize all the feature
extraction steps to generalize their corresponding binarized
version. The hyper-parameters in our binarized models are
set to be identical to their full-precision version.
6.3. Results
6.3.1. Comparisons
The results of the transductive learning tasks are shown
in Table 2. As can be observed, our Bi-GCN gives a com-
parable performance compared to the full-precision GCN
and other baselines. Meanwhile, our Bi-GCN can achieve
an average of ∼47x faster inference speed and ∼30x lower
memory consumption than the vanilla GCN, FastGCN, and
GAT. Besides, the proposed Bi-GCN is more effective than
SGC, especially on the size of the loaded data.
For the inductive learning tasks, our binarized GNNs can
signiﬁcantly save the memory consumptions of both the
loaded data and models, and reduce the amount of calcu-
lations with comparable performance, as shown in Table 3.
The original data size of Reddit is 534.99M, while our bi-
narized GNNs only demand 17.61M to load the data, which
proves the signiﬁcance of our binarization approach. Note
that the acceleration ratios of binarized GNNs on Reddit
dataset are only ∼10x, because the average node degree is
large, as discussed in Sec 5.3. In general, these results indi-
cate that our binarization approach is efﬁcient and it can be
successfully generalized to different GNNs.
6.3.2. Ablation Study
Here, an ablation study is performed to verify the ef-
fectiveness of the binarizations applied to the parameters
and node features. As can be observed from Table 2, the
prediction performances tend to vary less when the bina-
rization is performed only to the node features. This phe-
nomenon indicates that there exists many redundancies in
the full-precision features and our binarization can maintain
the majority portion of effective information for node classi-
ﬁcation. Meanwhile, the prediction results of binarizing the
network parameters indicate that the binarized parameters
cannot represent as much information as the full-precision
parameters. However, if both the node attributes and pa-
rameters are binarized, a comparable performance can be
achieved, compared to GCN. It reveals that the binarized
network parameters can be effectively trained by the bina-
1567