Bi-GCN: Binary Graph Convolutional Network
Junfu Wang1,2, Yunhong Wang2, Zhen Yang1,2, Liang Yang3, Yuanfang Guo1,2*
1State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, China
2School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China
3School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Hebei University of Technology, China
{wangjunfu,yhwang,yangzhen7,andyguo }@buaa.edu.cn,yangliang@vip.qq.com
Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved tremen-
dous success in graph representation learning. Unfortu-
nately, current GNNs usually rely on loading the entire at-
tributed graph into network for processing. This implicit
assumption may not be satisﬁed with limited memory re-
sources, especially when the attributed graph is large. In
this paper, we pioneer to propose a Binary Graph Convo-
lutional Network (Bi-GCN), which binarizes both the net-
work parameters and input node features. Besides, the orig-
inal matrix multiplications are revised to binary operations
for accelerations. According to the theoretical analysis, our
Bi-GCN can reduce the memory consumption by an aver-
age of∼30x for both the network parameters and input
data, and accelerate the inference speed by an average of
∼47x, on the citation networks. Meanwhile, we also de-
sign a new gradient approximation based back-propagation
method to train our Bi-GCN well. Extensive experiments
have demonstrated that our Bi-GCN can give a compara-
ble performance compared to the full-precision baselines.
Besides, our binarization approach can be easily applied to
other GNNs, which has been veriﬁed in the experiments.
1. Introduction
In the past few years, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs),
which can learn effective representations from irregular
data, have given excellent performances in various graph-
based tasks [ 18,28,31,30]. Considering the superior rep-
resentation abilities of these newly developed GNNs, re-
searchers have also applied them to many tasks, including
natural language processing [ 33], computer vision [ 24], etc.
Unfortunately, the current success of GNNs is attributed
to an implicit assumption that the input of GNNs contains
the entire attributed graph. If the entire graph is too large to
be fed into GNNs due to limited memory resources, in both
*Corresponding author.
(a)
 (b)
Figure 1. Performances on the Cora dataset. Note that the model
size is measured in bits and the number of cycle operations, which
will be introduced in Sec. 5, is employed to reﬂect the inference
speed. Bi-GCN gives the fastest inference speed and the lowest
memory consumption with comparable accuracy.
the training and inference process, which is highly likely
when the scale of the graph increases, the performances of
GNNs may degrade drastically.
To tackle this problem, an intuitive solution is sampling,
e.g., sampling a subgraph with a suitable size to be entirely
loaded into GNNs. The sampling based methods can be
classiﬁed into two categories, neighbor sampling [ 12,5]
and graph sampling [ 4,6,34]. Neighbor sampling selects a
ﬁxed number of neighbors for each node in the next layer
to ensure that every node can be sampled. Thus, it can be
utilized in both the training and inference process. Unfor-
tunately, when the number of layers increases, the problem
ofneighbor explosion [34] arises, such that both the train-
ing and inference time will increase exponentially. Differ-
ent from neighbor sampling, graph sampling samples a set
of subgraphs in the training process, which can avoid the
problem of neighbor explosion . However, it cannot guar-
antee that every node can be at least sampled once in the
whole training/inference process. Thus it is only feasible
for the training process, because the testing process usually
requires GNNs to process each node in the graph.
Another feasible solution is compressing the size of the
input graph data and the GNN model to better utilize the
limited memory and computational resources. Several ap-
proaches have been proposed to compress the convolutional
1561