neural networks (CNNs), such as designing shallow net-
works [ 2], pruning [ 9], designing compact layers [ 27] and
quantizing the parameters [ 15]. In quantization-based meth-
ods, binarization [ 15,22,21] has achieved a great success in
many CNN-based practical vision tasks when a faster speed
and a lower memory consumption is desired.
However, compared to the CNN compression methods,
the compression of GNNs possesses unique challenges.
Firstly, since the input graph data is usually much larger
than the GNN models, the compression of the loaded data
demands more attention. Secondly, the GNNs are usually
shallow, e.g., the standard GCN [ 18] only has 2 layers,
which contain less redundancies, thus the compression will
be more difﬁcult to be achieved. At last, the nodes tend to
be similar to its neighbors in the high-level semantic space,
while they tend to be different in the low-level feature space,
which is different from the grid-like data, such as images,
videos, etc. This characteristic requires the compressed
GNNs to possess sufﬁcient parameters for representations.
In general, the tradeoff between the compression ratio and
accuracy in the compressed GNNs requires careful designs.
To tackle the memory and complexity issues, SGC [ 29],
which is a 1-layered GNN, compresses GCN [ 18] by re-
moving nonlinearities and collapsing weight matrices be-
tween consecutive layers. This shallow GNN can accelerate
both the training and inference processes with comparable
performance. Although SGC compresses the network pa-
rameters, it does not compress the loaded data, which is the
major memory consumption when processing the graphs
with GNNs.
In this paper, to alleviate the memory and complexity is-
sue, we pioneer to propose a binarized GCN, named Binary
Graph Convolutional Network (Bi-GCN), which is a sim-
ple yet efﬁcient approximation of GCN [ 18], by binarizing
the parameters and node attribute representations. Speciﬁ-
cally, the binarization of the weights is performed by split-
ting them into multiple feature selectors and maintaining
a scalar per selector to further reduce the quantization er-
rors. Similarly, the binarization of the node features can
be carried out by splitting the node features and assigning
an attention weight to each node. By employing those ad-
ditional scalars, more efﬁcient information can be learned
and retained efﬁciently. After binarizing the weights and
node features, the computational complexity and the mem-
ory consumptions induced by the network parameters and
input data can be largely reduced. Since the existing binary
back propagation method [ 22] has not considered the rela-
tionships among the binary weights, we also design a new
back propagation method by tackling this issue. An intuitive
comparison between our Bi-GCN and the baseline methods
is shown in Figure 1, which demonstrates that our Bi-GCN
can achieve the fastest inference speed and lowest memory
consumption with a comparable accuracy compared to thestandard full-precision GNNs.
Our proposed Bi-GCN can reduce the redundancies in
the node representations while maintain the principle infor-
mation. When the number of layers increases, Bi-GCN also
gives a more obvious reductions of the memory consump-
tions of the parameters and effectively alleviates the over-
ﬁtting problem. Besides, our binarization approach can be
easily applied to other GNNs.
The contributions are summarized as follows:
• We pioneer to propose a binarized GCN, named Bi-
nary Graph Convolutional Network (Bi-GCN), which
can signiﬁcantly reduce the memory consumptions by
∼30x for both the network parameters and input node
attributes, and accelerate the inference by an average
of∼47x, on the citation networks, theoretically.
• We design a new back propagation method to effec-
tively train our Bi-GCN, by considering the relation-
ships among the binary weights in the back propaga-
tion process.
• With respect to the signiﬁcant memory reductions and
accelerations, our Bi-GCN can also give a comparable
performance compared to the standard GCN on four
benchmark datasets.
2. Related Work
2.1. Sampling Based GNNs
Sampling is an effective method that allows GNNs to
process larger graphs with limited memory. Current sam-
pling methods can be categorized into two categories,
neighbor sampling [ 12,5] and graph sampling [ 4,6,34].
GraphSAGE [ 12] gives an empirical number of the sam-
pled neighbors and extends the GNNs to inductive learning.
VRGCN [ 5] reduces the sampling size by maintaining the
embedding of each node from the previous iteration, which
requires a doubled memory consumption. Meanwhile, Fast-
GCN [ 4] samples a subgraph in each layer to accelerate
the training process, which sacriﬁces the classiﬁcation ac-
curacy. ClusterGCN [ 6] groups the nodes by graph clust-
ing methods, which demands additional complexity for the
clustering. GraphSAINT [ 34] proposes an edge sampling
method with low variance and apply GCN [ 18] to the sam-
pled subgraphs. Besides, DropEdge [ 23] generates the sub-
graphs randomly and DropConnection [ 13] adaptively sam-
ples the subgraphs, to alleviate the overﬁtting problem.
2.2. CNN Binarization Methods
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) suffer from cer-
tain issues, such as high computational costs and etc. Bina-
rization, as a promising type of techniques in network com-
pression, has been widely utilized to reduce the memory and
1562