Symmetry 2019 ,11, 1018 5 of 26
In the HMM-based model, different modules use different technologies and play different roles.
HMM is mainly used to do dynamic time warping at the frame level. GMM and DNN are used to
calculate HMM hidden states’ emission probability [ 20]. The construction process and working mode
of the HMM-based model determines if it faces the following difﬁculties in practical use:
 The training process is complex and difﬁcult to be globally optimized. HMM-based model
often uses different training methods and data sets to train different modules. Each module is
independently optimized with their own optimization objective functions which are generally
different from the true LVCSR performance evaluation criteria. So the optimality of each module
does not necessarily mean the global optimality [21,22].
 Conditional independent assumptions. To simplify the model’s construction and training,
the HMM-based model uses conditional independence assumptions within HMM and between
different modules. This does not match the actual situation of LVCSR.
2.2.2. End-to-End Model
Due to the above-mentioned shortcomings of the HMM-based model, coupled with the promotion
of deep learning technology, more and more works began to study end-to-end LVCSR. The end-to-end
model is a system that directly maps input audio sequence to sequence of words or other graphemes.
Its functional structure is shown in Figure 1.
X={x1,· · · ,xT} input sequenceEncoderF={f1,· · · ,fT} feature sequenceAlignerDecoderL={l1,· · · ,lN} output sequence
Figure 1. Function structure of end-to-end model.
Most end-to-end speech recognition models include the following parts: encoder, which maps
speech input sequence to feature sequence; aligner, which realizes the alignment between feature
sequence and language; decoder, which decodes the ﬁnal identiﬁcation result. Please note that this
division does not always exist, because end-to-end itself is a complete structure, and it is usually very
difﬁcult to tell which part does which sub-task at the analogy of an engineered modular system.
Different from the HMM-based model that is composed of multiple modules, the end-to-end
model replaces multiple modules with a deep network, realizing the direct mapping of acoustic signals
into label sequences without carefully-designed intermediate states. Besides, there is no need to
perform posterior processing on the output.
Compared to HMM-based model, the above differences give end-to-end LVCSR the
following characteristics:
 Multiple modules are merged into one network for joint training. The beneﬁt of merging multiple
modules is that there is no need to design many modules to realize the mapping between various
intermediate states [ 23]. Joint training enables the end-to-end model to use a function that is
highly relevant to the ﬁnal evaluation criteria as a global optimization goal, thereby seeking
globally optimal results [22].