Symmetry 2019 ,11, 1018 2 of 26
Therefore, the essential work of ASR is to establish a model that can accurately calculate the
posterior distribution p(LjX).
Automatic speech recognition is a pattern recognition task in the ﬁeld of computer science, which
is a subject area of symmetry.
In a large vocabulary continuous speech recognition task, the hidden Markov model (HMM)-based
model has always been mainstream technology, and has been widely used. Even today, the best speech
recognition performance still comes from HMM-based model (in combination with deep learning
techniques). Most industrially deployed systems are based on HMM.
At the same time, deep learning techniques have also spurred the rise of an alternative, which is the
end-to-end model. Compared with the HMM-based model, the end-to-end model uses a single model
to directly map audio to characters or words. It replaces engineering process with learning process
and needs no domain expertise, so end-to-end model is simpler for constructing and training. These
advantages make the end-to-end model quickly become a hot research direction in large vocabulary
continuous speech recognition (LVCSR).
In this paper we make a detailed review of end-to-end model. We make a brief comparison
between HMM-based model and end-to-end model, introduce the development of end-to-end
technology, thoroughly analyze different end-to-end technologies’ paradigms and compare their
advantages and disadvantages. Finally, we give our conclusions and opinions of future works.
The following content of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we brieﬂy reviewed
the history of automatic speech recognition, focus on introducing the basic ideas and characteristics
of HMM-Gaussian mixed model (GMM), HMM-deep neural network (DNN), end-to-end models,
and comparing their strengths and weaknesses; in Sections 3–5, we summarize and analyze the
principles, progress and research focus of connectionist temporal classiﬁcation (CTC)-based, recurrent
neural network (RNN)-transducer and attention-based three different end-to-end models, respectively.
Section 6 makes a theoretically and experimentally detailed comparison of these end-to-end models,
and concludes their respective advantages and disadvantages. The possible future works of the
end-to-end model are given in Section 7.
2. Background of Automatic Speech Recognition
2.1. History of ASR
Dreyfus Graf of France ﬁrst started research related to speech recognition. He represented speech
signal as the output of six band-pass ﬁlters and used its trace information displayed on screen to
determine transcriptions [2].
In 1952, Bell Labs of the United States made the ﬁrst truly complete speech recognizer [ 3],
which could recognize 10 digits by matching ﬁlter bank output to hand-constructed template. Since
then, the ﬁlter-based approach began to develop rapidly. In 1956, Olson and Belar developed
a simple voice-activated typewriter [ 4]. At MIT Lincoln Labs built a speaker-independent 10-vowel
recognizer [5].
Basically, speech recognition systems at this stage can only recognize speeches containing a single
word or vowel.
In the 1960’s, several Japanese laboratories demonstrated their capability of building special
purpose hardware to perform a speech recognition task [ 6]. Most notable were the vowel recognizer
of Suzuki and Nakata at the Radio Research Lab in Tokyo [ 7], the phoneme recognizer of Sakai and
Doshita at Kyoto University [ 8], and the digit recognizer of NEC Laboratories [ 9]. The work of Sakai
and Doshita involved the ﬁrst use of a speech segmenter for analysis and recognition of speech in
different portions of the input utterance. In contrast, an isolated digit recognizer implicitly assumed
that the unknown utterance contained a complete digit (and no other speech sounds or words) and
thus did not need an explicit “segmenter”. Kyoto University’s work could be considered a precursor
to a continuous speech recognition system [6].