Symmetry 2019 ,11, 1018 14 of 26
Based on the above reasons, end-to-end speech recognition model using attention mechanism has
received more and more interests and development.
Attention-based end-to-end model can also be divided into three parts: encoder, aligner,
and decoder. In particular, its aligner part uses attention mechanism. structure of attention-based
model is shown in Figure 5. Different works will make different improvements to each part.
X={x1,··· ,xT}EncoderAttentionDecoderSoftmaxp(lu|lu−1,··· ,l1,x)
F=f1,··· ,fT satt
u−1cu lu−1sdec
u
Figure 5. Attention-based model [38].
5.1. Works on the Encoder
The encoder plays the role of acoustic model, which is same as in CTC-based, RNN-Transducer
and even HMM-DNN hybrid models. So it faces the same problems as they do, and their solutions are
also the same. However, when the encoder is combined with attention, some new problems arise.
5.1.1. Delay and Information Redundancy
A serious problem caused by the combination of the encoder and attention is latency. Since
attention is applied to the entire encoding result sequence, it needs to wait until the encoding process
has been totally ﬁnished before it can start running (while CTC and RNN-transducer do not need to
wait), so the time spent in the encoding process will increase the model’s delay. In addition, an encoder
that does not shrink the sequence’s length will have a encoding result sequence that is much longer
than the target label sequence (for input speech sequence is much longer than transcription). This leads
to two problems: on the one hand, a longer encoding result sequence means more attention calculation,
thereby increasing the delay; on the other hand, since speech is much larger than transcription,
the sequence generated by encoding process without sub sampling will introduce a lot of redundant
information to the attention mechanism. Being a work about translation task itself, ref. [ 46] does not
take into account the sequence length problem which occurs in speech recognition task. In fact, early
works [47,48] that use attention for speech recognition did not notice this issue either.
The ﬁrst work to notice this problem and take action is [ 49]. It was based on their previous
work [ 48]. The encoder part used pooling between multiple RNN layers to speed up the model by
pooling in time dimension, which can reduce the input sequence’s length. The encoder’s time step
between upper and lower layers was decremented by the proportion of1
2, and the decrement could
be realized by either an adjacent summation or a simple sub sampling. The model’s encoder used
a four-layer bidirectional gated recurrent unit (GRU) [ 50], the last two layers read an output from
previous layer every other time step, reducing the input to1
4of its original length. This method is
called pooling or sub sampling.