Symmetry 2019 ,11, 1018 13 of 26
4.2. RNN-Transducer Works
To further enhance RNN-transducer’s performance, ref. [ 43] improved the work from [ 41].
It changed the Joint network from original simple addition to a full layer connection. it also increased
network depth and pre-trained the transcription network and the prediction network respectively.
In the end, it got 17.7% PER (Phoneme Error Rate)at TIMIT dataset, which was the best result at
the moment. A number of experimental comparisons showed that it was more difﬁcult to train
RNN-Transducer from scratch. Pre-training of RNN-transducer’s various parts could effectively
improve the model’s effect.
Ref. [ 17] explored and improved the RNN-transducer in more ways. On the one hand, it used
more layers to construct a model with a transcription network of 12 LSTM layers and a prediction
network of two LSTM layers. On the other hand, it used hierarchical pre-training with CTC to output
phonemes, fonts, and words on the ﬁfth, 10th, and 12th layers of transcription network, respectively.
At the same time, it no longer used word as its output unit, but usde word piece (which is the result of
word segmentation or combination, may be a part of a word, or a combination of multiple words). In
the end, it achieved 8.5% WER on Google Voice Search.
Although the RNN-Transducer has its advantages over CTC, in order to obtain this advantage, it
also leads to other shortcomings. One obvious problem is that it allows many unreasonable paths to
appear. Since the RNN-transducer is very ﬂexible, allowing one input to produce multiple outputs,
it is conceivable that such an extreme case may exist: the ﬁrst audio frame produces all the output
sequences, while all the other audio frames produce empty labels. This is obviously very unreasonable,
but it is a situation that RNN-transducer will deﬁnitely include. There are lots of paths like this. To
solve this problem, a recurrent neural aligner was proposed in [ 44,45]. This is an improvement to the
RNN-transducer that restricts only one output per input. But even so, there are still unreasonable paths.
Analysis and related works on the RNN-transducer show that although the RNN-transducer has
some improvements compared to CTC, it has the following shortcomings:
 Experiments show that the RNN-transducer is not easy to train. Therefore, it is necessary for each
part to be pre-trained, which is very important for improving performance.
 Thd RNN-transducer’s calculation process includes many obviously unreasonable paths. Even if
there are some improving works, it is still unavoidable. In fact, all speech recognitions that ﬁrst
enumerate all possible paths and then aggregate them face this problem, including CTC.
5. Attention-Based End-to-End Model
In 2014, ref. [ 46] published a work on machine translation. Their purpose was to solve the problem
that the encoder-decoder model for machine translation was required to encode input texts into a
ﬁxed-length vector, resulting in limited encoding capability. In this work, the model’s encoder encoded
input text into a sequence of vectors (rather than a single vector), and the decoder used an attention
method at each output step to assign different weights to each vector in this sequence. The next-step
output was determined by historical output sequence and a weighted summation of the encoding
result sequence. This method solves the problem of having to encode all the text information into a
ﬁxed length vector, so that even a long sentence can have a good encoding effect. This work has greatly
promoted speech recognition because it ﬁts well with speech recognition tasks in the following ways:
 Speech recognition is also a sequence-to-sequence process that recognizes the output sequence
from the input sequence. So it is essentially the same as translation task.
 The encoder–decoder method using an attention mechanism does not require pre-segment
alignment of data. With attention, it can implicitly learn the soft alignment between input and
output sequences, which solves a big problem for speech recognition.
 Encoding result is no longer limited to a single ﬁxed-length vector, the model can still have a good
effect on long input sequence, so it is also possible for such model to handle speech input of
various lengths.