Symmetry 2019 ,11, 1018 6 of 26
 It directly maps input acoustic signature sequence to the text result sequence, and does not require
further processing to achieve the true transcription or to improve recognition performance [ 24],
whereas in the HMM-based models, there is usually an internal representation for pronunciation
of a character chain. Nevertheless, character level models are known with some traditional
architectures, too.
These advantages of end-to-end LVCSR model make it able to greatly simplify the construction
and training of speech recognition models.
To varying degrees, sequence-to-sequence tasks face data alignment problems, especially for
speech recognition. Where a label in the label sequence should be aligned to the speech data is
an unavoidable problem for both HMM-based and end-to-end model. The end-to-end model uses soft
alignment. Each audio frame corresponds to all possible states with a certain probability distribution,
which does not require a forced, explicit correspondence [22].
The end-to-end model can be divided into three different categories depending on their
implementations of soft alignment:
 CTC-based: CTC ﬁrst enumerates all possible hard alignments (represented by the concept path),
then it achieves soft alignment by aggregating these hard alignments. CTC assumes that output
labels are independent of each other when enumerating hard alignments.
 RNN-transducer: it also enumerates all possible hard alignments and then aggregates them for
soft alignment. But unlike CTC, RNN-transducer does not make independent assumptions about
labels when enumerating hard alignments, so it is different from CTC in terms of path deﬁnition
and probability calculation.
 Attention-based: this method no longer enumerates all possible hard alignments, but uses
Attention mechanism to directly calculate the soft alignment information between input data and
output label.
3. CTC-Based End-to-End Model
Although currently the HMM-DNN hybrid model still has state-of-the-art results, the role played
by DNN is limited. It is mostly used to model the posterior state probability of HMM’s hidden
state, only representing local information. The time-domain feature is still modeled by HMM. When
attempting to model time-domain features using RNN or CNN instead of HMM, it faces a data
alignment problem: both RNN and CNN’s loss functions are deﬁned at each point in the sequence, so
in order to be able to perform training, it is necessary to know the alignment relation between RNN
output sequence and target sequence [25].
CTC was proposed in [ 25]. Its emergence makes it possible to make fuller use of DNN in speech
recognition and build end-to-end models, which is a breakthrough in the development of end-to-end
method. Essentially, CTC is a loss function, but it solves hard alignment problem while calculating the
loss. CTC mainly overcomes the following two difﬁculties for end-to-end LVCSR models:
 Data alignment problem. CTC no longer needs to segment and align training data. This solves
the alignment problem so that DNN can be used to model time-domain features, which greatly
enhances DNN’s role in LVCSR tasks.
 Directly output the target transcriptions. Traditional models often output phonemes or other
small units, and further processing is required to obtain the ﬁnal transcriptions. CTC eliminates
the need for small units and direct output in ﬁnal target form, greatly simplifying the construction
and training of end-to-end model.
Solving these two problems, CTC can use a single network structure to map input sequence
directly to label sequence, and implement end-to-end speech recognition.