Symmetry 2019 ,11, 1018 9 of 26
3.2. CTC-Based Works
Since CTC’s calculation process is quite certain, Most of CTC-based ASR works mainly study how
to effectively build the neural net acoustic model.
3.2.1. Model Structure
One of CTC’s great advantages is that it eliminates the necessity of data segmentation alignment,
so that deep learning techniques such as CNN and RNN can play an increasingly important role.
Network models with different structures and depths have been introduced into end-to-end ASR,
and have achieved better and better results.
Ref. [ 26] proposed an end-to-end model trained by CTC for an LVCSR task. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work in this area. It designed a three-layer network. The ﬁrst layer
is a 78-dimensional feed forward layer, the second layer is a 120-dimensional LSTM layer, and the
third layer is a 27-dimensional LSTM layer. A CTC layer is used for training. The results of various
structures showed that increasing network’s depth and hidden cell’s number could effectively improve
the recognition effect. This conclusion was further conﬁrmed by the experimental results in [27].
Based on the above conclusions, ef. [ 22] believed that the model of up to three LSTM layers
was still too shallow, so it did not achieved remarkable results. This paper uses CTC technology
to train a ﬁve-layer bidirectional LSTM model with 500 hidden units per direction in every layer.
The recognition effect reached state-of-the-art level at the time. Encouraged by this work, many
improvements to the ﬁve-layer network began to appear [19,28–30].
Since then, with the rapid development of deep learning technology, ASR model trained using
CTC has also undergone great changes in structure and depth.
In terms of structure, ref. [ 31] introduced CNN and combined it with RNN for ASR. It designed
the structure consists of four CNN layers, two dense layers, two RNN layer and a CTC layer. To solve
the problem that almost all models use RNN which is difﬁcult for training, ref. [ 21] designed a model
that abandons RNN and only uses CNN and CTC. The model used a 10-layer CNN and a three-layer
full connection, and performed convolution operations in both time and frequency dimensions. Results
also showed that deeper models could lead to better recognition. But more importantly, they found
that a CNN networks with sufﬁcient layers could also model the time-domain characteristics.
In terms of network depth, ref. [ 32] made a bold attempt to train a network with nine layers
(where seven layers are RNNs) using CTC. The model could even outperform a human in certain tasks.
Ref. [ 33] used CTC to train a deep neural network model with seven layers of bidirectional LSTM
with each direction having 1000 hidden units. It was trained on 125,000 h of voice data from YouTube,
which had a transcription vocabulary of 100 K. Similarly, ref. [ 34] used CTC to train a neural network
consisting of nine layers of bidirectional RNNs with hidden unit dimension of 1024, which achieved
optimal results on their respective data sets.
However, the trend in network model’s structure and depth does not mean that deeper and more
complex networks can achieve better results at any situation. Many newer jobs [ 35–37] chose to use
shallower networks (ﬁve layers), which in large part were because that the dataset they use did not
support training deeper networks. For example, ref. [ 35] used 2000-h datasets to train their ﬁve-layer
model, while [ 33] used 125,000 data to train seven-layer networks. There is a huge gap between the
two datasets.
3.2.2. Large-Scale Data Training
Lots of works show that complex, deep models require a lot of data to train, so as to speech
recognition. Successful deep ASR models often beneﬁt from a large-scale training data.
In order to effectively train a ﬁve-layer network model, the data set used by [ 19] has more than
7000 h of clean speech data, include their own 5000 h data and some other data sets (WSJ, Switchboard,
Fisher). Coupled with the synthetic noise speech, there are totally more than 100,000 h of speech data