Symmetry 2019 ,11, 1018 22 of 26
Comparing the performance of different end-to-end models, we can get the following conclusions:
 Without external language model, CTC-based model has the worst effect, and the gap between it
and other models is very large. This is consistent with our analysis and expectation of CTC: it
makes a conditional independent assumption of the output and cannot learn language model
knowledge itself.
 Compared with CTC, RNN-transducer has been greatly improved on all test sets because
compared to CTC, it uses Prediction network to learn language knowledge.
 Attention-based model is the best of all end-to-end, and the two-layer decoder is better than the
one-layer Decoder. This shows that decoder’s depth also has an impact on the results.
better than HMMs:DeepSpeech [19], but it uses large amount of data [23].
Although the end-to-end model has beat HMM-GMM model, lots of works show that its
performance is still worse than HMM-DNN model [ 20,27,29,39,48,52,58], and some works achieve
comparable performance with HMM-DNN model [ 45,47,54]. While only few works can outperform
HMM-DNN model [ 23] (DeepSpeech [ 19] also outperforms HMM-DNN, however, it is trained on
a large amount of data while HMM-DNN is not, which is unfair for comparison).
So, it is obvious that the end-to-end model has not surpassed the HMM-DNN model which
also uses deep learning techniques. A very important reason is their different abilities to learn
language knowledge. Although RNN-transducer and attention-based model have the ability to learn
language models, the language knowledge they learn is only within the scope of training data set’s
transcriptions. But HMM-DNN model is different. It uses specially constructed dictionaries and large
language models trained on a large amount of extra natural language corpus. Its linguistic knowledge
can have a very wide coverage.
As a conclusion, after years of development, the HMM-GMM model has reached its bottleneck,
and there is little room for its further performance improvement. The introduction of deep learning
technology has promoted the rise and development of HMM-DNN models and end-to-end models,
which have achieved performance beyond HMM-GMM. Both using deep learning techniques, current
performance of the end-to-end model is still worse than that of the HMM-DNN model, at best just
comparable. However, the HMM-DNN model itself is limited by various unfavorable factors such
as independent hypothesis and multi-module individual training inherited from HMM, while the
end-to-end model has advantages such as simpliﬁed model, joint training, direct output, No need for
forced data alignment. Therefore, the end-to-end model is the current focus of LVCSR and an important
research direction in the future.
7. Future Works
The end-to-end model has surpassed the HMM-GMM model, but its performance is still worse
than or only comparable to the HMM-DNN model, which also uses deep learning techniques. In order
to truly take advantage of the end-to-end model, the end-to-end model needs to at least be improved
in the following aspects:
 Model delay. CTC-based and RNN-transducer models are monotonic and support streaming
decoding, so they are suitable for online scenarios with low latency. However, their recognition
performance is limited. Attention-based models can effectively improve the recognition
performance, but it is not monotonous and has long delay. Although there are methods such
as “window” to reduce the delay of attention, they may reduce the recognition performance to
a certain extent [ 65]. Therefore, reducing latency while ensuring performance is an important
research issue for the end-to-end model.
 Language knowledge learning. HMM-based model uses additional language models to provide
a wealth of language knowledge, while all the language knowledge of the end-to-end model
comes only from training data’s transcriptions, whose coverage is very limited. This leads to great