Symmetry 2019 ,11, 1018 20 of 26
Table 1. Model characteristics comparison.
Model DelayComputation
ComplexityLanguage Model
AbilityTraining
DifﬁcultyRecognition
Accuracy
CTC-based    
RNN-Transducer  p 
Attention-based  p 
 Delay: the forward-backward algorithm used by CTC can adjust the probability of decoding
results immediately after receiving a encoding result without waiting for other information, so
CTC-based model has the shortest delay. RNN-Transducer model is similar to CTC in that it also
adjusts the probability of decoding results immediately after each acquisition of an encoding
result. However, since it uses not only the encoding result but also the previous decoding output
in the forward-backward calculation at each step, its delay is higher compared to CTC. But, they
all support streaming speech recognition, where recognition results are generated the same time
speech signals are produced. Attention-based model has the longest delay because it needs to
wait until all the encoding results are generated before soft alignment and decoding can start. So
streaming speech recognition is not supported unless some corresponding compromise is made.
 Computational complexity: In the process of calculating the probability of Lof length Nbased on
Xof length T, CTC technology needs to do a softmax on each input time step with a complexity of
O(T). RNN-transducer technology requires a softamx operation on each input/output pair with
a complexity of O(TN). The primitive attention, like RNN-transducer, also requires a softamx
operation on each input/output pair with O(NT)complexity. However, as more and more
attention mechanism uses window mechanisms, attention-based model only needs to perform
softmax operation on the input segments in the window when outputting each label, and its
complexity is reduced to O(wN),wT.
 Language modeling capabilities: CTC assumes that output labels are independent of each other, so
it has no ability to model language. RNN-transducer enables models with language model ability
through the joint network, while attention-based models achieves this through decoder network.
 Training difﬁculty: CTC is essentially a loss function, and there is no weight to train in itself. Its
role is to train an acoustic model. Therefore, the CTC-based network model can quickly achieve
optimal results. Attention mechanism and the joint network in RNN-transducer model introduce
weights and functions that require training, and because of the joint training of language model
and acoustic model, they are much more difﬁcult to train than CTC-based models. In addition,
RNN-transducer’s joint network will generate a lot of unreasonable data alignment between
input and output. So it is more difﬁcult to train than attention-based models. Generally, it needs
to pre-train the prediction network and transcription network to have better performance.
 Recognition accuracy: due to the modeling of linguistic knowledge, recognition accuracies of
RNN-Transducer and attention-based model are much higher than that of CTC-based model. In
most cases, the accuracy of attention-based model is higher than RNN-transducer.
6.2. Model Recognition Performance Comparison
In order to analyze the advantages and disadvantages of various ASR methods, [ 38] designed
experiments to carefully compare CTC-based, RNN-transducer, and attention models.
In these experiments, the input acoustic signal is represented with 80-dimensional log-mel
features, computed with a 25 ms window, and a 10 ms frame-shift. Following previous work [ 30],
three consecutive frames are stacked and only every third stacked frame are presented as input to the
encoder. The same acoustic frontend is used for all experiments.
All models use characters as the output unit. The vocabulary includes 26 English lowercase letters,
10 Arabic numerals, a label representing ‘space’, and punctuation symbols (e.g., the apostrophe symbol
(’), hyphen (-), etc.).