Symmetry 2019 ,11, 1018 3 of 26
Around 1970, Itakura, Saito, Atal, etc. ﬁrst introduced linear prediction technology to
speech study [ 10], and Vintsyuk et al. applied dynamic programming technology to speech
recognition [ 11]. Atal and Itakura independently proposed the Linear Predictive Coding LPC) cepstrum
distance [ 10,12]. These technologies’ introduction led to the rapid development of speech recognition
for speaker-speciﬁc, isolated words and small vocabulary tasks.
With the satisfactory results of speech recognition for speaker-speciﬁc, isolated words and small
vocabulary tasks, people began to extend speech recognition to LVCSR for non-speciﬁc-speaker speech.
However, the changes in characteristics of non-speciﬁc-speaker voice, the context correlation within
continuous speech, and the increase in vocabulary pose serious challenges to existing technologies [ 2].
For non-speciﬁc-speaker, large vocabulary continuous speech recognition tasks, HMM-based
technology and deep learning technology are the key to its breakthrough.
In the mid-1980s, HMM technology based on statistics began to be widely studied and applied in
speech recognition, and made substantial progress. Among them, the SPHINX system [ 13] developed
by Kai-Fu Lee of Carnegie–Méron University, which uses HMM to model the speech state over time
and uses GMM to model HMM states’ observation probability, made a breakthrough in LVCSR and
is considered a milestone in the history of speech recognition. Until deep learning techniques were
applied, HMM-GMM had been the dominant framework for speech recognition.
In the 1990s and early 2000s, the HMM-GMM framework was thoroughly and extensively
researched. However, the recognition performance was also approaching its ceiling, especially when
dealing with daily conversations such as telephone calls, conferences, etc., its performance is far
from practical.
Recently, deep learning brings remarkable improvements in many researches such as community
question answering [ 14] and visual tracking [ 15]. New development in speech recognition has also
been promoted. In 2011, Yu Dong, Deng Li, etc. from Microsoft Research Institute proposed a hidden
Markov model combined with context-based deep neural network which named context-dependent
(CD)-DNN-HMM [ 16]. It achieved signiﬁcant performance gains compared to traditional HMM-GMM
system in LVCSR task. Since then, LVCSR technology using deep learning has begun to be
widely studied.
2.2. Models for LVCSR
After years of development, LVCSR has made great progress. Many speech recognition systems
are now deployed on mobile phones, televisions, and automobiles, playing a very important role in
lives. Based on the differences in their basic ideas and key technologies, LVCSR can be divided into
two categories: HMM-based model and the end-to-end model.
2.2.1. HMM-Based Model
For a long time, the HMM-based model has been the mainstream LVCSR model with the best
recognition results. In general, the HMM-based model can be divided into three parts, each of which
is independent of each other and plays a different role: acoustic, pronunciation and language model.
The acoustic model is used to model the mapping between speech input and feature sequence (typically
a phoneme or sub-phoneme sequence). The pronunciation model, which is typically constructed by
professional human linguists, is to achieve a mapping between phonemes (or sub-phonemes) to
graphemes. The language model maps the character sequence to ﬂuent ﬁnal transcription [17].
HMM mechanism may be used in all those three parts [ 18]. However, the HMM-based model
generally emphasizes the use of HMM in acoustic model. In this HMM, sound is the observation,
and feature is the hidden state. For an HMM that has a state set f1,. . .,Jg, HMM-based model