Symmetry 2019 ,11, 1018 10 of 26
used for training. With the help of large-scale datasets, they achieved the best results on their own
constructed noisy datasets, outperforming several commercial companies such as Apple, Google, Bing,
and wit.ai. In their further work, Ref. [ 32] used 11,940 h of English speech and 9400 h Chinese speech
data to train the nine-layer network (seven layers are RNN) model, and ﬁnally achieved better level
than human in regular Chinese recognition.
At Google’s works, Ref. [ 33] trained a seven-layer bi-directional LSTM using 125,000 h of voice
data from YouTube, which has a transcription vocabulary of 100 K. Their other work [ 38] used 125,000 h
of google voice-search trafﬁc data for experiments, too.
A large amount of training data helps to improve model’s performance, but in order to use so
many data, training method needs to be improved accordingly.
In order to speed up the training procedure on large-scale data, ref. [ 19] made special
designs from two aspects: data parallelism and model parallelism. In terms of data parallelism,
the model used intra-graphics processing unit (GPU) parallelism, with each GPU processing multiple
samples simultaneously. Data parallelism was also performed between GPUs, where multiple GPUs
independently process one minibatch and ﬁnally integrate their gradients together. In addition, training
data were sorted by length so that audios of the same length are in the same minibatch, reducing the
average processing steps of RNN. In terms of model parallelism, the model was divided into two parts
according to the time series and run separately. For bi-directional RNN, the two parts exchanged
their roles and respective calculation results at the intermediate time points, thus improving RNN’s
calculation speed.
Based on [ 19,32] designed following efﬁcient methods for large-scale data training at a more
fundamental level: (1) it created its own all-reduce open message passing interface (OpenMPI) code
to sum gradients from different GPUs on different nodes; (2) it designed an efﬁcient CTC calculation
method to run on GPU; (3) it designed and used a new memory allocation method. Finally, the model
achieved 4–21 times acceleration.
3.2.3. Language Model
Equation (6)indicates that CTC considers each label in the output sequence to be independent of
each other. This independent assumption makes CTC not capable of modeling languages. Therefore,
many CTC-based works use a variety of methods to add a language model to CTC. Their results show
that language model is very helpful for improving the performance of CTC-based end-to-end ASR.
Ref. [ 22] showed that on the WSJ dataset, RNN+CTC model alone had 30.1% word error rate
(WER). If a word dictionary was introduced, the WER was 24%. If a tri-gram language model (LM)
was introduced, the WER fell to 8.7%. Ref. [ 28] also showed that a language model was essential to
achieve good performance at the word level.
Inspired by these works, ref. [27,29,39,40] and other works also integrated language model with
CTC. Results showed that the language model can greatly improve recognition accuracy. Not only that,
but the language model is also effective even for models with complex structure and large training
data such as DeepSpeech [ 19] and Deepspeech2 [ 32]. In contrast, there are less works that do not use
language model [21,34], which are less accurate than works with language model.
There are two main ways to use the language model: second-pass and ﬁrst-pass. Second-pass is
also known as re-ranking or the re-score method. In this method, the model ﬁrst uses a beam-search
algorithm to obtain a certain number of candidate results based on the probability distribution
calculated by CTC. These results are then re-scored by the language model, and both of the two scores
are used to determine the optimal recognition result [ 22]. The ﬁrst-pass method adds the language
model score at every extending step in beam-search, and only needs to run the scoring process once
to get the ﬁnal result. Since language model is integrated into the beam-search process, the ﬁrst-pass
method generally has better results and has been more widely used.
However, introducing language model also has its shortcomings. On the one hand, introduction
of language model makes the CTC-based works deviate from the end-to-end principle, and the