Symmetry 2019 ,11, 1018 7 of 26
3.1. Key Ideas of CTC
CTC process can be seen as including two sub-processes: path probability calculation and path
aggregation. In these two sub-processes, the most important is the introduction of a new blank label
(“-”, which means no output) and the intermediate concept path.
3.1.1. Path Probability Calculation
Given an input sequence X=fx1,,xTgof length T, the encoder encodes it into a feature
sequence F=ff1,,fTgof length T, for any t,ftis a vector whose dimension is one more than the
number of elements in the vocabulary V, i.e., ft2RjVj+1.
CTC acts on the feature sequence F=ff1,,fTg. Through softmax operation, CTC converts it
into a probability distribution sequence Y=fy1,,yTg,yt=fy1
t,,yjV+1j
tg, where yi
tindicates
the probability that the output at time step tis label i,yjVj+1
tindicates the probability of outputting the
blank label at time step t.
LetV0=V[f bg,V0Tdenote the collection of all sequences of length Tthat deﬁned on the
vocabularyV0. Combined with the deﬁnition of yk
t, we can conclude that for a given input sequence
X, the conditional probability distribution of any sequence pin the collectionV0Tis calculated as
Equation (6):
p(pjX) =T
Õ
t=1ypt
t,8p2V0T, (6)
where ptrepresents the label at position tof sequence p. The element inV0Tis called path and is
represented by p.
After the above calculation process, the input sequence fx1,,xTgis mapped to a path pof
the same length, and the conditional probability of pcan also be calculated according to Equation (6).
In this mapping process, every input frame xtis mapped to a certain label pt. It can be thought as that
the mapping from input sequence to path is actually a hard-aligning process.
From the calculation process of Equation (6), we can see that there is a very important assumption,
which is the independence assumption: elements in the output sequence are independent of each other.
Any time step which label is selected as the output does not affect the label distribution at other time
steps. In contrast, in the encoding process, the value of yk
tis affected by the speech context information
in both historical and future directions. That is to say, CTC uses conditional independence assumptions
in language models, but not in acoustic models. Therefore, the encoder obtained by CTC training is
essentially and totally an acoustic model, which does not have the ability to model language.
3.1.2. Path Aggregation
From the path probability calculation process, we can ﬁnd that the output path’s length is equal
to the input speech sequence’s, which is not in line with actual situation. Usually, the length of
transcription is much shorter than that of corresponding speech sequence. Therefore, a many-to-one,
long-to-short mapping is needed to aggregate multiple paths into a shorter label sequence.
LetVTdenote the set of all label sequences deﬁned on vocabulary Vwhose length is less than or
equal to T, and the path aggregation is deﬁned as a map function B:L0T7!LT. It maps paths in V0T
(i.e., path) to the real label sequence in VT. The path aggregation Bmainly consists of two operations:
1. Merge the same contiguous labels. If consecutive identical labels appear in the path, merge them
and keep only one of them. For example, for two different paths “c-aa-t-” and “c-a-tt-”, they are
aggregated according to the above principles to give the same result: “c-a-t-”.
2. Delete the blank label “-” in the path. Since label “-” indicates that there is no output, it should
be deleted when the ﬁnal label sequence is generated. The above sequence “c-a-t-”, after being
aggregated according to the present principle, becomes ﬁnal sequence “cat”.