Model@34K
 (53.17%)Correctly classified
Incorrectly classified
Model@36K
 (53.06%)
#1 #2500 #5000 #7500 #10000
Test sample indexModel@38K
 (52.93%)Figure 7: The bar plots show the outcome of
each individual robust prediction for different
snapshots of a same training run of a WRN-28-
10 against1= 8=255onCIFAR -10without
model weight averaging. The test sample indices
have been re-ordered such as to show contiguous
blocks. The plots show a signiﬁcant variation
in individual robust predictions across different
snapshots while the total robust accuracy (i.e. the
number in parenthesis) remains stable.
0.9 0.95 0.99 0.9925 0.995 0.9975 0.999
model weight averaging decay rate 
52%54%56%58%Robust test accuracy
Pad & Crop
CutMixFigure 8: Robust test accuracy against AA+MT
with1= 8=255onCIFAR -10as we vary the
decay rate of the model weight averaging. The
model is a WRN-28-10, which is trained either
with CutMix orPad & Crop .
have previously seen in Figure 3(a), CutMix without weight averaging prevents robust overﬁtting
and leads to a ﬂat robust accuracy after the change of learning rate. Hence, these model snapshots
share the same total accuracy but we would like to know if they differ at the individual prediction
level. Figure 7 represents the individual robust predictions on test samples for three snapshots taken
during training. While these three snapshots roughly have the same number of correctly classiﬁed
samples, we see that there are on average 888 errors (out of 10k samples) per snapshot which are
not made in the other two snapshots. This shows that augmentations which avoid robust overﬁtting
such as CutMix produce diverse and equally performing model iterations, which can be ensembled
effectively by model weight averaging, leading thereby to improved robust performance.
The limits when exploiting the diversity between model iterations. When robust overﬁtting
occurs, weight averaging is still helpful but to a lesser extent. In fact, a compromise must be found
between the performance boost from ensembling diverse model iterations and the performance loss
from incorporating model iterations with degraded performance in the ensemble. We illustrate this
point by running an ablation study in Figure 8 measuring the robust accuracy obtained when varying
the decay rate of model weight averaging and using either Pad & Crop orCutMix . While for CutMix
increasing the weight averaging decay rate (i.e. ensembling more model iterations) always results
in better robust performance, we observe that for Pad & Crop the maximum robust performance is
obtained at= 0:9925 . When the weight averaging decay rate becomes too large (  >0:9925 ), too
many model iterations with degraded performance are incorporated in the ensemble, thus hurting
the robust performance of the ensemble. Hence, the diversity between model iterations can only
compensate up to a certain point for the decrease in robust performance due to robust overﬁtting.
7 Conclusion
Contrary to previous works [ 20,44,56], which have tried data augmentation techniques to train
adversarially robust models without success, we demonstrate that combining data augmentations
with model weight averaging can signiﬁcantly improve robustness. We also provide insights on why
weight averaging works better with data augmentations which reduce robust overﬁtting. We show in
fact that model snapshots of a same run have the same total robust accuracy but they greatly differ at
the individual prediction level, thus allowing a performance boost when ensembling these snapshots.
Code and models are available online at https://github.com/deepmind/deepmind-research/
tree/master/adversarial_robustness .
9