step20%50%60%Robust test accuracy
without external data
with external data(a) Adversarial training with and
without additional data from
80M-T I(without WA)
step20%50%60%Robust test accuracy
without WA
with WA(b) Effect of WA without external
data
step20%50%60%Robust test accuracy
without WA
with WA(c) Effect of WA with external
data
Figure 2: We compare the robust accuracy against 1= 8=255onCIFAR -10of an adversarially
trained Wide ResNet ( WRN)-28-10. Panel (a) shows the impact of using additional external data
from 80M-T I[51] and illustrates robust overﬁtting . Panel (b) shows the beneﬁt of model weight
averaging (WA) despite robust overﬁtting. Panel (c) shows that WA remains effective and useful even
when robust overﬁtting disappears. The graphs show the evolution of the robust accuracy as training
progresses (against P GD40). The jump two-thirds through training is due to a drop in learning rate.
3.4 Hypothesis
As WA results in ﬂatter, wider solutions compared to the steep decrease in robust accuracy observed
for Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) [ 8], it is natural to ask ourselves whether WA remains useful
in cases that do not exhibit robust overﬁtting. Figure 2(c) shows how the robust accuracy evolves
as training progresses when using WA and additional external data (for which standard SGD does
not show signs of overﬁtting). We notice that the robust performance in this setting is not only
preserved but even boosted when using WA. Hence, we formulate the hypothesis that model weight
averaging helps robustness toagreater extent when robust accuracy between model iterations canbe
maintained . This hypothesis is also motivated by the observation that WA acts as a temporal ensemble
– akin to Fast Geometric Ensembling by Garipov et al. [17] who show that efﬁcient ensembling can
be obtained by aggregating multiple checkpoint parameters at different training times. As such,
to improve robustness, it is important to ensemble a suite of equally strong and diverse models.
Although mildly successful, we note that ensembling has received some attention in the context
of adversarial training [ 39,48]. In particular, Grefenstette et al. [22], Tramèr et al. [52] found that
ensembling could reduce the risk of gradient obfuscation caused by locally non-linear loss surfaces.
4 Data augmentations
Limiting robust overﬁtting without external data. Rice et al. [44] show that combining data
augmentation methods such as Cutout orMixUp with early stopping does not improve robustness
upon early stopping alone. While, these methods do not improve upon the “best” robust accuracy,
they reduce the extent of robust overﬁtting, thus resulting in a slower decrease in robust accuracy
compared to classical adversarial training (which uses random crops and weight decay). This can be
seen in Figure 3(a) where MixUp without WA exhibits no decrease in robust accuracy, whereas the
robust accuracy of the standard combination of random padding-and-cropping without WA ( Pad &
Crop ) decreases immediately after the change of learning rate.
Testing the hypothesis. Since MixUp preserves robust accuracy while Pad & Crop does not, this
comparison can be used to evaluate the hypothesis that WA is more beneﬁcial when the performance
between model iterations is maintained. Therefore, we compare in Figure 3(b) the effect of WA
on robustness when using MixUp . We observe that, when using WA, the performance of MixUp
surpasses the performance of Pad & Crop . Indeed, the robust accuracy obtained by the averaged
weights of Pad & Crop (in blue) slowly decreases after the change of learning rate, while the one
obtained by MixUp (in green) increases throughout training1. Ultimately, MixUp with WA obtains
a higher robust accuracy despite the fact that the non-averaged MixUp model has a signiﬁcantly
lower “best” robust accuracy than the non-averaged Pad & Crop model. This ﬁnding is notable as it
1The accuracy drop just after the change of learning rate stems from averaging very different weights.
4