10 
 The difference in I -V characteristics can be attributed not only to different values of 𝑅𝑆 and 𝑅𝑃, but also to the 1 
diode ideality factor, 𝑎. The spread  (scatter)  of the optimal solutions (30 sets) of these 3 -parameters is depicted in 2 
Fig. 5. It is observed that the value of each of these parameters varies over a reasonably wide  range. However, each 3 
set of optimal solutions can attain zero error for the three important  points. All the previous studies showed one I - 4 
V characteristic that passes through the three major points. However, the PV cell characteristic is found to be not 5 
unique when the designer  focus es on the 3 points of open circuit, short circuit and maximum power. Now, the 6 
question is, does a solar cell have multiple I -V characteristics? Or does a cell have different sets of optimal 7 
parameters? In reality, a solar cell has one defined  I-V cha racteristic  corresponding to a specific set of cell 8 
parameters . But, the user can decode th at specific  I-V characteristic only if experimental data are available for more 9 
points and not limited to the 3 -characteristic points. While estimating the optimum c ell parameters, the targeted 10 
aggregate  error for all available experimental I -V points shall be zero. The more the number of available I -V points, 11 
the more accurate the estimation is. Therefore, if the designer is concerned with only maximum power point, w hich 12 
in most cases is true, any set of optimal parameters is good enough for simulation and analysis. However, if the 13 
unique  I-V characteristic  and the corresponding set of cell parameters  are desired, the datasheet information on three 14 
characteristic  points is not sufficient and  more  experimental I-V data points are necessary.  15 
 16 
Fig. 4. 30 nos. probable I-V characteristic s for single -diode model of polycrystalline cell  KC200 GT. 17 
 18 
Fig. 5. Scatter  of optimal s olution s (30 points)  for single -diode model of polycrystalline cell KC200 GT. 19