• Corresponding authors  Parameter estimation  of solar cells using datasheet  information with  the 1 
application of an adaptive differential evolution  algorithm  2 
Partha  P. Biswas1*, P. N. Suganthan1, Guohua Wu2*, Gehan A . J. Amaratunga3 3 
1School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering , Nanyang Tech nological University, Singapore  4 
2School of Traffic and Transportation Engineering , Central South University , Changsha, PR China  5 
3Department of Engineering , University of Cambridge, UK  6 
parthapr001@e.ntu.edu.sg , epnsugan@ntu.edu.sg , guohuawu.nudt@gmail.com ,  7 
gaja1@hermes.cam.ac.uk  8 
 9 
Abstract:  A solar cell or photovoltaic (PV) module is electrically represented by an appropriate circuit 10 
model with certain defined parameters. The parameters are required to be correctly computed  from solar 11 
cell characteristic and/or a set of experimental data for simulation and control of the PV system. However, 12 
experimental data or accurate characteristic data  (i.e. current -voltage or I -V curve)  of a PV module  may 13 
not be readily available. The manufacturer of a PV system usually provides relevant information on open 14 
circuit, short circuit and maximum power points. Therefore, a n alternate approach is to estimate the PV 15 
system parameters by utilizing  the I-V characteristi c data at these three major points. The process involves 16 
formulation and solution of complex non -linear equations from an adopted solar cell  model . This paper 17 
proposes  an application of an advanced adaptive differential evolution algorithm on the problem of PV 18 
module parameter estimation using minimum available information from the manufacturer datasheet  by 19 
implementing  single -diode and double -diode models. Linear population size reduction technique of 20 
success history based adaptive differential evolution (L -SHADE) algorithm is implemented to minimize 21 
the error of  current -voltage relationships at the above -mentioned three important points defining the I -V 22 
characteristic . The algorithm facilitates evol ution of solution s that result in almost zero error (<10−12) 23 
at these three major  points.  All relevant parameters of the PV cell are optimized by the algorithm without 24 
an assumption or predetermination of any parameter. It is observed that a  set of feasible solutions 25 
(parameters) is obtained for the PV module from multiple runs of the algorithm.  The fact of attaining 26 
several probable solutions from datasheet information using  few other  metaheuristics is also discussed in 27 
this work . 28 
 29 
Keywords:  Photovoltaic module  · Parameter estimation  · Single -diode model · Double -diode 30 
model  · Current -voltage characteristic  · Adaptive differential evolution  algorithm  31 
 32 
1. Introduction  33 
 34 
Depletion of fossil fuels, environment al regulation and carbon tax imposition in many countries force mankind to 35 
look for clean, replenishable sources of energy. Solar energy is a popular form of renewable energy as it is abundant 36 
and almost ubiquitous. The energy can be directly  converted  to electricity by photovoltaic (PV) system. The unit of 37 
a PV system is the PV cell. Normally, many PV cells are grouped together to form a PV module . The array of PV 38 
modules  can directly feed small DC loads. However, converter is necessary for larger  application of the electricity 39 
generated by the PV system. For effective utilization, the PV device is needed to be operated at maximum power 40 
point (MPP). Therefore,  a designer must know the appropriate  model  of a PV cell for the detailed study, simulatio n 41 
and analysis . 42 
  43 
A PV cell is a p -n junction diode , typically represented with an equivalent electrical circuit [ 1]. Depending on the 44 
accuracy sought, the designer can assume a model with one, two or even more diodes. Single -diode model has been 45 
the most popular model due to its simplicity coupled with an acceptable level of accuracy  in representing the I -V 46 
characteri stic. Double -diode model accounts for the loss in the depletion region caused by the recombination of 47 
carriers [ 2]. Though three -diode model has been studied in literature [ 3-4], the model has not been so popular as 48 
increment in accuracy with this model is  not high enough considering the escalation in complexity due to addition 49 
of one more diode  [5]. No matter whatever circuit model is adopted for the PV system, finding the optimum circuit 50 
parameters requires solution of transcendental equations relating I -V characteristic of the PV device . For a single - 51 
diode model, the parameters to be found are the diode ideality factor ( 𝑎 ), the photocurrent ( 𝐼𝑃𝑉 ), the reverse 52 
saturation curren t of the diode ( 𝐼𝑂), the series resistance ( 𝑅𝑆) and the parallel resistance ( 𝑅𝑃). Population based 53 
metaheuristic methods have been very effective in solving non -linear, multimodal optimization problems. In recent 54 
years, several evolutionary algorithm s (EAs) have been applied in finding optimal parameters of a PV cell.  Usually 55 
an error function between the sets of experimental and the simulated I-V data of the PV system  is minimized by the 56 
EAs to provide optimal cell parameters. Variants of particle swarm optimization (PSO) such as time varying 57