Adversarial Examples in Modern Machine Learning: A Review
Lflow(f) +Ladv(x0;t) (43)
whereistheweightfactor, Ladv(x0;t)istheclassiﬁcationloss(e.g., theC&WlossfunctionasinEquation13
in Section 4.11), and Lflow()is a Total Variation loss [154] that encourages small and smooth perturbations.
In their experiments, the authors used L-BFGS [100] as the optimizer.
Figure 9: Illustration of spatially transformed adversarial example that is misclassiﬁed as the digit “2” where
the red arrows show how the pixels are moved from benign to adversarial image (taken from Xiao et al. [95]).
Adversarial examples generated by stAdv were shown to be perceptually indistinguishable from the orig-
inal example by a human, following the procedure in [146, 147]. The authors also evaluated stAdv against
a variety of methods that rely upon Lpnorm as the similarity metric, such as FGSM [32] and C&W [44],
evaluating against defenses including adversarial training [32] (see Section 6.1.1), ensemble adversarial train-
ing [47] (see Section 6.1.6), and PGD adversarial training [145] (see Section 6.1.5). In this experiment, stAdv
was found to be more eﬀective than Lpnorm attacks by a large margin. Nevertheless, since the authors only
considered baseline adversaries generated using FGSM, it remains to be seen if stAdv can produce stronger
adversaries than other attacks such as C&W. Still, we conclude that the use of diﬀerent perceptual metric
may produce diﬀerent types of adversaries, which can be used to attack defenses that are designed to be
robust against Lpadversaries.
4.25 Expectation Over Transformation
Early adversarial examples typically have lessened adversarial eﬀects when the source input is transformed,
e.g., when a source image is rotated or translated. In order to create adversaries that are robust to such
transformations, Athalye et al. [96] proposed a method called the Expectation Over Transformation (EOT).
Such a robustness attribute is especially important for physical-realizable adversarial examples, e.g., images
that are printed or displayed in the real-world and imaged under from diﬀerent view angles (see Section 5
for more details).
EOT is a meta-optimization process that can be coupled with various optimization-based attacks. The
key addition is to pre-process each input instance xby one or more parameterized transforms t(x), and to
optimize the expectation of the objective function over the probability distributions Tof the transformation
parameters:
arg min
x0EtT
Ladv(t(x0)) +Lperc(x;x0)
; (44)
whereLadvrepresents an adversarial loss (e.g., to minimize the distance between model predictions and
adversarial labels, or to maximize the model’s training error), and Lpercentails a perceptual similarity
loss (comparing either the raw source versus perturbed inputs, or their transformed representations). In
the reported experiments, perceptual similarity was measured as Euclidean distance in the CIE Lab space,
which is designed to correspond more closely to human perceptual distance compared to RGB (while still
remaining diﬀerentiable) [155].
41