Adversarial Examples in Modern Machine Learning: A Review
8 Conclusion and Future Work
We have seen various ways to generate adversarial examples in both whitebox and blackbox settings. While
whitebox attack is especially important for evaluating new defenses in the worst-case scenario, works in
blackbox attack are as important since they involve more realistic threat model that may happen in the
real world. We also discussed several methods to defend against adversarial examples either by trying to
robustify a model, or identifying adversarial samples so they can be rejected. However, the majority of
these defenses boil down to some form of gradient masking; hiding or disrupting the gradients available to
an attacker. The work from Athalye et al. [55] dramatically demonstrated the fragility of such approaches.
One of the interesting directions to explore is to investigate the eﬀectiveness of Bayesian inference as an
adversarial defense method. It may also be interesting to explore other existing algorithms to perform both
adversarial attack and defense. For example, one may further explore the applications of reinforcement
learning, meta-learning, and genetic algorithms in the ﬁeld of adversarial machine learning.
Recent work aiming to improve resistance to adversarial attacks resulted in more generally robust models,
which learned features that were immediately intuitive to human users [207, 209, 239]. Ilyas et al. [76] showed
how machine learning models can be trained to be robust by just relying on some robust features , while
models that are trained on non-robust features are highly vulnerable to adversarial examples. On somewhat
similar notes, Geirhos et al. [240] found that convolutional neural nets are biased towards textures, and how
increasing the bias towards shape may improve the robustness of the model. A follow up work by Zhang and
Zhu [241] further showed that adversarially trained model is less biased towards textures and more towards
shapes or edges. This emphasizes the fruitfulness of asking why machine learning models fail, and exploring
those failure modes.
Althoughtherehavebeenmanydiﬀerentdefensestrategiesproposed, manyofthesedefensemethodshave
been found to be vulnerable to speciﬁc type of attacks, and raises a concern on whether these defenses were
evaluatedunfairly[55,97,202,232]whichmayhaveledtofalserobustness. Gradientmaskingandobfuscated
gradients seems to be phenomenons that many defense methods often rely, intentionally or not . Athalye et al.
[55] suggested several tips to identify gradient masking: 1) if single step attacks perform better than iterative
attacks, 2) if blackbox attacks perform better than whitebox attacks, 3) if unbounded perturbations do not
reach 100% attack success rate, and 4) if random sampling successfully ﬁnds adversarial examples while
gradient based attacks do not.
We have seen the diﬃculty of correctly evaluating robustness of defense methods. New defenses not only
need to be evaluated against existing strongest adversaries, but also need to be evaluated on adaptive attacks
(i.e., evaluated with the assumption that an attacker is aware of the defense strategy used and will seek to
overcome it). For example, if the defense strategy aims to perform non-diﬀerentiable operation or gradient
minimization, then the defense needs to be evaluated against attacks that do not rely on calculating the
exact gradient such as BPDA [55] (see Section 4.26) or SPSA [97] (see Section 4.27). Defenses also need to
be evaluated against multiple types of adversaries (e.g., L1,L0, andL2and other types of adversaries) as
defensesuchasadversarialtraininghavebeenshowntoonlyberobustagainstcertaintypesofadversaries[47,
187, 210, 211]. Furthermore, the vast majority of defenses are limited to empirical evaluations and do not
oﬀer robustness guarantee to unknown attacks. A future direction is to investigate properties that can
theoretically guarantee robustness to adversarial attacks, similar to the WRM [182] (see Section 6.1.13),
coupled with empirical evaluations. It is important to note that these methods typically oﬀer guarantee
robustness only when the diﬀerence between the input and its adversarial counterpart is small under a
certain metric. However, our understanding in perceptual similarity metric is still very limited. Common
perceptual similarity metric such as the mean squared error is deﬁnitely not an ideal one [151]. As we
discussed in Section 4.24, attacks like stAdv [95] may still be able to penetrate through defenses that focus
only on defending against Lpadversaries. Carlini et al. [242] discuss about how to evaluate robustness and
some common pitfalls in robustness evaluation in more detail, thus we refer readers to their work for a more
comprehensive discussion.
We also discussed about the transferability property, where adversarial examples can be transferred
between diﬀerent machine learning models, diﬀerent machine learning techniques, and diﬀerent tasks. In the
case of neural networks, future research that evaluates the relation between memorization of deep networks
79