Adversarial Examples in Modern Machine Learning: A Review
5 Towards Real World Adversarial Attacks
This section discusses the danger of adversarial examples in real world scenarios. Most work on adversarial
attacks only test adversarial examples in the virtual domain, raising the question of whether or not these
adversarialexamplesarestilleﬀectiveinthe3Drealworldenvironment. Someworkspresentedinthissection
focus on physically realizable adversarial examples, and others show that adversarial examples need not be
physically realizable to be dangerous in real world. We refer physically realizable adversaries as adversarial
examples that are still adversarial when viewed in the 3D world from various viewpoints.
5.1 Printed Adversarial Examples
Kurakin et al. [77] studied whether adversarial examples generated using FGSM [32] (see Section 4.2),
BIM [45, 77] (see Section 4.3), and ILLCM [45, 77] (see Section 4.4) can be printed and remain adversarial
in the physical world. This was evaluated by capturing pictures of printed adversarial examples using a
cellphone camera, and classiﬁed these images with Inception-v3 [111] model.
In their experiments, they found adversaries generated by FGSM to be the most robust in the physical
world, while ILLCM is the least robust. They hypothesized that this is due to the fact that BIM and ILLCM
attempt to ﬁnd more subtle perturbations, which are easier to be destroyed in the real world environment.
Further, Kurakin et al. [77] demonstrated the transferability of the printed adversarial examples by fooling
an open source mobile application that performs image classiﬁcation. Note that the adversarial examples
were generated to fool Inception-v3 model, and not the model deployed by the mobile application.
Figure 11: Printed adversarial example still fools an image classiﬁer (taken from Kurakin et al. [77]).
The printed adversarial examples generated by this method seem to only work in some limited settings
such as when the printed image is located right in front of the camera with small variations in lighting,
distance, and camera angle, but they have not been evaluated on more diverse and extreme sets of 2D and
3D transformations. Still, both this work and the adversarial eyeglasses [64] (see Section 5.2) ignited the
discussion of adversarial examples in the physical world.
5.2 Adversarial Eyeglasses
Sharif et al. [64] demonstrated how a printable adversarial eyeglass can fool face recognition systems. As in
the L-BFGS attack [31] (see Section 4.1), Sharif et al. [64] model this problem as an optimization problem
that can be solved using gradient descent. In order to generate an adversary that looks like an eyeglass, a
masking matrix Mxis used so that only pixels inside the mask are allowed to change during the optimization
process. Sharif et al. [64] noticed the challenges in fabricating the eyeglass as a printer may produce slightly
diﬀerent color when printing. An additional loss term called the Non Printability Score (NPS) was then
introduced as part of the optimization process to ensure that the generated adversary is made of colors that
are printable by a particular printer. NPS is deﬁned as
46