Adversarial Examples in Modern Machine Learning: A Review
1 Introduction
Machine learning algorithms have critical roles in an increasing number of domains. Technologies such
as autonomous vehicles and language translation systems use machine learning at their core. Since the
early success of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) on the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition
Competition(ILSVRC)[1,2,3], deeplearning[4,5]hasbeensuccessfullyappliedtonumeroustasksincluding
image classiﬁcation [3, 6, 7], segmentation [8, 9], object tracking [10, 11, 12], object detection [13, 14, 15],
speech recognition [16, 17, 18], language translation [19, 20, 21], and many more.
Despite the success of modern machine learning techniques in performing various complex tasks, security
in machine learning has received far less academic attention. Robustness, both to accident and to malevolent
agents, is clearly a crucial determinant of the success of machine learning systems in the real world. For
example, Amodei et al. [22] catalogue a variety of possible negative impacts from poorly secured systems,
particularly emphasizing issues around sensitive applications such as medical and transportation systems.
Although these authors focused on the safety of reinforcement learning algorithms in particular, many of the
addressed concerns can directly applied to wide range of machine learning models.
In this review, we focus on the application of adversarial examples to supervised learning problems. We
leave it to future authors to cover unsupervised learning, reinforcement learning, or other classes of problems.
We also restrict our discussion to classiﬁcation tasks, as opposed to regression, although many of the methods
discussed below may generalize to other problem contexts.
1.1 What can we learn from adversarial examples?
The concept of an adversarial example long predates work in machine learning. Humans are famously vulner-
able to perceptual illusions, which have been fruitfully used to explore the mechanisms and representations
underlying human cognition. Such illusions are frequently used to elucidate the implicit priors present in hu-
man perception. For instance, the Müller-Lyer illusion [23], in which a line bracketed by two outwards-facing
arrows appears longer than one bracketed by outwards facing ones is thought to reveal a “cubeness” prior
learned by people who live in highly-rectangular environments [24]. Color and brightness constancy - our
ability to perceive colors and brightness as unchanging despite variance in illumination - are richly explored
in illusions such as Adelson’s checkerboard illusion and Lotto’s coloured cube. Such illusions can even probe
the inter-individual variance in visual priors: the recently popular “dress colour” meme is thought to rely
upon peoples’ diﬀering expectations of illuminating light, with people used to blue-tinted illumination seeing
the dress as gold/white, and those assuming warm illumination seeing it as blue/black [25].
Such illusions elucidate not only cognitive phenomena, but details of the underlying neural circuitry (for
a thorough review, see Eagleman [26]). For example, the phenomenon of Inter Ocular transfer has provided
a classic paradigm for identifying the locus of illusory eﬀects. Based upon whether an illusory eﬀect transfers
from one eye to another, the substrate can be localized to pre-cortical circuitry (no transfer between eyes)
or cortical ones, pathways after the mingling of information between the eyes [27, 28]. Similarly, adaptation-
based illusions - where the appearance of an image changes over a period of prolonged viewing - have been
used to predict the tuning curves of orientation-tuned neurons in visual cortex [27], the organization of
colour representation in the lateral geniculate nucleus [29], and the sensitivity of the three colour-coding cell
types in the retina [30]. So eﬀective were these techniques that they earned the nickname “the psychologists’
microelectrode” - a precise, non-invasive way to characterize the internal workings of a blackbox system.
Szegedy et al. [31] found that deep neural networks are also vulnerable to “illusions”. These “adversarial
examples” are created by the addition of “hidden messages” to an image, causing a machine learning model to
grossly misclassify the perturbed image. Unlike perceptual illusions in humans, which are handcrafted, such
examples are algorithmically generated to fool machine learning models. Figure 1 shows the now famous
adversarial example generated using a method called the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) [32] (see
Section 4.2). Judging from these evidences, there is indeed a huge generalisation gap between humans and
deep neural networks [33].
Theparallelbetweenperceptualillusionsinhumansandadversarialexamplesinmachinesextendsbeyond
the superﬁcial in several important ways. One explanation for the eﬀectiveness of adversarial examples is
4