Adversarial Examples in Modern Machine Learning: A Review
Papernot et al. [43] showed how increasing the temperature of the softmax function causes the probability
vector to converge to1
CasT!1. In other words, the predictions from both the teacher and student models
are trained to be smooth. They also showed that the Jacobian of the model with respect to input features is
inversely proportional to the temperature: the higher the temperature, the lower the dependence upon input
features. They argued that when the temperature is brought back to 1 during test time, it will only cause
the probability vector to be more discrete but will not change the Jacobian of the model, arriving at a model
with reduced sensitivity to small changes in the input (a similar logic to the Deep Contractive Network in
Section 6.1.2).
Although defensive distillation was shown to be robust against adversarial examples generated using the
JSMA-F [80] (see Section 4.8), this defense was found to be vulnerable to a variant of JSMA-Z [181], C&W
attacks [44] (see Section 4.11), as well as SBA [41] (see Section 4.9). Carlini and Wagner [44, 181] evaluated
this defense and pointed out how defensively distilled model produces logits with higher values compared to
standard models. They observed that if the values of the correct logit are large, the softmax probability of
the correct class will be closer to 1:0while those of the non-maximum elements become smaller. They also
found that the values of non-maximum element are even smaller than the precision of 32-bit ﬂoating values,
and thus are rounded to 0. In this case, the gradients of these units with respect to the input will be 0, which
may cause attacks like JSMA-F to fail in some cases. This is an interesting twist, given that the intention of
the temperature parameter was originally to produce a smoother output distribution. Carlini and Wagner
[181] showed that this defense can be circumvented by JSMA-Z variant where the logits are divided by the
temperature constant Tbefore being used to calculate the gradients.
6.1.4 MagNet
MagNet [81] is a multi-pronged approach to robustness, which requires a pair of autoencoders: a detector
(D) and a reformer networks ( R). Both are trained to reconstruct clean examples. However, the detector
Dis used to detect if an input is adversarial or not, while the reformer Ris used to remove adversarial
perturbations from adversarial inputs, moving examples back towards the manifold of clean data.
SinceDhas been trained to reconstruct clean examples, the detector network outputs images that are
close to the distribution of the clean samples, even when the inputs to the detector network are adversarial.
If the input was already a clean example, then the output of the detector network looks very similar; if the
input was in fact adversarial, then the reconstruction loss between input and output will be high. One can
then perform adversarial detection by setting a threshold value on the input reconstruction error.
Since naively measuring the reconstruction error only works if adversarial perturbations are large, [81]
leverage the target classiﬁer network fin their detection algorithm. They do this by measuring the Jensen-
Shannon Divergence ( DJS) [201] between f’s output when fed the original image and f’s output when fed
the detector-preprocessed image. The DJScan be understood as symmetric version of the Kullback-Leibler
divergence [127]. Formally, the DJSis deﬁned as
DJS
f(x)jjf(D(x))
=1
2DKL
f(x)jjM
+1
2DKL
f(D(x))jjM
; (58)
whereM=f(x)+f(D(x))
2, andDKLis the Kullback-Leibler divergence, DKL(PjjQ) =P
iP(i) logP(i)
Q(i).
Meng and Chen [81] argued that although the diﬀerence between x0andD(x0)may be small (e.g., when
xandx0are similar), the diﬀerence between f(x0)andf(D(x0))will be large due to the misclassiﬁcation by
the target network. Conversely, the diﬀerence between f(x)andf(D(x))stays small. Thus, the measure of
theDJSgives a signal of whether an input is adversarial or not. To improve numerical stability, Meng and
Chen [81] set the temperature constant of the softmax function to be larger than one, just as in defensive
distillation [43] (see Section 6.1.3).
Meng and Chen [81] realized that the whole MagNet pipeline is diﬀerentiable, making it vulnerable in
whiteboxsettings. Theythussuggestedtousemultipledetectorandreformernetworks,andthentorandomly
choose two of the candidates as the detector and reformer networks during test time. A regularization term
56