Adversarial Examples in Modern Machine Learning: A Review
whereriis thei-th masked region proposal. Since Chen et al. [156] wanted to constraint the location of the
perturbations, a masking operator was used. It is not clear how the masking operator was implemented, but
it may be similar to the masking operator used to generate adversarial eyeglass [64] (see Section 5.2), except
that it has to account for all the region proposals.
Chen et al. [156] showed that the generated adversaries can reasonably fool the Faster R-CNN model
in the real world when viewed from diﬀerent distances and view angles. The adversaries were tested both
in a controlled indoor environment and by conducting drive-by tests. They also identiﬁed some limitations
such as the weakness of the perturbations when viewed from a high viewing angle and lack of transferability
to other detection models. However, this work emphasizes once again how adversarial examples can be
physically realizable to fool object detection models that are more complex than classiﬁcation models.
5.7 Non-physical Adversaries in the Real World
In some cases, adversarial attacks do not need to be physically realizable to be dangerous. For example,
camera model identiﬁcation is the task of identifying the speciﬁc camera that was used to take an image
of interest, which can be used to detect copyright infringement and image falsiﬁcation. Several works have
considered deep learning as a means to perform camera model identiﬁcation [169, 170, 171]. Güera et al.
[172] showed that adversarial attack techniques such as the FGSM [32] (see Section 4.2) and JSMA [80] (see
Section 4.8) are suﬃcient to fool the models that were trained to perform camera model identiﬁcation. This
type of attack does not only exist in the vision domain, but also in the digital audio domain [173], where the
attack successfully fooled real world music copyright detectors.
Another area where adversarial examples do not have to be physically realizable is in the ﬁeld of med-
ical imaging. Deep learning systems have shown promising performance when it comes to medical image
analysis [174]. Deep learning has been used for diagnosis of breast cancer [175], pneumonia [176], skin can-
cer [177, 178], and has demonstrated super-human performance in some of the cases. Finlayson et al. [179]
showed that existing adversarial attack methods can be applied on medical images, and discussed various
real world scenarios where adversarial examples might negatively impact the healthcare economy when ma-
chine learning based systems are used. A bad dermatologist could commit fraud by inserting adversarial
perturbations on dermoscopy images in order to create more proﬁt by suggesting to perform unnecessary
procedures on patients, which will negatively aﬀect both the patients and insurance companies. A bad
pharmaceutical company can apply adversarial perturbations to alter the images used for new drug trials in
order to get positive results. A bad insurer can use adversarial examples to alter the healthcare policy by
manipulating the rate of surgeries required, which may be based on recommendations from machine learning
based systems. All of these are possible scenarios on how adversarial examples can negatively impact the
healthcare industry that are important to be addressed.
51