Adversarial Examples in Modern Machine Learning: A Review
(a) AAE
(b) P-ATN
Figure 5: Illustrations of AAE and P-ATN.
One naive instantiation of ATN is to set the adversarial class distribution r(y;t)to a one-hot encoding
oft, as when training normal classiﬁcation models. Nevertheless, the authors proposed a more eﬀective
reranking function, whose k-th components are minimally diﬀerent from the softmax probabilities of the
pre-trained classiﬁer f(x)(k):
r(y;t)(k)/(
max(f(x))ifk=t
f(x)(k) otherwise(24)
Since the >1hyper-parameter enhances the desired conﬁdence for the adversarial class, in general r(y;t)
needs to be vector-re-normalized. It is important to note that each trained ATN generator can only produce
adversarial examples that will be misclassiﬁed as a particular class by the targeted model. Multiple ATNs
must be trained in order to fool a given classiﬁer into diverse adversarial classes.
Baluja and Fischer [87] found that the transferability of adversarial examples generated by ATN is fairly
poor, butcanbeenhancedbytrainingtheATNtofoolmultiplenetworksatthesametime(e.g., thegradients
coming from attacking multiple networks are averaged during backpropagation). ATN exhibits some beneﬁts
thatotherattackmethodsarelacking: forinstance, sinceATNtakesadvantageoftheexpressivenessofneural
networks, the adversarial examples generated by ATN tend to be more diverse. This diversity of adversarial
examples can also be leveraged for adversarial training [32] (see Section 6.1.1). Similar to preliminary
investigationsbyHamm[132], afutureinterestingresearchdirectionistoformulateamin-maxgamebetween
aclassiﬁerandanATNthatcanprovidesome guarantee oftheclassiﬁer’srobustness, bylearningfromdiverse
sets of adversarial examples generated by the ATN without suﬀering from catastrophic forgetting [133]
between training iterations.
4.16 Dense Adversary Generation
Dense Adversary Generation (DAG) [88] is a targeted attack method for semantic image segmentation and
object detection models. DAG generalizes from attacks on classiﬁcation models in that it aims to misclassify
multiple target outputs associated to each given input, namely multiple pixel labels for semantic segmentation
tasks, or multiple region proposals for object detection tasks. DAG requires both the ground truth class
labels as well as speciﬁc adversarial labels for every target output of a given model. Using this information,
DAG incrementally builds an adversarial input perturbation rthat decreases the predicted logits for the
27