Adversarial Examples in Modern Machine Learning: A Review
does not rely on gradient masking by evaluating this defense against SPSA (see Section 4.27), which is a
gradient-free adversarial attack.
As a follow-up work, Tsipras et al. [207] showed several unexpected beneﬁts to training models with
this method. First, they showed how models trained using PGD-AT tend to only utilize features that are
strongly correlated with the correct label, eﬀectively reducing the attack surface (thus implicitly achieving
the same goal as the Deep Contractive Network, but better, see Section 6.1.2). They argued that standard
classiﬁers utilize too many features that are weakly correlated with the correct label in order to achieve
high accuracy, thus sacriﬁcing adversarial robustness. Lastly, they showed how the gradients of a robust
model is visually interpretable to a human with no additional steps required, precisely because the robust
solution relies upon a small number of important features rather than a large number of weakly relevant ones.
Note that other gradient-based explainability methods such as Gradient-weighted Class Activation Mapping
(Grad-CAM) [208] needs to perform additional steps to achieve visually interpretable saliency maps. Similar
ﬁndings were also reported by Engstrom et al. [209].
Although PGD-AT seems to be promising, the beneﬁts do not come for free. For example, PGD-AT
was shown to compromise the model’s accuracy on clean examples dramatically [207]. Furthermore, the
computational cost of this method is higher than standard adversarial training, since the cost scales with
the number of PGD iterations. More recent works also showed how PGD adversarial training is mainly only
robust against certain types of adversary used during the training, but not to the others [187, 210, 211].
6.1.6 Ensemble Adversarial Training
Ensemble adversarial training [47] is a variant of adversarial training [32] (see Section 6.1.1) in which a model
is retrained on adversarial examples generated to attack various other pre-trained models . This decoupling
of target model and adversarial training examples overcomes the overﬁtting observed with the vanilla version
of adversarial training. Tramèr et al. [47] argued that ensemble adversarial training is a good approximation
of the inner maximization shown in Equation 60 due to the transferability of adversarial examples between
diﬀerent models. Moreover, since the adversarial examples generation process is independent from the model
that is being trained, they hypothesized ensemble adversarial training to be more robust to future blackbox
attacks compared to the standard adversarial training.
In practice, Tramèr et al. [47] alternate the source of adversarial examples between the currently trained
and other pre-trained models, where the pre-trained models are chosen randomly per batch. This is done in
order to ensure diversity of adversarial examples during training. Tramèr et al. [47] noted that the gradients
of the pre-trained models can be pre-computed for the whole training dataset. Since we are not updating
the weights of the pre-trained models, the computation needed per training batch in ensemble adversarial
training is thus lower compared to standard adversarial training.
Tramèr et al. [47] demonstrated that this method outperforms regular adversarial training on ILLCM
adversaries (see Section 4.4) in blackbox settings. In their experiments, the models were evaluated against
SBA [41] (see Section 4.9) that used FGSM [32] (see Section 4.2) to attack the substitute model. However,
theyalsofoundthatensembleadversarialtrainingisslightlylessaccurateandslowertoconvergecomparedto
the standard method. They also demonstrated the scalability of ensemble adversarial training by evaluating
their defense on ImageNet dataset.
As discussed in Section 4.5, performing standard adversarial training causes the defended model to be
more robust against 2-step BIM [45, 77] (see Section 4.3) than R+FGSM [47] (see Section 4.5), strengthening
the suspicion of gradient masking. Tramèr et al. [47] showed that this ratio is decreased in the ensemble
case. Nevertheless, ensemble adversarial training is still not immune to adversarial examples as it is still
circumventable by R+FGSM.
6.1.7 Random Resizing and Padding as a Defense
Xie et al. [51] introduced a defense based on Random Resizing and Padding (RRP). The goal of this approach
is to remove perturbations through input transformation and introduce randomness during inference so that
the gradient of the loss with respect to the input is harder to compute. Concretely, RRP is implemented
58