Adversarial Examples in Modern Machine Learning: A Review
2 Common Terms and Notations
2.1 Common Terms
We provide deﬁnitions of several terms that are commonly used in the ﬁeld of adversarial machine learning
in Table 1.
Table 1: Common terms in adversarial machine learning.
Common Terms Deﬁnition
Adversarial example Input to a machine learning model that is intentionally designed to
cause a model to make mistake in its predictions despite resembling
a valid input to a human.
Adversarial perturbation Diﬀerence between a non-adversarial example and its adversarial
counterpart.
Adversarial attacks Methods to generate adversarial examples.
Adversarial defenses Methods to defend against adversarial examples.
Adversarial robustness The property of resisting misclassiﬁcation of adversarial examples.
Adversarial detection Methods to detect adversarial examples.
Whitebox attack Attack scenario where an attacker has complete access to the
target model, including the model’s architecture and parameters.
Blackbox attack Attack scenario where an attacker can only observe the outputs of
the targeted model.
Transferability A property of adversarial examples:
examples speciﬁcally generated to fool a model can also be used to
fool other models.
Universal attack Attack scenario where an attacker devises a single transform such
as image perturbation that adversarially confuses the model for
all or most input values (input-agnostic).
Targeted attack Attack scenario where an attacker wants the adversaries to be
mispredicted in a speciﬁc way.
Non-targeted attack Attack scenario where an attacker does not care about the outcome
as long as the example is mispredicted.
Adversarial training [32] Adversarial defense technique to train a model by including
adversarial examples into the training set. Note that this diﬀers from
the notion of adversarial training used in Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [63].
Gradient masking [46, 47] Defense mechanisms which prevent a model revealing
meaningful gradients, masking or hiding the
gradients of the outputs with respect to the inputs.
Shattered gradients [55] When the gradients of a model are hard to compute
exactly due to non-diﬀerentiable operations.
Stochastic gradients [55] When the gradients of a model are obstructed due to some stochastic
or random operations.
Obfuscated gradients [55] A form of gradient masking which encompasses shattered gradients,
stochastic gradients, vanishing, and exploding gradients.
Vanishing gradients When the gradients of a model are converging to zero.
Exploding gradients When the gradients of a model are diverging to inﬁnity.
7