Adversarial Examples in Modern Machine Learning: A Review
3 Adversarial Examples
Adversarial examples are typically deﬁned as inputs x0, where the diﬀerences between x0and non-adversarial
inputsxare minimal under a distance metric d()(e.g.,d()can be theLpdistance), whilst fooling the target
modelf. Generally, adversarial examples seek to satisfy
d(x0;x)<such that ^y(x0)6= ^y(x); (1)
whereis a small constant that bounds the magnitude of the perturbations, and ^y()denotes the predicted
label of a classiﬁer model (i.e., ^y(x) = arg max cf(x)(c)). Note that we use ^y(x)to denote arg maxcf(x)(c)
throughout this paper. However, some works have proposed perturbations that are visible but inconspicu-
ous [64, 65, 66], so the similarity constraint between xandx0can be relaxed. Throughout this paper, we call
these as “imperceptible” and “inconspicuous” (i.e., may be visible but not suspicious) adversarial examples,
respectively.
Adversarial attacks are often categorized as either whitebox or blackbox. In whitebox attacks, the
attackerisassumedtohaveinformationaboutthetargetmodelsuchasthearchitecture, parameters, training
procedure, or the training data. On the other hand, blackbox attacks involve only access to the output of a
target model, and not its internals. Blackbox attacks are more realistic assumption in the real world since an
attacker rarely enjoys knowledge of the internals of the victim. However, evaluating models against whitebox
attacksisimportanttomeasuretheperformanceofthemodelintheworst-casescenarios. Adversarialattacks
can be further categorized as targeted or non-targeted attacks. In a targeted attack, the adversarial example
is designed to elicit a speciﬁc classiﬁcation - like classifying all faces as belonging to George Clooney - whilst
non-targeted attack only seek to generate an incorrect classiﬁcation, regardless of class.
Adversarialexamplesexhibitaninterestingphenomenoncalledthetransferabilityproperty[31,32,67,68].
This property states that adversarial examples generated to fool a speciﬁc model can often be used to fool
other models. This phenomenon will be discussed in Section 7.
Why are machine learning models vulnerable to these examples? Several works have argued that adver-
sarial examples are eﬀective because they lie in the low probability region of the data manifold [31, 67]. Good-
fellow et al. [32] pointed that deep neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial examples due to the local
linearity property of these models, especially when using activation functions like the Rectiﬁed Linear Units
(ReLU)[69]orMaxout[70].Goodfellowetal.[32]observedthatalthoughdeepneuralnetworksusenon-linear
activation functions, one often trains such networks to only operate in the linear regions of the activation
functions to avoid things like the vanishing gradient problem [71, 72, 73]. Furthermore, Goodfellow et al.
[32] considered the fact that FGSM [32] (see Section 4.2) was designed based on the linear assumption works
eﬀectively to fool deep neural networks to support their argument that neural networks behave like a linear
classiﬁer. Arpit et al. [74] analyzed the capacity of neural networks to memorize training data and found
that models with high degree of memorization are more vulnerable to adversarial examples. Jo and Bengio
[75] argued that convolutional neural networks tend to learn the statistical regularities in the dataset rather
than the high level abstract concepts. This may be related to the transferability property; since adversarial
examples are transferable between models that are trained on the same dataset , these diﬀerent models may
have learned the same statistics and hence fall into the same traps. Similarly, Ilyas et al. [76] suggested
that adversarial examples exist as a byproduct of exploiting non-robust features that exist in a dataset. Up
to now, the reasons why machine learning models are vulnerable to adversarial examples are still an open
research area.
9