Adversarial Examples in Modern Machine Learning: A Review
6.2 Detecting Adversarial Attacks
Insteadoftryingtoclassifyadversarialexamplescorrectly, severalworkshaveshownprogressinthedetection
of adversarial examples. A sample can then be rejected if it was detected as an adversarial example. In this
section, we cover several adversarial detection methods.
6.2.1 Early Methods: PCA, Softmax, and Reconstruction of Adversarial Images
Hendrycks and Gimpel [190, 191] investigated three methods to perform adversarial detection. Broadly
speaking, these methods capitalize upon empirical diﬀerences between clean and perturbed issues, and are
all vulnerable to attacks which speciﬁcally aim to circumvent them. Together, we refer to these as H & G
detection methods.
The ﬁrst method proposed is to analyze the variance of coeﬃcients of PCA whitened input. Hendrycks
and Gimpel [190] found that the later principal components of adversarial images usually have larger variance
than those of clean inputs, and thus can be used as an indication to perform threshold based detection. They
showed that this method can be used to detect FGSM [32] (see Section 4.2) and BIM [45, 77] (see Section 4.3)
adversaries on MNIST, CIFAR10, and Tiny-ImageNet when the attacker is not aware of the defense in place.
However, Carlini and Wagner [232] found that this method can be bypassed if the attacker is aware of the
defense strategy, allowing them to constrain the variance of later principal components during adversarial
examples generation process. For example, this can be achieved using C&W attack [44] (see Section 4.11)
by folding the constraint to the objective function. Furthermore, Carlini and Wagner [232] argued that
the reason this method works on MNIST may be due to the certain artifacts that exist in the dataset.
For example, the pixel values that are not part of the digit have zero values in a clean image, while pixel
values that are not part of the digit in an adversarial image usually no longer have zero values due to the
modiﬁcation to the image. Carlini and Wagner [232] then evaluated this method on CIFAR10 and found
that this method is not as eﬀective as when evaluated on MNIST.
Second, Hendrycks and Gimpel [190, 191] suggested that the softmax distribution between clean and
adversarial inputs are diﬀerent, and thus can be analyzed to perform adversarial detection. This can be
done by measuring the Kullback-Leibler divergence [127] between uniform distribution and the softmax
distribution, then perform threshold-based detection on it. They found that the softmax distribution of
normal examples are usually further away from uniform distribution compared to adversarial examples since
amodeltendstopredictaninputwithahighconﬁdence, atleastforadversariesgeneratedbyattackmethods
that do not care about the output distribution as long as the generated adversaries are misclassiﬁed.
Thismethodseemstoonlyapplicabletospeciﬁcattacksthatstopassoonasaninputbecomesadversarial
such as the JSMA [80] (see Section 4.8), which may be predicted by the model with a low conﬁdence
score. Furthermore, evaluation on ImageNet models is needed (and to date, incomplete) since the softmax
probability on ImageNet dataset usually is less conﬁdent due to the large number of classes. It is also not
clear whether or not this strategy will work against adversarial attacks that also target speciﬁc conﬁdence
score such as the C&W attack [44] (see Section 4.11).
Finally,HendrycksandGimpel[190,191]proposedthatadversarialexamplescanbedetectedbyanalyzing
the input reconstructions obtained by adding an auxiliary decoder [233] to the classiﬁer model that takes
the logits as an input to reconstruct the image. The decoder and classiﬁer are jointly trained only on clean
examples. The detection can be done by creating a detector network which takes the input reconstruction,
logits, and conﬁdence score as inputs, and outputs a probability of an input being adversarial or not,
where the detector network is trained on both clean and adversarial examples. Hendrycks and Gimpel [190]
evaluated this method on MNIST model and showed that this method is able to detect adversarial examples
generated by FGSM and BIM. They showed qualitatively how reconstruction of adversarial examples are
noisier compared to normal inputs, allowing one to compute the diﬀerences as a way to detect adversarial
examples.
This defense method however is fully diﬀerentiable, and an attacker may still be able to ﬁnd adversarial
examples that fool both the classiﬁer and detector networks in whitebox setting. Although this method needs
to be evaluated more extensively on diﬀerent datasets and attack settings, the use of input reconstruction
71