Adversarial Examples in Modern Machine Learning: A Review
7 Transferability of Adversarial Examples
7.1 What is transferability?
Transferability is a phenomenon where adversarial examples or perturbations generated to fool a particular
model can be used to fool others. Many machine learning models, including deep networks, are subject to
this phenomenon [31, 41, 67]. Transferability can be carved into several diﬀerent categories: (1) transferabil-
ity between diﬀerent models (e.g., between VGG16 [122] and ResNet [6] in the case of deep neural networks)
trained on the same dataset or diﬀerent subsets of the same dataset, (2) transferability between diﬀerent
machine learning techniques (e.g., between SVMs and deep neural networks), and (3) transferability be-
tween models that perform diﬀerent tasks (e.g., between semantic image segmentation and object detection
models [88]). Understanding the transferability phenomenon is critical to creating safer machine learning
models. Several adversarial attacks like the SBA [41] (see Section 4.9) work by exploiting this phenomenon.
In fact, the transferability property has also been exploited to enable adversarial attacks on real world image
classiﬁcation [41, 67] and detection [99] systems.
7.2 Where does transferability come from?
Goodfellow et al. [32] suggested that the reason why adversarial examples can fool deep neural networks is
due to the linearity behavior when using activation functions like the Rectiﬁed Linear Units (ReLU) [69]
or Maxout [70]. Based on this view, Goodfellow et al. [32] argued that adversarial examples exist in the
“contiguous regions of the 1-D subspace deﬁned by the fast gradient sign method” which was contrary to
the belief that adversarial examples lie in the low probability regions in the data manifold [31]. This view
suggests that there exist many adversarial examples which have higher chance to be transferable because
diﬀerent models will end up learning similar functions, and that the direction of perturbations is the key
factor that allows transferable adversarial examples.
Tramèr et al. [238] studied the subspace dimensionality of adversarial examples and asked if there is
an intersection between the adversarial subspace of two diﬀerent models. They introduced a technique
called Gradient Aligned Adversarial Subspace (GAAS) to estimate the number of orthogonal adversarial
directions. They found that there were many orthogonal adversarial directions, a large percentage of which
were transferable. Furthermore, they found that the separating distance between the decision boundaries of
two models was on average smaller than the distances between any inputs to the decision boundaries, even on
adversarially trained models. This ﬁnding suggests that the adversarial subspaces of diﬀerent models overlap,
which is in agreement with the ﬁndings from Liu et al. [68], explaining why many adversarial examples are
transferable between models.
Tsipras et al. [207] investigated the property of robust classiﬁer and found that robust classiﬁers tend to
only take advantage of robust features (i.e., features that have high correlation with the ground truth label),
as opposed to weak features (i.e., features that have low correlation with the ground truth label) during
training. Based on this, Tsipras et al. [207] argue that classiﬁers that rely on weak features will suﬀer from
the same adversarial examples that were created by perturbing these features. This hypothesis was also
reinforced by Ilyas et al. [76] that shows how diﬀerent models tend to exploit similar non-robust features in
a dataset, and thus adversaries generated for one model can be transferred to the other models.
7.3 What aﬀects transferability?
There are several dimensions that appear to aﬀect transferability. Firstly, model type in turn inﬂuences the
typeoftransferabilityobserved.Papernotetal.[67]foundempiricallythatdeepneuralnetworksandkNNare
more robust to cross-technique transferability, but more vulnerable to intra-technique transferability. On the
other hand, linear regression, SVM, decision trees, and ensemble methods are more robust to intra-technique
transferability, but more vulnerable to cross-technique transferability.
Secondly, attack strength matters. Kurakin et al. [45] found that stronger adversarial examples that can
penetrate through a robustly defended model are less transferable to other models, while adversarial exam-
77