Adversarial Examples in Modern Machine Learning: A Review
whereXis the set of stop sign images taken in various conditions.
RP2was used to generate two diﬀerent types of attacks: poster-printing and sticker attacks. Poster-
printing attack is a scenario where an attacker prints a road sign of an actual size on paper which is overlaid
on top of a real road sign. Sticker attack is a scenario where an attacker prints some stickers containing the
adversarial perturbations and stick them on top of a real road sign. While the masking matrix used in the
poster-printing attack allows perturbations to be generated anywhere on the road sign, the mask used in the
sticker attack only allows the perturbations to be generated on certain parts of the road sign.
Figure 13: An example of sticker attack where it was misclassiﬁed as “Speed Limit 45” sign when viewed
from diﬀerent viewpoints (taken from Evtimov et al. [65]).
Evtimov et al. [65] successfully showed how the generated road signs can be physically realizable and
fooled the victim model in a controlled environment. For example, Evtimov et al. [65] demonstrated a
sticker attack on a real stop sign that was misclassiﬁed as a “Speed Limit 45” sign in a stationary lab setting
(see Fig. 13). They also conducted drive-by tests where a camera was placed on top of a moving vehicle to
conﬁrm that these examples are adversarial even when viewed from diﬀerent viewpoints. However, one major
limitation of RP 2remains: collecting real pictures of an object in the real world under various conditions
can be expensive to perform and may not be scalable.
Severalworkshaveshownthattheseadversarialroadsignsarecurrentlynotdangeroustoobjectdetection
models [167, 168] which are more commonly deployed in autonomous vehicles than classiﬁcation models.
However, this does not warrant complacency. Object detection models are also vulnerable to attack: see the
sections on DAG [88] (Section 4.16) and attacks on Faster R-CNN [15] using EOT [96] (see Section 4.25)
over region proposals [156].
5.4 Adversarial 3D Printed Turtle
Athalyeetal.[96]demonstratedtheeﬀectivenessofEOT(seeSection4.25)ingeneratingadversarialexamples
not only in the virtual image gomain, but also in generating 3D adversarial objects that remain adversarial
in the physical world, where the 3D adversarial object is robust to rotation, translation, lighting change, and
viewpoint change to reasonable extent. In practice, Athalye et al. [96] modeled the problem using a texture
that can be mapped to a 3D shape, and by considering the 3D rendering process as the transformation
function. The texture is then updated through an optimization process in order to ﬁnd an adversarial
texture. They showed how they were able to 3D print an adversarial turtle that is misclassiﬁed as a riﬂe, as
shown in Fig. 14.
To generate more robust adversaries, instead of only considering similar transformations used in the 2D
case (e.g., translation, rotation, Gaussian noise, etc.), Athalye et al. [96] consider more transformations that
better reﬂect the physical world. These include additive/multiplicative lighting and additive/multiplicative
per-channel color inaccuracies. They pointed out that modelling color inaccuracies is necessary to account
for printing errors.
This perhaps was the ﬁrst work that showed how adversarial textures can be projected onto some complex
3D shapes, such as the 3D printed turtle, and remain adversarial when viewed from diﬀerent angles in the
real world. We believe this form of attack as one of the most realistic possible attack scenarios in the real
world that can dangerously fool intelligent embodied agents such as autonomous cars or mobile robots. Thus,
48