Adversarial Examples in Modern Machine Learning: A Review
positions of human body keypoints, namely neck, wrists, elbows, knees, and ankles. A family of models
tackle this problem by generating a sequence of conﬁdence maps for each body part, and predicting the
location of each keypoint as maximally-conﬁdent coordinates [141, 142]. Even though these models can be
trained using smooth losses such as the Mean Squared Error (MSE), in contrast the standard evaluation
metric, namely the Percentage of Correctly-detectable Keypoints (PCKh), rejects all hypotheses that are
not within an epsilon neighborhood of ground truth positions. Despite having this non-diﬀerentiable `eval,
the Houdini loss can be used, by considering f(y0)to be the product of (normalized) conﬁdences of a set of
body part keypoints y0. The authors successfully demonstrated both non-targeted as well as targeted attacks
using the Houdini loss with the Fast Gradient Value (FGV) method [82] (see Section 4.2).
The second example focuses on semantic segmentation tasks, which labels each pixel in an input image
of a natural scene as one of diﬀerent semantic classes, such as sky, road, and pedestrian. A number of
semantic segmentation models are trained using per-pixel classiﬁcation cross-entropy loss, while prediction
performance is evaluated on across-class mIOU ratios instead. The Houdini loss augments mIOU by com-
paring the across-pixel product of class probabilities between the prediction and ground truth maps. While
the Dense Adversarial Generation (DAG) method [88] (see Section 4.16) can attack these models using the
per-pixel cross-entropy training loss `train, Cissé et al. [91] has shown that Houdini-based attacks, both
non-targeted and targeted, can ﬁnd adversaries that achieve equal levels of adversarial damage to mIOU
compared to DAG while being more perceptually similar.
The third setup centers around a speech recognition task, where the goal is to predict a text transcript
given an input audio spectrogram containing speech segments. Although standard evaluation for speech
recognition focuses on Word Error Rate (WER), which is non-diﬀerentiable, modern models are trained
using a specialized Connectionist Temporal Classiﬁcation (CTC) loss. Thankfully, since this model is trained
to maximize the likelihood of the conditional probabilities of a sequence of text labels lgiven an input
spectrogram x, the Houdini attack loss can combine this smooth probability map with the non-smooth
WER evaluation criterion. The authors have thus successfully demonstrated non-targeted attacks, targeted
attacks, and even blackbox attacks based on this surrogate loss function `H.
4.20 Momentum Iterative Fast Gradient Sign Method
Dong et al. [92] proposed a family of improvements to BIM and ILLCM [45, 77] (see Sections 4.3 and 4.4)
called the Momentum Iterative Fast Gradient Sign Method (MI-FGSM) by leveraging momentum during
optimization process. Momentum terms have been frequently used to accelerate the convergence of iterative
optimization processes [143]. When applied to optimization-based adversarial attacks such as FGSM, the
authors argued that the use of momentum helps to stabilize the update directions for perturbations, and
also helps to escape from weak local maxima and thus resulting in an increase in the adversarial example’s
transferability. This work extends upon a previous observation made by [45] that adversarial examples
generated by BIM are less transferable compared to FGSM [32] (see Section 4.2), i.e., stronger adversaries
are typically less transferable.
The algorithm for non-targeted variant of MI-FGSM is shown in Algorithm 10. Note that the Clipfg
function is the same as the one deﬁned in Equation 5 (see Section 4.3). In particular, giis a (scaled)
exponential moving average term that accumulates the directions of gradients rather than their raw values,
hence the use of a normalizing denominator jjrx0
iL(x0
i;y)jj1. This is used to smoothly perturb the adversarial
example over iterations, and to prevent strongly oscillatory updates on x0
i.
To further increase transferability and robustness of adversaries, an Ensemble MI-FGSM variant can be
used to attack multiple models for the same task (e.g., having the same input and output representations).
To achieve consensus, logits from each of the Mvictim models are combined together, e.g., via Zens(x) =PM
m=1Zm(x). The ensemble loss function Lens(x;y)can then be computed using the softmax of Zens(x).
Yet another variant, MI-FGM, can be constructed by varying how the underlying FGSM works. Rather
than constraining FGSM’s perturbations by an 1-norm bound, the authors propose to instead use an L2
constraint:
33