Fast-SCNN: Fast Semantic Segmentation Network
Rudra PK Poudel
Toshiba Research Europe, UK
rudra.poudel@crl.toshiba.co.ukStephan Liwicki
Toshiba Research Europe, UK
stephan.liwicki@crl.toshiba.co.uk
Roberto Cipolla
Cambridge University, UK
rc10001@cam.ac.uk
Abstract
The encoder-decoder framework is state-of-the-art for
ofﬂine semantic image segmentation. Since the rise in au-
tonomous systems, real-time computation is increasingly
desirable. In this paper, we introduce fast segmentation
convolutional neural network (Fast-SCNN), an above real-
time semantic segmentation model on high resolution im-
age data ( 10242048px) suited to efﬁcient computation
on embedded devices with low memory. Building on exist-
ing two-branch methods for fast segmentation, we introduce
our ‘learning to downsample’ module which computes low-
level features for multiple resolution branches simultane-
ously. Our network combines spatial detail at high resolu-
tion with deep features extracted at lower resolution, yield-
ing an accuracy of 68.0% mean intersection over union at
123.5 frames per second on Cityscapes. We also show that
large scale pre-training is unnecessary. We thoroughly val-
idate our metric in experiments with ImageNet pre-training
and the coarse labeled data of Cityscapes. Finally, we show
even faster computation with competitive results on sub-
sampled inputs, without any network modiﬁcations.
1. Introduction
Fast semantic segmentation is particular important in
real-time applications, where input is to be parsed quickly
to facilitate responsive interactivity with the environment.
Due to the increasing interest in autonomous systems and
robotics, it is therefore evident that the research into real-
time semantic segmentation has recently enjoyed signiﬁcant
gain in popularity [21, 34, 17, 25, 36, 20]. We emphasize,
faster than real-time performance is in fact often necessary,
since semantic labeling is usually employed only as prepro-
cessing step of other time-critical tasks. Furthermore, real-
time semantic segmentation on embedded devices (without
access to powerful GPUs) may enable many additional ap-plications, such as augmented reality for wearables.
We observe, in literature semantic segmentation is typ-
ically addressed by a deep convolutional neural network
(DCNN) with an encoder-decoder framework [29, 2], while
many runtime efﬁcient implementations employ a two- or
multi-branch architecture [21, 34, 17]. It is often the case
that
a larger receptive ﬁeld is important to learn complex
correlations among object classes ( i.e. global context),
spatial detail in images is necessary to preserve object
boundaries, and
speciﬁc designs are needed to balance speed and accu-
racy (rather than re-targeting classiﬁcation DCNNs).
Speciﬁcally in the two-branch networks, a deeper branch is
employed at low resolution to capture global context, while
a shallow branch is setup to learn spatial details at full input
resolution. The ﬁnal semantic segmentation result is then
provided by merging the two. Importantly since the com-
putational cost of deeper networks is overcome with a small
input size, and execution on full resolution is only employed
for few layers, real-time performance is possible on modern
GPUs. In contrast to the encoder-decoder framework, the
initial convolutions at different resolutions are not shared
in the two-branch approach. Here it is worth noting, the
guided upsampling network (GUN) [17] and the image cas-
cade network (ICNet) [36] only share the weights among
the ﬁrst few layers, but not the computation.
In this work we propose fast segmentation convolutional
neural network Fast-SCNN, an above real-time semantic
segmentation algorithm merging the two-branch setup of
prior art [21, 34, 17, 36], with the classical encoder-decoder
framework [29, 2] (Figure 1). Building on the observation
that initial DCNN layers extract low-level features [35, 19],
we share the computations of the initial layers in the two-
branch approach. We call this technique learning to down-
sample . The effect is similar to a skip connection in the
1arXiv:1902.04502v1  [cs.CV]  12 Feb 2019