Radzikowski etal. EURASIPJournalonAudio,Speech,andMusicProcessing         (2021) 2021:11 Page2of10
the speech recognition system’s accuracy to decrease in
such cases [ 4–7]. The current pace of development in the
globaleconomy,education,andmobilityoftheworkforce
createstheneedtoproperlyrecognizethespeechofnon-
nativespeakerswhonowadaysrepresentthevastmajority
ofusers.
Traditional approaches for training speech recognition
classifiers usually tend to employ supervised learning
techniques [ 8–15]. While perfectly fitted for cases of rec-
ognizing speech of most popular languages worldwide,
supervised learning methodologies will not produce clas-
sifiers of a decent quality for non-native speakers. The
main reason is the lack of labeled datasets of non-native
speechwhichwouldbelargeenoughtobeusedasatrain-
ing set in a supervised learning algorithm. We have dealt
withtheproblemofdatascarcityregardingthenon-native
speech in our previous research [ 16–19]. Our idea at the
time was to use unlabeled datasets (e.g., Japanese people
who speak English and English corpus) in a setup called
dualsupervisedlearning.
This time we plan to tackle the problem of non-native
accents using the style transfer methodology [ 20,21]
adapted for the case of speech. The application of style
transfer in the audio domain is not new. In [ 22], the
authors investigated how to transfer the style of a refer-
enceaudiosignaltoatargetaudiocontent.Theyproposed
a flexible framework for the task, which uses a sound
texturemodeltoextractstatisticscharacterizingtherefer-
enceaudiostyle,followedbyanoptimization-basedaudio
texturesynthesistomodifythetargetcontent.Incontrast
to mainstream optimization-based visual transfer meth-
ods, the process proposed by the authors is initialized
by the target content instead of random noise and the
optimizedlossisonlyabouttexture,notstructure.
In [23], the authors presented a new machine learn-
ingtechniqueforgeneratingmusicandaudiosignals.The
focus of their work was to develop new techniques paral-
leltowhathasbeenproposedforartisticstyletransferfor
images by others. They presented two cases of modifying
anaudiosignaltogeneratenewsounds.Afeatureoftheir
method is that a single architecture can generate these
different audio-style-transfer types using the same set of
parameterswhichotherwiserequirecomplexhand-tuned
diversesignalprocessingpipelines.
Totackletheproblemofnon-nativespeechrecognition,
weplantoapplyandadjuststyletransfertothedomainof
speechandsoundinordertocreateanalgorithmforreal-
timepronunciationandaccentmodification.Havingdone
that, it would enable the possibility of creating a wrap-
per over already existing and trained ASR systems. Such
an approach could allow the modification of a non-native
speaker’s voice in real time, so that the ASR system used
atthetimecanrecognizethespeechwithahigherdegree
ofaccuracy.2 Methods
Within this article, we present an approach for handling
the problem related to a specific, non-native accent. We
createdamethodthatmodifiestheaccentofanon-native
speakersothatitresemblestheaccentofanativespeaker
to a higher extent. The purpose of this method is to
increase the accuracy of ASR systems which had already
beendevelopedandtrainedusinganativespeechdataset,
without the necessity to train new ASR models adapted
foraspecificnon-nativeaccent.
Ourideaistomodifytheaccentofspeechusingtherep-
resentation of a sound wave in a graphical domain, i.e., a
spectrogram.
ThegeneralflowofourapproachisdepictedinFig. 1.
At the beginning, we transform a sound wave file into a
spectrogram (the process indicated as A on the diagram).
Secondly, accent modification is performed. Within the
second step, we decided to check two ways of modifying
accentwithspectrogramsandtheyaredescribedindetail
inSections 2.1and2.2.
Finally,thesoundwave,inmodifiedform,isfedintothe
ASR system in order to recognize the speech into text. In
our research, we experimented with two kinds of speech
recognition process. As shown in the figure, one way is
to revert the modified spectrogram back to the sound
wave (the process indicated as B on the diagram) in a
form of WAV file and then feed it to a previously agreed
ASR system. The second way indicated as C is to feed
the spectrogram directly to another ASR system (adapted
for recognizing the speech from spectrograms) created
withinthisresearch(Section 2.3).
Theaccentmodificationalgorithmsaretrainedinaway
that they learn how to modify the spectrogram repre-
senting non-native speech to one resembling the same
utterancebyanativespeaker.Thecorrectnessofthemod-
ified speech is determined by the accuracy of the speech
recognition system trained on a dataset containing native
speaker samples, allowing us to evaluate the quality of
accentmodification.Thecriterionwhichdecideswhether
ornotthestyle-modifyingalgorithmcanperformwellisa
reductioninthemetricsrelatedtotheerroryieldedduring
theinferenceusingtheASRnetworks,whichweretrained
onnativespeakersamples.
2.1 Accentmodificationusingautoencoder
I nt h i sa p p r o a c h ,w ec a m eu pw i t ha na u t o e n c o d e rb a s e d
on a convolutional neural network (CNN) [ 24]. Our idea
is to employ such a network for the purpose of changing
thepronunciationstyle(Fig. 2).
The autoencoder was written using the Keras library
[25],anditsdetailedarchitectureisdescribedinTable 1.
During the training phase, the autoencoder is fed spec-
trograms of samples of non-native speakers, whereas the
autoencoder’soutputiscompared against the spectrograms