Santosh Vempala. Random projection: A new approach to vlsi layout. In Proceedings 39th Annual
Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science , pp. 389–395. IEEE, 1998.
Pascal Vincent, Hugo Larochelle, Isabelle Lajoie, Yoshua Bengio, and Pierre-Antoine Manzagol.
Stacked denoising autoencoders: Learning useful representations in a deep network with a local
denoising criterion. Journal of machine learning research , 11:3371–3408, 2010.
Svante Wold, Kim Esbensen, and Paul Geladi. Principal component analysis. Chemometrics and
intelligent laboratory systems , 2(1-3):37–52, 1987.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. Split-brain autoencoders: Unsupervised learning
by cross-channel prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition , pp. 1058–1067, 2017.
Tinghui Zhou, Matthew Brown, Noah Snavely, and David G Lowe. Unsupervised learning of depth
and ego-motion from video. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition , pp. 1851–1858, 2017.
Bo Zong, Qi Song, Martin Renqiang Min, Wei Cheng, Cristian Lumezanu, Daeki Cho, and Haifeng
Chen. Deep autoencoding gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection. In ICLR ,
2018.
A I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS
RDP-enabled Anomaly Detection. The RDP consists of one fully connected layer with 50 hidden
units, followed by a leaky-ReLU layer. It is trained using Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) as its
optimiser for 200 epochs, with 192 samples per batch. The learning rate is ﬁxed to 0.1. We repeated
the boosting process 30 times to obtain statistically stable results. In order to have fair comparisons,
we also adapt the competing methods AE, REPEN, DAGMM and RND into ensemble methods and
perform the experiments using an ensemble size of 30.
RDP-enabled Clustering. RDP uses a similar network architecture and optimisation settings as the
one used in anomaly detection, i.e., the network consists of one fully connected layer, followed by
a leaky-ReLU layer, which is optimised by SGD with 192 samples per batch and 0.1 learning rate.
Compared to anomaly detection, more semantic information is required for clustering algorithms
to work well, so the network consists of 1,024 hidden units and is trained for 1,000 epochs. Clus-
tering is a signiﬁcant yet common analysis method, which aims at grouping samples close to each
other into the same clusters and separating far away data points into different clusters. Compared
to anomaly detection that often requires pattern frequency information, clustering has a higher re-
quirement of the representation expressiveness. Therefore, if the representative ability of a model is
strong enough, it should also be able to learn representations that enable clustering to work well on
the projected space.
Note that the representation dimension Min thefunction and the projection dimension Kin the
function are set to be the same to alleviate parameter tuning. This means that M=K= 50 is used
in anomaly detection and M=K= 1024 is used in clustering. We have also tried deeper network
structures, but they worked less effectively than the shallow networks in both anomaly detection
and clustering. This may be because the supervisory signal is not strong enough to effectively
learn deeper representations. We show in Appendix E that RDP performs stably w.r.t. a range of
representation dimensions in both anomaly detection and clustering tasks.
The runtime of RDP at the testing stage is provided in Appendix F with that of the competing meth-
ods as baselines. For both anomaly detection and clustering tasks, RDP achieves very comparable
time complexity to the most efﬁcient competing methods (see Tables 10 and 11 in Appendix F for
detail).
B D ATASETS
The statistics and the accessible links of the datasets used in the anomaly detection and clustering
tasks are respectively presented in Tables 6 and 7. DDoS is a dataset containing DDoS attacks
11