4.2.3 A BLATION STUDY
Similar to anomaly detection, this section examines the contribution of the two loss functions Lrdp
andLclu
auxto the performance of RDP, as well as the impact of different supervisory sources on the
performance. The F-score results of this experiment are shown in Table 5, in which the notations
have exactly the same meaning as in Table 3. The full RDP model that uses both LrdpandLclu
aux
performs more favourably than its two variants, RDP nLrdpand RDPnLclu
aux, but it is clear that using
Lrdponly performs very comparably to the full RDP. However, using Lclu
auxonly may result in large
performance drops in some datasets, such as R8,20news andOlivetti . This indicates Lrdpis a more
important loss function to the overall performance of the full RDP model. In terms of supervisory
source, distances obtained by the non-linear random projection in RDP are much more effective
than the two other sources on some datasets such as Olivetti andRCV1 . Three different supervisory
sources are very comparable on the other three datasets.
5 R ELATED WORK
Self-supervised Learning. Self-supervised learning has been recently emerging as one of the most
popular and effective approaches for representation learning. Many of the self-supervised methods
learn high-level representations by predicting some sort of ‘context’ information, such as spatial or
temporal neighbourhood information. For example, the popular distributed representation learning
techniques in NLP, such as CBOW/skip-gram (Mikolov et al., 2013a) and phrase/sentence embed-
dings in (Mikolov et al., 2013b; Le & Mikolov, 2014; Hill et al., 2016), learn the representations
by predicting the text pieces (e.g., words/phrases/sentences) using its surrounding pieces as the con-
text. In image processing, the pretext task can be the prediction of a patch of missing pixels (Pathak
et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2017) or the relative position of two patches (Doersch et al., 2015). Also,
a number of studies (Goroshin et al., 2015; Misra et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2017; Oord et al., 2018)
explore temporal contexts to learn representations from video data, e.g., by learning the temporal
order of sequential frames. Some other methods (Agrawal et al., 2015; Zhou et al., 2017; Gidaris
et al., 2018) are built upon a discriminative framework which aims at discriminating the images be-
fore and after some transformation, e.g., ego motion in video data (Agrawal et al., 2015; Zhou et al.,
2017) and rotation of images (Gidaris et al., 2018). There have also been popular to use generative
adversarial networks (GANs) to learn features (Radford et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2016). The above
methods have demonstrated powerful capability to learn semantic representations. However, most
of them use the supervisory signals available in image/video data only, which limits their application
into other types of data, such as traditional tabular data. Although our method may also work on
image/video data, we focus on handling high-dimensional tabular data to bridge this gap.
Other Approaches. There have been several well-established unsupervised representation learn-
ing approaches for handling tabular data, such as random projection (Arriaga & Vempala, 1999;
Bingham & Mannila, 2001; Li et al., 2006), PCA (Wold et al., 1987; Sch ¨olkopf et al., 1997; Rah-
mani & Atia, 2017), manifold learning (Roweis & Saul, 2000; Donoho & Grimes, 2003; Hinton &
Roweis, 2003; McInnes et al., 2018) and autoencoder (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006; Vincent et al.,
2010). One notorious issue of PCA or manifold learning approaches is their prohibitive computa-
tional cost in dealing with large-scale high-dimensional data due to the costly neighbourhood search
and/or eigen decomposition. Random projection is a computationally efﬁcient approach, supported
by proven distance preservation theories such as the Johnson-Lindenstrauss lemma (Johnson & Lin-
denstrauss, 1984). We show that the preserved distances by random projection can be harvested to
effectively supervise the representation learning. Autoencoder networks are another widely-used
efﬁcient feature learning approach which learns low-dimensional representations by minimising re-
construction errors. One main issue with autoencoders is that they focus on preserving global infor-
mation only, which may result in loss of local structure information. Some representation learning
methods are speciﬁcally designed for anomaly detection (Pang et al., 2018; Zong et al., 2018; Burda
et al., 2019). By contrast, we aim at generic representations learning while being ﬂexible to incor-
porate optionally task-dependent losses to learn task-speciﬁc semantic-rich representations.
8