UNSUPERVISED REPRESENTATION LEARNING
BYPREDICTING RANDOM DISTANCES
Hu WangGuansong PangChunhua Shen Congbo Ma
Australian Institute for Machine Learning
The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia
ABSTRACT
Deep neural networks have gained tremendous success in a broad range of ma-
chine learning tasks due to its remarkable capability to learn semantic-rich features
from high-dimensional data. However, they often require large-scale labelled data
to successfully learn such features, which signiﬁcantly hinders their adaption into
unsupervised learning tasks, such as anomaly detection and clustering, and limits
their applications into critical domains where obtaining massive labelled data is
prohibitively expensive. To enable unsupervised learning on those domains, in
this work we propose to learn features without using any labelled data by training
neural networks to predict data distances in a randomly projected space. Random
mapping is a theoretically proven approach to obtain approximately preserved
distances. To well predict these random distances, the representation learner is
optimised to learn genuine class structures that are implicitly embedded in the
randomly projected space. Empirical results on 19 real-world datasets show that
our learned representations substantially outperform a few state-of-the-art com-
peting methods in both anomaly detection and clustering tasks. Code is available
at:https://git.io/RDP
1 I NTRODUCTION
Unsupervised representation learning aims at automatically extracting expressive feature represen-
tations from data without any manually labelled data. Due to the remarkable capability to learn
semantic-rich features, deep neural networks have been becoming one widely-used technique to em-
power a broad range of machine learning tasks. One main issue with these deep learning techniques
is that a massive amount of labelled data is typically required to successfully learn these expressive
features. As a result, their transformation power is largely reduced for tasks that are unsupervised
in nature, such as anomaly detection and clustering. This is also true to critical domains, such as
healthcare and ﬁntech, where collecting massive labelled data is prohibitively expensive and/or is
impossible to scale. To bridge this gap, in this work we explore fully unsupervised representation
learning techniques to enable downstream unsupervised learning methods on those critical domains.
In recent years, many unsupervised representation learning methods (Mikolov et al., 2013a; Le &
Mikolov, 2014; Misra et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2017; Gidaris et al., 2018) have been introduced, of
which most are self-supervised approaches that formulate the problem as an annotation free pretext
task. These methods explore easily accessible information, such as temporal or spatial neighbour-
hood, to design a surrogate supervisory signal to empower the feature learning. These methods have
achieved signiﬁcantly improved feature representations of text/image/video data, but they are often
inapplicable to tabular data since it does not contain the required temporal or spatial supervisory in-
formation. We therefore focus on unsupervised representation learning of high-dimensional tabular
data. Although many traditional approaches, such as random projection (Li et al., 2006), principal
component analysis (PCA) (Rahmani & Atia, 2017), manifold learning (Donoho & Grimes, 2003;
Hinton & Roweis, 2003) and autoencoder (Vincent et al., 2010), are readily available for handling
those data, many of them (Donoho & Grimes, 2003; Hinton & Roweis, 2003; Rahmani & Atia, 2017)
are often too computationally costly to scale up to large or high-dimensional data. Approaches like
Equal contribution.
1arXiv:1912.12186v2  [cs.CV]  19 Jul 2020