2 Ke et al.
(a)(b)
Fig.1: Behavior cloning fails with multi-modal demonstrations. Experts go left or right
around obstacle. Learner interpolates between modes and crashes into obstacle.
Interestingly, this oddity is not restricted to behavior cloning. [4] show that
a more sophisticated approach, GAIL [5], also exhibits a similar trend. Their
proposed solution, InfoGAIL [4], tries to recover all the latent modes and learn
a policy for each one. For demonstrations with several modes, recovering all such
policies will be prohibitively slow to converge.
Our key insight is to view imitation learning algorithms as minimizing diver-
gencebetweentheexpertandthelearnertrajectorydistributions.Speciﬁcally,we
examine the family of f-divergences. Since they cannot be minimized exactly,
we adopt estimators from [6]. We show that behavior cloning minimizes the
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence (M-projection), GAIL minimizes the Jensen-
Shannon (JS) divergence and DAgger minimizes the Total Variation (TV).
Since both JS and KL divergence exhibit a mode-covering behavior, they end
up interpolating across modes. On the other hand, the reverse-KL divergence
(I-projection) has a mode-seeking behavior and elegantly collapses on a subset
of modes fairly quickly.
The contributions and organization of the remainder of the paper are:
1. We introduce a unifying framework for imitation learning as minimization
off-divergence between learner and trajectory distributions (Section 3).
2. We propose algorithms for minimizing estimates of any f-divergence. Our
frameworkisabletorecoverseveralexistingimitationlearningalgorithmsfor
diﬀerent divergences. We closely examine reverse KL divergence and propose
eﬃcient algorithms for it (Section 4).
3. We argue for using reverse KL to deal with multi-modal inputs (Section 5).
We empirically demonstrate that reverse KL collapses to one of the demon-
strator modes on both bandit and RL environments, whereas KL and JS
unsafely interpolate between the modes (Section 6).
2 Related Work
Imitation learning (IL) has a long-standing history in robotics as a tool to pro-
gram desired skills and behavior in autonomous machines [7–10]. Even though
IL has of late been used to bootstrap reinforcement learning (RL) [11–15], we fo-
cus on the original problem where an extrinsic reward is not deﬁned. We ask the