Imitation Learning as f-Divergence Minimization
Liyiming Ke1, Sanjiban Choudhury1, Matt Barnes1, Wen Sun2, Gilwoo Lee1,
and Siddhartha Srinivasa1
1Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of
Washington. Seattle WA 98105, USA,
{kayke,sanjibac,mbarnes,gilwoo,siddh}@cs.washington.edu ,
2The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA 15213, USA,
wensun@andrew.cmu.edu
Abstract. We address the problem of imitation learning with multi-
modal demonstrations. Instead of attempting to learn all modes, we ar-
guethatinmanytasksitissuﬃcienttoimitateanyoneofthem.Weshow
that the state-of-the-art methods such as GAIL and behavior cloning,
due to their choice of loss function, often incorrectly interpolate between
such modes. Our key insight is to minimize the right divergence between
the learner and the expert state-action distributions, namely the reverse
KL divergence or I-projection. We propose a general imitation learning
framework for estimating and minimizing any f-Divergence. By plug-
ging in diﬀerent divergences, we are able to recover existing algorithms
such as Behavior Cloning (Kullback-Leibler), GAIL (Jensen Shannon)
andDAgger (Total Variation). Empirical results show that our approx-
imate I-projection technique is able to imitate multi-modal behaviors
more reliably than GAIL and behavior cloning.
Keywords: machine learning, imitation learning, probabilistic reason-
ing
1 Introduction
We study the problem of imitation learning from demonstrations that have mul-
tiple modes . This is often the case for tasks with multiple, diverse near-optimal
solutions. Here the expert has no clear preference between diﬀerent choices (e.g.
navigating left or right around obstacles [1]). Imperfect human-robot interface
also lead to variability in inputs (e.g. kinesthetic demonstrations with robot
arms [2]). Experts may also vary in skill, preferences and other latent factors.
We argue that in many such settings, it suﬃces to learn a single mode of the ex-
pert demonstrations to solve the task. How do state-of-the-art imitation learning
approaches fare when presented with multi-modal inputs?
Consider the example of imitating a racecar driver navigating around an ob-
stacle. The expert sometimes steers left, other times steers right. What happens
if we apply behavior cloning [3] on this data? The learner policy (a Gaussian
with ﬁxed variance) interpolates between the modes and drives into the obstacle.arXiv:1905.12888v2  [cs.LG]  31 May 2020