f-Imitation 9
s0Tree
(a) The ideal policy.s0Tree
(b) RKL mode col-
lapsings0Tree
(c) KL/JS mode cov-
ering
Fig.2: Illustration of the safety concerns of mode-covering behavior. (a) Expert demon-
strations and policy roll-outs are shown in blue and red, respectively. (b) RKL receives
only a small penalty for the safe behavior whereas KL receives an inﬁnite penalty. (c)
The opposite is true for the unsafe behavior where learner crashes.
replicate one of the modes (mode-collapsing) or (2) cover both the modes plus
the region between (mode-covering). We argue that in some imitation learning
tasks when the dominant mode is desirable, paradigm (1) is preferable.
Mode-covering in KL. This divergence exhibits strong mode-covering tenden-
cies as in Fig. 2c. Examining the deﬁnition of the KL divergence, we see that
there is a signiﬁcant penalty for failing to completely support the demonstration
distribution, but no explicit penalty for generating outlier samples. In fact, if
9s;as.t.(s;a)>0;(s;a) = 0, then the divergence is inﬁnite. However, the
opposite does not hold. Thus, the KL–VIMoptimal policy in belongs to the
second behavior class – which the agent to frequently crash into the tree.
Mode-collapsing in RKL. Attheotherendofthemulti-modalbehaviorspectrum
lies the RKL divergence, which exhibits strong mode-seeking behavior as in
Fig. 2b, due to switching the expectation over with. Note there is no
explicit penalty for failing to entirely cover , but an arbitrarily large penalty
for generating samples which would are improbable under the demonstrator
distribution. This results in always turning left or always turning right around
the tree, depending on the initialization and mode mixture. For many tasks,
failing in such a manner is predictable and safe, as we have already seen similar
trajectories from the demonstrator.
Jensen-Shannon. This divergence may fall into either behavior class, depending
on the MDP, the demonstrations, and the optimization initialization. Exam-
ining the deﬁnition, we see the divergence is symmetric and expectations are
taken over both and. Thus, if either distribution is unsupported (i.e.
9s;as.t.(s;a)>0;(s;a) = 0or vice versa) the divergence remains ﬁnite.
Later, we empirically show that although it is possible to achieve safe mode-
collapse with JS on some tasks, this is not always the case.
6 Experiments
6.1 Low dimensional tasks
In this section, we empirically validate the following Hypotheses :