tion framework to ﬁnd the optimal quantization parameters
in the MMSE sense at each layer separately. The proposed
MMSE reconstruction gives better accuracy than other ex-
isting MSE based optimization methods. NN parameters
are quantized in a kernel-wise fashion that does not violate
the linearity of the dot product operations, enabling efﬁcient
deployment on any common deep learning hardware. We
identify key layers that are most sensitive to quantization
errors, and provide an adaptive quantization scheme that
makes use of multiple low precision tensors. Finally, we
propose a reﬁnement procedure for the scaling factors of
the quantized tensors, which is performed on a small un-
labelled calibration set. In a similar manner, the NN ac-
tivations quantization coefﬁcients are obtained ofﬂine via
MMSE criterion. More sensitive activations are better ap-
proximated according to their reconstruction residual. The
main contributions of this paper can be summarized as fol-
lows:
We propose a low-bit precision linear quantization
framework for fast deployment of pretrained NNs on
hardware which does not allow mixed precision oper-
ations.
We achieve minimal loss of task accuracy, while re-
maining compliant with modern deep learning hard-
ware, by using ﬁne grained partitioning of the NN
weights. We propose optimal solution to the MMSE
quantization problem and we deploy multiple tensors
for key layers. Also, we reﬁne the quantization fac-
tors of the network parameters for fast differentiable
optimization.
Extensive experiments on ImageNet with various pop-
ular architectures demonstrate that our INT4 linear
quantization method for both weights and activations,
performs inference with only 3%top-1 and 1:7%top-5
mean accuracy degradation, as compared to the FP32
models, reaching, to the best of our knowledge, state-
of-art results. The above degradation can be further re-
duced according to the complexity-accuracy trade-off
inherent to the proposed multiple kernel method.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 reviews related works. In section 3, after analyzing
the quantization challenges, we develop our MMSE based
quantization for accurate approximation of original mod-
els. In this section we also provide experimental results
to demonstrate the usefulness of the steps in the proposed
quantization pipeline. At the end of the section, we describe
the modiﬁcation of the presented algorithm components for
the problem of activation quantization. Finally, quantiza-
tion results from our experiments on several popular NNs
are presented in Section 4.2. Related Work
Neural network acceleration received increasing atten-
tion in the deep learning community, where the need for
accurate yet fast and efﬁcient frameworks is crucial for real-
world applications. A powerful approach is quantization of
NNs to low-bit representation. There are two main quan-
tization scenarios. The ﬁrst one is the full training of a
given model to a desired lower bit precision. With this ap-
proach, the weights, the activations and even the gradients
can be quantized to very low precision, enabling potentially
fast training and inference [36]. The major problem with
the training approach above arises from the discritness of
the parameters, wherein the backpropagation approach is
not well deﬁned. The ”straight-through estimator” [3] has
been used in [4, 30, 5] in order to estimate the gradient of a
stochastic neuron. [4] proposed to use stochastic quantiza-
tion of the weights via random rounding, in order to inject
regularizing noise to the training process. [33] suggests to
approximate solution using variational Bayes method where
the weights can be restricted to discrete values assuming
Gaussian distribution. Instead of seeking for appropriate
derivatives, [31] assumed smooth approximation of param-
eters with deﬁned gradients. Non-uniform quantization of
NN parameters has been proposed in [10] where the param-
eters are approximated using k-means algorithm. [24] pro-
posed a high order quantization scheme of weights where
the approximation residual is further processed allowing
better reﬁnement of full precision input. Estimation of the
quantization parameters by solving constrained optimiza-
tion problem has been proposed for binary [30] and ternary
weights [23].
We focus on the second quantization scenario that targets
direct quantization of a pretrained FP32 network to a lower
bit-depth precision without full training. INT8 quantiza-
tion of parameters has been proven to be relatively robust
to quantization noise even with simple uniform quantiza-
tion of weights [20]. [18] proposed L2error minimization
of weights via alternating optimization in order to obtain a
generalizing ability during the training. Nevertheless, INT8
quantization of the network activations is more challenging
because of real time constraints. Nvidia proposed in Ten-
sorRT [28] a quantization framework that searches for sat-
uration threshold of the activations, based on the Kullback-
Leibler divergence measure between the quantized activa-
tions and their full precision counterpart. Recently, [2] pro-
posed to approximate activations, as if they were sampled
from a known distribution in order to obtain, under some
assumptions, analytically optimal threshold in the L2sense.
However, quantization of full precision weights and activa-
tions to less than 8-bits usually causes signiﬁcant loss of
accuracy, a problem that has not been solved yet. In order
to overcome such degradation in performance, quantization
frameworks resort to retraining procedures, mixed preci-