Low-bit Quantization of Neural Networks for Efﬁcient Inference
Yoni Choukroun Eli Kravchik Fan Yang Pavel Kisilev
Huawei Technologies Co.
fyoni.choukroun,eli.kravchik,yangfan74,pavel.kisilev g@huawei.com
Abstract
Recent machine learning methods use increasingly large
deep neural networks to achieve state of the art results in
various tasks. The gains in performance come at the cost
of a substantial increase in computation and storage re-
quirements. This makes real-time implementations on lim-
ited resources hardware a challenging task. One popu-
lar approach to address this challenge is to perform low-
bit precision computations via neural network quantization.
However, aggressive quantization generally entails a severe
penalty in terms of accuracy, and often requires retraining
of the network, or resorting to higher bit precision quanti-
zation. In this paper, we formalize the linear quantization
task as a Minimum Mean Squared Error (MMSE) problem
for both weights and activations, allowing low-bit precision
inference without the need for full network retraining. The
main contributions of our approach are the optimizations of
the constrained MSE problem at each layer of the network,
the hardware aware partitioning of the network parameters,
and the use of multiple low precision quantized tensors for
poorly approximated layers. The proposed approach al-
lows 4 bits integer (INT4) quantization for deployment of
pretrained models on limited hardware resources. Multiple
experiments on various network architectures show that the
suggested method yields state of the art results with minimal
loss of tasks accuracy.
1. Introduction
Neural networks (NNs) proved to be extremely effec-
tive in solving a broad variety of problems in computer vi-
sion, speech recognition and natural language processing
[22, 14, 34]. Deep learning methods are usually evaluated
only according to their accuracy over a given task. This cri-
terion leads to the development of architectures with con-
stantly increasing computational complexity and memory
requirements. Thus, performing inference on low power
System on a Chip (SoCs) used in smartphones or IoT de-
vices is a signiﬁcant challenge, due to the limited available
memory and computational resources.Several approaches have been proposed in order to make
deep NNs less resource demanding. Network pruning of
redundant and non-informative weights allows signiﬁcant
reduction of the network size [12, 11]. Matrix factoriza-
tion via low-rank approximation exploits the redundancy
property of the NN parameters in order to increase speed
up [7]. Distillation of NNs aims to transfer the knowledge
contained in a pretrained large network to a compressed
model via adapted training process [15]. Also, new ar-
chitectures (i.e.[19, 16, 17]) with more efﬁcient operations
such as point/depth-wise or grouped convolutions allow the
reduction of the model size, compared to existing over-
parameterized architectures.
Another popular direction, which we focus on in this
paper, is the quantization of NN. Quantization methods at-
tempt to reduce the precision of the NN parameters and/or
activations from single precision (32 bit ﬂoating point, or
FP32) to lower bit representations. Several beneﬁts of low-
bit precision can be exploited by deep learning accelera-
tors. The storage requirement for a low-bit precision model
can be diminished substantially, as well as the power con-
sumption. Similarly, the memory bandwidth requirements
can be signiﬁcantly reduced. Since the multiply accumu-
late (MAC) operations are performed on low-bit processing
engines, the computational complexity can be reduced as
well. Perhaps the most important beneﬁt of low bit repre-
sentation is the saving of chip area. For instance, 8 bits in-
teger (INT8) operations can save up to 30x energy and up to
116x area compared to FP32 operations [6], allowing signif-
icantly better computational throughput. However, low-bit
precision inference often causes loss of the task accuracy,
which is usually compensated with the help of heavy full
retraining, mixed precision or non-uniform quantization
In this paper, we address the quantization problem
for weights and/or activations of a pretrained NN on
highly constrained hardware, wherein complete retraining
or mixed precision calculations cannot be tolerated. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time INT4 only de-
ployment of a pretrained NN via efﬁcient linear quantiza-
tion is performed with minimal loss of accuracy and data
requirement. We propose a simple yet efﬁcient optimiza-
1arXiv:1902.06822v2  [cs.LG]  25 Mar 2019