is used to enrich features with high-level context, leading
to a sharp increase in computational cost. Moreover, tra-
ditional methods usually enrich the feature maps from the
ﬁnal output of a single path architecture. In this kind of de-
sign, the high-level context is lacking in incorporation with
the former level features which also retain the spatial de-
tail and semantic information in the network path. In order
to enhance the model learning capacity and increase the re-
ceptive ﬁeld simultaneously, feature reuse is an immediate
thought. This motivates us to ﬁnd a lightweight method to
incorporate multi-level context into encoded features.
In our work, we deploy two strategies to implement
cross-level feature aggregation in our model. First, we
reuse high-level features extracted from the backbone to
bridge gap between semantic information and structure de-
tails. Second, we combine features of different stages in
the processing path of the network architecture to enhance
feature representation ability. These ideas are visualized in
Figure 2.
In detail, we replicate the lightweight backbone to verify
our feature aggregation methods. Our proposed Deep Fea-
ture Aggregation Network (DFANet) contains three parts:
the lightweight backbones, sub-network aggregation and
sub-stage aggregation modules. Because depthwise sepa-
rable convolution is proved to be one of the most efﬁcient
operation in real-time inference, we modify the Xception
network as the backbone structure. In pursuit of better ac-
curacy, we append a fully-connected attention module in the
tail of the backbone to reserve the maximum receptive ﬁeld.
Sub-network aggregation focuses on upsampling the high-
level feature maps of the previous backbone to the input of
the next backbone to reﬁne the prediction result. From an-
other perspective, sub-network aggregation can be seen as
a coarse-to-ﬁne process for pixel classiﬁcation. Sub-stage
aggregation assembles feature representation between cor-
responding stages through ”coarse” part and ”ﬁne” part. It
delivers the receptive ﬁeld and high dimension structure de-
tails by combining the layers with the same dimension. Af-
ter these three modules, a slight decoder composed of con-
volution and bilinear upsampling operations is adopted to
combine the outputs of each stage to generate the coarse-to-
ﬁne segmentation results. The architecture of the proposed
network is shown in Figure 3.
We test the proposed DFANet on two standard bench-
marks, Cityscapes and CamVid. With a 1024 ×1024 input,
DFANet achieves 71.3% Mean IOU with 3.4G FLOPs and
speed of 100 FPS on a NVIDIA Titan X card. While imple-
mented on a smaller input size and a lighter backbone, the
Mean IOU still stays in 70.3% and 67.1% with only 1.7G
FLOPs and 2.1G FLOPs respectively, better than most of
the state-of-the-art real-time segmentation methods.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
•We set a new record for the real-time and low calcu-lation semantic segmentation. Compared to existing
works, our network can be up to 8 ×smaller FLOPs
and 2×faster with better accuracy.
•We present a brand new segmentation network struc-
ture with multiple interconnected encoding streams to
incorporate high-level context into the encoded fea-
tures.
•Our structure provides a better way to maximize the
usage of multi-scale receptive ﬁelds and reﬁne high-
level features several times while computation burden
increases slightly.
•We modify the Xception backbone by adding a FC at-
tention layer to enhance receptive ﬁeld with little addi-
tional computation.
2. Related Work
Real-time Segmentation: Real-time semantic segmen-
tation algorithms are aiming to generate the high-quality
prediction under limited calculation. SegNet[1] utilizes a
small architecture and pooling indices strategy to reduce
network parameters. ENet[22] considers reducing the num-
ber of downsampling times in pursuit of an extremely tight
framework. Since it drops the last stages of the model, the
receptive ﬁeld of this model is too small to segment larger
objects correctly. ESPNet[26] performs new spatial pyra-
mid module to make computation efﬁcient. ICNet[33] uses
multi-scale images as input and a cascade network to raise
efﬁciency. BiSeNet[29] introduces spatial path and seman-
tic path to reduce calculation. Both in ICNet and BiSeNet,
only one branch is deep CNN for feature extraction, and
other branches are designed to make up resolution details.
Different from these methods, we enhance a single model
capacity in feature space to reserve more detail information.
Depthwise Separable Convolution: Depthwise sepa-
rable convolution (a depthwise convolution followed by a
pointwise convolution), is a powerful operation adopted in
many recent neural network designs. This operation re-
duces the computation cost and the number of parameters
while maintaining similar (or slightly better) performance.
In particular, our backbone network is based on the Xcep-
tion model[8], and it shows efﬁciency in terms of both ac-
curacy and speed for the task of semantic segmentation.
High-level Features: The key issues in segmentation
task are about the receptive ﬁeld and the classiﬁcation abil-
ity. In a general encoder-decoder structure, high-level fea-
ture of the encoder output depicts the semantic information
of the input image. Based on this, PSPNet[34], DeepLab
series[7][5][4], PAN[16] apply an additional operation to
combine more context information and multi-scale feature
representation. Spatial pyramid pooling has been widely
employed to provide a good descriptor for overall scene
29523