We keep the feature always ﬂow from high-resolution
into the low-resolution. Our formulation not only learns a
new mapping of nth feature maps but also preserves ( n−
1)th features and receptive ﬁeld. Information ﬂow can be
transferred through multiple networks.
3.3. Network Architecture
The whole architecture is shown in Figure 3. In gen-
eral, our semantic segmentation network could be seen as
an encoder-decoder structure. As discussed above, the en-
coder is an aggregation of three Xception backbones, com-
posed with sub-network aggregate and sub-stage aggregate
methods. For real-time inference, we don’t put too much fo-
cus on the decoder. The decoder is designed as an efﬁcient
feature upsampling module to fuse low-level and high-level
features. For convenience to implement our aggregate strat-
egy, our sub-network is implemented by a backbone with
single bilinear upsampling as a naive decoder. All these
backbones have the same structure and are initalized with
same pretrained weight.
Backbone. The basic backbone is a lightweight Xcep-
tion model with little modiﬁcation for segmentation task,
we will discuss the network conﬁguration in the next sec-
tion. For semantic segmentation, not only providing dense
feature representation, how to gain semantic context effec-
tively remains a problem. Therefore, we preserve fully-
connected layers from ImageNet pretraining to enhance se-
mantic extraction. In classiﬁcation task, fully-connected
(FC) layer is followed by global pooling layers to make
ﬁnal probability vectors. Since classiﬁcation task dataset
[15] provides large amount of categories than segmentation
datasets [10][36]. Fully-connected layer from ImageNet
pretraining could be more powerful to extract category in-
formation than training from segmentation datasets. We ap-
ply a1×1convolution layer followed with FC layer to
reduce channels to match the feature maps from Xception
backbone. Then N×C×1×1encoding vector is multiplied
with original extracted features in channel-wise manner.
Decoder. Our proposed decoder module is illustrated in
Figure 3. For real-time inference, we don’t put too much fo-
cus on designing complicated decoder module. According
to DeepLabV3+[7], not all the features of the stages are nec-
essary to contribute to decoder module. We propose to fuse
high-level and low-level features directly. Because our en-
coder is composed of three backbones, we ﬁrstly fuse high-
level representation from the bottom of three backbones.
Then the high-level features are bilinearly upsampled by a
factor of 4, and low-level information from each backbone
that have the same spatial resolution is fused respectively.
Then the high-level features and low-level details are added
together and upsampled by a factor of 4 to make the ﬁnal
prediction. In decoder module, we only implement a few
convolution calculations to reduce the number of channels.4. Experiments
While our proposed network is effective for high resolu-
tion images, we evaluate it on two challenging benchmarks:
Cityscapes andCamVid . The image resolution of these
two datasets are up to 2048×1024 and960×720respeciti-
valy, which makes it a big challenge for real-time seman-
tic segmentation. In the following, we ﬁrst investigate the
effects of the proposed architecture, then conduct the accu-
racy and speed results on Cityscapes and CamVid compared
with the existing real-time segmentation algorithms.
All the networks mentioned below follow the same train-
ing strategy. They are trained using mini-batch stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) with batch size 48, momentum 0.9
and weight decay 1e−5. As common conﬁguration, the
”poly” learning rate policy is adopted where the initial rate
is multiplied by (1−iter
maxiter)powerwith power 0.9 and the
base learning rate is set as 2e−1. The cross-entropy error
at each pixel over the categories is applied as our loss func-
tion. Data augmentation contains mean subtraction, random
horizontal ﬂip, random resizing with scale ranges in [0.75,
1.75], and random cropping into ﬁx size for training.
4.1. Analysis of DFA Architecture
We adopt Cityscapes to conduct the quantitative and
qualitative analysis of experiments ﬁrstly. The Cityscapes is
comprised of a large, diverse set of stereo video sequences
recorded in streets from 50 different cities, containing 30
classes, and 19 of them are considered for training and eval-
uation. The dataset contains 5,000 ﬁnely annotated images
and 19,998 images with coarse annotation, which all have a
high resolution of 2048×1024 . Following the standard
setting of Cityscapes, the ﬁne annotated images are split
into training, validation and testing sets with 2,979, 500 and
1,525 images respectively. We only use the ﬁne annotated
images during training and stop the training process after
40K iterations.
The model performance is evaluated on Cityscapes val-
idation set. For fair comparison, we make the ablation
study under 1024×1024 crop size. In this process, we
don’t employ any testing augmentation, like multi-scale or
multi-crop testing for the best result quality. For quanti-
tative evaluation, the mean of class-wise intersection over
union (mIoU), and the number of ﬂoat-point operations
(FLOPs) are applied to investigate the accuracy and com-
putation complexity measurement respectively.
4.1.1 Lightweight Backbone Networks
As mentioned above, backbone network is one of the ma-
jor limitations of model acceleration. However, too small
backbone networks lead to serious degradation of segmen-
tation accuracy. Xception, designed with lightweight archi-
tecture, is known as achieving better speed-accuracy trade-
59526