Figure 2. Structure Comparison. From left to right: (a) Multi-branch. (b) Spatial pyramid pooling. (c) Feature reuse in network level. (d)
Feature reuse in stage level. As a comparison, the proposed feature reuse methods enrich features with high-level context in another aspect.
interpretation, especially for various objects in multiple
scales. These models have shown high-quality segmenta-
tion results on several benchmarks while usually need huge
computing resources.
Context Encoding: As SE-Net[12] explores the chan-
nel information to learn a channel-wise attention and has
achieved state-of-the-art performance in image classiﬁca-
tion, attention mechanism becomes a powerful tool for
deep neural networks[3]. It can be seen as a channel-
wise selection to improve module features representation.
EncNet[32][20][6] introduces context encoding to enhance
per-pixel prediction that is conditional on the encoded se-
mantics. In this paper, we also propose a fully-connected
module to enhance backbone performance, which has little
impact on calculation.
Feature Aggregation: Traditional approaches imple-
ment a single path encoder-decoder network to solve pixel-
to-pixel prediction. As the depth of network increase,
how to aggregate features between blocks deserves fur-
ther attention. Instead of simple skip connection design,
ReﬁneNet[17] introduces a complicated reﬁne module in
each upsampling stage between the encoder and decoder to
extract multi-scale features. Another aggregation approach
is to implement dense connection. The idea of dense con-
nections has been recently proposed for image classiﬁcation
in [13] and extended to semantic segmentation in [14] [28].
DLA[31] extent this method to develop deeper aggregation
structures to enhance feature representation ability.
3. Deep Feature Aggregation Network
We start with our observation and analysis of calcula-
tion volume when applying current semantic segmentation
methods in the real-time task. This motivates our aggrega-
tion strategy to combine detail and spatial information indifferent depth position of the feature extraction network to
achieve comparable performance. The whole architecture
ofDeep Feature Aggregation Network (DFANet) is illus-
trated in Figure 3.
3.1. Observations
We take a brief overview of the segmentation network
structures, shown in Figure 2.
For real-time inference, [33][29] apply multiple
branches to perform multi-scale extraction and preserve im-
age spatial details. For example, BiSeNet[29] proposed a
shallow network process for high-resolution images and a
deep network with fast downsampling to strike a balance
between classiﬁcation ability and receptive ﬁled. This struc-
ture is displayed in Figure 2(a). Nevertheless, the draw-
back of these methods is obvious that these models are short
of dealing with high-level features combined from parallel
branches, since it merely implements convolution layers to
fuse features. Moreover, features lack communication be-
tween parallel branches. Also, the additional branches on
high-resolution images limit the acceleration of speed.
In semantic segmentation task, spatial pyramid pooling
(SPP) module is a common approach to deal with high-
level features [5] (Figure 2(b)). The ability of spatial pyra-
mid module is to extract high-level semantic context and in-
crease receptive ﬁeld, such as [4][34][16]. However, imple-
menting spatial pyramid module is usually time-consuming.
Inspired by the above methods, we ﬁrstly replace the
high-level operation by upsampling the output of a network
and reﬁning the feature map with another sub-network, as
shown in Figure 2(c). Different from SPP module, the fea-
ture maps are reﬁned on a larger resolution and sub-pixel
details are learned simultaneously. However, as the whole
structure depth grows, high-dimension features and recep-
tive ﬁeld usually suffer precision loss since the feature ﬂow
39524