Figure 3. Overview of our Deep Feature Aggregation Network: sub-network aggregation, sub-stage aggregation, and dual-path decoder for
multi-level feature fusion. In the ﬁgure, ”C” means concatenation, ”xN” is N ×up-sampling operation.
is a single path.
Pushing a bit further, we propose stage-level method
(Figure 2(d)) to deliver low-level features and spatial in-
formation to semantic understanding. Since all these sub-
networks have the similar structure, stage-level reﬁnement
can be produced by concatenating the layers with the same
resolution to generate the multi-stage context. Our pro-
posed Deep Feature Aggregation Network aims to exploit
features combined from both network-level and stage-level.
3.2. Deep Feature Aggregation
We focus on making the fusion of different depth fea-
tures in networks. Our aggregation strategy is composed
of sub-network aggregate and sub-stage aggregate methods.
The structure of DFANet is illustrated in Figure 3.
Sub-network Aggregation. Sub-network aggregation
implements a combination of high-level features at the net-
work level. Based on the above analysis, we implement
our architecture as a stack of backbones by feeding the
output of the previous backbone to the next. From an-
other perspective, sub-network aggregation could be seen
as a reﬁnement process. A backbone process is deﬁned as
y= Φ(x), the output of encoder Φnis the input of en-
coderΦn+1, so sub-network aggregate can be formulated
as:Y= Φn(Φn−1(...Φ1(X))).
A similar idea has been introduced in [21]. The struc-
ture is composed of a stack of encoder-decoder ”hourglass”
network. Sub-network aggregation allows these high-level
features to be processed again to further evaluate and re-
assess higher order spatial relationships.
Sub-stage Aggregation. Sub-stage aggregation focuses
on fusing semantic and spatial information in stage-level be-
tween multiple networks. As the depth of network grows,
spatial details suffer precise lose. Common approaches, like
U-shape, implement skip connection to recover image de-tails in the decoder module. However, the deeper encoder
blocks lack low-level features and spatial information to
make judgments in large-scale various objects and precise
structure edge. Parallel-branch design uses original and de-
creased resolution as input, and the output is the fusion of
large-scale branch and small-scale branch results, while this
kind of design has a lack of information communication be-
tween parallel branches.
Our sub-stage aggregation is proposed to combine fea-
tures through encoding period. We make the fusion of dif-
ferent stages in the same depth of sub-networks. In detail,
the output of a certain stage in the previous sub-network is
contributed to the input of the next sub-network in the cor-
responding stage position.
For a single backbone Φn(x), a stage process can be de-
ﬁned asφi
n. The stage in the previous backbone network is
φi
n−1.imeans the index of the stage. Sub-stage aggrega-
tion method can be formulated as:
xi
n=/braceleftbiggxi−1
n+φi
n(xi−1
n) ifn= 1,
[xi−1
n,xi
n−1]+φi
n([xi−1
n,xi
n−1])otherwise,
(1)
While,xi
n−1is coming from:
xi
n−1=xi−1
n−1+φi
n−1(xi−1
n−1) (2)
Traditional approaches are learning a mapping of F(x)+
xforxi−1
n. In our proposed method, sub-stage aggregation
method is learning a residual formulation of [xi−1
n,xi
n−1],
at the beginning of each stage.
Forn >1situation, the input of ith stage in nth network
is given by combining the ith stage output in ( n−1)th net-
work with the ( i−1)th stage output in nth network, then the
ith stage learns a residual representation of [xi−1
n,xi
n−1].
xi−1
nhas the same resolution as xi
n−1, and we implement
concatenation operation to fuse features.
49525