times of FA for each node requires its L-th order neighbor
nodes’ representations, which results in sampling a large
number of neighbor nodes. FA is the main barrier for re-
ducing the time and memory complexity of GCN in the
mini-batch SGD algorithm.
Feature transformation. After FA, in the second step
GCN conducts FT in the lth layer, which consists of linear
and nonlinear transformations:
X(l)=σ(ˆX(l)W(l)). (4)
With (4), the complexity is mainly relevant to the feature
dimension. Ltimes FT for a node only requires its own
representation in each layer. Given the supervised node
labelsY, the conventional training process for a GCN is
formulated as:
(W(1)∗,...,W(L)∗,Θ∗) =
min
W(1),...,W(L),ΘLoss(X(L),Θ,Y), s.t. (3),(4).(5)
For the entire propagation of a mini-batch SGD over an
L-layer GCN, there are Ltimes of FA and FT in each batch
as shown in Figure 2(a) . Without FT, Ltimes of FA can ag-
gregate the structure information, which lacks representation
learning and is still time- and memory-consuming. Without
FA,Ltimes of FT is no more than a multi-layer perceptron
(MLP), which efﬁciently learns the representation but lacks
structure information.
3.1. L­GCN: Layer­wise GCN Training
As described earlier, the one-batch propagation of the
conventional training for an L-layer GCN consists of Ltimes
of feature aggregation (FA) and feature transformation (FT).
Both FA and FT are necessary for capturing graph structures
and learning data representations but the coupling between
the two leads to inefﬁcient training. We therefore propose a
layer-wise training algorithm (L-GCN) to properly separate
the FA and FT processes while training GCN layer by layer.
We illustrate the L-GCN algorithm in Figure 2(b). For
training the lth layer, we do FA once for all the (l−1)th
vertex representations, aggregating its lth order structure in-
formation, and then feed the vertex embeddings into a single
layer perceptron and run the mini-batch SGD optimizer for
batches. The lth layer is trained by solving
(W(l)∗,Θ∗) =
min
W(l),ΘLoss/parenleftBig
σ(ˆAX(l−1)W(l)),Θ,Y/parenrightBig
.(6)
Note that X(l−1)depends on (W(1)∗,...,W(l−1)∗).
After ﬁnishing the lth layer training, we save the weight
matrixW(l)∗between the current input layer and hidden
layer as the weight matrix of the lth layer, drop the weightmatrices between hidden layer and output layer unless l=L,
and calculate the lth-layer representations. This process is
repeated until all layers are trained.
The time and memory complexities are signiﬁcantly lower
compared to the conventional training and the state of the
arts, as shown in Table 1. For the time complexity, L-GCN
only conducts FA Ltimes in the entire training process and
FT does once per batch, whereas the conventional mini-batch
training conducts FA Ltimes and FT Ltimes in each batch.
Suppose that the total training batch number is NBAT, the
time complexity of L-GCN is O(L||ˆA||0
NBATD+BD2). The
memory complexity is O(BD)since L-GCN only trains a
single layer perceptron in each batch.
3.2. Theoretical Justiﬁcation of L­GCN
We set out to answer the following question theoretically
for L-GCN: How close could the performance of layer-wise
trained GCN be compared with conventionally trained GCN?
To establish the theoretical background of our layer-wise
training algorithm, we follow Xu and coworker’s work [ 23]
and show that a layer-wise trained GCN can be as powerful
as a conventionally trained GCN under certain conditions.
In [23], the representation power of an aggregation-based
graph neural network (GNN) is evaluated, when input fea-
ture space is countable, as the ability to map any two differ-
ent nodes into different embeddings. The evaluation of the
representation power is extended to the ability to map any
two non-isomorphic graphs into non-isomophic embeddings,
where the graphs are generated as the rooted subtrees of
the corresponding nodes. An L-layer GNN A:G→RD
(excluding the linear classiﬁer described earlier) can be rep-
resented [ 23] as:
A=R◦L(L)◦...◦L(1), (7)
whereL(l):RD×MD→RD,(l= 1,...,L)is the vertex-
wise aggregating mapping , MDis the multiset of dimension
D, andR:MD→RDis the readout mapping as:
x(l)
i=L(l)(x(l−1)
i,{x(l−1)
j:j∈ N(i)}),l∈L,
Output=R({x(L)
i:i∈N}),(8)
whereN(i)is the set of node neighbors for the ithnode.
Since GCN belongs to aggregation-based GNN, we use
the same graph isomorphism framework for our analysis.
Xu et al. [ 23] provided the upper-bound power of GNN as
Weisfeiler-Lehman graph isomorphism test (WL test) [ 20],
and proved sufﬁcient conditions for GNN to be as powerful
as the WL test, which is described in the following lemma
and theorem.
Lemma 1. [23] LetG1andG2be any two non-
isomorphic graphs, i.e. G1≇G2. If a GNN AmapsG1and
G2into different embeddings, the WL test also decide G1
andG2are not isomorphic.
2130