Figure 4: For each time step t, the RNN controller will ﬁrst take the
previous hidden vector htand the generated embedding xtas input
. Embedding xtis a concatenation of action embeddings, loss in
the current epoch and the layer index. (Following [ 8], we generate
embeddings randomly from a multinomial distribution for each
action.) Then the RNN will output a hidden vector ht+1, which will
be decoded and classiﬁed by its corresponding softmax classiﬁer.
After obtaining probability vector ρ(t), it performs multinomial
sampling to pick the action jt+1according to ρ(t). The relative
probability ρ(t)
t+1will be further concatenated and recorded for
reward calculation. When terminal, a ﬁnal reward which is the dot
product between picked actions probability vector and ˆR(ˆRis the
weighted sum of the ﬁnal loss and total training epochs), will be
generated for the controller to update its weights.
algorithm in PyTorch [ 16]: for layer-wise training, we use
the Adam optimizer with learning rate of 0.001 for Cora &
PubMed, and 0.0001 for PPI, Reddit, Amazon-670K and
Amazon-3M; for RNN controller, we set the controller to
make a stopping-or-not decision each 10 epochs (5 for Cora
and 50 for PPI), use the controller architecture as in [ 8] and
the Adam optimizer with the learning rate of 0.05. All the
experiments are conducted on a machine with GeForce GTX
1080 Ti GPU (11 GB memory), 8-core Intel i7-9800X CPU
(3.80 GHz) and 16 GB of RAM.
4.1. Comparison with State of the Arts
To demonstrate the efﬁciency and performance of our pro-
posed algorithms, we compare them with state-of-the-arts in
Table 3. We compare L-GCN and L2-GCN to the state-of-
the-art GCN mini-batch training algorithms as GraphSAGE
[10], FastGCN [ 4] and VRGCN [ 5], using their originally re-
leased codes and published settings, except that the batchsize
and the embedding dimension of hidden layers are kept the
same in all methods to ensure fair comparisons. Speciﬁcally,
we set the batchsize at 256 for Cora and 1024 for others; and
we did the embedding dimension of hidden layers at 16 for
Cora & PubMed, 512 for PPI and 128 for others. We do not
compare the controller with other hyper-parameter tuning
methods since the controller is widely used in many ﬁelds
such as neural architecture search [ 8].On four common datasets Cora, PubMed, PPI and Reddit,
we demonstrate that our proposed algorithm L-GCN is signif-
icantly faster than state-of-the-arts, with a consistent usage
of GPU memory not dependent on dataset size, while main-
taining comparable prediction performance. With a learned
controller to make the stopping decision, L2-GCN can fur-
ther reduce the training time (here we do not include search
time) by half with tiny performance loss compared to L-GCN.
For super large datasets, GraphSAGE and FastGCN fail to
converge on Amazon-670K, and exceed the time limit on
Amazon-3M in our experiment, whereas VRGCN achieves
good performances after long training. Our proposed al-
gorithms still stably achieve comparable performances efﬁ-
ciently on both Amazon-670K and Amazon-3M.
We did not include in Table 1the time spent on hyper-
parameter tuning (search) for any algorithm. Such a com-
parison was impossible as search time was not accessible
for pre-trained state-of-the-arts. Although a typical con-
troller learning can be expensive (as reported in Table 4),
RNN controllers in L2-GCN learned over (especially large)
datasets can be transferrable (shown next); and L2-GCN
without controller retraining actually saves time compared
to dataset-speciﬁc manual tuning. As to the memory usage,
the trends in practical GPU memory usages during training
did not entirely agree with those in the theoretical analyses
(Table 1). We contemplate that it is more likely in implemen-
tation: other models were implemented on TensorFlow and
ours on PyTorch; and possible CPU memory usage of some
models was unclear.
4.2. Ablation Study
Transferability. We explore the transferability of the
learned controller. Results in Table 4show that the controller
learned from larger datasets could be reused for smaller ones
(with similar loss functions) and thus save search time.
Epoch conﬁguration. We consider the inﬂuence of dif-
ferent epoch conﬁgurations in layer-wise training on perfor-
mance on six datasets. Table 5shows that training under
different epoch numbers in different layers will affect the
ﬁnal performance. For layer-wise training (L-GCN), we
conﬁgure different numbers of epochs for the two layers of
our GCN as reported in Table 5. For layer-wise training with
learning to optimize (L2-GCN), we let the RNN controller to
learn the epoch conﬁguration from randomly sampled sub-
graphs as training data and report the automatically learned
epoch numbers. Experimental results show that, trained with
more epochs for each layer, L-GCN improves perfoemance
except for Cora. Moreover, with learning to optimize, the
RNN controller in L2-GCN automatically learns epoch con-
ﬁgurations with tiny performance loss but much less epochs.
Figure 5compares the loss curves of layer-wise training
under various conﬁgurations and over various datasets.
Deeper networks. We evaluate the necessity of train-
2133