Input
FAFT
W(1)Linear 
Classier
ΘInput
FAFTFAFeature Aggregation (FA) Feature Transformation (FT)
W(1)*𝐵(1,𝜌)RNN
No
train another epochYesStage2RNN ControllerReward for RNN Controller
FT
W(2)Linear 
Classier
ΘRNN
No
train another epochYesEnd 
TrainingRNN ControllerStage1 Stage2
Time Complexity Loss Loss Time Complexity𝐵(1,𝜌)
Figure 3: Learning to optimize in layerwise training algorithm for a two-layer GCN. Two layers are trained in two stage: in each stage the
layer-wise trained network generates the training loss, the later index as the input for the RNN controller, and the RNN controller outputs the
hidden stage for the next epoch, and the stopping probability ρfor the current epoch, and sees whether the stopping probability ρis greater
than the threshold probability ρThres . Ifρ > ρThres then the layer-wise training ﬁnishes, entering the next stage or ending the whole train (if
it is the last layer), otherwise ρ≤ρThres then training for another epoch. When one iteration of training process ﬁnishes, the reward of
performance and efﬁciency will be fed back to the RNN controller, updating the weight and starting a new round of training.
with deeper layers:
Prob{R◦L(l−1)
Lay◦...◦L(1)
Lay(G1)
/ne}ationslash=R◦L(l−1)
Lay◦...◦L(1)
Lay(G2)|G1≇G2}
≤Prob{R◦L(l)
Lay◦L(l−1)
Lay◦...◦L(1)
Lay(G1)
/ne}ationslash=R◦L(l)
Lay◦L(l−1)
Lay◦...◦L(1)
Lay(G2)|G1≇G2}.(12)
We again direct readers to the appendix for the proof. The
theorem indicates that, if the network architecture is not
powerful enough through conventional training , we can try
to increase its capacity through training a deeper network.
Layer-wise training can also train deeper GCNs more efﬁ-
ciently compared to state-of-the-arts.
What remains challenging is that the network capacity
CAis not available in an analytical form with regards to
network parameters. In this study, we use the cross entropy
as the loss function in classiﬁcation tasks. More development
in loss functions would be needed in future.
3.3. L2­GCN: Training with Learn Controllers
One challenge to apply the layerwise training algorithm
to graph convolutional networks (L-GCN) is that one may
need to manually adjust the training epochs for each layer.
A possible solution is early stopping, nevertheless it does
not intuitively work well in L-GCN since the training loss
in each layer is not comparable with the ﬁnal validation
loss. Motivated by learning to optimize [ 2,6,15,3], we
propose L2-GCN, training a learned RNN controller to de-
cide when to stop in each layer’s training via policy-based
REINFORCE [ 21]. The algorithm is illustrated in Figure 3.
Speciﬁcally, we model the training process for L-GCN
as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) deﬁned as follows: i)
Action. The action atat timetfor the RNN controller ismaking the decision on whether to stop at the current-layer
training or not. ii) State. The state stat timetis the loss in
the current epoch, the layer index, and the hidden state of
the RNN controller at time t−1. iii) Reward. The purpose
of the RNN controller is to train the network efﬁciently with
competitive performance, and therefore the non-zero reward
is only received at the end of the MDP as the weighted sum
of ﬁnal loss and total training epochs (Time Complexity). iv)
Terminal. Once the L-GCN ﬁnishes the L-layer training,
the process terminates.
Given the above settings, a sample trajectory from MDP
will be:(s1,a1,r1,...,st,at,rt). The detailed architechture
of RNN controller is shown in Figure 4. For each time step,
the RNN will output a hidden vector, which will be decoded
and classied by its corresponding softmax classier. The RNN
controller works in an autogressive way, where the output
of the last step will be fed into the next step. L-GCN will
be sampled for each time step’s output to decide whether to
stop or not. When terminated, a ﬁnal reward will be fed to
the controller to update the weight.
4. Experiments
In this section, we evaluate predictive performance, train-
ing time, and GPU memory usages of our proposed L-GCN
and L2-GCN on single- and multi-class classiﬁcation tasks
for six increasingly larger datasets: Cora & PubMed [ 13],
PPI & Reddit [ 10], and Amazon-670K & Amazon-3M [ 7],
as summarized in appendix. For Amazon-670K & Amazon-
3M, we use principal component analysis [ 11] to reduce
the feature dimension down to 100, and use the top-level
categories as the class labels. The train/validate/test split
is following the conventional setting for the inductive su-
pervised learning scenario. We implemented our proposed
2132