Input
FAFT
W(1)FA FT
W(2)Linear
Classier
Θ
Input
FAFT
W(1)Linear
Classier
ΘOptimize: Θ∗
Optimize: W(1)*,Θ∗Input
FAFT FA FT
W(2)Linear
Classier
Θ
Optimize: W(2)*,Θ∗
Stage 1 Stage 2(a) Conventional Training
(b) Layerwise TrainingFeature Aggregation (FA) Feature Transformation (FT)
W(1)*W(1)*,W(2)*,
Figure 2: Conventional training vs layer-wise training for a two-layer GCN. (a) In conventional training, the optimizer jointly optimizes
the weight matrix W(1),W(2)asW(1)∗,W(2)∗and the linear classiﬁer ΘasΘ∗, savingW(1)∗,W(2)∗,Θ∗for the network. (b) In
layer-wise training, two layers are trained in two sequential stages: in the ﬁrst stage the optimizer optimizes the weight matrix W(1)
asW(1)∗and the linear classiﬁer Θ(1)asΘ(1)∗, savingW(1)∗for the second stage and dropping Θ(1)∗; then in the second stage the
optimizer optimizes the weight matrix W(2)asW(2)∗and the linear classiﬁer Θ(2)asΘ∗, savingW(2)∗,Θ∗for the network.
wherex(0)
i=F[i,:]. With (2), we can feed the feature ma-
trixFin a mini-batch dataloader and run the stocastic gradi-
ent descent (SGD) optimizer. Suppose Bis the minibatch
size andSNEIthe neighborhood size, the time complexity
for the propagation per mini-batch is O(SL
NEIBD2)and the
memory complexity is O(SL
NEIBD). We next discuss a few
variants on top of the vanilla minim-batch algorithm:
•GraphSAGE & FastGCN. [10,4] Both adopted sam-
pling scheme to reduce complexities. GraphSAGE
proposes to use ﬁxed-size sampling for the neighbor-
hood in each layer. It yet suffers from the “neighbor-
hood expansion” problem, making its time and memory
complexities grow exponentially with the layer num-
ber. FastGCN proposes global importance sampling
rather than local neighborhood sampling, alleviating
the complexity growth issue. Suppose S≤SNEI
is the sample size, the time and memory complexi-
ties areO(SLBD2)andO(SLBD)for GraphSAGE,
andO(SLBD2)andO(SLBD)for FastGCN, respec-
tively. Besides, for FastGCN, there is extra complexity
requirement for importance weight computation.
•VRGCN. [5] proposes to use variance reduction to re-
duce the sample size in each layer, which managed to
achieve good performance with smaller graphs. Unfor-
tunately, it requires to store all the vertex intermediate
embeddings during training, which leads to its mem-
ory complexity coming close to the full-batch training.
SupposeSVR≤Sis the reduced sample size, the time
and memory complexities of VRGCN are O(SL
VRBD2)andO(LND), respectively (plus some overhead for
computing variance reduction).
•Cluster-GCN. [7] Instead of feeding nodes and their
neighbors directly, [ 7] ﬁrst uses a graph clustering al-
gorithm to partition subgraphs, and then runs the SGD
optimizer over each subgraph. The performance of this
approach heavily hinges on the chosen graph cluster-
ing algorithm. It is further difﬁcult to ensure training
stability, e.g., w.r.t different clustering settings.
3. Proposed Algorithm
To discuss the bottleneck of graph convolutional network
(GCN) training algorithms, we ﬁrst analyze the propagation
of GCN following [ 22] and factorize the propagation (1)into
feature aggregation (FA) andfeature transformation (FT) .
Feature aggregation. To learn the node representation
X(l)of thelth layer, in the ﬁrst step GCN follows the neigh-
borhood aggregation strategy, where in the lth layer it up-
dates the representation of each node by aggregating the
representations of its neighbors, and at the same time the
representation of itself is aggregated by the representations
of its neighbors, which is written as:
ˆX(l)=ˆAX(l−1). (3)
With (3), the time and memory complexity is highly de-
pendent on the edge number, and in the mini-batch SGD
algorithm it is highly dependent on the sample size. Since
during mini-batch SGD training for an L-layer network, L
2129