L2-GCN: Layer-Wise and Learned Efﬁcient Training of
Graph Convolutional Networks
Yuning You∗, Tianlong Chen∗, Zhangyang Wang, Yang Shen
Texas A&M University
{yuning.you,wiwjp619,atlaswang,yshen }@tamu.edu
Abstract
Graph convolution networks (GCN) are increasingly pop-
ular in many applications, yet remain notoriously hard to
train over large graph datasets. They need to compute
node representations recursively from their neighbors. Cur-
rent GCN training algorithms suffer from either high com-
putational costs that grow exponentially with the number
of layers, or high memory usage for loading the entire
graph and node embeddings. In this paper, we propose
a novel efﬁcient layer-wise training framework for GCN
(L-GCN), that disentangles feature aggregation and feature
transformation during training, hence greatly reducing time
and memory complexities. We present theoretical analy-
sis for L-GCN under the graph isomorphism framework,
that L-GCN leads to as powerful GCNs as the more costly
conventional training algorithm does, under mild condi-
tions. We further propose L2-GCN, which learns a controller
for each layer that can automatically adjust the training
epochs per layer in L-GCN. Experiments show that L-GCN
is faster than state-of-the-arts by at least an order of mag-
nitude, with a consistent of memory usage not dependent
on dataset size, while maintaining comparable prediction
performance. With the learned controller, L2-GCN can fur-
ther cut the training time in half. Our codes are available at
https://github.com/Shen-Lab/L2-GCN .
1. Introduction
Graph convolution networks (GCN) [ 13] generalize con-
volutional neural networks (CNN) [ 14] to graph data. Given
a node in a graph, a GCN ﬁrst aggregates the node embed-
ding with its neighbor node embeddings, and then trans-
forms the embedding through (hierarchical) feed-forward
propagation. The two core operations, i.e., aggregating
and transforming node embeddings, take advantage of the
graph structure and outperform structure-unaware alterna-
tives [ 17,18,9]. GCNs hence demonstrate prevailing success
in many graph-based applications, including node classiﬁca-
∗Equal Contribution.
3
 4
 5
 6
 7
Log(Time)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000Memory
L-GCNVRGCNFastGCN GraphSAGE
L2-GCNFigure 1: Summary of our achieved performance and efﬁciency
on Reddit. The lower left corner indicates the desired lowest
complexity in time (training time) and memory consumption
(GPU memory usage). The size of markers represents F1 scores.
Blue circles ( •) are state-of-the-art mini-batch training algorithms,
red circle ( •) is L-GCN, and red star ( ★) is L2-GCN. The corre-
sponding F1 scores are: GraphSAGE ( •, 93.4), FastGCN ( •, 92.6),
VRGCN ( •, 96.0), L-GCN ( •, 94.2) and L2-GCN( ★, 94.0).
tion [ 13], link prediction [ 26] and graph classiﬁcation [ 24].
However, the training of GCNs has been a headache, and
a hurdle to scale up GCNs further. How to train CNNs more
efﬁciently has recently become a popular topic of explosive
interest, by bypassing unnecessary data or reducing expen-
sive operations [ 19,25,12]. For GCNs, as the graph dataset
grows, the large number of nodes and the potentially dense
adjacency matrix prohibit ﬁtting them all into the memory,
thus putting full-batch training algorithms ( i.e., those requir-
ing the full data and holistic adjacency matrix to perform)
in jeopardy. That motivates the development of mini-batch
training algorithms, i.e., treating each node as a data point
and updating locally. In each mini-batch, the embedding of
a node at the lth layer is computed from the neighborhood
node embeddings at the ( l−1)-th layer through the graph
convolution operation. As the computation is performed re-
cursively through all layers, the mini-batch complexity will
increase exponentially with respect to the layer number. To
mitigate the complexity explosion, several sampling-based
strategies have been adopted, e.g. GraphSAGE [ 10] and Fast-
2127