stewardship of the land fights deforestation, resource extraction,
and monocropping.
Are any of these capability sets fertile, in the sense of securing other
capabilities?
To maximize the capabilities of various communities, we may
wish to focus on capabilities that produce fertile functionings, as
discussed in Section 5. Specifically, many functionings are necessary
inputs to produce others; for example, achieving physical fitness
from playing sports requires as input good health and nourishment
[15]. Some of Nussbaum’s 10 central capabilities—including bodily
integrity (security against violence and freedom of mobility) and
control over one’s environment (right of political participation, to
hold property, and dignified work)—may be viewed as fertile [ 59].
Reading, for instance, may secure the capability to work, associate
with others, and have control over one’s environment. AI has the
potential to help achieve many of these capabilities. For example,
accessible crowdwork, done thoughtfully, offers the opportunity
for people with disabilities to find flexible work without the need
for transit [88].
How closely do the values of the project match those of the community
as opposed to the designers? How does the focus of the project respond
to their expressed needs and concerns? Does the project have the
capacity to respond to those needs?
Consider the scenario where a community finds it acceptable to
hunt elephants, while the designers are trying to prevent poach-
ing. There could be agreement on high-level values, such as public
health, but disagreement on whether to prioritize specific interven-
tions to promote public health. There could even be a complete lack
of interest in the proposed AI system by the community.
At an early stage of a project, AI researchers need to facilitate
a consultation method to understand communities’ values and
choices. Note that this process could allow stark differences in pri-
ority between stakeholders to surface which prevent the project
from starting so as not to over-invest in a project that will later
be terminated because of difference in values. We may consider
several of the strategies we discussed previously in this case, such
as deliberative democratic processes, Diverse Voices panels, or com-
putational social choice methods. It may subsequently be necessary
to end the project if these strategies do not work.
6.2 Evaluating AI for Social Good
Once AI researchers and practitioners have a system tailored to
these capabilities, we believe that communities should be the ones
to judge the success of this new system. This stage of the process
may pose additional challenges, given the difficulty of measuring
capabilities [ 34]. Though we do not here endorse any measurement
methodology, various attempts to operationalize the capabilities
approach give us confidence that such methodologies are feasible
and may be implemented in the course of evaluating AI projects
[3].
First and foremost, we maintain that the evaluation of success
should be done throughout the lifecycle of the AI4SG project (and
beyond) as discussed above, especially via community feedback.
However, we wish to emphasize that we as AI researchers need
to keep capabilities in mind as we evaluate the success of AI4SG
projects to avoid “unintended consequences” and a short-sightedfocus on improved performance on metrics such as accuracy, preci-
sion, or recall.
How does the new AI4SG system affect all stakeholders’ capabilities,
particularly those selected at the start?
This question is related to the literature on measuring capabilities
[34], and is therefore difficult to answer. We will aim to provide a
few examples, which may not apply well to every AI4SG system,
nor will it be an exhaustive list of techniques that could be valid.
First, based on the idea of AI as a diagnostic to measure social
problems [ 1], we may be able to (partially) probe this question us-
ing data. Sweeney [77] show through ad data that advertisements
related to arrest records were more likely to be displayed when
searching for “Black-sounding” names, which may affect a candi-
date’s employment capability, for example. Obermeyer et al . [61]
analyze predictions, model inputs and parameters, and true health
outcome data to show that the capability of health is violated for
Black communities, as they are included in certain health programs
less frequently than white communities due to a biased algorithm.
There could additionally be feedback mechanisms when an in-
tervention is deployed, whether via the AI system itself, or possibly
by collaborating with local non-profits and NGOs. This may be
especially useful in cases where these organizations are already
engaged in tracking and improving key capabilities such as health
outcomes, e.g., World Health Partners [ 14] or CARE international
[33]. Again, these examples will likely not apply to all cases and
opens the door for further, interdisciplinary research. However, no
matter what strategy is taken, it is imperative that we continue
to center communities in all attempts to measure the effects on
stakeholders’ capabilities.
Are other valued capabilities or functionings negatively affected as a
result of the project? Are stakeholders’ values and priority rankings
in line with such tradeoffs?
We have a responsibility to actively think about possible outcomes;
it is neglect to dismiss negative possibilities as “unintended conse-
quences” [ 64]. These participatory mechanisms should thus ensure
that the perspective of the most vulnerable and most impacted
stakeholders is given due consideration. We recognize that this can
be especially challenging, as discussed in our first guiding ques-
tion for identifying impacted communities. Therefore, we further
suggest that the evaluation of an AI4SG project should employ
consultation mechanisms that are open to all community mem-
bers throughout the implementation process, such as the feedback
mechanisms suggested previously.
What should my role be as an AI researcher? As a student?
We believe that AI researchers at all levels should participate in
this work. This work involves all of the above points, including
learning about the domain to understand who stakeholders are,
discussing with the stakeholders, and evaluating performance. We
also acknowledge that we AI researchers may not always be the
best suited to lead participatory efforts, and so encourage inter-
disciplinary collaborations between computer science and other
disciplines, such as social sciences. A strong example would be the
Center for Analytical Approaches to Social Innovation (CAASI) at
the University of Pittsburgh, which brings together interdisciplinary
teams from policy, computing, and social work [ 11]. However, AI