Envisioning Communities: A Participatory Approach
Towards AI for Social Good
Elizabeth Bondi,∗1Lily Xu,∗1Diana Acosta-Navas,2Jackson A. Killian1
{ebondi,lily_xu,jkillian}@g.harvard.edu,diana_acosta_navas@hks.harvard.edu
1John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University
2Department of Philosophy, Harvard University
ABSTRACT
Research in artificial intelligence (AI) for social good presupposes
some definition of social good, but potential definitions have been
seldom suggested and never agreed upon. The normative ques-
tion of what AI for social good research should be “for” is not
thoughtfully elaborated, or is frequently addressed with a utilitar-
ian outlook that prioritizes the needs of the majority over those
who have been historically marginalized, brushing aside realities of
injustice and inequity. We argue that AI for social good ought to be
assessed by the communities that the AI system will impact, using
as a guide the capabilities approach, a framework to measure the
ability of different policies to improve human welfare equity. Fur-
thermore, we lay out how AI research has the potential to catalyze
social progress by expanding and equalizing capabilities. We show
how the capabilities approach aligns with a participatory approach
for the design and implementation of AI for social good research
in a framework we introduce called PACT, in which community
members affected should be brought in as partners and their input
prioritized throughout the project. We conclude by providing an
incomplete set of guiding questions for carrying out such participa-
tory AI research in a way that elicits and respects a community’s
own definition of social good.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Human-centered computing →Participatory design ;•Com-
puting methodologies →Artificial intelligence ;•General and
reference→Cross-computing tools and techniques .
KEYWORDS
artificial intelligence for social good; capabilities approach; partici-
patory design
ACM Reference Format:
Elizabeth Bondi,∗1Lily Xu,∗1Diana Acosta-Navas,2Jackson A. Killian1.
2021. Envisioning Communities: A Participatory Approach Towards AI for
Social Good. In Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics,
and Society (AIES ’21), May 19–21, 2021, Virtual Event, USA. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3461702.3462612
*Equal contribution. Order determined by coin flip.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
AIES ’21, May 19–21, 2021, Virtual Event, USA
©2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8473-5/21/05. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3461702.3462612
PACTcapabilities approachparticipatory approachconceptrealizationFigure 1: The framework we propose, Participatory Ap-
proach to enable Capabilities in communiTies (PACT),
melds the capabilities approach (see Figure 3) with a partici-
patory approach (see Figures 4 and 5) to center the needs of
communities in AI research projects.
1 INTRODUCTION
Artificial intelligence (AI) for social good, hereafter AI4SG, has re-
ceived growing attention across academia and industry. Countless
research groups, workshops, initiatives, and industry efforts tout
programs to advance computing and AI “for social good.” Work in
domains from healthcare to conservation has been brought into
this category [ 43,73,83]. We, the authors, ourselves have endeav-
ored towards AI4SG work as computer science and philosophy
researchers.
Despite the rapidly growing popularity of AI4SG, social good
has a nebulous definition in the computing world and elsewhere
[27], making it unclear at times what work ought to be considered
social good. For example, can a COVID-19 contact tracing app be
considered to fall within this lauded category, even with privacy
risks? Recent work has begun to dive into this question of defining
AI4SG [ 22,23,49]; we will explore these efforts in more depth in
Section 2.
However, we point out that context is critical, so no single
tractable set of rules can determine whether a project is “for so-
cial good.” Instead, whether a project may bring about social good
must be determined by those who live within the context of the
system itself; that is, the community that it will affect. This point
echoes recent calls for decolonial and power-shifting approaches to
AI that focus on elevating traditionally marginalized populations
[5, 36, 45, 54, 55, 84].
The community-centered, context-specific conception of social
good that we propose raises its own questions, such as how toarXiv:2105.01774v2  [cs.CY]  18 Jun 2021