backgrounds. They suggest strategies to invite discussion, such as
games, acting out design proposals, storytelling, group brainstorms
of what a perfect utopian solution would look like, participatory
prototyping, and probing. In the case of probing, for example, one
strategy was to provide participants with a cultural probe kit, con-
sisting of items such as a diary and a camera, in order to understand
people’s reactions to their environments [24].
Further, several fields in artificial intelligence have devoted a
great deal of thought to learning and aggregating preferences: pref-
erence elicitation [ 12], which learns agent utility functions; com-
putational social choice [9], which deals with truthful agents; and
mechanism design [ 74], which deals with strategic agents. As an ex-
ample, Kahng et al . [35] form what they call a “virtual democracy”
for a food rescue program. They collect data about preferences
on which food pantry should receive food, then use these prefer-
ences to create and aggregate the preferences of virtual voters. The
goal is to make ethical decisions without needing to reach out to
stakeholders each time a food distribution decision needs to be
made.
These fields have highlighted theoretical limitations in prefer-
ence aggregation, such as Arrow’s impossibility theorem [ 4] which
reveals limitations in the ability to aggregate preferences with as
few as three voters, but these results do not necessarily inhibit us
from designing good systems in practice [ 53,71]. Such areas provide
rich directions for future research, particularly at the intersection
of participatory methods and social science research.
What specific concerns are raised during the deliberative process, and
how are these addressed?
Diverse Voices panels [ 87] with experiential experts (both from
non-profits and from within the community) may also be used to
identify potential issues by asking questions such as “What mistakes
could be made by decision makers because of how this proposal
is currently worded?” and, “What does the proposal not say that
you wish it said?” Other strategies we discussed for understanding
multiple viewpoints may also have a role to play here when tailored
towards sharing concerns. However, we also stress the importance
of ongoing partnerships with impacted community members be-
yond just an initial session. By ensuring that the community has a
voice throughout the project’s lifetime, their values are always kept
front-and-center. As others have argued, it is not sufficient to inter-
view impacted communities once simply to “check the participatory
box” [76].
6.1 Determining Capability Sets
Now, equipped with some guiding questions and concrete examples
of a participatory approach, we will apply these principles directly
to selecting capability sets at the outset of an AI4SG project. To
identify what capabilities to work towards, some scholars such as
Nussbaum [59] have proposed well-defined sets of capabilities and
argued that society ought to focus on enabling those capabilities.
However, we endorse the view that the selection of an optimal set
of capabilities should be based on community consensus [ 70]. We
argue that an AI project can only be for social good if it is responsive
to the values of the communities affected by the AI system.
What functionings do members of the various stakeholder groups wish
they could achieve through the implementation of the project?In the fair machine learning literature, Martin Jr. et al . [52] pro-
pose a participatory method called community-based system dy-
namics (CBSD) to bring stakeholders in to help formulate a machine
learning problem and mitigate bias. Their method is designed to
understand causal relationships, specifically feedback loops, par-
ticularly those in high-stakes environments such as health care or
criminal justice, that may disadvantage marginalized and vulnerable
groups. This process is intended to bring in relevant stakeholders
and recognize that their lived experience makes these participants
more qualified to recognize the effects of these interventions. Us-
ing visual diagrams designed by impacted community members,
the CBSD method can help identify levers that may help enable
or inhibit functionings, particularly for those who are most vul-
nerable. Similarly, Simonsen and Robertson [75] suggest the use
of mock-ups and prototypes to facilitate communication between
experiential experts and developers. Other strategies discussed for
understanding multiple viewpoints may also apply if tailored to-
wards determining capabilities.
What functionings are the priority for those most vulnerable? Is there
an overlap between their priorities and the goals of other stakeholders?
We need to pay attention to those who are most vulnerable.
The capabilities approach may be leveraged to fight inequality by
thinking in terms of capability equalizing. To identify capabilities
that are not yet available to marginalized members of a community,
we must listen to their concerns and ensure those concerns are
prioritized, for example via strategies proposed in our discussions
on finding those impacted by AI systems and including multiple
viewpoints.
As an example of the consequences of failing to include those
most vulnerable throughout the lifetime of an AI system, consider
one of the initial steps of data collection. Women are often ignored
in datasets and therefore their needs are underreported [ 20]. For
example, crash-test dummies were designed to resemble the average
male, and vehicles were evaluated to be safe based on these male
dummies—leaving women 47% more likely to be seriously injured
in a crash [ 65]. These imbalances are often also intersectional, as
Buolamwini and Gebru [10] demonstrate by revealing stark racial
and gender-based disparities in facial recognition algorithms.
Beyond the inclusion of all groups in datasets, data must be prop-
erly stratified to expose disparities. During the COVID-19 pandemic
in December 2020, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported a loss
of 140,000 net jobs. The stratified data reveal that all losses were
women’s: women lost 156,000 jobs while men gained 16,000, and un-
employment was most severe for Black, Latinx, and Asian women
[21]. Without accounting for the capabilities of all people affected
by such systems, it is difficult to claim that these technologies were
for social good.
On the other hand, prioritizing the needs of the most marginal-
ized groups may at times offer an accelerated path towards achiev-
ing collective goals. Project Drawdown identified and ranked 100
practical solutions for stopping climate change [ 29]. Number 6 on its
list was the education of girls, recognizing that women with higher
levels of education marry later and have fewer children, as well
as manage agricultural plots with greater yield. Another solution
advocates for securing land tenure of indigenous peoples, whose