Guiding Principles for a Participatory Approach to AI4SGHow are impacted communities identi/f.shortied? Represented?         Including marginalized groups? Long-term plans for maintaining work?  Compensation for their input? Are they valued as partners? How to incorporate divergent viewpoints? How are concerns addressed?Determining Capability SetsWhat functionings do stakeholders want to achieve? What functionings are priority for the most vulnerable? Are any of the capability sets fertile? Do the values of the project match those of the community?Evaluating AI4SGHow does the new AI4SG system aﬀect all stakeholders' capabilities, particularly those selected at the start? Are any capabilities or functionings negatively aﬀected? What should the role of an AI researcher be?Figure 5: Guiding principles for the participatory approach we propose. The key message is to center the community’s desired
capabilities throughout, and to ensure that the goals of the project are properly aligned to do so without negatively impacting
other capabilities.
What kind of compensation are stakeholders receiving for their time
and input? Does that compensation respect them as partners?
Stakeholders must be respected as experiential or domain experts
and be considered as partners. They must be compensated in some
way, whether monetarily or otherwise. We advocate for compen-
sation to avoid establishing an approach made under the guise of
participatory AI that ends up being extractive [ 63]. One notable
drawback to a participatory approach is the potential for these com-
munity interactions to become exploitative if not done with inten-
tion, compensation, or long-term interactions [ 76]. Collaborators
who have significantly influenced the design or implementation of
a project ought to be recognized as coauthors or otherwise acknowl-
edged in resulting publications, presentations, media coverage, etc.
How can we understand and incorporate viewpoints from many groups
of stakeholders?
Surveys or voting may seem a natural choice. However, a simple
voting mechanism is risky, as it may find that a majority of the
community favors, for example, building a heavily polluting factory
near a river, while the impacted community living at the proposed
site would object that this factory would severely degrade their
quality of life. These concerns from the marginalized group must
be given due weight. This emphasis on the welfare of marginal-
ized groups is based on the premise that the evaluation of human
capabilities must consider individual capabilities [59]. In short, all
individual capabilities are valuable as ends in their own right; they
should never be considered means to someone else’s rights or wel-
fare. We must, therefore, guard against depriving individuals of
basic entitlements as a means to enhancing overall welfare.Hence, we endorse a deliberative approach, which aims to un-
cover “overlapping consensus” [ 67]. This approach is based on the
expectation that, in allowing diverse worldviews, value systems,
and preference sets to engage in conversation, with appropriate
moderation and technical tools, social groups may find a core set
of decisions that all participants can reasonably agree with. De-
liberative approaches to democracy have been operationalized by
programs such as vTaiwan, which uses digital technology to inform
policy by building consensus through civic engagement and dia-
logue [ 31]. vTaiwan uses the consensus-oriented voting platform
Pol.is which seeks to identify a set of common values upon which
to shape legislation, rather than arbitrating between polarized sides
[78]. Similarly, OPPi serves as a platform for consensus building
through bottom-up crowd-sourcing [ 47]. This tool is tailored for
opinion sharing and seeking, oriented towards finding common
ground among stakeholders.
An alternative to fully public deliberative processes are targeted
efforts such as Diverse Voices panels [ 87] which focus on including
traditionally marginalized groups in existing policy-making pro-
cesses. Specifically, they advocate for informal elicitation sessions
with partners, asking questions such as, “What do you do currently?
What would support your work?” [ 37]. They also suggest consider-
ing whether tech should be used in the first place and highlight that
a key challenge of participatory design is to determine a course of
action if multiple participants disagree. We add that it remains a
challenge to assemble these panels.
Simonsen and Robertson [75] provide multiple strategies as well,
particularly with the goal of coming to a common language and
fostering communication between groups of experts from different