A Participatory Approach to AI4SGdetermine desired capability setsevaluate successproject design + developmentFigure 4: Our proposed approach to AI4SG projects, where
the key is that stakeholder participation is centered
throughout. We do not explicitly comment on the design
and development of the project other than calling for the
inclusion of community participation and iterative evalua-
tion of success, in terms of whether the project realized the
desired capability sets.
interaction and engagement rather than being decided through the
centralized and non-representative lens of AI researchers [46].
6 GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR A
PARTICIPATORY APPROACH
To direct the participatory approach we propose, we provide the fol-
lowing set of guiding questions, outlined in Figure 5 and elaborated
on below. These questions are specifically worded to avoid binary
answers of yes or no. When vaguely stated requirements are put
forth as list items to check off, there is a risk of offering a cheap seal
of approval on projects that aren’t sufficiently assessed in terms of
their ethical and societal implications. Instead, we expect that in
nearly all cases, none of these questions will be fully resolved. Thus,
these questions are meant to serve as a constant navigation guide
to help researchers regularly and critically reassess their intended
work.
We begin our discussion on how a participatory approach to
AI4SG would look with our first guiding question:
How are impacted communities identified and how are they rep-
resented in this process? Who represents historically marginalized
groups?
This question is one of the most important and potentially dif-
ficult. As such, we encourage readers to research their domain
of interest and seek partners as an important first step, but of-
fer some advice from our experience. We often consider seeking
partners at non-profits, community-based organizations, and/or
(non-) governmental organizations (NGOs), and have even had some
experience with non-profits or NGOs finding us. Finding these
groups as an AI researcher may be done with the help of an institu-
tion’s experts on partnerships (e.g., university or company officials
focused on forming external partnerships), prior collaborators or
acquaintances, discussions with peers within an institution in dif-
ferent departments (e.g., public health or ecology researchers), or
“cold emails.” Young et al . [87] provide further guiding questions
for finding these partners, particularly in their companion guide
[50]. In any case, some vetting and research is an important step.AI researchers may also co-organize workshops, such as a pair
of “AI vs. tuberculosis” workshops held by some of the authors in
Mumbai, India which brought together domain experts, non-profits,
state and local health officials, industry experts, and researchers,
identified by Mumbai-based collaborators who specialize in building
relationships across health-focused organizations in India. The
varied backgrounds of the stakeholders at these workshops was
conducive to quickly identifying areas of greatest need across the
spectrum of tuberculosis care in India, many of which would not
have been considered by AI researchers alone. Further, these group
forums sparked conversations between stakeholders that often
would not otherwise communicate, but that led to initial ideas
for solutions. This highlights that such approaches are often most
successful when AI researchers move out of their usual spheres and
into the venues of the domains that their projects impact.
At the inception of a project, the designers and initial partners
should together identify all relevant stakeholders that will be im-
pacted by the proposed project, bringing them on as partners or
members of a (possibly informal) advisory panel. Every effort should
be made to include at least one member from each impacted group.
If stakeholders were initially omitted and are later identified, they
should then be added. Initial consultation with panel members and
partners should be carried out in a way that facilitates open and can-
did discussion to ensure all voices are represented and accounted
for during the project design phase [ 87]. We additionally propose
that during the lifetime of the project, the panel and partners should,
if possible, be available for ongoing consultation during mutually
agreed upon checkpoints to ensure the project continues to align
with stakeholder values. Similar practices have been suggested by
Perrault et al . [66] , who advocate for close, long-term collaborations
with domain experts. Likewise, the Design Justice network pursues
non-exploitative and community-led design processes, in which
designers serve more as facilitators than experts. This framework
is modeled on the idea of a horizontal relation in which affected
communities are given the role of domain experts, given their lived
experience and direct understanding of projects’ impact [18].
How are plans laid out for maintaining and sustaining this work in
the long-term, and how would the partnership be ended?
We believe partnership norms should be established at the begin-
ning of the partnership, including ensuring that the community
representatives and experiential experts have the power to end
the project and partnership, in addition to the designers and other
stakeholders. As noted by Madaio et al . [49] , this should also neces-
sitate an internal discussion amongst the research team to decide
what, if any, criteria would be grounds for such a cessation, e.g., if it
becomes clear that the problem at hand requires methods in which
the research team does not have sufficient expertise. Discussions
with the broader partners should also lay out the expected time
scale and potential benefits and risks for all involved.
Once the relationship is underway, it should be maintained as
discussed, with regular communication. When a project reaches
the point where a potential deployment is possible, we advocate
for an incremental deployment, such as the example of Germany’s
teststrecken for self-driving cars, which sets constraints for auton-
omy, then expands these constraints once certain criteria are met
[23].