researchers should not completely offload these important scenar-
ios to social science or non-profit colleagues. It should be a team
effort, which we believe will bring fruitful research in social science,
computer science, and even more disciplines.
AI researchers and students can also advocate for systematic
change from within, which we discuss more in depth in the con-
clusion. Although student researchers are limited by constraints
such as research opportunities and funding, they may establish a
set of moral aspirations for their work and set aside time for people-
centered activities, such as mentoring and community-building
[13].
7 CONCLUSION: THOUGHTS ON AI FOR
SOCIAL GOOD AS A FIELD
In this paper, we lay out a community-centered approach to defining
AI for social good research that focuses on elevating the capabilities
of those members who are most marginalized. This focus on capa-
bilities, we argue, is best enacted through a participatory approach
that includes those affected throughout the design, development
and deployment process, and gives them ground to choose their
desired capability sets as well as influence how they wish to see
those capabilities realized.
We recognize that the participatory approach we lay out requires
a significant investment of time, energy, and resources beyond
what is typical in AI or even much existing AI4SG research. We
highlight this discrepancy to urge a reformation within the AI research
community to reconsider existing incentives to encourage researchers
to pursue more socially impactful work.
Institutions have the power to catalyze change by (1) establish-
ing requirements for community engagement in research related
to public-facing AI systems; and (2) increasing incentives for re-
searchers to meaningfully engage impacted communities while
simultaneously producing more impactful research [6].
While engaging in collaborative work with communities can
give rise to some technical directions of independent interest to the
AI community [ 19], such a shift to encourage community-focused
work will in part require reconsidering evaluation criteria used
when reviewing papers at top AI conferences. Greater value must
be placed on papers with positive social outcomes, including those
with potential for impact, if the work has not yet been deployed.
Such new criteria are necessary since long-term, successful AI4SG
partnerships often also lead to non-technical contributions, as well
as situated programs which do not focus necessarily on general-
izability [ 66]. We encourage conferences to additionally consider
rewarding socially beneficial work with analogies to Best Paper
awards, such as the “New Horizons” award from the MD4SG 2020
Workshop, and institutions to recognize impactful work such as the
Social Impact Award at the Berkeley School of Information [58].
In the meantime, we suggest that researchers look to nontradi-
tional or interdisciplinary venues for publishing their impactful
community-focused work. These venues often gather researchers
from a variety of disciplines outside computer science, opening the
door for future collaborations. For example, researchers could con-
sider COMPASS, IAAI, MD4SG/EAAMO [ 2], the LIMITS workshop
[57], and special tracks at AAAI and IJCAI, among others. Venues
such as the Computational Sustainability Doctoral Consortium andCRCS Rising Stars workshop bring students together from multiple
disciplines to build relationships with each other. Researchers could
also consider domain workshops and conferences, such as those in
ecology or public health.
The incentive structure in AI research is often stacked against
thoughtful deployment. Whereas a traditional experimental section
may take as little as a week to prepare, a deployment in the field
may take months or years, but is rarely afforded corresponding
weight by reviewers and committee members. This extended time-
line weighs most heavily on PhD students and untenured faculty
who are evaluated on shorter timescales. We should thus reward
both incremental and long-term deployment, freeing researchers
from the pressure to rush to deployment before an approach is
validated and ready.
In addition to the need for bringing stakeholders into the design
process of AI research, we must ensure that all communities are
welcomed as AI researchers as well. Such an effort could counteract
existing disparities and inequities within the field. For example, as
is the case in other academic disciplines, systemic anti-Blackness is
ingrained in the AI community, with racial discrepancies in physi-
cal resources such as access to a secure environment in which to
focus, social resources such as access to project collaborators or
referrals for internships, and measures such as the GRE or teacher
evaluations [ 28]. Further, as of 2018, only around 20% of tenure-
track computer science faculty were women [ 69]. To combat these
inequities, people across the academic ladder may actively work
to change who they hire, with whom they collaborate, including
collaborations with minority-serving institutions [ 41], and how
much time they spend on service activities to improve diversity
efforts [28].
The above reformations could contribute greatly to making the
use of participatory approaches the norm in AI4SG research, rather
than the exception. PACT, we argue, is a meaningful new way
to answer the question: “what is AI for social good?” We, as AI
researchers dedicated to the advancement of social good, must
make a PACT with communities to find our way forward together.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Jamelle Watson-Daniels and Milind Tambe
for valuable discussions. Thank you to all those we have collab-
orated with throughout our AI4SG journey for their partnership,
wisdom, guidance, and insights. This work was supported by the
Center for Research on Computation and Society (CRCS) at the
Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sci-
ences.
REFERENCES
[1]Rediet Abebe, Solon Barocas, Jon Kleinberg, Karen Levy, Manish Raghavan, and
David G Robinson. 2020. Roles for computing in social change. In Proceedings of
the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency . 252–260.
[2]Rediet Abebe and Kira Goldner. 2018. Mechanism design for social good. AI
Matters 4, 3 (2018), 27–34.
[3]Paul Anand, Graham Hunter, Ian Carter, Keith Dowding, Francesco Guala, and
Martin Van Hees. 2009. The development of capability indicators. Journal of
Human Development and Capabilities 10, 1 (2009), 125–152.
[4]Kenneth J Arrow. 1950. A difficulty in the concept of social welfare. Journal of
political economy 58, 4 (1950), 328–346.
[5]Abeba Birhane and Olivia Guest. 2020. Towards decolonising computational
sciences. Women, Gender and Research (2020).