AI4SGexternal resources goods availablewider material &  social environmentindividuals’ internal characteristics skills, conditions, traitscapability setsfunctionings achievedjointly createindividual choicemay providealtershelps fosterFigure 3: AI for social good research projects can expand and equalize capabilities by fostering individuals’ internal charac-
teristics, providing external resources, or altering the wider material and social environment, thus creating capability sets to
improve social welfare and fight injustice.
to secure capability sets for individuals and communities. For exam-
ple, AI-based predictive policing may increase the presence of law
enforcement agents in specific areas, which may in turn affect the
capability sets of community members residing in those areas. If
this presence increases security from, say, armed robbery, commu-
nity members may enjoy some more liberties than they previously
did. And yet, if this acts to reinforce the disparate impact of law
enforcement on members of vulnerable communities, along with
other inequalities, then it may not only diminish the substantive
liberties of those individuals impacted, but also alter the way in
which such liberties are distributed across the population.
Assessing this kind of trade-off ought to be a crucial step in
evaluating the ability of a particular project to promote social good.
This assessment must be aligned with the kinds of choices and
opportunities community members have reasons to pursue [ 72]. A
project should not be granted the moral standing of being “for social
good” if it leads to localized utility increments, at the expense of
reducing the ability of members of the larger community to choose
the lives they value. Most importantly, this assessment must be
made by community members themselves, as the following section
argues.
5 COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
As Ismail and Kumar [32] contend, communities should ultimately
be the ones to decide whether and how they would like to use AI.
If the former condition is met and the community agrees that an AI
solution may be relevant and useful, the latter requires the inclusive
design of an AI system through a close and continued relationship
between the AI researcher and those impacted.
This close partnership is particularly important as the gross
effects of AI-based social interventions on communities’ capabilities
are unlikely to be exclusively positive. Tradeoffs may be forced on
designers and stakeholders; some are likely to be intergroup, and
some, intragroup. For this reason, it is only consistent with the
proposed approach that designers consult stakeholders from all
groups on their preferred ways to navigate such tradeoffs. In other
words, if PACT is focused on creating capabilities, it must enableimpacted individuals to have a say on what alternatives are opened
(or closed) to them.
Moreover, AI projects that incorporate stakeholders’ choices
into their design process may contribute to create what Wolff and
De-Shalit [86]refer to as “fertile functionings. ” That is, functionings
that, when secured, are likely to secure other functionings. Fertile
functionings include, though are not limited to, the ability to work
and the ability to have social affiliations. These are the kinds of
functionings that either enable other functionings (e.g. control over
one’s environment) or reduce the risk associated with them.
Projects in AI that create propitious environments and enable
individuals to make decisions over the capability sets they value in
turn give those individuals the capability to function in a way that
leads to the creation of other capabilities. If this kind of participatory
space is offered to those who are the most vulnerable, AI could
plausibly act against disadvantage, and contribute to shifting the
distribution of power. In this way, the PACT framework is aligned
with the principles of Design Justice in prioritizing the voices of
affected communities and viewing positive change as a result of an
accountable collaborative process [18].
The PACT framework is also committed to the notion that, when
applying capabilities to AI, we must include all stakeholders, espe-
cially vulnerable members of society. But how do we accomplish
this concretely, and how does this affect the different steps in an
AI4SG research project? In the following section, we will first intro-
duce suggested mechanisms of a participatory approach rooted in
capabilities, and then discuss how these come into play in (1) deter-
mining which capability sets to pursue at the beginning of a project,
and (2) evaluating the success of an AI4SG system in terms of its
impact, particularly on groups’ sets of substantive liberties.
The approach we propose is diagrammed in Figure 4, which
embeds community participation into each stage. By beginning
first with defining capability sets, we resist the temptation to im-
mediately apply established tools to address ingrained social issues,
which would only restrict the possibilities for change [ 48]. These
participatory approaches constitute bottom-up approaches for em-
bedding value into AI systems, by learning values from human