reconcile multiple viewpoints. We therefore address these concerns
with an integrated framework, called the Participatory Approach
to enable Capabilities in communi Ties, or PACT, that allows re-
searchers to assess “goodness" across different stakeholder groups
and different projects. We illustrate PACT in Figure 1. As part of
this framework, we first suggest ethical guidelines rooted in capa-
bility theory to guide such evaluations [ 59,70]. We reject a view
that favors courses of action solely for their aggregate net benefits,
regardless of how they are distributed and what resulting injustices
arise. Such an additive accounting may easily err toward favor-
ing the values and interests of majorities, excluding traditionally
underrepresented community members from the design process
altogether.
Instead, we employ the capabilities approach , designed to mea-
sure human development by focusing on the substantive liberties
that individuals and communities enjoy, to lead the kind of lives
they have reason to value [ 70]. A capability-focused approach to so-
cial good is aimed at increasing opportunities for people to achieve
combinations of “functionings”—that is, combinations of things
they may find valuable doing or being. While common assessment
methods might overlook new or existing social inequalities if some
measure of “utility” is increased high enough in aggregate, our
approach would only define an endeavor as contributing to social
good if it takes concrete steps toward empowering all members of
the affected community to each enjoy the substantive liberties to
function in the ways they have reason to value.
We then propose to enact this conception of social good with
aparticipatory approach that involves community members in “a
process of investigating, understanding, reflecting upon, establish-
ing, developing, and supporting mutual learning between multiple
participants” [ 75], in order for the community itself to define what
those substantive liberties and functionings should be. In other
words, communities define social good in their context.
Our contributions are therefore (i) arguing that the capabilities
approach is a worthy candidate for conceptualizing social good, es-
pecially in diverse-stakeholder settings (Section 3), (ii) highlighting
the role that AI can play in expanding and equalizing capabilities
(Section 4), (iii) explaining how a participatory approach is best
served to identify desired capabilities (Section 5), and (iv) presenting
and discussing our proposed guiding principles of a participatory
approach (Section 6). These contributions come together to form
PACT.
2 GROWING CRITICISMS OF AI FOR SOCIAL
GOOD
As a technical field whose interactions on social-facing problems
are young but monumental in impact, the field of AI has yet to fully
develop a moral compass. On the whole, the subfield of AI for social
good is not an exception.
We highlight criticisms that have arisen against AI4SG research,
which serve as a call to action to reform the field. Later, we ar-
gue that a participatory approach rooted in enabling capabilities
will provide needed direction to the field by letting the affected
communities—particularly those who are most vulnerable—be the
guide.Recent years have seen calls for AI and computational researchers
to more closely engage with the ethical implications of their work.
Green [26] implores researchers to view themselves and their work
through a political lens, asking not just how the systems they build
will impact society, but also how even the problems and methods
they choose to explore (and notexplore) serve to normalize the
types of research that ought to be done. Latonero [44] offers a
critical view of technosolutionism as it has recently manifested in
AI4SG efforts emerging from industry, such as Intel’s TrailGuard
AI that detects poachers in camera trap images, which have the
potential to individually identify a person. Latonero argues that
while companies may have good intentions, they often lack the
ability to gain the expertise and local context required to tackle
complex social issues. In a related spirit, Blumenstock [7]urges
researchers not to forget “the people behind the numbers” when
developing data-driven solutions, especially in development con-
texts. De-Arteaga et al . [19] focus on a specific subset of AI4SG
dubbed machine learning for development (ML4D) and similarly
express the importance of considering local context to ensure that
researcher and stakeholder goals are aligned.
Also manifesting recently are meta-critiques of AI4SG specifi-
cally, which contend that the subfield is vaguely defined, to trou-
bling implications. Moore [56] focuses specifically on how the
choice of the word “good” can serve to distract from potentially
negative consequences of the development of certain technolo-
gies, retorting that AI4SG should be re-branded as AI for “not bad”.
Malliaraki [51] argues that AI4SG’s imprecise definition hurts its
ability to progress as a discipline, since the lack of clarity around
what values are held or what progress is being made hinders the
ability of the field to establish specific expertise. Green [27] points
out that AI4SG is sufficiently vague to encompass projects aimed
at police reform as well as predictive policing, and therefore simply
lacks meaning. Green also argues that AI4SG’s orientation toward
“good” biases researchers toward incremental technological im-
provements to existing systems and away from larger reformative
efforts that could be better.
Others have gone further, calling for reforms in the field to say
that “good” AI should seek to shift power to the traditionally dis-
advantaged. Mohamed et al . [55] put forth a decolonial view of
AI that suggests that AI systems should be built specifically to
dismantle traditional forms of colonial oppression. They provide
examples of how AI can perpetuate colonialism in the digital age,
such as through algorithmic exploitation via Mechanical Turk–
style “ghost work” [ 25] or through algorithmic dispossesion in
which disadvantaged communities are designed forwithout being
allowed a seat at the design table. They also offer three “tactics” for
moving toward decolonial AI, namely: (1) a critical technical prac-
tice to analyze whether systems promote fairness, diversity, safety,
and mechanisms of anticolonial resistance; (2) reciprocal engage-
ments that engender co-design between affected communities and
researchers; and (3) a change in attitude from benevolence to soli-
darity, that again necessitates active engagement with communities
and grassroots organizations. In a similar spirit, Kalluri [36]calls for
researchers to critically analyze the power structures of the systems
they design for and consider pursuing projects that empower the
people they are intended to help. For example, researchers may seek
to empower those represented in the data that enables the system,