Figure 2: The United Nations Human Development Index
(HDI) was inspired by the capabilities approach, which
serves as the foundation of the participatory approach that
we propose. The above map from Wikimedia Commons
shows the HDI rankings of countries around the world,
where darker color indicates a higher index.
doing, and how it interacts with existing social realities, to enhance
or reduce the opportunities of the most vulnerable members of
society to pursue the lives they have reason to value. It asks whether
the social, political, and economic environment that it contributes
to create deprives individuals of those capabilities or fosters the
conditions in which they may enjoy equal substantive liberties to
flourish. In this framework, a measure of social good is how much
a given project contributes to bolster the enjoyment of substantive
liberties, especially by members of marginalized groups. This kind
of measure is respectful of individual liberties, sensitive to questions
of distribution, and responsive to interpersonal variations in utility.
Before discussing the relation between AI and capabilities, we
would like to dispel a potential objection to our framework. The
capabilities approach has been criticized for not paying sufficient
attention to groups, institutions, and social structures, thus render-
ing itself unable to account for power imbalances and dynamics
[30,40]. This characteristic would make the approach unappealing
for a field that seeks to address injustices in the distribution of
power. However, the approach does indeed place substantial em-
phasis on conceptualizing the factors that affect (particularly those
which may enhance) individuals’ power. Its emphasis on substantial
opportunities is itself a way of conceptualizing what individuals
have the power to do or to be. These powers are determined in
large part by the broader social environment, which includes group
membership, inter-group relations, institutions, and social prac-
tices. Furthermore, the approach explicitly focuses on enhancing
the power of the most vulnerable members of society. In fact, the
creation and enhancement of capabilities constitute intermediate
steps on the way towards shifting power, promoting the welfare
and broadening the liberties of those who have been historically
deprived. For this reason, it provides a fruitful framework to assess
genuine moral progress and a promising tool for AI projects seeking
to promote social good.
Light discussion of the capabilities approach has begun inside
the AI community. Moore [56] references the capabilities approach
to call for greater accountability and individual control of private
data. Coeckelbergh [16] proposes taking a capabilities approach to
health care, particularly when using AI assistance to replace humancare, but focuses on Nussbaum’s proposed set of capabilities rather
than eliciting desired capabilities from affected patients. We signif-
icantly build on these claims by discussing the potential of AI to
enhance capabilities and argue that the capabilities approach goes
hand-in-hand with a participatory approach. Two papers specifi-
cally ground their work in the capabilities approach; we highlight
these as exemplars for future work in AI4SG. Thinyane and Bhat
[79] invoke the capabilities approach, specifically to empower the
agency of marginalized groups, to motivate their development of a
mobile app to identify victims of human trafficking in Thai fisheries.
Kumar et al . [42] conduct an empirical study of women’s health in
India through the lens of Nussbaum’s central human capabilities.
4 AI AND CAPABILITIES
The capabilities approach may serve AI researchers and developers
to assess the potential impact of projects and interventions along
two dimensions of social progress: capability expansion and distri-
bution. This section argues that, when they interact productively
with other social factors, AI projects can contribute to equalizing
and enhancing capabilities—and that therein lies their potential
to bring about social good. For instance, an AI-based system Vi-
sual Question Answering System can enhance the capabilities of
the visually impaired to access relevant information about their
environment [38].
When considering equalizing and enhancing capabilities, it is
important to notice that whether an individual or group enjoys a
set of capabilities is not solely a matter of having certain personal
characteristics or being free from external obstruction. External
conditions need also be conducive to enable individuals’ choices
among the set of alternatives that constitutes the capability set
[60]. This is why these liberties are described as substantial , as
opposed to formal or negative. Hence, capabilities, or substantive
liberties, are composed of (1) individuals’ personal characteristics
(including skills, conditions, and traits), (2) external resources they
have access to, and (3) the configuration of their wider material and
social environment [34].
Prior work at the intersection of technology and capabilities has
addressed the potential of technology to empower users, by en-
hancing their capabilities and choice sets. Johnstone [34] proposes
the capabilities approach as a key framework for computer ethics,
suggesting that technological objects may serve as tools or external
resources that enhance individuals’ range of potential action and
choice [ 17,39]. This is an important role that AI-based technologies
may play in enhancing capabilities: providing tools for geographic
navigation, efficient communications, accurate health diagnoses,
and climate forecasts. Technology may also foster the development
of new skills, abilities, and traits that broaden an individual’s choice
sets. We diagram in Figure 3 the relationship between an AI4SG
project on an individual’s characteristics, resources, and environ-
ments, and thus the potential of AI to alter (both positively and
negatively) capability sets.
Technological objects may also become part of social structures,
forming networks of interdependencies with people, groups, and
other artifacts [ 62,85]. When focusing on AI-based technologies, it
is crucial to also acknowledge their potential to affect the social and
material environment, which may render it more or less conducive