rather than the decision-maker who is privileged with a wealth of
data. This could be accomplished by designing systems for users to
audit or demand recourse based on an AI system’s decision [36].
In tandem with these criticisms, there have been corresponding
efforts to define AI4SG. Floridi et al . [22] provide a report of an
early initiative to develop guidelines in support of AI for good.
Therein, they highlight risks and opportunities for such systems,
outline core ethical principles to be considered, and offer several
recommendations for how AI efforts can be given a “firm foun-
dation” in support of social good. Floridi et al . [23] later expand
on this work by proposing a three-part account, which includes a
definition, a set of guiding principles, and a set of “essential factors
for success.” They define AI4SG as “the design, development, and
deployment of AI systems in ways that (i) prevent, mitigate, or
resolve problems adversely affecting human life and/or the well-
being of the natural world, and/or (ii) enable socially preferable
and/or environmentally sustainable developments.” Note that this
disjunctive definition captures a broad spectrum of projects with
widely diverging outcomes, leaving open still the possible critiques
discussed above. However, their principles and essential factors
contribute to establishing rough guidelines for projects in the field,
as others have done [49, 81] in lieu of seeking a definition.
3 THE CAPABILITIES APPROACH
Clearly, AI for social good is in need of a stricter set of ethical
criteria and stronger guidance. To understand what steps take us
in the direction of a more equitable, just, and fair society, we must
find the right conceptual tools and frameworks. Utilitarian ethics,
a widely referenced framework, adopts the aggregation of utility
(broadly understood) as the sole standard to determine the moral
value of an action [68, 80].
According to classic utilitarianism, the right action to take in
any given context is whichever action maximizes utility for society.
This brand of utilitarianism seems particularly attractive in science-
oriented circles, due to its claim that a moral decision can be made
by simply maximizing an objective function. For example, in the
social choice literature, Bogomolnaia et al . [8] argue for the use
of utilitarianism as “it is efficient, strategyproof and treats equally
agents and outcomes.” However, the apparent transparency of the
utilitarian argument obscures its major shortcomings. First, like
the problem of class imbalance in machine learning, a maximizing
strategy will bias its objective towards the majority class. Hence,
effects on minority and marginalized groups may be easily over-
looked. Second, which course of action can maximize utility for
society overall cannot be determined on simple cost–benefit analy-
ses. Any such procedure involves serious trade-offs, and a moral
decision requires that we acknowledge tensions and navigate them
responsibly.
To take a recent example, the development of digital contact
tracing apps in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic represented a
massive potential benefit for public health, yet posed a serious threat
to privacy rights, and all the values that privacy protects—including
freedom of thought and expression, personal autonomy, and demo-
cratic legitimacy. Which course of action will maximize utility? It
is not just controversial. What verdict is reached will necessarily
depend on what fundamental choices and liberties individuals valuemost, and which they are willing to forgo. Furthermore, for some
groups the losses may be more significant than for others, and this
fact requires due consideration.
A related, though distinct, standard might put aside the ambition
of maximizing good and adopt some threshold condition instead.
As long as it generates a net improvement over the status quo , some-
one might say, an action can be said to promote social and public
good. This strategy raises three additional problems: first, utility
aggregates are insensitive to allocation and distribution; second,
they are not sensitive to individual liberties and fundamental rights;
and third, to the extent that they consider stakeholders’ preferences,
they do not take into account the idea that individuals’ preferences
depend on their circumstances and in better circumstances could
have different preferences [ 70]. Why should this matter? Because
attempts to increase utility may be too easily signed off as progress
while inflicting serious harm and contributing to the entrenchment of
existing inequality.
For this reason, we believe that respect for liberty, fairness of
distribution, and sensitivity to interpersonal variations in utility
functions should serve as moral constraints, to channel utility in-
crements towards more valuable social outcomes. Operating within
these constraints suggests shifting the focal point from utility to
a different standard. In the spirit of enabling capabilities, we sug-
gest that such standard should be based on an understanding of
the kinds of lives individuals have reason to value, how the dis-
tribution of resources in combination with environmental factors
may create (or eliminate) opportunities for them to actualize these
lives, and designing projects that create fertile conditions for these
opportunities to be secured.
This reorientation of the moral assessment framework is in line
with a view of AI as a tool to shift power to individuals and groups
in situations of disadvantage, as advocated by Kalluri [36]. What
this shift means, in operational terms, is not yet fully elucidated.
We therefore hope to contribute to this endeavor by exploring
conceptual tools that may guide developers in the process, providing
intermediate landmarks. We consider “capabilities” to be suitable
candidates for this task, as they constitute a step in the direction
of empowering disadvantaged individuals to decide what, in their
view, that shift should consist of.
The capabilities approach, which stands at the intersection of
ethics and development economics, was originally proposed by
Amartya Sen and Martha Nussbaum [ 60,70]. The approach focuses
on the notion that all human beings should have a set of substan-
tive liberties that allow them to function in society in the ways
they choose [ 60]. These substantive liberties include both freedom
from external obstruction and the external conditions conducive to
such functioning. The capability set includes all of the foundational
abilities a human being ought to have to flourish in society, such
as, freedom of speech, thought and association; bodily health and
integrity; and control over one’s political and material environ-
ment; among others. The capabilities approach has inspired the
creation of the United Nations Human Development Index (Fig-
ure 2), marking a shift away from utilitarian evaluations such as
gross domestic product to people-centered policies that prioritize
substantive capabilities [82].
A capability-oriented AI does not rest content with increasing
aggregate utility and respecting legal rights. It asks itself what it is