Our proposed method is able to associate dierent weights to an individual 740
functional connectivity with respect to its importance in predicting a class label
(healthy control and ADHD). The proposed method appears to assign weight
to dierent brain networks with respect to a particular class.
Our results suggest that the frontal lobe carries most discriminant power in
classifying ADHD. The frontal lobe is known to be associated with cognitive 745
functions like attention, memory, planning and mood. Our ndings of the
frontal lobe anomalies in ADHD concur with earlier studies results. One of
the limitations of the proposed work is the small data size being evaluated.
There is a smaller number of subjects in the individual imaging sites. Also, the
data is very heterogeneous across dierent sites requiring training the network 750
separately for each institution. The distribution of classes (healthy control
and ADHD) in training and testing splits in the imaging sites is dierent,
which makes the dataset very challenging for any classier to achieve decent
results. Due to these facts, the classication accuracy achieved by studies on
this dataset is low and has room for improvement. We have compared results of 755
the DeepFMRI and existing studies with a baseline classier that simply chooses
the majority class based on the testing data distribution. In the case of NYU,
the baseline classier accuracy is high (70.7%) and accuracy achieved by other
studies are comparatively lower. However, the DeepFMRI method was able to
achieve a slightly higher accuracy than the baseline, and was able to achieve 760
much better accuracy than the baseline for the Peking and NI dataset.
In future work, we are interested to apply the proposed network to study
ADHD sub-groups. The study might be based on treatment response, clinical
scores, disorder outcomes etc. However, it will not require redesigning the
proposed network. If the output variable is discrete, a classier can be used 765
as presented in this paper. If the output variable is continuous, instead a
regressor can be used. We are curious to evaluate the proposed method on
other disorders like epilepsy and Alzheimer's with a large number of subjects.
We are also interested to explore whether the proposed method can be used
to overcome variations in dierent imaging sites. One interesting experiment 770
36