which is designed to capture pair-wise region connectivity. The last component
is a classier that takes functional connectivity measures computed from pairs
of brain regions as input, and produces a nal prediction. The contributions
of the work include 1) a deep learning architecture, trained end-to-end, for 55
the classication of ADHD, 2) demonstration of the importance of functional
connectivity for improved results and, 3) a new state-of-the-art classication
accuracy on the ADHD-200 dataset.
It should be noted that a preliminary version of this work was published in a
peer review conference [19]. Compared to the earlier version of this manuscript, 60
we have extended our work by 1) performing and including additional experimental
results, 2) exploring the impact of functional connectivity in an end-to-end deep
network and, 3) performing anatomical analysis of our results. In this paper,
we have applied our framework to ADHD data only, however, the proposed
method can also be applied to other neurological disorders like schizophrenia 65
and epilepsy.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Related work is introduced
in Section 2. We present an overview of the fMRI data used in this work and
preprocessing steps in Section 3. Our proposed multi-stage network is detailed
in Section 4. Section 5 shows the experimental validation and results. The 70
anatomical analysis is discussed in Section 6. Section 7 concludes the paper.
2. Related work
ADHD has received signicant research focus, including studies employing
machine learning using fMRI data to investigate functional connectivity alterations
in ADHD [20, 21, 4, 9, 22]. In the following subsections, we review the related 75
work categorised as correlation methods, dimensionality reduction methods,
graph based methods, clustering based methods, and deep learning methods.
2.1. Correlation methods
Correlation is a widely used method calculating functional connectivity where
the regions with high correlation are considered strongly functionally connected. 80
4