2.5. Deep learning based methods
End-to-end deep learning networks have been shown to outperform existing 170
classical machine learning models in a number of domains like image classication,
image segmentation and object recognition [36]. Generally speaking, an end-to-end
trainable network refers to a single learning system where the predicted label
of a neural network model is predicted directly from the input, with all weights
learned through back-propagation. In the domain of fMRI, there is very limited 175
work exploring deep learning based functional connectivity for classication of
neurological disorders [13].
Many studies have applied deep learning to MRI data. In [37], the authors
have applied a three-dimensional convolutional neural network for the classication
of Alzheimer's disease using MRI data. The method used an auto-encoder 180
for pre-training the CNN lters. The study suggested that a CNN performs
better than other classiers for prediction of Alzheimer's disease. In [38], the
authors have applied a CNN for the classication of ADHD using combined
features of MRI and fMRI. Instead of applying a CNN directly on the temporal
data of brain regions, the CNN was applied to the features extracted from the 185
fMRI data. These features include regional homogeneity (ReHo), the normalized
amplitude of low-frequency 
uctuations (fALFF) and voxel-mirrored homotopic
connectivity (VMHC). These features are calculated using conventional hand-crafted
statistical measures and might not able to capture the inherent characteristics
of temporal fMRI signals. Also, functional connectivity is not explored. In [39], 190
the authors have applied an auto-encoder for the classication of Alzheimer's
disease. Functional connectivity was calculated through correlation and then
fed to an auto-encoder network followed by a softmax layer for the classication.
The method uses a deep network, however, still relies on correlation for functional
connectivity. 195
The use of an articial neural network for classication of ADHD has been
explored in [40]. However, this method relied on a classical machine learning
model for the extraction of multiple features, which are passed to a fully connected
neural network for classication. Similarly, the study in [41] addressed the
8