In this work, we propose a novel end-to-end deep learning method incorporating
functional connectivity for the classication of ADHD. To the best of our knowledge,
this has not been explored by existing studies.
Conclusions
The results suggest that the proposed end-to-end deep learning architecture
achieves better performance as compared to the other state-of-the-art methods.
The ndings suggest that the frontal lobe contains the most discriminative power
towards the classication of ADHD.
Keywords: functional MRI, Deep Learning, End-to-end network, ADHD
1. Introduction
The human brain can be perceived as a large and complex network controlling
and monitoring the systems of the body. The brain network is comprised
of multiple inter-connected brain regions. While supervising and executing
dierent bodily functions, the brain regions continuously coordinate with each 5
other in an ecient manner resulting in a complex brain connectivity pattern.
Brain connectivity is a promising source for diagnosis, characterization and
prediction of pathologies, which are linked to abnormal functional organization
of the brain. Recently, analysis of the connectivity of brain regions has gained
much research focus as it is believed that connectivity plays a key role in the 10
cognitive processes [1].
A number of dierent imaging modalities have been proposed to explore
the functional activity of the brain, such as Electroencephalography (EEG),
Magnetoencephalography (MEG), functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI)
and Positron Emission Tomography (PET). Being non-invasive and displaying 15
remarkable spatial resolution, fMRI is considered most suitable towards determining
functional activity of the brain regions [2]. In recent years, fMRI has emerged as
a popular neuroimaging modality to explore brain connectivity patterns for the
classication of dierent neurological disorders, demonstrated in several studies
[3, 4, 5] with promising outcomes by studying brain functional networks in 20
2