5.2.3. Correlation method 465
Correlation is a popular method for calculating functional connectivity. In
order to compare the proposed method with correlation, we performed correlation
on pre-processed fMRI signals to calculate the functional connectivity between
the brain regions. We applied an Elastic Net based feature selection to extract
discriminant features. Finally, an SVM classier was applied for classication. 470
5.2.4. Clustering method
A clustering-based approach for calculating functional connectivity of brain
regions was used in [3]. Clustering is considered a more sophisticated technique
than correlation-based techniques for calculating functional connectivity [8] as
the network obtained by clustering is sparse [7, 2]. In this study, authors applied 475
Synthetic Minority Over sampling TEchnique (SMOTE) [51] to address the
problem of dataset imbalance. An Elastic Net [21] was applied to functional
connectivity to extract discriminant features. Finally an SVM classier was
utilized to classify healthy vs ADHD subjects.
5.3. Feature importance of functional connectivity 480
A common criticism of deep networks is that they are a `black box', mapping
inputs to outputs and lacking interpretability. In a clinical context, it is of
keen interest to not just produce diagnoses, but also draw some insights from
network itself, particularly looking for dierences between healthy control and
patient groups to characterise the neurological condition. A key advantage of 485
the proposed method is that due to the functional connectivity network, once
the model is trained, we can analyse the functional connectivity of brain regions
for patients and control, leading to interpretable results. As a demonstration,
we carried out an experiment to rank the contribution of individual functional
connectivity values towards prediction of a particular class label (in our case, 490
class labels are healthy control and ADHD). This weighted rank can be viewed as
feature importance of functional connectivity and represents the strength of the
20