and a classier [36].
We propose a deep neural network for diagnosis of ADHD. The network is
learned end-to-end, taking pre-processed fMRI time-series as input and producing
a classication (healthy or ADHD) as output. Our proposed network does not
involve hand-crafted features or independent modules for feature extraction, 235
feature selection and classication. Rather, all these modules are incorporated
in a single network and the weights are learnt itself by the model during the
training. To the best of our knowledge, this is the rst study to propose a
fully end-to-end deep learning method incorporating functional connectivity for
the classication of a neurological disorder based on fMRI. Particularly, we 240
are interested to explore if a deep network-based model can be designed for the
classication of ADHD, and if it is able to outperform classical machine learning
methods or a combination of deep learning and existing classical machine learning
methods. The strength of deep learning comes from its representation learning
capabilities, where the most discriminative features are learned during training. 245
A deep network is composed of multiple modules, where each module learns the
representation from one lower level to a higher, more abstract level.
3. Data and preprocessing
The resting state fMRI data used in this study is from the NeuroBureau
ADHD-200 competition [44]. The data provided by the competition consists of 250
MRI and resting state fMRI data as well as dierent phenotypic information
(non-imaging data) such as age, gender and IQ, for each subject. There was a
global competition held for classication of ADHD subjects, and the consortium
has provided the training and independent test dataset for each imaging site.
The dataset was collected and contributed by eight dierent imaging sites. For 255
the development and evaluation of our proposed network, we used datasets from
three imaging sites: NeuroImage (NI), New York University Medical Center
(NYU), and Peking University (Peking). Our approach is designed to accept
time-series signals of length 172, therefore, we discarded the imaging sites with
10