functional connectivity of two brain regions towards calculating the assignment
of a class label.
In our end-to-end network, the nal prediction is calculated through the 495
classication network. The classication network is comprised of multiple layers
where it gets the functional connectivity from the mapping layer as input and
produces the nal prediction of the network (i.e. control or ADHD) through a
softmax layer. During the training step, the network optimizes the parameters
with respect to the individual class label. The network back-propagates the error 500
from the last layer to the mapping layer (reminiscent of functional connectivity
in our network) during the training phase. Thus the learned weights of this
network carry important information towards determining the feature importance
of the functional connectivity for each of the 4005 pairs of brain regions.
Specically, we are interested to explore the weights assigned by the classication 505
network to the mapping layer Min Equation 2. Deep neural networks have
been applied to visualize feature importance on images [52] and videos [53]. To
explore the importance of features assigned by the classication network, we
carried work similar to [5]. The main idea of the approach is: given a learned
neural network and a class of interest, we trace back to the original input by 510
a backward pass with which we can determine how each input entity aects
the nal detection score for a specic class. In our model, we have two classes
(healthy control and ADHD) and we trace back to the mapping layer values to
nd how each mapping layer value aects the prediction of a particular class.
Given a particular output value of mapping layer M0, a class cand the class 515
score function Sc(M), we would like to rank the elements of M0based upon
their in
uence on the score Sc(M0). Consider the linear score model for the
class c:
Sc(M) =wcM+bc; (4)
where Mis the one-dimensional vector, calculated from Equation 2 and is
reminiscent of the functional connectivity in our network. The wcis the weight 520
21