2.3. Graph based methods 140
A number of graph based approaches have been applied to model brain
networks. Dey et al. [4] proposed a graph-based solution for the classication of
ADHD. They modelled the brain connectivity network as a graph and represented
each node of the network as a set of attributes which was termed as the signature
of a node. The correlation was applied for functional network construction 145
and a threshold was applied to construct the network. The threshold value
was arbitrarily chosen and dierent values were employed for dierent imaging
datasets. Similarly, Siqueira et al. [9] investigated dierent graph-based measures
for the classication of ADHD.
2.4. Clustering based methods 150
Clustering is another popular approach for the evaluation of functional connectivity,
where regions belonging to the same cluster are assumed to be functionally
connected. Studies have shown that a clustering-based approach is more sophisticated
as compared to correlation-based approaches, as the network obtained by clustering
is sparse [7, 2]. Recently, a few studies have applied clustering to the ADHD-200 155
dataset for functional connectivity analysis [8, 3]. Zhang et al. [31] applied
k-means clustering to calculate functional connectivity. However, in k-means,
random initialization of clusters and priori information on the number of clusters
emerges as a major drawback, as these are unknown in the case of fMRI.
Hierarchical clustering can also be applied to calculate functional connectivity 160
[34], however the selection of the thresholding and the number of clusters are
not known in advance in the case of fMRI. Other studies (e.g., [7, 8, 3]) have
applied anity propagation (AP) [35] clustering for the classication of brain
disorders. AP clustering does not require an initial number of clusters, which
is a good choice for fMRI data. However, AP requires a similarity measure 165
between data points as the input and output of the algorithm are aected by
this measure. Selection of the distance measure presents a limitation of these
methods.
7