Next, in order to study the dierences in the two classes, we have plotted
the feature importance map for both classes in Figure 6. For the sake of clarity, 685
we have plotted the top 100 feature maps for both classes. The gure highlights
the dierences in the feature maps of both classes.
To explore further, we have plotted the feature importance values on the
brain map. The visualization of the healthy and the ADHD classes are visualized
in Figure 7 and Figure 8, respectively. The gures show that in most of the 690
cases, the importance value assigned by our network to a particular functional
connectivity is dierent for both classes. We performed an experiment for the
quantitative analysis of the feature maps of both classes. Our motivation was
to compare the top 100 feature maps of both classes. The top 100 feature maps
values were extracted from the healthy class and a lookup was performed in the 695
ADHD feature maps. The result is presented in Figure 9. The gure shows that
out of top 100 feature maps of healthy class, less than 10% fall in the top 500
feature maps in the ADHD class. Similarly, we extracted top 100 feature maps
from the ADHD class and computed the lookup in the healthy class and the
results are presented in Figure 10. As in the previous inference, out of the top 700
100 feature maps of the ADHD class, less than 10% fall in the top 500 feature
maps in the healthy class. Our ndings suggest that the altered functional
connectivity between healthy control and ADHD may relate to functional brain
network dierences. In particular, the proposed method appears to weight
dierent brain network structures depending on the particular class (control 705
or ADHD).
Finally, we are interested in analyzing the learned feature importance map
for both classes with respect to the inter-lobe and intra-lobe distribution. We
have categorized the learned feature importance map with respect to their
respective lobes and the results are visualized in Figure 11. The results suggest 710
that for both classes, the frontal lobe carries a higher number of discriminant
features in terms of both inter and intra-lobe features. The gure shows a
dierent distribution for all of the lobes in both classes. The distribution is
highlighted by the dierent shape of an individual lobe when comparing the two
31