problem of classication of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) from fMRI data. 200
The authors applied a deep autoencoder for dimensionality reduction of pre-processed
fMRI signals. The representation encoded by the autoencoder was fed into
a hidden Markov model to estimate the likelihood of a subject belonging to
the healthy control group or the MCI group to identify its predicted label.
Recently, a deep learning method, namely FCNet [13], has been proposed for 205
the classication of ADHD from fMRI data. The method applies a convolutional
neural network (CNN) to predict functional connectivity of brain regions. However,
after predicting functional connectivity using deep learning, the method applies
classical machine learning methods to extract discriminant features and an SVM
classier to predict classication labels. These approaches rely on classical 210
machine learning models for prediction of a disorder. In a non peer reviewed
work [42], a CNN was proposed for classication of Alzheimer's disease using
fMRI data. The study applied a 2D CNN where the 4D fMRI data was converted
to a stack of 2D images and classication was evaluated on the individual 2D
images. The study does not incorporate the temporal information in the work, 215
which is the most important aspect of the fMRI time-series data. Being a 2D
CNN model, the prediction results are evaluated for individual images instead
of per subject. For prediction of a subject, the results of individual 2D images
are accumulated. A recent study [43] applied a 3D CNN for classication of
autism spectrum disorder. The fMRI 3D volume was downsampled and the 3D 220
CNN was applied on the downsampled data. The study does not incorporate
functional connectivity which is an important characteristic in brain studies.
Many of the studies describe above highlight the importance of functional
connectivity towards the classication of a disorder. However, most existing
techniques employ classical machine learning methods for classication, typically 225
relying solely on hand-crafted features. Discriminant features are selected and
presented to a classier for the nal prediction. More importantly, all the
dierent processing steps in a classical machine learning method are independent
of each other. However, in the machine learning literature, deep learning has
proved to be a powerful paradigm to simultaneously learn discriminant features 230
9