from fMRI time-series signals, however it combines deep learning and classical 300
machine learning and is not trained end-to-end. For ease of understanding, our
proposed architecture can be divided into three modules: 1) feature extractor
network, 2) functional connectivity network, and 3) classication network. The
feature extractor network is applied to a pre-processed time-series signal of
individual brain region and it produces an abstracted feature as its output. 305
These features are learned during the training. The functional connectivity
network takes the abstracted features as input and produces the strength of
similarity between any two brain regions. Finally, the classication network
produces the nal prediction label based on the functional connectivity values
of all brain regions. We describe the details of each individual network below. 310
4.1.1. The feature extractor network
This convolutional neural network (CNN) extracts features from individual
brain region pre-processed time-series signals and is comprised of multiple layers
that are common in CNN models to learn abstract representations of data. The
network is designed to accept signals of length 172 as the input and produces 315
an abstract representation (vector of size 32). The network hyperparameters
were not tuned using a validation dataset, instead, the network architecture
and hyper-parameters are inspired by [48]. We use parametric ReLU and its
slope is learned during the training phase. The parametric ReLU is presented
as: 320
f(x) =8
<
:x; x > 0
ax; x0; (1)
where ais a non-negative scalar subject to learning. Instead of three consecutive
convolutional layers proposed in the network of [48], we have two convolutional
layers next to each other (Layer 12 and 13). The network is presented in Figure
1a and is comprised of 15 layers (Figure 1d). All convolutional layers are one
dimensional with a kernel size of 3, stride of 1 and the numbers of lters are 32, 325
64, 96, 64, 64 for the respective layers as presented in Figure 1. All max pooling
layers pool temporally with pool length of 2 with stride 1 as proposed by [48].
13