proposed method outperforms the average accuracy results of the competition
teams (data from the competition website [44]), the highest accuracy of competition 565
for any individual site (from [20]), correlation-based functional connectivity
results and clustering based results. Our method also performs well in comparison
with the state-of-the-art FCNet method [13]. Table 1 highlights that the distribution
of healthy control and ADHD class in train and test splits are dierent. However,
in order to achieve better performance by any classier, the training and testing 570
data should follow a similar class-distribution. The performance of any classier
depends on the distribution of the training data. If the majority class is changed
for the testing data, the classier performance would drop badly. For the
calculation of the baseline classier accuracy, it can be assumed that a simple
classier would predict the majority class of the training dataset for all testing 575
subjects. In the case of Peking, the majority class in the training dataset is
healthy control, so the baseline accuracy for Peking on testing dataset is 47.1%
(24=(24 + 27)). Similarly for NYU, with ADHD as majority class in training
data set, is 70.7% (29 =(29 + 12)), and for NI, with ADHD as majority class
in training dataset, is 44.0% (11 =(11 + 14)). The baseline accuracy for three 580
imaging sites are presented in Table 4, where the DeepFMRI performs much
better than baseline accuracy for the Peking and NYU and slightly better for
the NYU.
The results show that the proposed method shows the improved results for
NI and NYU and the classication accuracy is highest in all three imaging sites. 585
For Peking, results for both the FCNet [13] and proposed method are the same.
One interesting point about the ADHD dataset is that the studies employing
the dataset were not able to achieve high classication accuracy. The average
and highest accuracy achieved by competing studies is presented in Table 4
where the accuracy results are around 50%. One possible reason for lower 590
accuracy could be the heterogeneous nature of the data and the scan parameters.
For example, for NI imaging site data acquisition, the subjects were asked
to keep their eyes closed. No visual stimulus was presented during the scan.
For NYU, the participants were asked to close their eyes, think of nothing
24