choice for fMRI studies as these methods do not require any prior information
about the spatial or temporal patterns of source signals.
In another study [32], the authors have proposed a framework for the classication
of Autism and ADHD. The authors have used multiple imaging modalities,
namely MRI and fMRI for classication of disorders. Also, personal characteristic 115
data such as age, gender has been explored for the classication. In this
work, a histogram of oriented gradients have been calculated from the imaging
modalities and the minimum redundancy maximum relevance (MRMR) is applied
as the feature selection strategy. The selected features are presented to a support
vector machine classier for the nal prediction. Similarly, in another study 120
[33], the authors have also used multiple imaging modalities (MRI and fMRI)
for the classication of ADHD and Autism. In this study, the structural features
from MRI are extracted through a sparse auto-encoder and principal component
analysis (PCA) is applied to the fMRI data to decompose to extract principal
components. Finally, an SVM classier is used for nal prediction. Both of these 125
studies rely on multiple imaging modalities and do not incorporate functional
connectivity in their work, which is an important characteristic of fMRI data.
The focus in this proposed work is to utilise a single imaging modality (fMRI)
and exploit functional connectivity for prediction of ADHD. We note that the
proposed method produces comparable results to [32, 33], but using only a single 130
imaging modality.
ICA-based approaches have shown success in classication tasks, however,
there are limitations to these methods. First, independent components are often
perceived as dicult to understand [1]. ICA is based on the assumption that
components (signal sources) are independent, whether spatially or temporally. 135
Violation of the assumption degrades performance. Moreover, selection of the
number of independent components and a threshold value for the independent
component maps are considered as a drawback [2], especially in the case of fMRI,
where there is no prior information of the number of components available.
6