Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 582 21 of 25
conﬁrm the necessity of the attention mechanism. Third, the results of the di erent activation functions
show that Mish is a better choice than ReLU for DBDA.
5.1. Investigation of the Proportion of Training Samples
As we mentioned, deep learning is a data-driven algorithm that depends on large amounts of
high-quality labelled dataset. In this part, we investigate the scenarios for di erent proportions of
training samples.
Figure 13 demonstrates the experimental results. For the IP and BS datasets, we use 0.5%, 1%, 3%,
5%, and 10% samples as the training sets, respectively. For the UP and SV datasets, we use 0.1%, 0.5%,
1%, 5%, and 10% of samples as the training sets, respectively.
Remote Sens.  2020 , 12, 582 21 of 25 
  
Figure 1 3. The OA results of SVM, CDCNN, CDCN N, SSRN, FDSSC, DBMA and our proposed 
method with varying proportions of training samples on the ( a) IP, ( b) UP, ( c) SV and ( d) BS. 
5.2. Effectiveness of the Attention Mechanism  
To verify the effectiveness of the attention mech anism, we remove the spatial-attention module, 
spectral-attention module, and both attention modules of the DBDA respectively, and compare the performance between these three “incomplete DBDA” and the “complete DBDA.” 
From Figure 14, we can conclude that the exis tence of the spatial attention mechanism and the 
spectral attention mechanism does promote the accuracy on four datasets. 
Averagely, the attention mechanism improves 4.69 % OA on four datasets. Furthermore, a single 
spatial attention mechanism (average 2.18% improv ement) performs better than a single spectral 
attention mechanism (average 0.97% im provement) upon most occasions. 
 
Figure 14. Effectiveness of the attention mechanism (res ults of different at tention mechanisms). 
  
Figure 13. The OA results of SVM, CDCNN, CDCNN, SSRN, FDSSC, DBMA and our proposed method
with varying proportions of training samples on the ( a) IP , ( b) UP , ( c) SV and ( d) BS.
As we expected, the accuracy improves with increase in the number of training samples.
All 3D-based methods, including SSRN, FDSSC, DBMA, and the proposed framework can obtain
near-perfect performances as long as enough samples (about 10% of the whole dataset) are provided.
At the same time, the performance gaps between di erent models are narrowed according to the
increases in training samples. Nevertheless, our method outpaces other methods, especially when
samples are insu cient. Since it is costly to label the dataset, our proposed method can save labor
and cost.
5.2. E ectiveness of the Attention Mechanism
To verify the e ectiveness of the attention mechanism, we remove the spatial-attention module,
spectral-attention module, and both attention modules of the DBDA respectively, and compare the
performance between these three “incomplete DBDA” and the “complete DBDA”.
From Figure 14, we can conclude that the existence of the spatial attention mechanism and the
spectral attention mechanism does promote the accuracy on four datasets.