Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 582 6 of 25
in which xjimeans the ith channel’s inﬂuence on the jth channel. Then, the results of matrix
multiplication between XTandAare reshaped into Rcpp. Finally, the reshaped results are weighted
by a parameter of scale and added input Ato acquire the ﬁnal spectral attention map E2Rcpp:
Ej=X
C
i=1(xjiAj) +Aj (7)
whereis initialized as zero and can be learned gradually. The ﬁnal map Eencompasses the weighted
summations of all channels’ features, which can describe long-range dependencies and boost the
discriminability about features.
Remote Sens.  2020 , 12, 582 6 of 25 
 where ߙ is initialized as zero and can be learned gradually. The final map E encompasses the 
weighted summations of all channels’ features, wh ich can describe long-r ange dependencies and 
boost the discriminability about features. 
2.4.2. Spatial Attention Block 
As illustrated in Figure 4b, given an input feature map ࡭ℝ௖×௣×௣, two convolution layers are 
adopted to generate new feature maps B and C respectively, where ሼ࡯,࡮ ሽℝ௖×௣×௣. Next, B and C are 
reshaped into ℝ௖×௡, where ݌=݊×݌  is the number of pixels. Then a multiplication of matrices is 
executed between B and C, and a softmax layer is attached subsequently to calculate the spatial 
attention feature maps ࡿℝ௡×௡: 
ݏ௝௜=௘௫௣ ൫஻೔×஼ೕ൯
∑ ௘௫௣ ൫஻೔×஼ೕ൯ಿ
೔సభ  (8) 
where ݏ௝௜ measures the impact of ith pixel to the jth pixel. The closer feat ure representations of the 
two pixels signify a stronger correlation between them. 
The initial input feature A is simultaneously fed into a convolution layer to obtain a new feature 
map ࡰℝ௖×௣×௣ which is reshaped into ℝ௖×௡ subsequently. Then a multiplication of matrices is 
performed between D and ܂ࡿ ,and the result is reshaped into ℝ௖×௣×௣ as: 
ܧ௝=ߚ ∑ (ݏ௝௜ܦ௝)+ܣ௝ே
௜ୀଵ   (9) 
where ߚ with a zero initial value can be learned to assign more weight gradually. By Equation (9), 
it can be inferred that all positions and original features are added with a certain weight to get the final feature ࡱ
ℝ௖×௣×௣. Therefore, long-range contextual information in the spatial dimension is 
modeled as E. 
 
Figure 4. The details of the spectral attention block and the spatial attention block. 
Figure 4. The details of the spectral attention block and the spatial attention block.
2.4.2. Spatial Attention Block
As illustrated in Figure 4b, given an input feature map A2Rcpp, two convolution layers are
adopted to generate new feature maps BandCrespectively, where fB,Cg2Rcpp. Next, BandC
are reshaped into Rcn, where n=ppis the number of pixels. Then a multiplication of matrices
is executed between BandC, and a softmax layer is attached subsequently to calculate the spatial
attention feature maps S2Rnn:
sji=exp(Bi+Cj)
PN
i=1exp(Bi+Cj)(8)
where sjimeasures the impact of ith pixel to the jth pixel. The closer feature representations of the two
pixels signify a stronger correlation between them.