Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 582 22 of 25
Remote Sens.  2020 , 12, 582 21 of 25 
  
Figure 1 3. The OA results of SVM, CDCNN, CDCN N, SSRN, FDSSC, DBMA and our proposed 
method with varying proportions of training samples on the ( a) IP, ( b) UP, ( c) SV and ( d) BS. 
5.2. Effectiveness of the Attention Mechanism  
To verify the effectiveness of the attention mech anism, we remove the spatial-attention module, 
spectral-attention module, and both attention modules of the DBDA respectively, and compare the performance between these three “incomplete DBDA” and the “complete DBDA.” 
From Figure 14, we can conclude that the exis tence of the spatial attention mechanism and the 
spectral attention mechanism does promote the accuracy on four datasets. 
Averagely, the attention mechanism improves 4.69 % OA on four datasets. Furthermore, a single 
spatial attention mechanism (average 2.18% improv ement) performs better than a single spectral 
attention mechanism (average 0.97% im provement) upon most occasions. 
 
Figure 14. Effectiveness of the attention mechanism (res ults of different at tention mechanisms). 
  
Figure 14. Eectiveness of the attention mechanism (results of di erent attention mechanisms).
Averagely, the attention mechanism improves 4.69% OA on four datasets. Furthermore, a single
spatial attention mechanism (average 2.18% improvement) performs better than a single spectral
attention mechanism (average 0.97% improvement) upon most occasions.
5.3. E ectiveness of the Activation Function
In Section 3.2.1, we illustrate why we adopted Mish as the activation function rather than the
generally used ReLU. Here, we will compare the performance between DBDA based on Mish and
DBDA based on ReLU. Figure 15 shows the classiﬁcation OA of them.
Remote Sens.  2020 , 12, 582 22 of 25 
 5.3. Effectiveness of the Activation Function 
In Section 3.2.1, we illustrate why we adopted Mi sh as the activation function rather than the 
generally used ReLU. Here, we will compare th e performance between DBDA based on Mish and 
DBDA based on ReLU. Figure 15 shows the classification OA of them. 
As shown in Figure 15, DBDA based on Mish surpasses DBDA based on ReLU. Specifically, 
there are 2.27%, 2.01%, 4.00% and 1.24% OA improvements on the IP, UP, SV, and BS datasets, respectively. Since Mish can quicken counter-prop agation, the difference in performance occurs. 
 
Figure 15. Effectiveness of the activation  function (results on different activation functions). 
6. Conclusions 
In this paper, we proposed an end-to-end framework double-branch dual-attention mechanism 
network for HSI classification. The input of the DBDA framework is original 3D pixel data without any cumbersome pre-proc essing to reduce dimensionality. Based on densely connected 3D-CNN 
layers with BN, we designed two branches that ca pture spectral and spatial features respectively. 
Meanwhile, a flexible and adaptive self-attention mechanism was applied to spectral branch and 
spatial branch, respectively. Mish was introduced as the activation function to accelerate the counter-
propagation and convergence processes. Dynamic lear ning rates, early stoppi ng, and dropout layers 
were also adopted to prevent overfitting. 
Extensive experimental results demonstrate that  our proposed framework surpasses the state-
of-the-art algorithm, es pecially when training samples are finite and limited. Meanwhile, the 
consumption of time is also decreased in comparison to FDSSC and DBMA, as the attention blocks and the activation function Mish accelerate the conv ergent speed of the model. Accordingly, we draw 
a conclusion that the structure of our method is more preferable for HSI classi ﬁcation. 
A future direction of our work is applying our proposed framework to other hyperspectral 
images, not just process the above-mentioned open-source datasets. Moreover, it is also an attractive challenge to reduce the training time. 
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, R.L.; formal  analysis, R.L.; funding acquisition, S.Z.; methodology, 
R.L.; validation, R.L.; writing—original draft, R.L. and C.D.; writing—review and editing, S.Z., C.D., Y.Y., and 
XW. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. 
Funding: This research was funded by the National Na tural Science Foundations of China (Nos. 41671452). 
Acknowledgments:  I am indebted to my mentor, Shunyi Zheng, who supported my work strongly. I would also 
like to express my gratitude to Chenxi Duan, my morning sunlight who revised my manuscript earnestly. 
Conflicts of Interest:  The authors declare no con ﬂicts of interest. The founding sponsors had no role in the 
design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in  the writing of the manuscript; nor in 
the decision to publish the results. 
Figure 15. Eectiveness of the activation function (results on di erent activation functions).
As shown in Figure 15, DBDA based on Mish surpasses DBDA based on ReLU. Speciﬁcally, there
are 2.27%, 2.01%, 4.00% and 1.24% OA improvements on the IP , UP , SV , and BS datasets, respectively.
Since Mish can quicken counter-propagation, the di erence in performance occurs.
6. Conclusions
In this paper, we proposed an end-to-end framework double-branch dual-attention mechanism
network for HSI classiﬁcation. The input of the DBDA framework is original 3D pixel data without any
cumbersome pre-processing to reduce dimensionality. Based on densely connected 3D-CNN layers