Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1402 3 of 7
tasks of consensus and coordination between agents, as they may be learning at all times and changing
their behavior.
Multi-Agent Learning (MAL) [ 10] allows us to design certain guidelines from which an agent
will be able to exploit the dynamics of its environment and use them to adapt to it. In a multi-agent
environment, learning is both more important and more difﬁcult, since the selection of actions has
to be done in the presence of other agents, who do not necessarily have to follow the rules of the
environment and can make non-deterministic decisions. These agents in turn will adapt their actions
to those previously carried out by the other agents. The problems seen in the MAL have a strong
relationship with the theory of games, in which an agent selects actions to maximize his/her advantage
over the rest.
In the area of MAS learning, this Special Issue contributes with two papers. The ﬁrst one [ 11] dealt
with the problem of coordinated control of multiple hovercrafts. To address this problem, the authors
proposed the design of coordinated control algorithms for multiple agents. For a single vehicle, they
proposed to use Radial Basis Function Neural Networks (RBFNNs) to improve the robustness of the
controller. For multiple vehicles, they considered the use of a directed topology, but considering that
communication among vehicles is continuous.
The second work [ 12] proposed an approach to learn behavior models as behavior trees for
autonomous agents. The main goal of the proposal is to facilitate behavior modeling for autonomous
agents in simulation and computer games. The experiments, carried out on the Pac-Man game
environment, showed the effectiveness of the proposal, although it is necessary to broaden the
applications of the proposed approach in more complex scenarios and conﬁgurations.
4. MAS in Ambient Intelligence
Ambient Intelligence (AmI) was built to respond to the technological call to monitor and act in
the homes of people with disabilities. Its aim was to create a nest of sensor systems that together
could provide more information than alone, thus transforming data into knowledge [ 13–15]. This is
achieved by incorporating digital environments that are sensitive to people’s needs, can respond to
their requirements, anticipate behaviors, and adjust the response accordingly. In the last few years,
several projects have been developed to attend to the needs of the AmI, being very recently under the
focus of the industry, a result of the advances of the sensor systems and their decrease of cost, as well
as the introduction into mobile devices. Furthermore, the advances of the Internet of Things (IoT) have
introduced a new hypothesis of communicating with the home appliances and, above all, introducing
them in the home network where they can be remotely controlled [16–18].
Over the last few years, MAS have been employed as a tool for the development of many AmI
frameworks. As examples, we can highlight the iGendaframework [ 19,20], which has as its main goal
providing intelligent event management, consisting of a platform that receives events from other users
and tries to schedule them according to its importance, having the ability to create, move, and delete
events. Moreover, aiming for the implementation of the active aging concept, it schedules ludic
activities in the users’ free time, adjusted to their medical conditions, user shared events being the last
implemented feature. Another example is ALZ-MAS [ 21], which consists of an Ambient Intelligence
framework based on multi-agent technology aimed at enhancing the assistance and health care for
Alzheimer patients.
In this Special Issue, three new contributions in this area have been presented. The ﬁrst one [ 22]
presented a tool, the goal of which is to assist in creating a work environment that is adapted to
the needs of people with disabilities. The tool measures the degree of accessibility in the place of
work and identiﬁes the architectural barriers of the environment by considering the activities carried
out by workers. A case study was conducted to assess the performance of the system, analyzing
the accessibility of the different jobs in a real company. Although the tool was initially conceived
of for the detection of accessibility problems in ofﬁce environments, it can be considered a valid