Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1402 4 of 7
tool for the simulation of any agent production process representing human beings in the ﬁeld of
ofﬁce environments.
The second contribution [ 23] explored the representation of user interaction levels using an
intelligent hybrid system approach with agents. The authors considered the use of an intelligent
hybrid approach to provide a decision-making system to an agent that self-evaluates interactions in
interactive modules in a museum exhibition. The main goal of this work was to provide a solution to
the problem of overcrowding in museums, making museums smart spaces with multi-user adaptive
interaction exhibitions. As a case study, the authors built software agents that represented a high-level
abstraction of a gallery, speciﬁcally an interactive exhibition module in a real museum in Mexico.
Finally, the third work [ 24] presented CogHelper, which is an orientation system for people with
cognitive disabilities. The main idea is that using this system, people with cognitive disabilities may
have a more active life, reducing the worry of getting lost both indoors and outdoors. CogHelper will
guide users taking into consideration his preferences. To achieve this behavior, the proposed system
applies a speculative computation module [ 25], which needs to be loaded by the traveling path before
its execution. For the moment, the system is just a prototype, and authors will test the entire system in
real case scenarios in the near future.
5. MAS and Simulation
Agent-based simulation is an approach to modeling systems, which focuses on the simulation
of complex technical systems that are distributed and involve complex interaction between humans
and machines [ 26]. It can be seen as a type of computational model that allows the simulation of
actions and interactions of autonomous individuals within an environment and allows determining
what effects they produce in the system as a whole. It combines elements of game theory, complex
systems, emergency, computational sociology, multi-agent systems, and evolutionary programming.
The models simulate the simultaneous operations of multiple entities (agents) in an attempt to recreate
and predict the actions of complex phenomena. It is an emergency process from the most elementary
level (micro) to the highest level (macro).
In this way, agent-based simulation can be seen as a powerful research method that allows dealing
in a simple way with the complexity, the emergency, and the non-linearity typical of many social,
political, and economic phenomena [ 27] through mechanisms that allude to the actions of agents and
the structure of the interaction between them.
In this Special Issue, the work proposed in [ 28] took into account the problem of the simulation
of Double Action (DA) markets [ 29]: both buyers and sellers submit their bids, and an auctioneer
determines resource allocation and prices on the basis of their bids. Recent works have not considered
the ﬂuctuating nature of perishable goods markets, where supply and demand change dynamically
and unpredictably. To solve the problem, the authors have developed an online DA market, in which
multiple buyers and sellers dynamically tender their bids for trading commodities before their due
dates. The experimental results using multi-agent simulation showed that the proposed DA mechanism
was effective at promoting the truthful behavior of traders for realizing the fair distribution of large
utilities between sellers and buyers. With this work, the authors hope to contribute to promoting
successful deployment of electronic markets for ﬁsheries and improve the welfare of people in the area
by attracting more traders online.
Moreover, the work presented in [ 22], mentioned in the previous section, can also be seen as a
simulation platform for a 3D environment, which is capable of modeling and enabling simulations in
ofﬁce environments.
6. MAS in Smart Cities
The concept of the smart city [ 30] arises from the need to ﬁnd a solution to rapid population
growth and the risks this entails for a city, economic risks such as unemployment or physical risks
such as over-pollution. To solve these problems, different technologies, among many others, have been