Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1402 2 of 7
the need arises that agents have to be able to reach agreements in order to be able to operate in a
multi-agent system. Here lies an important aspect of the programming complexity of intelligent agents.
This Special Issue attempts to advance the paradigm of multi-agent systems by proposing new
works in different areas of interest. In this way, works are proposed in the areas of agent-oriented
software engineering, multi-agent learning, agent based simulation, and agent applications in highly
topical domains such as smart cities and ambient intelligence. The following sections detail the selected
contributions in each of these areas.
2. MAS and Methodologies
Within the framework of artiﬁcial intelligence, multi-agent systems have been characterized by
offering a possible solution to the development of complex problems with distributed characteristics.
When approaching the development of multi-agent systems, there is undoubtedly a signiﬁcant increase
in complexity, as well as the need for adapting existing techniques, or in some situations, developing
new techniques and tools. In recent years, different works have appeared trying to propose new
processes and techniques for the development of multi-agent systems [3].
The construction of MAS integrates technologies from different areas of knowledge: software
engineering techniques to structure the development process; AI techniques to provide systems with
the capacity to deal with unexpected situations and to make decisions, and concurrent programming to
address task coordination executed on different machines under different scheduling policies. Due to
this mix of technologies, the development of MASis complicated. In this sense, during the last few
years, there have been different development platforms and tools that provide partial solutions for the
modeling and design of agent-based systems [4].
There is still much work to be done in this area. Thus, in this Special Issue, three works
related to agent-oriented software engineering have been included. The ﬁrst work [ 5] shows how
accountability plays a central role in MAS engineering. Accountability is a well-known key resource
inside human organizations, and the idea of this proposal is to propose the design of agent systems
where accountability is a property that is guaranteed by design. The authors proposed an interaction
protocol, called ADOPT, that allows the realization of accountable MAS organizations. The proposed
protocol has been implements using JaCaMo [ 6], allowing one to demonstrate how to develop agents
and the organization to which they belong, being mutually accountable.
The second work [ 7] proposed a new development methodology for the development of MAS
working in semantic web environments. The proposed methodology is based on a domain-speciﬁc
modeling language, called Semantic Web-Enabled Agent Modeling Language (SEA_ML) [ 8]. The study
was demonstrated using a case study implemented using the well-known JACKplatform (http://
aosgrp.com/products/jack/). The proposed example consists of a set of agents that exchange services
or goods of owners according to their preferences without using any currency. Finally, the third
work [ 9] introduced an agent development framework for mobile devices. The proposed framework
allows users to build intelligent agents with the typical agent-oriented attributes of social ability,
reactivity, proactivity, and autonomy. Actually, the main contribution is the linked data support of
the framework. Linked data support corresponds to the ability to supply the agent’s beliefs from
the linked data environment and to use those beliefs during the planning process. According to the
authors, these kinds of agent development frameworks, speciﬁcally addressed for mobile devices,
will be of great importance in domains such as cyber physical systems and the Internet of Things in
the near future.
3. MAS and Learning
Learning in MAS is a paradigm of great importance because a system capable of learning and
changing its way of acting dynamically provides great potential to face many problems for which we
do not know the behavior of other agents in the environment. This adds more levels of difﬁculty in