Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1402 5 of 7
applied in order to ﬁnd solutions in this area. Multi-agent systems together with the Internet of
Things [18] are traditionally the most employed.
Typically, these concepts come together, designing intercommunicated networks that responds to
the needs of citizens both individually and as a whole and also monitoring through sensors the levels
of pollution, trafﬁc, noise, etc. A smart city is a great intercommunicated organism that, together with
an intelligent government, seeks to improve the quality of life of its citizens [31].
Therefore, a smart city would be full of sensors constantly collecting information about actions
that happen in the city, humidity sensors, temperature sensors, noise, pollution, etc. All these sensors
are part of a data collection system that will be responsible for processing information quickly and
intelligently. It is for this point where the use of multi-agent systems make sense. The decentralized
control of an MAS offers the possibility of managing all available information in a distributed way and
also coordinating possible actions effectively over the city. Moreover, decision making processes, apart
from being coordinated, can execute in parallel actions at different points of the city, without a strong
centralized control, which gives greater ﬂexibility and adaptation to the whole system.
This Special Issue contributes with three works in the area of smart cities. The ﬁrst work [ 32]
proposed a multi-agent system that provides visualization and prediction tools for bike sharing systems.
The proposed MAS includes an agent that performs data collection and cleaning processes, and it is
also capable of creating demand forecasting models for each bicycle station. The authors included a
case study, which validated the proposed system, by implementing it in a public bicycle sharing system
in Salamanca, called SalenBici. In the proposed solution, the information collected was employed
by the agents who performed demand forecasting. Moreover, different regression algorithms have
also been employed in the process of bike demand prediction. Additionally, a statistical analysis has
been performed in order to show the differences in their performance and to determine the relevance
of results. The second approach presented in this Special Issue regarding smart cities is the work
done in [ 33], where a multi-agent system was proposed, in order to facilitate the analysis of different
possible placement conﬁgurations for electric vehicles charging stations in a city. The MAS proposed in
this paper integrates the information extracted from heterogeneous data sources as a starting point to
specify the areas where future charging stations could potentially be placed. To do this, the proposed
MAS integrates an optimization algorithm, which is in charge of the locating process. Finally, the third
contribution, presented in [ 34], analyzed the use of agreement technologies [ 35], which envisions
the next-generation of open distributed systems, where interactions between software components
are based on the concept of agreement. In this sense, the authors increased the coordination among
entities using agreement technologies in the domain of smart cities as a way to enable the development
of novel applications. Concretely, they proposed the use of these techniques in a speciﬁc domain
such as the coordination in emergency medical services, which includes many tasks that require
ﬂexible, on-demand negotiation, initiation, coordination, information exchange, and supervision
among different involved entities. All these aspects can be solved through the use of, as previously
mentioned, agreement technologies.
7. Conclusions
As it has been possible to observe throughout the analysis carried out on the accepted articles,
research on MAS continues to provide technological solutions in a wide variety of domains.
MAS researchers develop new advances that allow the development of more powerful, ﬂexible,
and adapted systems that allow predicting a fruitful future. This Special Issue of Applied Sciences
gives us a precise view of the area covering different hot topics.
The high number of submissions and the quality of the selected works gives us an idea of the
potential of the multi-agent systems area and their excellent health after more than two decades of
research. In this way , the main goal of this Special Issue is considered to be more than reached, which has
allowed us to extend it to new editions to continue disseminating high-quality works in this area.