VLNœBERT: A Recurrent Vision-and-Language BERT for Navigation
Yicong Hong1Qi Wu2Yuankai Qi2Cristian Rodriguez-Opazo1,2Stephen Gould1
1The Australian National University2The University of Adelaide
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
{yicong.hong, cristian.rodriguez, stephen.gould}@anu.edu.au
qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au, qykshr@gmail.com
Project URL: https://github.com/YicongHong/Recurrent-VLN-BERT
Abstract
Accuracy of many visiolinguistic tasks has beneﬁted
signiﬁcantly from the application of vision-and-language
(V&L) BERT. However, its application for the task of vision-
and-language navigation (VLN) remains limited. One rea-
son for this is the difﬁculty adapting the BERT architecture
to the partially observable Markov decision process present
in VLN, requiring history-dependent attention and decision
making. In this paper we propose a recurrent BERT model
that is time-aware for use in VLN. Speciﬁcally, we equip
the BERT model with a recurrent function that maintains
cross-modal state information for the agent. Through ex-
tensive experiments on R2R and REVERIE we demonstrate
that our model can replace more complex encoder-decoder
models to achieve state-of-the-art results. Moreover, our
approach can be generalised to other transformer-based ar-
chitectures, supports pre-training, and is capable of solving
navigation and referring expression tasks simultaneously.
1. Introduction
Asking a robot to navigate in complex environments fol-
lowing human instructions has been a long-term goal in AI
research. Recently, a great variety of vision-and-language
navigation (VLN) setups [ 3,44,52] have been introduced
for relevant studies and a large number of works explore
different methods to leverage visual and language clues to
assist navigation. For example, in the popular R2R naviga-
tion task [ 3], enhancing the learning of visual-textual cor-
respondence is essential for the agent to correctly interpret
the instruction and perceive the environment.
On the other hand, recent work on vision-and-language
pre-training has achieved signiﬁcant improvement over a
wide range of visiolinguistic problems. Instead of designing
complex and monolithic models for different tasks, those[        ] State 
[                                                                   ] 𝑣𝑛
𝑡 𝑣3
𝑡 𝑣2
𝑡 𝑣1
𝑡
Multi-Layer Transformer...
𝑑𝑡 Observation      𝑉𝑡
Recurrence Decision𝑠𝑡
Figure 1. Recurrent multi-layer Transformer for addressing par-
tially observable inputs. A state token is deﬁned along with the
input sequence. At each time step, a new state representation st
will be generated based on the new observation. Meanwhile, the
past information will help inferring a new decision dt.
methods pre-train a multi-layer Transformer [ 53] on a large
number of image-text pairs to learn generic cross-modal
representations [ 7,26,28,30,33,48,50], known as V&L
BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Trans-
formers [ 10]). Such advances have inspired us to employ
V&L BERT for VLN, replacing the complicated modules
for modelling cross-modal relationships and allowing the
learning of navigation to adequately beneﬁt from the pre-
trained visual-textual knowledge. Unlike recent works on
VLN, which apply a pre-trained V&L BERT only for en-
coding language [ 14,29] or for measuring the instruction-
path compatibility [ 37], we propose to use existing V&L
BERT models themselves for learning to navigate.
However, an essential difference between VLN and other
vision-and-language tasks is that VLN can be considered as
a partially observable Markov decision process, in which
future observations are dependent on the agent’s current
state and action. Meanwhile, at each navigational step, the
visual observation only corresponds to partial instruction,
requiring the agent to keep track of the navigation progress
and correctly localise the relevant sub-instruction to gain
useful information for decision making. Another difﬁculty
of applying V&L BERT for VLN is the high demand on
computational power; since the navigational episode could
1643