...Word tokensInstruction
Embeddings
Multi-Layer Transformer, ,𝐾𝐿
0𝑄𝐿
0𝑉𝐿
0
State &
Contexts Initialisation 
Embeddings
Multi-Layer Transformer,𝐾𝐿
𝑡−1𝑉𝐿
𝑡−1
New state &
Contexts, ,𝐾𝑆
0𝑄𝑆
0𝑉𝑆
0
, ,𝐾𝑆
𝑡−1𝑄𝑆
𝑡−1𝑉𝑆
𝑡−1[CLS] Walk bar past the sofa ...
...stop at the [SEP]
...
 Navigation 
......
...Observation
SceneAgent
ResNet-152 Faster-RCNN
Visual tokens
, ,𝐾𝑉
𝑡𝑄𝑉
𝑡𝑉𝑉
𝑡 , ,𝐾𝑂
𝑡𝑄𝑂
𝑡𝑉𝑂
𝑡Model
Model
Action
probsREF
probs𝑠𝑡𝑠0
...
... 𝑝𝑎
𝑡 𝑝𝑜
𝑡𝑠𝑡−1(R2R & 
REVERIE)Objects (REVERIE)
Figure 2. Schematics of the Recurrent Vision-and-Language BERT. At the initialisation stage, the entire instruction is encoded by a multi-
layer Transformer, where the output feature of the [CLS] token serves as the initial state representation of the agent. During navigation,
the concatenated sequence of state, encoded language and new visual observation is fed to the same Transformer to obtain the updated state
and decision probabilities. The updated state and the language encoding from initialisation will be fused and applied as input at the next
time step. The green star ( ) indicates the cross-modal matching (Eq. 12) and the past decision encoding (Eq. 13) inState Reﬁnement .
the Navigation from Dialog History (NDH) [ 52] problems.
Comparing to previous methods, our VLNœBERT uses a
single network to address the navigation task and the remote
referring expression task seamlessly in REVERIE [ 44].
3. Proposed Model
In this section, we ﬁrst deﬁne the vision-and-language
navigation task, then we revisit the BERT model [ 10] and
present the architecture of our proposed VLNœBERT .
3.1. VLN Background
The problem of VLN can be formulated as follows:
Given a natural language instruction Uwhich contains a
sequence of words, at each time step t, the agent observes
the environment and infers an action atthat transfers the
agent from state stto a new state st`1. The state consists
of the navigational history and the current spatial position
deﬁned by a triplet xCt,θt,φty, whereCtis a viewpoint
on the pre-deﬁned connectivity graph of the environment
[3], andθtandφtare the angles of heading and elevation,
respectively. The agent needs to execute a sequence of ac-
tions to navigate on the connectivity graph and eventually
decides tostop at the target position to complete the task.3.2. Revisit BERT
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transform-
ers (BERT) [ 10] is a multi-layer Transformer architec-
ture [ 53] designed to pre-train deep bidirectional language
representations. Each layer of the Transformer encodes the
language features from the previous layer Xl´1PRIˆhdh
with multi-head self-attention to capture the dependencies
among the Iwords in the sentence, and applies a residual
feed-forward network to process the output features.
Formally, the k-th attention head at the l-th layer per-
forms self-attention over Xl´1as
Q“Xl´1WQ
l,k,K“Xl´1WK
l,k,V“Xl´1WV
l,k(1)
Hl,k“Softmax˜
QKJ
?dh¸
V (2)
whereWQ,WKandWVPRhdhˆdhare learnable linear
projections1speciﬁcally for queries, keys and values; dhis
the hidden dimension of the network. The outputs from all
the attention heads will be concatenated and projected onto
the same dimension as the input as
Hl“ rHl,1;...;Hl,hsWO
l (3)
1AllWin this section denotes learnable linear projections
1645