wherehis the total number of heads, r;sdenotes concate-
nation and WOPRhdhˆhdhis a learned linear projection.
Finally, the output of layer lis formulated by
H1
l“LayerNorm pHl`Xl´1q (4)
X1
l“ReLU pH1
lWF1
lqWF2
l(5)
Xl“LayerNorm pH1
l`X1
lq (6)
where ReLU is the Rectiﬁed Linear Unit activation function
and LayerNorm is layer normalisation [ 4].
Based on this architecture, BERT has been extended to
V&L BERT [ 7,26,28,30,33,48,50], which takes the con-
catenation of language tokens and visual tokens as input,
and pre-trains on image-text corpus to learn generic visi-
olinguistic representations.
3.3. Recurrent VLN BERT
The idea of our VLNœBERT can be adapted to a wide
range of Transformer-based networks. In this section we
apply the recently proposed one-stream V&L BERT model
OSCAR [ 30] for demonstration. We modify the model to
enable the learning of navigation and the associated refer-
ring expression (REF) task. As shown in Fig. 2, at each time
step, the network takes four sets of tokens as input; the pre-
vious state token st´1, the language tokens X, the visual to-
kensVtfor scene, and the visual tokens Otfor objects (only
in REVERIE [ 44]). Then, it performs self-attention over
these cross-modal tokens to capture the textual-visual cor-
respondence for inferring the action probabilities pa
tand the
object grounding probabilities po
t(only in REVERIE [ 44]):
st,pa
t,po
t“VLNœBERT pst´1,X,Vt,Otq (7)
Language Processing At initialisation ( t“0), a sequence
of words consisting of the classiﬁcation token [CLS] , the
language tokens of the instruction Uand the separation to-
ken[SEP] will be fed into VLNœBERT, where [CLS]
and[SEP] are pre-deﬁned in BERT models. In the pre-
training of OSCAR [ 30], the[CLS] token is applied for
aggregating relevant visiolinguistic clues from the input se-
quence for contrastive learning. Here, we deﬁned the em-
bedded[CLS] token as the initial state representation s0,
to inherit such function — initialise an agent’s state which
is aware of the entire navigation task.
s0,X“VLNœBERT p[CLS],U,[SEP] q (8)
During navigation steps ( tą0), unlike the state token stor
the visual tokens VtandOtwhich performs self-attention
with respect to the entire input sequence, the language to-
kensXonly serve as the keys and values in the Trans-
former. We consider the language tokens produced by the
model at the initialisation step as a deep representation of
the instruction which does not need to be further encoded inlater steps. Not updating the language features also save a
huge amount of computational resources since the instruc-
tion and the trajectory can be long in VLN problems.
Vision Processing At each navigation step ( tą0), the
agent makes new visual observation in the environment and
uses the visual clues to assist navigation. To process the vi-
sual clues, the network ﬁrst projects the image features of
views at the navigable directions Iv
tto the same space as
the BERT token as Vt“Iv
tWIv. Then, the visual tokens
will be concatenated with the state token and the language
tokens, and fed into the model.
In terms of the remote REF task [ 44], we simply consider
the object features Io
tas additional visual tokens in the in-
put sequence. Similarly, the features will be projected onto
the token space as Ot“Io
tWIoand fed into the model. The
object clues can provide valuable information about the im-
portant landmarks on the path, which could be very helpful
to the navigation with high-level instructions [ 44].
State Representation We formulate the agent’s state at
each time step stas the summary of all textual and visual
clues that the agent collects, as well as all decisions that the
agent makes until the current viewpoint. Instead of explic-
itly deﬁning a memory buffer [ 61] or implementing an addi-
tional recurrent network [ 16] to store the past experiences,
our model relies on BERT’s original architecture to recog-
nise time-dependent inputs, and recurrently updates s0from
initialisation to represent the state. At each navigation step,
the state representation is used as the leading input token of
the entire textual-visual sequence. It then performs inter-
modal self-attention in VLNœBERT with other tokens to
update its content and becomes the leading token of the in-
put at the next step, in an autoregressive way.
State Reﬁnement Unlike most of the V&L BERT models
which apply the output feature of the [CLS] token for clas-
siﬁcation, our state is not directly used for inferring a de-
cision (see following Decision Making subsection), which
means, the vanilla state representation is not explicitly en-
forced to capture the most important language and visual
features. To address this issue, our model matches the raw
textual and visual tokens, and feeds the output to the state
representation. Formally, let Qs
l,kandKx
l,kbe the state
and textual tokens at head kof the ﬁnal ( l“12) layer of
VLNœBERT, the attention scores over the textual tokens
can be expressed as:
As,x
l,k“Qs
l,kKx
l,kJ
?dh(9)
Then, we average the scores over all the attention heads
(K“12) and apply a Softmax function to get the overall
state-language attention weights as:
rAs,x
l“Softmax psAs,x
lq “Softmax˜
1
KKÿ
k“1As,x
l,k¸
(10)
1646