Similarly, the visual attention scores As,v
l,kand weights rAs,v
l
can be obtained. Now, we perform a weighted sum over the
input textual tokens and visual tokens respectively to obtain
the weighted raw features as:
Fx
t“rAs,x
lX andFv
t“rAs,v
lVt (11)
We then enforce a cross-modal matching between the raw
textual and visual features via element-wise product and
send such information to the agent’s state as:
sf
t“ rsr
t;Fx
tdFv
tsWr(12)
wheresr
tis the output state features at the ﬁnal layer.
Notice that in REVERIE [ 44], only the visual features is
sent to the state representation, i.e., Eq. 12becomes sf
t“
rsr
t;Fv
tsWr. This is because the navigational instructions
in REVERIE are high-level, hence performing step-wise
matching between the raw textual and visual features is less
valuable.
Finally, past decisions are important for the agent to keep
track of the navigation progress, our network records the
new decision by feeding the directional features of the se-
lected action atinto the state token as:
st“”
sf
t;atı
Ws(13)
wherestis the new representation of the agent’s state at
time step t.
Decision Making Many previous VLN agents apply an
inner product between the state representation and the vi-
sual features at candidate directions to evaluate the state-
vision correspondence, and choose a direction with the
highest matching score to navigate [ 36,51]. We ﬁnd that
the BERT network can nicely perform such scoring because
it is fully built upon the inner product based soft-attention.
Inspired by the method of predicting alignment between re-
gions and phrases in VisualBERT [ 28], we directly apply
the mean attention weights of the visual tokens over all the
attention heads in the last layer, with respect to the state, as
the action probabilities, simply pa
t“rAs,v
l(as deﬁned in
Eq.10). As for the remote referring expression task [ 44],
our agent uses the same method to select an object. The se-
lection probabilities can be expressed as po
t“rAs,o
l, where
rAs,o
lis the mean attention weights for all candidate objects.
We refer the Appendix §B.2 for more details.
3.4. Training
We train our network with a mixture of reinforcement
learning (RL) and imitation learning (IL) objectives. We ap-
ply A2C [ 38] for RL, in which the agent samples an action
according to pa
tand measures the advantage Atat each step
(we refer the Appendix §B.5 for more details about RL.). InIL, our agent navigates on the ground-truth trajectory by fol-
lowing teacher actions and calculates a cross-entropy loss
for each decision. Formally, we minimise the navigation
loss function, expressed for each given sample, as
L“ ´ÿ
tas
tlogppa
tqAt´λÿ
ta˚
tlogppa
tq (14)
whereas
tis the sampled action and a˚
tis the teacher ac-
tion. Here λis a coefﬁcient for weighting the IL loss.
In REVERIE [ 44], we applied an additional cross-entropy
termř
to˚
tlogppo
tqto learn object grounding.
3.5. Adaptation
We initialise the parameters of VLNœBERT from OS-
CAR [ 30] pre-trained without object tags. Although OS-
CAR is trained on regional features, we ﬁnd that it is
also compatible with the grid features of the entire scene.
When adapting to the LXMERT-like [ 50] model in PREV A-
LENT [ 14], we remove the language branch in the cross-
modality encoder and concatenate the state token with
the visual tokens for self-attention (see Appendix §B.3 for
schematics). We also remove the entire downstream net-
work EnvDrop [ 51], including the Speaker and the environ-
mental dropout, and then directly ﬁne-tune the model pre-
trained by PREV ALENT for navigation.
4. Experiments
Implementation Details All experiments are conducted
on a single NVIDIA 2080Ti GPU, the learning rate is ﬁxed
to10´5throughout the training and AdamW optimiser [ 32]
is applied. For R2R, we train the agent directly on the mix-
ture of the original training data and the augmented data
from PREV ALENT [ 14], the batch size2is set to 16 and the
network is trained for 300,000 iterations. For REVERIE,
we use batch size28 and train the agent for 200,000 it-
erations. Images in the environments are encoded by a
ResNet-152 [ 15] pre-trained on Places365 [ 59], and objects
are encoded by a Faster-RCNN [ 46] pre-trained on the Vi-
sual Genome [ 23]. Early stopping is applied when the train-
ing saturates, the model which achieves the highest SPL in
validation unseen split is adopted for testing.
Evaluation Metrics We apply the standard metrics em-
ployed by previous works to evaluate the performance.
R2R [ 3] considers Trajectory Length (TL): the average
path length in meters, Navigation Error (NE): the average
distance between agent’s ﬁnal position and the target in me-
ters, Success Rate (SR): the ratio of stopping within 3 me-
ters to the target, and Success weighted by the normalised
inverse of the Path Length (SPL) [ 2].
2Half for RL and half for IL in each iteration, corresponding to the ﬁrst
and the second term in Eq. 14, respectively.
1647