tains 24.62% SR and 19.48% SPL for navigation, as well
as 12.65% RGS and 10.00% RGSPL for REF, achieving a
better performance than the previous best [ 44] which ap-
plies SoTA navigator FAST [ 19] for navigation and pointer
MATTN [ 58] for object grounding. Compare our model
with OSCAR initialisation to without, the navigation re-
sults on the validation splits are similar, but the naviga-
tion on the test split and the object grounding across all
the data splits are largely improved. This result also sug-
gests that it is possible to apply a BERT-based model for
VLN and REF multi-task learning. Although the previous
method has higher OSR, it is likely due to longer searching
(long TL), the lower SR suggests that the agent does not
know where to stop correctly. In Table 2, we also present
the performance of VLNœBERT initialised from PREV A-
LENT [ 14], which achieves the best result across almost
all of the metrics in all dataset splits. It is very interesting
to see that although PREV ALENT is pre-trained on low-
level R2R instructions [ 3] without other V&L knowledge, it
signiﬁcantly boosts the navigation with high-level instruc-
tions as well as the object grounding in REVERIE. We hy-
pothesis that the pre-trained knowledge provides the model
with some structural priors, while the learning of REF is
strongly inﬂuenced by navigation, especially at the early
training stage where the target object is rarely observable
by the agent.
Visualisation of Language Attention To demonstrate
that our VLNœBERT (init. OSCAR) is able to trace the
navigation progress, we visualise the changes of language
attention weights at the ﬁnal Transformer layer over all in-
structions during navigation (Fig. 3). As the agent moves
forward, the attention weights with respect to state shifts
from the beginning of the instructions to the end. Since
the sub-instructions and sub-paths for each sample in R2R
is monotonically aligned [ 18], our results indicate that the
state nicely records the partial instruction that has been
completed. In terms of the attention weights with respect to
the visual token at the select direction, it follows a similar
pattern meaning that the most relevant part of the instruction
is used for guiding the action selection.
4.2. Ablation Study
Network Components Table 3shows comprehensive ab-
lation experiments on the inﬂuence of using V&L BERT
(init. OSCAR) to replace or to add the key network compo-
nents in the baseline model (EnvDrop [ 51]). The baseline
model consists of a language encoder, a visual encoder, a
state LSTM and a decision making module, corresponding
to the columns of Language ,Vision ,State andDecision in
Table 3, respectively. E.g., Model #3 replaces the language
encoder and visual encoder in baseline with a V&L BERT.
For fair comparison, all models in the table are trained with
State0.0
1.00.80.60.40.2
Visual token at selected direction
Averaged InstructionsAveraged Instructions
Averaged InstructionsSteps Steps
Figure 3. Averaged attention weights over all instructions in val-
idation unseen split during navigation. State : Attention weights
with respect to the state representation. Selected Action : Attention
weights with respect to the visual token at the selected direction.
the same data and training strategy as our VLNœBERT.
As the results suggested, our proposed method is a multi-
functional framework, the more network components it cov-
ers, the larger performance gain it achieves. Comparing the
baseline with Model #1 and #2, we can see that employing a
pre-trained BERT as language encoder improves the perfor-
mance only if the BERT is ﬁne-tuned for navigation. This
ﬁnding is also supported by using the V&L BERT to en-
code both the textual and visual signals (Model #3 and #4).
However, simply using pre-trained V&L BERT as text and
image encoders does not fully utilise its power; model #5
indicates that relying on the original architecture of BERT
to learn recurrence is feasible and it is able to achieve bet-
ter results. Moreover, using the averaged visual attention
weights of the ﬁnal layer of the Transformer as the action
probabilities (Model #6) and enhancing the state represen-
tation with visual-textual matching as deﬁned in Eq. 12(full
model) further improves the agent’s performance.
Self-Attended Language Features Due to the long in-
structions and episodes, high memory cost during training
is one of the key issues that prevents previous research to
apply BERT for self-attention at every time step. To demon-
strate the inﬂuence of self-attending textual features during
navigation, we compare the agent’s performance and the
training time GPU memory consumption (constrained to a
single 11GB memory GPU) of re-attending the language
at each step. As shown in Table 4, training for Emb-Attn ,
Init-Attn andRe-Attn consume much more memory for each
sample than performing language self-attention only at ini-
tialisation ( Ours ), and their performances are worse than
Ours . The results of Re-Attn degenerates signiﬁcantly be-
cause at each time step the output language features aggre-
gate the most relevant visual-textual clues at a certain view-
point, which suppresses the valuable information in other
part of the instruction for the future steps. We refer Ap-
pendix §C.2 for experiment on language self-attention with
larger batch size by applying gradient accumulation.
1649