PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, FEBRUARY 2023 13
cloud and edge computing paradigms, is adopted. Explicitly,
edge computing is used to deal with real-time tasks, while
cloud computing was focused on completing time-insensitive
tasks, such as historical data processing. The deployment of
edge computing enables cloud service characteristics such as
mobile computing, scalability, and privacy policy [135].
The fourth layer is the service layer. In this level, a large
number of manufacturing resources are stored at the cloud
platform, which offers different AI services. Pattern recogni-
tion, accurate modeling, knowledge discovery, reasoning, and
decision-making capabilities are provided.
The working process of the platform is as follows. First,
customers select candy products according to their preferences,
which included the color, taste, quantity, and variety of the can-
dies in an AI recommender web service system. Then, these
proposed schemes and candy order parameters are delivered
to the manufacturing cloud through the web service, and the
web server was connected to the cloud via the Internet. The
related product orders are created according to the submitting
information. These orders were decomposed into different
working steps by the ontology-based manufacturing system.
Next, the multiple agents completed the production tasks in
a self-organized way. After obtaining the working steps, the
manufacturing devices are assembled into collaborative groups
to ﬁnish all tasks. Thereafter, the platform ﬁnished the candy
wrapping task.
During the product manufacturing process, the manufactur-
ing data is collected by sensors and is then transmitted to the
cloud or nearby edge servers. The analyzed results provide key
information for product monitoring. More importantly, these
results can be used to adjust the processes and procedures to
ensure higher quality and increase the production efﬁciency
of the whole system. The model-driven method with ontology
proposed in [136] was used to achieve interoperability and
knowledge sharing in a manufacturing system across multiple
platforms in the product lifecycle. When multiple tasks were
needed to be ﬁnished in the platform, the manufacturing re-
source reconstruction methods were employed for production
scheduling. The cloud-based manufacturing semantic model
proposed in [137] was used to obtain general task construc-
tion and task matching. After implementation, three candy-
wrapping tasks with ten different candies were processed in
the AI-assisted platform at the same time, which represented
a typical production line model for mass wrapping, and the
ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-out (FIFO) scheme was adopted accordingly.
B. Big data analysis using AI technology for preventive main-
tenance
Preventive maintenance for smart manufacturing has re-
ceived attention in the literature [138]–[143]. A system ar-
chitecture for an active preventive maintenance system was
proposed in [144]. Based on this architecture, an improved
preventive maintenance mechanism was constructed by merg-
ing cloud computing and edge computing with deep learn-
ing, as shown in Fig. 11. The smart preventive maintenance
system was composed of CM devices, industrial networks,
big data processing centers, and applications for preventivemaintenance. The data pipeline consisted of three main steps,
data collection, data processing, and data mining and analysis
using AI.
From the perspective of preventive maintenance, the related
data collection represented the fundamental step in the fol-
lowing analysis. Different data, including the environmental
data, product processing data, device working status, and
device logs were collected and transmitted to the computing
servers, such as cloud and edge computing servers, through
the industrial network or industrial IoT. Edge computing and
cloud computing paradigms presented in [145] were employed
to address elastic and virtual manufacturing resources, which
provided opportunities for real-time monitoring of produc-
tion Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) and smart inven-
tory management. The computing servers were responsible
for data processing and for device maintenance. The data
includes different types of manufacturing device-related data.
First, redundant and misleading data were removed during
the data collection process. Then, the abstract data for real-
time or historical big data analysis was used for equipment
maintenance. The AI-based techniques (e.g., deep learning)
have been regarded as the most effective way for system and
equipment fault recognition based on big data analysis, so
these techniques were adopted in this step. Consequently, the
manufacturing maintenance knowledge base was built on top
of big data. Note that AI techniques play an important role in
extracting knowledge from massive and heterogeneous manu-
facturing data, consequently achieving the intelligence [146].
The manufacturing data includes 1) structured data such as
data stored in a rational database and 2) non-structured data
such as text, documents, sound, image, and video. Diverse
AI algorithms such as ontology learning, natural language
processing, and deep learning can be leveraged.
Furthermore, in our previous work [144], a big data solution
for active preventive maintenance in manufacturing environ-
ments was proposed. This approach essentially combined a
real-time active maintenance mechanism with an ofﬂine pre-
diction method. The real-time performance was considered as
the main feature of a manufacturing system, especially equip-
ment maintenance. Therefore, to achieve the system mainte-
nance tasks, the hybrid edge and cloud computing paradigm
for big data analysis represented a better option for preventive
maintenance. Speciﬁcally, the equipment maintenance tasks
can be divided into online and ofﬂine tasks. On the one
hand, as edge servers being deployed close to the equipment
can provide low-latency (real-time) service, edge computing
was adopted for dealing with the data online. On the other
hand, cloud servers have powerful computing capabilities,
and ofﬂine big data processing was executed at the cloud
layer. Moreover, the analysis result was delivered to the man-
agement or data visualization system. The segmented model
provided in [147] for preventive maintenance of semiconductor
manufacturing equipment, including both parametric and non-
parametric models, was used for preventive maintenance.
Consequently, big data with AI is a key technology for
equipment maintenance in smart manufacturing. Big data helps
to build comprehensive condition monitoring and prediction
systems, which can provide preventive maintenance scheduling