PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, FEBRUARY 2023 7
intelligent manufacturing equipment (e.g., manipulators, con-
veyor belt, PLC), which was essentially the ﬁeld device.
The knowledge layer was essentially the information model
composed of intelligent devices, which was integrated into the
domain knowledge base through the OWL language [88]. The
rule layer was used to gather the intelligent characteristics of
intelligent equipment, such as decision-making and reasoning.
The data layer included a distributed database for real-time
data storing, and the relational database was used to associate
the real-time data.
Due to the massive amount of data generated from man-
ufacturing devices, it is nearly impossible to consider all
the manufacturing device resources. Thus, it is important to
construct a new manufacturing description model to realize
the reconﬁguration of various manufacturing resources. In this
model, the resources can be easily adjusted by running the
model. Therefore, ontology modeling is conducted on a device
and related attributes of an intelligent production line in CM.
The manufacturing resources are mapped to different functions
with different attributes. For instance, the time constraint of
a product manufacturing is divided into a number of time
slots with consideration of features of processes and devices.
Then, the CM resources of a product can be mapped into
computing, cutting, conveying, and other functions with the
limited time slot, as shown in Fig. 4. Next, a customized
product can be produced by different devices with different
time constraints. Accordingly, a product can be represented
by ontology functions.
Meanwhile, after making a reasonable arrangement of dif-
ferent manufacturing functions at different time slots, a DL
algorithm can forecast time slots of working states. The time
slots of working states are important for the reconﬁguration of
manufacturing resources. Therefore, in actual applications, a
different attribution of a device and customized products can
be employed as a constraint condition.
C. Edge Computing in Intelligent Sensing
The concept of ubiquitous intelligent sensing is a corner-
stone of smart manufacturing in the Industry 4.0 framework.
Numerous research studies have been conducted in monitoring
manufacturing environments [89]–[91]. Most published results
adopt a precondition-sensing system that only accepts a static
sensing parameter. Obviously, this results in inﬂexibility and
the sensing parameters are difﬁcult to be adjusted to fulﬁll
different requirements. Second, although some studies claim
dynamic parameter tuning, the absence of a prediction function
is still an issue. Existing environment sensing (monitoring)
cannot adjust the sensing parameters in advance to achieve a
more intelligent manufacturing response.
As shown in Fig. 5, the manufacturing environment intel-
ligent sensing based on the edge AI computing framework
includes two components: sensors nodes and edge computing
nodes [92]. Generally, smart sensor nodes are equipped with
different sensors, processors, and storage and communication
modules. The sensors are responsible for converting the phys-
ical status of the manufacturing environment into digital sig-
nals, and the communication module delivers the sensing data
Wireless link
Wired link
Edge computing node
Data
 Information
 knowledgeInformation extraction process
AI
Computing facilities
Sensors
SensorsSensorsSensors
SensorsFig. 5. Intelligent sensing based on edge AI computing. Sensor nodes
collect ambient data while edge computing notes can preprocess and
cache the collected data, which can be further transferred to remote
cloud servers for in-depth data analysis.
to the edge server or remote data centers. The edge computing
servers (nodes) include the stronger processing units, larger
memories, and storage space. These servers are connected
to different sensors nodes and deployed in approximation
to the devices, with the provision of the data storage and
smart computing services by running different AI algorithms.
Meanwhile, the edge computing servers are interconnected
with each other to exchange information and knowledge.
Especially, the sensing parameters can be adjusted in a ﬂex-
ible monitoring subsystem in the manufacturing environment,
according to different application requirements and the task
priority. To achieve a rapid response high priority system, the
edge AI servers should have access to the sensing data, and
capability to categorize the status of the CM environment.
This can be done by processing the data features through ML
classiﬁcation algorithms such as logistic regression, SVM, and
classiﬁcation trees. When the data is out of the safety range, a
certain risk may exist in the manufacturing environment. For
instance, if an anomalous temperature event would happen in
the CM area, the edge server could drive the affected nodes to
increase their temperature sensing frequency, in order to obtain
more environmental details and to make proactive forecasts
and decisions.
The environmental sensing data delivery is another im-
portant component in CM. With the development of smart
manufacturing, a sensing node not only performs sensing but
also transmits the data. With the proliferation of massive
sensing data, sensor nodes have been facing more challenges
from the perspectives of data volume and data heterogeneity.
In order to collect environment data effectively, it is needed
to introduce new AI technologies. The sensor nodes can
realize intelligent routing and communications by adjusting
the network parameters, assigning different network loads and
priorities to different types of data packets. With this optimized
sensing transfer strategy, the AI methods can make adequate
forecasts with reduced bandwidth usage.
Discussion. We present intelligent manufacturing devices
from edge computing-assisted intelligent agent construction,