PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, FEBRUARY 2023 12
ES(g2)
CustomersAGVsIndustrial 
cloud
Sensor
Machine
Conveyor belt 
controllerData base
ProcuctES (g1)
Mobile elementMoving track
ES(g4)Logistics system
SensorSensorSensor
ES(g3)
Producing groupRobotProduct Producing
 groupProducing group
Producing group
(a) Framework for case study
Cloud server
Feeding robot
Box delivery robot
Camera
RFID
Feeding robot
Optoelectr -
onic switch
Grasping robot 
Candy
Non-packed box
Robot 
arm
Edge server
PLC
Wireless module
AGV
Grasping 
robot (b) Implementation scenario of CM
Fig. 10. The framework of customized candy wrapping smart production. (a) The framework includes CM devices, the industrial network,
a conveyor, and a cyber-physical system. (b) The implementation of customized candy wrapping line consists of diverse devices.
the entire production process. The main goal of AI-driven
methods is to save unnecessary human resource consumption
and mitigate other operational expenditures. In this manner,
human workers can concentrate on planning and optimizing
the overall production procedure instead of conducting te-
dious and repetitive tasks. Meanwhile, an appropriate human
intervention is still necessary when full automation is not
achievable or is partially implemented. In this sense, AI-driven
methods can also assist human workers to give intelligent
determinations.
VII. C ASE STUDY
In the section, a case study is presented, showcasing the
following aspects: prototype platform construction, big data
analysis using AI technology for preventive maintenance, and
cloud-assisted customization service.
A. Prototype platform construction
We implement a prototype of the AI-assisted CM frame-
work, namely a customized candy wrapping production line.
As shown in Fig. 10a, the framework includes the following
components: CM devices, the industrial network, a conveyor,
and a cyber-physical system. All components are connected
through the industrial network, i.e., OPC Uniﬁed Architecture
(OPC UA) and Data Distribution Service (DDS). Fig. 10b
illustrates the implementation of customized candy wrapping
line. The candy packing line mainly includes the production
stations and the logistics transmission system. In the logis-
tics transmission system, the packing box is continuously
transferred by the conveyor belts or AGVs. The production
stations are distributed discretely between the mainline and
the branch line, and RFID tags are adopted to obtain the
operation information. The equipment types of the production
stations include the materiel feeding, candy grasping, box
delivery, and ﬁnished goods storage. The presented system
meets the requirements of small-batch production. In partic-
ular, the packaged candy followed the taste, ﬂavor and color
preferences given by the customers. The system includes fourlayers, all of which are connected by the industrial IoT with
different link functions.
The ﬁrst layer is the device layer, including ﬁve robots, two
AGVs, a conveyor system, and a warehouse. The device layer
performs the basic functions of an intelligent production line,
such as carrying, clipping, loading raw material, and unloading
ﬁnal products. Cognitive robots can be vertically integrated
into a cyber-physical system in smart manufacturing [132].
The industrial network layer (second layer) plays a key
role in the information interaction and intelligent connection
of different communication technologies – e.g., industrial
wireless local networks (Wi-Fi, ZigBee), industrial Ethernet,
industrial NFC (Near Field Communication), and mobile
communications. There are three sub-networks for ﬁnishing
different latency communication functions [133]. Speciﬁcally,
wired industrial networks are employed as the inner equipment
to achieve higher real-time performance. In this aspect, the
wireless industrial networks were mainly adopted in the mon-
itoring system while the mobile wireless local networks also
helped to achieve higher-level ﬂexibility [134]; for instance,
mobile wireless nodes were dynamically deployed to monitor
the industrial environment status.
The third layer is the computing layer, which is mainly
involved with the analysis, computing, and knowledge mining
of big data. A commercial solution has been adapted to build a
cloud platform. XenServer developed by Citrix is used to real-
ize the virtualization of the server cluster consisting of multiple
virtual machines and the management of virtual machines.
Meanwhile, we also establish a big data analytics framework,
which is a software architecture based on a cloud platform for
big data storage and distributed computing. Apache Hadoop,
an open-source solution, is used to provide the non-relational
database HBase and the computing architecture of YARN
(Yet Another Resource Negotiator). On top of the big data
framework, the AI-assisted optimization algorithms (such as
deep learning models) have been deployed to realize intelligent
applications. To meet different latency requirements in the
platform, a hybrid computing paradigm, orchestrating the