PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, FEBRUARY 2023 4
Edge
computing
AI modelsCloud
computing
Smart
devices
DataProduction
line
MotorsRobots
MachinesCustomer
analysis
Maintenance ProfitsSmart
servicesVisualizationSuppliers
Sensors
SensorsSmart
interationComputing center
Customers
ManagementLogistics Markets
Base station
Access pointRouter
Wireless link
Wired link
Fig. 2. The architecture of AI-assisted customized manufacturing includes smart devices, smart interaction, AI layer, and smart services.
upload) the manufacturing data to cloud computing service
providers who can conduct the computing-intensive tasks.
Nevertheless, outsourcing the manufacturing data to the third
party may lead to the risk of leaking conﬁdential data (e.g.,
customized product design) or exposing private customer data
to others. On the other hand, transferring the manufacturing
data to remote clouds inevitably leads to high latency, thereby
failing to fulﬁll the real-time requirement of time-sensitive
tasks.
III. A RCHITECTURE OF AN AI-A SSISTED CUSTOMIZED
MANUFACTURING FACTORY
This section ﬁrst presents an AI-Assisted customized manu-
facturing (AIaCM) framework in Section III-A and then gives
a brief comparison of the proposed AIaCM framework with
the state-of-the-art literature in Section III-B.
A. AI-Assisted Customized Manufacturing Factory
Different frameworks have been presented towards the
increased interactivity and resource management [50]–[52].
Most studies have focused on information communica-
tions [53] or big data processing [54]–[56]. So far, research
proposing generic AI-based CM frameworks is limited. Sys-
tem performance metrics, e.g., ﬂexibility, efﬁciency, scalabil-
ity, and sustainability, can be improved by adopting AI tech-
nologies such as ML, knowledge graphs, and human-computer
interaction (HCI). This is especially true in sensing, inter-
action, resource optimization, operations, and maintenance
in a smart CM factory [57], [58]. Since cloud computing,
edge computing, and local computing paradigms have their
unique strengths and limitations, they should be integratedto maximize their effectiveness. At the same time, the cor-
responding AI algorithms should be redesigned to match the
corresponding computing paradigm. Cloud intelligence is re-
sponsible for making comprehensive, time-insensitive analysis
and decisions, while the edge and local node intelligence
are applicable to the context or time-aware environments. In-
telligent manufacturing systems include smart manufacturing
devices, realize intelligent information interaction, and provide
intelligent manufacturing services by merging AI technologies.
As shown in Fig. 2, an AI-assisted CM framework that
includes smart devices, smart interaction, AI layer, and smart
services. We then explain this framework in detail as follows.
1) Smart devices: include robots, conveyors, and other ba-
sic controlled platforms. Smart devices serve as “the physical
layer” for the entire AIaCM. Speciﬁcally, different devices and
equipment, such as robots and processing tools are controlled
by their corresponding automatic control systems. Therefore, it
is crucial to meet the real-time requirement for the device layer
in an AIaCM system. To achieve this goal, ML algorithms can
be implemented at the device layer in low power devices such
as FPGAs. The interconnection of the physical devices, e.g.,
machines, conveyors, is implemented at the device layer [59],
[60] using edge computing servers.
2) Smart interaction: links the device layer, AI layer, and
services layer [61], [62]. It represents a bridge between differ-
ent layers of the proposed architecture. The smart interaction
layer is composed of two vital modules. The ﬁrst module
includes basic network devices such as access points, switches,
routers and network controllers, which are generally supported
by different network operating systems, or equipped with dif-
ferent network functions. The basic network devices constitute
the core of the network layer [63], [64]. Different from the ﬁrst