PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, FEBRUARY 2023 2
The contributions of the research presented in this paper are
as follows.
The architecture of the AI-assisted CM for smart factories
is developed by merging smart devices and industrial
networks with big data analysis.
The state-of-the-art AI technologies are reviewed and
discussed.
The key AI-enabled technologies in CM are validated
with a prototype platform of a customized candy pack-
aging line.
The challenges and possible solutions brought by the
introduction of AI into CM are discussed.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec-
tion II, the relationship between the CM and AI is discussed.
The general architecture of AI-assisted CM is presented in
Section III. Section IV illustrates the implementation of AI
in intelligent manufacturing equipment. The intelligent infor-
mation exchange process, ﬂexible production line, and smart
manufacturing services in the AI-assisted CM are proposed in
Section V and Section VI, respectively. A case study is pro-
vided in Section VII. The challenges and possible solutions to
the AI-assisted intelligent manufacturing factory are discussed
in Section VIII. Section IX concludes the paper.
II. C USTOMIZED MANUFACTURING AND ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE
This section ﬁrst summarizes the characteristics of cus-
tomized manufacturing in Section II-A and then discusses the
opportunities brought by AI-driven customized manufacturing
in Section II-C.
A. Characteristics of customized manufacturing
Despite the progress made, manufacturing industry faces a
number of challenges, some of which are: traditional mass-
production is not able to adapt to the rapid production of
personalized products; and resource limitations, environmental
pollution, global warming, and an aging global population
have become more prominent. Therefore, a new manufac-
turing paradigm to address these challenges is needed. The
customer-to-manufacture concept reﬂects the characteristics of
customized production where a manufacturing system directly
interacts with a customer to meet his/her personalized needs.
The goal is to realize the rapid customization of personalized
products. The new generation of intelligent manufacturing
technology offers improved ﬂexibility, transparency, resource
utilization, and efﬁciency of manufacturing processes. It has
led to new programs, e.g., the Factory of the Future in
Europe [36], Industry 4.0 in Germany [1], and Made in
China 2025 [37]. Moreover, the United States has accelerated
research and development programs [38].
Compared with mass production, the production organi-
zation of CM is more complex, quality control is more
difﬁcult, and the energy consumption needs attention. In
classical automation, the production boundaries were rigid to
ensure quality, cost, and efﬁciency. Compared with traditional
production, CM has the following characteristics.Smart interconnectivity. Smart manufacturing
embraces a cyber-physical environment, e.g.,
processing/detection/assembly equipment, and storage,
all operating in a heterogeneous industrial network.
The Industrial IoT has progressed from the original
industrial sensor networks to the Narrow Band-Internet
of Things (NB-IoT), LoRa WAN, and LTE Cat M1 with
increased coverage at reduced power consumption [39].
Edge computing units are deployed to improve system
intelligence. Cognitive technology ensures the context
awareness and semantic understanding of the industrial
IoT [40]. Intelligent industrial IoT as the key technologies
is widely used for intelligent manufacturing.
Dynamic reconﬁguration. The concept of a smart factory
aims at the rapid manufacturing of a variety of products
in small batches. Since the product types may change
dynamically, system resources need to be dynamically
reorganized. A multi-agent system [41] is introduced to
negotiate a new system conﬁguration.
Massive volumes of data. An intelligent manufacturing
system includes interconnected devices generating data
such as device status and process parameters. Cloud com-
puting and big data science make data analysis feasible
in failure prediction, active preventive maintenance, and
decision making.
Deep integration. The underlying intelligent manufac-
turing entities, cloud platforms, edge servers, and up-
per monitoring terminals are closely connected. Data
processing, control, and operations can be performed
simultaneously in the Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS),
where the information barriers are broken down, thereby
realizing the deep integration of physical and information
environments.
B. Overview of AI technologies
AI embraces theories, methods, technologies, and applica-
tions to augment human intelligence. It includes not only AI
techniques such as perception, machine learning (ML), deep
learning (DL), reinforcement learning, and decision making,
but also AI-enabled applications like computer vision, natural
language processing, intelligent robots, and recommendation
systems, as shown in Fig. 1a. ML has outperformed traditional
statistical methods in tasks such as classiﬁcation, regression,
clustering, and rule extraction [42]. Typical ML algorithms
include decision tree, support vector machines, regression
analysis, Bayesian networks, and deep neural networks. Recent
advanced AI approaches like AIGC [11] can be used to intel-
ligently direct the interaction between customers and product
designers.
As a subset of ML algorithms, DL algorithms have superior
performance than other ML algorithms. The recent success of
DL algorithms mainly owes to three factors: 1) the availability
of massive data; 2) the advent of computer capability achieved
by computer architectures and hardware, such as Graphic
Processing Units (GPUs); 3) the advances in diverse DL
algorithms such as a convolutional neural network (CNN),
long short-term memory (LSTM) and their variants. Different