PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, FEBRUARY 2023 21
Jiafu Wan (M’11) is a Professor in School of Me-
chanical & Automotive Engineering at South China
University of Technology, China. He has directed
20 research projects, including the National Key
Research and Development Project, and the Joint
Fund of the National Natural Science Foundation
of China and Guangdong Province. Thus far, he has
published more than 160 scientiﬁc papers, including
100+ SCI-indexed papers, 50+ IEEE Trans./Journal
papers, 20 ESI Highly Cited Papers and 4 ESI Hot
Papers. According to Google Scholar Citations, his
published work has been cited more than 12,000 times (H-index = 49). His
SCI other citations, sum of times cited without self-citations, reached 3500
times (H-index = 36) according to Web of Science Core Collection. He is
an Associate Editor of IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, Journal
of Intelligent Manufacturing and Computers & Electrical Engineering, and
Editorial Board for Computer Integrated Manufacturing Systems. He is a
Leading Guest Editor for several SCI-indexed journals, such as IEEE Systems
Journal, IEEE Access, Elsevier Computer Networks, Mobile Networks & Ap-
plications, Computers and Electrical Engineering, Wireless Communications
and Mobile Computing, Journal of Internet Technology, and Microprocessors
and Microsystems. His research interests include Cyber-Physical Systems,
Intelligent Manufacturing, Big Data Analytics, Industry 4.0, Smart Factory,
and Cloud Robotics. He is listed as a Clarivate Analytics Highly Cited
Researcher in 2019 and 2020.
Xiaomin Li is currently an Associate Professor at
Zhongkai University of Agriculture and Engineer-
ing, Guangzhou, China. He received B.S. degree
from the Air Force Engineering University, Xi’an
China (2004); M.S. degree from the South China
Agricultural University, Guangzhou, China (2014);
and Ph.D. degree from the South China Univer-
sity of Technology, Guangzhou, China (2018). His
research interests include Cyber-Physical Systems,
Smart manufacturing, Big data, Wireless Network.
Hong-Ning Dai (M’05–SM’16) is currently with
Faculty of Information Technology at Macau Uni-
versity of Science and Technology (MUST) as an
associate professor. He obtained the Ph.D. degree
in Computer Science and Engineering from Depart-
ment of Computer Science and Engineering at the
Chinese University of Hong Kong. His current re-
search interests include Data Analytics, Blockchain
Technology, Cyber-Physical System and industrial
Internet of Things. He is a holder of 1 U.S. patent
and 1 Australia innovation patent. He is also the
winner of Bank of China (BOC) Excellent Research Award of MUST. He has
3 ESI highly-cited papers awarded by Clarivate Analytics and 1 IEEE Out-
standing Paper Award conferred by IEEE International Conference on Cyber
Physical and Social Computing. He holds visiting positions at Department of
Computer Science and Engineering of the Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications
of the University of New South Wales, Hong Kong Applied Science and
Technology Research Institute (ASTRI). He has served as associate editors of
IEEE Systems Journal, IEEE Access, and Connection Science, an editor of Ad
Hoc Networks, guest editors for IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing. He is also an ACM
senior member.
Andrew Kusiak is a Professor in the Department of
Industrial and Systems Engineering and Director of
the Intelligent Systems Laboratory at The University
of Iowa, Iowa City. He has chaired two departments,
Industrial Engineering (1988-95) and Mechanical
and Industrial Engineering (2010-15). His current
research focuses on applications of artiﬁcial intelli-
gence and big data in smart manufacturing, product
development, renewable energy, sustainability, and
healthcare. He has published numerous books and
technical papers in journals sponsored by profes-
sional societies, such as the Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Institute of
Industrial and Systems Engineers, Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers, Nature, and other societies. He speaks frequently at international
meetings, conducts professional seminars, and consults for industrial corpo-
rations. Dr. Kusiak has served in elected professional society positions as
well as various editorial roles in over ﬁfty journals, including ﬁve different
IEEE Transactions. Professor Kusiak is a Fellow of the Institute of Industrial
and Systems Engineers and the Editor-in-Chief of the Journal of Intelligent
Manufacturing.
Miguel Mart ´ınez-Garc ´ıais a Lecturer in Human-
machine systems at Loughborough University, UK.
He received a BSc degree in Mathematics from the
Polytechnic University of Catalonia (UPC), Spain in
2013, a MSc in Advanced Mathematics and Math-
ematical Engineering (MAMME) from the same
university in 2014, and a PhD in Engineering from
the University of Lincoln, UK, in 2018. He also
worked as a researcher since 2017, both at the
University of Lincoln and at the Advanced Virtual
Reality Research Centre (A VRRC) at Loughborough
University. His research interests include human-machine integration, machine
learning, artiﬁcial intelligence, intelligent signal processing, and complex
systems, with particular focus in the analysis of non-linear signals representing
phenomena of interest between humans and machines.
Di Li is a Professor of School of Mechanical and
Automotive Engineering, South China University of
Technology, Guangzhou, China. Di Li was born in
Fu yang City, Anhui Province, China, in 1965. She
received the B.S. and M. S. degrees in aerospace
engineering from the Nanjing University of Aero-
nautics and Astronautics, Nanjing City, Jiangshu
Province, China, in 1988 and the Ph.D. degree
in automation from the South China University of
Technology, Guangzhou City, Guangdong Province,
China, in 1993. From 1988 to 1990, she was an
Assistant Engineer with the Qingdao Beihai Shipyard of the China State
Shipbuilding Corporation, Qingdao City, Shandong Province, China. From
1993 to 1998, she was an Associate Professor with the Guangdong University
of Technology, Guangzhou City, Guangdong Province, China. Since 1999,
she has been a Professor with the Mechanical and Electrical Engineering
Department, South China University of Technology. She is the author of
more than 150 articles and holds eight patents. Her research interests include
high-performance embedded control system, numerical control, and machine
vision. Ms. Li was a recipient of the First Prize for Science and Technology
Development of Guangdong Province in 2009 and Ding Ying Science and
Technology Awards in 2011.