PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, FEBRUARY 2023 9
reducing the cost of dynamically adjusting or reconﬁguring
network resources. Moreover, it can improve and propel the
whole manufacturing intelligence. Additionally, by adopting
an AI-assisted SDIN, the production efﬁciency can be further
improved.
B. End-to-End communication
End-to-end (E2E) or device-to-device communication be-
tween manufacturing entities is a convenient communication
strategy in industrial networks [102], [103]. E2E communica-
tion provides communication services with lower latency and
higher reliability, as compared to a centralized approach [104].
With effective information interaction via E2E communication,
the entire system can achieve full connectivity. In the context
of CM, data transmission with different real-time constraints
has become a critical requirement [105]. The E2E industrial
communication approach optimizes the usage of network
resources (e.g., network access and bandwidth allocation)
through data communication of varying latency [106], [107].
Meanwhile, in order to realize the E2E communication in the
industrial domain, a hybrid E2E communication network –
based on the AI technology and SDIN – is here constructed
by exploiting different media, communication protocols, and
strategies. The hybrid E2E-based communication mechanism
with the AI assistance can be divided into three layers: the
physical layer, the media access controlling (MAC) layer, and
the routing layer.
In the physical layer, according to the advantages and
disadvantages of the involved communication technologies,
different communication media include optical ﬁber [108],
network cable [109], and wireless radio [110]. Generally, in-
dustrial communications can be divided into wired or wireless
communications. On the one hand, wired communications typ-
ically exhibit high-stability and low-latency. A representative
case is an industrial Ethernet, which is based on a common
Ethernet and runs improved Ethernet protocols, such as Ether-
CAT [111], EtherNet/IP [112], and Powerlink [113]. On the
other hand, wireless networks have been adopted in applica-
tions with relatively high ﬂexibility [114], [115]. Nowadays,
an increasing number of mobile elements have been incor-
porated in manufacturing systems; therefore, wireless media
has been widely exploited in mobile communications [116].
Conventional strategies on ﬁxed and static industrial networks
may not fulﬁll the emerging requirements on ﬂexible network
conﬁgurations. The AI and related technologies, such as deep
reinforcement learning, optimization theory and game theory,
can play signiﬁcant roles in improving the communication
efﬁciency in the physical layer, e.g., determining the optimal
communication between wired and wireless networks while
achieving a good balance between network operational cost
and network performance.
In the MAC layer, different devices have different require-
ments for E2E communications according to their speciﬁc
functions. Although many different MAC protocols have been
proposed (e.g., CSMA–Carrier Sense Multiple Access) [117],
CDMA–Code Division Multiple Access) [118], TDMA–Time
Division Multiple Access) [119] and their improved versions,these methods still lack ﬂexibility, and do not fulﬁll the
emerging requirements of industrial applications. Generally,
industrial E2E communications can be divided into two cat-
egories: periodic communications and aperiodic communica-
tions. Similarly, AI plays an important role in the MAC layer.
An example is a hybrid approach that combines the CSMA and
TDMA, with an intelligent optimization method, to improve
the efﬁciency of the E2E communication. In particular, the two
categories of communication requirements (high and low real-
time or periodic and aperiodic communications) are classiﬁed
by the AI-based method (e.g., na ¨ıve Bayes). Next, an improved
hybrid MAC is constructed on top of the CSMA and TDMA.
TDMA and CSMA schemes deal with the periodic and aperi-
odic data ﬂows of the E2E communications. The size of this
proposed mechanism can be adjusted in accordance with the
AI-optimized results of a real application.
The network routing is also another key component of
E2E communications. The key node of the routing path
plays an important role in the E2E communications as well.
However, the performances of routing key nodes are impacted
by the workload; for instance, the amount of forwarded data.
Similarly, AI plays a signiﬁcant role in the routing layer. The
predicted state parameters, such as communication rate and
network loads of key nodes, can be obtained by using historical
data from the network node status by algorithms, such as deep
neural networks or deep reinforcement learning (e.g. deep Q-
learning).
VI. F LEXIBLE MANUFACTURING LINE
A ﬂexible manufacturing production line realizes customiza-
tion. AI-driven production line strategies and technologies,
such as collective intelligence, autonomous intelligence, and
cross-media reasoning intelligence, have accelerated the global
manufacturing process. Therefore, the subjects of cooperative
operation between multiple agents, dynamic reconﬁguration
of manufacturing, and self-organizing scheduling based on
production tasks are presented in this section.
A. Cooperative multiple agents
Cooperation among multiple agents is necessary to dynam-
ically construct collaborative groups for the completion of
customized production tasks [120]. As discussed in Section IV,
multiple agents with edge computing provide a better option
than a single device to build a collaborative operation to realize
CM [79], [121]. Therefore, by combining the edge computing-
assisted intelligent agents and different AI algorithms, a novel
cooperative operation can be constructed as shown in Fig. 7.
The strategy of cooperative operation by multiples agents can
be divided into the order of submission, task decomposition,
cooperative group, and subgroup assignment.
The working process of a ﬂexible manufacturing produc-
tion line can be described as follows. First, according to
the customers’ requirements, the CM product orders are is-
sued to the manufacturing system through the recommender
system. After receiving the product orders, the AI-assisted
task decomposition algorithms take the product orders as the
input, the device working procedure as the output, and the