PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, FEBRUARY 2023 6
Device layer
Agent layer
Edge layer
Robot arm
Robot
 Forklift
AGV
Agent
Conveyor belt
Edge computing agent
Edge computing node
Computing facilities
Agent
Camera
3D printer
AI library
Data storage
MotorAI layer
Fig. 3. Edge computing-assisted manufacturing devices. This archi-
tecture includes the device layer, agent layer, edge computing layer,
and AI layer.
for instance, the image-based personalized product recogni-
tion, expected from the emerging multi-agent systems [74],
[75]. However, the multiple agents are deﬁcient in processing
massive data. Recent advances in edge computing can meet
this emerging need [76]–[78]. As shown in Fig. 3, a variety
of decentralized manufacturing agents are connected to edge
computing servers via high-speed industrial networks. The
edge computing assisted manufacturing agents embrace the
device layer, agent layer, edge computing layer, and AI layer.
An agent is equipped with a reasoning module and a
knowledge base, offering basic AI functionalities such as
inferencing and computing. Moreover, with the support of
new communication technologies (e.g., 5G mobile networks
and high-speed industrial wired networks), all agents and edge
computing servers can be interconnected.
Agents run on edge computing servers to guarantee low-
latency services for data analytics. The agent edge servers are
connected by high-speed industrial IoT to achieve low latency.
Generally, edge computing servers support a variety of AI
applications.
An example of such a system is a personalized product
identiﬁcation based on deep learning image recognition. First,
a multiple agent subsystem is constructed for producing per-
sonalized products. Then, a single agent records image or
video data at different stages of the CM process. Next, the
edge computing server runs the image recognition algorithms,
such as a convolutional neural network (CNN), R-CNN, Fast
R-CNN, Faster R-CNN, YOLO, or Single Shot Detection
(SSD), all of which have demonstrated their advantages in
computer vision tasks. The identiﬁcation results are rapidly
transferred to the devices. When the single edge computing
server cannot meet the real-time requirements, the multiple
agent edge servers may work collaboratively to complete the
speciﬁc tasks such as product identiﬁcation. Indeed, during
Function ConveyingMotor
CuttingCuttingConveying_unitPLC
ID_device 1
NeighborCurrent
stateIntelligent
WarehouseComputing
Working
qualityWorking
qualityWarehouse
Management
SystemID_device 2
NeighborCurrent
stateWorking
qualityWorking
qualityis-a
is-ais-a
is-a
is-ais-a
is-ais-ais-ais-a
is-a
is-a
is-ais-a
is-ais-aFig. 4. Manufacturing resources from the device function perspective.
The CM resources of a product can be mapped into computing,
cutting, conveying, and other functions.
the process, the master-slave or auction mode can be adopted
for coordination, according to the status analysis of each edge
server.
Additionally, with the help of edge computing, it is possible
to establish a quantitative energy-aware model with a multi-
agent system for load balancing, collaborative processing
of complex tasks, and scheduling optimization in a smart
factory [79]. The above procedure can also optimize the
production line with better logistics while ensuring ﬂexibility
and manufacturing efﬁciency.
B. Manufacturing resource description based on ontology
Intelligent manufacturing will be greatly beneﬁcial to the in-
tegration of distributed competitive resources (e.g., manpower
and diverse automated technologies), so that resource shar-
ing between enterprises and ﬂexibility to respond to market
changes are possible (i.e., CM). Therefore, in smart manu-
facturing, it is imperative to realize dynamic conﬁgurations of
manufacturing resources [80], [81]. CM can optimize lead time
and manufacturing quality under various real-world constraints
of dynamic nature (resource and manpower limitations, market
demand, etc.).
There are several strategies in describing manufacturing
resources, such as databases, object-oriented method [82], and
the uniﬁed manufacturing resource model [83]. In contrast to
the conventional resource description methods, the ontology-
based description is one of the most prominent methods. An
ontology represents an explicit speciﬁcation of a conceptual
model [84], by way of a classical symbolic AI reasoning
method (i.e., an expert system). Modeling an application
domain knowledge through an expert system provides a con-
ceptual hierarchy that supports system integration and inter-
operability via an interpretable way [85], [86].
In our previous work [87], the device resources of smart
manufacturing were integrated by the ontology-based inte-
gration framework, to describe the intelligent manufacturing
resources. The architecture consisted of four layers, namely,
the data layer, the rule layer, the knowledge layer, and the
resource layer. The resource layer represented the entity of