PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, FEBRUARY 2023 16
such as deployment, accessing and spectrum management to
be addressed. A hybrid industrial network with the latest
communication technologies and AI (including deep learning,
integrated learning, transfer learning, etc.) can be a promising
solution for information interaction, which should consider
different data ﬂows according to different applications of
intelligent CM.
C. Dynamic reconﬁguration of manufacturing resources
Intelligent manufacturing, especially CM, involves a dy-
namic reorganization of the available resources and extreme
ﬂexibility. The essence of CM is to provide customized
products, which have the characteristics of small-batch, short
processing cycle, and ﬂexible production. Therefore, manufac-
turing resources need constant readjustment and reorganiza-
tion [166]. In addition, customized products are thought of as
a variety of processing crafts. Moreover, the increasing com-
plexity of the industrial environments makes the management
of the resources even more difﬁcult. A factory nowadays is
a system consisting of many sub-systems, which can produce
emergent behaviors through the interaction of the subsystems.
Therefore, the dynamic reconstruction of manufacturing re-
sources is one of the main challenges towards achieving a
generic CM facility. In this aspect, a number of strategies have
been proposed [167], [168] in this domain.
Recently, knowledge reasoning, knowledge graph, trans-
fer learning, and other AI algorithms have attained great
progress [169]–[171]. In our opinion, hybrid AI methods
combining the latest knowledge reasoning technologies with
swarm intelligence can be a promising solution for dynamic
reconstruction, which may consider different application sce-
narios of CM. Manufacturing-based process optimization with
ML technologies may be one of the effective methods to
reorganize resources. Moreover, digital twin technologies may
be the driving technologies to improve resource reconﬁgura-
tion [172]–[174].
D. Practical deployment and knowledge transfer
Although the AI-assisted CM framework is promising to
foster smart manufacturing, several challenges in industrial
practice arise before the formal adoption of this framework.
The ﬁrst non-technical challenge mainly lies in the cost of
upgrading existing manufacturing machinery, digitizing man-
ufacturing equipment, and purchasing computing facilities as
well as AI services. This huge cost may be affordable for small
and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). With respect to up-
grading manufacturing production lines for SMEs, retroﬁtting
legacy machines can be an economic solution as discussed
in Section IV-C. In particular, diverse sensors and IoT nodes
can be attached to existing manufacturing equipment to collect
diverse manufacturing data. Those sensors and IoT nodes can
be collected with the Internet so as to improve the interconnec-
tivity of legacy machines. For example, Raspberry Pi models
mounted with sensors can be deployed in workrooms to collect
ambient data [93], [175]. Besides hardware upgrading, soft-
ware tools as well as AI services should be also purchased and
adopted by manufacturing enterprises. Similarly, the economicsolution for SMEs is to outsource manufacturing data to cloud
services providers or Machine learning as a service (MLaaS)
provider who can offer on-demand computing services. Never-
theless, outsourcing conﬁdential data to untrusted third parties
may increase the risks of security and privacy leakage. Thus,
it is a prerequisite to enforce privacy and security protection
schemes on manufacturing data before outsourcing. Moreover,
the expenditure of system operating and training personnel
should not be ignored in practical deployment.
Another challenge is the effective technology transfer from
research institutions to enterprises. Technology transfer in-
volves many non-technical factors and multiple parties. The
non-technical issues of technology transfer include marketing
analysis, intellectual property management, technical invention
protection, commercialization, and ﬁnancial returns. Many
frontier technological innovations often end up with unsuc-
cessful technology transfer due to ignorance of the non-
technical factors [176]. One of the main obstacles in tech-
nology transfer lies in the technology readiness level (TRL)
gap between research and industrial practice. In particular,
research institutions often focus on research results at TRL 1-
3 implying basic feasibility and effectiveness while industrial
enterprises often require transferred technologies at TRL 7-8
or even higher levels meaning prototype demonstration and
real deployment [177]. We admit that there is still a long way
for the AI-assisted CM framework before reaching TRL 7-
8. The investigation of the technology transfer of AI-assisted
CM will be a future direction. Both researchers and industrial
practitioners are expected to work together to realize AI-
assisted CM.
IX. C ONCLUSION
Recent advances in AI technologies have had an impact
on the manufacturing industry, especially within customized
smart manufacturing. In this article, AI-assisted customized
manufacturing architectures – incorporating IoT, edge intelli-
gence, and cloud computing paradigms – have been proposed.
These key AI-enabled technologies have been validated in
an industrial packaging scenario. Further, each of the aspects
composing these architectures have been carefully reviewed.
The fusion of AI and manufacturing provides a potential
solution for customized manufacturing. Future research will
be directed towards tackling the challenges related to smart
manufacturing devices, effective information interaction, dy-
namic reconstruction of manufacturing resources, and practical
deployment issues.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Lasi, P. Fettke, H.-G. Kemper, T. Feld, and M. Hoffmann, “Industry
4.0,” Business & information systems engineering , vol. 6, no. 4, pp.
239–242, 2014.
[2] V . Roblek, M. Me ˇsko, and A. Krape ˇz, “A complex view of industry
4.0,” Sage Open , vol. 6, no. 2, p. 2158244016653987, 2016.
[3] A. Kusiak, “Smart manufacturing,” International Journal of Production
Research , vol. 56, no. 1-2, pp. 508–517, 2018.
[4] S. Wang, J. Wan, M. Imran, D. Li, and C. Zhang, “Cloud-based
smart manufacturing for personalized candy packing application,” The
Journal of Supercomputing , vol. 74, no. 9, pp. 4339–4357, 2018.
[5] L. Li, “China’s manufacturing locus in 2025: With a comparison of
“Made-in-China 2025” and “Industry 4.0”,” Technological Forecasting
and Social Change , vol. 135, pp. 66–74, 2018.