PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, FEBRUARY 2023 5
TABLE I. Summary of most relevant state-of-the-art literature
Refs. Smart devices Smart interaction AI Smart services Pros Cons Applications
[50] X  X X Integration sensor with
cloud servicesNo edge computing
consideredMachine status monitor-
ing (primitive ML meth-
ods were used)
[51] X X X X Service-oriented smart
manufacturingNo edge computing
consideredMilk production from
buffalo pasture
[52] X X Integration CPS with
smart manufacturingNo edge computing and
in-depth analysis of AI
algorithmsSeveral cases from prod-
uct design to manufac-
turing control
[53] X  X Comprehensive consid-
eration of the entire in-
dustrial networkNo AI as well as edge
computing consideredNo speciﬁc application
[55] X  X X Integration sensor with
cloud servicesNo edge computing
consideredLight gauge steel pro-
duction line
[56] X X X Integration CPS with
AINo edge computing
consideredProduction line and fac-
tory management
[57]  X Diverse AI algorithms
were usedNo consideration
of smart devices,
interactions and
servicesCold spray additive
manufacturing,
augmented reality-
guided inspection and
surface stress estimation
module which is ﬁxed or static, the second module consists
of the dynamic elements, including network/communications
protocols, information interaction, and data persistent or tran-
sient storage. These dynamic elements are essentially infor-
mation carriers to connect different manufacturing processes.
The dynamic module is running on top of the static one.
AI is utilized in the prediction of wireless channels, op-
timization of mobile network handoffs, and control network
congestion. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) or Reservoir
Computing (RC) are candidate solutions due to their advan-
tages of them in analyzing temporal network data.
3) The AI layer: includes algorithms running at different
computing platforms such as edge or cloud servers [55],
[65]. The computing environment consists of cloud and edge
computing servers running MapReduce, Hadoop, and Spark.
AI algorithms are adopted at different levels of computing
paradigms in the AIaCM architecture. For instance, training a
deep learning model for image processing can be conducted
in the cloud. Then, edge computing servers are responsible for
running the trained DL model and executing relatively simple
algorithms for speciﬁc manufacturing tasks.
4) Smart manufacturing services: include data visualiza-
tion, system maintenance, predictions, and market analysis.
For example, a recommender system can provide customers
with details of CM products, and the information including the
performance of a production line, market trends, and efﬁciency
of the supply chain.
B. Overview on state-of-the-art manufacturing methods
Recently, substantial research efforts have been made to im-
prove the interactivity and elasticity of exiting manufacturing
factories [50]–[58]. Table I summarizes most relevant state-
of-the-art literature. We can observe from Table I that most of
the references only concentrate on a single or several aspects
in CM. For example, the work [50] presents a cloud man-
ufacturing framework to analyze and process manufacturingdata. Similarly, a cloud-based manufacturing equipment [55] is
proposed to provide users with on-demand services. However,
outsourcing manufacturing data to cloud services providers
who are often owned by third parties can also bring the risks
of leaking customers’ private data and exposing conﬁdential
manufacturing data (e.g., product design models). Despite
most of the aspects being considered, the work [51] ignores
the critical issues such as the edge computing paradigm and
advanced AI technologies.
In contrast, our AIaCM framework includes all the aspects
in CM, including smart devices, smart interaction, AI tech-
nologies, and smart services. Meanwhile, our AIaCM frame-
work also considers the advent of edge computing, software-
deﬁned networks, and advanced AI technologies. Moreover,
we also present a full-ﬂedged prototype to further demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed framework (please refer to
Section VII for more details). The implementation details of
the AIaCM architecture are discussed next.
IV. I NTELLIGENT MANUFACTURING DEVICES
A. Edge computing-assisted intelligent agent construction
In the customized production paradigm, manufacturing de-
vices should be capable of rapid restructuring and reuse for
small batches of personalized products [66], [67]. However,
it is challenging to achieve elastic and rapid control over the
massive manufacturing devices. The agent-based system was
considered a solution to this challenge [68], [69]. Agents can
autonomously and continuously function in a collaborative
system [70]. A multi-agent system can be constructed to
take autonomous actions. Different types of agents have been
constructed in [71]–[73].
Although a single agent may have sensing, computing, and
reasoning capabilities, it alone can only accomplish relatively
simple tasks. Smart manufacturing may involve complex tasks,