PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, FEBRUARY 2023 10
Management
Edge agent
CustomersProduct 
order
Product taskWorking step
Task decomposition Main cooperative  group Order submmissionUsers
Process analysisProcess libaryFine group
Fine group Edge agent
Sub cooperative group Working step
merging
AI methods
Computing server Working step
merging
Fig. 7. Cooperative multiple agents. The strategy of cooperative multiple agents can be divided into i) the order of submission, ii) task
decomposition, iii) cooperative group and iv) subgroup assignment.
product manufacturing time as a constraint; these algorithms
are mainly executed at the remote cloud server. A product
order can be divided into multiple subtasks, which are sent to
all the agents via the industrial network. After the negotiation,
agents return the answers to the edge server, which handles the
working subtasks according to corresponding conditions and
constraints. Next, the AI-assisted cost-evaluation algorithm
calculates the cost of a producing group (i.e., cooperative
manufacturing group) from the historical data. Then, the edge
agents intelligently select suitable device agents to ﬁnish the
product order after considering the whole cooperative group
performances, such as producing time and product quality.
Moreover, the edge agents send the selection result to the
device agents, which are chosen to take part in the producing
order. The main cooperative group is constructed based on the
working steps.
The main cooperative group may not be well suited for real
applications, especially for complicated CM tasks. Therefore,
an AI-based method for constructing a suitable-size coop-
erative subgroup is an important step for dealing with the
mentioned problem. A possible strategy is to use cognitive ap-
proaches such as the Adaptive Control of Thought—Rational
(ACT-R) model [122]. These subtasks cooperative groups can
be mapped to the digital space (i.e., edge agent) and form
even lower level subgroups, all interconnected by the conveyor,
logistics systems, and industrial communication systems. Each
subgroup can delegate the same edge agent, to provide the
management and customers with manufacturing services. The
characteristics of the subgroups are partly derived from the
process constraints and the physical constraints of the plant.
In principle, the higher the constrains the deeper the task tree
will expand, from more abstract tasks to particular atomic
targets achievable by the present devices. This structure can
be replicated with a probabilistic graphical model or with a
fuzzy tree.
After all the agents have been assigned with subtasks,
they form two level-cooperative groups. The formation of
these cooperative groups is beneﬁcial to resource manage-ment. Then, according to the manufacturing task attributes,
multiple agents complete the producing task. During this
period, the corresponding device agents send their status data
to edge servers timely, and the manufacturing process can
be monitored by analyzing these data in the entire system.
In contrast to the AI-driven cooperative operation between
multiple agents, conventional methods often rely on human
operators who participate in the whole process or computer-
assisted operators also requiring human interventions. These
methods inevitably result in huge operational expenditure.
B. Dynamic reconﬁguration of manufacturing Systems
With the scientiﬁc development of the industrial market
and manufacturing equipment, different industrial devices
present different performance requirements representing mul-
tiple function trends [123]. For instance, the latest Computer
Numerical Control (CNC) machine tool can complete a wide
range of tasks, from lathing to milling functions. On the
other hand, a dedicated manufacturing line does not meet
new industrial requirements, especially for customized produc-
tion [124]. The trend today is towards reconﬁguration and re-
programmability of manufacturing processes [125]. Although
several studies have investigated the problem and presented
meaningful results [126], [127], most of them lack intelligent
design to fulﬁll the emerging requirements of dynamic recon-
ﬁguration of manufacturing systems, especially for customized
manufacturing. In particular, the work [126] focuses on the
communications between agents while [127] investigates the
relationship between manufacturing ﬂexibility and demands.
Thus, AI technologies have seldom been adopted in these
studies. At present, ontology (as shown in Section IV) of-
fers insights into dynamic reconﬁguration of manufacturing
resources [104], [128].
A schematic of the dynamic reconﬁguration process based
on the ontology inference is shown in Fig. 8. Each customized
product invokes several processing procedures. First, a person-
alized product manufacturing-related device (such as cutting,
materials handling device) is selected by ontology reasoning