PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, FEBRUARY 2023 15
shopping experience.
In terms of the market trend prediction, the more the
market data gathered, the more accurate the results. Differ-
ent algorithms can assist in the data-driven decision-making
process. For example, shape mining is a framework based
on engineering design data [153] and has been applied to
passenger car design. Further, the apriori and C5.0 algorithms
for data mining are able to extract rules from databases [154].
The platform used in the experiment, cannot only ﬁnish on-
demand candy production based on the customization param-
eters but also adapt to changes in the market. The constructed
platform can increase the efﬁciency of the entire system
of candy wrapping. This methodology, in combination with
the aforementioned decision-making algorithms, constitutes a
proof of concept of a seamless CM production pipeline.
Discussion. It is worth mentioning that the number of
interactions between customization and production should also
be limited although cloud-assisted customization services can
greatly improve user experience [155]. In practice, there is
a trade-off between customization interactions and product
manufacturing. From the user experience perspective, the more
customization interactions lead to a better user experience.
However, the increased number of customization interactions
may also increase the expenditure and prolong the produc-
tion time of products, consequently affecting user experience.
Therefore, it can enhance customization services to provide
users with some well-designed product samples accompanied
by tutorials in advance.
VIII. C HALLENGES AND ADVANCES
The convergence of AI technologies, IoT, SDN, and other
new ICTs in smart factories, while it can signiﬁcantly increase
the ﬂexibility, intelligence, and efﬁciency of CM systems
it also poses challenges. In this section, we discuss these
challenges as well as recent advances.
A. Smarter devices in customized manufacturing
In a CM environment, the equipment does not only per-
form the basic functions of automation but also needs to be
intelligent and ﬂexible. From the point of view of stand-alone
equipment, the devices should have the following functions:
parameter sensing, data storage, logical inference, information
interaction, self-diagnostics, hybrid computing support, and
preventive maintenance. From the perspective of the physical
layer, the realization of CM is increasingly complex, as stan-
dard devices or equipment cannot accomplish this complicated
task. Therefore, devices need to have both collaborative ability
and swarm intelligence to collaborate with each to complete
complex tasks. Devices with the above functions can meet the
requirements of personalized production and adapt to the trend
of achieving the automation and intelligence of manufacturing.
Therefore, CM devices must be based on the integration
and deep fusion of advanced manufacturing technologies,
automation technologies, information technology, image tech-
nology, communication technologies, and AI technologies to
realize the local and swarm intelligence. In this aspect, to
be realizable in a generic context, further progress needs tobe made in AI and in AI/robotics integration. However, as
shown in Section VII, CM is already realizable in restricted
environments.
Extensive studies have been conducted in the respective
technologies to support CM [156]–[158]: intelligent connec-
tivity, data-driven intelligence, cognitive Internet of things, and
industrial big data. Unfortunately, most of these studies have
mainly focused on single-device intelligence. Although these
studies provide useful suggestions towards smarter devices,
there is a still huge gap between realistic smart devices and
the current solutions. We consider that an ideal method for
realizing smart devices in manufacturing should integrate a
series of methods to ensure the CM with edge intelligence that
offers adaptability and response to a wide range of scenarios.
These different methods or algorithms can be orchestrated by
a central AI unit, which decides which algorithm is more
useful for a particular task (combining a symbolic AI approach
with machine learning). Meanwhile, a good balance between
intelligence and cost is still a challenge that needs to be
addressed in the future.
B. Information interaction in CM
Most manufacturing frameworks represent the distributed
systems, where high-efﬁcient communications between differ-
ent components are needed [159], [160]. On the one hand,
different components of CM need not only effective connec-
tions but also highly efﬁcient information interactions. As
shown in early parts of this paper, the CM systems must
incorporate different information interaction technologies and
algorithms. On the other hand, due to the device hetero-
geneity and the increased demands of communications, the
CM information interactive systems have to transmit massive
data with different latency requirements. Consequently, the
networks of CM need to be optimized to fulﬁll the diverse
requirements of different applications, such as media access,
moving handover, and congestion control. In other words, CM
needs as a basis of a highly efﬁcient information interaction
system, which integrates multiple information technologies,
including the absorbing DL and other AI algorithms. This
system particularly depends on efﬁcient and reasonable in-
formation interaction. With the development of manufacturing
techniques, an increased number of studies have focused on
the massive volume of communications and a large number of
connections [161]. Based on network performance optimiza-
tion methods, researchers have developed several industrial
networks [162], [163]. As different information transfer pro-
tocols exist with different requirements, such as time-sensitive
and time-insensitive data transfer, the construction of a more
efﬁcient interaction industrial network represents another im-
portant challenge of future research. Existing studies mostly
focus on high-speed communications, rather than efﬁcient
interaction with intelligent networks. These methods usually
only meet the basic requirements of industrial networks, such
as bandwidth and delay.
Recently, wireless mobile communications (e.g., 5G sys-
tems) and optical ﬁber communications have achieved great
development [164], [165]. The 5G technology for smart fac-
tories is still in its infancy, and there are still a number of issues