PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, FEBRUARY 2023 8
SDN controller
Data centerControl flow
Computing center
AI models
AI modelsCoordination node
SDN router
Data flow
Fig. 6. Software-deﬁned industrial networks consist of network
coordinated nodes, SDN routers, SDN controllers, data centers, and
cloud computing servers which can support intensive computing tasks
of AI algorithms.
manufacturing resource description based on ontology, and
edge computing in intelligent sensing. It is a challenge to
upgrade the existing manufacturing devices to improve the
interoperability and the inter-connectivity. Retroﬁtting instead
of replacing all the legacy machines may be an alternative
strategy in this regard. The legacy manufacturing equipment
can be connected to the Internet by additively mounting sen-
sors or IoT nodes in approximation to existing manufacturing
devices [93], [94]. Moreover, monitors can be attached to
existing machinery to visualize the monitoring process. It is
worth mentioning that retroﬁtting strategies may apply for the
sensing or monitoring scenarios while they are not suitable or
less suitable for the cases requiring to make active actions
(like control or movement). Furthermore, a comprehensive
plan should be made in advance rather than arbitrarily adding
sensors to the existing production line [95]. Retroﬁtting strate-
gies also have their limitations, such as a limited number of
internal physical quantities can be monitored in a retroﬁtted
asset with respect to a newly-designed smart machine.
V. I NTELLIGENT INFORMATION INTERACTION IN A
SMART FACTORY
In the CM domain, the information exchange system needs
to fulﬁll the dynamic adjustment of network resources so
as to produce multiple customized products in parallel. In
order to obtain optimal strategies, many studies have focused
on this topic, and proposed insightful algorithms as well as
strategies [96]. However, there are still two open issues: a
network framework to dynamically adjust network resources,
and the end-to-end (E2E) data delivery. In this section, we
present software-deﬁned industrial networks and AI-assisted
E2E communication to tackle these two challenges.
A. Software-deﬁned industrial networks
Industrial networks are a crucial component in CM, and cus-
tomized product manufacturing groups can be understood as
subnets. Via an industrial network (consisting of base stations,access points, network gateways, network switches, network
routers, and terminals), the CM equipment and devices are
closely interconnected with each other and can be supported
by edge or cloud computing paradigms [97]. Taking full
advantage of AI-driven software-deﬁned industrial networks,
and relevant networking technologies is an important method
to achieve intelligent information sharing in CM [98], [99].
In conventional industrial networks, network control func-
tions have been ﬁxed at network nodes (e.g., gateways,
routers, switches). Consequently, industrial networks cannot
be adapted to dynamic and elastic network environments,
especially in customized manufacturing. The software-deﬁned
networking (SDN) technology can separate the conventional
network into the data plane and the control plane [100]. In
this manner, SDN can achieve ﬂexible and efﬁcient network
control for industrial networks. It has been reported that a
software-deﬁned industrial network can increase the ﬂexibility
of a dynamical network system while decreasing the cost of
constructing a new network infrastructure [101].
The introduction of AI technologies to SDN can further
bestow network nodes with intelligence. As demonstrated in
Fig. 6, AI technologies are introduced into traditional SDN
so as to form a novel software-deﬁned industrial network
(SDIN). The proposed SDIN contains a number of mapping
network nodes, SDIN related devices, data centers, and cloud
computing servers to support intensive computing tasks of
AI algorithms. Manufacturing devices are connected by their
communication modules, and they are mapped to different
network terminal nodes. On the SDIN level, key devices
such as coordinated nodes and SDIN controllers construct the
SDIN layer. First of all, coordinated nodes are linked with the
ordinary nodes, and deliver network control messages from
other SDN devices. Second, the SDN routers are the key
devices that realize the separation of data ﬂow and control
ﬂow of the entire manufacturing network. In addition, the
SDIN controller is directly connected to the AI server, and
the AI server provides network decisions directly to the SDN
controller.
In the network information process, AI algorithms, such as
deep neural networks, reinforcement learning, SVM, and other
ML algorithms can be executed in a server according to the
state of the network devices, such as load information, commu-
nication rate, received signal strength indicator, and other data.
Then, the AI server returns the optimized results to the SDN
controller, and the results are divided into different instructions
for different network devices in the light of a speciﬁc CM task.
Following the above steps, the SDN controllers send a set of
instructions to the routers and the coordination nodes. Finally,
network terminals readjust the related parameters, (e.g., com-
munication bandwidth, transmitted powers) to complete the
data communication process.
Intelligent optimization algorithms (e.g., ant colony or
particle swarm optimization) can ﬁnd optimal data transfer
strategies – based on the network parameters provided by
the SDIN, or given by the constraints of data interaction.
These algorithms can adjust the latency and energy consump-
tion requirements. Thus SDIN can improve the information
management processes within a CM industry framework,