Adversarial Machine Learning Attacks and Defense Methods
in the Cyber Security Domain
Ishai Rosenberg, Asaf Shabtai, Yuval Elovici, and Lior Rokach
March 16, 2021
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Abstract
In recent years machine learning algorithms, and more speciﬁcally deep learning algorithms, have been
widely used in many ﬁelds, including cyber security. However, machine learning systems are vulnerable
to adversarial attacks, and this limits the application of machine learning, especially in non-stationary,
adversarial environments, such as the cyber security domain, where actual adversaries (e.g., malware de-
velopers) exist. This paper comprehensively summarizes the latest research on adversarial attacks against
security solutions based on machine learning techniques and illuminates the risks they pose. First, the ad-
versarial attack methods are characterized based on their stage of occurrence, and the attacker’s goals and
capabilities. Then, we categorize the applications of adversarial attack and defense methods in the cyber
security domain. Finally, we highlight some characteristics identiﬁed in recent research and discuss the
impact of recent advancements in other adversarial learning domains on future research directions in the
cyber security domain. This paper is the ﬁrst to discuss the unique challenges of implementing end-to-end
adversarial attacks in the cyber security domain, map them in a uniﬁed taxonomy, and use the taxonomy
to highlight future research directions.
CCSDescription: General and reference - >Surveys and overviews
Keywords: adversarial learning; adversarial machine learning; evasion attacks; poisoning attacks; deep
learning; adversarial examples; cyber security.
1 Introduction
The growing use of machine learning, and particularly deep learning, in ﬁelds like computer vision and
natural language processing (NLP) has been accompanied by increased interest in the domain of adversarial
machine learning (a.k.a. adversarial learning), i.e., attacking and defending machine learning models algo-
rithmically (Huang et al. (2011)). Of special interest are adversarial examples, which are samples modiﬁed
in order to be misclassiﬁed by the classiﬁer attacked.
Most of the research in adversarial learning has focused on the computer vision domain, and more
speciﬁcally in the image recognition domain. This research has centered mainly on convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), which are commonly used in the computer vision domain (Akhtar and Mian (2018); Qiu
et al. (2019)). However, in recent years, adversarial example generation methods have increasingly been
1arXiv:2007.02407v3  [cs.LG]  13 Mar 2021