Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
2.3 Executables are More Complex than Images
An image used as input to an image classiﬁer (usually a convolutional neural network, CNN) is represented
as a ﬁxed size matrix of pixel colors. If the actual image has different dimensions than the input matrix, the
picture will usually be resized, clipped, or padded to ﬁt the dimension limits.
An executable, on the other hand, has a variable length: executables can range in size from several
kilobytes to several gigabytes. It is also unreasonable to expect a clipped executable to maintain its original
classiﬁcation. Let’s assume that we have a 100MB benign executable into which we inject a shellcode in a
function near the end-of-ﬁle. If the shellcode is clipped in order to ﬁt the malware classiﬁer’s dimensions,
there is no reason that the ﬁle would be classiﬁed as malicious, because its benign variant would be clipped
to the exact same form.
In addition, the execution path of an executable may depend on the input, and thus, the adversarial
perturbation should support any possible input that the malware may encounter when executed in the target
machine.
Finally, in the cyber security domain, classiﬁers usually use more than a single feature type as input
(e.g., phishing detection using both URLs and connected server properties as was done in Shirazi et al.
(2019)). ]). A non-exhaustive list of features used in the cyber security domain is presented in Figure 2.
Some feature types are easier to modify without harming the executable’s functionality than others. For
instance, in the adversarial attack used in Rosenberg et al. (2018), appending printable strings to the end of a
malware PE ﬁle is much easier than adding API calls to the PE ﬁle using a dedicated framework built for this
purpose. In contrast, in an image adversarial attack, modifying each pixel has the same level of difﬁculty.
The implications of this issue are discussed in Section 7.6.1.
While this is a challenge for malware classiﬁer implementation, it also affects adversarial attacks against
malware classiﬁers. For instance, attacks in which you have a ﬁxed input dimension, (e.g., a 28*28 matrix
for MNIST images), are much easier to implement than attacks for which you need to consider the variable
ﬁle size.
3 Adversarial Learning Methods Used in the Cyber Security Domain
This section includes a list of theoretical adversarial learning methods that are used in the cyber security
domain but were inspired by attacks from other domains. Due to space limitations, this is nota complete
list of the state-of-the-art prior work in other domains, such as image recognition or NLP. Only methods
that have been used in the cyber security domain are mentioned. A more comprehensive list that includes
methods from other domains can be found, e.g., in Qiu et al. (2019).
The search for adversarial examples as a similar minimization problem is formalized in Szegedy et al.
(2014) and Biggio et al. (2013):
argrminf(x+r)6=f(x)s:t:x+r2D (1)
The input x, correctly classiﬁed by the classiﬁer f, is perturbed with rsuch that the resulting adversarial
example, x+r, remains in the input domain Dbut is assigned a different label than x. To solve Equation 1,
we need to transform the constraint f(x+r)6=f(x)into an optimizable formulation. Then we can easily use
the Lagrange multiplier to solve it. To do this, we deﬁne a loss function Loss()to quantify this constraint.
This loss function can be the same as the training loss, or different, e.g., hinge loss or cross-entropy loss.