Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
requires gray-box knowledge of the classiﬁer’s features and training set addaccess. The poisoning was done
by adding static features (permissions, API calls, URL requests) from the target to existing benign instances.
Mu˜noz Gonz ´alez et al. (2017) used a training integrity poisoning attack against logistic regression, MLP, and
ADALINE classiﬁers, for spam and ransomware detection, by using back-gradient optimization. This attack
requires gray-box knowledge of the classiﬁer’s features and training set addandread access. A substitute
model is built and poisoned, and the poisoned samples are effective against the target classiﬁer as well, due
to the transferability property. The main problem with these poisoning attacks is that they require a powerful
attacker who is able to inject samples into the training set of the malware classiﬁer. While such a scenario is
possible in some cases (e.g., supply chain attacks), this is usually not a common case, making such attacks
less feasible.
Dang et al. (2017) utilized the rate of feature modiﬁcations from a malicious sample and a benign known
sample as the score and used a hillclimbing approach to minimize this score, bypassing SVM and random
forest PDF malware classiﬁers based on static features in a query-efﬁcient manner. Thus, their inference
integrity attack is a query-efﬁcient gray-box attack. This attack was the ﬁrst attempt to perform a query-
efﬁcient attack in the cyber security domain. However, the classiﬁers bypassed were not state-of-the-art
deep classiﬁers.
In Anderson et al. (2018, 2017), the features used by the gradient boosted decision tree classiﬁer included
PE header metadata, section metadata, and import/export table metadata. In Anderson et al. (2018, 2017),
an inference integrity black-box attack which trains a reinforcement learning agent was presented. The
agent is equipped with a set of operations (such as packing) that it may perform on the PE ﬁle. The reward
function was the evasion rate. Through a series of games played against the target classiﬁer, the agent
learns which sequences of operations are likely to result in detection evasion for any given malware sample.
The perturbed samples that bypassed the classiﬁer were uploaded to VirusTotal and scanned by 65 anti-
malware products. Those samples were detected as malicious by 50% of anti-malware products that detected
the original unperturbed samples. This means that this attack works against real-world security products
(although the authors did not mention which ones were affected). However, unlike other attacks, this attack’s
effectiveness is less than 25% (as opposed to 90% for most other adversarial attacks), showing that additional
research is needed in order for this approach to be practical in real-life use cases.
5.1.2 Attacking Deep Neural Network Malware Classiﬁers
Rosenberg et al. (2020a); Rosenberg and Meir (2020) used the EMBER dataset and PE structural features
(see Table 8) to train a substitute FC DNN model and used explainability machine learning algorithms (e.g.,
integrated gradients) to detect which of the 2,381 features have high impact on the malware classiﬁcation and
can also be modiﬁed without harming the executable’s functionality (e.g., ﬁle timestamp). These features
were modiﬁed in a gray-box inference integrity attack, and the mutated malware bypassed not only the
substitute model, but also the target GBDT classiﬁer, which used a different subset of samples and features.
The main advantage of these attacks are that they bypassed an actual, targeted, real-life NGA V . The main
limitation of this attack is that it is not fully automatic - human intervention is required to select the features
that are perturbed.
Grosse et al. (2017); Grosse et al. (2016) presented a white-box inference integrity attack against an
Android static analysis fully connected DNN malware classiﬁer. The static features used in the DREBIN
dataset (see Table 8) were from the AndroidManifest.xml ﬁle and included permissions, suspicious API
calls, activities, etc. The attack is a discrete FGSM (see Section 3) variant, which is performed iteratively
in the following two steps until a benign classiﬁcation is made: (1) compute the gradient of the white-box
model with respect to the binary feature vector x, and (2) ﬁnd the element in xwhose modiﬁcation from zero