Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
7 Current Gaps and Future Research Directions for Adversarial Learn-
ing in the Cyber Security Domain
In this section, we highlight gaps in our taxonomy, presented in Section 4, which are not covered by the
applications presented in Sections 5 and 6, despite having a required functionality. Each such gap is pre-
sented in a separate subsection below. For each gap, we summarize the progress made on this topic in other
domains of adversarial learning, such as the computer vision domain, and extrapolate future trends in the
cyber security domain from it.
7.1 Attack’s Targeting Gap: Feature-Targeted Attacks and Defenses
Poisoning integrity attacks place mislabeled training points in a region of the feature space far from the
rest of the training data. The learning algorithm labels such a region as desired, allowing for subsequent
misclassiﬁcations at test time. However, adding samples to the training set might cause misclassiﬁcation of
many samples and thus would raise suspicion of an attack, while the adversary might want to evade just a
speciﬁc sample (e.g., a dedicated APT).
In non-cyber security domains, a feature-targeted attack, also known as a Trojan neural network attack
(Liu et al. (2018)) or backdoor attack (Gu et al. (2019), Chen et al. (2017a)), is a special form of poisoning
attack, which aims to resolve this problem. A model poisoned by a backdoor attack should still perform
well on most inputs (including inputs that the end user may hold out as a validation set) but cause targeted
misclassiﬁcations or degrade the accuracy of the model for inputs that satisfy some secret, attacker-chosen
property, which is referred to as the backdoor trigger. For instance, adding a small rectangle to a picture
would cause it to be classiﬁed with a speciﬁc target label Liu et al. (2018). Such attacks were performed
on face recognition Chen et al. (2017a); Liu et al. (2018), trafﬁc sign detection (Gu et al. (2019)), sentiment
analysis, speech recognition, and autonomous driving (Liu et al. (2018)) datasets.
However, such attacks have not been applied yet in the cyber security domain, despite the fact that such
attacks have interesting use cases. For instance, such an attack might allow only a speciﬁc nation-state APT
to bypass the malware classiﬁer, while still detecting other malware, leaving the defender unaware of this
feature-targeted attack.
Defenses against such attacks are also required. In the image recognition domain, Wang et al. (2019)
generates a robust classiﬁer by pruning backdoor-related neurons from the original DNN. Gao et al. (2019)
detects a Trojan attack during run-time by perturbing the input and observing the randomness of predicted
classes for perturbed inputs on a given deployed model. A low entropy in predicted classes implies the
presence of a Trojaned input. Once feature-targeted attacks are published in the cyber security domain,
defense methods to mitigate them will follow.
7.2 Attacker’s Goals Gap: Resource Exhaustion-Based Availability Attacks
There are two availability attack variants. One is the subversion attack, in which the system is fooled so
it does not serve legitimate users. Such adversarial attacks have been implemented in the cyber security
domain by fooling the classiﬁer into considering legitimate trafﬁc as malicious, thus blocking it (e.g., Huang
et al. (2011); Nelson et al. (2008)). The other variant is the resource exhaustion attack, in which all of
a system’s available resources are used in order to prevent legitimate users from using them. The second
variant is very common in the cyber security domain (e.g., distributed denial-of-service attacks on websites,
zip bombs, etc.) but not in adversarial attacks in this domain.