Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
(thus, this is a gray-box attack). Then, from this full text, sentences with a ﬁxed length were created.
An LSTM model used those sentences as a training set in order to generate the next character. Once the
model generated a full prose text, it was divided by http structure delimiters to produce a list of pseudo
URLs. Each pseudo URL was assigned a compromised domain, such that the synthetic URLs take the
form: http://+compromised domain+pseudo URL. While this attack is indeed effective, the concatenation
of benign URLs can be signed, making this attack less evasive for real-life classiﬁers then the generative
attacks (e.g., AlEroud and Karabatis (2020)) mentioned below.
Shirazi et al. (2019) generated adversarial examples using all possible combinations of the values of
the features (e.g., website reputation) used by state-of-the-art phishing classiﬁers, such as Verma and Dyer
(2015), making this a more realistic attack. However, the attack requires knowledge about the features
being used by the classiﬁer, making it a gray-box inference integrity attack. Such knowledge is not always
accessible to the attacker, making this attack less feasible in real-life scenarios.
Phishing URLs were generated by a text GAN in Trevisan and Drago (2019); Anand et al. (2018), in
order to augment the phishing URL classiﬁer’s training set and improve its accuracy. AlEroud and Karabatis
AlEroud and Karabatis (2020) used the phishing URLs generated as adversarial examples in an inference
integrity attack, in order to bypass the target classiﬁer. It remains unclear whether the attack mentioned in
AlEroud and Karabatis (2020) is robust enough to bypass GAN-based defenses, such as the defense methods
presented in Trevisan and Drago (2019); Anand et al. (2018).
5.2.2 Domain Generation Algorithm (DGA) URL Detection
DGAs are commonly used malware tools that generate large numbers of domain names that can be used
for difﬁcult to track communications with command and control servers operated by the attacker. The large
number of varying domain names makes it difﬁcult to block malicious domains using standard techniques
such as blacklisting or sinkholing. DGAs are used in a variety of cyber attacks, including ransomware,
spam campaigns, theft of personal data, and implementation of distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks.
DGAs allow malware to generate any number of domain names daily, based on a seed that is shared by the
malware and the threat actor, allowing both to synchronize the generation of domain names.
Sidi et al. (2019) used a black-box inference integrity attack, training a substitute model to simulate the
DGA classiﬁer on a list of publicly available DGA URLs. Then that attacker iterates over every character
in the DGA URL. In each iteration, the results of the feedforward pass of the substitute model are used to
compute the loss with regard to the benign class. The attacker performs a single backpropagation step on
the loss in order to acquire the Jacobian-based saliency map, which is a matrix that assigns every feature
in the input URL with a gradient value (JSMA; see Section 3). Features (characters) with higher gradient
values in the JSMA would have a more signiﬁcant (salient) effect on the misclassiﬁcation of the input, and
thus each character would be modiﬁed in turn, making the substitute model’s benign score higher. Finally,
URLs that evade detection by the substitute model would also evade detection by the target DGA classiﬁer
due to the transferability property (see Section 3). Despite the fact that this attack conﬁrms the feasibility
of transferability in the DGA URL detection sub-domain, the use of (only) character-level features does not
accurately represent real-life classiﬁers.
Anderson et al. (2016) performed an inference integrity black-box attack that used a GAN to produce
domain names that current DGA classiﬁers would have difﬁculty identifying. The generator was then used
to create synthetic data on which new models were trained. This was done by building a neural language
architecture, a method of encoding language in a numerical format, using LSTM layers to act as an autoen-
coder. The autoencoder is then repurposed such that the encoder (which takes in domain names and outputs
an embedding that converts a language into a numerical format) acts as the discriminator, and the decoder