Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
to one (i.e., only feature addition and not removal) would cause the maximum change in the benign score and
add this feature to the adversarial example. The main advantage of this attack is that it provides a methodical
way of dealing with discrete features, commonly used in the cyber security domain, and evaluates this attack
against many DNN architectures. The main problem is that the white-box assumption is unrealistic in many
real-life scenarios.
Kreuk et al. (2018b) implemented an inference integrity attack against MalConv, a 1D CNN, using the
ﬁle’s raw byte content as features (Raff et al. (2018)). The additional bytes are selected by the FGSM method
(see Section 3) and are inserted between the ﬁle’s sections. Kolosnjaji et al. (2018) implemented a similar
attack and also analyzed the bytes which are the most impactful features (and are therefore added by the
attack), showing that a large portion of them are part of the PE header metadata. Suciu et al. (2018a) trans-
formed this white-box gradient-based attack to a black-box decision-based attack by appending bytes from
the beginning of benign ﬁles, especially from their PE headers, which, as shown in Kolosnjaji et al. (2018),
are prominent features. The main insight of these attacks is that even classiﬁers that use raw memory bytes
as features (leveraging deep architecture’s representation learning) are vulnerable to adversarial examples.
The main disadvantages is that such classiﬁers are rarely used by real-life NGA Vs.
Hu and Tan (2017b) perturbed static API call unigrams by performing a gray-box inference integrity
attack. If nAPI types are used, the feature vector dimension is n. A generative adversarial network (GAN;
Appendix A) was trained, where the discriminator simulates the malware classiﬁer while the generator tries
to generate adversarial samples that would be classiﬁed as benign by the discriminator, which uses labels
from the black-box model (a random forest, logistic regression, decision tree, linear SVM, MLP, or an
ensemble of all of these). However, this is a feature vector attack: the way to generate an executable with
the perturbed API call trace was not presented, making this attack infeasible in real life.
Xu et al. (2016) generated adversarial examples that bypass PDF malware classiﬁers, by modifying static
PDF features. This was done using an inference integrity genetic algorithm (GA), where the ﬁtness of the
genetic variants is deﬁned in terms of the target classiﬁer’s conﬁdence score. The GA is computationally
expensive and was evaluated against SVM, random forest, and CNN classiﬁers using static PDF structural
features. This gray-box attack requires knowledge of both the classiﬁer’s features and the target classiﬁer’s
conﬁdence score. Liu et al. (2019) used the same approach to bypass an IoT Android malware detector. The
bypassed fully connected DNN, logistic regression, decision tree, and random forest classiﬁers were trained
using the DREBIN dataset.
Abusnaina et al. (2019) trained an IoT malware detection CNN classiﬁer using graph-based features (e.g.,
shortest path, density, number of edges and nodes, etc.) from the control ﬂow graph (CFG) of the malware
disassembly. They used white-box attacks: C&W, DeepFool, FGSM, JSMA (see Section 3), the momentum
iterative method (MIM), projected gradient descent (PGD), and virtual adversarial method (V AM). They also
added their own attack, graph embedding, and augmentation, which adds a CFG of a benign sample to the
CFG of a malicious sample via source code concatenation. The problem with this attack is that CFG takes a
long time to generate, and therefore graph-based features are rarely used by real-life malware classiﬁers.
Hu and Tan (2017a) proposed a gray-box inference integrity attack using an RNN GAN to generate
invalid APIs and inserted them into the original API sequences to bypass an LSTM classiﬁer trained on the
API call trace of the malware. A substitute RNN is trained to ﬁt the targeted RNN. Gumbel-Softmax, a one-
hot continuous distribution estimator, was used to smooth the API symbols and deliver gradient information
between the generative RNN and the substitute RNN. Null APIs were added, but while they were omitted to
make the adversarial sequence generated shorter, they remained in the loss function’s gradient calculation.
This decreases the attack’s effectiveness, since the substitute model is used to classify the Gumbel-Softmax
output, including the null APIs’ estimated gradients, so it does not simulate the malware classiﬁer exactly.
The gray-box attack output is a feature vector of the API call sequence that might harm the malware’s