Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
example (different from the predicted class for the unperturbed sample), and (3) Feature-Targeted attack -
The malicious behavior of these attacks are only activated by inputs stamped with an attack trigger, which
might be the existence of a speciﬁc input feature or group of feature values in the adversarial example.
Attacks can be both feature and label targeted. Note that in the cyber security domain, many classiﬁers
are binary (i.e., they have two output classes: malicious and benign, spam and ham, anomalous or not, etc.).
For binary classiﬁers, label-indiscriminate and label-targeted attacks are the same, because in these cases,
minimizing the probability of the current class (label-indiscriminate attack) is equivalent to maximizing the
probability of the only other possible class.
4.6 Perturbed Features
As mentioned in Section 2.3, in the cyber security domain, classiﬁers and other machine learning systems
often use more than one feature type. Thus, attackers who want to subvert those systems should consider
modifying more than a single feature type. We can therefore characterize the different adversarial attacks in
the cyber security domain by the features being modiﬁed/perturbed or added. Note that the same feature type
might be modiﬁed differently depending on the sample’s format. For instance, modifying a printable string
inside a PE ﬁle might be more challenging than modifying a word within the content of an email content,
although the feature type is the same. Thus, this classiﬁcation is not simply a feature type but a tuple of
feature type and sample format (for instance, printable strings inside a PE ﬁle). The following is a partial
list (e.g., the work of Rosenberg et al. (Rosenberg et al., 2020a) contains 2,381 features, so the full list cannot
be included) of such tuples used in the papers reviewed in our research: PCAP (packet capture; part of a
network session) statistical features (e.g., number of SYN requests in a certain time window), PCAP header
(e.g., IP or UDP) ﬁelds, PE header ﬁelds, printable strings inside a PE ﬁle, binary bytes inside a PE ﬁle, PE
executed API calls (during a dynamic analysis of the PE ﬁle), and words inside an email or characters inside
a URL.
4.7 Attack’s Output
As discussed in Section 2.1, in contrast to image-based attacks, most adversarial attacks in the cyber domain
require the modiﬁcation of a feature’s values. While in some domains, such as spam detection, modifying
a word in an email is non-destructive, modifying, e.g., a ﬁeld in a PE header metadata, might result in an
unrunnable PE ﬁle. Thus, there are two type of attacks: (1) Feature-Vector attack - Such attacks obtain
a feature vector as an input and output another perturbed feature vector. However, such an attack doesn’t
generate a sample which can be used by the attacker and is usually only a hypothetical attack that would not
be possible in real life, and (2) End-to-End attack - This attack generates a functional sample as an output.
Thus, this is a concrete real-life attack. This category is further divided into many subgroups based on the
sample type produced, e.g., a valid and runnable PE ﬁle, a phishing URL, a spam email, etc.
For instance, most trafﬁc anomaly detection attacks reviewed in this paper are feature vector attacks.
They use statistical features aggregating packet metadata, but the authors do not show how to generate the
perturbed packet. In contrast, the attack used by Rosenberg et al. (2018) to add API calls to a malicious
process uses a custom framework that generates a new binary that adds those API calls. Thus, this is an
end-to-end attack. In some image-based domains, e.g., face recognition systems (Section 5.6.1), end-to-
end attacks can be further categorized as those that generate images (e.g., Liu et al. (2018)) and those that
generate physical elements that can be used to generate multiple relevant images (e.g., Sharif et al. (2016)).