Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
(which takes in the embedding and outputs the domain name) acts as the generator. Anderson et al. attacked
a random forest classiﬁer trained on features deﬁned in Schiavoni et al. (2014); Antonakakis et al. (2012);
Yadav et al. (2012); Yadav et al. (2010). The features of the random forest DGA classiﬁer are unknown to
the attacker. They include: the length of domain name; entropy of character distribution in domain name;
vowel to consonant ratio; Alexa top 1M n-gram frequency distribution co-occurrence count, where n = 3, 4,
or 5; n-gram normality score; and meaningful character ratio. The fact that this attack bypasses a classiﬁer
which uses many features, as speciﬁed above, makes it more suitable for real-life scenarios.
5.3 Network Intrusion Detection
A security system commonly used to secure networks is a network intrusion detection system (NIDS). An
NIDS is a device or software that monitors all trafﬁc passing a strategic point for malicious activities. When
such an activity is detected, an alert is generated. Typically an NIDS is deployed at a single point, for
example, at the Internet gateway. A summary of the attacks in the network intrusion detection sub-domain
is provided in Table 4.
Clements et al. (2019) conducted a white-box inference integrity attack against Kitsune (Mirsky et al.
(2018)), an ensemble of autoencoders used for online network intrusion detection. Kitsune uses packet
statistics which are fed into a feature mapper that divides the features between the autoencoders, to ensure
fast online training and prediction. The RMSE output of each autoencoder is fed into another autoencoder
that provides the ﬁnal RMSE score used for anomaly detection. This architecture can be executed on small,
weak routers.
Clements et al. used four adversarial methods: FGSM, JSMA, C&W, and ENM (see Section 3). The
attacker uses the LPdistance on the feature space between the original input and the perturbed input as the
distance metric. Minimizing the L0norm correlates to altering a small number of extracted features. This
method has two main limitations: (1) The threat model assumes that the attacker knows the target classiﬁer’s
features, architecture, and hyperparameters. This makes this attack a white-box attack, rather than black-box
attack. This is a less realistic assumption in real-life scenarios. (2) Modiﬁcation is done at the feature level
(i.e., modifying only the feature vector) and not at the sample level (i.e., modifying the network stream). This
means that there is no guarantee that those perturbations can be performed without harming the malicious
functionality of the network stream. The fact that some of the features are statistical makes the switch from
vector modiﬁcation to sample modiﬁcation even more challenging.
Lin et al. (2018) generated adversarial examples using a GAN, called IDSGAN, in which the GAN’s
discriminator obtains the labels from the black-box target classiﬁer. The adversarial examples are evaluated
against several target classiﬁers: SVM, naive Bayes, MLP, logistic regression, decision tree, random forest,
and k-nearest neighbors classiﬁers. This attack assumes knowledge about the target classiﬁer’s features,
making it a gray-box inference integrity attack. The features include individual TCP connection features
(e.g., the protocol type), domain knowledge-based features (e.g., a root shell was obtained), and statistical
features of the network sessions (like the percentage of connections that have SYN errors within a time
window). All features are extracted from the network stream (the NSL-KDD dataset was used; see Table
8). This attack generates a statistical feature vector, but the authors do not explain how to produce a real
malicious network stream that has those properties.
Yang et al. (2018) trained a DNN model to classify malicious behavior in a network using the same
features as Lin et al. (2018), achieving performance comparable to state-of-the-art NIDS classiﬁers, and
then showed how to add small perturbations to the original input to lead the model to misclassify malicious
network packets as benign while maintaining the maliciousness of these packets, this attack assumes that
an adversary without internal information on the DNN model is trying to launch black-box attack. Three