Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
different black-box attacks were attempted by the adversary: an attack based on zeroth order optimization
(ZOO; see Section 3), an attack based on a GAN (similar to the one proposed by Lin et al. (2018)), and an
attack on which a substitute model is trained which is followed by a C&W attack (see Section 3) performed
against the substitute model. Applying the generated adversarial example against the target classiﬁer suc-
ceeds due to the transferability property (see Section 3). This paper has the same limitations as Lin et al.
(2018): this gray-box inference integrity attack assumes knowledge about the target classiﬁer’s features and
also generates only the feature vectors and not the samples themselves.
In their gray-box inference integrity attack, Rigaki and Elragal Rigaki and Elragal (2017) used the same
NSL-KDD dataset (see Table 8). Both FGSM and JSMA (see Section 3) attacks were used to generate
adversarial examples against an MLP substitute classiﬁer, and the results were evaluated against decision
tree, random forest, and linear SVM classiﬁers. This paper has the same limitations as Lin et al. (2018): this
attack assumes knowledge about the target classiﬁer’s features and also generates only the feature vectors
and not the samples themselves.
Warzynski and Kolaczek (2018) performed a white-box inference integrity feature vector attack against
an MLP classiﬁer trained on the NSL-KDD dataset (see Table 8). They used a white-box FGSM attack (see
Section 3). Wang (2018) added three more white-box attacks: JSMA, DeepFool, and C&W (see Section 3).
TheLpdistance and the perturbations are in the feature space in both cases. This attack is not an end-to-end
attack, so again it cannot be used to generate malicious network streams that bypass real-life classiﬁers.
Kuppa et al. (2019) proposed a query-efﬁcient gray-box inference integrity attack against deep unsu-
pervised anomaly detectors, which leverages a manifold approximation algorithm for query reduction and
generates adversarial examples using spherical local subspaces while limiting the input distortion and KL
divergence. Seven state-of-the-art anomaly detectors with different underlying architectures were evaluated:
a deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model, an autoencoder, anoGAN, adversarially learned anomaly de-
tection, deep support vector data description, one-class support vector machines, and isolation forests (see
Section 3), which is a more diverse set of classiﬁers than other attacks mentioned in this section, making
this attack more applicable, regardless of the classiﬁer deployed. All classiﬁers were trained on the CSE-
CIC-IDS2018 dataset and features (see Table 8). This dataset is more recent than the NSL-KDD dataset
used in much of the research mentioned in this section and better represent today’s threats. Unlike other
papers discussed in this section, the authors generated a full PCAP ﬁle (and not just feature vectors). They
also only modiﬁed features that could be modiﬁed without harming the network stream (e.g., time-based
features), so they actually created adversarial samples and not just feature vectors. However, they did not
run the modiﬁed stream in order to verify that the malicious functionality remains intact.
Ibitoye et al. (2019) attacked a fully connected DNN and a self-normalizing neural network classiﬁer
(an SNN is a DNN with a SeLU activation layer; Klambauer et al. (2017)) trained on the BoT-IoT dataset
and features (see Table 8), using FGSM (see Section 3), the basic iteration method, and the PGD at the
feature level. They showed that both classiﬁers were vulnerable, although SNN was more robust to adver-
sarial examples. This attack is unique in terms of the dataset and architectures used and demonstrates the
susceptibility of IoT SNN-based classiﬁers to adversarial attacks.
Huang et al. (2019) attacked port scanning detectors in a software-deﬁned network (SDN). The detectors
were MLP, CNN, and LSTM classiﬁers trained on features extracted from Packet-In messages (used by port
scanning tools like Nmap in the SDN) and switch monitoring statistic messages (STATS). The white-box
inference integrity attacks used were FGSM and JSMA (see Section 3). The JSMA attack was also (suc-
cessfully) conducted on regular trafﬁc packets (JSMA reverse) to create false negatives, creating noise and
confusion in the network (a white-box training availability attack). While this attack requires permissions
not available to a regular attacker (knowledge of the classiﬁer’s architecture, etc.), it shows the susceptibility
of port scanning classiﬁers to adversarial attacks.