Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
Taheri et al. (2019) trained a CNN classiﬁer on the CASIA dataset of images of iris and ﬁngerprint
data. They implemented a white-box inference integrity attack using the FGSM, JSMA, DeepFool, C&W,
and PGD methods to generate the perturbed images. This attack uses a white-box approach, making it less
feasible in real-life scenarios.
Soleymani et al. (2019a,b) generated adversarial examples for code-based iris recognition systems, us-
ing a gray-box inference integrity attack. However, conventional iris code generation algorithms are not
differentiable with respect to the input image. Generating adversarial examples requires backpropagation of
the adversarial loss. Therefore, they used a deep autoencoder substitute model to generate iris codes that
were similar to iris codes generated by a conventional algorithm (OSIRIS). This substitute model was used
to generate the adversarial examples using FGSM, iGSM, and Deepfool attacks. The attack of iris codes can
serve as the initial step toward end-to-end adversarial attacks against biometric systems.
6 Adversarial Defense Methods in the Cyber Security Domain
Our taxonomy focuses on the attack side, but every attack is accompanied by a corresponding defense
method.
If adversarial attacks are equivalent to malware attacking a computer (a machine learning model), then
defense methods can be viewed as anti-malware products. However, most defense methods have been evalu-
ated in the image recognition domain for CNNs and in the NLP domain for RNNs. Due to space limitations,
we cannot provide a complete list of the state-of-the-art prior work in those domains. A more comprehensive
list can be found, e.g., in Qiu et al. (2019).
Several papers presenting attacks in the cyber security domain (e.g., Grosse et al. (2017); Sidi et al.
(2019)) discuss the fact that the attack is effective even in the presence of well-known defense methods
that were evaluated and found effective in the computer vision domain (e.g., distillation and adversarial
retraining). However, only a few defense methods were developed speciﬁcally for the cyber security domain
and its unique challenges, like those described in Section 2. Furthermore, cyber security classiﬁers usually
have a different architecture than computer vision classiﬁers, against which most of the methods presented
in prior research were evaluated.
Adversarial defense methods can be divided into two subgroups: (1) detection methods - methods used
to detect adversarial examples, and (2) robustness methods - methods used to make a classiﬁer more robust
to adversarial examples, without explicitly trying to detect them.
Each defense method is either attack-speciﬁc (i.e., it requires adversarial examples generated by the
attack in order to mitigate the attack) or attack-agnostic (i.e., it works against all types of attack methods,
without the need to have a dataset of adversarial examples generated by those attacks). Attack-agnostic
defense methods are more generic and are therefore preferable.
In the malware detection sub-domain, Chen et al. (2018b) suggested an attack-agnostic method to make
an Android malware classiﬁer robust to poisoning attacks. Their method includes two phases: an ofﬂine
training phase that selects and extracts features from the training set and an online detection phase that
utilizes the classiﬁer trained by the ﬁrst phase. These two phases are intertwined through a self-adaptive
learning scheme, in which an automated camouﬂage detector is introduced to ﬁlter the suspicious false
negatives and feed them back into the training phase. Stokes et al. (2017) evaluated three attack-agnostic
robustness defense methods: weight decay, an ensemble of classiﬁers, and distillation (neural network com-
pression, resulting in gradient masking) for a dynamic analysis malware classiﬁer based on a non-sequence
based deep neural network. Rosenberg et al. (2019) tried to defend an API call-based RNN classiﬁer and