Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
magnitude Rosenberg and Gudes (2016)), the knowledge required is rarely available in real-world use cases.
However, white-box knowledge can be gained either through internal knowledge or by using a staged attack
to reverse engineer the model beforehand Tram `er et al. (2016). Each type of attack (black-box, gray-box,
etc.) has a query-efﬁcient variant in which the adversary has only a limited number of queries (in each
query the adversary inserts input into the classiﬁer and obtains its classiﬁcation label), and not an unlimited
amount of queries, as in the variants mentioned above. A query-efﬁcient variant is relevant in the case of
cloud security services (e.g., Rosenberg et al. (2020b)). In such services, the attacker pays for every query
of the target classiﬁer and therefore aims to minimize the number of queries made to the cloud service when
performing an attack. Another reason for minimizing the number of queries is that many queries from the
same computer might arouse suspicion of an adversarial attack attempt, causing the cloud service to stop
responding to those queries. Such cases require query-efﬁcient attacks.
4.3 Attacker’s Training Set Access
Another important characteristic of an attack, sometimes considered part of the threat model, is the access
the adversary has to the training set used by the classiﬁer (as opposed to access to the model itself, mentioned
in the previous subsection). The attacker’s training set access is categorized as follows: (1) None - no access
to the training set, (2) Read data from the training set (entirely or partially), (3) Add new samples to the
training set, and (4) Modify existing samples (modifying either all features or just speciﬁc features, e.g., the
label). For instance, poisoning attacks require addormodify permissions.
4.4 Targeted Phase
This attack characteristic is sometimes considered part of the attack type. Adversarial attacks against ma-
chine learning systems occur in two main phases of the machine learning process: (1) Training Phase attack
- This attack aims to introduce vulnerabilities (to be exploited in the classiﬁcation phase) by manipulat-
ing training data during the training phase. For instance, a poisoning attack can be performed by inserting
crafted malicious samples labeled as benign to the training set as part of the baseline training phase of a
classiﬁer, (2) Inference Phase attack - This attack aims to ﬁnd and subsequently exploit vulnerabilities in
the classiﬁcation phase. In this phase, the attacker modiﬁes only samples from the test set. For example, an
evasion attack involves modifying the analyzed malicious sample’s features in order to evade detection by
the model. Such inputs are called adversarial examples .
Note that attacks on online learning systems (for instance, anomaly detection systems Clements et al.
(2019)) combine both training phase and inference phase attacks: the attack is an evasion attack, but if it
succeeds, the classiﬁer learns that this trafﬁc is legitimate, making additional such attacks harder to detect
by the system (i.e., there is a poisoning effect). Such attacks would be termed inference attacks in this paper,
since in this case, the poisoning aspect is usually a by-product, and is not the attacker’s main goal. Moreover,
even if the poisoning aspect is important to the attacker, it would usually be successful only if the evasion
attack works, so evasion is the primary goal of the attacker in any case.
4.5 Attack’s Targeting
This characteristic is sometimes considered part of the attack type. Each attack has a different targeting,
deﬁning the trigger conditions or the desired effect on the classiﬁer: (1) Label-Indiscriminate attack - Always
minimizes the probability of correctly classifying a perturbed sample (the adversarial example), (2) Label-
Targeted attack - Always maximizes the probability of a speciﬁc class to be predicted for the adversarial