Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
5 Adversarial Attacks in the Cyber Security Domain
Our paper addresses adversarial attacks in the cyber security domain. An overview of this section is provided
in Tables 1-7. Target classiﬁer abbreviations are speciﬁed in Appendix A. The attack type includes the
attacker’s goals, the targeted phase, and the attack’s targeting. The threat model includes the attacker’s
knowledge and training set access. Unless otherwise mentioned, a gray-box attack requires knowledge of
the target classiﬁer’s features, the attack’s targeting is label-indiscriminate, and the attacker’s training set
access is none . Some of the columns are not a part of our taxonomy (Section 4) but provide additional
relevant information that may be helpful for understanding the attacks, such as the target classiﬁers.
Each of the following subsections represents a speciﬁc cyber security domain that uses adversarial learn-
ing and discusses the adversarial learning methods used in this domain. While there are other domains in
cyber security, we focused only on domains in which substantial adversarial learning research has been per-
formed. Due to space limits, this review paper covers only the state of the art in the abovementioned areas
and not all adversarial attacks, especially in large and diverse domains, such as biometric or cyber-physical
systems. The strengths and weaknesses of each adversarial attack are analyzed throughout this section.
For the reader’s convenience, we have summarized the analysis in Tables 1-7 using the following Boolean
parameters:
(1) Reasonable attacker knowledge – Is the attack a gray-box or black-box attack, both of which re-
quire a reasonable amount of knowledge (+ value in Tables 1-7) or a white-box attack, which requires an
unreasonable amount of knowledge (- value in Tables 1-7) in the cyber security domain?
(2) End-to-end attack – Does the attack have an end-to-end attack output (deﬁned in Section 4.7)? Such
attacks are considered more feasible attacks (+ value in Tables 1-7), while feature vector attacks (deﬁned in
Section 4.7) are considered less feasible (- value in Tables 1-7).
(3) Effective attack – Is the attack effective (success rate greater than 90%) for the attack use case (+
value in Tables 1-7), or ineffective (success rate lower than 90%; - value in Tables 1-7)?
(4) Representative dataset - Is the dataset used representative of the relevant threats in the wild (+ value
in Tables 1-7), or is it just a subset (or old variants) of those threats (- value in Tables 1-7)?
(5) Representative features - Are the features used in the classiﬁers being attacked similar to those being
used in real-life security products (+ value in Tables 1-7) or not (- value in Tables 1-7)?
The mathematical background for the deep learning classiﬁers is provided in Appendix A, and the math-
ematical background for the commonly used adversarial learning attacks in the cyber security domain is
provided in Section 3.
Note that while the classiﬁers the attacker tries to subvert are mentioned brieﬂy in order to provide
context helpful for understanding the attack, a complete list of the state-of-the-art prior work is not provided
due to space limits. A more comprehensive list can be found, e.g., in Berman et al. (2019). Cases in
which an adversarial attack does not exist for a speciﬁc application type are omitted. This paper also does
not review adversarial attacks in non-cyber domains, such as image recognition (with the exception of the
face recognition domain which is addressed in Section 5.6.1, which is cyber related). It also does not cover
papers related to cyber security, but not to adversarial learning, such as the use of machine learning to bypass
CAPTCHA.
5.1 Malware Detection and Classiﬁcation
Next generation antivirus (NGA V) products, such as Cylance, CrowdStrike, SentinelOne, and Microsoft
ATP use machine and deep learning models instead of signatures and heuristics, allowing them to detect
unseen and unsigned malware but also leaving them open to attacks against such models.