Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
Given recent advancements in the computer vision domain, e.g., sponge examples Shumailov et al.
(2020), which are adversarial examples whose classiﬁcation requires 10-200 times the resources of classify-
ing a regular sample, we believe it is only a matter of time before such examples will reach the cyber security
domain, e.g., PE ﬁles that take a very long to classify.
7.3 Attacker’s Goals and Knowledge Gap: Conﬁdentiality Attacks via Model Queries
and Side-Channels
Reverse engineering (reversing) of traditional (non-ML-based) anti-malware is a fundamental part of a mal-
ware developer’s modus operandi. So far, conﬁdentiality attacks have only been conducted against image
recognition models and not against cyber security related models, e.g., malware classiﬁers. However, per-
forming such attacks in the cyber security domain might provide the attacker with enough data to perform
more effective white-box attacks, instead of black-box ones.
In the image recognition domain, conﬁdentiality attacks have been conducted by querying the target
model. Tram `er et al. (2016) formed a query-efﬁcient gray-box (the classiﬁer type should be known) score-
based attack. The attack used equation solving to recover the model’s weights from sets of observed sample-
conﬁdence score pairs (x;h(x))retrieved by querying the target model. For instance, a set of nsuch pairs is
enough to retrieve the nweights of a logistic regression classiﬁer using n-dimensional input vectors. Wang
and Gong (2018) used a similar approach to retrieve the model’s hyperparameters (e.g., the factor of the
regularization term in the loss function equation).
In non-cyber domains, conﬁdentiality attacks have also been conducted via side-channel information.
Duddu et al. (2018) used timing attack side-channels to obtain neural network architecture information.
Batina et al. (2019) used electromagnetic radiation to get neural network architecture information from
embedded devices. Hua et al. (2018) used both a timing side-channel and off-chip memory access attempts
during inference to discover on-chip CNN model architecture.
7.4 Perturbed Features Gap: Exploiting Vulnerabilities in Machine and Deep Learn-
ing Frameworks
In non-ML based cyber security solutions, vulnerabilities are commonly used to help attackers reach their
goals (e.g., use buffer overﬂows to run adversary-crafted code in a vulnerable process). A vulnerability in the
underlying application or operating system is a common attack vector for disabling or bypassing a security
product. This trend is starting to be seen in the adversarial learning domain against image classiﬁers, however
such attacks have not been demonstrated against malware classiﬁers. Such vulnerabilities are specialized,
and should be researched explicitly for the proper cyber use cases in order to be effective.
In the image recognition domain, Xiao et al. (2018) discovered security vulnerabilities in popular deep
learning frameworks (Caffe, TensorFlow, and Torch). Stevens et al. (2017) did the same for OpenCV (a com-
puter vision framework), scikit-learn (a machine learning framework), and Malheur Rieck et al. (2011) (a
dynamic analysis framework used to classify unknown malware using a clustering algorithm). By exploiting
these frameworks’ implementations, attackers can launch denial-of-service attacks that crash or hang a deep
learning application, or control-ﬂow hijacking attacks that lead to either system compromise or recognition
evasions.
We believe that future adversarial attacks can view the deep learning framework used to train and run
the model as a new part of the attack surface, leveraging vulnerabilities in the framework, which can even
be detected automatically by a machine learning model (as reviewed in Ghaffarian and Shahriari (2017)).
Some of these vulnerabilities can be used to add data to input in a way that would cause the input to be