Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
Feng et al. (2017) presented a gray-box inference integrity attack against a LSTM anomaly detector us-
ing a GAN (see Appendix A) with a substitute model as a discriminator. Two use cases were evaluated: gas
pipeline and water treatment plant sensor data. Li et al. (2020a) presented a gray-box inference integrity at-
tack against the same dataset, but used a constraint-based adversarial machine learning to adhere the intrinsic
constraints of the physical systems, modeled by mathematical constraints derived from normal sensor data.
This attack targets LSTM classiﬁers, which are commonly used in ICS, making this an important attack.
Erba et al. (2019) demonstrated inference integrity and availability attacks against an autoencoder-based
anomaly detection system of water treatment plant sensor data. Access to both the ICS features and benign
sensor data (to train a substitute model) is assumed, making this attack a gray-box attack. This attack
enumerates all possible operations for every sensor. This attack targets autoencoder classiﬁers, which are
commonly used to detect anomalies, as done in ICSs, making this an important attack.
Yaghoubi and Fainekos (2019) presented a gray-box inference integrity attack against a steam condenser
with an RNN-based anomaly detector that monitors continuous (e.g., signal) data. The attack uses gradient-
based local search with either uniform random sampling or simulated annealing optimization to ﬁnd the data
to modify.
5.6 Biometric Systems
In this subsection, we focus on attacks that target the most commonly used biometric systems that leverage
machine learning: face, speech, and iris recognition systems. While these attacks can be viewed as computer
vision (or audio) attacks, we focus only on such attacks that affect cyber security authentication thus allowing
unauthorized users access to the protected systems. Many studies have focused on adversarial attacks against
other types of biometric systems, for instance: handwritten signature veriﬁcation (Hafemann et al. (2019)),
EEG biometrics ( ¨Ozdenizci et al. (2019)), and gait biometric recognition (Prabhu et al. (2017)). However,
as previously mentioned, these are not discussed here due to space limitations. A summary of the attacks
against biometric systems is presented in Table 7.
5.6.1 Face Recognition
Sharif et al. (2016) presented an inference integrity attack against face recognition systems. The target clas-
siﬁer for the white-box attack was VGG-Face, a 39 layer CNN (Parkhi et al. (2015)). The target classiﬁer
for the black-box attack was the Face++ cloud service. Instead of perturbing arbitrary pixels in the facial
image, this attack only perturbed the pixels of eyeglasses which were worn by the attacker so the attacker
would either be classiﬁed as another person (label-target attack) or not be classiﬁed as himself (indiscrim-
inate attack). Both attacks are feature-targeted. Sharif et al. used a commodity inkjet printer to print the
front plane of the eyeglass frames on glossy paper, which they then afﬁxed to the actual eyeglass frames
when physically performing attacks. This makes this end-to-end attack interesting, as it can be used (in its
black-box variant) in real-life scenarios.
Both Chen et al. (2017a) and Liu et al. (2018) used a black-box training integrity poisoning attack against
face recognition systems. The CNN target classiﬁers were VGG-Face (Parkhi et al. (2015)) and DeepID (Sun
et al. (2014)) respectively. Liu et al. used a non-physical image, such as a square appearing in the picture,
as the Trojan trigger in the picture to be labeled as a different person. In Chen et al. (2017a), the poisoned
facial images contained a physical accessory as the key; a photo of a person taken directly from the camera
can then become a backdoor when the physical accessory is worn; thus, this is both a feature-targeted and a
label-targeted attack. Both attacks require training set addaccess. Despite the fact that these are white-box
attacks, the usage of feature-targeting ﬁts nicely with some forms of real-life attacks, such as supply-chain