Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
compared their own RNN attack-agnostic robustness defense method, termed sequence squeezing, to four
robustness defense methods inspired by existing CNN-based defense methods: adversarial retraining (re-
training the classiﬁer after adding adversarial examples), defense GAN (generating several samples using a
GAN and using the closest one to the original input as the classiﬁer’s input), nearest neighbor classiﬁcation,
and RNN ensembles. They showed that sequence squeezing provides the best trade-off between training and
inference overhead (which is less critical in the computer vision domain) and adversarial robustness.
For DGA detection, Sidi et al. (Sidi et al., 2019) evaluated the robustness defense methods of adversar-
ial retraining (attack-speciﬁc) and distillation (attack-agnostic), showing that they improve the robustness
against adversarial attacks.
For CPS defense, Kravchic and Shabtai Kravchik and Shabtai (2019) suggested detecting adversarial
attacks in ICS data using 1D CNNs and undercomplete autoencoders (UAEs), an attack-agnostic method.
The authors demonstrate that attackers must sacriﬁce much of their attack’s potential damage to remain
hidden from the detectors. Ghafouri et al. (2018) presented robust linear regression and neural network
regression-based anomaly detectors for CPS anomalous data detection by modeling a game between the
defender and attacker as a Stackelberg game in which the defender ﬁrst commits to a collection of thresholds
for the anomaly detectors, and the attacker then computes an optimal attack. The defender aims to minimize
the impact of attacks, subject to a constraint typically set to achieve a target number of false alarms without
consideration of attacks.
For spam detection, Alzantot et al. (2018) evaluated the attack-speciﬁc robustness defense methods of
adversarial retraining against RNN classiﬁers, showing that such methods improve robustness against adver-
sarial attacks.
For biometric systems defense methods, Taheri et al. (2019) presented an attack-speciﬁc detection ar-
chitecture that includes shallow and deep neural networks to defend against biometric adversarial examples.
The shallow neural network is responsible for data preprocessing and generating adversarial samples. The
deep neural network is responsible for understanding data and information, as well as for detecting adver-
sarial samples. The deep neural network gets its weights from transfer learning, adversarial training, and
noise training. Specht et al. (2018) suggested an attack-speciﬁc robustness defense method using an iter-
ative adversarial retraining process to mitigate adversarial examples for semi-conductor anomaly detection
system of sensor data. Soleymani et al. (2019a) used an attack-agnostic robustness defense method involv-
ing wavelet domain denoising of the iris samples, by investigating each wavelet sub-band and removing the
sub-bands that are most affected by the adversary.
In our opinion, other defense methods proposed for the computer vision domain could inspire similar
defense methods in the cyber domain. However, their effectiveness in the cyber security domain would need
to be evaluated, since as discussed above, the cyber security domain is different and has unique challenges.
Furthermore, in the cyber security domain further emphasis should be put on the defense method overhead
(as done, e.g., in Rosenberg et al. (2019)), since cyber security classiﬁers usually perform their classiﬁcation
in real-time, meaning that low overhead is critical, unlike in the computer vision domain. Finally, we
believe that te research attention should be given to attack-agnostic defense methods, as attack-speciﬁc
defense methods (e.g., adversarial retraining) provide a very narrow defense against the growing variety of
adversarial attacks presented in this study.