Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
Figure 1: Chronological overview of the taxonomy
A taxonomy for the adversarial domain in general exists (e.g., Barreno et al. (2010)) and inspired our
taxonomy. However, the cyber security domain has a few unique challenges, described in the previous
section, necessitating a different taxonomy to categorize the existing attacks, with several new parts, e.g.,
the attack’s output, attack’s targeting, and perturbed features.
Our proposed taxonomy is shown in Figure 1. The attacks are categorized based on seven distinct attack
characteristics, which are sorted by four chronological phases of the attack:
1) Threat Model - The attacker’s knowledge and capabilities, known prior to the attack. The threat model
includes the training set access and attacker’s knowledge.
2) Attack Type - These characteristics are a part of the attack implementation. The attack type includes
the attacker’s goals, the targeted phase, and the attack’s targeting.
3) The features modiﬁed (or perturbed) by the attack.
4) The attack’s output.
A more detailed overview of our proposed taxonomy, including possible values for the seven characteris-
tics, is shown in Figure 2. The seven attack characteristics (attacker’s goals, attacker’s knowledge, attacker’s
training set access, targeted phase, attack’s targeting, perturbed features, and attack’s output) are described
in the subsections that follow.
We include these characteristics in our taxonomy for the following reasons:
1) These characteristics are speciﬁc to the cyber domain (e.g., perturbed features and attack’s output).
2) These characteristics are especially relevant to the threat model, which plays a much more critical
role in the cyber security domain, where white-box attack are less valuable than in other domains, since
the knowledge of adversaries in the cyber security domain about the classiﬁer architecture is usually very
limited (e.g., attacker’s knowledge, the attacker’s training set access, and the targeted phase).
3) These characteristics highlight missing research in the cyber security domain, which exists in other
domains of adversarial learning. Such research is speciﬁed in Section 7 7 (e.g., attack’s targeting).
4) These characteristics exist in many domains but have a different emphasis (and are therefore more
important) in the cyber security domain (for example, if we analyze the attacker’s goal characteristic, avail-
ability attacks are of limited use in other domains, but they are very relevant in the cyber security domain).
4.1 Attacker’s Goals
This characteristic of the attack is sometimes considered part of the attack type. An attacker aims to achieve
one or more of the following goals (a.k.a. the CIA triad): (1) Conﬁdentiality - Acquire private information
by querying the machine learning system, e.g., stealing the classiﬁer’s model (Tram `er et al. (2016)), (2)
Integrity - Cause the machine learning system to perform incorrectly for some or all input; for example,
to cause a machine learning-based malware classiﬁer to misclassify a malware sample as benign (Srndic
and Laskov (2014)), and (3) Availability - Cause a machine learning system to become unavailable or block
regular use of the system; for instance, to generate malicious sessions which have many of the features of