Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
This means that we should not only take into account the impact of a feature on the prediction, but also
the difﬁculty of modifying this feature type. Unfortunately, there is currently no numeric metric to assess
the difﬁculty of modifying features. Currently, we must rely on the subjective opinion of experts who assess
the difﬁculty of modifying each feature type, as shown in Katzir and Elovici Katzir and Elovici (2018).
When such a metric becomes available, combining it with the maximum impact metric would be a better
optimization constraint than minimal perturbation.
In conclusion, both from an adversary’s perspective (when trying to decide which attack to use) and from
the defender’s perspective (when trying to decide which classiﬁer would be the most robust to adversarial
attack), the metric of evaluation currently remains an open question in the cyber security domain.
7.6.2 Defense Methods Combining Domain-Speciﬁc and Domain-Agnostic Techniques
Domain-speciﬁc constraints and properties have been leveraged in the computer vision domain. For instance,
thefeature squeezing method mentioned in Xu et al. (2018) applied image-speciﬁc dimensionality reduction
transformations to the input features, such as changing the image color depth (e.g., from 24 bit to 8 bit), in
order to detect adversarial examples in images.
We argue that the same approach can be applied in the cyber security domain, as well. In the cyber
security domain, there are very complex constraints on the raw input. For instance, a PE ﬁle has a very
strict format (in order to be loadable by the Windows operating system), with severe limitations on the
PE header metadata values, etc. Such constraints can be leveraged to detect “domain-speciﬁc anomalies”
more accurately. For example, the attacks used to evade malware classiﬁers in Rosenberg and Meir (2020);
Rosenberg et al. (2020a) involved concatenation of strings from the IAT to the EOF/PE overlay; while such
concatenation generates a valid PE, one might ask whether it makes sense for such strings to be appended to
the EOF instead of, e.g., being in the data section or a resource section.
7.6.3 Defense Methods Robust to Unknown and Transparent-Box Adversarial Attacks
There are two main challenges when developing a defense method:
The ﬁrst challenge is creating a defense method which is also robust against transparent-box attacks, i.e.,
attackers who know what defense methods are being used and select their attack methods accordingly.
In the computer vision domain, Tramer et al. (2020); Carlini and Wagner (2017a) showed that many
different types of commonly used defense methods (e.g., detection of adversarial examples using statistical
irregularities) are rendered useless by a speciﬁc type of adversarial attack. He et al. (2017) showed the same
for feature squeezing, and Athalye et al. (2018); Hashemi et al. (2018); Ilyas et al. (2017) presented similar
results against Defense-GAN.
Similar research should be conducted in the cyber security domain. For instance, attackers can make
their attack more robust against RNN subsequence model ensembles presented in Rosenberg et al. (2019)
by adding perturbations across the entire API call sequence and not just until the classiﬁcation changes.
The second challenge is creating defense methods that are effective against all attacks and not just spe-
ciﬁc ones, termed attack-agnostic defense methods in Rosenberg et al. (2019). However, the challenge of
ﬁnding a metric to evaluate the robustness of classiﬁers to adversarial attacks in the cyber security domain,
already discussed in Section 7.6.1, makes the implementation of attack-agnostic defense methods in the
cyber security domain more challenging than in other domains.