Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
misclassiﬁed, just as adversarial perturbation would, but by subverting the framework instead of subverting
the algorithm. This can be viewed as an extension of the perturbed features attack characteristics in our
taxonomy.
7.5 Attack’s Output Gap: End-to-End Attacks in Complex Format Sub Domains
As discussed in Section 4.7, only end-to-end attacks can be used to attack systems in the cyber security
domain. Some sub-domains, such as email, have a simple format and therefore it is easier to map from
features (words) back to a sample (email) and create an end-to-end attack. However, in more complex sub-
domains, such as NIDS and CPS, the mapping from features to a full sample (e.g., a network stream) is
complex. As can be seen in Sections 5.3 and 5.5, only a small number of attacks in the NIDS and CPS
sub-domains (less than 10%) are end-to-end attacks.
We predict that the trend seen in the computer vision domain, where after several years of feature vector
attacks (e.g., Goodfellow et al. (2015)), end-to-end attacks followed Eykholt et al. (2018), will also be seen
in the cyber security domain. There will likely be three directions for such end-to-end attacks: 1) Adding
new features to an existing sample, e.g., Li et al. (2020b); Rosenberg et al. (2018); Srndic and Laskov (2014).
2) Modifying only a subset of features that can be modiﬁed without harming the functionality of an existing
sample, e.g., Rosenberg et al. (2020a); Kuppa et al. (2019). 3) Using cross-sample transformations (e.g.,
packing) that would change many features simultaneously Rosenberg et al. (2020a); Anderson et al. (2018).
7.6 Adversarial Defense Method Gaps
The gaps in the domain of defense methods against adversarial attacks in the cyber security domain is acute,
because this domain involves actual adversaries: malware developers who want to evade next generation
machine and deep learning-based classiﬁers. Such attacks have already been executed in the wild against
static analysis deep neural networks Cyl ([n.d.]). We have mapped two gaps speciﬁc to the cyber security
domain, which are shown below.
7.6.1 Metrics to Measure the Robustness of Classiﬁers to Adversarial Examples
Several papers (Katz et al. (2017); Weng et al. (2018); Peck et al. (2017)) suggested measuring the robustness
of machine learning systems to adversarial attacks by approximating the lower bound on the perturbation
needed for any adversarial attack to succeed; the larger the perturbation, the more robust the classiﬁer.
However, these papers assume that the robustness to adversarial attacks can be evaluated by the minimal
perturbation required to modify the classiﬁer’s decision. This raises the question of whether this metric is
valid in the cyber security domain.
Section 2.2 leads us to the conclusion that minimal perturbation is not necessarily the right approach
for adversarial learning in the cyber security domain . As already mentioned in Biggio and Roli (2018),
maximum conﬁdence attacks, such as the Carlini and Wagner (C&W) attack (Section 3), are more effective.
However, this is not the complete picture.
As mentioned in Section 2.3, in the cyber security domain, classiﬁers usually use more than a single
feature type as input (e.g., both PE header metadata and byte entropy in Saxe and Berlin (2015)). Certain
feature types are easier to modify without harming the executable functionality than others. On the other
hand, an attacker can add as many strings as needed; in contrast to images, adding more strings (i.e., a larger
perturbation) is not more visible to the user than adding less strings, since the executable ﬁle is still a binary
ﬁle.