Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
types of malware that need to steal user information (e.g., keyloggers), spread across the network (worms),
or perform any other malicious functionality while remaining undetected.
A key step in deﬁning the proper taxonomy for the cyber security domain is answering this question:
Given the obvious relevance of the cyber security domain to adversarial attacks, why do most adversarial
learning researchers focus on computer vision? In addition to the fact that image recognition is a popular
machine learning research topic, another major reason for the focus on computer vision is that performing an
end-to-end adversarial attack in the cyber security domain is more difﬁcult than performing such an attack in
the computer vision domain. The differences between adversarial attacks performed in those two domains
and the challenges that arise in the cyber security domain are discussed in the subsections that follow.
2.1 Keeping (Malicious) Functionality Intact in the Perturbed Sample
Any adversarial executable ﬁle must preserve its malicious functionality after the sample’s modiﬁcation.
This might be the main difference between the image classiﬁcation and malware detection domains, and
pose the greatest challenge. In the image recognition domain, the adversary can change every pixel’s color
(to a different valid color) without creating an “invalid picture” as part of the attack. However, in the cyber
security domain, modifying an API call or arbitrary executable’s content byte value might cause the modiﬁed
executable to perform a different functionality (e.g., changing a WriteFile() call to ReadFile() ) or even crash
(if you change an arbitrary byte in an opcode to an invalid opcode that would cause an exception). The same
is true for network packets; perturbing a network packet in order to evade the network intrusion detection
system (NIDS) while keeping a valid packet structure is challenging.
In order to address this challenge, adversaries in the cyber security domain must implement their own
methods (which are usually feature-speciﬁc) to modify features in a way that will not break the functionality
of the perturbed sample, whether it is an executable, a network packet, or something else. For instance, the
adversarial attack used in Rosenberg et al. (2018) generates a new malware PE (portable executable) with a
modiﬁed API call trace in a functionality-preserving manner.
2.2 Small Perturbations Are Not Applicable for Discrete Features
In the computer vision domain, gradient-based adversarial attacks, e.g., the fast gradient sign method (FGSM)
(Section 3), generate a minimal random modiﬁcation to the input image in the direction that would most sig-
niﬁcantly impact the target classiﬁer prediction. A ‘small modiﬁcation’ (a.k.a. perturbation) can be, for
example, changing a single pixel’s color to a very similar color (a single pixel’s color can be changed from
brown to black to fool the image classiﬁer).
However, the logic of a ‘small perturbation’ cannot be applied to many cyber security features. Consider
a dynamic analysis classiﬁer that uses API calls. An equivalent to changing a single pixel’s color would be to
change a single API call to another API call. Even if we disregard what such a modiﬁcation would do to the
executable’s functionality (mentioned in the previous subsection), would one of the following be considered
a ‘small perturbation’ of the WriteFile() API call: (1) modifying it to ReadFile() (a different operation for
the same medium), or (2) modifying it to RegSetValueEx() (a similar operation for a different medium)?
The use of discrete features (e.g., API calls) which are not continuous or ordinal severely limits the use of
gradient-based attack methods (Section 3). The implications of this issue will be discussed in Section 7.6.1.