Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
Generalized attack methods, which are effective against several NLP classiﬁers, are a recent trend.
Kuleshov et al. (2018) implemented such a generalized black-box inference integrity attack to evade NLP
classiﬁers, including spam ﬁltering, fake news detection, and sentiment analysis. The greedy attack ﬁnds
semantically similar words (enumerating all possibilities to ﬁnd words with a minimal distance and score
difference from the original input) and replacing them in sentences with a high language model score. Three
classiﬁers were evaded: NB, LSTM, and a word-level 1D CNN.
Lei et al. (2018) did the same while using a joint sentence and word paraphrasing technique to maintain
the original semantics and syntax of the text. They attacked LSTM and a word-level 1D CNN trained on
same datasets used by Kuleshov et al. (2018), providing a more effective attack on many datasets, including
a spam ﬁltering dataset.
This interesting approach of generalization can be extended in the future by applying other NLP-based
attacks in the domain of spam adversarial examples.
5.5 Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs) and Industrial Control Systems (ICSs)
Cyber-physical systems (CPSs) and industrial control systems (ICSs) consist of hardware and software com-
ponents that control and monitor physical processes, e.g., critical infrastructure, including the electric power
grid, transportation networks, water supply networks, nuclear plants, and autonomous car driving. A sum-
mary of the attacks in the CPS sub-sdomain is provided in Table 6.
Specht et al. (2018) trained a fully connected DNN on the SECOM dataset, recorded from a semi-
conductor manufacturing process, which consists of 590 attributes collected from sensor signals and vari-
ables during manufacturing cycles. Each sensor data entry is labeled as either a normal or anomalous pro-
duction cycle. They used the FGSM white-box inference integrity feature vector attack to camouﬂage ab-
normal/dangerous sensor data so it appears normal. This attack uses a white-box approach, making it less
feasible in real-life scenarios.
Ghafouri et al. (2018) conducted a gray-box inference integrity attack on a linear regression-based
anomaly detector, a neural network regression anomaly detector, and an ensemble of both, using the TE-
PCS dataset, which contains sensor data describing two simultaneous gas-liquid exothermic reactions for
producing two liquid products. There are safety constraints that must not be violated (e.g., safety limits
for the pressure and temperature of the reactor), corresponding to the data. For the linear regression-based
anomaly detector, the problem of ﬁnding adversarial examples of sensor data can be solved using a mixed-
integer linear programming (MILP) problem. In order to bypass the neural network regression and ensemble,
an iterative algorithm is used. It takes small steps in the direction of increasing objective function. In each
iteration, the algorithm linearizes all of the neural networks at their operating points and solves the problem
using MILP as before. The mathematical approach taken in this attack (MILP) can be used in the future to
attack different models, e.g., auto-regressive models, with greater efﬁciency than current approaches.
Clark et al. (2018) used a Jaguar autonomous vehicle (JA V) to emulate the operation of an autonomous
vehicle. The driving and interaction with the JA V environment used the Q-learning reinforcement learning
algorithm. JA V acts as an autonomous delivery vehicle and transports deliveries from an origination point to
a destination location. The attacker’s goal is to cause the JA V to deviate from its learned route to an alternate
location where it can be ambushed. A white-box inference integrity attack was chosen with the goal of
compromising the JA V’s reinforcement learning (RL) policy and causing the deviation. The attack was
conducted by inserting an adversarial data feed into the JA V via its ultrasonic collision avoidance sensor.
This attack uses a white-box approach, making it less feasible in real-life scenarios. However, it attacks
reinforcement learning models which are frequently used in CPSs.