Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
Malware classiﬁers can either use static features gathered without running the code (e.g., n-gram byte se-
quence, strings, or structural features of the inspected code) or dynamic features (e.g., CPU usage) collected
during the inspected code execution.
While using static analysis provides a performance advantage, it has a major disadvantage: since the
code is not executed, the analyzed code might not reveal its “true features.” For example, when looking
for speciﬁc strings in the ﬁle, one might not be able to catch polymorphic malware, in which those features
are either encrypted or packed, and decrypted only during runtime by a speciﬁc bootstrap code. Fileless
attacks (code injection, process hollowing, etc.) are also a problem for static analysis. Thus, dynamic
features, extracted at runtime, can be used. The most prominent dynamic features that can be collected
during malware execution are the sequences of API calls (Kolbitsch et al. (2009)), particularly those made to
the OS, which are termed system calls. Those system calls characterize the software behavior and are harder
to obfuscate during execution time without harming the functionality of the code. The machine learning
techniques (and thus the attacks of them) can be divided into two groups: traditional (or shallow) machine
learning and deep learning techniques. A summary of the attacks in the malware detection sub-domain is
shown in Tables 1 and 2.
5.1.1 Attacking Traditional (Shallow) Machine Learning Malware Classiﬁers
Srndic and Laskov (2014) implemented an inference integrity gray-box evasion attack against PDFRATE,
a random forest classiﬁer for static analysis of malicious PDF ﬁles, using PDF structural features, e.g., the
number of embedded images or binary streams within the PDF. The attack used either a mimicry attack in
which features were added to the malicious PDF to make it “feature-wise similar” to a benign sample, or
created an SVM representation of the classiﬁer and subverted it using a method that follows the gradient of
the weighted sum of the classiﬁer’s decision function and the estimated density function of benign examples.
This ensures that the ﬁnal result lies close to the region populated by real benign examples. The density
function must be estimated beforehand, using the standard technique of kernel density estimation, and then
the transferability property is used to attack the original PDFRATE classiﬁer using the same PDF ﬁle. Li
et al. (2020b) performed an inference integrity gray-box attack against the same classiﬁer by using GAN-
generated feature vectors and transforming them back into PDF ﬁles. The main advantage of these attacks
is the fact that they are end-to-end attacks that produce a valid (malicious) PDF ﬁle, which evade detection.
The main problem is that very few malware have PDF ﬁle type. PE ﬁles, which are more common, were not
covered in this work.
Ming et al. (2015) used an inference integrity replacement attack, replacing API calls with different
functionality-preserving API subsequences (so gray-box knowledge about the monitored APIs is required)
to modify the malware code. They utilized a system-call dependence graph (SCDG) with the graph edit
distance and Jaccard index as clustering parameters of different malware variants and used several SCDG
transformations on their malware source code to move it to a different cluster. Their transformations can
cause similar malware variants to be classiﬁed as a different cluster, but they didn’t show that the attack
can cause malware to be classiﬁed (or clustered) as a benign program, which is usually the attacker’s main
goal. Xu et al. (2020) also implemented an inference integrity gray-box attack against a SCDG-based APK
malware classiﬁer, using n-strongest nodes and FGSM (see Section 3) methods. The main advantage of
these attacks is the fact that they are end-to-end attacks that produce a valid (malicious) binary (PE or APK,
respectively) ﬁle, which evade detection. The main problem is that the features used (SCDG) are not used
by real-life NGA V products.
Suciu et al. (2018b) and Chen et al. (2018b) used a training integrity poisoning attack against a linear
SVM classiﬁer trained on the Drebin dataset Arp et al. (2014) for Android malware detection. This attack