Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
where L(q;w)represents the loss function for the reconstruction.
A.5 Deep Autoencoding Gaussian Mixture Model (DAGMM)
The DAGMM (Zong et al. (2018)) uses two different networks, a deep autoencoder and a Gaussian mixture
model (GMM) based estimator network to determine whether a sample is anomalous or not.
A.6 AnoGAN
AnoGAN (Schlegl et al. (2017)) is GAN-based method for anomaly detection. This method involves training
a DCGAN (Radford et al. (2016)) and using it to recover a latent representation for each test data sample at
inference time. The anomaly score is a combination of reconstruction and discrimination components.
A.7 Adversarially Learned Anomaly Detection (ALAD)
ALAD (Zenati et al. (2018)) is based on a bidirectional GAN anomaly detector, which uses reconstruction
errors from adversarially learned features to determine if a data sample is anomalous. ALAD employs
spectral normalization and additional discriminators to improve the encoder and stabilize GAN training.
A.8 Deep Support Vector Data Description (DSVDD)
DSVDD (Ruff et al. (2018)) trains a deep neural network while optimizing a data-enclosing hypersphere in
the output space.
A.9 One-Class Support Vector Machine (OC-SVM)
The OC-SVM (Sch ¨olkopf et al. (1999)) is kernel-based method that learns a decision boundary around
normal examples.
A.10 Isolation Forest (IF)
An isolation forest (Liu et al. (2008)) is a partition-based method which isolates anomalies by building trees
using randomly selected split values.
B Commonly Used Datasets in The Cyber Security Domain
One of the major issues in cyber security related research is that, unlike the computer vision domain, there
are very few publicly available datasets containing malicious samples, as such samples are either private and
sensitive (e.g., benign emails for spam ﬁlters) or can cause damage (e.g., PE malware samples). Moreover,
the cyber security domain is rapidly evolving, so older datasets do not always accurately represent the rele-
vant threats in the wild. The lack of common datasets makes the comparison of attacks and defenses in the
cyber security domain challenging.
Table 8 lists some of the datasets that are publicly available in the cyber security domain and commonly
used to train the attacked classiﬁers mentioned in this paper.