Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
utilized in other domains, including natural language processing (e.g., Gao et al. (2018)). These attacks
have also been used recently in the cyber security domain (e.g., Rosenberg et al. (2018)). This domain
is particularly interesting, because it is rife with adversaries (e.g., malware developers who want to evade
machine and deep learning-based next generation antivirus products, spam ﬁlters, etc.). Adversarial learning
methods have already been executed against static analysis deep neural networks1.
The main goal of this paper is to illuminate the risks posed by adversarial learning to cyber security
solutions that are based on machine learning techniques. This paper contains: (1) an in-depth discussion
about the unique challenges of adversarial learning in the cyber security domain (Section 2), (2) a summary
of the state-of-the-art adversarial learning research papers in the cyber security domain, categorized by
application (Sections 5 and 6) and characterized by our uniﬁed taxonomy (deﬁned in Section 4), (3) a
discussion of the challenges associated with adversarial learning in the cyber security domain and possible
future research directions (Section 7), including issues relating to existing defense methods (and the lack
thereof), and (4) a summary of the theoretical background on the adversarial methods used in the cyber
security domain (Section 3). We focus on adversarial attacks and defenses against classiﬁers used in the
cyber security domain, and not on other topics, such as attacks on models’ interpretability (Kuppa and Le-
Khac (2020)) or methods to assist the model’s interpretability (Ross and Doshi-Velez (2018)).
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
1. We focus on a wide range of adversarial learning applications in the cyber security domain (e.g.,
malware detection, speaker recognition, cyber-physical systems, etc.), introduce a new uniﬁed taxonomy
and illustrate how existing research ﬁts into this taxonomy, providing a holistic overview of the ﬁeld. In
contrast, previous work focused mainly on speciﬁc domains, e.g., malware detection or network intrusion
detection.
2. Using our taxonomy, we highlight research gaps in the cyber security domain that have already
been addressed in other adversarial learning domains (e.g., Trojan neural networks in the image recognition
domain) and discuss their impact on current and future trends in adversarial learning in the cyber security
domain.
3. We discuss the unique challenges that attackers and defenders face in the cyber security domain,
challenges which do not exist in other domains (e.g., image recognition). For instance, in the cyber security
domain, the attacker must verify that the original functionality of the modiﬁed malware remains intact. Our
discussion addresses the fundamental differences between adversarial attacks performed in the cyber security
domain and those performed in other domains.
2 Preliminary Discussion: The Differences Between Adversarial At-
tacks in the Computer Vision and Cyber Security Domains
Most adversarial attacks published, including those published at academic cyber security conferences, have
focused on the computer vision domain, e.g., generating a cat image that would be classiﬁed as a dog by
the classiﬁer. However, the cyber security domain (e.g., malware detection) seems to be a more relevant
domain for adversarial attacks, because in the computer vision domain, there is no real adversary (with
a few exceptions, e.g., terrorists who want to tamper with autonomous cars’ pedestrian detection systems
(Eykholt et al. (2018)), deepfakes (Liu et al. (2020)) which might cause fake news or ﬁnancial fraud, etc.).
In contrast, in the cyber security domain, there are actual adversaries with clear targeted goals. Examples
include ransomware developers who depend on the ability of their ransomware to evade anti-malware prod-
ucts that would prevent both its execution and the developers from collecting the ransom money, and other
1https://skylightcyber.com/2019/07/18/cylance-i-kill-you/