Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
functionality (e.g., by inserting the ExitProcess() API call in the middle of the malware code), making this
attack infeasible in real-life scenarios.
Rosenberg et al. (2018) presented a gray-box inference integrity attack that adds API calls to an API call
trace used as input to an RNN malware classiﬁer, in order to bypass a classiﬁer trained on the API call trace
of the malware. A GRU substitute model was created and attacked, and the transferability property was
used to attack the original classiﬁer. The authors extended their attack to hybrid classiﬁers combining static
and dynamic features, attacking each feature type in turn. The target models were LSTM variants, GRUs,
conventional RNNs, bidirectional and deep variants, and non-RNN classiﬁers (including both feedforward
networks, like fully connected DNNs and 1D CNNs, and traditional machine learning classiﬁers, such as
SVM, random forest, logistic regression, and gradient boosted decision tree). The authors presented an
end-to-end framework that creates a new malware executable without access to the malware source code.
The variety of classiﬁers and the end-to-end framework ﬁts real-life scenarios, but the focus only on strings’
static features is limiting.
A subsequent work (Rosenberg et al. (2020b)) presented two query-efﬁcient gray-box inference integrity
attacks against the same classiﬁers, based on benign perturbations generated using a GAN that was trained
on benign samples. One of the gray-box attack variants requires the adversary to know which API calls
are being monitored, and the other one also requires the conﬁdence score of the target classiﬁer in order to
operate an evolutionary algorithm to optimize the perturbation search and reduce the number of queries used.
This attack is generic for every camouﬂaged malware and does not require a per malware pre-deployment
phase to generate the adversarial sequence (either using a GAN, as in Hu and Tan (2017a), or a substitute
model, as in Rosenberg et al. (2018)). Moreover, the generation is done at runtime, making it more generic
and easier to deploy.
5.2 URL Detection
Webpages are addressed by a uniform resource locator (URL). A URL begins with the protocol used to
access the page. The fully qualiﬁed domain name (FQDN) identiﬁes the server hosting the webpage. It
consists of a registered domain name (RDN) and preﬁx referred to as subdomains. A phisher has full control
of the subdomain and can set them to any value. The RDN is constrained, since it has to be registered with
a domain name registrar. The URL may also have a path and query components which also can be changed
by the phisher at will.
Consider this URL example: https://www.amazon.co.uk/ap/signin?encoding=UTF8. We can identify
the following components: protocol = https; FQDN = www.amazon.co.uk; RDN = amazon.co.uk; path and
query = /ap/signin?encoding=UTF8. A summary of the attacks in the URL detection sub domain is shown
in Table 3.
Since URLs can be quite long, URL shortening services have started to appear. In addition to shortening
the URL, these services also obfuscate them.
5.2.1 Phishing URL Detection
Phishing refers to the class of attacks where a victim is lured to a fake web page masquerading as a target
website and is deceived into disclosing personal data or credentials. Phishing URLs seem like legitimate
URLs and redirect the users to phishing web pages, which mimic the look and feel of their target websites
(e.g., a bank website), in the hopes that the user will enter his/her personal information (e.g., password).
Bahnsen et al. (2018) performed an inference integrity attack to evade a character-level LSTM-based
phishing URL classiﬁer (Bahnsen et al. (2017)), by concatenating the effective URLs from historical attacks