Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
attacks, where a powerful adversary wants to exploit a very speciﬁc scenario (e.g., evade detection of a
person only when he/she is holding a key).
5.6.2 Speaker Veriﬁcation/Recognition
Note that in this subsection, we only discuss speaker recognition and veriﬁcation system adversarial attacks.
Kreuk et al. (2018a) presented white-box inference integrity attacks on an LSTM/GRU classiﬁer that
was either trained on the YOHO or NTIMIT datasets using two types of features: Mel-spectrum features and
MFCCs. They also presented two black-box inference integrity attacks, using the transferability property. In
the ﬁrst one, they generated adversarial examples with a system trained on NTIMIT dataset and performed
the attack on a system that was trained on YOHO. In the second attack, they generated the adversarial
examples with a system trained using Mel-spectrum features and performed the attack on a system trained
using MFCCs. All of the attacks used the FGSM attack, and the attack output was a feature vector and not a
complete audio sample. This, and the fact that this attack uses a white-box approach, making it less feasible
in real-life scenarios
Gong and Poellabauer (2017) trained a WaveRNN model (a mixed CNN-LSTM model) on raw wave-
forms (the IEMOCAP dataset’s utterances; see Table 8) for speaker recognition, as well as emotion and
gender recognition. They used a substitute waveCNN model and performed a black-box inference integrity
attack using FGSM on the raw waveforms, rather than on the acoustic features, making this an end-to-end
attack that does not require an audio reconstruction step. The use of a gray-box approach and raw waveform
features makes this attack feasible in real-life scenarios.
Du et al. (2019) used six state-of-the-art speech command recognition CNN models: VGG19, DenseNet,
ResNet18, ResNeXt, WideResNet18, and DPN-92, all adapted to the raw waveform input. The models
were trained for speaker recognition on the IEMOCAP dataset (see Table 8) and for speech recognition,
sound event classiﬁcation, and music genre classiﬁcation using different datasets. The black-box inference
integrity attack used FGSM or particle swarm optimization (PSO) on the raw waveforms. The use of a
gray-box approach and raw waveform features and the evaluation against many classiﬁers make this attack
feasible in real-life scenarios.
Cai et al. (2018) trained a CNN classiﬁer that performs multi-speaker classiﬁcation using Mel-spectrograms
as input. They used a Wasserstein GAN with gradient penalty (WGAN-GP) to generate adversarial exam-
ples for an indiscriminate gray-box inference integrity attack and also used a WGAN-GP with a modiﬁed
objective function for a speciﬁc speaker for a targeted attack. The attack output is a feature vector of Mel-
spectrograms and not an audio sample. This attack uses a white-box approach, making it less feasible in
real-life scenarios.
5.6.3 Iris and Fingerprint Systems
Wang et al. (2018) performed an indiscriminate black-box inference integrity attack, leveraging the fact that
many image-based models, including face recognition and iris recognition models, use transfer learning, i.e.,
they add new layers on top of pretrained layers which are trained on a different model (a teacher model with a
known architecture) and are used to extract high-level feature abstractions from the raw pixels. For instance,
the face recognition model’s teacher model can be VGG-Face (Parkhi et al. (2015)), while an iris model’s
teacher model can be VGG16. By attacking the teacher model using white-box attacks, such as C&W, the
target model (student model), for which the architecture is unknown, is also affected. This approach can be
used to attack many classiﬁers, especially those in domains where transfer learning using a known model is
common, like the computer vision domain.