Accepted as a long survey paper at ACM CSUR 2021
5.4 Spam Filtering
The purpose of a spam ﬁlter is to determine whether an incoming message is legitimate (i.e., ham) or unso-
licited (i.e., spam). Spam detectors were among the ﬁrst applications to use machine learning in the cyber
security domain and therefore were the ﬁrst to be attacked. A summary of the attacks in the spam ﬁltering
sub domain is shown in Table 5.
Huang et al. (2011) attacked SpamBayes Robinson (2003), which is a content-based statistical spam ﬁlter
that classiﬁes email using token counts. SpamBayes computes a spam score for each token in the training
corpus based on its occurrence in spam and non-spam emails. The ﬁlter computes a message’s overall spam
score based on the assumption that the token scores are independent, and then it applies Fisher’s method
for combining signiﬁcance tests to determine whether the email’s tokens are sufﬁciently indicative of one
class or the other. The message score is compared against two thresholds to select the label: spam, ham (i.e.,
non-spam), or unsure.
Huang et al. (2011) designed two types of training availability attacks. The ﬁrst is an indiscriminate
dictionary attack, in which the attacker sends attack messages that contain a very large set of tokens—the
attack’s dictionary. After training on these attack messages, the victim’s spam ﬁlter will have a higher spam
score for every token in the dictionary. As a result, future legitimate email is more likely to be marked as
spam, since it will contain many tokens from that lexicon. The second attack is a targeted attack - the attacker
has some knowledge of a speciﬁc legitimate email he/she targets for incorrect ﬁltering. Nelson et al. (2008)
modeled this knowledge by letting the attacker know a certain fraction of tokens from the target email, which
are included in the attack message. Availability attacks like these are quite rare in the adversarial learning
landscape and open up interesting attack options, such as adversarial denial-of-service attacks (see Section
7.2).
Biggio et al. (2014) evaluated the robustness of linear SVM and logistic regression classiﬁers to a white-
box inference integrity attack where the attacker adds the most impactful good words and found that while
both classiﬁers have the same accuracy for unperturbed samples, the logistic regression classiﬁer outper-
forms the SVM classiﬁer in robustness to adversarial examples. The white-box approach used in this attack
is less feasible in real-life scenarios.
Br¨uckner et al. (2012) modeled the interaction between the defender and the attacker in the spam ﬁltering
domain as a static game in which both players act simultaneously, i.e., without prior information about their
opponent’s move. When the optimization criterion of both players depends not only on their own action
but also on their opponent’s move, the concept of a player’s optimal action is no longer well-deﬁned, and
thus the cost functions of the learner (the defender) and the data generator (the attacker) are not necessarily
antagonistic. The authors identiﬁed the conditions under which this prediction game has a unique Nash
equilibrium and derived algorithms that ﬁnd the equilibrial prediction model. From this equation, they
derived new equations for the Nash logistic regression and Nash SVM using custom loss functions. The
authors showed that both the attacker and the defender are better off respectively attacking and using the
Nash classiﬁers. While this attack took a different (more game theory focused) approach then other more
“conventional” attacks, its effectiveness is no different.
Sethi and Kantardzic (2018) trained several classiﬁers (linear SVM, k-nearest neighbors, SVM with RBF
kernel, decision tree, and random forest) on several datasets, including SPAMBASE for spam detection and
NSL-KDD (see Table 8) for network intrusion detection. They presented a gray-box inference integrity and
conﬁdentiality attack and a query-efﬁcient gray-box anchor point inference integrity attack which is effective
against all models. The uniqueness of this study lies in its focus on query-efﬁciency (thus making this attack
more feasible) and on the conﬁdentiality attack (trying to reverse engineer the attacked model, i.e., a model
inversion attack), which are quite rare in the spam ﬁltering domain.