4
Prosody prediction. We train our prosody predictor
via a unique data augmentation scheme. Since the duration
predictor is trained separately from other modules (using only
Ldur), the duration predictions it produces may not always be
optimal or compatible with the prosody predictor. To make the
prosody predictor more robust to these potentially suboptimal
duration predictions, we augment the data to introduce prosody
invariance over the duration.
More specifically, instead of using the ground truth alignment,
pitch, and energy of the original mel-spectrogram, we first apply
a 1-D bilinear interpolation to stretch or compress the mel-
spectrogram in time to obtain the augmented sample ˜x. As a
result, the speech speed changes, yet the pitch and energy curves
remain consistent. Accordingly, the prosody predictor learns to
maintain pitch and energy prediction invariance, regardless of
the duration of speech. This approach helps mitigate issues with
unnatural prosody when the predicted duration is incorrect.
We use Lf0andLn, which are F0 and energy reconstruction
loss, respectively:
Lf0=Ep˜x
∥p˜x−Pp(S(htext, s)·˜aalign)∥1
(9)
Ln=E˜x
∥n˜x−Pn(S(htext, s)·˜aalign)∥1
(10)
where p˜x,n˜xand˜aalignare the pitch, energy and alignment
of˜x∈˜Xthe augmented dataset. Ppdenotes the pitch output
from the prosody predictor, and Pndenotes the energy output.
Decoder reconstruction. Lastly, we aim to ensure that
the predicted pitch and energy can be effectively used by
the decoder. Given that the mel-spectrogram is stretched or
compressed during data augmentation, using them as the ground
truth may lead to unwanted artifacts in the predicted prosody.
Instead, we train the prosody predictor to produce pitch and
energy predictions that can effectively reconstruct the decoder’s
outputs
Lde=E˜x,t
∥ˆx−G(htext·˜aalign, s,ˆp,ˆn)∥1
, (11)
where ˆx=G(htext·˜aalign, s,˜p,∥˜x∥)is the reconstruction of
˜x∈˜X,ˆp=Pp(S(htext, s)·˜aalign)the predicted pitch and
ˆn=Pn(S(htext, s)·˜aalign)the predicted energy.
Second stage full objectives. Our full objective functions
in the second stage can be summarized as follows with
hyperparameters λdur, λf0, and λn:
min
S,L,PLde+λdurLdur+λf0Lf0+λnLn (12)
III. E XPERIMENTS
A. Datasets
We conducted experiments on three datasets. We trained
a single-speaker model on the LJSpeech dataset [ 44]. The
LJSpeech dataset consists of 13,100 short audio clips with a
total duration of approximately 24 hours. We used the same
split as VITS where the training set contains 12,500 samples,
the validation set 100 samples and the test set 500 samples. We
also trained a multi-speaker model on the LibriTTS dataset [ 45].
The LibriTTS train-clean-460 subset consists of approximately
(a) An example speaker from ESD
(b) Same reference audios on LJ
(c) Unseen speakers from VCTK
Fig. 2. t-SNE visualization of style vectors. All styles are learned without
explicit emotion or speaker labels. (a) Style vectors of reference audios in five
different emotions of the speaker 0017 in ESD, computed by the multi-speaker
model trained on ESD. (b) Style vectors of the same reference audios as in Fig.
2a, computed by the single-speaker model trained on the LJSpeech dataset.
(c) Style vectors from the model trained on the LibriTTS data of 10 unseen
speakers in the VCTK dataset.
245 hours of audio from 1,151 speakers. We removed utterances
with a duration longer than 30 seconds and shorter than one
second. We randomly split the train-clean-460 subset into a
training (98%), a validation (1%), and a test (1%) set and
use the test set for evaluation following [ 32]. We also used
the VCTK [ 46] dataset to show that our model is capable of
zero-shot speaker adaptation. We used the same training and
test speaker split as in [ 47] for VCTK, where 88 speakers were
used for training and the rest 20 were used for testing.
In addition, we trained a multi-speaker model on the
emotional speech dataset (ESD) [ 48] to demonstrate the capacity
to synthesize speech with diverse prosodic patterns. ESD
consists of 10 Chinese and 10 English speakers reading the
same 400 short sentences in five different emotions. We trained
our model on 10 English speakers with all five emotions. We