11
APPENDIX A
ABLATION STUDY DETAILS
In this section, we describe the detailed settings of each
condition in Table VII and provide more discussions of the
results in Table VII and Table VIII.
A. TMA-related
There are three Transferable Monotonic Aligner (TMA)
related innovations in this work: the decoder is trained with hard
monotonic alignment and soft attention in a 50%-50% manner
and two TMA objectives functions. The 50%-50% training
is motivated by the fact that the monotonic alignment search
proposed in [ 9] is not differentiable, and the soft attention
alignment does not necessarily provide correct alignments
for duration prediction in the second stage of training. This
50%-50% split is arbitrary and can be changed to anything
from 10%-90% to 90%-10%, depending on the dataset and
the application. When the ratio is 100%-0%, it becomes the
case where the external aligners are not fine-tuned like in
most parallel TTS systems such as FastSpeech [ 17], while
when the ratio is 0%-100%, it becomes the case we fine-tune
the aligner with only soft attention such as in Cotatron [ 66]
for voice conversion applications. We find that training with
external aligners (100% hard, no fine-tuning) decreases the
naturalness of the synthesized speech because bad alignments
can happen due to covariate shifts between the training dataset
(LibriSpeech) and testing dataset (LJSpeech) as in the case of
Montreal Forced Aligner [ 33]. One example is given in the
leftmost figure in Figure 5. On the other hand, if we only fine-
tune the decoder with soft alignment, the decoder will overfit on
the soft alignment and be unable to synthesize audible speech
from hard alignment because the soft alignments are not either
0 or 1 and the precise numerical values of alignments are used
by the decoder to generate speech.
Another notable case is when we do not use a pre-trained text
aligner such as in the case of VITS. This case makes MOS even
lower than the case of no fine-tuning, suggesting that overfitting
on a smaller dataset can be more detrimental than failure in
generalization on the TTS dataset for some samples. The figure
in the middle in Fig. 5 shows an alignment with gaps and no
background noises. This indicates overfitting of the text aligner
to the smaller dataset for the mel-spectrogram reconstruction
objective. However, since our goal is to synthesize the speech
from predicted alignment, overfitting to speech reconstruction
can be harmful to natural speech synthesis during inference.
In addition to the 50%-50% training, we also introduced
two TMA objectives Ls2sandLmono . This is motivated by
the fact that Ls2slearns correct alignments for S2S-ASR but
not necessarily monotonic while non-differentiable monotonic
alignments obtained through dynamic programming algorithms
proposed in [ 9] do not necessarily produce correct alignments.
By combining Ls2sandLmono , we can learn an aligner that
produces both correct and monotonic alignments.
B. AdaIN, AdaLN, and Concatenation
As shown in Table VII and Table VIII, AdaIN outperforms
AdaLN and simple concatenation for both naturalness and stylereflection. Here we describe our intuitions behind these results.
Concatenation vs. AdaIN. When we concatenate the style
vector to each frame of the encoded phonetic representations,
we create a representation hstyle="htext
—
s#
. When the hstyleis
passed to the next convolution layer whose parameter is W,
we get
hstyle·W="htext
—
s#
·[Wtext|Wstyle]
=htext·Wtext+s·Wstyle
=htext·Wtext+Concat (htext,s)(13)
where WtextandWstyle are block matrix notation of the
corresponding weights for hstyleandsandConcat (htext,s) =
s·Wstyledenotes the concatenation operation as a function
of input htextand style vector s. This Concat (x, s)function
is almost like AdaIN in equation 1 where Lµ(s) =Wstyle
except we do not have the temporal modulation term Lσ(s).
The modulation term is very important in style transfer, and
some works argue that modulation alone is enough for diverse
style representations [ 24], [67]. In contrast, concatenation only
provides the addition term ( Lµ) but no modulation term ( Lσ).
Intuitively, the modulation term can determine the variance of
the pitch and energy, for example, and therefore without such
a term, correlations for pitch and energy standard deviation are
much lower than AdaIN and AdaLN as shown in Table VIII.
AdaLN vs. AdaIN. Generative models for speech synthesis
learn to generate mel-spectrograms, which is essentially a 1-
D feature map with 80 channels. Each channel in the mel-
spectrogram represents a single frequency range. When we
apply AdaIN, we learn a distribution with a style-specific mean
and variance for each channel , compared to AdaLN, where
a single mean and variance are learned for the entire feature
map. This inherent difference between feature distributions
makes AdaIN more expressive in terms of style reflection than
AdaLN.
C. Pitch Extractor
Acoustic methods for pitch estimation sometimes fail because
of the presence of non-stationary speech intervals and sensitivity
of hyper-parameters as discussed in the original papers that
propose these methods [ 39], [41]. A neural network trained
with ground truth from these methods, however, can leverage
the problems of failed pitch estimation because the failed pitch
estimation can be regarded as noises in the training set, so it
does not affect the generalization of the pitch extractor network.
Moreover, since the pitch extractor is fine-tuned along with
the decoder, there is no ground truth for the pitch beside the
sole objective that the decoder needs to use extracted pitch
information to reconstruct the speech. This fine-tuning allows
better pitch representations beyond the original F0 in Hertz, but
it also allows flexible pitch control as we can still recognize the
pitch curves and edit them later when needed during inference.