2
overfitting problems that can be caused by internal aligners.
This paper presents the following novel contributions: (i) the
introduction of the Transferable Monotonic Aligner (TMA),
a new transfer learning scheme that refines pre-trained text
aligners for TTS tasks, (ii) a duration-invariant data augmen-
tation method for improving prosody prediction, and (iii) a
parallel TTS model that incorporates generalized speech styles
for natural and expressive speech synthesis. Together, these
contributions pave the way for advanced TTS technologies
enhancing human-computer interactions.
II. M ETHODS
A. Proposed Framework
Given t∈ T the input phonemes and x∈ X an arbitrary
reference mel-spectrogram, our goal is to train a system that
generates the mel-spectrogram ˜x∈ X that corresponds to the
speech of tand reflects the generalized speech styles of x.
Generalized speech styles are defined as any characteristics
in the reference audio xexcept the phonetic content [ 16],
including but not limited to prosodic pattern, lexical stress,
formants transition, speaking rate, and speaker identity. Our
framework consists of eight modules that can be divided
into three major categories: (i) speech generation modules
that include the text encoder, style encoder, and decoder, (ii)
TTS prediction modules that include the duration and prosody
predictor, and (iii) utility modules only used during training
that include the discriminator, text aligner, and pitch extractor.
An overview of our framework is provided in Figure 1. We
detail each of the modules below.
Text Encoder. The text encoder Ttransforms the phonemes
tinto a hidden representation htext=T(t). It consists of a
3-layer CNN followed by a bidirectional LSTM [36].
Text Aligner. The text aligner Agenerates an alignment
dalignbetween mel-spectrograms and phonemes. We train a text
aligner Aalongside the decoder Gduring the reconstruction
phase. Modeled after the decoder of Tacorton 2 with attention,
Ais initially trained on an automatic speech recognition (ASR)
task using the LibriSpeech corpus [ 37] and then fine-tuned
concurrently with our decoder. We call an aligner with this
setup (pre-trained on large corpora and fine-tuned for TTS
tasks) a Transferable Monotonic Aligner (TMA).
Style Encoder. Given an input mel-spectrogram x, our
encoder derives a style vector s=E(x). With various reference
audios, Ecan generate diverse style representations, allowing
the decoder Gto create speech that mirrors the style sof
a reference audio x.Econsists of four residual blocks [ 38]
followed by an averaging pooling layer along the time axis.
Pitch Extractor. As in FastPitch [ 11], we extract pitch F0
directly in Hertz without further processing, providing a more
straightforward representation and allowing enhanced control of
speech pitch. Instead of using the acoustic periodicity detection
method [ 39] employed in FastPitch to estimate the ground
truth pitch, we train a pitch extractor Fend-to-end with our
decoder Gfor a more accurate estimation. Our pitch extractor
Fis a JDC network [ 40], pre-trained on LibriSpeech with
ground truth F0 estimated using YIN [ 41]. This extractor isfine-tuned with the decoder to predict pitch px=F(x)for the
reconstruction of x.
Decoder. Our decoder Gis trained to reconstruct
the input mel-spectrogram x, represented by ˆx=
G(htext·dalign,s, px, nx). Here, htext·dalignis aligned hidden
representation of phonemes, s=E(s)is the style vector of x,
pxis pitch contour of x, and nxis energy (represented by the
log norm) of xper frame. The decoder is comprised of seven
residual blocks with AdaIN [19], defined as follows:
AdaIN (c, s) =Lσ(s)c−µ(c)
σ(c)+Lµ(s), (1)
where cis a single channel of the feature maps, sis the style
vector, µ(·)andσ(·)denote the channel mean and standard
deviation and LσandLµare learned linear projections for
computing the adaptive gain and bias using the style vector
s. The use of AdaIN is one of the major differences between
our model and other TTS models with style encoders such as
[13] and [ 16]. The advantages of AdaIN for diverse speech
synthesis are further discussed in Appendix A-B.
To prevent dilution of import features, we concatenate the
pitch px, energy nx, and residual phoneme features hresand
deliver them to subsequent residual blocks after AdaIN. This
process is further detailed in Table , and its effectiveness is
discussed in Section IV-D.
Discriminator. We include a discriminator Dto facilitate
training of our decoder for better sound quality [ 1]. The
discriminator shares the same architecture as our style encoder.
Duration Predictor. Our duration predictor consists of a 3-
layer bidirectional LSTM Rwith adaptive layer normalization
(AdaLN) module followed by a linear projection L, where
instance normalization is replaced by layer normalization in
equation 1. We use AdaLN because Rtakes discrete tokens
similar to those in NLP applications, where layer normalization
[42] is preferred. Ris shared with the prosody predictor P
through hprosody =R(htext)as input to P.
Prosody Predictor. Our prosody predictor Ppredicts both
the pitch ˆpxand energy ˆnxwith given text and style vector. The
aligned shared representation hprosody·ais processed through a
shared bidirectional LSTM layer to generate hprosody , which is
then fed into two sets of three residual blocks with AdaIN and
a linear projection layer, one for the pitch output and another
for the energy output (see Appendix D for details).
B. Training Objectives
Our model training process is divided into two stages to allow
the integration of duration-invariant prosody data augmentation,
a key contribution of our work. During the first stage, the
model learns to reconstruct the mel-spectrogram from the text,
pitch, energy, and style. The second stage fixes all modules
except the duration and prosody predictors, which are trained
to predict the duration, pitch, and energy from the given text.
1) First Stage Objectives:
Mel reconstruction. Given a mel-spectrogram x∈ X and
its corresponding text t∈ T, we train our decoder under the
L1reconstruction loss
Lmel=Ex,t
∥x−G(htext·aalign,s, px, nx)∥1
(2)