8
TABLE VII. A BLATION STUDY FOR VERIFYING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF EACH PROPOSED COMPONENT .
Model CMOS
StyleTTS 0
w/ 100% hard – 0.26
w/ 0% hard – 2.98
w/oLmono – 0.10
w/oLs2s – 2.48Model CMOS
StyleTTS 0
w/o pitch extractor – 0.11
w/o pre-trained aligner – 0.39
w/o augmentation – 0.39
w/o discriminator – 1.79Model CMOS
StyleTTS 0
w/o residual – 0.30
AdaIN →AdaLN – 0.21
AdaIN →Concat. – 0.17
AdaIN →IN – 0.03
TABLE VIII. C OMPARISON OF PEARSON CORRELATION COEFFICIENTS OF ACOUSTIC FEATURES ASSOCIATED WITH EMOTIONS BETWEEN REFERENCE
AND SYNTHESIZED SPEECH IN ABLATION STUDY .
ModelPitch
meanPitch
standard
deviationEnergy
meanEnergy
standard
deviationHarmonics-
to-noise
ratioShimmer Jitter
Baseline 0.90 0.53 0.77 0.15 0.79 0.66 0.64
AdaIN →AadLN 0.89 0.52 0.67 0.19 0.76 0.53 0.66
AdaIN →Concat. 0.36 0.16 0.19 -0.07 0.58 0.36 0.40
w/o residual 0.88 0.51 0.68 0.11 0.79 0.64 0.60
data (LJ Speech). An example of bad alignment of the pre-
trained external aligner is shown in Figure 5. This shows that
fine-tuning the aligner is effective in improving the quality of
synthesized speech. However, when using 0% hard alignment
(100% soft attention alignment), the model gets overfitted to
reconstruct speech with soft alignment and is unable to produce
audible speech using hard alignment during inference ( −2.98
CMOS). We also see that both TMA objectives (equations 3
and 4) are important for high-quality speech synthesis.
The table in the middle shows the effects of removing various
training techniques and components. Using an external pitch
extractor (such as acoustic-based methods) decreases MOS
by−0.11. This is likely caused by the acoustic-based pitch
extraction method sometimes failing to extract the correct F0
curve, and fine-tuning the pitch extractor along with the decoder
makes the model learn better pitch representation (see Appendix
A-C). Without a pre-trained text aligner (such as VITS), the
rated MOS is decreased by −0.39. This indicates that our
transfer learning is helpful for mitigating overfitting problems
when training internal aligners with a relatively small dataset.
Removing our novel duration-invariant data augmentation also
lowers the performance. Lastly, training without discriminators
significantly affects the perceived sound quality.
The rightmost table shows architecture changes by removing
the residual features and replacing the AdaIN components in the
decoder and predictor with instance normalization (IN), AdaLN,
and simple feature concatenation (Concat). Their effects on
style reflection are also shown in Table VIII. Removing the
residual features in the decoder decreases both naturalness
and correlations between synthesized and reference speech.
Layer normalization is also worse than IN for both metrics.
Concatenating styles in place of AdaIN dramatically decreases
the correlations and lowers rated naturalness, confirming our
observation that all previous methods that use concatenation
to incorporate style information ([ 1], [9], [64], [12], [13], [15],
[16]) are not as effective as AdaIN due to the lack of temporal
modulations (see Appendix A-B). Lastly, we see that replacing
AdaIN with IN does not significantly affect the rated naturalness,suggesting that the improved naturalness is not due to the
introduction of styles but our novel technical improvements
including TMA, data augmentation, use of IN, pitch extractor,
and residual features. Nevertheless, styles enable diverse speech
synthesis which models without styles cannot do.
V. C ONCLUSIONS
We introduced StyleTTS, a novel natural and diverse text-
to-speech (TTS) synthesis approach. Our research takes a
distinctive step forward in leveraging the strengths of parallel
TTS systems with several novel constitutions that include a
unique transferable monotonic aligner (TMA) training while
integrating style information via AdaIN. We demonstrated
that this method can effectively reflect stylistic features from
reference audio. Moreover, the style vectors from our model
encode a rich set of information present in the reference audio,
including pitch, energy, speaking rates, formant transitions, and
speaker identities. This allows easy control of the synthesized
speech’s prosodic patterns and emotional tones by choosing an
appropriate reference style while benefiting from robust and
fast speech synthesis of parallel TTS systems. Collectively, they
enable natural speech synthesis with diverse speech styles that
go beyond what was achieved in previous TTS systems.
Our contribution lies not only in the theoretical underpinnings
but also in its practical applicability. Our approach empowers
various new applications, including movie dubbing, book
narration, unsupervised speech emotion recognition, personal-
ized speech generation, and any-to-any voice conversion (see
Appendix C and our follow-up work [ 65] for more details).
Our source code and pre-trained models are publicly available
3to assist research in this area further.
VI. A CKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Gavin Mischler and Vinay Raghavan for their
feedback. Funding was from the national institute of health
(NIHNIDCD) and Marie-Josee and Henry R. Kravis.
3https://github.com/yl4579/StyleTTS