tion. In this framework, researchers generally use simple linear
regression of a binary outcome Yion a treatment Di.
Yi/H11005/H92520/H11001/H92521Di/H11001/H9280 (3)
in which idenotes individuals. In the context of Equation 3, the
average treatment effect (ATE)3is equal to /H92521, directly expressed
in terms of probabilities. In the context of Equation 3, which
regresses a binary outcome on a binary treatment, linear regressioncannot possibly yield out-of-bound predictions, and always pro-vides an unbiased estimate of the causal effect D
ionYi(Angrist &
Pischke, 2009). The analytical proof of this argument is provided
later in this article.
Linear Regression Analysis Including Discrete
Covariates
Psychologists typically include covariates (e.g., gender, religi-
osity, ethnicity) in their regression for two possible reasons. Inexperimental studies, the presence of covariates increase statisticalpower and precision (Green & Aronow, 2011; Maxwell & Dela-ney, 2004). In the context of quasi-experimental designs (i.e., inthe absence of random assignment to the treatment condition) suchas natural experiments, covariates may be included in the linearregression analysis to account for preexisting differences betweengroups (Shadish, Cook, & Campbell, 2002, p. 166–170), allowingto obtain approximately unbiased estimates of causal effects.
Multiple linear regression analysis aiming to estimate causal
effects of binary treatments on binary outcomes are perfectlysuited, as long as covariates are discrete and take on only fewvalues (Woolridge, 2002, p. 456). It is noteworthy that whenmodels are saturated,
4which is the case of the simple linear
regression model described in Equation 3 as well as fully inter-acted models with binary covariates, their underlying structure isinherently linear
5(Woolridge, 2002). This implies that for satu-
rated models, the linear regression estimator is unbiased and con-sistent, and predicted values are never out-of-bounds.
Linear Regression Analysis Including Continuous
Covariates
The underlying structure of models that include continuous
covariates, commonly referred to as the conditional expectationfunction (CEF), is often nonlinear. This raises the question of thepertinence of linear modeling strategies in these circumstances. Aspointed out by Woolridge (2002), linear regression analysis usu-ally provides a good approximation of the effects of any variableXon the binary outcome of interest near the center of the distri-
bution of X.
Undeniably, OLS will not approximate the CEF of an unknown
nonlinear CEF. However, there is no reason to believe that logit orprobit models constitute the correct approximation of a given CEF.Analysts willing to model nonlinear CEFs in the context of binaryoutcomes may use clustering methods such as Bernoulli mixturemodels. These unsupervised learning techniques can be powerful,but are beyond the scope of this article.
Violation of the Homoskedasticity Assumption
As already mentioned, binary outcomes impose heteroskedas-
ticity, which constitute a violation of one of the OLS assumptions.First, as pointed out by Angrist and Pischke (2009), the OLS
assumption of homoskedasticity is generally violated in the realworld, even in the case of nonbinary outcomes (Angrist & Pischke,2009, p. 46). The implications of the homoskedasticity assumptionare related to the calculation of standard errors. If the variance ofthe error term εdiffers for different values of X, regular standard
errors overweight some portions of the data. In order to resolve thiscommon issue (Angrist & Pischke, 2009), researchers have in-creasingly used heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, whichare valid even in the context of arbitrary heteroskedasticity (Wool-ridge, 2002, p. 56).
Reasons to Prefer Linear Regression Analysis
Target Estimands and Interpretability
When the target quantity of interest, also referred to as estimand
(Rubin, 1974, 1977), is the average causal effect of a treatmentvariable on a binary outcome, linear regression is the optimalstrategy. OLS coefficients allow for a direct interpretation of thetreatment effect in terms of the percentage point change in theprobability to observe Y
i/H110051. For instance, if Equation 3 yields
/H92521/H11005.01, we immediately understand that the treatment caused an
increase of 1 percentage point in the probability to observe Yi/H110051.
The coefficients of nonlinear models are never directly inter-
pretable. Logistic regression coefficients, for instance, are on thelog-odds scale,
6which implies that they are interpretable in terms
of signs and statistical significance, but not effect size. As a result,they are often expressed in terms of odds ratios ( ORs), which are
also difficult to decipher. As described by Hellevik (2009) “anodds is the ratio between the probability of having a certain valueon a variable, and the probability of not having this valu e... what
the odds ratio shows, is the ratio between odds, not betweenproportions” (Hellevik, 2009, p. 66). This definition makes it clearthat communicating study results in terms of ORs makes their
interpretation complex. As pointed out by King and Zeng (2002),“the disadvantage of odds ratios is understanding what it means . . .we have found no author who claims to be more comfortablecommunicating with the general public using an odds ratio” (p.1411). Researchers can take more advanced analytical steps toconvert logistic regression coefficients into probabilities. Theseextra analyses, commonly termed “first differences,” include mar-ginal standardization, prediction at the means, or prediction at themodes, and imply additional assumptions (for a detailed treatmentof the question, see Gelman & Hill, 2006; Muller & MacLehose,2014).
Making the decision to use logistic regression instead of linear
regression, both with and without these additional steps, comeswith costs. When researchers omit these additional steps, they
3The average treatment effect is also referred to as the average causal
effect.
4A model in which the dependent variable is regressed on a set of binary
variables is saturated. Researchers can “saturate their model” by turningany categorical variables that have more than two values (e.g., ethnicity,education) into a set of dummy variables.
5In the case of saturated models, the conditional expectation function of
the parameter is linear.
6Probit regression coefficients are on the probit scale.This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.3 LINEAR REGRESSION FOR BINARY OUTCOMES