mate causal effects of any variables with any distribution on binary
outcomes. Third, I introduce the framework of potential outcomesthrough the Neyman-Rubin causal model to prove analytically thatlinear regression yields unbiased estimates of causal effects oftreatments, even when the outcome is binary. Finally, I conductanalyses on simulated data as well as existing data to establishlinear regression as a simple, flexible and powerful analysis strat-egy when the outcome is binary. The advantages of using linearinstead of logistic regression to analyze experimental data withbinary outcomes are summarized in Table 1.
Arguments Supporting Nonlinear Approaches
Nonlinear Models Are Necessary in the Context of
Prediction
The main argument in favor of nonlinear models such as logit or
probit to analyze binary outcomes is that these models constrainpredictions between 0 and 1. That is, contrary to ordinary leastsquares (OLS), these methods prevent the analyst from makingimpossible forecasts, such as predicting that the probability toobserve an event is less than 0 or greater than 1. For instance,unlike logit or probit, linear regression could lead one to predictthat the probability that an individual commits a crime in theirlifetime is 1.2, or /H11002.04. As a result, nonlinear modeling strategies
often constitute the only valid option for researchers interested inmodeling the data to predict the probability of occurrence of binaryvariables. This is often the case in other disciplines such asbiomedical research or finance.
The Presence of Predictions Outside of the Interval
Unit Leads to Biased and Inconsistent Estimates ofParameters
A different but related argument in favor of nonlinear models is
that, specifically because of predictions outside of the interval unitof the outcome variable, OLS coefficients may be biased andinconsistent in the case of binary outcomes. Horrace and Oaxaca(2006) demonstrated that bias and inconsistency of the estimatorincrease with the proportion of predicted probabilities that falloutside of the support, and recommend the use of logit or probitmodels.Binary Outcomes Impose Heteroskedasticity in
Violation of OLS Assumptions
One of the assumptions of OLS regression is homoskedasticity,
which holds if the variance of the error term is the same for allvalues of X. Mathematically, Var( /H9280|X)/H11005/H9268
2, in which /H9268is a
constant. When this OLS assumption is violated, errors are con-
sidered heteroskedastic, which biases the standard errors of theOLS estimates because too much weight is given to some portionof the data.
The presence of heteroskedasticity in the context of binary
outcomes can be understood by looking at the variance formula. Ifwe regress a binary variable Yonkvariables X
1,X2,X3,..., Xk, the
conditional mean and variance of Yare expressed below, and
Equation 2 implies that we observe heteroskedasticity unless thecoefficients /H9252
0,/H92521,..., /H9252kare all equal to 0.
E[Y|X]/H11005/H92520/H11001/H92521x1/H11001/H92522x2/H11001.../H11001/H9252kxk (1)
Var(Y|X)/H11005X/H9252(1/H11002X/H9252) (2)
Relevance of These Arguments for Psychology
Research
Prediction Versus Explanation in Psychology Research
For the most part, psychology research has focused on explain-
ing causal mechanisms that give rise to psychological and behav-ioral outcomes, not on making predictions about these outcomes(Yarkoni & Westfall, 2017). As a result, for most psychologists,the question of whether using linear regression is appropriate whenoutcomes are binary becomes: to what extent do out-of-boundpredictions from linear regression bias estimates of causal effect?Broadly speaking, the answer to this question is that psychologistsdo not need to worry about out-of-bound predictions. To under-stand why, I now turn to examine different study designs.
The Case of Simple Regression in Experimental
Designs
To estimate causal effects of treatments on outcomes, psychol-
ogy researchers mostly use experimental designs, in which partic-ipants are randomly assigned to a treatment versus control condi-
Table 1
Comparison of the Attributes of Linear and Logistic Regression for the Analysis of Experimental Data
Desirable attributes of the analytic strategy Linear regression Logistic regression
Overall interpretability of coefficients or commonly reported estimates Yes No
Provides immediate estimate of the average treatment effect (ATE) in terms of probability of change Yes NoInterpretability of interaction terms Yes No
Appropriate for models including fixed effects Yes NoPredictions constrained to the interval unit [0, 1] Yes
aYes
Unbiasedness Yes Yes
Consistency Yes Yes
Robustness to heteroskedasticity YesbYes
Note. The content of this table applies to both simple and multiple regression analysis.
aAs discussed in more details in this article, predictions outside the interval unit sometimes occur in special cases of multiple linear regression: w hen models
are not saturated. This is the case of models that include continuous covariates (e.g., age).bUsing robust standard errors.This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.2 GOMILA