Logistic or Linear? Estimating Causal Effects of Experimental Treatments
on Binary Outcomes Using Regression Analysis
Robin Gomila
Princeton University
When the outcome is binary, psychologists often use nonlinear modeling strategies such as logit or probit.
These strategies are often neither optimal nor justified when the objective is to estimate causal effects ofexperimental treatments. Researchers need to take extra steps to convert logit and probit coefficients intointerpretable quantities, and when they do, these quantities often remain difficult to understand. Oddsratios, for instance, are described as obscure in many textbooks (e.g., Gelman & Hill, 2006, p. 83). I drawon econometric theory and established statistical findings to demonstrate that linear regression isgenerally the best strategy to estimate causal effects of treatments on binary outcomes. Linear regressioncoefficients are directly interpretable in terms of probabilities and, when interaction terms or fixed effectsare included, linear regression is safer. I review the Neyman-Rubin causal model, which I use to proveanalytically that linear regression yields unbiased estimates of treatment effects on binary outcomes.Then, I run simulations and analyze existing data on 24,191 students from 56 middle schools (Paluck,Shepherd, & Aronow, 2013) to illustrate the effectiveness of linear regression. Based on these grounds,I recommend that psychologists use linear regression to estimate treatment effects on binary outcomes.
Keywords: binary outcomes, logistic regression, linear regression, average treatment effects, causal
effects
Psychology research often targets binary outcomes, commonly
defined as dependent variables that can take two possible values:0 and 1. For instance, psychologists have explored the validity ofpeople’s intuitive judgments (Kahneman & Frederick, 2002), thecircumstances that lead them to violate or conform to social norms(Cialdini, Reno, & Kallgren, 1990; Gomila & Paluck, 2020), thedeterminants of dropping out of therapy (Wierzbicki & Pekarik,1993), the predictors of college attendance (Brumley, Russell, &Jaffee, 2019), or the influence of defendants’ and victims’ race onthe likelihood that the defendant receives a death sentence (Eber-hardt, Davies, Purdie-Vaughns, & Johnson, 2006).
Psychology researchers rely extensively on nonlinear models
such as logit and probit when the outcome is binary, althoughadvances in statistics and methods have established that this isoften not optimal, justified or appropriate (Angrist & Pischke,2009; Freedman, 2008; Hellevik, 2009; Woolridge, 2002). In thisarticle, I summarize the relevant literature on regression analysis of
binary outcomes, and I use analytical, simulation, and empiricalapproaches to demonstrate the effectiveness of simple and multiplelinear regression to estimate treatment effects on binary out-comes.
1This is true independently of the sample size and distri-
bution of the binary outcome variable (Judkins & Porter, 2016),and in the context of experimental and quasi-experimental de-signs.
2
There are several reasons to prefer linear regression to nonlinear
models such as logit and probit when the outcome is binary. Linearregression allows for direct interpretation of the coefficients asprobabilities, and is safe when the model includes fixed effects orinteraction terms. On the contrary, logit and probit coefficients arenot immediately interpretable. Converting them into probabilitiesrequires the additional complexity of methods such as marginalstandardization, prediction at the means, or prediction at the modes(Angrist & Pischke, 2009; Freedman, 2008; Muller & MacLehose,2014). Furthermore, nonlinear models such as logit and probitbecome unsuitable in the presence of interaction terms or fixedeffects (i.e., nested models) (Beck, 2018; Freedman, 2008).
First, I review the arguments commonly used to support the use
of nonlinear modeling approaches to analyze binary outcomes, anddiscuss the relevance of these arguments for psychologists. Sec-ond, I examine the advantages of using linear regression to esti-
1When the outcome is binary, linear regression is commonly referred to
as the linear probability model.
2For multiple linear regression models with binary outcomes, it is best
to use covariates that are categorical and sparse (Woolridge, 2002). This isgenerally the case of the typical covariates used by psychologists (e.g.,gender, religiosity, or income 5-point scales, etc.).A preprint of this article was posted on PsyArXiv: https://psyarxiv.com/
4gmbv/. A draft of this article was discussed in Betsy Levy Paluck’s labmeeting. I thank Betsy Levy Paluck, Alexander Coppock, Jasper Cooper,Brandon Stewart, Cyrus Samii, Andi Zhou, Yang-Yang Zhou, ChelseyClark, Roni Porat, Hannah Alarian, Alex Hayes, and John-Henry Pezzutofor their generous feedback on this article.
Materials and codes: Simulations and analyses reported in this article
were computed in R. The R codes can be found on the Open ScienceFramework (OSF): https://osf.io/ugsnm/.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to X
Robin
Gomila, Department of Psychology, Princeton University, 325 Peretsman-Scully Hall, Princeton, NJ 08544. E-mail: rgomila@princeton.eduThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.Journal of Experimental Psychology: General
© 2020 American Psychological Association 2020, Vol. 2, No. 999, 000
ISSN: 0096-3445 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/xge0000920
1