NeRF-V AE: A Geometry Aware 3D Scene Generative Model
prior
conditional scene 
function 
image 
likelihood 
camera position/orientation context views 
set encoder approx. 
posterior 
 image 
position 
orientation 
inference 
inference generation training 
dataset  of scenes 
inference 
generation 
 context view(s) 
(a) During training , we embed common
scene properties (across the dataset) in
the parameters ;ofNeRF-VAE.(b) Once the model is trained, we can infer parameters
of a scene in constant time, even from a single view.(c) We can sample novel scenes from
NeRF-VAE generative model and ren-
der them from various viewpoints.
Figure 1: An overview of NeRF-VAE: a geometry-aware 3D scene generative model. NeRF-VAE is trained on a dataset of several views
(images and camera positions/orientations) from multiple synthetic scenes. Once trained, it allows for efﬁcient inference of scene
parameters (colours and geometry, including depth-maps) and sampling novel scenes from the prior.
rendering. We note that while these representations do not
model the scene geometry explicitly (as e. g. mesh-based
representations), the subsequent volumetric rendering pro-
cess explicitly uses 3D rays and 3D geometry to produce
output images.
NeRFrepresents a scene by the values of multilayer percep-
tron ( MLP) parameters. Being extremely high-dimensional,
this representation precludes using amortized inference. We
change NeRF’s formulation to a scene function shared be-
tween scenes, and conditioned on a per-scene latent vari-
able. Intuitively, the latent variable captures scene-speciﬁc
information (e. g. position and kind of objects, colours, light-
ing, etc.), while shared information (e. g. available textures
and shapes, properties of common elements, sky) is stored
in the parameters of the scene function. A prior over latent
variables (and therefore scene functions) allows sampling
novel scenes from the model, and rendering arbitrary view-
points within them. NeRF-VAEparameters are learned using
a collection of images from different scenes, with known
camera position and orientation. Since these parameters are
shared between scenes (unlike in NeRF),NeRF-VAE can in-
fer scene structure from very few views of an unseen scene.
This is in contrast to NeRF, where using few views results
in poor performance. A high level overview of NeRF-VAE
is depicted in Fig. 1.
In summary, NeRF-VAE introduces four key beneﬁts com-
pared to existing models. First, due to its amortized in-
ference, it removes the need for costly optimization from
scratch for every new scene. Second, as it learns shared
information between multiple scenes, it is able reconstruct
unobserved scenes from a much smaller number of input
views. Third, compared to existing convolutional generative
models for view synthesis, such as GQN, it generalizes much
better when evaluated on out-of-distribution camera views.
Finally, NeRF-VAE is the only amortized NeRFvariant that
uses compact scene representation in the form of a latent
variable and that can handle uncertainty in the inputs.2 Neural Radiance Fields ( NeRF)
NeRF’s scene function is represented as a 6D continuous
vector-valued function whose inputs are ray coordinates
(x;d)partitioned into position x2R3and orientation1
d2R3. Its outputs are an emitted colour (r;g;b )2R3
and a volume density 0. The scene function is approxi-
mated by a neural network F: (x;d)7!((r;g;b );)with
weights. In order to encourage multi-view consistency,
the architecture of this network is such that volume density
only depends on position while the emitted colour (r;g;b )
depends on both position and ray orientation.
V olumetric image rendering works by casting rays from the
camera’s image plane into the scene, one ray per pixel. The
colour that each ray produces is the weighted average of
colours along the ray, with weights given by their accumu-
lated volume densities. NeRF’s renderer uses a differentiable
approximation to this accumulation process. For details, we
refer to Mildenhall et al. (2020); Curless & Levoy (1996).
We denote the image rendering process whose inputs are a
camera c(position and orientation) and a scene function
F, and which outputs the rendered image2^I, by
^I=render (F();c): (1)
Note that computation of the camera’s image plane and cor-
responding rays for each pixel requires camera parameters
(e. g. ﬁeld of view, focal length, etc).
3 Ne RF-VAE
We build a generative model over scenes by introduc-
ing a view-independent latent variable zwith priorp(z)
and a conditional scene function G(;z) : (x;d)7!
((r;g;b );).Gis much like NeRF’sF, but is additionally
1It is also possible to parameterize orientation using two an-
gles, as e. g. done by Mildenhall et al. (2020), but we follow their
implementation in using a vector.
2Note that it is easily possible to compute depth estimates for
each rendered ray. We use this for visualization and evaluation
purposes.