NeRF-V AE: A Geometry Aware 3D Scene Generative Model
CONV -AR-V AE 
NeRF-V AE 
CONV -AR-V AE 
NeRF-V AE W ithin-distribution
Out-of-distribution
Figure 5: Generalization ability for interpolations along two trajectories. Top: the camera is moving parallel to the ground, facing the
horizon ( within-distribution (WD) , both models were trained using such views). While convolutional autoregressive VAE (CONV -AR-
VAE) predicts the room consistently, it is inconsistent regarding the presence of the blue object. In contrast, NeRF-VAE produces fully
consistent predictions, as further illustrated by visualizations of its inferred scene geometry. Bottom : the camera is further lifted off the
ground, along a quadratic curve, facing downwards ( out-of-distribution (OOD) ).CONV -AR-VAE fails to account for downward camera
orientations and outputs distorted colours, whereas NeRF-VAE produces plausible and consistent predictions and scene geometry.
let each model infer the latent representation given the same
Ntest
ctx= 4views. We pick two arbitrary views and generate
a sequence of camera positions and orientations that interpo-
lates between them8. We do this twice: once with a simple
linear interpolation across the plane, changing only the yaw
of the camera ( within-distribution (WD) views ), and once
with the camera lifting off the plane, along a quadratic curve,
and looking down, changing both pitch and yaw ( out-of-
distribution (OOD) views ); see Fig. 14 in Appendix F.2
for an illustration. We note that out-of-distribution here
means that these camera positions lie outside the support of
the training data distribution.
Fig. 5 shows each models’ outputs along the within-
distribution trajectories and out-of-distribution views trajec-
tories. Both models produce plausible within-distribution
interpolations, although CONV -AR-VAE has problems with
object persistency. When evaluated on out-of-distribution
views, CONV -AR-VAE completely fails to produce plausi-
ble outputs: ignoring the downward camera angle and in-
stead distorting colours of the scene. In contrast, NeRF-VAE
renders the inferred scene geometry properly from out-of-
distribution viewpoints. Fig. 5 further shows depth estimates
forNeRF-VAE’s outputs, revealing the inferred scene geom-
etry.
We now investigate generalization on CLEVR data, where
we again focus on out-of-distribution camera views, and
additionally investigate generalization across the number of
visible objects. We compare CONV -AR-VAE to variants of
NeRF-VAE, namely MLP,ATTN and II+ATTN .
We again see a clear advantage of NeRF-VAE. For instance,
Fig. 6 (left) shows almost perfect predictions when using
theii+attn model as the camera gets closer to the object,
8Note that the GQN dataset does not contain ground truth
images for these interpolated views.compared to CONV -AR-VAE.
When evaluated on scenes that contain more objects than
visible during training (here: 5 vs. 4, Fig. 6 (right) ), NeRF-
VAE using the attention-based scene function described in
Section 3.2 correctly reconstructs all objects in the scenes,
while the NeRF-VAE with the MLP scene function misses
objects. Appendix F.2 contains quantitative results for this
experiment.
Ground truth C-AR-V AE ITT+ATTN 
Ground truth MLP        ATTN 
Figure 6: Left: Generalization to out-of-distribution camera views.
While CONV -AR-VAE fails to produce plausible predictions, NeRF-
VAE generalizes well. Right: Generalization to larger number
of objects. The MLP scene function misses objects, while ATTN
captures all objects.
DEGENERATE ORIENTATIONS IN THE GQN DATA
Recall that camera views in the GQN data lie within a plane
parallel to the ground. Consequently, certain points in the
scene are only observed from orientations within this plane.
When trained on this degenerate data, evaluating a neural-
network-based scene function on different (e. g. when look-
ing down) orientations inputs leads to unpredictable outputs.
A simple way to circumvent the resulting rendering artifacts
is to remove orientations from the scene function’s inputs,
as done in the above interpolations. In the case of the GQN
data, which does not contain viewpoint dependent colours
(reﬂections or specularities), this restriction does not impair
visual output quality. We replicate the interpolations from