NeRF-V AE: A Geometry Aware 3D Scene Generative Model
0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10
MSE0.00.10.20.40.5
AB C(b) MSE histogram, NeRF
5 views
20 views
100 views
0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10
MSE0.00.10.20.40.5(b) MSE histogram, NeRF-VAE
2 views
4 views
6 views
1 234610 203050100
Number of views0.00.20.50.81.0MSE [10−1]
(a) MSE
NeRF
NeRF-VAE
Predictions for NeRF error level A 
Ground truth NeRF NeRF-V AE Predictions for NeRF error level B 
Ground truth NeRF NeRF-V AE Predictions for NeRF error level C 
Ground truth NeRF NeRF-V AE 
Figure 4: Error analysis of NeRFand a minimalistic version (see text) of NeRF-VAE on Jaytracer data. (a):MSE decreases with increasing
number of training ( NeRF) and context ( NeRF-VAE) views. We show the mean and 95% percentiles across 100 test views averaged over
10 scenes and 10 seeds. Despite its minimal version, NeRF-VAE performs much better for fewer ( 6) views; NeRFneeds many more
views ( 100) to reach comparable error. (b, c) :MSEhistograms. Compared to NeRF-VAE,NeRFneeds a large number of training
views to consistently achieve low errors, and even then incurs a small number of larger errors. Bottom : An example scene, where views
correspond to three error levels, indicated in (b), of NeRFtrained on 100 views. NeRF’s predictions for level A are near perfect, but the
model fails catastrophically for level C—which regularly happens when training on fewer views, see (b). NeRF-VAE’s predictions are
more consistent, despite its simple decoder and inference.
orders of magnitude faster than running the full optimiza-
tion in NeRF.NeRFachieves lower MSE than our model
only when sufﬁcient training data is available (here = 100
views). We emphasize that while NeRF-VAE was trained
usingNctx= 4context views, the model generalizes well to
different numbers of context views at test time.
Taking a look at the distribution of errors and the corre-
sponding predictions in Fig. 4 (b, c), we see that NeRF’s
MSE distributions are extremely wide when trained on fewer
than 100 views. Even for 100 views, NeRFsuffers from
a long tail of large errors. NeRF-VAE’s errors concentrate
on a small positive value for all evaluated Ntest
ctx, with tails
comparable to NeRFwith 100 training views.
Fig. 4, bottom, shows predictions from both models on
an example scene, for views corresponding to error levels
attained by NeRFtrained on 100 views: near-perfect (A),
medium (B), and catastrophic (C), marked in Fig. 4 (b).
NeRF’s A-level predictions are near perfect, but signiﬁcantly
deteriorate in error levels B, C. As seen above, however,
NeRFconsistently (but not exclusively) attains level A only
when trained with 100 views. We stress that in these simple
scenes, this effect is not7due to incomplete scene coverage
from a limited number of views— NeRFis simply not able
to interpolate well between few training views. In contrast,
NeRF-VAE captures the scene structure well on all error
levels—though the simple version used here ( MLP scene
function, no iterative inference) misses high frequency de-
7Similar results, including catastrophic failures of NeRFtrained
with few views, can be obtained on CLEVR data where most of
the scene is visible in all views, see Appendix F.1.tails such as sharp object boundaries and textures. This
suggests that while amortized inference from few views is
possible, NeRF-VAE could beneﬁt from a more expressive
scene function and a better inference mechanism.
5.4 Comparison with a Convolution-Based
Generative Model
Our next set of experiments compares NeRF-VAEto a CONV -
AR-VAE—a model that is very closely related to GQN of
Eslami et al. (2018), but with slight modiﬁcations to make
it comparable to NeRF-VAE, see Appendix D for details.
Both NeRF-VAE and CONV -AR-VAE are able to infer novel
scenes from few input images, and to subsequently synthe-
size novel views within those scenes. The key difference
between the models is their decoder, responsible for render-
ing images given camera and latent scene representation:
convolutional for CONV -AR-VAE and geometry informed
forNeRF-VAE.
INTERPOLATIONS & G ENERALIZATION
We ﬁrst illustrate that NeRF-VAE’s explicit knowledge of 3D
geometry allows it to generalize well to out-of-distribution
camera positions and orientations compared to CONV -AR-
VAE.
We train both NeRF-VAE and CONV -AR-VAE on the GQN
dataset, using similar settings, which are detailed in Ap-
pendix F.2. For the this experiment, we restrict NeRF-VAE’s
scene function’s access to orientations, which we will moti-
vate below. For evaluation, we select a held-out scene and