NeRF-V AE: A Geometry Aware 3D Scene Generative Model
We provide a tabular comparison of NeRF-VAE and dis-
cussed models in terms of desirable scene model properties
in Appendix A.
5 Experiments
To evaluate NeRF-VAE, we ﬁrst analyze its ability to re-
construct novel viewpoints given a small number of input
views, and contrast that with NeRF. Second, we compare our
model with a Generative Query Network-like autoregressive
convolutional model, (Eslami et al., 2018, GQN) and show
that while NeRF-VAE achieves comparably low reconstruc-
tions errors, it has a much improved generalization ability,
in particular when being evaluated on camera views not
seen during training. Third, we provide an ablation study
ofNeRF-VAE variants, with a focus on the conditioning
mechanisms of the scene function described in Section 3.2.
Finally, we showcase samples of NeRF-VAE.
5.1 Datasets
We use three datasets, each consisting of 64 64 coloured
images, along with camera position and orientation for each
image, and camera parameters used to extract ray position
and orientation for each pixel.
GQN (Eslami et al., 2018)6, consists of 200k scenes each
with 10 images of rooms with a variable number of objects.
Camera positions and orientations are randomly distributed
along a plane within the rooms, always facing the horizon.
Note that this dataset does not contain reﬂections or specu-
larities, which we discuss in Section 5.4
CLEVR We created a custom CLEVR dataset (Johnson
et al., 2017) with 100k scenes, each with 10 views. Each
scene consist of one to three randomly coloured and shaped
objects on a plane. Camera positions are randomly sampled
from a dome. Orientations are such that all objects are
always present, making inference from a limited number of
views easier than in the GQN data. The dataset is of higher
visual quality than GQN, e. g. it includes reﬂections.
Jaytracer In order to have more control over individual
aspects of the data (e. g. complexity, distribution of camera
views, etc.), we also created a custom raytraced dataset
which consists of 200k randomly generated scenes, each
with 10 views, with a ﬁxed number of objects in random
orientations on a plane. Shapes, colours, textures, and light
position are random, an example can be seen in Fig. 4.
For both CLEVR and Jaytracer, we generate 10 additional
6We use the rooms_free_camera_no_object_rotations variant
publicly available at https://github.com/deepmind/
gqn-datasetsscenes each with 200 views and ground-truth depth maps for
evaluation purposes and for training NeRF. See Appendix B
for more details.
5.2 Implementation Details
The conditional scene functions’ architecture follows NeRF,
ﬁrst processing position xto produce volume density and
then additionally receiving orientation dto produce the
output colours. Both position and orientation use circular
encoding whereby we augment the network input values
with a Fourier basis, c. f. Fig. 3.
We follow Mildenhall et al. (2020, Section 5.2) in using
hierarchical volume sampling in order to approximate the
colour of each pixel. This means we maintain a second
instance of the conditional scene function (conditioned on
the same latent z), which results in an additional likelihood
term in the model log-likelihood in Eq. (2).
We use Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) and -annealing of the
KL term in Eq. (2). Full details can be found in Appendix C.
5.3 Comparison with Ne RF
NeRF-VAE, unlike NeRF, can infer scene structure without
re-training—through the introduction of a per-scene latent
variable and shared across-scene parameters. Our ﬁrst exper-
iment explores the following questions: 1. Can NeRF-VAE
leverage parameter sharing to infer novel scenes from very
few views? 2. Is NeRF-VAE’s capacity affected by having a
much smaller scene representation (a latent variable instead
of an MLP). 3. At what number of views do both models
reach comparable errors?
To focus on these conceptual differences between NeRF
and NeRF-VAE, we use NeRF-VAE with the simple MLP
scene function and without iterative inference. We train
NeRF-VAE on the Jaytracer data using Nctx= 4 context
images (with corresponding cameras). We evaluate on 10
held-out scenes, with an increasing number of context views
Ntest
ctx= 1;:::; 6.
We train a separate instance of NeRFon each of these same
10 evaluation scenes, with an increasing number of training
views 5;:::; 100. Both models are evaluated on images
of 100 unseen views from the 10 evaluation scenes. We
train and evaluate both models using 10 different seeds. See
Appendix F for further training details.
RESULTS
Fig. 4 (a) shows reconstruction MSEs (mean and 95% per-
centiles) across the 100 test views. NeRF-VAE achieves a
signiﬁcantly lower MSE and uniformly lower worst case er-
rors compared to NeRFtrained on less than 100 views. This
is despite NeRF-VAE’s amortized inference, which is many