NeRF-V AE: A Geometry Aware 3D Scene Generative Model
Figure 7: Variants of NeRF-VAE compared with CONV -AR-VAE on
CLEVR and GQN datasets. We trained NeRF-VAE with a range
ofvalues to investigate reconstruction/ KLtrade-offs. Iterative
inference ( II) improves MLP-based scene functions, but has a small
effect on attentive ( ATT) ones.
Fig. 5 with orientation inputs in Appendix F.3.
QUANTITATIVE COMPARISON & M ODEL ABLATIONS
Fig. 7 shows MSE and Kullback-Leibler ( KL)-divergence of
NeRF-VAE variants using amortized or iterative amortized
(II) inference and MLP or attentive ( ATT) scene functions,
and juxtaposes them against the CONV -AR-VAE. We focus
on CLEVR and GQN datasets. All NeRF-VAEs are trained
with increasing values of to trace out the available trade-
offs between MSE and KL.
CLEVR contains simple objects visible from every view-
point, and has no complicated textures. Consequently, the
MLP scene function achieves good MSE and KL. Iterative in-
ference further increases reconstruction performance while
decreasing KL. It is interesting that MLP-based models
tend to have lower KLvalues than attentive models while
still maintaining good reconstruction. However, attentive
models do obtain lower reconstruction errors in high- KL
regimes, which suggests that they have higher capacity to
model complicated data. CONV -AR-VAEis not able to model
the CLEVR data well—the model attains high KLvalues
despite manually setting a high MSE threshold.
The GQN dataset contains high-frequency textures and
rooms which are not fully visible from every view, caus-
ing both a more difﬁcult inference problem and more com-
plicated rendering compared to CLEVR. The MLP scene
function without iterative inference achieves low KLalbeit
generally higher MSE.ATT can achieve lower errors than
MLP at similar KLlevels, despite also reaching very large KL
values, indicating a peaked posterior for certain values of .
Using iterative inference helps both decoders, and allowsthe model to achieve both lowest KLand MSE. We note that
while CONV -AR-VAE achieves slightly lower MSE and KL
on this within-distribution evaluation, it fails to generalize
to out-of-distribution views as discussed above.
5.5 Samples & Uncertainty
We now demonstrate NeRF-VAE’s capability to learn an
unconditional prior over scenes (as opposed to images).
We ﬁrst sample the latent variable zp(z), and then
render a number of views of the induced scene function
G(;z). Samples from NeRF-VAE trained on the GQN
and CLEVR datasets are shown in Fig. 8. These samples
resemble the training data distribution to a high degree,
both in appearance and variability. Furthermore, the depth
estimates (example in last row) reveal a consistent geometric
structure of the sampled scene.
Fig. 9 shows an example where NeRF-VAE infers a scene
from a single context image containing a barely-visible pink
object. The model is able to accurately predict a view that
contains the full object. At the same time, the model main-
tains uncertainty about the exact shape (sphere vs. icosa-
hedron), as can be seen in the predictive variance of depth
estimate.
Figure 8: Sampled scenes from NeRF-VAE, trained on GQN (left)
and CLEVR (right). Each row shows interpolated views in a
different scene, corresponding to a sample of the latent variable.
The last row shows a rendered depth map of the images in the
above row (other depth maps omitted for space reasons).
Context image Ground truth Predictive mean Predictive variance Predictive mean 
Figure 9: An example of predictions under limited information in
the context view. We show colour and depth predictions. NeRF-
VAE is able to reconstruct a plausible explanation of the object
which is only marginally visible in the single context view. The
predictive variance of depth estimates (averaged over 100 samples
from the posterior over the latent variable) accounts for object
boundaries not clearly visible in the context.