arXiv:2003.08316v2  [cs.AI]  24 Mar 2020From Statistical Relational to Neuro-Symbolic Artiﬁcial I ntelligence
Luc De Raedt ,Sebastijan Duman ˇci´c,Robin Manhaeve andGiuseppe Marra
KU Leuven, Department of Computer Science
{ﬁrstname.lastname }@kuleuven.be,
Abstract
Neuro-symbolic and statistical relational artiﬁcial
intelligence both integrate frameworks for learn-
ing with logical reasoning. This survey identi-
ﬁes several parallels across seven different di-
mensions between these two ﬁelds. These can-
not only be used to characterize and position
neuro-symbolic artiﬁcial intelligence approaches
but also to identify a number of directions for fur-
ther research.
1 Introduction
The integration of learning and reasoning is one of the key
challenges in artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning
today , and various communities have been addressing it.
That is especially true for the ﬁeld of neuro-symbolic com-
putation (NeSy) [Besold et al. , 2017; Garcez et al. , 2019],
where the goal is to incorporate symbolic reasoning into
neural networks. NeSy already has a long tradition, and it
has recently attracted a lot of attention from various com-
munities (cf. e.g., the keynotes of Yoshua Bengio and Henry
Kautz on this topic at AAAI 2020). Many approaches to
NeSy aim at extending neural networks with logical rea-
soning.
Another domain that has a rich tradition in inte-
grating learning and reasoning is that of statistical
relational learning and artiﬁcial intelligence (StarAI)
[Getoor and Taskar, 2007; De Raedt et al. , 2016]. But
rather than focusing on how to integrate logic and neural
networks, it is centred around the question of how to inte-
grate logic with probabilistic graphical models. Despite t he
common interest in combining logic or symbolic reasoning
with a basic paradigm for learning, i.e., probabilistic gra ph-
ical models or neural networks, it is surprising that there
are not more interactions between these two ﬁelds.
This discrepancy is the key motivation behind this sur-
vey: it aims at pointing out the similarities between these
two endeavours and in this way stimulate more cross-
fertilization. In doing so, we start from the literature on
StarAI because, arguably , there is more consensus on what
the key concepts, challenges and issues are in StarAI than
in NeSy (cf. the number of tutorials and textbooks on re-
lated topics such as [Russell, 2015; De Raedt et al. , 2016]but see also[Besold et al. , 2017; Garcez et al. , 2019]). It
turns out that essentially the same issues and techniques
that arise in StarAI have to be addressed in NeSy as well.
The key contribution of this survey is that we identify a set of
seven dimensions that these ﬁelds have in common and that
can be used to categorize both StarAI and NeSy approaches .
These seven dimensions are concerned with (1) directed
vs undirected models, (2) grounding vs proof based infer-
ence, (3) integrating logic with probability and /or neural
computation, (4) logical semantics, (5) learning parame-
ters or structure, (6) representing entities as symbols or
sub-symbols, and, (7) the type of logic used. We provide ev-
idence for our claim by positioning a wide variety of StarAI
and NeSy systems along these dimensions and pointing out
analogies between them. This, in turn, allows us to iden-
tify interesting opportunities for further research, by lo ok-
ing at areas across the dimensions that have not seen much
work yet. Of course, there are also important differences
between StarAI and NeSy, the most important one being
that the former operates more at the symbolic level, lending
itself naturally to explainable AI, while the latter operat es
more at the sub-symbolic level, lending itself more natu-
rally for computer vision and natural language processing.
Unlike some other recent surveys or perspectives
on neuro-symbolic computation [Besold et al. , 2017;
Garcez et al. , 2019], the present survey limits itself to a
logical and probabilistic perspective, which it inherits f rom
StarAI, and to developments in neuro-symbolic computa-
tion that are consistent with this perspective. Furthermor e,
it focuses on representative and prototypical systems
rather than aiming at completeness (which would not be
possible given the page limitations). At the same time,
unlike many early approaches to neuro-symbolic compu-
tation (see[Bader and Hitzler, 2005 ]for an overview),
which focused more on modeling issues and principles, we
focus on approaches that are also used for learning.
The following sections of the paper each describe a
dimension. We summarize various neuro-symbolic ap-
proaches along these dimensions in Table 1. Furthermore,
for ease of writing, the table mentions for each system the
key reference (so that we do not always have to repeat
these references).