we ﬁnd[Rocktäschel et al. , 2015; Minervini et al. , 2017;
Demeester et al. , 2016].
Now that we discussed how entities can be represented
by symbols and sub-symbols, let us discuss how they can
be used for reasoning. Most methods either only work
with logic reasoning on symbols, or perform algebraic op-
erations on sub-symbols. However, some methods can use
both simultaneously . A very powerful and elegant mecha-
nism for reasoning about symbols in ﬁrst order logic is uni-
ﬁcation . It is used to reason about equality at the symbolic
level. For instance, the atomic expressions p(a,Y)and
p(X,b)can be uniﬁed using the substitution {X=a,Y=
b}. Uniﬁcation not only works for constants but also for
structured terms f(t1,...,tn)where fis a structured term
and the tiare constants, variables or structured terms them-
selves.
While uniﬁcation is not supported by standard neural
networks, reasoning about equality corresponds closely to
reasoning about similarity in embedding space. Entities ar e
typically embedded in some metric space, and represented
through their embeddings, that is, through sub-symbols.
Reasoning typically proceeds by performing algebraic oper -
ations (such as vector addition) on these embeddings, and
considering the similarity between two entities by using
their distance in embedding space. It is quite interesting
to see to what extent current neuro-symbolic approaches
support uniﬁcation on the one hand, and to what extent
the use of embeddings has been integrated into the neuro-
symbolic logics as a kind of softequality or uniﬁcation
This idea was implemented in NTPs and NLProlog as soft
orweak uniﬁcation . In these systems, two entities can be
uniﬁed if they are similar, and not just if they are identical .
As such, this system can interweave both symbols and sub-
symbols during inference. For each entity , an embedding
is learned and their similarity is determined based on the
distance between the embeddings using a radial basis func-
tion. However, this potentially adds a lot of different proo f
paths, which can result in computational issues for larger
programs. This problem was solved in later iterations of
the system[Minervini et al. , 2020].
8 Type of logic
There is a natural ordering of logical representations, sta rt-
ing with propositional logic (only arity 0 predicates), to
relational logic (having no structured terms, so only con-
stants and variables as terms, which is also the basis for
the Datalog database language), to general ﬁrst order logic
(FOL), and then to logic programs (LP) as in the program-
ming language Prolog. Logic programs are usually re-
stricted to deﬁnite clauses, while the semantics of a deﬁ-
nite clause program is given by its least Herbrand model,
the set of all ground facts that are logically entailed by the
program. This contrasts with the standard semantics of ﬁrst
order logic that would also allow for other models. This dif-
ference carries over to StarAI, where probabilistic logic p ro-
grams and Markov Logic inherit their semantics from logic
programming, respectively ﬁrst order logic. This explains ,
for instance, why Markov Logic’s semantics boils down toa maximum entropy approach when a theory has multiple
models (such as a∨b), cf.[De Raedt and Kimmig, 2015;
De Raedt et al. , 2016]for more details. On the other hand,
logic programs are also the basis for the programming lan-
guage Prolog, which implies that they can be used to spec-
ify traditional programs such as sorting and data structure s
such as lists through structured terms. This is relevant esp e-
cially for those approaches to neurosymbolic computation
that are used to synthesize programs from examples.
Neuro-symbolic representations typically extend one of
these four types of logic: propositional, relational, ﬁrst or-
der logic, or logic programs. For instance, SL focuses only
on the propositional setting. On the other hand, ∂ILP , NTPs
and DiffLog are based on Datalog, which belongs to re-
lational logic segment. LTNs and SBR use fuzzy logic to
translate a general FOL theory into a training objective, ei -
ther isolated or in conjunction with a supervised criterion .
Just like Markov Logic, also RNM and NMLN use ﬁrst or-
der logic to generate a random ﬁeld. Finally , DeepProbLog,
NLProlog and LRNN are examples of neuro-symbolic logic
programming frameworks.
9 Open challenges
To conclude, we now list a number of challenges for NeSy,
which deserve, in our opinion, more attention.
Probabilistic reasoning Although relatively few meth-
ods explore the integration of logical and neural methods
through probabilities perspective, we believe that a proba -
bilistic approach is the best way to principally integrate t he
two[De Raedt et al. , 2019]. There should be further inves-
tigation into the applicability of probabilistic reasonin g for
neuro-symbolic computation.
Structure learning While signiﬁcant progress has been
made on learning the structure of purely relational models
(without probabilities), learning StarAI models remains a
major challenge due to the complexity of inference and the
combinatorial nature of the problem. Incorporating neural
aspects complicates the problem even more. NeSy methods
have certainly shown potential for addressing this problem
(Section 6), but the existing methods are still limited and
mostly domain-speciﬁc which impedes their wide applica-
tion.
Scaling inference Scalable inference is a major chal-
lenge for StarAI and therefore also for NeSy approaches
with an explicit logical or probabilistic reasoning com-
ponent. Investigating to which extent neural methods
can help with this challenge by means of lifted (exploit-
ing symmetries in models) or approximate inference, as
well as reasoning from the intermediate representations
[Abboud et al. , 2020], are promising future research direc-
tions.
Data efﬁciency A major advantage of StarAI methods, as
compared to neural ones, is their data efﬁciency – StarAI
methods can efﬁciently learn from small amount of data,
whereas neural methods are data hungry . On the other
hand, StarAI methods do not scale to big data sets, while
neural methods can easily handle them. We believe that