model can be a graphical model, or alternatively , it can be a
ground weighted logical theory on which traditional infer-
ence methods apply , such as belief propagation or weighted
model counting. This is used in well known systems such
as MLNs, PSL, BLPs, and PRMs. Some systems like PRMs
and BLPs also use aggregates or combining rules in their
knowledge base construction approach. The idea then is to
combine multiple conditional probability distributions i nto
one using, e.g., noisy-or.
Alternatively , one can follow a proof or trace based
approach to deﬁne the probability distribution and per-
form inference. This is akin to what happens in prob-
abilistic programming (cf. also [Russell, 2015]), in
StarAI frameworks such as PLPs, probabilistic databases
[Van den Broeck et al. , 2017]and probabilistic uniﬁcation
based grammars such as Stochastic Logic Programs (SLPs)
[Muggleton, 1996 ]. The idea is that a proof will form the
basis for probabilistic inference. Just like pure logic sup -
ports the model-theoretic and proof-theoretic, both per-
spectives have been explored in parallel for some of the
probabilistic logic programming languages such as ICL
[Poole, 2008]and ProbLog[Fierens et al. , 2015].
Again this carries over to neuro-symbolic methods. Ap-
proaches of NTPs, DeepProblog, ∂ILP and DiffLog are
proof-based. The probabilities or certainties that these s ys-
tems output are based on the enumerated proofs, and they
are also able to learn how to combine them. In contrast, ap-
proaches of LRNN, LTNs, RNM, NMLN, NLM and NeuralLP
are all based on grounding. Learning in these models is
done through learning the (shared) parameters over the
ground model and inference is based on possible ground-
ings of the model.
4 Logic vs Probability vs Neural
When two paradigms are integrated, examining which of
the base paradigms are preserved, and to which extent,
tells us a lot about the strengths and weaknesses of the
resulting paradigm. In StarAI, the traditional knowledge
based model construction approach is to use the logic only
to generate a probabilistic graphical model, implying that
both the inference and the semantics are pushed inside the
graphical model. The effect is that it is often harder to rea-
son at a purely logical level with such systems. What is
meant here is that it may become unclear how to apply log-
ical inference rules such as resolution (or extensions that
take into account the parameters) to such models or what
the effect of applying such rules will be. This is what hap-
pens with systems such as PRMs, BLPs, PSL , and MLNs.
For instance, in MLNs the addition of the resolvent of two
weighted rules, makes it hard to predict the effect on the
distribution. On the other hand, the opposite holds for PLPs
and its variants. While it is clear what the effect of a log-
ical operation is, it is often harder to directly identify an d
exploit properties such as conditional or contextual inde-
pendencies, which are needed for efﬁcient probabilistic in -
ference.
This position on the spectrum between logic and prob-
ability has a profound inﬂuence on the properties of theunderlying model. For NeSy, the spectrum involves not
only logic and neural networks, but often also probabil-
ity . It has been argued that when combining different
perspectives in one model or framework, such as neural,
logic and probabilistic ones, it is desirable to have the
originals or base paradigms as a special case, see also
[De Raedt et al. , 2019].
The vast majority of current NeSy approaches focus
on the neural aspect (i.e., they originated as a fully
neural method to which logical components have been
added). Some of these approaches like LTNs and Tensor-
Log[Cohen et al. , 2017]pursue a kind of knowledge-based
model construction approach in which the logic is compiled
away into the neural network architecture. A different fam-
ily of NeSy approaches, which includes SL and SBR, turns
the logic into a regularization function to provide a penalt y
whenever the desired logical theory or constraints are vi-
olated. This leads to the logic being compiled into the
weights of the trained neural network.
A small number of NeSy methods, however, retain the
focus on logic. Some of these methods start from ex-
isting logic (programming) frameworks and extend them
with primitives that allow them to interface with neural
networks and allow for differentiable operations. Exam-
ples include DeepProbLog and DiffLog. Other methods in-
stead take an existing framework and turn it into a differ-
entiable version. The key inference concepts are mapped
onto an analogous concept that behaves identically for
the edge cases, but is continuous and differentiable in
non-deterministic cases. Such methods include ∂ILP ,∂4
[Bošnjak et al. , 2017]and NTPs.
Even for methods that focus on logic, it can be use-
ful to map the problem onto an intermediate representa-
tion. One such idea concerns performing probabilistic in-
ference by mapping it onto a weighted model counting
(WMC) problem. This can then in turn be solved by com-
piling it into a structure (e.g. an arithmetic circuit) that
allows for efﬁcient inference. This has the added bene-
ﬁt that this structure is differentiable, which can facilit ate
the integration between logic based systems and neural
networks. DeepProbLog, for example, uses this approach.
In[Zuidberg Dos Martires et al. , 2019], the authors argue
that this intermediate representation can serve as an assem-
bly language for AI .
5 Semantics
Traditionally , StarAI combines two semantics: a logical an d
a probabilistic one. In a logical semantics, atoms are as-
signed a truth value in the {true,false}set (i.e.{0,1}). In a
probabilistic semantics, probability is deﬁned as a measure
over sets of possible worlds, where each possible world is
an assignment of values to the random variables. This im-
plies that a probabilistic logic semantics deﬁnes probabil -
ity distributions over ground logical interpretations, th at is,
over sets of ground facts. Prominent examples in StarAI
are ProbLog (from the directed side) and Markov Logic
(from the undirected one). However, the complexity of in-
ference in probabilistic logic has led to statistical relat ional