2 Directed vs undirected
Within the graphical model community there is a distinc-
tion between the directed andundirected graphical models
[Koller and Friedman, 2009 ], which has led to two distinct
types of StarAI systems. The ﬁrst generalizes directed mod-
els, and resembles Bayesian networks; the second gener-
alizes undirected models like Markov networks or random
ﬁelds. The key difference between the two is that the ﬁrst
class of models indicates a natural direction (sometimes th e
term “causal” is used) between the different random vari-
ables, while the second one does not.
In StarAI, the ﬁrst category includes well-
known representations such as plate notation
[Koller and Friedman, 2009 ], probabilistic relational mod-
els (PRMs)[Friedman et al. , 1999], probabilistic logic pro-
grams (PLPs)[De Raedt and Kimmig, 2015 ], and Bayesian
logic programs (BLPs) [Kersting and De Raedt, 2007 ].
Today the most typical and popular representatives of
this category are the probabilistic (logic) programs. The
second category includes Markov Logic Networks (MLNs)
[Richardson and Domingos, 2006 ]and Probabilistic Soft
Logic (PSL)[Bach et al. , 2017]. They essentially specify a
set of weighted constraints, clauses or formulae.
From a logical perspective, the difference amounts to us-
ing a form of deﬁnite clauses (as in the programming lan-
guage Prolog) versus the use of full clausal logic or even
ﬁrst order logic. On the one side, a deﬁnite clause is an
expression of the form h←b1∧...∧bnwhere hand the
biare logical atoms of the form p(t1,...,tm), with pbe-
ing a predicate of arity mand the tibeing terms, that
is, constants, variables, or structured terms of the form
f(t1,...,tn), where fis a functor and the tiare again terms.
On the other side, full clausal logic also allows for formula e
of the form h1∨...∨hm←b1,...,bn.
In the ﬁrst type of rule the direction of the implication
indicates, just like the direction of the arrows in a Bayesia n
network, what can be inferred from what. In the second
type of rule, this relationship is blurred because of the dis -
junction in the head of the rule, which allows multiple con-
clusions for the same premises. This explains why the ﬁrst
type of rule is more directly used for inference, while the
second more as a constraint. It also reﬂects the kind of
knowledge that the user has about the problem. With di-
rected models, one can express that a set of variables has a
direct “causal” inﬂuence on another one, while with undi-
rected ones one expresses a kind of (soft) constraints on a
set of variables, that is, that the variables are related to o ne
another.
Borrowing this view from StarAI, we can devise a ﬁrst
dimension for neuro-symbolic approaches, which relies en-
tirely on the logical perspective outlined above.
The ﬁrst category includes NeSy systems based
on Prolog or Datalog, such as Neural Theorem
Provers (NTPs) [Rocktäschel and Riedel, 2017 ],
NLProlog[Weber et al. , 2019], DeepProbLog
[Manhaeve et al. , 2018]and DiffLog[Siet al. , 2019].
These systems retain the directed nature of logical infer-
ence as they exploit backward chaining. Lifted RelationalNeural Networks (LRNNs) [Šourek et al. , 2018]and∂ILP
[Evans and Grefenstette, 2018 ]are other examples of
non-probabilistic directed models, where deﬁnite clauses
are compiled into a neural network architecture in a
forward chaining fashion. The systems that imitate logical
reasoning with tensor calculus, Neural Logic Programming
(NeuralLP)[Yang et al. , 2017]and Neural Logic Machines
(NLM)[Dong et al. , 2019], are likewise instances of
directed logic.
The undirected NeSy approaches consider logic as a con-
straint on the behaviour of a predictive model. A large
group of approaches, including Semantic Based regulariza-
tion (SBR)[Diligenti et al. , 2017]and Semantic Loss (SL)
[Xuet al. , 2018], exploits logical knowledge as a soft con-
straint over the hypothesis space in a way that favours so-
lutions consistent with the encoded knowledge. SBR im-
plements predicates as neural networks and translates the
provided logical formulas into a real valued regularizatio n
by means of fuzzy logic, while SL uses marginal probabil-
ities of the target atoms to deﬁne the regularization term
and relies on arithmetic circuits [Darwiche, 2011]to eval-
uate it efﬁciently .
Another group of approaches, including Logic Tensor
Networks (LTN) [Donadello et al. , 2017], Neural Markov
Logic Networks (NMLN) [Marra and Kuželka, 2019 ]and
Relational Neural Machines (RNM) [Marra et al. , 2020]
extend MLNs, allowing either predicates (LTN) or
factors (NMLN and RNM) to be implemented as neu-
ral architectures. Finally , [Rocktäschel et al. , 2015;
Demeester et al. , 2016]compute ground atoms scores as
dot products between relation and entities embeddings;
implication rules are then translated into a logical loss
by means of continuous relaxation of the implication
operator.
3 Grounding vs proofs
From a logical perspective there is a model-theoretic and a
proof-theoretic perspective to inference. This is clear wh en
looking at the difference between Answer Set Program-
ming and the programming language Prolog. In the model
theoretic perspective, one ﬁrst grounds out the clauses in
the theory and then calls a SAT solver (possibly after break-
ing cycles), while in a proof theoretic perspective, one per -
forms a sequence of inference steps in order to obtain a
proof.
Grounding is the step whereby a clause c(or formula)
containing variables {V1,...,Vk}is replaced by all instances
cθwhereθis a substitution{V1=c1,...Vk=ck}and the
ciare constants (or other ground terms) appearing in the
domain. The resulting clause cθis that obtained by simul-
taneously replacing all variables by the corresponding con -
stants. Usually the grounding process is optimised in order
to obtain only those ground clauses that are relevant for
the considered inference task.
These two perspectives carry over to the StarAI perspec-
tive. Many StarAI systems use the logic as a kind of tem-
plate to ground out the relational model in order to obtain
a grounded model and perform inference. This grounded