approaches (e.g. [Bach et al. , 2017]), where the truth val-
ues are relaxed in the continuous interval [0,1]and logic
operators are turned into real valued functions. This set-
ting is described in terms of fuzzy logic (or soft logic) se-
mantics, mathematically grounded in the t-norm theory . By
exploiting the translation of Boolean formulas into real va l-
ued functions, the fuzzy semantics allows to exploit alge-
braic and geometric properties of t-norms (including es-
pecially their differentiability) to reduce complexity . T he
main issue of fuzzy semantics in the context of StarAI is
that it is often not exploited to describe problems that are
intrinsically vague[Fine, 1975], but, simplistically , as a con-
tinuous surrogate of Boolean logic. A side effect of this
approximation is that many properties of the original logi-
cal theory can be realised in many different ways in their
continuous translation. Indeed, the fuzziﬁcation procedure
alters the logical properties of the original theory (such a s
satisﬁability), depending on the particular connectives e x-
ploited in the conversion. For example, in the Łukasiewicz
t-norm tŁ(x,y)=max{0,x+y−1}, the conjunction can
be 0 (i.e. false) even without any of the elements being 0
(e.g. x=y=0.5).
Neuro-symbolic approaches can easily be categorized in
terms of the same logical, probabilistic or fuzzy semantics .
Neural enhancements of the logic semantics either use neu-
ral networks to turn perceptive input to a logical atom or
introduce a relaxed version of logical reasoning performed
through tensor calculus. An instance of the former is ABL
[Daiet al. , 2019], which use logical abduction to provide
the feedback for a neural model processing the perceptive
input. Tensor calculus approaches, such as NLM and Neu-
ralLP , interpret predicates as tensors grounded over all co n-
stants in a domain and interpret clauses as a product of
those matrices.
Neural enhancements of the probabilistic semantics usu-
ally reparameterize the underlying distribution in terms o f
neural components. In particular, DeepProbLog exploits
neural predicates to compute the probabilities of probabil is-
tic facts as the output of neural computations over vectoria l
representations of the constants, which is similar to SL in
the propositional counterpart. NMLN and RNM use neural
potentials in order to implement factors (or their weights)
as neural networks. [Rocktäschel et al. , 2015]computes
marginal probabilities as logistic functions over similar ity
measures between embeddings of entities and relations.
Neural enhancements of the fuzzy semantics are usu-
ally realised by allowing continuous truth values to be the
outcome of a neural process and the differentiability of
the corresponding t-norm allows for an easy integration
with neural computation frameworks. In particular, SBR
and LTN turn atoms into neural networks taking as inputs
the feature representation of the constants and returning
the corresponding truth value. Similarly , in LRNN and
[Wang and Pan, 2019 ], the output of the neurons of the log-
ical network can be interpreted as fuzzy truth values of the
corresponding atoms.
Finally , there is a large class of methods
[Minervini et al. , 2017; Demeester et al. , 2016;
Cohen et al. , 2017; Weber et al. , 2019]realised by re-laxing logical statements in a numeric way , without giving
any other speciﬁc semantics, either probabilistic or fuzzy .
Here, atoms are assigned scores in /Rbbbcomputed by a neural
scoring function over embeddings. Numerical approxi-
mations are then applied either to combine these scores
according to logical formulas or to aggregate proofs scores .
The resulting neural architecture is usually differentiab le
and, thus, trained end-to-end.
6 Learning parameters or structure
StarAI distinguishes between two types of learning: struc-
ture learning, which corresponds to learning the logical
clauses of the model [Kok and Domingos, 2005 ], and pa-
rameter learning in which the probabilities or weights of
the clauses have to be estimated [Gutmann et al. , 2008;
Lowd and Domingos, 2007 ].
This distinction is less clear in the NeSy setting. Unlike
what is common in StarAI, the NeSy approaches do not per-
form a search through the discrete space of possible clauses ,
but rather through the space of parameters of such clauses
which are typically enumerated by following a template (of-
ten with a predeﬁned complexity). Examples of such sys-
tems include NTPs, ∂ILP , DeepProbLog, NeuralLP and Dif-
fLog. Alternatively , one can provide a sketch of the desired
program – a program with certain decisions left blank – and
learn a NeSy model to ﬁll out the blanks, such as Deep-
ProbLog and∂4.
A substantial number of approaches tries to leverage
the best of both worlds. These ideas include using neural
models to guide the symbolic search [Kalyan et al. , 2018;
Ellis et al. , 2018a; Valkov et al. , 2018], or using a neural
model to produce a program that is then executed symbol-
ically[Ellis et al. , 2018b; Mao et al. , 2019].
7 Symbols vs Sub-symbols
An important factor in both StarAI and NeSy systems is
the representation of entities. StarAI generally represen ts
entities by constants (symbols). But neural methods are
numerical by nature and therefore symbols are replaced
with sub-symbols, i.e., vectorized representations. If th e
entity has inherent numerical properties, these could be
used as sub-symbols (e.g. the pixel data of an image).
However, if this is not the case, a one-hot encoding or
learned embedding can be used instead. This, of course,
has an impact on the generalizability of the system to-
wards unseen entities, as new embeddings have to be
learned for new symbols. Naturally , among the neuro-
symbolic methods, there is a wide variety in how symbols
and sub-symbols are used in representation and reasoning.
The idea of mapping entities onto sub-symbols is made
very explicit in LTNs, where in a ﬁrst step, all symbols
are replaced with sub-symbols. In DeepProbLog, entities
are represented using symbols, but they sometimes have
sub-symbolic representations that are only used inside the
neural networks. Similarly , in [Lippi and Frasconi, 2009 ]
and RNM, MLNs are conditioned on a feature represen-
tation of constants (e.g. images, audio signals, etc.). Fi-
nally , among those models exploiting learned embeddings,