only makes use of this head. When λ= 0, our total loss falls back to the loss used for PGD training.
For our experiments, we use λ= 0.5and the following rotation-based self-supervised loss
LSS(x;θ) =1
4
/summationdisplay
r∈{0◦,90◦,180◦,270◦}LCE(one_hot(r),prot_head(r|Rr(x));θ)
, (4)
whereRr(x)is a rotation transformation and LCE(x,r;θ)is the cross-entropy between the auxiliary
head’s output and the ground-truth label r∈ {0◦,90◦,180◦,270◦}. In order to adapt the PGD
adversary to the new training setup, we modify the loss used in the PGD update equation (2) to
maximize both the rotation loss and the classiﬁcation loss. In the Appendix, we ﬁnd that this
modiﬁcation is optional and that the main source of improvement comes from the rotation loss itself.
We report results with the modiﬁcation here, for completeness. The overall loss that PGD will try to
maximize for each training image is LCE(y,p(y|x);θ)+LSS(x;θ). At test-time, the PGD loss does
not include the LSSterm, as we want to attack the image classiﬁer and not the rotation classiﬁer.
Results and analysis. We are able to attain large improvements over standard PGD training by
adding self-supervised rotation prediction. Table 1contains results of our model against PGD
adversaries with K= 20 andK= 100 . In both cases, we are able to achieve a 5.6% absolute
improvement over classical PGD training. In Figure 2, we observe that our method of adding
auxiliary rotations actually provides larger gains over standard PGD training as the maximum
perturbation distance εincreases. The ﬁgure also shows that our method can withstand up to 11%
larger perturbations than PGD training without any drop in performance.
In order to demonstrate that our method does not rely on gradient obfuscation, we attempted to
attack our models using SPSA [Uesato et al., 2018] and failed to notice any performance degradation
compared to standard PGD training. In addition, since our self-supervised method has the nice
property of being easily adaptable to supplement other different supervised defenses, we also studied
the effect of adding self-supervised rotations to stronger defenses such as TRADES [Zhang et al.,
2019]. We found that self-supervision is able to help in this setting as well. Our best-performing
TRADES + rotations model gives a 1.22% boost over standard TRADES and a 7.79% boost over
standard PGD training in robust accuracy. For implementation details, see code.
3.2 Robustness to Common Corruptions
Setup. In real-world applications of computer vision systems, inputs can be corrupted in various
ways that may not have been encountered during training. Improving robustness to these common
corruptions is especially important in safety-critical applications. Hendrycks and Dietterich [2019]
create a set of ﬁfteen test corruptions and four validation corruptions common corruptions to measure
input corruption robustness. These corruptions fall into noise, blur, weather, and digital categories.
Examples include shot noise, zoom blur, snow, and JPEG compression.
We use the CIFAR-10-C validation dataset from Hendrycks and Dietterich [2019] and compare the
robustness of normally trained classiﬁers to classiﬁers trained with an auxiliary rotation prediction
loss. As in previous sections, we predict all four rotations in parallel in each batch. We use 40-2 Wide
Residual Networks and the same optimization hyperparameters as before. We do not tune on the
validation corruptions, so we report average performance over all corruptions. Results are in Figure 3.
Results and analysis. The baseline of normal training achieves a clean accuracy of 94.7% and
an average accuracy over all corruptions of 72.3%. Training with auxiliary rotations maintains
clean accuracy at 95.5% but increases the average accuracy on corrupted images by 4.6% to 76.9%.
Thus, the beneﬁts of self-supervision to robustness are masked by similar accuracy on clean images.
Performance gains are spread across corruptions, with a small loss of performance in only one
corruption type, JPEG compression. For glass blur, clean accuracy improves by 11.4%, and for
Gaussian noise it improves by 11.6%. Performance is also improved by 8.9% on contrast and shot
noise and 4.2% on frost, indicating substantial gains in robustness on a wide variety of corruptions.
These results demonstrate that self-supervision can regularize networks to be more robust even if
clean accuracy is not affected.
3.3 Robustness to Label Corruptions
Setup. Training classiﬁers on corrupted labels can severely degrade performance. Thus, several
prior works have explored training deep neural networks to be robust to label noise in the multi-class
4