out-of-distribution data. For Outlier Exposure to work successfully, we applied the aforementioned
geometric transformations to the outlier images so that the in-distribution data and the outliers are as
similar as possible.
Results are in Table 3. Notice many self-supervised techniques perform better than methods speciﬁ-
cally designed for one-class learning. Also notice that our self-supervised technique outperforms
Outlier Exposure, the state-of-the-art fully supervised method, which also requires access to out-of-
distribution samples to train. In consequence, a model trained with self-supervision can surpass a
fully supervised model. Combining our self-supervised technique with supervision through Outlier
Exposure nearly solves this CIFAR-10 task.
4.2.2 ImageNet
Dataset. We consequently turn to a harder dataset to test self-supervised techniques. For this
experiment, we select 30 classes from ImageNet Deng et al. [2009]. See the Appendix for the classes.
Method. Like before, we demonstrate that a self-supervised model can surpass a model that is
fully supervised. The fully supervised model is trained with Outlier Exposure using ImageNet-22K
outliers (with ImageNet-1K images removed). The architectural backbone for these experiments is a
ResNet-18. Images are resized such that the smallest side has 256 pixels, while the aspect ratio is
maintained. Images are randomly cropped to the size 224×224×3. Since images are larger than
CIFAR-10, new additions to the self-supervised method are possible. Consequently, we can teach
the network to predict whether than image has been resized. In addition, since we should like the
network to more easily learn shape and compare regions across the whole image, we discovered
there is utility in self-attention [Woo et al., 2018] for this task. Other architectural changes, such as
using a Wide RevNet [Behrmann et al., 2018] instead of a Wide ResNet, can increase the AUROC
from 65.3% to 77.5%. AUROCs are shown in Table 4. Self-supervised methods outperform the fully
supervised baseline by a large margin, yet there is still wide room for improvement on large-scale
OOD detection.
Method AUROC
Supervised (OE) 56.1
RotNet 65.3
RotNet + Translation 77.9
RotNet + Self-Attention 81.6
RotNet + Translation + Self-Attention 84.8
RotNet + Translation + Self-Attention + Resize (Ours) 85.7
Table 4: AUROC values of supervised and self-supervised OOD detectors. AUROC values are
an average of 30 AUROCs corresponding to the 30 different models trained on exactly one of the
30 classes. Each model’s in-distribution examples are from one of 30 classes, and the test out-
of-distribution samples are from the remaining 29 classes. The self-supervised methods greatly
outperform the supervised method. All values are percentages.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we applied self-supervised learning to improve the robustness and uncertainty of
deep learning models beyond what was previously possible with purely supervised approaches. We
found large improvements in robustness to adversarial examples, label corruption, and common
input corruptions. For all types of robustness that we studied, we observed consistent gains by
supplementing current supervised methods with an auxiliary rotation loss. We also found that self-
supervised methods can drastically improve out-of-distribution detection on difﬁcult, near-distribution
anomalies, and that in CIFAR and ImageNet experiments, self-supervised methods outperform fully
supervised methods. Self-supervision had the largest improvement over supervised techniques in our
ImageNet experiments, where the larger input size meant that we were able to apply a more complex
self-supervised objective. Our results suggest that future work in building more robust models and
better data representations could beneﬁt greatly from self-supervised approaches.
9