change. Importantly, these methods can improve robustness and uncertainty estimation without re-
quiring larger models or additional data [Schmidt et al., 2018, Kurakin et al., 2017]. They can be used
with task-speciﬁc methods for additive effect with no additional assumptions. With self-supervised
learning, we make tangible progress on adversarial robustness, label corruption, common input
corruptions, and out-of-distribution detection, suggesting that future self-supervised learning methods
could also be judged by their utility for uncertainty estimates and model robustness. Code and our
expanded ImageNet validation dataset are available at https://github.com/hendrycks/ss-ood .
2 Related Work
Figure 1: Predicting rotation requires modeling
shape. Texture alone is not sufﬁcient for determin-
ing whether the zebra is ﬂipped, although it may
be sufﬁcient for classiﬁcation under ideal condi-
tions. Thus, training with self-supervised auxiliary
rotations may improve robustness.Self-supervised learning. A number of self-
supervised methods have been proposed, each
exploring a different pretext task. Doersch et al.
[2015] predict the relative position of image
patches and use the resulting representation to
improve object detection. Dosovitskiy et al.
[2016] create surrogate classes to train on by
transforming seed image patches. Similarly, Gi-
daris et al. [2018] predict image rotations (Fig-
ure1). Other approaches include using coloriza-
tion as a proxy task [Larsson et al., 2016], deep
clustering methods [Ji et al., 2018], and methods
that maximize mutual information [Hjelm et al.,
2019] with high-level representations [van den
Oord et al., 2018, Hénaff et al., 2019]. These
works focus on the utility of self-supervision for
learning without labeled data and do not consider its effect on robustness and uncertainty.
Robustness. Improving model robustness refers to the goal of ensuring machine learning models
are resistant across a variety of imperfect training and testing conditions. Hendrycks and Dietterich
[2019] look at how models can handle common real-world image corruptions (such as fog, blur, and
JPEG compression) and propose a comprehensive set of distortions to evaluate real-world robustness.
Another robustness problem is learning in the presence of corrupted labels [Nettleton et al., 2010,
Patrini et al., 2017]. To this end, Hendrycks et al. [2018] introduce Gold Loss Correction (GLC), a
method that uses a small set of trusted labels to improve accuracy in this setting. With high degrees
of label corruption, models start to overﬁt the misinformation in the corrupted labels [Zhang and
Sabuncu, 2018, Hendrycks et al., 2019a], suggesting a need for ways to supplement training with
reliable signals from unsupervised objectives. Madry et al. [2018] explore adversarial robustness
and propose PGD adversarial training, where models are trained with a minimax robust optimization
objective. Zhang et al. [2019] improve upon this work with a modiﬁed loss function and develop a
better understanding of the trade-off between adversarial accuracy and natural accuracy.
Out-of-distribution detection. Out-of-distribution detection has a long history. Traditional meth-
ods such as one-class SVMs [Schölkopf et al., 1999] have been revisited with deep representations
[Ruff et al., 2018], yielding improvements on complex data. A central line of recent exploration
has been with out-of-distribution detectors using supervised representations. Hendrycks and Gimpel
[2017] propose using the maximum softmax probability of a classiﬁer for out-of-distribution detection.
Lee et al. [2018] expand on this by generating synthetic outliers and training the representations to
ﬂag these examples as outliers. However, Hendrycks et al. [2019b] ﬁnd that training against a large
and diverse dataset of outliers enables far better out-of-distribution detection on unseen distributions.
In these works, detection is most difﬁcult for near-distribution outliers, which suggests a need for
new methods that force the model to learn more about the structure of in-distribution examples.
3 Robustness
3.1 Robustness to Adversarial Perturbations
Improving robustness to adversarial inputs has proven difﬁcult, with adversarial training providing
the only longstanding gains [Carlini and Wagner, 2017, Athalye et al., 2018]. In this section, we
demonstrate that auxiliary self-supervision in the form of predicting rotations [Gidaris et al., 2018] can
2