Using Self-Supervised Learning Can Improve Model
Robustness and Uncertainty
Dan Hendrycks
UC Berkeley
hendrycks@berkeley.eduMantas Mazeika∗
UIUC
mantas3@illinois.edu
Saurav Kadavath*
UC Berkeley
sauravkadavath@berkeley.eduDawn Song
UC Berkeley
dawnsong@berkeley.edu
Abstract
Self-supervision provides effective representations for downstream tasks without
requiring labels. However, existing approaches lag behind fully supervised training
and are often not thought beneﬁcial beyond obviating or reducing the need for
annotations. We ﬁnd that self-supervision can beneﬁt robustness in a variety of
ways, including robustness to adversarial examples, label corruption, and common
input corruptions. Additionally, self-supervision greatly beneﬁts out-of-distribution
detection on difﬁcult, near-distribution outliers, so much so that it exceeds the
performance of fully supervised methods. These results demonstrate the promise of
self-supervision for improving robustness and uncertainty estimation and establish
these tasks as new axes of evaluation for future self-supervised learning research.
1 Introduction
Self-supervised learning holds great promise for improving representations when labeled data are
scarce. In semi-supervised learning, recent self-supervision methods are state-of-the-art [Gidaris
et al., 2018, Dosovitskiy et al., 2016, Zhai et al., 2019], and self-supervision is essential in video
tasks where annotation is costly [V ondrick et al., 2016, 2018]. To date, however, self-supervised
approaches lag behind fully supervised training on standard accuracy metrics and research has existed
in a mode of catching up to supervised performance. Additionally, when used in conjunction with
fully supervised learning on a fully labeled dataset, self-supervision has little impact on accuracy.
This raises the question of whether large labeled datasets render self-supervision needless.
We show that while self-supervision does not substantially improve accuracy when used in tandem
with standard training on fully labeled datasets, it can improve several aspects of model robustness, in-
cluding robustness to adversarial examples [Madry et al., 2018], label corruptions [Patrini et al., 2017,
Zhang and Sabuncu, 2018], and common input corruptions such as fog, snow, and blur [Hendrycks
and Dietterich, 2019]. Importantly, these gains are masked if one looks at clean accuracy alone,
for which performance stays constant. Moreover, we ﬁnd that self-supervision greatly improves
out-of-distribution detection for difﬁcult, near-distribution examples, a long-standing and underex-
plored problem. In fact, using self-supervised learning techniques on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet for
out-of-distribution detection, we are even able to surpass fully supervised methods .
These results demonstrate that self-supervision need not be viewed as a collection of techniques
allowing models to catch up to full supervision. Rather, using the two in conjunction provides strong
regularization that improves robustness and uncertainty estimation even if clean accuracy does not
∗Equal Contribution.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.