Computers 2023 ,12, 151 19 of 41
N
CR
C
I
LO
F
SD
Fully Connected
Max pooling 
size(2x2)Kernel size(5x5) Kernel size(3x3) Kernel size( 3x3) Kernel size(3x3) Kernel size(3x3)1024
512
Input image 
(124x124)
Figure 9. CNN architecture used in our previous work [149].
The work discussed in [ 151] developed a novel deep ensemble learning technique
that uses CNN and vision transformer models to detect and classify olive leaf illnesses.
Disease detection algorithms based on deep learning are becoming increasingly essential in
agriculture, but the diversity of plant species and regional features of many species make
them difﬁcult to build. Due to the range of pathogens that can infect olive groves, olive leaf
diseases are difﬁcult to diagnose. The authors built binary and multi-classiﬁcation methods
using deep convolutional models. The proposed deep ensemble learning technique uses
CNN and vision transformer models to achieve 96% multi-class classiﬁcation accuracy
and 97% binary classiﬁcation accuracy, beating other models. This study suggests that the
proposed approach could detect and classify olive leaf illnesses, which could assist olive
growers by enabling timely disease identiﬁcation and treatment. Thus, the work developed
a novel deep ensemble learning technique for olive leaf disease detection and classiﬁcation,
which could increase olive grove proﬁtability and sustainability.
The work discussed in [ 105] developed a strong mask detection model utilizing
computer vision to tackle COVID-19. The authors remark that the COVID-19 epidemic
has motivated the artiﬁcial intelligence community to research new ways to ﬁght the
disease, and computer vision, a sub-discipline of AI, has been effective in many sectors.
The authors have since contributed a few articles using computer vision for COVID-19
tasks. The suggested mask detection model can identify persons wearing prescribed masks,
those not wearing masks, and those not wearing masks properly. Experiments prove the
model’s power and robustness. Thus, this work developed a computer vision-based mask
recognition algorithm to help battle COVID-19 by detecting those who are not wearing
masks or wearing them improperly.
The work discussed in [ 152] explores visual spam classiﬁcation using deep convolu-
tional neural networks (DCNNs) and transfer-learning-based pre-trained CNN models.
Image spam, which uses images to bypass text-based spam ﬁlters, was classiﬁed using two
DCNN models and several pre-trained ImageNet architectures on three datasets. Cost-
sensitive learning was also tested for data imbalance. In the best situation, several of the
presented models approach 99% accuracy with zero false positives, improving picture
spam classiﬁcation. This study proposes employing DCNNs and transfer-learning-based
pre-trained CNN models to improve visual spam categorization.
The work discussed in [ 153] developed a neural-network-based approach for detecting
driver micro-naps and sleepiness. In this work, the authors use facial landmarks detected
by a camera as input to a convolutional neural network to categorize tiredness instead of
a multi-layer perceptron. The suggested CNN-based model obtains high accuracy rates,
with more than 88% for the category without glasses, more than 85% for the category night
without glasses, and an overall average accuracy of more than 83% in all categories. The
proposed model has a maximum size of 75 KB and is smaller, simpler, and more storage-
efﬁcient than the benchmark model. This lightweight and accurate CNN-based model