Computers 2023 ,12, 151 14 of 41
 
   Predicted class   Actual class  
 
 
  Positive  Negative   Positive  
True Positive (TP)  False Negative 
(FN)  
Type II Error  Recall  
𝑻𝑷
𝑻𝑷+𝑭𝑵 Negative  
False Positive (FP)  
Type I Error  True Negative (TN)  Specificity  
𝑻𝑵
𝑻𝑵+𝑭𝑷 
  Precision  
𝑻𝑷
𝑻𝑷+𝑭𝑷 Negative 
predictive value  
𝑻𝑵
𝑻𝑵+𝑭𝑵 Accuracy  
𝑻𝑷+𝑻𝑵
𝑻𝑷+𝑻𝑵+𝑭𝑵+𝑭𝑷 
Figure 7. Confusion matrix.
The results are divided into four categories:
• True positive ( TP): The “true positive” category in the confusion matrix represents the
number of instances in which the model accurately predicts the positive class or event
out of all the true positive instances in the dataset.
• True negative ( TN): In the confusion matrix, “true negative” refers to the number of
instances in which the model correctly predicts the negative class out of all the true
negative instances in the dataset.
• False positive ( FP): The “false positive” represents the model’s error when it incorrectly
predicts the presence of a speciﬁc condition or event that is not actually present. This
type of error is also called a type I error and can lead to incorrect decisions if not
properly managed.
• False negative ( FN): A “false negative” in the confusion matrix is when the model
incorrectly predicts the absence of an event among all actual positive instances in the
data. It measures the model’s tendency to miss positive cases or make type II errors.
3. CNN Architectures
Over the years, several different CNN architectures have been developed, each with
its own unique features and performance characteristics.
3.1. LeNet
LeNet is one of the earliest CNN architectures, developed by Yann L.C. et al. in 1998
for recognizing handwritten digits. The LeNet architecture consists of two Conv_Lays,
followed by two fully connected layers [ 126–129]. The Conv_Lays use small ﬁlters and
Pool_Lays to extract features from the input image, and the fully connected layers use a
softmax activation to output a probability distribution over the possible classes.
Mathematically, the LeNet architecture can be represented as:
1. Conv_Lay with 6 ﬁlters of size 5 5, followed by a 2 2 max Pool_Lay.
2. Conv_Lay with 16 ﬁlters of size 5 5, followed by a 2 2 max Pool_Lay.
3. Fully connected layer with 120 units and a sigmoid Activ_Func.
4. Fully connected layer with 84 units and a sigmoid Activ_Func.
5. Out_Lay with 10 units and a softmax Activ_Func.