Boundary-preserving Mask R-CNN
Tianheng Cheng1, Xinggang Wangy1, Lichao Huang2, and Wenyu Liu1
1Huazhong University of Science and Technology
fthch,xgwang,liuwy g@hust.edu.cn
2Horizon Robotics Inc.
lichao.huang@horizon.ai
Abstract. Tremendous eorts have been made to improve mask local-
ization accuracy in instance segmentation. Modern instance segmenta-
tion methods relying on fully convolutional networks perform pixel-wise
classication, which ignores object boundaries and shapes, leading coarse
and indistinct mask prediction results and imprecise localization. To
remedy these problems, we propose a conceptually simple yet eective
Boundary-preserving Mask R-CNN (BMask R-CNN) to leverage object
boundary information to improve mask localization accuracy. BMask R-
CNN contains a boundary-preserving mask head in which object bound-
ary and mask are mutually learned via feature fusion blocks. As a result,
the predicted masks are better aligned with object boundaries. With-
out bells and whistles, BMask R-CNN outperforms Mask R-CNN by
a considerable margin on the COCO dataset; in the Cityscapes dataset,
there are more accurate boundary groundtruths available, so that BMask
R-CNN obtains remarkable improvements over Mask R-CNN. Besides,
it is not surprising to observe that BMask R-CNN obtains more obvi-
ous improvement when the evaluation criterion requires better localiza-
tion ( e.g., AP 75) as shown in Fig. 1. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/hustvl/BMaskR-CNN .
Keywords: instance segmentation, object detection, boundary-preserving,
boundary detection
1 Introduction
Instance segmentation, a fundamental but challenging task in computer vision,
aims to assign a pixel-level mask to localize and categorize each object in im-
ages, driving numerous vision applications such as autonomous driving, robotics
and image editing. With the rapid development of deep convolutional neural
networks (DCNN), various methods based on DCNN were proposed for instance
segmentation. Prevalent methods for instance segmentation are based on object
detection, which provides box-level localization information for instance-level
segmentation, among which Mask R-CNN [21] is the most successful one. It ex-
tends Faster R-CNN [44] by adding a simple fully convolutional network (FCN)
yXinggang Wang is the corresponding author.arXiv:2007.08921v1  [cs.CV]  17 Jul 2020