6 Cheng et al.
box regression. The boundary-preserving mask head performs RoIAlign [21] to
acquire RoI features for both boundary and mask prediction.
Boundary-preserving mask head jointly learns object boundaries and masks
in an end-to-end manner. Note that object boundary and object mask have a
close relation and we can easily convert either one to another. Features from
the mask sub-network can provide high-level semantic information for learning
boundaries. After obtaining boundaries, the shape information and abundant
location information in boundary features can guide more precise mask predic-
tions.
RoI Feature Extraction: We deneRmandRbas Region of Interest (RoI)
features for mask prediction and boundary prediction respectively. Following [34],
Rmis extracted from the specic feature pyramid level ( P2P5) according to
the scale of the proposal, while Rbis obtained from the nest-resolution feature
levelP2, containing abundant spatial information. To preserve spatial informa-
tion better for boundary prediction, the resolution of Rbis set to be larger than
that ofRmwhen performing RoIAlgin. Then, it is downsampled by a strided
33 convolution and the output feature is denoted as fRb.fRbhas the same
resolution asRmand is used for feature fusion.
The feature fusion scheme in BMask R-CNN is illustrated in Fig. 4. Mask
RoI featuresRmis fed into 4 consecutive 3 3 convolutions and the output
feature is denoted as Fm. Boundary features fRbis fused withFmand then fed
into two consecutive 3 3 convolutions.
Mask!Boundary (M2B) Fusion: Mask featuresFmcontain rich high-level
information, i.e., the pixel-wise object category information, which is benecial
to predict object boundaries. Hence, we propose a simple fusion block to integrate
boundary features and mask features for boundary prediction. The fusion block
can be formulated as follows.
Fb=f(Fm) +fRb, (1)
whereFbdenotes the output boundary features and fmeans a 11 convolution
with ReLU.
Boundary !Mask (B2M) Fusion: We fuse the nal boundary features with
mask features; thus, boundary information can be used to enrich mask features
and guide precise mask prediction. The fusion block is the same as the M2B
fusion block.
Predictor: Following Mask R-CNN, our predictor is a 2 2 deconvolution
followed by the 1 1 convolution as output layer. Both masks and boundaries
are class-specic.
3.3 Learning and Optimization
Following the common practice in edge detection [49,52], we regard boundary
prediction as a pixel-level classication problem. The learned boundary features
are fused with mask features to provide shape information for mask prediction.