2 Cheng et al.
0.50.550.60.650.70.750.80.85
Mask IoU202530354045505560AP
0.511.522.533.5
 APBMask R-CNN (ResNet-101)
Mask R-CNN (ResNet-101)
 AP
Fig. 1: AP curves of Mask R-CNN
and BMask R-CNN under dierent
mask IoU thresholds on the COCO
val2017 set. The blue line shows the
AP gains of BMask R-CNN over
Mask R-CNN.
Fig. 2: First row : Selected cases
of coarse boundaries appeared in
the instance segmentation results of
Mask R-CNN. Second row : Our
proposed method can predict more
precise boundaries.
to predict the mask of each detected instance. Due to the great eectiveness and

exibility, Mask R-CNN serves as a state-of-the-art baseline and has facilitated
most recent instance segmentation research, such as [24,37,7,5,28].
In the Mask R-CNN framework, state-of-the-art instance segmentation net-
works [21,24,37] obtain instance masks by performing pixel-level classication
via FCN. It treats all pixels in the proposal equally and ignores the object shape
and boundary information. However, the pixels near boundaries are hard to be
classied. Evidently, it is hard for pixel-level classier to guarantee precise masks.
We nd that ne boundaries can provide better localization performance and
make the object masks more distinct and clear. As illustrated in Fig. 2, Mask R-
CNN (the rst row) without consideration about boundaries is prone to output
coarse and indistinct segmentation results with unreasonable overlaps between
objects in comparison with the one that involves boundaries (the second row).
To address this issue, we leverage instance boundary information to enhance
the mask prediction. Instance boundary is a dual representation of instance mask
and it can guide the mask prediction network to output masks that are well-
aligned with their groundtruths. Thus, the masks are more distinct and give
more precise object location. Based on this motivation, we propose a conceptu-
ally simple and novel Boundary-preserving Mask R-CNN (BMask R-CNN) that
unies instance-level mask prediction and boundary prediction in one network.
Specically, based on Mask R-CNN, we replace the original mask head with
the proposed boundary-preserving mask head which contains two sub-networks
for jointly learning object masks and boundaries. We insert two feature fusion
blocks to strengthen the connection between boundary feature learning and mask
feature learning. At last, mask prediction is guided by boundary features which
contain abundant shape and localization information. The main purpose of learn-
ing boundaries is to capture features for precise object localization. Nevertheless,
learning boundaries is non-trivial, because boundary groundtruths that gener-
ated from sparse annotated polygons ( i.e:, in the COCO dataset [35]) are noisy