14 Cheng et al.
shows the qualitative results on COCO val. Mask R-CNN is more prone to gen-
erate masks with coarse boundaries which contain much background along with
some false positive areas. Our proposed BMask R-CNN can alleviate this issue
with the help of preserving boundaries. We further visualize our raw boundary
and mask results in Fig. 8(b). It can be easily observed that predicted masks
are more clear and highly coincident with their boundaries. Furthermore, uti-
lizing predicted boundaries to rene masks brings minor improvement and the
renement is vulnerable to the noises.
MRCNN
 BMRCNN
(a)
MRCNNBMRCNNBoundaryGT (b)
Fig. 8: (a):Qualitative results on COCO dataset generated by Mask R-CNN and
BMask R-CNN with ResNet-101-FPN. MRCNN and BMRCNN denotes Mask R-
CNN and BMask R-CNN respectively. (b): Raw mask prediction and boundary
prediction from boundary-preserving mask head. GT: the groundtruth segmen-
tation. MRCNN: mask predicted by Mask R-CNN. BMRCNN: mask predicted
by BMask R-CNN. Boundary: boundary predicted by BMask R-CNN. Results
are obtained with ResNet-101-FPN backbone.
5 Conclusion
We address the issue that coarse boundaries and imprecise localization in in-
stance segmentation and propose a novel Boundary-preserving Mask R-CNN. It
incorporates boundary information to guide the mask learning for better bound-
aries and localization. Our experiments demonstrate that our method achieves
remarkable and stable improvements on both COCO and Cityscapes especially
in terms of localization performance. Extensive studies and visualization results
provide a deep understanding of how our method BMask R-CNN works. Our
method could also be plugged into Cascade Mask R-CNN and etc. for higher
performance. We hope it can be a strong baseline and sheds light on this funda-
mental research topic.
Acknowledgements
This work was in part supported by NSFC (No. 61733007 and No. 61876212),
Zhejiang Lab (No. 2019NB0AB02), and HUST-Horizon Computer Vision Re-
search Center.