7
Fig. 5. The graphs shows the percentage of natural images that were
successfully perturbed to a certain number (from 0 to 9) of target classes
by using one, three or ﬁve-pixel perturbation. The vertical axis shows the
percentage of images that can be perturbed while the horizontal axis indicates
the number of target classes.
these points rarely change when going across the input space
throughndirections perpendicular to the axes. Therefore,
the corresponding original classes are kept robust along these
directions. However, it can be seen that such robustness can
rather easily be broken by merely increasing the dimensions of
perturbation from one to three and ﬁve because both success
rates and number of target classes that can be reached increase
when conducting higher-dimensional perturbations.
Additionally, it can also be seen that each heat-map matrix
is approximately symmetric, indicating that each class has
similar number of adversarial images which were crafted from
these classes as well as to these classes (Figure 8). Having said
that, there are some exceptions for example the class 8 (ship)
when attacking NiN, the class 4 (deer) when attacking AllConv
networks with one pixel, among others. In the ship class when
attacking NiN networks, for example, it is relatively easy to
craft adversarial images from them while it is relatively hard to
craft adversarial images to them. Such unbalance is intriguing
since it indicates the ship class is similar to most of the other
Fig. 6. Heat-maps of the number of times a successful attack is present with
the corresponding original-target class pair in one, three and ﬁve-pixel attack
cases. Red (vertical) and (horizontal) blue indices indicate respectively the
original and target classes. The number from 0to9indicates respectively the
following classes: airplane, automobile, bird, cat, deer, dog, frog, horse, ship,
truck.
classes like truck and airplane but not vice-versa. This might
be due to (a) boundary shape and (b) how close are natural
images to the boundary. In other words, if the boundary shape
is wide enough it is possible to have natural images far away
from the boundary such that it is hard to craft adversarial
images from it. On the contrary, if the boundary shape is
mostly long and thin with natural images close to the border,
it is easy to craft adversarial images from them but hard to
craft adversarial images to them.
In practice, such classes which are easy to craft adversarial
images from may be exploited by malicious users which
may make the whole system vulnerable. In the case here,
however, the exceptions are not shared between the networks,