6
target classes. Given the time constraints, we conduct the
experiment without proportionally increasing the number of
evaluations, i.e. we keep the same number of evaluations. Our
tests are run over the BVLC AlexNet using 105 images from
ILSVRC 2012 test set selected randomly for the attack. For
ImageNet we only conduct one pixel attack because we want
to verify if such a tiny modiﬁcation can fool images with
larger size and if it is computationally tractable to conduct
such attacks. The ILSVRC 2012 images are in lossy jpeg
format with non-uniﬁed sizes. In order to reduce the practical
interference to the evaluation as much as possible, we ﬁrst
convert all target images from jpeg to png therefore during
later processing it will be lossless. The images are further
resized to 227X227 resolution for inputting to AlexNet (using
nearest ﬁlter). Then we follow the same procedure to attacking
CIFAR-10. Note that the discrepancy on pre-processing raw
images (e.g., using center cropping instead of simple resizing)
can inﬂuence the classiﬁcation performance of AlexNet and
attack rate. Here we only show the result on one setting and
leave the comprehensive evaluation of attacking AlexNet using
difference pre-processing methods for future work.
C. Results
The success rates and adversarial probability labels for one-
pixel perturbations on three CIFAR-10 networks and BVLC
network are shown in Table 4 and the three and ﬁve-pixel
perturbations on Kaggle CIFAR-10 is shown in Table 5. The
number of target classes is shown by Figure 5. The number
of original-target class pairs is shown by the heat-maps of
Figure 6 and 7. In addition to the number of original-target
class pairs, the total number of times each class had an attack
which either originated or targeted it is shown in Figure 8.
Since only non-targeted attacks are launched on ImageNet,
the “Number of target classes” and “Number of original-target
class pairs” metrics are not included in the ImageNet results.
1) Success Rate and Adversarial Probability Labels (Tar-
geted Attack Results): On Kaggle CIFAR-10, the success
rates of one-pixel attacks on three types of networks show
the generalized effectiveness of the proposed attack through
different network structures. On average, each image can be
perturbed to about two target classes for each network. In
addition, by increasing the number of pixels that can be
modiﬁed to three and ﬁve, the number of target classes that can
be reached increases signiﬁcantly. By dividing the adversarial
probability labels by the success rates, the conﬁdence values
(i.e. probability labels of target classes) are obtained which
are 79.39 %, 79.17 %and 77.09 %respectively to one, three
and ﬁve-pixel attacks.
On ImageNet, the results show that the one pixel attack gen-
eralizes well to large size images and fool the corresponding
neural networks. In particular, there is 16:04% chance that an
arbitrary ImageNet test image can be perturbed to a target class
with 22:91% conﬁdence. Note that the ImageNet results are
done with the same settings as CIFAR-10 while the resolution
of images we use for the ImageNet test is 227x227, which is
50 times larger than CIFAR-10 (32x32). Notice that in each
successful attack the probability label of the target class is theAllConv NiN VGG16 BVLC
OriginAcc 85:6% 87:2% 83:3% 57:3%
Targeted 19:82% 23:15% 16:48% –
Non-targeted 68:71% 71:66% 63:53% 16:04%
Conﬁdence 79:40% 75:02% 67:67% 22:91%
TABLE IV
RESULTS OF CONDUCTING ONE -PIXEL ATTACK ON FOUR DIFFERENT
TYPES OF NETWORKS : ALLCONVOLUTIONAL NETWORK (ALLCONV ),
NETWORK IN NETWORK (NIN), VGG16 AND BVLC A LEXNET. THE
ORIGINAL ACC IS THE ACCURACY ON THE NATURAL TEST DATASETS .
TARGETED /NON-TARGETED INDICATE THE ACCURACY OF CONDUCTING
TARGETED /NON -TARGETED ATTACKS . CONFIDENCE IS THE AVERAGE
PROBABILITY OF TARGET CLASSES .
3 pixels 5 pixels
Success rate(tar) 40:57% 44:00%
Success rate(non-tar) 86:53% 86:34%
Rate/Labels 79:17% 77:09%
TABLE V
RESULTS OF CONDUCTING THREE -PIXEL ATTACK ON ALLCONV
NETWORKS AND FIVE -PIXEL ATTACK ON NETWORK IN NETWORK .
highest. Therefore, the conﬁdence of 22:91% is relatively low
but tell us that the other remaining 999classes are even lower
to an almost uniform soft label distribution. Thus, the one-
pixel attack can break the conﬁdence of BVLC AlexNet to a
nearly uniform soft label distribution. The low conﬁdence is
caused by the fact that we utilized a non-targeted evaluation
that only focuses on decreasing the probability of the true
class. Other ﬁtness functions should give different results.
2) Number of Target Classes (Non-targeted Attack Results):
Regarding the results shown in Figure 5, we ﬁnd that with only
one-pixel modiﬁcation a fair amount of natural images can be
perturbed to two, three and four target classes. By increasing
the number of pixels modiﬁed, perturbation to more target
classes becomes highly probable. In the case of non-targeted
one-pixel attack, the VGG16 network got a slightly higher
robustness against the proposed attack. This suggests that all
three types of networks (AllConv network, NiN and VGG16)
are vulnerable to this type of attack.
The results of attacks are competitive with previous non-
targeted attack methods which need much more distortions
(Table 6). It shows that using one dimensional perturbation
vectors is enough to ﬁnd the corresponding adversarial images
for most of the natural images. In fact, by increasing the
number of pixels up to ﬁve, a considerable number of images
can be simultaneously perturbed to eight target classes. In
some rare cases, an image can go to all other target classes
with one-pixel modiﬁcation, which is illustrated in Figure 9.
3) Original-Target Class Pairs: Some speciﬁc original-
target class pairs are much more vulnerable than others (Fig-
ure 6 and 7). For example, images of cat (class 3) can be much
more easily perturbed to dog (class 5) but can hardly reach the
automobile (class 1). This indicates that the vulnerable target
classes (directions) are shared by different data points that
belong to the same class. Moreover, in the case of one-pixel
attack, some classes are more robust than others since their
data points can be relatively hard to perturb to other classes.
Among these data points, there are points that can not be
perturbed to any other classes. This indicates that the labels of