10
AllConv NiN VGG16
Targeted 3:41% 4:78% 5:63%
Non-targeted1 22:67% 32:00% 30:33%
Conﬁdence 54:58% 55:18% 51:19%
Non-targeted2 22:60% 35:20% 31:40%
Conﬁdence 56:57% 60:08% 53:58%
TABLE VIII
RESULTS OF CONDUCTING ONE -PIXEL ATTACK ON ORIGINAL CIFAR-10
TEST SET . NON-TARGETED 1INDICATES THE NON -TARGETED ATTACK
ACCURACY CALCULATED FROM TARGETED ATTACK RESULTS AND
NON-TARGETED 2INDICATES THE TRUE NON -TARGETED ATTACK
ACCURACY . OTHER METRICS ARE THE SAME TO TABLE 4.
V. R ESULTS ON ORIGINAL CIFAR-10 T ESTDATA
We present another evaluation of one pixel attack which
is on original CIFAR-10 test dataset [12]. Comparing to the
results on Kaggle CIFAR-10 aforementioned, the scenario is
more limited since the images contain much less practical
noise. Therefore, the target CNNs can have higher classiﬁca-
tion accuracy and conﬁdence which deﬁnitely makes the attack
harder. Additionally, we only use images correctly classiﬁed
by the target CNNs while in the experiment on Kaggle CIFAR-
10 set we use all images (i.e., which contain wrongly classiﬁed
images) with their true labels predicted by the target CNNs.
We use 500 random images for non-targeted attack and
300 for targeted attack. We also make small modiﬁcation
on network structure for better implementation. Speciﬁcally,
for the Network in Network, we remove the second average
pooling layers. For All convolutional network, we remove
the batch normalization on the ﬁrst layer. Three CIFAR-10
networks are re-trained to have similar natural accuracy to
Table 4. An early-stop criterion will be triggered when the
probability label of the target class exceeds the original class.
All other settings are kept the same. The attack results are
shown by Table 8. The number of target classes is shown by
Figure 11. The number of original-target class pairs is shown
by the heat-maps of Figure 12 and Figure 13. In addition to the
number of original-target class pairs, the total number of times
each class had an attack which either originated or targeted it
is shown in Figure 14 and Figure 15.
According to the attack results shown, we ﬁnd the following
features of one-pixel attack on original CIFAR-10.
1. Attack rate: The three networks have higher robustness
to one-pixel attack according to the lower attack rate and con-
ﬁdence (Table 8). This might due to the higher classiﬁcation
accuracy and conﬁdence of three networks on original CIFAR-
10 test-set. Similar to the results on Kaggle set, the network
in network still gets the lowest overall robustness considering
both attack rate and conﬁdence. This might be related to the
proximity to the decision boundary. However, VGG network
becomes much more vulnerable in this case. The discrepancy
indicates that the robustness among different networks can be
varied when handling images with low (e.g. Kaggle CIFAR-
10) and high (e.g., original CIFAR-10) conﬁdence.
2. Number of targeted classes: According to Figure 11, it
can be seen that in the case of targeted attack, it is still quite
common that a vulnerable image can be perturbed to more
than one class. In other words, the image might be locate near
to the boundaries to multiple classes, especially in the case of
Fig. 11. The percentage of natural images that were successfully perturbed to
a certain number (from 0 to 9) of target classes by one pixel targeted attack.
VGG. This is similar to the Kaggle CIFAR-10 results shown
by Fig 5.
Note that one image can be perturbed to a ﬁnal target class
Athrough the original target class B(i.e. semi-successful
targeted attack). For some images, the number of Bcan be
more than one. We do not count it as a successful targeted
attack unless A=B.
3. Original-target class pairs: In both cases of targeted
and non-targeted attack we again found the existence of
vulnerable original-target classes pairs such as dog (5th)-cat
(3rd) (Figure 12 and Figure 13 ). In most cases, for a class pair
between class AandB, the number of successful perturbation
fromAtoBis similar to the number of BtoA, which
makes the heat-maps almost symmetric. However, there are
exceptions such as ship (8th)-airplane (0th) pair, which the
perturbation from ship to airplane class is very frequent but
not vice versa.
Additionally, it also can be seen from Figure 14 and
Figure 15, some vulnerable classes exist which have higher
number of times being both original and target class of the
attack. A vulnerable original class is probably also vulnerable
being a target class to a similar extend.
Most of these features, together with the speciﬁc vulnerable
class-pairs shown by Figure 12 and Figure 13 and vulnerable
classes shown by Figure 14 and Figure 15, are similar or even
exactly the same to the ﬁnding on attacking Kaggle CIFAR-10
dataset.
VI. D ISCUSSION
A. Adversarial Perturbation
Previous results have shown that many data points might be
located near to the decision boundaries [9]. For the analysis
the data points were moved small steps in the input space