1
One Pixel Attack for Fooling
Deep Neural Networks
Jiawei Su*, Danilo Vasconcellos Vargas* and Kouichi Sakurai
Abstract —Recent research has revealed that the output of Deep
Neural Networks (DNN) can be easily altered by adding relatively
small perturbations to the input vector. In this paper, we analyze
an attack in an extremely limited scenario where only one pixel
can be modiﬁed. For that we propose a novel method for gen-
erating one-pixel adversarial perturbations based on differential
evolution (DE). It requires less adversarial information (a black-
box attack) and can fool more types of networks due to the
inherent features of DE. The results show that 67.97 %of the
natural images in Kaggle CIFAR-10 test dataset and 16.04 %
of the ImageNet (ILSVRC 2012) test images can be perturbed
to at least one target class by modifying just one pixel with
74.03%and 22.91 %conﬁdence on average. We also show the
same vulnerability on the original CIFAR-10 dataset. Thus, the
proposed attack explores a different take on adversarial machine
learning in an extreme limited scenario, showing that current
DNNs are also vulnerable to such low dimension attacks. Besides,
we also illustrate an important application of DE (or broadly
speaking, evolutionary computation) in the domain of adversarial
machine learning: creating tools that can effectively generate low-
cost adversarial attacks against neural networks for evaluating
robustness.
Index Terms —Differential Evolution, Convolutional Neural
Network, Information Security, Image Recognition.
I. I NTRODUCTION
IN the domain of image recognition, DNN-based approach
has outperform traditional image processing techniques,
achieving even human-competitive results [25]. However, sev-
eral studies have revealed that artiﬁcial perturbations on natu-
ral images can easily make DNN misclassify and accordingly
proposed effective algorithms for generating such samples
called “adversarial images” [7][11][18][24]. A common idea
for creating adversarial images is adding a tiny amount of
well-tuned additive perturbation, which is expected to be
imperceptible to human eyes, to a correctly classiﬁed natural
image. Such modiﬁcation can cause the classiﬁer to label the
modiﬁed image as a completely different class. Unfortunately,
most of the previous attacks did not consider extremely limited
scenarios for adversarial attacks, namely the modiﬁcations
might be excessive (i.e., the amount of modiﬁed pixels is fairly
large) such that it may be perceptible to human eyes (see Fig-
ure 3 for an example). Additionally, investigating adversarial
images created under extremely limited scenarios might give
Authors are with the Graduate School/Faculty of Information Science and
Electrical Engineering, Kyushu University, Japan. The third author is also
afﬁliated to Advanced Telecommunications Research Institute International
(ATR).
The ofﬁcial version of this article has been published in IEEE Transactions
on Evolutionary Computation [65], which can be accessed through the
following link: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/8601309
*Both authors have equal contribution.
Fig. 1. One-pixel attacks created with the proposed algorithm that success-
fully fooled three types of DNNs trained on CIFAR-10 dataset: The All
convolutional network (AllConv), Network in network (NiN) and VGG. The
original class labels are in black color while the target class labels and the
corresponding conﬁdence are given below.
new insights about the geometrical characteristics and overall
behavior of DNN’s model in high dimensional space [9]. For
example, the characteristics of adversarial images close to the
decision boundaries can help describing the boundaries’ shape.
In this paper, by perturbing only one pixel with differential
evolution, we propose a black-box DNN attack in a scenario
where the only information available is the probability labels
(Figure 1 and 2) Our proposal has mainly the following
advantages compared to previous works:arXiv:1710.08864v7  [cs.LG]  17 Oct 2019