2
Fig. 2. One-pixel attacks on ImageNet dataset where the modiﬁed pixels are
highlighted with red circles. The original class labels are in black color while
the target class labels and their corresponding conﬁdence are given below.
Effectiveness - On Kaggle CIFAR-10 dataset, being able
to launch non-targeted attacks by only modifying one
pixel on three common deep neural network structures
with 68:71%,71:66% and 63:53% success rates. We
additionally ﬁnd that each natural image can be perturbed
to1:8,2:1and1:5other classes. On the original CIFAR-
10 dataset with a more limited attack scenario, we show
22:60%,35:20% and31:40% success rates. On ImageNet
dataset, non-targeted attacking the BVLC AlexNet model
also by changing one pixel shows that 16:04% of the test
images can be attacked.
Semi-Black-Box Attack - Requires only black-box feed-
back (probability labels) but no inner information of
target DNNs such as gradients and network structures.
Our method is also simpler than existing approaches since
it does not abstract the problem of searching perturbation
to any explicit target functions but directly focus on in-
creasing the probability label values of the target classes.
Flexibility - Can attack more types of DNNs (e.g.,
networks that are not differentiable or when the gradient
calculation is difﬁcult).
Regarding the extremely limited one-pixel attack scenario,
there are several main reasons why we consider it:
Analyze the Vicinity of Natural Images - Geometri-
cally, several previous works have analyzed the vicinity
of natural images by limiting the length of perturbation
vector. For example, the universal perturbation adds small
value to each pixel such that it searches the adversarial
images in a sphere region around the natural image [14].
On the other side, the proposed few-pixel perturbations
can be regarded as cutting the input space using very low-
dimensional slices, which is a different way of explor-
ing the features of high dimensional DNN input space.
Fig. 3. An illustration of the adversarial images generated by using Jacobian
saliency-map approach [18]. The perturbation is conducted on about 4 %of
the total pixels and can be obvious to human eyes. Since the adversarial pixel
perturbation has become a common way of generating adversarial images,
such abnormal “noise” might be recognized with expertise.
Among them, one-pixel attack is an extreme case of
several-pixel attack. Theoretically, it can give geometrical
insight to the understanding of CNN input space, in
contrast to another extreme case: universal adversarial
perturbation [14] that modiﬁes every pixel.
A Measure of Perceptiveness - The attack can be effec-
tive for hiding adversarial modiﬁcation in practice. To the
best of our knowledge, none of the previous works can
guarantee that the perturbation made can be completely
imperceptible. A direct way of mitigating this problem
is to limit the amount of modiﬁcations to as few as
possible. Speciﬁcally, instead of theoretically proposing
additional constraints or considering more complex cost
functions for conducting perturbation, we propose an
empirical solution by limiting the number of pixels that
can be modiﬁed. In other words, we use the number of
pixels as units instead of length of perturbation vector to
measure the perturbation strength and consider the worst
case which is one-pixel modiﬁcation, as well as two other
scenarios (i.e. 3 and 5 pixels) for comparison.
II. R ELATED WORKS
The security problem of DNN has become a critical topic
[1][2]. C. Szegedy et al. ﬁrst revealed the sensitivity to
well-tuned artiﬁcial perturbation [24] which can be crafted
by several gradient-based algorithms using back-propagation
for obtaining gradient information [11][24]. Speciﬁcally,
I.J.Goodfellow et al. proposed “fast gradient sign” algorithm
for calculating effective perturbation based on a hypothesis
in which the linearity and high-dimensions of inputs are the
main reason that a broad class of networks are sensitive to
small perturbation [11]. S.M. Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. proposed