0 5 10 15 205
4
3
2
1
Inter-Task Affinity onto a1
0 5 10 15 208
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0Inter-Task Affinity onto a5
0 5 10 15 203
2
1
01Inter-Task Affinity onto a6
a1
a2
a3a4
a5
a6a7
a8
a9
Number of Epochs Before Early StoppingPer-Epoch Inter-Task AffinityFigure 4: Total per-epoch inter-task afﬁnities onto tasks {a1, a5, a6} in the CelebA dataset. The
y-axis signiﬁes the total change in train loss after applying an update to the shared parameters. Note
the relationship among afﬁnities changes. For instance in the center plot representing the inter-task
afﬁnity onto a5, a6 initially manifests higher afﬁnity onto a5 than does a7. In later stages of training,
this trend is reversed. In the same subplot, a1 manifests higher inter-task afﬁnity over the tasks {a3,
a4, a8, a9} at different stages of training.
inference time budget of {2-groups, 3-groups, 4-groups} compared with 49.576 for groupings found
on the validation set.
More formally, let XtrandXvalbe independent and identically distributed random variables for
training and validation, respectively. Given the updated shared parameter t+1
sjiusing the gradient of
taskicalculated on Xtr, the loss of task j(s.t.j6=i) yields similar expectations with respect to Xtr
andXval. That is,
Eval[Etr[Lj(Xt
val;t+1
sji;t
j)]]Eval[Lj(Xt
val;Etr[t+1
sji];t
j)] =Etr[Lj(Xt
tr;Etr[t+1
sji];t
j)]:
The leftmost term is a joint expectation w.r.t. both XtrandXval, in whichXtris only used to calculate
the updated shared parameters t+1
sji. Assuming both tasks have distinct loss functions that do not
directly depend on each other during training, we can move the second expectation inside the loss
function to obtain the middle term. By using the fact that XtrandXvalare identically distributed, thus
yielding the same expectation, we can move from the middle term to the rightmost term. Hence, the
inter-task afﬁnity computed on the training dataset would approximately equal the inter-task afﬁnity
computed on the validation set.
How do inter-task afﬁnities change over the course of training? Our analysis on CelebA and
Taskonomy suggests inter-task afﬁnities change throughout training, but no obvious patterns emerge
related to how inter-task afﬁnities change as a function of time across tasks. Nevertheless, our
analysis indicates certain tasks exhibit higher-than-average inter-task afﬁnity and tend to maintain
this difference throughout training. We visualize this effect in Figure 4 for three tasks in the CelebA
dataset. Figure 4(left) shows that task a7 exhibits signiﬁcantly higher afﬁnity onto task a1 than
any other task in the network, and in a similar comparison, Figure 4(right) indicates that tasks {a5,
a7} manifest signiﬁcantly higher afﬁnity onto a6 than any other task. Shifting our focus to a5 in
Figure 4(center), we ﬁnd {a6, a7} display markedly higher afﬁnity, and a1 sometimes displays higher
afﬁnity, onto a5 than the other tasks in the network.
One additional observation not captured in Figure 4 relates to the initial steps of training. At
this stage of convergence, all tasks seem to manifest positive and similar inter-task afﬁnity. We
postulate the representations learned by the model at this early stage may be common among all
tasks. For example, the learned representations may extract general-purpose facial characteristics, but
specialization occurs quickly thereafter.
Can changes in hyperparameters affect task groupings? We deﬁne three settings: (i) typical, the
base setting, (ii) b=0.5x, or halving the batch size, and (iii) lr=2x, or increasing the learning rate by
a factor of 2. To determine the ground-truth task groupings, we train all 511 combinations of task
groupings from our 9-task subset of CelebA and select the groups in each setting with the lowest total
test error. Our aim is to assess the extent to which task groupings chosen in setting b=0.5x or lr=2x
generalize to the typical setting.
9