BudgetImprovement in Test Accuracy
Relative to Optimal Groupings
b=0.5x lr=2x
2-groups -0.61% -1.22%
3-groups -0.25% -2.90%
4-groups -1.87% -3.21%
Table 3: Accuracy of task groupings found by
b=0.5x and lr=2x relative to the typical setting.Our results are summarized in Table 3. They indicate
that simply changing the batch size or learning rate of
a model may change which tasks should be trained to-
gether, with the groupings found by lr=2x exhibiting
worse generalization than those found by b=0.5x. This
result suggests that how tasks should be trained together
does not simply depend on the relationships among tasks,
but also on detailed aspects of the model and training. It
is notably difﬁcult to build intuition for the latter, illus-
trating the need to develop automated methods that can
take into account these nuances.
6 Conclusion
In this work, we present an approach to quantify inter-task afﬁnity in a single training run and show
how this quantity can be used to systematically determine which tasks should train together in multi-
task networks. Our empirical ﬁndings indicate our approach is highly competitive. It outperforms
multi-task training augmentations like Uncertainty Weights, GradNorm, and PCGrad, and performs
competitively with state-of-the-art task grouping methods like HOA, while improving computational
efﬁciency by over an order of magnitude. Further, our ﬁndings are supported by extensive analysis
that suggests inter-task afﬁnity scores can ﬁnd close to optimal auxiliary tasks, and in fact, implicitly
measure generalization capability among tasks.
A plethora of research has been undertaken to design better multi-task learning architectures, or
improve the optimization dynamics within multi-task learning systems, with relatively little work
addressing the question of which tasks should train together in the ﬁrst place. It is our hope this work
renews interest in this domain, and given the sensitivity of task groupings to even small changes in
hyperparameters, encourages the development of efﬁcient and automatic methods to identify which
tasks should train together in multi-task learning networks.
7 Broader Impact
Efﬁciently identifying task groupings in multi-task learning has the potential to save signiﬁcant
time and computational resources in both academic and industry environments. Despite this beneﬁt,
there are several risks associated with this work. In particular, inter-task afﬁnities can be mistakenly
interpreted as “task similarity”, and incorrectly create an association and/or causation relationship
among tasks with high mutual inter-task afﬁnity scores. This association would be especially
problematic for datasets involving sensitive prediction quantities related to race, gender, religion,
age, status, physical traits, etc., where inter-task afﬁnities could be mistakenly used to support
an unfounded conclusion that attempts to posit similarity among tasks. That said, we believe
acknowledging these risks mitigates their potential for abuse, and the beneﬁt from this work —
most notably decreasing computational resources by over an order of magnitude compared with a
state-of-the-art task grouping method while performing competitively in terms of accuracy — merits
its dissemination.
Acknowledgement
We thank Vince Gatto, Bing-Rong Lin, Nick Bridle, Li Wei, Shawn Andrews, Yuan Gao, and Yuyan
Wang for their thoughtful discussion related to a precursor of this work. We also thank James Chen
and Linda Wang for providing feedback on an earlier draft of this paper. Lastly, we would like to
recognize Zirui Wang for technical support with running experiments as well as our anonymous
NeurIPS reviewers for their thoughtful feedback and clear desire to improve this work.
References
[1]Martín Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu
Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, et al. Tensorﬂow: A system for
10