Efﬁciently Identifying Task Groupings for
Multi-Task Learning
Christopher Fifty1, Ehsan Amid1, Zhe Zhao1, Tianhe Yu1;2,
Rohan Anil1,Chelsea Finn1;2
Google Research, Brain Team1, Stanford University2
cfifty@google.com
Abstract
Multi-task learning can leverage information learned by one task to beneﬁt the
training of other tasks. Despite this capacity, naïvely training all tasks together
in one model often degrades performance, and exhaustively searching through
combinations of task groupings can be prohibitively expensive. As a result, efﬁ-
ciently identifying the tasks that would beneﬁt from training together remains a
challenging design question without a clear solution. In this paper, we suggest an
approach to select which tasks should train together in multi-task learning models.
Our method determines task groupings in a single run by training all tasks together
and quantifying the effect to which one task’s gradient would affect another task’s
loss. On the large-scale Taskonomy computer vision dataset, we ﬁnd this method
can decrease test loss by 10.0% compared to simply training all tasks together
while operating 11.6 times faster than a state-of-the-art task grouping method.
1 Introduction
Many of the forefront challenges in applied machine learning demand that a single model performs
well on multiple tasks, or optimizes multiple objectives while simultaneously adhering to unmovable
inference-time constraints. For instance, autonomous vehicles necessitate low inference time latency
to make multiple predictions on a real-time video feed to precipitate a driving action [ 27]. Robotic
arms are asked to concurrently learn how to pick, place, cover, align, and rearrange various objects
to improve learning efﬁciency [ 25], and online movie recommendation systems model multiple
engagement metrics to facilitate low-latency personalized recommendations [ 13]. Each of the
above applications depends on multi-task learning, and advances which improve multi-task learning
performance have the potential to make an outsized impact on these and many other domains.
Multi-task learning can improve modeling performance by introducing an inductive bias to prefer
hypothesis classes that explain multiple objectives and by focusing attention on relevant features [ 43].
However, it may also lead to severely degraded performance when tasks compete for model capacity
or are unable to build a shared representation that can generalize to all objectives. Accordingly,
ﬁnding groups of tasks that derive beneﬁt from the positives of training together while mitigating the
negatives often improves the modeling performance of multi-task learning systems.
While recent work has developed new multi-task learning optimization schemes [ 28,10,45,53,
11,50], the problem of deciding which tasks should be trained together in the ﬁrst place is an
understudied and complex issue that is often left to human experts [ 56]. However, a human’s
understanding of similarity is motivated by their intuition and experience rather than a prescient
knowledge of the underlying structures learned by a neural network. To further complicate matters,
the beneﬁt or detriment induced from multi-task learning relies on many non-trivial decisions
including, but not limited to, dataset characteristics, model architecture, hyperparameters, capacity,
and convergence [ 51,49,46,47]. As a result, a systematic technique to determine which tasks
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).