Two Groups Three Groups Four Groups
Number of Splits48163264Tesla V100 GPU Hours
~1.79 TeslaV100 GPU Hours~2.14 TeslaV100 GPU Hours~52.7 TeslaV100 GPU HoursRuntime to Find and Train Task Groupings in CelebA
TAG
CS
RG
HOA
Two Groups Three Groups
Number of Splits12825651210242048Tesla V100 GPU Hours~189 TeslaV100 GPU Hours~146 TeslaV100 GPU Hours~1850 TeslaV100 GPU HoursRuntime to Find and Train Task Groupings in Taskonomy
TAG
CS
RG
HOAFigure 2: (Left) time to determine and train task groupings in CelebA. (Right) time to determine and
train task groupings in Taskonomy. Note the y-axis is in log scale , and the time to determine task
groupings is incurred only once to determine groupings for all splits.
5 Experiments
We evaluate2the capacity of TAG to select task groupings on CelebA, a large-scale face attributes
dataset [ 38] and Taskonomy, a massive computer vision dataset of indoor scenes [ 54]. Following this
analysis, we direct our focus towards answering the following questions with ablation experiments
on CelebA:
• Does our measure of inter-task afﬁnity align with identifying which tasks should train together?
• Should inter-task afﬁnity be measured at every step of training to determine task groupings?
•Is measuring the change in train loss comparable with the change in validation loss when computing
inter-task afﬁnity?
• How do inter-task afﬁnities change over the course of training?
• Do changes in a model’s hyperparameters change which tasks should be trained together?
As described in Section 3, we constrain all networks to have the same number of parameters to adhere
to a ﬁxed inference-time latency constraint. We provide experimental results removing this constraint,
as well as additional experimental results and detail relating to experimental design, in the Appendix.
5.1 Supervised Task Grouping Evaluation
For our task grouping evaluation, we compare two classes of approaches: approaches that determine
task groupings, and approaches that train on all tasks together but alter the optimization. In the ﬁrst
class, we consider simply training all tasks together in the same network (MTL), training every task
by itself (STL), the expected value from randomly selecting task groupings (RG), grouping tasks
by maximizing inter-task cosine similarity between pairs of gradients (CS), our method (TAG ), and
HOA [ 46] which approximates higher-order task groupings from pair-wise task performance. For the
latter class, we consider Uncertainty Weights (UW) [ 28], GradNorm (GN) [ 10], and PCGrad [ 53]. In
principle, these two classes of approaches are complementary and can be combined.
Our empirical ﬁndings are summarized in Figure 3. For the task grouping methods TAG , CS, and
HOA, we report the time to determine task groupings, not determine task groupings and train the
resultant multi-task networks. The runtime of RG is ﬁxed to the time it takes to train a single multi-
task network, and the runtime of STL is reported as the time it takes to train all single task networks.
This is to facilitate comparison between the efﬁciency of different task grouping methods and provide
a high-level overview of how long it takes to select task groupings compared to popular multi-task
learning benchmarks. We also include a comparison of the time to determine task groupings and train
the resultant multi-task networks among task grouping methods in Figure 2.
CelebA. We select a subset of 9 attributes {a1, a2, a3, a4, a5, a6, a7, a8, a9} from the 40 possible
attributes in CelebA and optimize the baseline MTL model by tuning architecture, batch size, and
2Our code is available at github.com/google-research/google-research/tree/master/tag.
6