Figure 3: (Left) average classiﬁcation error for 2, 3, and 4-split task groupings for the subset of 9
tasks in CelebA. (Right) total test loss for 2 and 3-split task groupings for the subset of 5 tasks in
Taskonomy. All models were run on a TeslaV100 instance with the time to train the full MTL model
being approximately 83 minutes in CelebA and 146 hours in Taskonomy. Note the x-axis is in log
scale, and the relative runtime for TAG , CS, and HOA only considers the time to ﬁnd groups.
learning rate to maximize the performance of training all tasks together on the validation set. We do
not tune other methods with the exception of GradNorm, for which we search over {0.1, 0.5, 1.0,
1.5, 2.0, 3.0, 5.0} for alpha. For task grouping algorithms, we evaluate the set of {2-splits, 3-splits,
4-splits} inference-time memory budgets. Each of the multi-task networks has the same number of
parameters as the base MTL model; however, the inference-time latency constraint is satisﬁed as all
models may run in parallel. Our ﬁndings are summarized in Figure 3 (left). Alternatively, increasing
the number of parameters within a single model may signiﬁcantly increase the time to make a forward
pass during inference. Figure 6 visualizes our ﬁndings when we remove the inference-time latency
constraint from comparison systems.
We ﬁnd the performance of TAG surpasses that of the HOA, RG, and CS task grouping methods,
while operating 22 times faster than HOA. We also ﬁnd UW, GN, and PCGrad to perform worse than
the groups found by either HOA or TAG, suggesting the improvement from identifying tasks which
train well together cannot be replaced with current multi-task training augmentations. Nevertheless,
we ﬁnd multi-task training augmentations can be complementary with task grouping methods. For
example, augmenting the groups found by TAG with PCGrad improves 2-splits performance by
0.85%, 3-splits performance by 0.18%, but changes 4-splits performance by -0.08%.
Similar to the results from [ 46], we ﬁnd GradNorm [ 10] can sometimes perform worse than training
all tasks together. We reason this difference is due to our common experimental design that loads the
weights from the epoch with lowest validation loss to reduce overﬁtting, and differs from prior work
which uses model weights after training for 100 epochs [ 45]. Reformulating our design to mirror [ 45],
we ﬁnd training the model to 100 epochs without early stopping results in worse performance on
MTL, GradNorm, UW, and PCGrad; however, with this change, each training augmentation method
now signiﬁcantly outperforms the baseline MTL method.
Taskonomy. Following the experimental setup of [ 46], we evaluate the capacity of TAG to select
task groupings on the “Semantic Segmentation”, “Depth Estimation”, “Keypoint Detection”, “Edge
Detection”, and “Surface Normal Prediction” objectives in Taskonomy. Unlike [ 46], our evaluation
uses an augmented version of the medium Taskonomy split (2.4 TB) as opposed to the Full+ version
(12 TB) to reduce computational overhead and increase reproducibility.
Our results are summarized in Figure 3 (right). Similar to our ﬁndings on CelebA, TAG continues
to outperform MTL by 10.0%, GN by 7.7%, STL by 1.5%, and RG by 9.5%. Comparing TAG to
HOA, we ﬁnd the 2-split task grouping found by TAG to surpass the performance of that found by
HOA by 2.5%, but HOA’s 3-split task grouping performance is superior to that of TAG. In terms
of compute, TAG is signiﬁcantly more efﬁcient than HOA, with HOA demanding an additional
2,008 TeslaV100 GPU hours to ﬁnd task groupings. To put this cost into perspective, on an 8-GPU,
on-demand p3.16xlarge AWS instance, the difference in monetary expenditure between TAG and
HOA would be $6,144.48. On a similar note, the performance of TAG and CS on Taskonomy are
equivalent, but TAG is more efﬁcient, requiring 140 fewer TeslaV100 GPU hours to compute task
groupings.
7