device-level features, which degrades its performance. Af-
ter adding EMD versions of these images, the accuracy sig-
niﬁcantly improves to 94.6%. Since, the 1st IMF of the
input image was removed in our EMD versions, this IMF is
likely to have some correlations to the device-level features.
Using the entire Dataset-I during training, which included
the data from Flickr, the accuracy is further improved to
96.1%. This can be mainly attributed to the presence of
images captured by different devices in the Flickr Data for
each camera-model. Because of the presence of these vari-
ations in device-level features, the network could learn the
model-speciﬁc features more accurately– thus causing the
increase in accuracy. Adding EMD versions of all these im-
ages boosted the accuracy to 97.7%. This strengthens our
previous assumption of EMD being an effective augmen-
tation technique in this task. To recall, all of these results
are achieved by using patches of only one size– 256×256.
Using all of the patches and our full pipeline, we have
achieved a ﬁnal accuracy of 98.37%. This is our ﬁnal re-
sult on Dataset-I, which is the current state-of-the-art on this
dataset using a single network.
5.2. Phase­II
For Phase-II, we have tested our network on the im-
ages from 27 different camera models of the Dresden
Database. Although we have not used our full pipeline
for this dataset, an overall accuracy of over 99% is
achieved for 19 camera models by the 1st network of
Phase-I. The camera-models for which accuracy dropped
are CANON IXUS-55, CANON A640, NIKON D200,
NIKON D70, NIKON D70S, SONY H50, SONY T77,
SONY W170. However, the false detection of images is
conﬁned within the models of the manufacturing company.
It means, this network is able to detect the manufacturing
company of the source camera-model with an accuracy of
100%. Also, we have another very important thing to no-
tice in this case. Though the training dataset is very small
(16961×20 = 339220 ) compared to the dataset of Phase-I,
but still, DenseNet-201 is able to detect the camera models
very accurately because of the learnt features from Phase-I.
This indicates that our network can be ﬁne-tuned to detect
further camera models. In case of wrongly detected cam-
era models, such as Nikon D200 or Sony W170, there is a
high chance that these models does have almost similar in-
terpolation method or CFA pattern corresponding to other
camera models from the same manufacturer. That is why
the test-results show some mismatch for these models. Our
ﬁndings are in commensurate with the work of Kirchner et
al. [16] where Nikon D70 and Nikon D70s, have been found
out to be the same.5.3. Phase­III
In this phase of experiments, we have tried to identify
the 4 types of image-manipulations used on the images of
Dataset-I: Unaltered, JPEG Compressed, Gamma Corrected
and Resized. In testing, we have used the unaltered images
from the test data of size 512×512provided by Kaggle and
generated a total of 1320×9 = 11880 test images, which in-
clude1320 unaltered, 2640 JPEG compressed, 2640 gamma
corrected and 5280 resized images. Details of the result are
given in Table 4. We have achieved an overall accuracy of
96.66% in this task. It is instructive to mention that, these
results have been obtained by using only the DenseNet-201
architecture and 128×128patch size.
The results show that, the features learned by our pro-
posed model, have some sort of orthogonality among them,
depending on the type of manipulation present in the im-
age. As a result, these features may be used in other image-
forensic tasks outside the premise of our current work.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we have proposed a DenseNet-oriented
pipeline for identifying the source camera-model of an im-
age. We have used DenseNet-201 as well as a Squeeze
and Excitation (SE) network for our model architecture and
trained our model on the IEEE Forensic Camera-Model
Identiﬁcation Dataset. This pipeline shows an overall ac-
curacy of 98.37% on the test data provided for the IEEE
Signal Processing Cup 2018 Camera Model Identiﬁcation
Challenge. A number of Data-Augmentation techniques
have been used in our work to extend the dataset, among
which EMD is a novel addition to the repertoire of tech-
niques used in Camera-Model Identiﬁcation. Besides, we
have also used transfer learning and evaluated our model
on the Dresden Image Database, which showed an accuracy
of over 99% for 19 camera models, where we have been
able to detect the manufacturing company of the camera-
model with an accuracy of 100%. However, there is an
issue that needs to be addressed regarding the experiment
on Dresden image Database. The test images used in this
experiment are not from a separate device than the devices
used to capture the training images because of the unavail-
ability of multiple devices for all 27 camera models. This
may have resulted in higher accuracy than the experiment
on SP Cup database. Moreover, the features learned by the
DenseNet have also been used to classify the manipulations
that have been applied to an image, with an accuracy of
96.66%. This demonstrates the generalization of our train-
ing procedure, for detecting camera-model features across
varying datasets and the suitability of using these features
in multiple image-forensic tasks.
26