Figure 3. Illustration of Dense-Connections and Transition-Layers
implemented in DenseNet.
(DenseNet). The details of the DenseNet architecture that
we use for Camera-Model Identiﬁcation is summarized in
Table 2.
Table 2. Architecture of DenseNet-201
Layers DenseNet-201
Convolution 7×7 conv, stride 2
Pooling 3×3 max pool, stride 2
Dense Block/bracketleftBig1×1 conv/bracketrightBig
×6(1) 3×3 conv
Transition Layer 1×1 conv
(1) 3×3 max pool, stride 2
Dense Block/bracketleftBig1×1 conv/bracketrightBig
×12(2) 3×3 conv
Transition Layer 1×1 conv
(2) 2×2 average pool, stride 2
Dense Block/bracketleftBig1×1 conv/bracketrightBig
×48(3) 3×3 conv
Transition Layer 1×1 conv
(3) 2×2 average pool, stride 2
Dense Block/bracketleftBig1×1 conv/bracketrightBig
×32(4) 3×3 conv
Layer Global Average Pooling
Classiﬁcation Softmax
The model that we use is the 201-layer DenseNet intro-
duced in [ 12]. It consists of 4 dense blocks, each with a
growth-rate of 32. Transition layers have been used between
successive dense blocks. These consist of a convolution
layer and a max-pooling layer. No reduction and dropout
layers have been used in the network. The dimensionality
of the output feature vector is reduced by using Global Av-
erage Pooling, and the features are ﬁnally classiﬁed by us-
ing a Fully-Connected layer with Softmax as the activation
function. This layer outputs the probabilities of classiﬁca-
tion for each class.
The intuition behind using this architecture is the na-ture of the classiﬁcation that we wish to accomplish. The
camera-model features inherent in an image are very subtle
and minute features of the image [ 28]. Detecting and clas-
sifying these features are difﬁcult in itself. But, the task is
made even more challenging by the constraints posed for
the task. In addition to the model-level features, the im-
age also contains device-level features such as the Photo
Response Non Uniformity (PRNU) sensor noise [ 9] . To
detect the source camera-model effectively, we need to take
care that the network does not become dependent on this
type of sensor noise. In addition to this, post-processing has
also been introduced in the dataset which alters the spacial
structure of the model-features in an unpredictable manner.
Therefore, a network that can detect the model-features un-
der all of these constraints needs to be sufﬁciently deep and
have a large number of parameters. But, training such a
deep network to detect the subtle model-features proves to
be very difﬁcult. The network invariably becomes depen-
dent on the image content or the device speciﬁc noise, as all
of the minute statistical information is lost when the image
is propagated through consecutive layers.
This problem is alleviated in the DenseNet through the
use of dense connections. To preserve image information
throughout the network, the output of each layer is propa-
gated to all of the layers in front of it. Even if some of the
minute features are lost due to some operation, it is regen-
erated from the output of the previous layers at the input of
the subsequent layers through these dense connections (see
Fig. 3). This prevents the gradient-ﬂow from vanishing dur-
ing training in such a deep network and allows us to extract
features which are very difﬁcult - if not impossible to detect
using conventional CNN architectures.
3.3.2 Squeeze and Excitation Block
The output after the 4 dense blocks is passed to another
module called a ” Squeeze-and-Excitation ” (SE) block. This
module has been introduced by Hu, Shen and Sun [ 11]. The
aim of this module is to improve the representational power
of a network by explicitly modelling the interdependencies
between the channels of its output. To achieve this, the SE
block performs feature recalibration, through which it can
learn to use global information to selectively emphasize in-
formative features and suppress less useful ones, without
changing the dimensions of the feature vector.
The internal layers of the SE block and corresponding
shapes are given in Figure 4. We construct the SE block to
perform feature recalibration as follows. The input features
are ﬁrst passed through a squeeze operation, which aggre-
gates the feature maps across spatial dimensions to produce
a channel descriptor. This descriptor embeds the global dis-
tribution of channel-wise feature responses, enabling infor-
mation from the global receptive ﬁeld of the network to be
23