decade, Neural Networks have achieved phenomenal ac-
curacy on image-classiﬁcation benchmarks ([ 26]). To this
end, [ 31] have trained a CNN on the Dresden database
to solve this classiﬁcation problem. Their work also in-
cludes the use of preprocessing using a custom built 2D
high-pass ﬁlter. However, their overall accuracy is below
the state-of-the-art accuracy reported in ([ 7]). A concept
of Content Adaptive Fusion Network is introduced by [ 32],
which is basically a cluster of CNNs with different kernel
size, has been introduced to classify camera brand and de-
vice to achieve a moderate accuracy around 95%. In spite
of the breadth of work performed in this ﬁeld, little at-
tention has been given to the detection of camera-model
speciﬁcally from post-processed images (such as different
JPEG Compression Rate, Resized, Gamma-Corrected im-
ages etc.) Though researchers have explored some of these
cases discretely, not many have tried to bring them into the
same framework. Image authentication from JPEG head-
ers ([ 14]), forgery detection from intrinsic statistical ﬁnger-
prints of images ([ 27]), detecting doubly compressed JPEG
images using Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) ([ 17]), and
even the recent use of CNN to detect image manipulation
in ([1] and [ 2]) are some examples of work done in detect-
ing image manipulations and classifying them using this ap-
proach.
But still, the use of very deep networks is yet to be ex-
plored thoroughly for this task. In the absence of metadata
and the presence of extensive post-processing in images, we
believe that Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have the poten-
tial to achieve a better classiﬁcation-rate than existing meth-
ods. In the presence of these challenges, traditional feature-
vectors such as the DCT-Residue([ 25]) and co-occurrence
matrices(([ 7], [21])) are unarguably altered, often in ways
that cannot be predicted in the general case. Thus, design-
ing features that retain the camera-model information even
from post-processed images is quite cumbersome, if not, ex-
tremely difﬁcult ([ 19]). This provides the motivation to use
Neural Networks to perform this task. Since, DNNs do not
require explicit feature engineering, and can automatically
learn the necessary features from the image, it makes the
task of classiﬁcation more tractable.
As stated earlier, forensic researchers have used a num-
ber of custom neural network architectures ([ 32], [2], [4],
[33]). Besides, a number of deep architectures have been
also proposed to perform the task of classiﬁcation, such as
the VGGNet, GoogLeNet, ResNet and most recently, the
DenseNet ([ 20]). A major challenge in using such deep net-
works is to address the issues of over-ﬁtting and feature-
attenuation during training. The camera-model features ex-
isting within an image are extremely subtle, compared to
other dominating features of the image. As such, while
training a Deep Neural Network, these model-level features
may be sharply attenuated as the input image is propagatedthrough successive layers.
In this work, we choose to use the 201-layer DenseNet
[12] as the core architecture of our network. In the
DenseNet, the output of a certain layer is propagated to
all the layers in front of it. Any layer in the network
has direct access to the features generated by all the lay-
ers that came before it. As a result, if any of the image
features are lost during forward propagation, they are re-
generated at the input of latter layers through the dense con-
nections. That is why, this architecture is quite suitable for
detecting minute statistical features like those related to the
source camera-model of the image. Again, experiments on
image-classiﬁcation benchmarks have shown that, using a
secondary network to re-calibrate the learned features im-
proves the representational power of a network. Motivated
by these results, we feed the output features of our main net-
work into a Squeeze-and-Excite block, introduced in ([ 11]).
This boosts the ﬁnal test-accuracy of our networks on the
given benchmarks.
But, the problem of over-ﬁtting still remains, as exist-
ing datasets are limited in their size. To overcome this set-
back and to ensure generalization of the features that are
learned, we use a number of data-augmentation schemes
such as, gamma correction, JPEG compression, re-scaling,
extracting patches for training, randomly cropping and ﬂip-
ping the training image to extend the dataset. These prevent
the network from becoming dependent on the speciﬁc de-
vice from which the training images are taken and help the
network learn more robust features. Additionally, we have
also trained the network for image manipulation detection,
to see whether or not- it can be used as a general purpose
network for image forensics.
The following sections of this paper explain image acquisi-
tion model, the outline of our model, detailed architecture
of the network, training procedure, and the detailed com-
parative results.
2. Materials
2.1. Description of Datasets
In order to train our network, we have used the Camera-
Model Identiﬁcation Dataset provided for the IEEE Signal
Processing (SP) Cup 2018. The initial dataset consisted of
images captured by 10 different camera models having 275
images for each, all of which were provided by the IEEE
Signal Processing Society. In addition to this, external data
for each camera-model is collected from Flickr during the
open competition phase of SP Cup 2018. This one con-
tained varying number of images for each camera model.
Dataset-I is formed by combining both of these sets of data.
A brief summary of the dataset-I is given in Table 1.
The test data for the SP Cup dataset is provided sepa-
rately on the Kaggle platform without any labels. It includes
20