Application of DenseNet in Camera Model Identiﬁcation and Post-processing
Detection
Abdul Muntakim Raﬁ1Uday Kamal1Rakibul Hoque1Abid Abrar1Sowmitra Das1
Robert Lagani `ere2Md. Kamrul Hasan1*
1Bangladesh University of Engineering & Technology2University of Ottowa
2laganier@uottawa.ca1*khasan@eee.buet.ac.bd
Abstract
Camera model identiﬁcation has earned paramount im-
portance in the ﬁeld of image forensics with an upsurge of
digitally altered images which are constantly being shared
through websites, media, and social applications. But, the
task of identiﬁcation becomes quite challenging if metadata
are absent from the image and/or if the image has been post-
processed. In this paper, we present a DenseNet pipeline
to solve the problem of identifying the source camera-
model of an image. Our approach is to extract patches of
256×256from a labeled image dataset and apply augmen-
tations, i.e., Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD). We
use this extended dataset to train a Neural Network with the
DenseNet-201 architecture. We concatenate the output fea-
tures for 3 different sizes ( 64×64,128×128,256×256) and
pass them to a secondary network to make the ﬁnal predic-
tion. This strategy proves to be very robust for identifying
the source camera model, even when the original image is
post-processed. Our model has been trained and tested on
the Forensic Camera-Model Identiﬁcation Dataset provided
for the IEEE Signal Processing (SP) Cup 2018. During
testing we achieved an overall accuracy of 98.37%, which
is the current state-of-the-art on this dataset using a sin-
gle model. We used transfer learning and tested our model
on the Dresden Database for Camera Model Identiﬁcation,
with an overall test accuracy of over 99% for 19 models. In
addition, we demonstrate that the proposed pipeline is suit-
able for other image-forensic classiﬁcation tasks, such as,
detecting the type of post-processing applied to an image
with an accuracy of 96.66% – which indicates the general-
ity of our approach.
1. Introduction
In digital forensics, camera model identiﬁcation is a dis-
tinguished ﬁeld of research and has profound impact on cru-
cial real-life applications, such as criminal investigations,authenticating evidence, detecting forgery, etc. Nowadays,
professional image editing tools are readily available, mak-
ing image-forgery quite commonplace. Thus, cyber-crimes
via digital images are ever increasing and; so as, the need
for a robust camera model identiﬁcation scheme. But un-
fortunately, the task of identifying the camera-model is very
challenging, especially when the metadata of the digital im-
age is unavailable. As a result, a forensic analyst has to im-
plement unique techniques to determine the source camera-
model solely from an image.
In the literature, various methods have been proposed to
perform this task. [ 28], [16] and [ 23] have perfectly de-
scribed the present condition of camera model identiﬁcation
in their review. The initial approach was an infeasible idea
of merging external features in an image for each and ev-
ery device; like watermarks, device-speciﬁc-code, etc. As a
result, focus has shifted towards detecting intrinsic camera
features, such as the Color Filter Array (CFA) pattern ([ 3]),
interpolation algorithms and Image Quality Metrics (IQM)
used in the camera ([ 15], [10]). Device-speciﬁc camera-
detection schemes have also been proposed, where noise-
patterns like the Photo Response Non-Uniformity (PRNU)
have been exploited to identify the device ([ 8], [18]), [9].
Although device speciﬁcity is an inherent feature of PRNU
noise, forensic researchers have developed methods to make
camera model identiﬁcation device invariant ([ 30], [19]).
Most of these works try to estimate the model-speciﬁc ar-
tifacts that are introduced into an image during image-
capture, and then, correlate these features with a reference
for the corresponding camera-model ([ 5]). In this approach,
the second order statistics of the CFA pattern ([ 29]) and 3D
co-occurrence matrices ([ 7], [21]) have been used as feature
vectors to successfully detect camera-models with state-of-
the-art accuracy.
Most of the methods stated so far have used traditional
complex ensemble classiﬁers. Recently, researchers have
adopted a data-driven approach and made an effort to solve
this problem using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN).
This suggestion seems quite promising because, in the past
1
19