12 
 restriction dependencies between the units, and the SIEs within each unit , for the purposes of generating  267 
natural language  requirements  that are readily semantic and computer -understandable (i.e., the intelligent 268 
code) . The background form shows the SIEs and the predicate -argument structures between the SIEs  and 269 
the requirement units in a sequential format . The background form consists of two types of tokens: 270 
semantic  tokens to represent the semantic  meanings  of the SIEs  (e.g., words and numbers) , and syntactic  271 
token s to indicate the predicate -argument structure s (e.g., parenthesis and vertical bars) . The form can be 272 
directly embe dded using vector  representations and thus fed into the deep learning  requirement unit-to- 273 
text generation model for generating the requirement sentence segmen ts corresponding to the units in the 274 
MFS requirement hierarchy . The surface form can be converted into the background form using rules 275 
(e.g., rules to concatenate words from the surface form and add syntactic tokens to build  the background 276 
form ). Examples of these rules, which were developed in Python 3, are shown in F ig. 1 . Due to its 277 
semantic and structured representation, the MFS requirement hierarchy is potentially compatible and 278 
integrable  with other ACC representations  and workflow s (e.g., CDP) . 279 
5.2 Intelligent code  representation  280 
The paper defines a n intelligent code  as a natural -language requirement connected with its corresponding 281 
MFS requirement hierarchy . It consists of three parts – the natural -language requirement , its 282 
corresponding MFS requirement hierarchy, and the semantic links  that indicate the  correspondence 283 
between the surface form  and the background form  of the hierarchy  and the natural -language requirement  284 
(an example to illustrate the representation of the  intelligent requirement  is shown in Fig. 1) . Each 285 
semantic correspondence key  consists of a requirement unit identifier and an SIE identifier , and  every  286 
token  in the natural -language requirement and the requirement hierarchy is annotated with  such a 287 
semantic correspon dence key . Thus, intelligent  requirements can be understood by both humans (via the 288 
natural -language requirement ) and computers (via the MFS requirement hierarchy) , and meanwhile , 289 
preserve the semantic links between the natural -language requirement and the requirement units and SIEs 290 
in the hierarchy (via the semantic correspondence keys ). 291