11 
 representations  (e.g., logic) . An MFS  requirement hierarchy models  a requirement in a hierarchical 250 
structure that consists of several requirement units. Each  requirement unit consists of several SIEs (as 251 
listed in Table 1) , which are the constituent concepts  (e.g., subject  and compliance checking attribute ), 252 
relations  (e.g., subject relations) , and indicators (e.g., deontic operator indicator) that define  a requirement 253 
or a condition  in a requirement . Each unit has  at least one  subject or compliance checking attribute  and 254 
may or may not have other SIEs . Each unit does not have any secondary SIEs  such as restrictions and 255 
exceptions, and thus is easily processable  using  most of the existing semi -automated or automated 256 
compliance ch ecking methods and systems . There are two types of relations between the requirement 257 
units: simple and complex relations. Simple relations include conjunctions (e.g., “and”) and disjunctions 258 
(e.g., “or”). Complex relations include exceptions and restrictio ns.  259 
Table 1. Semantic Information Elements (SIEs) for Defining  Requirements for Compliance Checking [1]. 260 
Semantic information element  Definition  
Subject  An ontology concept representing a thing (e.g., building element) that is subject 
to a particular requirement  
Subject relation  A term or phrase that defines the type of relation ship between two subjects, a 
subject and an attribute, or a subject or an attribute and a quantity (e.g., 
“equipped”)  
Compliance checking attribute  An ontology concept representing a specific characteristic of a “subject” that is 
checked for compliance (e.g., “width”)  
Deontic operator  indicator  A term/phrase that indicates the deontic type of the requirement (i.e., obligation, 
permission, or prohibiti on) 
Comparative relation  A term/phrase for comparing quantitative values, including “greater than or 
equal to,” “greater than,” “less than or equal to,” “less than,” and “equal to”  
Quantity value  A numerical value that defines the quantity  
Quantity unit  The unit of measure for a “quantity value”  
Reference  A term or phrase that denotes the mentioning or reference to a chapter, section, 
document, table, or equation in a building -code sentence  
The MFS requirement hierarchy is represented in two supplementary forms: the surface form [see Fig. 261 
1(a)] and the background form  [see Fig. 1( b)]. The surface form  shows the requirement units  and the SIEs 262 
within each unit  in a hybrid, templatized and graphical , format . Similar to the conceptual graph [6] and 263 
the visual code checking language [7], the surface form can be  visualized  and manipulated for the purpose 264 
of requirement editing , development , or navigation . For example, the surface form can be embedded as a 265 
part of a user interface for the  requirement developers to add or modify the requirement units,  the 266