1 
  Natural language generati on and deep learning for intelligent building codes  1 
Ruichuan Zhanga; and Nora El -Goharyb 2 
a Graduate Student , Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana - 3 
Champaign, 205 N. Mathews Ave., Urbana, IL 61801, United States. E -mail: rzhang65 @illinois.edu.  4 
b Associate  Professor, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Un iversity of Illinois at Urbana - 5 
Champaign, 205 N. Mathews Ave., Urbana, IL 61801, United States (corresponding author). E -mail: 6 
gohary@illinois.edu; Tel: +1 -217-333-6620.  7 
Abstract  8 
Many existing ACC systems require the process es of extracti ng regulatory information from natural 9 
language building -code requirements and transforming  the extracted  information into computer - 10 
processable semantic representations . These processes  could , however, be jeopardized by the ambiguous 11 
nature of the natural la nguage and the hierarchically complex structures of building -code requirements . 12 
To address this problem , this paper proposes the concept of  intelligent building code for bypassing the 13 
error -prone information extraction and transformation processes . In the proposed intelligent code, the  14 
natural -language requirements in the code are connected with highly  structured computer -understandable 15 
semantic information , which is represented in the form of  semantic requirement hierar chies and can be 16 
readily used by computers for ACC . The paper  also propose s a deep learning -based method  to 17 
automatically generate such intelligent code . The method leverages the requirement hierarchy 18 
representation , a proposed deep learning unit -to-text model for generating requirement sentence segment s, 19 
and a proposed semantic correspondence score for configuring the segments into requirement  sentences . 20 
The method  was implemented and tested on a dataset from  multiple regulatory documents . The generated 21 
intelligent requirements were evaluated in terms of both natural -language requirement  comprehensibility 22 
and correspondence  between the natural language and the semantic representation , with the results 23 
indicating high pe rformance for the proposed representation and method . The proposed intelligent code 24 
will help reduce ACC errors, improve requirement comprehensibility, and facilitate intelligent code 25 
analytics . 26 
Keywords : Intelligent building code ; Natural language generation; Deep learnin g; Automated  compliance 27 
checking; Requirement representation . 28