3 
 requirements directly with only limited or even zero use of  natural language . Following these approaches, 54 
to create new requirements, b uilding code developers  no longer need to write natural -language 55 
requirements; instead, they would solely provide  the semantic regulatory information that define s the new  56 
requirement s directly in the form of such representation  (i.e., aiming to eliminate the natural -language 57 
form) . For example, the conceptual graphs [6] and the visual code checking language [7] were proposed 58 
to represent rules that define building -code requirements, which consist o f AEC domain -specific semantic 59 
concepts (e.g., building objects and relations between these objects) and connections (e.g., conjunctions, 60 
disjunctions, and constraints), in graph -like structures (e.g., nodes and edges).  These semantic concepts 61 
and connecti ons are provided by the users of these two representations as input in the form of nodes and 62 
edges to develop graphs that represent requirements. However,  these computer -processable semantic 63 
representations suffer from two limitations. First, without the corresponding natural -language  64 
requirements , it is often difficult for practitioners to understand and comprehend the regulatory 65 
information in the se representations [8]. Second , even when supplemented with the corresponding 66 
natural -language requirements, these representations  still lack  comprehensibility because the  direct 67 
correspondence /link between the two forms (i.e., the natural  language and the computer -processable  68 
semantic representation ) is missing , limiting their use in ACC p rocesses .  69 
An intelligent code , where highly  structured computer -understandable semantic information  that can be 70 
used directly by computers for semantic analysis tasks  [9] is connected with its natural -language 71 
counterpart , takes the best of both worlds  of the semantic representations  and the natural language . Such 72 
intelligent code  would  (1) reduce the ambiguity of the natural -language  requirements , while  preserv ing its 73 
comprehensibility, (2) be both directly process able by computers and understood by humans  [10], and (3) 74 
maintain the correspondence between the semantic information  and the natural -language  sentences .  75 
Recent advances in data-to-text generation ( e.g., [11]) in the domains of computer science and natural 76 
language generation (NLG) provide an unprecedented opportunity  for developing such intelligent code  77 
for both reduced ACC errors and improved requirement comprehensibility . NLG aims to produce human - 78