35 
 transforming existing codes to intelligent codes, no user input is needed, and the requirement hierarch ies 695 
could be automatically generated using existing algorithms  [31,54] . Second, although the proposed 696 
representation and method showed successful perform ance on requirements with  different levels of 697 
computability and from different building codes and standards, the testing and evaluation did not cover all 698 
possible types of requirements, especially the challenging ones such as requirements that have hidden 699 
dependencies or assumptions , requirements that have ambiguities and require human judgment by nature , 700 
and requirements that have very complex syntactically and semantically structures . Further research is , 701 
thus,  needed to (1) study the limit of the machine learning -based approach in the intelligent code 702 
generation , (2) better understand  the benefits and challenges of machine learning -based methods 703 
compared to rule -based methods , especially when dealing with the se challenging types  of requirements , 704 
and (3) further refine, improve, and adapt the proposed representation  and method based on these findings . 705 
9 Contribution to the body of knowledge  706 
This research is important from both intellectual and application perspectives. From an intellectual 707 
perspective, t his research contributes to the body of knowledge in three primary ways . First, this research 708 
proposes a novel NLG -based approach for intelli gent building code  representation . It models intelligent 709 
requirements as natural -language requirements connected with their corresponding multi -form semantic 710 
(MFS) requirement hierarchies. The MFS requirement hierarchy  is a new semantic representation of 711 
requirements for representing, analyzing, and generating requirements , especially the hierarchically 712 
complex ones . Its two forms, the forward and backward forms, support  automated generation of  713 
intelligent code  by facili tating the capturing of the semantic and syntactic structures of the requirements  714 
and the automated conversion and linking of the structured semantic information into natural -language 715 
sentences . The proposed intelligent code can circumvent the error -prone information extraction and 716 
transformation processes in the ACC systems and bring together the comprehensibility of the natural 717 
language with the computer -processability of the semantic representa tions. Second , this research  is the 718 
first effort to automatically generate intelligent code given the regulatory information that defines the 719