36 
 requirements. It proposes a deep learning and NLG -based method, where an RNN -based sequence -to- 720 
sequence model is a dopted to generate requirement sentence segments and a semantic correspondence 721 
score with a depth -first insertion and concatenation algorithm is defined to connect the segments into 722 
whole requirements. The experimental results show that the proposed method  achieved consistent 723 
performance across intelligent requirements from different codes/standards and with different levels of 724 
computability (i.e., from high to low computability), in terms of both natural language requirement 725 
comprehensibility and semantic linking correctness.  Third, it offers an approach for generating intelligent 726 
code, with minimal development effort. The proposed method achieves competitive performance 727 
compared to semantic and rule -based methods, while eliminating the need for handcraftin g rules for 728 
generating intelligent code. It further minimizes the manual effort for creating annotated data in training 729 
the deep learning -based NLG models by leveraging pretrained domain -specific information extraction 730 
and semantic relation extraction mode ls and rules to automatically create large -scale annotated data to 731 
train the requirement unit -to-text model.   732 
From a practical perspective, first, the proposed intelligent code could help reduce ACC errors, improve 733 
requirement comprehensibility, and facil itate intelligent analytics of building codes. All would lead to 734 
enhanced project efficiency (e.g., by reducing time and cost of ACC) and fewer violations of building 735 
codes and standards. Second, the application of the proposed NLG -based approach could be extended to 736 
support many other applications and purposes such as automated generation of contract documents like 737 
specifications and agreements, project planning documents like site plans, and progress reports. We can 738 
envision many more applications of NLG in the AEC domain if combined with other artificial 739 
intelligence (AI) approaches, like computer vision (e.g., automated generation of progress reports based 740 
on site images).  741 
10 Conclusions  and future work  742 
In this paper, a deep learning -based approach for generating intelligent  building  code s was proposed . First, 743 
a new semantic representation of requirements , multi -form semantic (MFS) requirement hierarchy, was 744