valence of robots shows us exactly the opposite, that is, that ethics
can and must precede the de ﬁnition of the nature of these
technologies, by the simple fact that we are human beings,“with autonomy and moral rules, dealing with these
ontologically inde ﬁnite artefacts ”(Cortese, 2018 ).
A virtue ethics approach can thus offer an interesting way of
dealing with the problems generated by the interaction betweenhumans and social robots. To avoid the risk of an individualistsolution, Coeckelbergh (2010 ,2020) highlights the importance of
thinking about a relational and socially oriented ethics of virtue,that is, “virtue in its history and in its concrete bodily
performances ”(Coeckelbergh, 2020 ).
The “individualist solutions ”, which also mark the
philosophical discourse of modernity, have also beentransposed to legal discourse. The emphasis placed on the
subjective centre of abstract imputation stems from the
transposition of an illusion: the individual-subject of law withall his attributes would be capable of shaping the whole juridicalsystem ( Alcaro, 1976 ). While, on the philosophical level, the
philosophy of conscience favoured the immediacy of subjectiveexperience over discursive mediation ( Habermas, 2007 ), on the
juridical level, processes of social interaction, such as the union ofpersons around a certain initiative, also came to be portrayed bythe interposition of a transcendental subjectivity: the legal person.
ELECTRONIC PERSONS AS LEGAL
ENTITIES
Legal Entity and Calculation With Concepts
The main argument for the defence of electronic personhood is
associated with a pragmatic or functional analysis of legalpersonhood. In the verbalized legal world, the term “legal
person ”refers to an autonomous centre of legal relations. If
legal personhood is already dissociated from the human substrate,there would be no way to deny personhood to robots due to thenon-existence of any human characteristic in these artefacts. In
that narrative, the legal person is presented as if there were no
problems in the process of attributing legal personhood tocompanies. The analogy with the legal person requires,however, an understanding of the function of this term inlegal grammar.
The philosophical discourse of modernity is not structured
only in subjectivity. The rationalization that crystallizes aroundthe organization of the capitalist enterprise and the bureaucraticapparatus of the state also appears as an essential characteristic ofthose “new times ”, with the institutionalization of economic and
administrative action with regard to the aims. Law is also going
through a process of rationalization, the central idea of which is
the differentiation and institutionalisation of autonomous socialsystems, thought of as machines, since they are founded onthemselves and governed by a particular procedural reason.The consolidation of this formal law is not limited to theexternal foresight of the administration of justice or to theseparation of powers, but also requires an internal, predictablecontrol, embodied in the idea that it is “calculated with concepts ”,
as in mathematics.The term legal person was perfectly suited to the context of
formal Law internally controllable by means of abstract concepts.Even today, when we perceive that this pretension of a legalmachine has always been illusory and Law is incalculable, as Irti
(2018) pointed out, we can also see that the legal person retains, to
a certain extent, its original inspiration: calculation mediated byconcepts.
Functions and Illusions of the Legal Person
According to Solaiman (2017) , being a legal person entails the
ability to exercise rights and to perform duties. For Bryson et al.
(2017) , there are three issues related to legal personality that
directly interest the debate on electronic personality. First, legalpersonality is a ﬁction. Legal personality is not necessarily
correlated with an ethical notion of moral personhood.
Second, legal personality is divisible. A legal system might
treat differently legal entities in respect of some rights andsome obligations. Third, the rights and obligations that a legalperson may have as a matter of law may not match those it has asa matter of fact ( Bryson, 2018 ). Even agreeing with the points
presented, we believe that the heuristic function of the term legalperson has a decisive role in the analysis of the proposal to createan electronic personality.
The legal person represents a mental shortcut, a trigger that
facilitates access to a set of complex situations. The actsperformed by shareholders and directors are uni ﬁed around
abstract subjectivity, and there is no need, in each situation, to
refer to the whole set of people who are contemplated by the legalentity ’s particular framework. In this sense, it is important to
perceive the heuristic function of the term legal person, that is, amental shortcut that enables, with simpli ﬁed information, rapid
judgements.
As a mental shortcut, legal personhood allows the allocation of
the patrimony in autonomous centres, different from the complexof legal relations of each partner. The creation of the new subject(legal person) facilitates the understanding of the separation ofassets according to a particular purpose. This, however, creates
the illusion that patrimonial segregation is dependent on legal
personhood, as if patrimonial autonomy could only be explainedwith the mediation of the legal person. In addition to thesimpli ﬁcation of the complex of relationships and the
autonomous allocation of assets, recourse to corporationpersonhood also allows access to a model of privateimputation of acts practiced by shareholders and directorsand, at the same time, gives stability to the model ofcoordination that develops within the legal person.
In the debate on electronic personhood, the process of
conferring legal personhood on companies is presented as a
model that would justify the recognition of legal personality
for robots with arti ﬁcial intelligence, as argued, for example,
byTurner (2018) , who even maintains that possible abuses, such
as the lack of accountability of programmers and engineers, couldbe fought by disregarding legal personhood ( “piercing the
corporate veil ”). This type of argument demonstrates how the
analogy with corporate law is mobilized without, for this purpose,pointing out the problems present in the model of the corporatepersonality.
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org December 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 789327 6Avila Negri Robot as Legal Person