to the complex ethical challenges posed by emerging
technologies. In fact, it is a mistake to suppose that thesealgorithms can be confused with human intelligence, since,although they surpass human intelligence in certain aspects,
they also fall short in others ( Watson, 2019 ). Even though
one cannot criticize simple inspiration in human models forthe development of arti ﬁcial intelligence, it is always important
to be careful when differences are erased and one begins tothink of metaphors and analogies in their literal sense.Consequently, when thinking about any attempt todiscipline or regulate Robotics, it is fundamental not toconfuse the existence of real autonomy or agency with thesensation of autonomy or agency. Unfortunately, theconfusion between the supposed agency of the artefacts andthe sensation provoked by the emerging technology leads to a
naturalization of the autonomy itself, as if every robot with AI
necessarily was, as happens w ith human beings, making a
decision in a speci ﬁc and independent way.
Social Robots, Vulnerability and Social
Valence
It is important to separate certain issues that are confused in the
debates about the legal personhood of robots.Anthropomorphism does not depend on the beliefs peoplemay have about the ontological nature of artefacts. Even
acknowledging that current questioning about the status of
“intelligent ”robots may impact on how people re ﬂect and
relate to these artefacts, the debates about the supposed agencyof robots, or about the technical possibility of developing acomplex arti ﬁcial intelligence system, called strong AI, may
not condition people ’s willingness to continue to explain the
behaviour of a robotic artefact based on the assignment of mentalstates. This happens on account of the particular social valence ofthis technology.
Moreover, social meaning (or social valence) relates to the fact
that humans show greater social commitment and provide
different stimuli when dealing with robots compared to other
goods. This characteristic can be linked to embodiment, since thephysical embodiment of the robot tends to make a person treatthat moving object as if it were alive. This is even more observablewhen the robot has anthropomorphic characteristics, since theresemblance to the human body causes people to start projectingemotions, feelings of pleasure, pain and care, as well as desires toconstitute relationships. Balkin (2015) understands that the
projection of human emotions on inanimate objects is not arecent phenomenon in human history, but when applied torobots, it entails numerous consequences.
Calo (2015) lists some consequences that can be generated by
social valence, amongst which Balkin (2015) highlights four: 1)
the more anthropomorphic a robot is, the more people blame therobot, rather than the person who uses it; 2) the presence ofrobots in a surveillance system increases the subjective feelingthat someone is being watched; 3) humans take greater risks topreserve the integrity of anthropomorphic robots than for thingsdesignated as tools; and 4) humans may suffer distinct emotionaldamage from the loss of robotic fellows.Robotics is no longer restricted to the factory and the
laboratory. So-called social robots are designed precisely tointeract with humans in uncontrolled environments. To thisend, studies and projects have been intensi ﬁed to develop
artefacts capable of interacting with people as naturally as
possible. Social robots are characterized by the possibility,albeit apparent, to transmit emotions, encourage and formsocial relationships, demonstrate personality, use natural cluesof communication and interact socially with people. There isalready a particular ﬁeld of study called human-robot interaction
(HRI), which seeks, based on social valence, to replicate in roboticartefacts a variety of cues and markers present in humancommunication, such as facial expressions and even language.
Along with social robots, assistive and rehabilitation Robotics
also stand out. Pearl, the Nursebot, is a prototype of a personal
mobile robotic assistant that can recognize speech, accompany
patients and communicate via touch screen. Designed at CarnegieMellon University, the nurse robot is being prepared to remindpeople to take their medicine and help them move around in oldpeople ’s homes. Rehabilitation robots were initially designed to
assist in the movement of patients in recovery. Assistive Roboticshas always had a wide reach, including rehabilitation robots,wheelchair robots, companion robots and manipulative arms. Wecan also speak of a Socially Assisted Robotics, a term used todescribe artefacts whose central focus, instead of physical contact,is some form of social interaction. Robots are already used to help
stroke (CVA) patients to do their exercises, to assist the elderly
and to care for and educate children and adolescents, especially incases of speci ﬁc conditions, as has been advocated in situations of
autism.
According to Sharkey and Sharkey (2008) , there are several
ethical problems related to the use of social robots by people invulnerable situations. With regard to the elderly, the following arenoteworthy: 1) potential reduction in human contact; 2)increased sense of objecti ﬁcation and loss of control; 3) loss of
privacy; 4) loss of personal freedom; 5) deceit and infantilisation;6) uncertainty regarding the circumstances in which the elderly
can and should have permission to control robots. For Sparrow
and Sparrow (2006) , the use of social robots with the elderly
reveals a serious ethical problem, as it is based, mainly in the caseof anthropomorphic artefacts, on the illusion of genuine socialinteraction. Even in the case of relatively simple assistive robots,introduced in old people ’s homes to monitor their behaviour, one
can speak of a technology that decisively affects the choices ofthese people, which can result in authoritarian Robotics.
When we think of robots as if they were people, we envisage
for the artefact a degree of agency and autonomy that is notsimply exaggerated, it is actually a transference, in which we lose
part of our own autonomy. The proposal of an electronic
personhood does nothing to help deal with this problem. Itmay, in fact, aggravate it, since, even if it is restricted to Law,legal personhood reinforces the concealed equivalence that issymbolically projected towards other ﬁelds. But if we move the
artefacts away from the idea of natural person, would we not runthe risk of abandoning our own ethics in these interactions, as canbe seen, for example, with the advance of sexual robots thatreproduce misogynistic stereotypes present in society? The social
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org December 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 789327 5Avila Negri Robot as Legal Person