In the verbalized legal world, the term “legal person ”refers to
an autonomous centre of legal relations. The ascription of legalpersonhood is based on the assumptions that all legal relationstake place among natural person and arti ﬁcial legal person, such
as corporations. Following that, the term natural person refers to
a human being. By contrast, the term “legal person ”or“legal
entity ”will be often used in this paper when referring to the
artiﬁcial legal person.
According to Gurnkel (2018a ,2018b) ,i ti si m p o r t a n tt o
separate certain questions that are confused in the debatesabout the legal personhood of robots. First, there is a relevantd i f f e r e n c eb e t w e e nt h et w ov e r b st h a tc o m p r i s et h eq u e s t i o n :“can”and “should ”AI be persons ( Gurnkel, 2018a .) On the
other hand, there is another relevant difference, betweennatural person and legal person. Following that, if legal
personhood is already dissociated from the human
substrate, there would be no way to deny that AI can be alegal person. But, just because it is possible, that does notmean it should be a good idea.
Just as it is important to separate the idea of moral
personhood from the concept of legal personality, itshould also be noted that the moral community is notlimited to the ﬁgure of moral agents, currently reaching
the ﬁgure of moral patients, who are affected by the
actions of ( “rational ”) agents. This means that rights must
not be confused with moral personhood. Likewise, courts
might recognize certain legal rights without this implying the
recognition of a moral per sonhood or a general legal
personality.
In dialogue with these important elements of the debate on the
legal personality of robots, I would like to highlight in this work adistinct aspect, very sensitive to the practice of Law: the legalentity presents itself as a decision structure, which allows theidenti ﬁcation of problems and normative solutions used in
previous cases. In this sense, it is important to understand theheuristic function of the term legal entity, that is, a mentalshortcut that allows, with simpli ﬁed information, quick
judgments.
In the debate on electronic personhood, it is commonly
observed that the legal person is presented as if there were noproblems in the process of attributing legal personhood tocorporations and companies. The analogy with the legalperson requires, however, an understanding of the function ofthis term in legal grammar. This paper seeks to investigate theproposal to create a legal (electronic) personhood for robotsbased on the European Parliament resolution withrecommendations on Civil Law and Robotics. To this end, wehighlight the various risks and problems present in this type
of initiative, especially in view of the current trend of
expanding legal subjectivity in various jurisdictions. Inaddition to an anthropomorphic rhetoric, we can observet h ep r e v a l e n c eo fap r a g m a t i cl i n et h a ts e e k st ob eg u i d e d ,mainly, by the model of corporations, without taking intoaccount, however, problems present in the process ofembodiment of companies and the particular function ofthe term legal person in the grammar of Law.PRIVATE LAW AND ROBOTICS
The architecture of digital platforms is capable, in certain cases, ofinﬂuencing society more directly and ef ﬁciently than Law itself. In
the growing scenario of technical regulation, it is important tonote that programmers and engineers may have dif ﬁculty
translating ethical and fundamental values into demands thatdecisively affect people ’s lives. In this sense, Langdon Winner
(1985) ,a sLeenes (2011) recalls, was already working with the
political dimension of artefacts and cited, for example, the absurd,
structurally elitist urban constructions of Robert Moses in New
York, which were designed to physically impede the passage ofpublic transport to noble areas of the city, since it waspredominantly used by the black population.
With the emergence of cyberspace, Information and
Communication Technologies (ICTs) have come to beunderstood as instruments capable of conditioningbehaviours. The relationship between Law and thenormative effects of technology has been consolidated as aﬁeld of study. Lessig (2006) presents the “code ”—in his words,
the hardware and software that make up cyberspace —as a new
form of regulation, since it de ﬁnes the terms in which
interactions in cyberspace take place. Thus, as the codechanges, so does the character of cyberspace. Technologyalways incorporates certain rules, which allow a certainbehaviour and inhibit another. Therefore, the rules incyberspace are increasingly shaped by technology ratherthan by Law.
Robotics cannot be seen as a novelty. In industry, with
emphasis on automobile manufacturing, Robotics represents atechnique already incorporated into production, mainly inrelation to the performance of routine tasks. As Pagallo (2018)
points out, more than 50 years ago “robots have already
materialised as a reprogrammable machine, operating semi orfully automatically in manufacturing operations and otherindustrial tasks ”(Pagallo, 2018 ). Although Robotics should not
be confused with AI, it is undeniable that today these ﬁelds are
more and more closely intertwined, mainly due to theimprovement of probabilistic methods, the increasingavailability of huge amounts of data and the increase incomputational power. One cannot forget, either, the morerecent transformation of places and spaces into environmentsmore receptive to information technology, as occurs with the
imagery of intelligent cities.
The European Parliament Resolution of February 16, 2017
established that a robot shall be considered intelligent when it hasthe following characteristics: 1) the existence of sensors capable ofallowing it to exchange data with the environment; 2) the abilityto learn from experience and interact with the environment; 3)the existence of material support; 4) the ability to adapt and 5) theabsence of life in the biological sense (European Union, 2017).
Among the recommendations on the constitution of a suitable
registry, the formation of insurance schemes and compensationfunds is the suggestion of the creation of a legal status of robotsfor more complex artefacts, which would then be endowed with a
legal (electronic) personhood.
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org December 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 789327 2Avila Negri Robot as Legal Person