without constant human monitoring, but controlled at a time of
need, be quali ﬁed as autonomous ( Bertonili, 2013 )? In this sense,
the absence of speci ﬁcation of the term “autonomy ”contributes
to its own naturalization, that is, autonomy is presented as a
given, as if it were a necessary consequence of the supposed
intelligence of these systems.
In an attempt to dispel this imprecision, Bertolini (2013)
highlights three meanings for the term autonomy whendiscussing robotic applications: 1) autonomy as consciousnessor self-consciousness, which would lead us to the idea of free willand, consequently, to the identi ﬁcation of a moral agent; 2) the
capacity to interact independently in the operationalenvironment; 3) the capacity to learn.
In philosophical terms, autonomy, in a strong sense, is related
to the idea that responsibility can only be attributed to a moral
agent. Like subjectivity, autonomy, in that sense, is part of the
philosophical discourse of modern times. Moral concepts in“modern times ”have come to be shaped to recognize the
subjective freedom of the individual in discerning as validwhat they should do. By breaking with the paradigm ofmorality as obedience, Kant practically invented the concept ofmorality as autonomy ( Schneewind, 1998 ). The rejection of the
inequality of moral quality makes each one their own legislator, tothe extent that every person would be capable of evaluating theirown action, without the need for any external interference.Although the strong anthropocentric component of this idea
of autonomy can be criticised, there is currently no robotic
artefact that meets these described conditions, which would inprinciple rule out qualifying robots as autonomous agents in astrong sense. Since the law does not restrict legal personhood, asan aptitude to acquire duties and rights, to the human substrate,the ontological debate ends up losing space when confronted withmore pragmatic arguments, such as the attribution of legalpersonhood to corporations and other business associations.
In another sense, autonomy could be understood as the ability
to perform tasks without human supervision. This is autonomy ina weak sense. From the autonomous drone, to vehicles without a
driver, to the robotic vacuum cleaner, one can speak, in these
cases, of autonomy at various levels, even if the robotic artefact isassociated with performing a certain activity due to a goalpreviously de ﬁned by a programmer. Although far from the
idea of a strong agency concept, it is undeniable that this is anappearance of agency, which, as we have seen, has its importance.In the classic de ﬁnition of Richards and Smart (2013) , robotic
artefacts are analysed from this sense of agency, which is not to beconfused with its strong sense. In this aspect, a robot can beunderstood as a built system that displays, even if only apparently,a physical and mental agency, but is not alive in the biological
sense, that is, it is something manufactured, that moves around
the world (materiality), seems to make rational decisions aboutwhat to do (weak or apparent autonomy) and is a machine.
To avoid anthropomorphic rhetoric, Calo (2015) avoids the
use of the term “autonomy ”and prefers to use the term
emergence. This behaviour is found in complex adaptivesystems where there is a global behaviour resulting fromindividual interaction. Some examples can be seen in theanimal world, such as the ﬂock of birds, the school of ﬁsh andthe swarm of bees, which show the creation of patterns without
the existence of a central command. Emergent behaviour is acharacteristic phenomenon of complex adaptive systems(Doneda et al., 2018 ). It is a type of global behaviour, which
can result from hundreds and thousands of simple individual
interactions. They create the illusion of central coordination. Wespeak of emergence when we observe a behaviour that is notexplicitly programmed, but which results from the interaction ofsimple mechanisms.
The notion of emergence is associated with a holistic
perspective, in which the robot ’s behaviour is not confused
with the simple sum of its parts, creating, in some situations,the sensation that the artefact performed an unexpected, non-programmed behaviour. It is interesting to realize that surprisecan depend on the subjective expectation of the expecter. Even so,
even if one adopts the perspective of the programmer, there is no
way to establish beforehand all the behaviours that emerge fromthe interaction that occurs only in a certain time and space of theexecution. As Mataric (2014) points out, the fact that we cannot
predict everything in advance does not mean that we cannotpredict anything, such as the risks associated with the use ofartefacts, such as surgical robots, in a context of a particular use.Thus, the input received by the robot continues to be determinantfor the behaviour it will produce, even if the latter is unexpected.
Autonomy can also be associated with a supposed ability to
learn. Could the ability of a robot to acquire and elaborate data to
perform its activities be equated to real learning? There are
already robotic artefacts capable of deciding independently onthe course of an action without any human intervention. Couldthe rules that determine the action and decisions be changed bythe robotic artefact itself? What does this machine learningconsist of? AI systems need the ability to acquire their ownknowledge by extracting patterns from raw data. This resource isknown as machine learning. The learning process, which may ormay not be supervised, allows the system itself to do the same taskmore ef ﬁciently with each attempt, thus automatically improving
its experience. Among the types of learning, the outstanding one
today is deep learning, which attains great power and ﬂexibility in
the attempt to represent the outside world with an alignedhierarchy of concepts, allowing the classi ﬁcation of images,
speech recognition and object detection, among other uses.
AsGoodfellow et al. (2016) point out, the ﬁrst deep learning
algorithms we recognize today were thought of as computationalmodels of biological learning, that is, models of how learninghappens or can happen in the brain. Deep learning is closelyassociated with the architecture of arti ﬁcial neural networks. Here
it is noted that anthropomorphism is not a unique characteristic
of Robotics. AI has also been historically conceptualised in
anthropomorphic terms. As Watson (2019) points out, besides
the fact that people always talk about machines that think andlearn, the name itself (arti ﬁcial intelligence) challenges us to
repeatedly compare human ways of reasoning with algorithms.In the same way as with legal entities, it is not always clearwhether this language is used in a literal or metaphorical sense.
The anthropomorphic metaphor conceals functional aspects
of arti ﬁcial intelligence, so that this rhetoric, which mimics
human qualities and attributes, may compromise the response
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org December 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 789327 4Avila Negri Robot as Legal Person