AsGalgano (2010) had already reported in Italian law, there
are several disadvantages in the process of conferring legalpersonhood on companies, which are not, to this day,properly measured. Galgano (2010) pointed out that the term
legal person was used, both by courts and lawyers, as if there was a
single entity to be protected behind the label of the legal person.This form of approach generated a serious problem: unitarytreatment. Besides distorting the function of the institute, itmasked the diversity of phenomena that articulated aroundthat term. Similarly, Ferro-Luzzi (2001) demonstrated how the
idea of activity, fundamental to the understanding of the termenterprise, was mistakenly absorbed by the notion of abstractsubjectivity, which, in turn, compromised the very regulation ofthe business phenomenon by the law. According to the Italianauthor, the concept of activity depends on a new legal grammar,
which reveals itself capable of culturally disassociating the action
from the ﬁgure of the abstract subject that has rights and duties.
The model of the corporate personality has also contributed to
an improper understanding of the limitation of the shareholder ’s
liability by concealing the unequal transfer of entrepreneurial riskto third parties. If, on the one hand, there are creditors who canprotect their own interests by renegotiating the risk with thecompany, as happens with a ﬁnancial institution; there are, on the
other hand, creditors who are unable to do so, as is sometimesseen with victims of environmental damage, such as thoseaffected by mining. The prevalence of the abstract model of
subjectivity has given rise to a unitary reading of patrimonial
autonomy itself and, consequently, of the limitation ofresponsibility, which are indifferent to the different credits.
If the electronic personhood has been conceived according to
the problems generated by the need to be accountable for possibledamages, it should be remembered that there is a mismatchbetween the legal format of the isolated corporation and theeconomic protagonism of the multinational enterprise groups.This is an internal contradiction of Law, materialized in theparadoxical tension between legal diversity and economic unity.To minimize this problem, Law has sought a new grammar,
coming closer to the ﬁgure of control and direction, breaking with
the model of an abstract subject as the central point in the processof accountability.
The creation of an electronic personhood may end up
repeating the same problems. Instead of recognizing thepeculiarities of the different areas of operation of robots, thesedifferent relationships are uni ﬁed in a single legal model, based
exclusively on the ﬁgure of an abstract subject. This is a frequent
mistake when the law tries to approach new technologies. Insteadof their ownership, the artefacts are in fact determined by theirspeciﬁc destinies. Thus, they do not include abstract
generalizations and unitary reductions, regardless of their
various uses. Is it possible to compare the problems caused bythe use of Robotics in medicine with the use of drones for militaryand security purposes? Similarly, the use of social robots withvulnerable people raises speci ﬁc ethical problems, which cannot
be compared with the use of Robotics for the transport of goodsand people.
Accountability focused on the personhood of this new subject,
supported by a still debatable concept of autonomy, may concealthose who are truly responsible for the damage and for the
development of the artefacts, transferring the risks of theactivity carried out by programmers and computer engineersto third parties who share the same spaces with the robots.
Contrary to what Turner (2018) states, “piercing the corporate
veil doctrine ”(disregard of legal entity) does not represent an
adequate instrument to remedy these problems, but represents, infact, a technique that is the main manifestation of theunitarianism that marks the whole discourse of the legalperson. There can be seen in the European Parliament ’s
particular Resolution with recommendations on Civil Law onRobotics, confusion between the attribution of personhood andthe separation of patrimony. The creation of a speci ﬁc fund for
any damage caused does not depend on the creation of a newsubject, since the legal person, even if associated with patrimonial
autonomy, does not have a monopoly on the disposition of
property. Nor does criticism of the personi ﬁcation make the
disposition of property the main solution to the problem. It isfundamental to come up with differentiated liability mechanisms,sensitive to the different uses of robotic artefacts and the diversetypes of damage that may possibly be caused.
On April 21, 2021, the European Commission presented
the Proposal for a Regulation on Arti ﬁcial Intelligence, which
seeks to establish a uniform legal framework for the development,commercialization, and use of arti ﬁcial intelligence within the
scope of the European Union. The current proposal moved
away from the creation of an electronic legal personality.
The text relies on a risk-based approach, which modulates thecontent of standards according to the intensity of risks created byAI systems.
Taking Metaphors Seriously: New Subjects
and the “Imitation Game ”
The proposal to create an electronic personhood is part of a wider
debate: the recognition of new subjectivities and, consequently,new legal actors ( Gellers, 2020 ).Teubner (2006) recalls that in
1,522 rats were submitted to a trial in the ecclesiastical court of
Autun. The methodological individualism that has informed legalpersonhood since modern times has prevented the recognition ofanimal rights. In ﬂuenced by the process of rationalization of
science and nature, the number of actors in the legal world was, asthe German author maintains, drastically reduced by adevelopment of the philosophical discourse of modernity. Indialogue with Luhmann ’s Theory of Systems and with Latour ’s
sociology, Teubner (2006) rejects the anthropocentrism that
underlies the psychological and sociological analysis of anintentional action in which the only plausible actor is the
human individual.
In 2017, a river in New Zealand was given legal personhood.
In the same year, in India, a court recognized the legalpersonhood of the rivers Ganges and Yamuna. Unlike theIndian case and the New Zealand case, the Constitution ofEcuador made a more daring proposal. The projection of therights of nature was presented as a way of trying to move from ananthropocentrism to a biocentrism based on the idea of goodliving. This openness to new forms of subjectivity has the merit of
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org December 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 789327 7Avila Negri Robot as Legal Person