trying to dissociate oneself from the individualistic model that
underlies both the natural person and the legal person. But mightit be possible to combat anthropocentrism by making use of aninstrument such as the legal personhood, the main representative
of methodological individualism in legal grammar? Even if these
initiatives are of great importance, in a symbolic and culturaldimension, by recognising the wisdom of traditional andindigenous populations with a new cosmovision, the newpersonalities may end up imprisoned in an old grammar stillinspired by an anthropocentric model, such as the ideas ofsubjective rights and individual ownership. The same canhappen with the supposed electronic personhood. Even if theassociation with the dichotomy natural person and legal personis avoided, the new subjects are articulated by means ofold models, which reinforce the already classic subjective
modulation of legal discourse.
In the lesson of Rodotà (2015) , the problem lies in the
perspective of the very idea of an abstract subject that informsany process of attribution of legal personhood. This constructionallowed the juridical discourse to formally liberate the person,artiﬁcially detaching him or her from his or her economic, social
and natural conditions. As a response to the contempt for theconcrete, we note the attempt to reconnect the person, in amaterial sense, to his or her context, with the reinvention ofthe person, now socio-environmentally situated and embodied.
The pitfall of the metaphor of the abstract subject is precisely
that it tends to merge person and juridical subjectivity by not
demonstrating the differences and thus hiding them. In Serick ’s
classic study (1958), there is reference to the teratological casePeople ’s Pleasure Park Co. v. Rohleder, in which a Virginia court
in 1908 asked itself what the colour of the legal person would bewhen faced with the following question: whether a society, as anautonomous centre of juridical relations, could be constrained bythe racist laws of the state which prohibited blacks from acquiringland. In Germany, with the rise of Nazism, the courts also had toexamine whether the anti-Semitic laws could be applied tocompanies controlled by Jews ( Serick, 1958 ).
In the case Santa Clara County v. Southern Paci ﬁc Railroad,
the term “person ”, provided for in the 14th amendment of the US
Constitution, was also associated with a corporation, which couldbe seen as an example of a subject for Law ( Hall, 2005 ). In 2014, in
a controversial decision, the US Supreme Court resorted to theargument that an entrepreneurial society, Hobby Lobby, couldinvoke religious freedom in order not to collaborate with thepayment of a health plan that would allow employees access toemergency contraceptive drugs, with high doses of oestrogen,popularly known as morning-after pills.
The accommodation of the religious freedom of a for-pro ﬁt
business society comes up against an important point, however:
thousands of women employed by Hobby Lobby may not sharethe same belief as the main shareholders in the company. In viewof this situation, did the court decide to protect the legal positionof the company ’s controlling shareholders to the detriment of
the private autonomy of the female employees? For JudgeGinsburg, the casting vote at the time of the trial, there was nodoubt: the choice to extend religious freedom to a pro ﬁt-making
organisation generated a serious imbalance within the companyby favouring the belief of the controllers over the protection of
the rights of women working in the company in question.
In the debate on the rights of the personhood of legal persons
and on the moral damage to legal persons in Brazil, there is a
sometimes problematic approach between natural persons and
legal persons. This equalisation may, as already highlighted,ignore the diversity of interests that justi ﬁed the
personi ﬁcation of the human being in relation to the
embodiment of companies, foundations and associations. Justas it is important to criticize the disguised fusion between personand legal person, we should also separate person and legalpersonhood and recognize that the expansion of new subjectsrefers only to the latter, to juridical subjectivity.
In this context of new subjectivities, what should be done?
Albeit controversial, the very origin of the term legal personhood,
derived from the term persona , is associated with a metaphor, the
mask used in theatre, allowing the actor to impose his voice.Despite this remote use, people still believe today in the illusorypossibility that metaphors, even those already incorporatedwithin legal grammar, can be prohibited. Italian nominalism,recognising that the legal person would represent a linguisticinstrument, almost suggested its end, thus underestimating thepower and function of metaphors. Even if there is no way toeliminate them, it will always be possible to monitor theirnormative use, reporting, in speci ﬁc situations, the abuses
related to the use of metaphors and analogies in a literal sense.
AsTurner (2018) , one of the enthusiasts of the attribution of
legal personhood to robots, points out, the accreditation ofelectronic personhood to robots in the United States or theEuropean Union is likely to in ﬂuence other legal decisions.
The electronic personhood may thus be adopted by countriesthat traditionally import legal models, as is the case of Brazil,whose model of legal personhood for natural persons has neverbeen fully achieved. Political, economic and social challenges haveprevented, and still prevent, the construction of a completecitizenship in several peripheral countries. Although in ﬂuenced
by the philosophical discourse of modernity, the adoption of legal
models in Brazil has occurred, in various situations, in a
particular and partial way, as in a real game of imitation, anincomplete and untimely simulacrum of never-realisedexpectations. We cannot move on to new subjectivitieswithout confronting old promises, such as the problems ofsubjects whose human rights have not yet been achieved, atthe risk of confusing people and legal entities. Perhaps robotswith arti ﬁcial intelligence can wait for their controversial rights.
Perhaps the only task, no less important, left for us to carry out isthat of adjusting subjects, putting back on the masks and takingthe metaphors seriously, that is, continuing to report the non-
problematised convergence between the contemplated metaphor
and the disguised comparison.
CONCLUSION
The sentence “the robots are coming ”, which has already become
a cliché, does not accurately portray the evolution of thistechnology. If robots, in fact, have already arrived, what is this
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org December 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 789327 8Avila Negri Robot as Legal Person