Robot as Legal Person: Electronic
Personhood in Robotics and Arti ﬁcial
Intelligence
Sergio M. C. Avila Negri*
Department of Private Law, Federal University of Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, Brazil
This paper seeks to investigate the proposal to create a legal (electronic) personhood for
robots with arti ﬁcial intelligence based on the European Parliament resolution with
recommendations on Civil Law and Robotics. To this end, we highlight the variousrisks and problems present in this type of initiative, especially in view of the currenttrend of expanding legal subjectivity in various jurisdictions. In addition to ananthropomorphic rhetoric, we can observe the prevalence of a pragmatic line thatseeks to be guided, mainly, by the model of corporations, without taking into account,however, problems present in the process of embodiment of companies and the particularfunction of the term legal person in the grammar of Law.
Keywords: arti ﬁcial intelligence, legal personhood, robotics, electronic personhood, legal person
INTRODUCTION
In his essay The Sphere of Pascal , the writer Jorge Luis Borges reports that the Greek philosopher
Xenophanes, master of Parmenides, was tired of the Homeric verses that dressed the Gods as humanbeings. In opposition to anthropomorphic traits, he proposed to the Greeks one God, who was in factan eternal sphere. History followed its course and the exaggeratedly human gods were relegated to
poetic ﬁctions.
The anthropomorphic metaphor is not restricted to mythical or religious imagery. Sophia, a
humanoid robot with Arti ﬁcial Intelligence (AI), developed by the Hanson Robotics company,
received citizenship from Saudi Arabia in 2017. Although several interviewers were impressed withthe sophistication of its responses, the robot follows a simple algorithm and most of its statements arecredited to a previously prepared text ( Parviainen and Coeckelbergh, 2020 ).
As in Borges ’essay, Robotics can also be thought of without any anthropomorphic resource, with
other metaphors, as a sphere. Roomba is a ﬂat, round domestic robot. Even though it does not have
social skills like Sophia, the fact that this robotic vacuum cleaner moves on its own, following a simplealgorithm, causes some people to give it a name, talk to it and feel bad when the appliance gets stuckunder the sofa ( Darling, 2016 ).
If, for a long time, the idea that robots and human beings should be separated was in force, an opposite
trend has been accentuated, especially in the last d ecade: human beings can and should share the same
environment as robotic artefacts. As escorts of the elderly —and even children with autism —surgical
apparatus, deliverers or secu rity guards, robots have already begun to enter people ’s homes and lives.
Because of the lack of ontological and legal de ﬁnition about this emerging technology, the Law is
forced to resort to old ﬁgures, already-known metaphors, which help us to approach with a certain
familiarity what is new and unknown. In 2017, the European Parliament put forward a resolutionwith guidelines on Robotics, with a proposal to create an electronic personhood for “intelligent ”
robotic artefacts (European Union, 2017).Edited by:
David Gunkel,
Northern Illinois University,
United States
Reviewed by:
Jaana Parviainen,
Tampere University, Finland
Andreas Theodorou,
Umeå University, Sweden
*Correspondence:
Sergio M. C. Avila Negri
sergio.negri@ufjf.br
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Ethics in Robotics and Arti ﬁcial
Intelligence,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Robotics and AI
Received: 04 October 2021
Accepted: 02 December 2021
Published: 23 December 2021
Citation:
Avila Negri SMC (2021) Robot as Legal
Person: Electronic Personhood in
Robotics and Arti ﬁcial Intelligence.
Front. Robot. AI 8:789327.
doi: 10.3389/frobt.2021.789327
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org December 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 789327 1HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 23 December 2021
doi: 10.3389/frobt.2021.789327