Electronic personhood is presented as an answer to the
problems of liability in view of possible damage that could becaused by robotic artefacts. Indeed, we can discern someconfusion in this form of approach: the attribution of a
supposed legal personhood for robots is treated as an
automatic consequence of the debate on liability. As Pagallo
(2018) noted, just as we should not confuse apples with
oranges, it is important to separate apples from liability andoranges from personhood. In addition to polarising the debates, itshould be noted that the defence or criticism of legal personhoodfor robots necessarily involves an understanding of the process ofconferring legal personhood on business companies andcorporations. If the law does not restrict the attribution oflegal personhood to human beings, how could we criticize theattribution of legal personhood to a robot ? Should we approach
robotic artefacts by means of old categories, as if robots were
people for the law?
THE ANDROID FALLACY AND
ANTHROPOMORPHIC RHETORIC
Robots as Natural Persons
Tracing the relationship between Law and new technologies is not
an easy task and, generally, this harmonisation does not occur in asimple way. This link is often made possible through the use of
metaphors, which serve as an instrument for the achievement of a
rhetorical effect, directly comparing different concepts. Richards
and Smart (2013) explain that, when dealing with different types
of robots, there are a series of competing metaphors, so choosingwhich ones to use generates consequences of great importance forthe success or failure of an attempt to regulate Robotics.
Calo (2015) asserts that currently we are already dealing with
the choice of metaphors for robots, as drones have already beenequated with “aircraft ”, leading to severe limitations of usage. In
addition, regulatory agencies in the United States have alreadycompared surgical robots to laparoscopic surgery, which is
minimally invasive, speeding up the process of approval.
A particularly seductive metaphor, not only for the law but
also for other ﬁelds of study of Robotics, is to think of robots
based on anthropomorphic rhetoric, as if they were people. If theimagery about robots is marked by the presence ofanthropomorphic artefacts, such as the androids of ﬁlms and
literature, what would be the problem for the law to resort to thissubtle comparison as well? To understand the risks of thisrhetoric, which projects human qualities on robots with AI,we need, ﬁrst, to better understand this technology.
Faced with the challenges brought by the spread of intelligent
robots, which are gradually coming onto the market and
consequently are becoming more and more present in people ’s
lives, also impacting the sphere of Law, Calo (2015) presents three
distinctive characteristics of robots: embodiment, emergence andsocial meaning. One of the main characteristics of a robot is to bephysically incorporated into the world, which allows it to sharethe physical environment with human beings. As Mataric (2014)
points out, corporeality also means perceiving other bodies andobjects around it, because one of the ﬁrst things a robot mustinternalize when programmed is how to avoid collisions, which is
done with the help of sensors, physical devices that allow a robotto receive information about itself and the objects around it. Inthis sense, contrary to what it may seem, uncertainty is part of
Robotics and arises from the fact that robots are physical
mechanisms that operate in situations in which it will bedifﬁcult to know exactly their own state and that of their
environment.
Materiality is not just a purely aesthetic issue. The way we
think about robots (and their human operators) will also affecttheir design. In this context, Richards and Smart (2013) question
what society expects of robots based on metaphors: are theyvirtual butlers, virtual pets, or virtual children? The answerschosen for these questions will affect the physical presentationof the robot and its con ﬁguration. According to Coeckelbergh
(2009) , ascribing responsibility to such agents is to experience,
feel and perceive a form and performance. In this sense, one couldspeak of “virtual agency ”and “virtual responsibility ”to refer to
“the responsibility that humans attribute to each other and to
(some) non-humans based on how the other is experienced andappears to them ”(Coeckelbergh, 2009 ).
Despite its anthropomorphic traits, Sophia, the humanoid
robot, follows a simple program. On this point, the metaphorcan be transmuted into a fallacy: human appearance can lead usto think of robots as people. Thus, since not all robots areandroids, the illusion caused by anthropomorphism of form
can be dangerous when we think of regulatory initiatives
based on false assumptions about the capacity of roboticartefacts themselves.
The projection of human characteristics on robots does not
depend on their form. Even when a robotic artefact has noanthropomorphic shape, people project onto thesetechnologies human qualities such as consciousness andintelligence. As the autonomy of the system increases, makingconnections between the inputs (its commands) and thebehaviour of the robot dif ﬁcult, analogies with human beings
are reinforced, which, in turn, can hinder any normative attempt,
whether in terms of ethical debate, or in legal matters, such as the
determination of who would be liable for possible damage causedby robotic artefacts.
The Naturalisation of Autonomy and
Consciousness in Robotics and in AI
In the debate on electronic personhood, it is commonly observed
that already existing legal norms would be incapable of portrayingand, consequently, disciplining autonomous, intelligent robots.Since it is admitted that today ’s robots can perform unanticipated
behaviour, we would only have to recognise their legal
(electronic) personhood. This kind of reasoning has severalﬂaws. The ﬁrst is the lack of determination of the meaning of
autonomy. At the same time, autonomy is confused withunpredictability of the result. Machines operated by directhuman control can bring about unpredictable results. From atechnological perspective, could the term “autonomy ”be used in
robotic applications where teleoperation, telepresence or humansupervision are found at some point? Could a robot acting
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org December 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 789327 3Avila Negri Robot as Legal Person