GP-VAE: Deep Probabilistic Multivariate Time Series Imputation
Vincent Fortuin1,2Dmitry Baranchuk1,3Gunnar Rätsch Stephan Mandt
ETH Zürich, Switzerland Yandex, Russia ETH Zürich, Switzerland UC Irvine, USA
Abstract
Multivariate time series with missing values
are common in areas such as healthcare and
ﬁnance, and have grown in number and com-
plexityovertheyears. Thisraisesthequestion
whether deep learning methodologies can out-
perform classical data imputation methods
in this domain. However, naïve applications
of deep learning fall short in giving reliable
conﬁdence estimates and lack interpretability.
We propose a new deep sequential latent vari-
able model for dimensionality reduction and
data imputation. Our modeling assumption
is simple and interpretable: the high dimen-
sional time series has a lower-dimensional rep-
resentation which evolves smoothly in time
according to a Gaussian process. The non-
linear dimensionality reduction in the pres-
ence of missing data is achieved using a VAE
approach with a novel structured variational
approximation. We demonstrate that our ap-
proach outperforms several classical and deep
learning-based data imputation methods on
high-dimensional data from the domains of
computer vision and healthcare, while addi-
tionally improving the smoothness of the im-
putations and providing interpretable uncer-
tainty estimates.
1 Introduction
Time series are often associated with missing values,
for instance due to faulty measurement devices, par-
tially observed states, or costly measurement proce-
dures [Honaker and King, 2010]. These missing values
impair the usefulness and interpretability of the data,
leading to the problem of data imputation : estimating
Proceedings of the 23rdInternational Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) 2020, Palermo, Italy.
PMLR: Volume 108. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).those missing values from the observed ones [Rubin,
1976].
Multivariate time series, consisting of multiple corre-
lated univariate time series or channels, give rise to two
distinct ways of imputing missing information: (1) by
exploiting temporal correlations within each channel,
and (2) by exploiting correlations across channels, for
example by using lower-dimensional representations
of the data. For instance in a medical setting, if the
blood pressure of a patient is unobserved, it can be
informative that the heart rate at the current time
is higher than normal and that the blood pressure
was also elevated an hour ago. An ideal imputation
model for multivariate time series should therefore take
both of these sources of information into account. An-
other desirable property of such models is to oﬀer a
probabilistic interpretation, allowing for uncertainty
estimation.
Unfortunately, current imputation approaches fall short
with respect to at least one of these desiderata. While
there are many time-tested statistical methods for mul-
tivariate time series analysis (e.g., Gaussian processes
[Roberts et al., 2013]) that work well in the case of
complete data, these methods are generally not appli-
cable when features are missing. On the other hand,
classical methods for time series imputation often do
not take the potentially complex interactions between
the diﬀerent channels into account [Little and Rubin,
2002, Pedersen et al., 2017]. Finally, recent work has
explored the use of non-linear dimensionality reduction
using variational autoencoders for i.i.d. data points
with missing values [Nazabal et al., 2018, Ainsworth
et al., 2018, Ma et al., 2018], but this work has not
considered temporal data and strategies for sharing
statistical strength across time.
Following these considerations, it is promising to com-
bine non-linear dimensionality reduction with an ex-
pressive time series model. This can be done by jointly
learning a mapping from the data space (where features
are missing) into a latent space (where all dimensions
1Equal contribution.
2Contact: fortuin@inf.ethz.ch
3Work partially done at ETH Zürich.