GP-VAE: Deep Probabilistic Multivariate Time Series Imputation
are fully determined). A statistical model of choice can
then be applied in this latent space to model temporal
dynamics. If the dynamics model and the mapping for
dimensionality reduction are both diﬀerentiable, the
approach can be trained end-to-end.
In this paper, we propose an architecture that uses deep
variational autoencoders (VAEs) to map the missing
data time series into a latent space without missing-
ness, where we model the low-dimensional dynamics
with a Gaussian process (GP). As we will discuss be-
low, we hereby propose a prior model that eﬃciently
operates at multiple time scales, taking into account
that the multivariate time series may have diﬀerent
channels (e.g., heart rate, blood pressure, etc.) that
change with diﬀerent characteristic frequencies. Fi-
nally, our variational inference approach makes use of
eﬃcient structured variational approximations, where
we ﬁt another multivariate Gaussian process in order
to approximate the intractable true posterior.
We make the following contributions:
A new model. We propose a VAE architecture
for multivariate time series imputation with a GP
prior in the latent space to capture temporal dy-
namics. We propose a Cauchy kernel to allow the
time series to display dynamics at multiple scales
in a reduced dimensionality.
Eﬃcient inference. We use a structured variational
approximation that models posterior correlations
in the time domain. By construction, inference
is eﬃcient and the time complexity for sampling
from the variational distribution, used for training,
is linear in the number of time steps (as opposed
to cubic when done naïvely).
Benchmarkingonreal-worlddata. Wecarryoutex-
tensive comparisons to classical imputation meth-
ods as well as state-of-the-art deep learning ap-
proaches, and perform experiments on data from
two diﬀerent domains. Our method shows favor-
able performance in both cases.
WestartbyreviewingtherelatedliteratureinSec.2, de-
scribe the general setting in Sec. 3.1 and introduce our
model and inference scheme in Sec. 3.2 and Sec. 3.3, re-
spectively. Experiments and conclusions are presented
in Sec. 4 and 5.
2 Related work
Classical statistical approaches. The problem of
missing values has been a long-standing challenge in
many time series applications, especially in the ﬁeld
of medicine [Pedersen et al., 2017]. The earliest ap-
proaches to deal with this problem often relied onheuristics, such as mean imputation or forward im-
putation. Despite their simplicity, these methods are
still widely applied today due to their eﬃciency and
interpretability [Honaker and King, 2010]. Orthogonal
to these ideas, methods along the lines of expectation-
maximization (EM) have been proposed, but they often
require additional modeling assumptions [Bashir and
Wei, 2018].
Bayesian methods. When it comes to estimating
likelihoods and uncertainties relating to the imputa-
tions, Bayesian methods, such as Gaussian processes
(GPs) [Rasmussen, 2003], have a clear advantage over
non-Bayesian methods such as single imputation [Little
and Rubin, 2002]. There has been much recent work
in making these methods more expressive and incorpo-
rating prior knowledge from the domain (e.g., medical
time series) [Wilson et al., 2016, Fortuin and Rätsch,
2019] or adapting them to work on discrete domains
[Fortuin et al., 2018a], but their wide-spread adoption
is hindered by their limited scalability and the chal-
lenges in designing kernels that are robust to missing
values. Our latent GP prior bears certain similarities
to the GP latent variable model (GP-LVM) [Lawrence,
2004, Titsias and Lawrence, 2010], but in contrast to
this line of work, we propose an eﬃcient amortized
inference scheme.
Deep learning techniques. Another avenue of re-
search in this area uses deep learning techniques, such
as variational autoencoders (VAEs) [Nazabal et al.,
2018, Ainsworth et al., 2018, Ma et al., 2018, Dalca
et al., 2019] or generative adversarial networks (GANs)
[Yoon et al., 2018, Li et al., 2019]. It should be noted
that VAEs allow for tractable likelihoods, while GANs
generally do not and have to rely on additional opti-
mization processes to ﬁnd latent representations of a
given input [Lipton and Tripathi, 2017]. Unfortunately,
none of these models explicitly take the temporal dy-
namics of time series data into account. Conversely,
there are deep probabilistic models for time series [e.g.,
Krishnan et al., 2015, 2017, Fortuin et al., 2018b], but
those do not explicitly handle missing data. There
are also some VAE-based imputation methods that are
designed for a setting where the data is complete at
training time and the missingness only occurs at test
time [Garnelo et al., 2018a,b, Ivanov et al., 2018]. We
do not regard this setting in our work.
HI-VAE. Our approach borrows some ideas from the
HI-VAE [Nazabal et al., 2018]. This model deals with
missingdatabydeﬁninganELBOwhosereconstruction
error term only sums over the observed part of the
data. For inference, the incomplete data are ﬁlled with
arbitrary values (e.g., zeros) before they are fed into
the inference network, which induces an unavoidable
bias. The main diﬀerence to our approach is that the