ALIME: Autoencoder Based Approach for Local
Interpretability
Sharath M. Shankaranarayana and Davor Runje
ZASTI.AI
Abstract. Machine learning and especially deep learning have garnered
tremendous popularity in recent years due to their increased performance
over other methods. The availability of large amount of data has aided
in the progress of deep learning. Nevertheless, deep learning models are
opaque and often seen as black boxes. Thus, there is an inherent need to
make the models interpretable, especially so in the medical domain. In
this work, we propose a locally interpretable method, which is inspired
by one of the recent tools that has gained a lot of interest, called local
interpretable model-agnostic explanations (LIME). LIME generates single
instance level explanation by artiﬁcially generating a dataset around
the instance (by randomly sampling and using perturbations) and then
training a local linear interpretable model. One of the major issues in
LIME is the instability in the generated explanation, which is caused due
to the randomly generated dataset. Another issue in these kind of local
interpretable models is the local ﬁdelity. We propose novel modiﬁcations
to LIME by employing an autoencoder, which serves as a better weighting
function for the local model. We perform extensive comparisons with
diﬀerent datasets and show that our proposed method results in both
improved stability, as well as local ﬁdelity.
Keywords: Interpretable Machine Learning Deep Learning Autoen-
coder Explainable AI (XAI) Healthcare
1 Introduction and related work
Machine learning models with good predictability, such as deep neural networks,
are diﬃcult to interpret, opaque, and hence considered to be black box models.
Deep neural networks have gained signiﬁcant prominence in healthcare domain
and are increasingly being used in critical tasks such as disease diagnosis, survival
analysis, etc. As a result, there is a pressing need to understand these models to
ensure that they are correct, fair, unbiased, and/or ethical.
Currently, there is no precise deﬁnition of interpretability, and the deﬁnitions
tend to depend upon the application. Some of the most common types of model
explanations are [10]:
1.Example-based . In this method, one is interested in knowing the point
in the training set that has close resemblance with the test point one is
interested in explaining [2,6].arXiv:1909.02437v1  [cs.LG]  4 Sep 2019