8 Sharath M. Shankaranarayana and Davor Runje
Fig. 3.Comparisons between our method and LIME [ 12] for local ﬁdelity. The ﬁrst row
corresponds to the R2 score of the local surrogate model, the second row corresponds
to the mean of MSE for all the points in the test set. In all cases, the number of data
points for the local surrogate model is varied in log scale.
deﬁne and employ suitable metrics for the two issues of focus. For local ﬁdelity,
the local surrogate model should ﬁt the global black box model locally. To test
this, we compute the R2score of the local surrogate model using the results from
the black box model as the ground truth. This tells us how good the model has
ﬁt on the generated data points. We compute the mean R2scores considering all
the points in the test set. We also test the local model for ﬁdelity by computing
the mean squared error (MSE) between the local model prediction and the black
box model prediction for the instance of interest that is to be explained. We
again compute mean MSE considering all the points in the test set for the three
respective datasets. Additionally, to study the eﬀects of the dataset size used for
the local surrogate model, we vary the number of generated data points used for
training the local surrogate model. The results for the local ﬁdelity experiments
are shown in Figure 3. It can be seen that in terms of both metrics, ALIME clearly
outperforms LIME by providing a better local ﬁt. The results seem consistent
across the three datasets.
It is even more diﬃcult to deﬁne a suitable metric for the interpretable model
stability. Since the explanations are based on the surrogate model’s coeﬃcients,
we can compare the change in the values of the coeﬃcients for multiple iterations.
Randomly selecting a particular instance from the test set, we run both LIME
and ALIME for 10iterations. Because of their nature, both methods sample
diﬀerent set of points at every iteration. Because of the diﬀerent dataset used at
every iteration, the coeﬃcients’ values change. As a measure for stability, one
of the things we compare is the standard deviations of the coeﬃcients. For each
feature, we ﬁrst compute the standard deviation across 10iterations and then
compute the average of standard deviations of all the features. We also compute