ALIME: Autoencoder Based Approach for Local Interpretability 3
upon encountering new data points as present in the test set. Thus, we ask the
following question:
Can we improve the stability of local interpretable model while sampling
randomly generated points?
In other words, we wish to see if we can still improve the stability by following
the same sampling paradigm of LIME and therefore not using the training set
for local interpretable model as done in [5,15].
Another important issue in local intepretable methods is locality, which refers
to the the neighbourhood around which the local surrogate is trained and in [ 8],
the authors show that it is non-trivial to deﬁne the right neighbourhood and
how it could impact the local ﬁdelity of the surrogate. A straightforward way to
improve the stability is to simply generate a large set of points and use it to train
the local surrogate. Although doing so would improve stability, it also decreases
local ﬁdelity or local accuracy. Thus, we ask another question:
Can we improve the stability while simultaneously maintaining the local
ﬁdelity?
Inthispaper,wemainlyfocusonansweringthequestionsabovebyintroducing
an autoencoder-based local interpretability model ALIME. Our contributions
can be summarized as follows:
–we propose a novel weighting function as a modiﬁcation to LIME to address
the issues of stability and local ﬁdelity, and
–we perform extensive experiments on three diﬀerent healthcare datasets to
study the eﬀects and compare with LIME.
2 Methods
Since our model builds upon LIME, we begin by a short introduction to LIME,
and then describe our proposed modiﬁcations.
2.1 LIME
Local surrogate models use interpretable models (such as ridge regression) in order
to explain individual instance predictions of an already trained machine learning
model, which could be a black box model. Local interpretable model-agnostic
explanations (LIME) is a very popular recent work where, instead of training
a global surrogate model, LIME trains a local surrogate model for individual
predictions. LIME method generates a new dataset by ﬁrst sampling from a
distribution and later perturbing the samples. The corresponding predictions
on this generated dataset given by the black box model are used as ground
truth. On these pairs of generated samples and the corresponding black box
predictions, an interpretable model is trained around the point of interest by
weighting the proximity of the sampled instances to it. This new learned model