2 Sharath M. Shankaranarayana and Davor Runje
2.Local. In these methods, one is interested in deriving explanations by ﬁtting
an interpretable model locally around the test instance of interest [12].
3.Global. In these methods, one is interested in knowing the overall behaviour
of the model. Global explanations attempt to understand underlying patterns
in the model behaviour, usually by employing a series of rules for explanations
as [7,13].
The interpretable and explainable methods can also be grouped based on other
criteria, such as i)Model agnostic or model speciﬁc ii)Intrinsic or post-hoc
iii)Perturbation or saliency based, etc. Recently, post-hoc explainable methods,
such as LIME [ 12], have gained a lot of interest since a posteriori explanations
may currently be the only option for explaining already trained models. These
methods are model-agnostic and hence do not require understanding of the inner
workings of trained model.
Some of the desired characteristics of interpretable models are consistency
and stability of explanations, and local ﬁdelity or faithfulness of the model locally.
Local post-hoc methods, such as LIME, lack in this regard. In this paper, we
propose a modiﬁcation to the popular framework for generating local explanations
LIME[12] that improves both stability andlocal ﬁdelity of explanations.
Since our focus is on post-hoc and local interpretable methods, we restrict our
literature review to include only those methods. As mentioned above, LIME[ 12]
is one the most popular methods in local interpretability. In LIME, artiﬁcial
data points are ﬁrst generated using random perturbation around the instance
of interest to be explained, and then a linear model is ﬁt around the instance.
The same authors extended LIME to include global explanations in [ 13]. Most of
the modiﬁcations to LIME have been in the line of selecting appropriate kind of
data for training the local interpretable model. In [ 5], the authors use K-means
clustering to partition the training dataset and use them for local models instead
of perturbation-based data generation. In another work called DLIME [ 15], the
authors employ Hierarchical Clustering (HC) for grouping the training data
and later use one of the clusters nearest to the instance for training the local
interpretable model. These modiﬁcations are aimed at addressing the lack of
"stability", which is one of the serious issues in the local interpretable methods.
The issue of stability occurs in LIME because of the data generation using random
perturbation. Suppose we select an instance to be explained, the LIME generates
diﬀerent explanations (local interpretable models with diﬀerent feature weights)
at every run for the same instance. The works such as [ 15] use clusters from the
training data itself to address this problem. Since the samples are always taken
from the same cluster of the training set, there is no variability in the feature
weights at diﬀerent runs for a particular instance.
Using the training set would make the black box model (the model for which
we seek explanations) overﬁt by creating a table where each individual example in
the training set is assigned to its class (i.e. exact matching of training instances),
Therefore, using these results in training the local interpretable model would
produce incorrect results, since the explanation instance of interest is from the
test set and we do not have information as to how the black box model behaves