Resurrecting Recurrent Neural Networks for Long Sequences
B. Related works
We first discuss standard RNN-based approaches for sequence-to-sequence modeling, and then provide a historical overview
on the progress of the literature stemming from the S4 paper (Gu et al., 2021a).
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs). Before the rise of transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), RNNs were widely used
in various applications of natural language processing tasks such as language modeling (Mikolov et al., 2010), machine
translation (Cho et al., 2014b) and text summarization (Nallapati et al., 2016). The modern RNN structure (see Eq.1)
is mainly attributed to the works of Rumelhart et al. (1985), and enjoys strong theoretical guarantees such as Turing
completeness (Stogin et al., 2020) in the width limit. However, it is possible to see the Hopfield Networks as a particular
form of RNN (Hopfield, 1982). Modern RNN formulations are also often related to the Elman Networks (Elman, 1990).
The issue of vanishing or exploding gradients, as described by Bengio et al. (1994); Pascanu et al. (2013), is one barrier
to training Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) with gradient descent. This problem limits the ability of RNNs to learn,
especially on tasks with long input sequences. One of the critical contributions to the success of RNNs was the introduction
of gating mechanisms such as the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) proposed by the Hochreiter & Schmidhuber (1997).
LSTMs address the vanishing gradients problem by introducing input, output, and forget gates, which enable the network to
selectively remember or forget information from previous time steps. Another popular variant of gated RNNs is the Gated
Recurrent Unit (GRU) (Cho et al., 2014b) which simplifies the LSTM architecture by merging input and forget gates into a
single update gate.
Mitigating the vanishing gradient problem with orthogonal and unitary RNNs. Arjovsky et al. (2016) introduced
unitary evolution RNNs (uRNN), where eigenvalues in the RNN state-to-state transition matrix ( Ain Eq. (1)) are restricted
to live on the unit circle. The induced map driving the hidden state evolution, therefore, mixes state components taking
into account new inputs — but the signal from past timestamps is not exponentially vanishing/exploding as in the vanilla
RNN case (see discussion on stability in §3.2.1 and (Pascanu et al., 2013)). This idea is powerful but introduces two
problems: (1) choosing unitary transitions restricts the function approximation class, and (2) training unitary matrices is
expensive since a projection on the Stiefel manifold is required at each gradient step. To resolve the second issue, many
works devoted attention to carefully designed reparameterization of the transition matrix as e.g., with the product of simpler
matrices (Arjovsky et al., 2016), Givens rotations (Jing et al., 2017), Householder reflections (Mhammedi et al., 2017), or
as exponentials of skew-symmetric matrices (Hyland & R ¨atsch, 2017; Lezcano-Casado & Martınez-Rubio, 2019). The
approximation capacity of these models is discussed and improved in Wisdom et al. (2016). A further step in designing
efficient orthogonal RNNs is provided by Helfrich et al. (2018), who parametrized skew-symmetric matrix using the Cayley
transforms, resulting in a fully real parameter space.
Recent Developments in the RNN literature. In addition to LSTMs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), GRUs (Cho
et al., 2014b), and orthogonal RNNs (Arjovsky et al., 2016; Helfrich et al., 2018), in recent years many works devoted
attention to the problem of vanishing gradients and of efficient learning in recurrent models. Such approaches can be put in
comparison with our work, and with the literature on SSMs. While linear recurrences such as the ones used in this paper as
well as in SSMs are studied mainly in the theoretical setting (to reduce level of complexity) (Li et al., 2022b; Hardt et al.,
2016), diagonal nonlinear real recurrences appeared in the literature before S4. One example is the IndRNN (Li et al., 2018),
which restricts the recurrent weights to have diagonal form (that is, hidden state components learn independently). (Li et al.,
2018) also gives intuition on why this feature makes IndRNNs more stable to the vanishing gradient problem. Compared
to our work, in the IndRNN a nonlinearity is placed directly in the recurrence as in classical RNNs. In our work, we give
evidence that complex-valued linear recurrences placed as sequence-to-sequence processing units followed by MLPs lead to
a boost both in scalability (through the use of parallel scans) and in test accuracy (see §3.1).
An alternative and very interesting approach for solving the vanishing gradient problem consists in using random nonlinear
recurrences, fixed at initialization, and just training the linear readout. The state produced by such networks – often called
Echo State Networks (ESNs) (Jaeger & Haas, 2004) is called a reservoir (see (Luko ˇseviˇcius & Jaeger, 2009) for a review).
The reservoir acts as a nonlinear dynamical system that transforms input data into a higher-dimensional space, enabling
effective learning and prediction. Shallow versions of these networks were found to be particularly efficient in the context of
learning low-dimensional nonlinear dynamical systems, and offer strong connections to new areas of mathematics such as
rough-path theory (Compagnoni et al., 2022). While clamping the recurrent weights to initialization leads to a decrease
in test performance (see Gu et al. (2020; 2022a)), in ESNs the vanishing gradient problem clearly is no longer causing
issues, as the recurrent weights are not trained. It would be interesting to compare the performance of our model to that of
deep (transformer-like) echo-state networks and to leverage ideas in this literature to design more effective initializations.
More fundamentally, the problem of vanishing gradients and the challenges of learning from sequential data are studied in the
15