Resurrecting Recurrent Neural Networks for Long Sequences
The crucial property of the Koopman operator is that it is linear and bounded (Mauroy et al., 2020): let f1, f2be two
observables, then
KS(αf1+βf2)(x) = (αf1+βf2)(S(x)) (17)
=αf1(S(x)) +βf2(S(x)) (18)
=α(KSf1)(x) +β(KSf2)(x). (19)
IfSis regular enough, i.e. if the Hilbert space of observables can be chosen such that Konly has point spectrum, then the
spectral theory of bounded linear operators in Hilbert spaces implies that KSis diagonalizable — i.e. any observable fcan
be expanded in terms of eigenfunctions of KS, where the Koopman acts linearly. We recall the definition: ϕλ:Cn→Cis
an eigenfunction of KSwith eigenvalue λ∈CifKSϕλ=λϕλ— i.e if the system measured on ϕevolves linearly. Since
the eigenfunctions of KSform a basis for L2, for any observable f:Cn→C, there exist complex numbers ν1, ν2,···such
that one can write (Mauroy & Mezi ´c, 2016)
KSf(x) =KS
∞X
j=1νjϕj
(x) =∞X
j=1λkνjϕj(x). (20)
Since also the identity measurement map x7→xcan be decomposed into eigenfunctions of KScoordinate-wise, we have
the following: assuming xk+1=S(xk), with x∈Rn, for any k∈Nwe have
xk=VΛkΦ(x0), (21)
where, with slight abuse of notation, Φ :Rn→C∞is a vector of functions with the jcoordinate defined as (Φ)j:=x7→
ϕj(x), and V∈Cn×∞(often named the Koopman modes matrix) is the infinite dimensional matrix such that, for the
observable fi:x7→xi, one has fi(x) =P∞
j=1Vijϕj(x).
Basic Theory Summary. In essence, Koopman operator theory, provides the following guarantee: any sufficiently
regular nonlinear autonomous dynamical system can be made linear under a high-dimensional nonlinear blow-up of
the state-space. Sounds familiar? This is exactly what a wide MLP + Linear RNN can do . Moreover, to take the system
back to the original coordinate system, one just needs a linear projection with matrix V. In practice, for identification and
diagnosis of nonlinear systems (e.g. in machanical engineering), this approach is used in a truncated version, where the
finite class of dominant eigenfunctions is constructed by using the dynamic mode decomposition (DMD) algorithm from
Hermite Polynomials (Schmid, 2010; Kaiser et al., 2021).
Extension to nonlinear systems with inputs. Several options exist for extending Koopman operator theory to systems
with inputs (Surana, 2016; Proctor et al., 2018; Kaiser et al., 2021; Korda & Mezi ´c, 2020). Here, we briefly outline the
approach of (Korda & Mezi ´c, 2020). Let S:Rn×Rm→Rnbe a nonlinear function which evolves the state of the
system as xk+1=S(xk, uk), where (uk)∞
k=1∈ℓ2(Rm)is the input sequence. We wish to take this nonlinear dynamical
system with inputs to linear form in the infinite-dimensional space of observables fof the form Rn×ℓ2(Rm)→C. LetL
denote the left shift operator ˜u= (u0, u1, . . .)7→ L(˜u) = (u1, u2, . . .), then one can define the Koopman operator for any
observable fas follows:
KSf(x,˜u) =f(S(x, u0),L(˜u)). (22)
This operator is again linear and bounded for regular enough S(Korda & Mezi ´c, 2020) — hence the analysis in the
autonomous setting carries out also in this case. In particular, using the notation in the last paragraph:
xk=VΛk
(x,u)Φ(x0,˜u), (23)
where Λ(x,u)is a diagonal complex infinite-dimensional matrix which contains the eigenvalues corresponding to the
eigenfunctions of the extended state Φ(x0,˜u).
Implication for deep RNNs. In essence, Koopman operator theory, provides the following guarantee: any regular
nonlinear dynamical system is representable by a linear RNN after proper nonlinear reparameterization of the inputs —
which can be performed by an MLP. While we believe this connection is conceptually solid and gives substantial insights into
our architecture, a quantitative discussion would require substantial technical efforts perhaps linked to recent contributions
from the statistical learning community (Kostic et al., 2022).
24