Resurrecting Recurrent Neural Networks for Long Sequences
Table 1. The effect of removing the nonlinearity from the recurrent
unit on test accuracy ( §3.1). We show results only for the sCIFAR,
ListOps, Text and Retrieval tasks in LRA as these models did not ex-
ceed random guessing on PathFinder/PathX (further improvements
in Tb.2&3). Performance of deep SSMs shown in Tb.3.
RECURRENCE SCIFAR LISTOPS TEXT RETRIEVAL
RNN-R ELU 69.7 (0.2) 37.6 (8.0) 88.0 (0.1) 88.5 (0.1)
RNN-T ANH 69.9 (0.3) 43.9 (0.1) 87.2 (0.1) 88.9 (0.2)
RNN-L IN 72.2 (0.2) 50.4 (0.2) 89.1 (0.1) 89.1 (0.1)
we discuss how interleaving linear RNN layers with nonlin-
ear feedforward blocks is sufficient to approximate highly
nonlinear systems. A key observation in our analysis is
that position-wise nonlinearities effectively transfer signal
information to higher frequencies, enabling the system to
go beyond linearity in the spectral domain and increasing
the layer capacity. To further strengthen our claim on the
advantage of linear recurrences, in §E.2 we show that, while
linear and nonlinear RNNs share an important class of ap-
proximating functionals (linear operators, see Wang et al.
(2022)), nonlinear activations can potentially slow down
training.
3.2. Complex diagonal recurrences are efficient
We now show that we can significantly speed up training
and inference for deep linear RNNs without losing perfor-
mance by using complex-valued diagonal recurrent matrices.
While the idea of diagonalizing linear systems for computa-
tional efficiency is a dominating feature of all deep SSMs,
following the introduction of DSS by Gupta et al. (2022a), in
this section we construct our diagonalized version to exactly
match the initialization spectrum (see §3.2.1) of the Glorot-
initialized deep linear RNN in Tb.1. Our main purpose with
this approach is to disentangle the effects of initialization
and diagonalization on performance (cf. Tb.2 and Tb.3).
We start in §3.2.1 by recalling some useful linear algebra el-
ements, and then proceed in §3.2.2 with a discussion on how
to diagonalize the recurrence while preserving the eigen-
value spectrum at initialization.
3.2.1. L INEAR RNN EIGENDECOMPOSITION
The recurrence xk=Axk−1+Bukcan be unrolled easily
using the assumption that x−1= 0∈RN:
xk=k−1X
j=0AjBuk−j. (4)
Exponentiations of the matrix Ain the equation above are
the source of the well-known vanishing/exploding gradient
issue in RNNs (Bengio et al., 1994; Pascanu et al., 2013).
While in nonlinear RNNs the state xkis forced to live on
the compact image of the activation function, the hidden-
state of our linear variant can potentially explode or vanishexponentially as kincreases. This phenomenon can be better
understood by leveraging an eigenvalue (a.k.a. spectral)
analysis: up to an arbitrarily small perturbation of the entries,
every matrix A∈RN×Nis diagonalizable4(Axler, 1997),
i.e. one can write A=PΛP−1, where P∈CN×Nis an
invertible matrix and Λ = diag(λ1, λ2, . . . , λ N)∈CN×N.
It is essential to note that, unlike the symmetric setting
where eigenvalues and eigenvectors are real, in the non-
symmetric case5one has to allow for complex entries to
achieve full equivalence. Plugging the decomposition A=
PΛP−1into Eq. (4)and multiplying both sides by P−1,
we get ¯xk=Pk−1
j=0Λj¯Buk−j, where ¯xk:=P−1xk,¯B:=
P−1B. The output can then be computed as yk=ℜ[¯C¯xk]+
Duk∈RH, where ¯C=CP−1, and we take the real
part of ¯C¯xk. Therefore, instead of learning (A, B, C, D ),
one can equivalently learn (Λ,¯B,¯C, D), where Λ,¯B,¯Care
complex valued, and Λis a diagonal matrix.
Are complex numbers really necessary? We adopt com-
plex numbers since they provide a convenient and compact
representation of non-symmetric matrices in diagonal form.
However this is not the only option – one could work almost
as efficiently using only real numbers (see §E.3).
Stability. Since ¯xk=Pk−1
j=0Λj¯Buk−j, the norm of com-
ponent jof¯xat timestamp kevolves such that |xk,j|=
O(|¯xk,j|) =O(|λj|k). Therefore, a sufficient condition to
ensure stability (i.e. xkdoes not explode) is therefore to
require |λj|<1for all j(Gu et al., 2021a).
3.2.2. L EARNING IN THE DIAGONALIZED SPACE
Learning recurrent linear systems in diagonal form provides
substantial computational speedups both for training and in-
ference. For example, in our implementation of sCIFAR, we
found diagonal linear RNNs to be ∼8 times faster to train
than a dense RNN with ReLUs, matching the speed of our
implementations of S4D and S5. The main reasons for this
computational benefit are that (a) taking powers of diagonal
matrices is trivial (speeding up both training (see also (Li
et al., 2018)) and inference), while exponentiating dense
matrices is computationally expensive, and (b) while nonlin-
ear recurrences must be computed sequentially, unrolling a
linear recurrence can be parallelized using associative scans,
resulting in faster training (Smith et al., 2022) (App. C.1).
Equivalent initialization. To disentangle the benefits of
diagonal linear systems from the role of initialization, we
seek an initialization for the diagonal system which keeps
the eigenvalue spectrum of the recurrence unchanged when
comparing our diagonal system with the dense linear RNN
in§3.1, where Afollowed Glorot initialization. We use a
4In other words, the set of non-diagonalizable matrices has
measure zero, see e.g. Zhinan (2002) for a proof idea.
5Take e.g. A= ((0 ,1)(−1,0)). The solution to the standard
eigenvalue equation gives λ=±i, where iis the imaginary unit.
5