Resurrecting Recurrent Neural Networks for Long Sequences
where A= diag(˜ a)is initialized with complex entries, of-
ten guided by HiPPO theory (Gu et al., 2020). Zero-Order-
Hold (ZOH) discretization with stepsize ∆leads to the re-
currence xk= exp(∆ ˜A)xk−1+ (exp(∆ ˜A)−I)˜A−1˜Buk.
This formula, while arguably complex compared to our
Eq.(6), relates to it as outlined in the following paragraphs.
Matrix exponentials make training easier. The ex-
ponential in the ZOH formula arises from the inte-
gration of ˙xct(t) = ˜Ax ct(t), obtaining xct(∆k) =
exp(∆ ˜A)xct(∆(k−1)). To enforce stability, in models
inspired by S4 the real part of Ais often fed into a positive
nonlinearity, as we also do in §3.3. From our results in §3.3
we claim that the power of exponential parameterization is
not necessarily attributable to accurate integration (which is
not present in our system), but is more fundamentally rooted
in a magnitude-phase decoupling on the recurrence (which
makes training with Adam easier, see Fig.9), as well as in
the overall advantage of learning in diagonalized space (see
Tb.2). We also note that stabilizing the recurrence by adding
a nonlinearity in parameter generation was beneficial also
in our experiments, although this is not prescribed by the
theory underlying S4.
Structured initialization is not necessary. While Gu
et al. (2022a); Gupta et al. (2022b); Smith et al. (2022)
also discuss initializations for Adeviating from the HiPPO
structure (see §2 and §B), to the best of our knowledge we
are the first to show that simple uniform initialization on
a slice of the unit disk, combined with proper normaliza-
tion, is able to also solve the hardest task in LRA: PathX.10
We also show (Tb.2) that uniform initialization on the disk,
which is simply the diagonalized version of Glorot initializa-
tion (Thm. 3.1), is sufficient to achieve performance close
to more complex deep state-space models on the remain-
ing LRA tasks. Our results ultimately suggest that HiPPO
theory, while fundamental for the development of this field,
should not be thought of as the main source of S4’s success.
Discretization changes the initialization spectrum. For
simplicity, we restrict our attention to S4D-Lin, for which
A= diag(˜ a)with ˜an=−1
2+iπn, yielding a diago-
nal transition matrix with elements (i.e. eigenvalues) ini-
tialized at exp(−∆/2 +iπ∆n). Under typical choices,
such as ∆ = 1 e−3andN= 128 , the SSM eigenval-
ues have magnitude exp(−∆/2)≈0.9995 , and phase
θ=π∆n∼∈[0, π/8]; i.e. initialization is performed on
a ring11close to the unit circle in C, with restricted phase
connected to the eigenvalues magnitude. As is clear from the
10Among the models in Gu et al. (2022a), only S4D-inv and
S4D-LegS (options heavily inspired by the HiPPO theory) perform
beyond random guessing on PathX. In S5, the skew-symmetric
component of the HiPPO matrix is used for initialization.
11For all diagonal SSMs, ∆is actually a vector initialized in the
range [∆min,∆max]. This interval can be directly mapped through
the exponential map to a ring in complex space (see Lemma 3.2).results in §3.3 and §3.4, linking the eigenvalues phase and
magnitude is not necessary to achieve good performance:
indeed, as it can be seen in Tb.3, test accuracy on the Long
Range Arena (except PathX) can be recovered by using a
more natural magnitude-independent initialization on the
complete ring. As we discussed in §3.4, changing the
initialization phase to a small range around 0can be moti-
vated by first principles, yet is only needed for extremely
long sequences: this modification is already hard-coded
in S4, where choosing a small ∆also shrinks the phase.12
However, our results clearly show that connecting real and
imaginary parts during training through the ∆parameter is
not necessary to achieve good performance, even on PathX.
Discretization performs normalization. The most strik-
ing visual difference between our model and ZOH-
discretized S4 recurrence is in the matrix multiplier for
uk:(exp(∆ ˜A)−I)˜A−1˜B. After conducting experiments
on S4D, we found that simply replacing this multiplier with
its first-order expansion in ∆, i.e.∆˜B, achieves very similar
performance, despite being much simpler and not being a
valid second order integration scheme. For input dimension
H= 1and unit B∈RN×1(to keep reasoning simple), the
corresponding recurrence is xk= exp(∆˜ a) + ∆1 Nuk. Ele-
mentwise unrolling of this recurrence without a ∆factor in
front of uyields|xk,i| ≤Pk−1
j=0|exp(∆˜ ai)|juk−j,i, which
in the limit k→ ∞ isO(∆−1). We conclude that including
a∆multiplier on Bimplicitly scales the recurrence to nor-
malize the activations, similar to our γnormalization factor.
Parameter sharing is not necessary. As a result of dis-
cretization, the ∆parameter multiplying both ˜Aand˜Bcou-
ples the recurrence formula with the input projection during
training. In our S4 ablations, we found that decoupling
these as two separate parameters, while keeping the same
initialization to normalize the hidden activations (see last
paragraph), does not decrease performance, suggesting that
the ODE discretization viewpoint (which induces parameter
sharing) is not necessary to achieve S4 performance.
From this discussion, we conclude that the success of (diag-
onal) state-space models is attributable to the use of linear
recurrences and complex diagonal exponential matrices,
combined with the normalization and initialization induced
by discretization. On the other hand, other artifacts of dis-
cretization such as parameter sharing or the continuous-time
interpretation do not necessarily contribute to performance.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Michalis Titsias, Aleksandar
Botev, James Martens, Daniel Worrall and Yee Whye Teh
for the interesting discussions and perspectives on our work.
12This is a useful effect of having a latent continuous-time
model: choosing eigenvalues close to the unit circle (i.e. small ∆)
changes the oscillation frequencies in the discretized system.
9