Resurrecting Recurrent Neural Networks for Long Sequences
that using an exponential parameterization for the diag-
onal recurrent matrix has important benefits. Crucially,
this enables us to easily enforce stability during training,
which in turn allows us to modify the initialization dis-
tribution to facilitate long-range reasoning and improve
performance. Our results indicate that rather than the
specific deterministic initializations used by several
recent SSMs, it is the eigenvalue distribution of the
recurrent layer at initialization that determines whether
or not the model can capture long-range reasoning.
•Normalization. In§3.4 we show that normalizing the
hidden activations on the forward pass is important
when learning tasks with very long-range dependencies.
With this final modification, our RNNs can match the
performance of deep SSMs on all tasks in the LRA
benchmark. Connecting back to state-space models, we
show in §4 how our normalization scheme can be linked
to the discretization structure in S4.
We summarize the deep Linear Recurrent Unit (LRU) ar-
chitecture used in this paper, and the effect of each of the
above steps on performance in Fig.1. We emphasize that the
main purpose of our work is not to surpass the performance
of S4-based models, but rather to demonstrate that simple
RNNs can also achieve strong performance on long range
reasoning tasks when properly initialized and parameterized.
We believe the insights derived in this paper can be useful
to design future architectures, and to simplify existing ones.
2. Preliminaries
In this section, we compare the key architectural compo-
nents (RNNs and SSMs) studied in this work, and also
describe our methodology and experimental setup. For a
more thorough discussion including related architectures,
we refer the reader to our related work section §B.
2.1. Recap of recurrent block structures
We give an overview of the main architectural components
considered in this paper, focusing on the major differences
between Vanilla RNNs and recent S4-like deep SSMs (Gu
et al., 2021a; 2022a; Gupta et al., 2022a; Smith et al., 2022).
RNN Layer. Let(u1, u2, . . . , u L)be a sequence of Hin-
dimensional inputs, which can be thought of as either the
result of intermediate layer computations (which keep the se-
quential structure) or as the initial input. An RNN layer with
N-dimensional hidden state computes a sequence of Hout-
dimensional outputs (y1, y2, . . . , y L)through a recurrent
computation1using learnable parameters A∈RN×N, B∈
1We do not use bias parameters as they can be incorporated
into the MLP blocks preceding and following the RNN block.
Classical RNNs also included a nonlinearity on the output yk=
σout(Cxk+b)withD= 0. Having D̸= 0basically introduces a
skip connection (standard in modern architectures), and the σoutRN×Hin, C∈RHout×N, D∈RHout×Hin:
xk=σ(Axk−1+Buk), y k=Cxk+Duk,(1)
starting from x0= 0∈RN.σhere denotes a nonlinearity,
often chosen to be a tanh or sigmoid activation. If σis the
identity function, then we say the RNN layer is linear .
S4-like recurrent layer. We present a simplified2version
of the S4 recurrence introduced in Gu et al. (2021a). The
input (u0, u1, . . . , u L−1)is now seen as the result of sam-
pling a latent continuous-time signal uct:R≥0→RHinat
multiples of a stepsize ∆>0: i.e. uct(∆k) :=ukfor all
k∈0, . . . , L −1. The output sequence (y0, y1, . . . , y L−1)
is then sampled, again with stepsize ∆, from the signal
yct:R≥0→RHoutcomputed by the following continuous-
time state-space model, initialized at xct(0) = 0 :
d
dtxct(t) =˜Ax ct(t) +˜Bu ct(t),
yct(t) =ℜh
˜Cx ct(t)i
+˜Du ct(t), (2)
whereℜ(p)denotes the real part of a complex-valued vector
p,˜A=diag(˜a)with˜a∈CN,˜B∈CN×Hin,˜C∈CHout×N
and˜D∈RHout×Hin. Aside from the use of continuous
time, the most striking differences compared to Eq. (1)are
(a) the computation on the right-hand-side is linear in the
hidden state and the input, and (b) most parameters are
complex valued, with ˜Adiagonal. While ˜B,˜C,˜Dfollow
complex random or uniform initialization, the transition ma-
trix˜Aisstructured , i.e., initialized deterministically through
HiPPO theory (Gu et al., 2020) in diagonal form. Common
choices (Gu et al., 2022a) are ˜an=−1
2+iπn(S4D-Lin) and
˜an=−1
2+iN
π
N
n+1−1
(S4D-Inv), for n= 1,2, . . . , N .
For training and inference, the continuous-time system in
Eq.(2)is discretized at stepsize ∆using the Zero-Order-
Hold (ZOH) or Bilinear method. The ZOH method gives
xk=Axk−1+Buk, y k=Cxk+Duk, (3)
where x−1= 0,A= exp(∆ ˜A),B= (A−I)˜A−1˜B,
C=˜CandD=˜D, and expdenotes the matrix exponen-
tial. Under the assumption that uctis constant in between
timestamps (which can be thought of as a modeling assump-
tion), this numerical integration is exact (Jacquot, 2019).
Moreover, note that all these discretization operations can
be quickly performed element-wise since ˜Ais diagonal.
Some key differences. We now highlight some of the
most important differences between RNNs and SSMs:
can be thought of as part of the MLP following the RNN.
2This version is most similar to S5 (Smith et al., 2022), but
is here presented for ease of reasoning for a single discretization
parameter ∆, shared across input dimensions. See §B for details.
3