Resurrecting Recurrent Neural Networks for Long Sequences
•Since Eq. (3)is linear, it can be efficiently parallelized
untilk=L−1using parallel scans (Martin & Cundy,
2017; Smith et al., 2022), unlike a nonlinear RNN where
the computation has to be performed sequentially.
•While Eq. (3)is similar to the linear RNN computation,
we note that (a) AandBare parameterized in a peculiar
way prescribed by discretization, and (b) these matrices
share parameters (e.g. ∆affects both AandB). These
differences are critical as in SSMs learning is performed
on the continuous-time parameters ˜A,˜B,˜C,˜D,∆; hence
parameterization choices directly affect optimization.
•Unlike RNNs, most SSMs use complex-valued diagonal
recurrent matrices that are initialized deterministically
using HiPPO theory. The literature attributes much of
the success of SSMs to the specific initialized used (Gu
et al., 2021a; Gupta et al., 2022a; Gu et al., 2022b).
The points above motivate our investigation. We consider
the same architecture as Gu et al. (2021a; 2022a) and Smith
et al. (2022), but replace the SSM layer in the recurrent core
by an RNN. We then study which steps need to be taken to
gradually retrieve S4-like performance on LRA (Tay et al.,
2020) tasks. The effectiveness of each of our steps is sup-
ported by empirical evidence and theoretical considerations,
and leads to the architecture shown in Fig.1.
2.2. Experimental setup
We consider the Long Range Arena benchmark (Tay et al.,
2020), a set of tasks designed to test the ability of models to
do long-range sequence modelling (we use coloured images
instead of grayscale images for the sequential CIFAR-10
classification task). Transformers fail to perform well on
most of these tasks, while deep SSMs have shown remark-
able performance on these tasks (Gu et al., 2021a; Dao et al.,
2022a). This makes it an appropriate benchmark to explore
the long-range modelling capabilities of deep RNNs.
For all our experiments, we use a network of 6 layers with
residual connections and layer/batch normalization (Ioffe &
Szegedy, 2015; Ba et al., 2016) similar to Gu et al. (2021a)
(Fig.1), and we replace the SSM layers with RNN layers
with roughly the same number of parameters, building up to
our LRU in a sequence of steps (see §3). All experiments are
repeated three times, and we report the mean and standard
error. We train using the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov &
Hutter, 2017). We use a smaller learning rate and no weight
decay on the recurrent parameters, as suggested by Steil
(2004); Gu et al. (2021a). We tune hyperparameters such as
learning rates for all models on a logarithmic grid for best
accuracy. See §D for more details.
3. Designing Performant Deep RNNs
In this section, we discuss the fundamental steps needed
for designing RNNs to reach the impressive performanceof deep SSMs on the LRA benchmark. We present these
steps, already outlined in the introduction, in logical order,
and support each claim with experimental evidence and
theoretical considerations (discussed further in section §E).
We consider the architecture of Fig.1, where the recurrent
computation is gradually modified starting from a vanilla
RNN. We start by showcasing the advantage of using linear
recurrences in §3.1; then, in §3.2, we show how to speed-up
training and inference without affecting expressivity or the
initialization distribution. In §3.3, we discuss how (and why)
changing the parameterization and initialization distribution
enables us to make the RNN stable and improve long-range
modeling. In §3.4, we finalize the LRU architecture by
proposing a normalization strategy for the hidden activations
that results in a close match in performance with SSMs.
3.1. Linear RNN layers are performant
One of the main findings of our work is that linear RNN
layers can be surprisingly expressive when coupled with
nonlinear MLP or GLU (Dauphin et al., 2017) blocks, out-
performing tuned nonlinear RNN variants in the same ar-
chitecture. In Tb.1, we show that simply removing3the
nonlinearity, and therefore computing the next state as
xk=Axk−1+Buk, is able to improve test accuracy on
most LRA tasks. While the boost provided by vanilla linear
RNN blocks leads to performance which is still far behind
S4 on some tasks (sCIFAR, PathFinder and PathX), this first
finding motivates us to drop nonlinearities in the recurrence
for the rest of this paper. In later sections, we leverage the
linearity of the recurrence to significantly speed up training
as well as derive principled initialization and normalization
principles to learn long-range dependencies. We note that,
on the Text and Retrieval tasks, performance using vanilla
RNNs already matches performance of deep SSMs (see Tb.3
for the performance of S4/S4D/S5 on these tasks).
The empirical result in Tb.1 is surprising , since recurrent
nonlinearities are believed to be a key component for the suc-
cess of RNNs — both in theory and in practice (Siegelmann,
2012; Pascanu et al., 2013; Erichson et al., 2021). Indeed, a
strong property of single-layer sigmoidal and tanh RNNs is
Turing completeness, which cannot be achieved by the lin-
ear variant (Stogin et al., 2020; Chung & Siegelmann, 2021).
However, the architecture we use (Fig.1) is deeper than a
standard RNN and includes nonlinearies, placed position-
wise after each RNN block. In §E.1, we investigate how the
expressivity and trainability of deep models is affected by
recurrent nonlinearities. Leveraging a spectral analysis and
Koopman operator theory (Koopman & Neumann, 1932),
3All other settings in the recurrent block match the Vanilla
RNN Haiku module (Hennigan et al., 2020). All matrices have
Glorot initialization (Glorot & Bengio, 2010). The overall archi-
tecture is as in Fig.1, with the LRU block replaced by an RNN.
4