Resurrecting Recurrent Neural Networks for Long Sequences
Antonio Orvieto1 *Samuel L Smith2Albert Gu2Anushan Fernando2Caglar Gulcehre2Razvan Pascanu2
Soham De2
Abstract
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) offer fast in-
ference on long sequences but are hard to opti-
mize and slow to train. Deep state-space models
(SSMs) have recently been shown to perform re-
markably well on long sequence modeling tasks,
and have the added benefits of fast parallelizable
training and RNN-like fast inference. However,
while SSMs are superficially similar to RNNs,
there are important differences that make it un-
clear where their performance boost over RNNs
comes from. We show that careful design of deep
RNNs using standard signal propagation argu-
ments can recover the impressive performance of
deep SSMs on long-range reasoning tasks, while
matching their training speed. To achieve this, we
analyze and ablate a series of changes to standard
RNNs including linearizing and diagonalizing the
recurrence, using better parameterizations and ini-
tializations, and ensuring careful normalization of
the forward pass. Our results provide new insights
on the origins of the impressive performance of
deep SSMs, and introduce an RNN block called
the Linear Recurrent Unit (or LRU) that matches
both their performance on the Long Range Arena
benchmark and their computational efficiency.
1. Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have played a central
role since the early days of deep learning, and are a natural
choice when modelling sequential data (McCulloch & Pitts,
1943; Hopfield, 1982; Rumelhart et al., 1985; Elman, 1990).
However, while these networks have strong theoretical prop-
erties, such as Turing completeness (Kilian & Siegelmann,
1996; Chung & Siegelmann, 2021), they can be hard to train
*Work done at DeepMind.1Department of Computer
Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland.2DeepMind, London,
United Kingdom.. Correspondence to: Antonio Orvieto <anto-
nio.orvieto@inf.ethz.ch >, Soham De <sohamde@google.com >.
Proceedings of the 40thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).in practice. In particular, RNNs suffer from the vanishing
and exploding gradient problem (Hochreiter, 1991; Bengio
et al., 1994; Pascanu et al., 2013), which makes it difficult
to learn the long-range dependencies in the data. Several
techniques were developed that attempt to mitigate this is-
sue, including orthogonal/unitary RNNs (Arjovsky et al.,
2016; Helfrich et al., 2018), and gating mechanisms such
as long short-term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmid-
huber, 1997) and gated recurrent units (GRUs) (Cho et al.,
2014a). Nonetheless, these models are still slow to optimize
due to the inherently sequential nature of their computation
(Kalchbrenner et al., 2016), and are therefore hard to scale.
In recent years, Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have
gained increasing prominence for sequence modelling tasks,
achieving remarkable success in a wide range of applica-
tions (Brown et al., 2020; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Jumper
et al., 2021). Compared to RNNs, attention layers are easier
to scale and parallelize during training, and crucially they
do not suffer from the vanishing gradient problem, since
the interaction between any two tokens in the sequence is
modeled by direct edges in the network. A key issue with at-
tention layers however is that their computation and memory
costs scale quadratically as O(L2)for sequence length L.
Transformers can therefore be expensive to deploy on long
sequences. RNNs, which scale linearly with the sequence
length, are typically faster than transformers at inference
time even for modest sequence lengths (Liu et al., 2019).
Motivated by these problems, Gu et al. (2021a) recently
introduced the S4 model, a carefully designed deep state-
space model (SSM) that achieves remarkable performance
on tasks from the Long Range Arena (LRA) (Tay et al.,
2020), a benchmark explicitly designed to require very long-
ranged reasoning. The S4 layer and its variants (DSS, S4D,
Liquid S4, S5, etc) (Gupta et al., 2022a; Gu et al., 2022a;
Hasani et al., 2022; Smith et al., 2022) overcome the O(L2)
bottleneck of attention layers by modeling interactions be-
tween tokens sequentially using a hidden state. These mod-
els are therefore very efficient at inference time as we can
simply unroll the recurrent layer like an RNN. Futhermore,
since SSMs are linear in the temporal dimension, they are
easily parallelizable during training, in contrast to the slow
sequential nature of training non-linear RNNs. This makes
them very computationally efficient on long sequences.
1