Resurrecting Recurrent Neural Networks for Long Sequences
literature on credit assignment (Mali et al., 2021a; Manchev & Spratling, 2020; Ororbia et al., 2020; Ke et al., 2018; Tallec
& Ollivier, 2017). This field of machine learning studies alternatives to backpropagation in the context of training recurrent
models, targeted towards improving generalization and biological plausibility. Approaches include variants of Kronecker
Factors Real-Time Recurrent Learning (Williams & Zipser, 1989) (such as Unbiased Online Recurrent Optimization (Tallec
& Ollivier, 2017)) and application of sparse attention mechanisms (Ke et al., 2017). We find these ideas particularly
interesting, and believe insights from this literature can be leveraged to further strengthened training speed in linear RNNs.
An orthogonal line of research is instead concerned with higher order recurrent networks (Omlin & Giles, 1996). For
instance, Mali et al. (2021b) proposes to update the hidden state using equations such as xk=σ(A(xk−1, uk) +Buk),
where Ais a third-order tensor (named a Second-Order Tree Recurrent Network). While our work does not discuss
higher-order recurrences, we believe a successful parallel implementation of simplified variants (e.g. without nonlinearity)
is a promising direction for furture investigations.
To conclude, other works which proposed conceptually different solutions to mitigate the vanishing gradient problem include
combinations with rectified linear units (Le et al., 2015), Lipschitz RNNs (Erichson et al., 2021), and dilated convolutions to
increase context size (Oord et al., 2016; Bai et al., 2018).
Deep state-space models (SSMs), a historical overview. Inspired by interesting approaches involving continuous-time
representation for recurrent neural networks (V oelker et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2017), Gu et al. (2020) recently provided an
alternative view on the vanishing gradient problem: one can design linear continuous-time state-space models (SSMs), of
the form ˙x(t) =Ax(t) +Bu(t)where the state x(t)∈RNis guaranteed to compress all relevant (under a certain metric)
information about previously observed (one-dimensional) inputs u([0, t]). For instance, by using specific pair of matrices
(A∈RN×N, B∈RN×1), one can discretize the continuous-time SSM above using a stable, accurate integrator (e.g.,
bilinear or zero-order-hold) and retrieve the hidden state x(t), which contains the coefficients for the best N-th degree
polynomial approximation to u([0, t]). The idea of Gu et al. (2020) was to then use the resulting discretized structured (i.e.,
using structured HiPPO matrices) state-space model as a starting for the design and initialization of a novel gated RNN.
Later, Gu et al. (2021a) scaled up this idea into a deep architecture, where a collection (one for each input dimension) of
discretized continuous-time structured SSM was placed at each layer as a substitute13for the attention block, in an attempt
to mitigate the O(L2)issue in transformers and provide a theoretically principled component for sequence-to-sequence
modeling. The model reached state-of-the-art on the Long Range Arena benchmark (Tay et al., 2020), effectively showcasing
the power of discretized linear recurrences using structured transition matrices. Notably, the resulting model, named S4,
uses a convenient and stable representation of the HiPPO transition, which is initialized using a normal + low-rank matrix
and then learned efficiently in diagonal + low-rank form using fast Fourier transforms (FFTs) and Cauchy kernels.
In the months following the publication of S4, Gupta et al. (2022a) noticed that most of S4 performance can be retrieved by
only considering the diagonal component of the HiPPO matrix, and therefore showed the power of discretized diagonal
structured continuous-time state space models. This architecture is known as DSS. As the interest of the community was
rising, with first applications of DSS and S4 in language (Mehta et al., 2022), vision (Nguyen et al., 2022) and audio (Goel
et al., 2022), Gu et al. (2022a) further simplified DSS providing a diagonal form ( S4D) with theoretical guarantees in the
infinite width setting. Notably Gu et al. (2022a) showed that, to retrieve most performance of S4, one can simply initialize
the transition matrix Ain diagonal form, with entries an=−1
2+iπn(S4D-Lin) or an=−1
2+iN
π
N
n+1−1
(S4D-Inv).
Our interest in S4-like models spiked at this point since the findings of Gu et al. (2022a) suggest that, given the effectiveness
of such simplified versions of A, the root of S4 success might be attributable to more fundamental effects are orthogonal to
the HiPPO theory.
Shortly after, Smith et al. (2022) found that one can also depart from the formal one-dimensional discretization structure
of S4, rooted in the HiPPO theory, and considered a simplified version where all input dimensions are efficiently and
simultaneously processed using parallel scans (Martin & Cundy, 2017) — not separately like in S4, S4D, and DSS. This
model (named S5) set a new state-of-the art on PathX, the hardest task in the Long Range Arena, and provides further
evidence for a conceptually simpler motivation for the performance of deep state-space models. Indeed, as already mentioned,
S5 is not precisely the discretization of a latent continuous-time SSM, yet still includes parameters like discretization
stepsizes that have an ambiguous interpretation in this context14, suggesting further investigations are needed.
At the same time, a few interesting works developed novel variants of the S4 architecture. Liquid S4 used the original
13This idea is also leveraged in FNet (Lee-Thorp et al., 2021), where the attention mechanism is replaced with a simpler linear
token-mixing strategy.
14One can still view S5 as a discretized version of a continuous-time SSM. However, this requires adjusting the input projection matrix.
16