set the neuroevolution mutation scale to be
σ¼λﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2α=βp
; ð17Þ
where λis a parameter. Thus, one neuroevolution step
corresponds to λintegration steps of the gradient descent
procedure. In ﬁgures, we compare gradient descent with
neuroevolution as a function of common (scaled) time
t=αtgd=αλtevol.
Results are shown in Fig. 6, for step-size parameter λ=1. In
panel (a) we show the evolution with time of two of the weights
of the network. The noise associated with neuroevolution at
this value of βis considerable: individual trajectories (gray lines)
bear little resemble to the gradient-descent result (black line).
However, the population average (green line, average of n=1000
trajectories) shows the expected correspondence. Thecorrespondence is less precise than that shown previously,
because we use a larger effective step size and each trajectory is
much noisier than its in ﬁnite- βcounterpart.
In Fig. 6(b) we show the loss, with line colors corresponding to
the quantities of panel (a). In addition, we show the loss of the
average network produced by neuroevolution (red line), Uðxhi Þ,
which, if correspondence holds, should be equal to UðxÞ/C10/C11
(green
line). The initial fast relaxation of the loss (the boxed region)
shows a difference between gradient descent and averaged
neuroevolution results; doing neuroevolution for smaller step-
size parameter λ=1/10 (inset) reduces this difference, as
expected.
In panel (c) we show the parameter Δ, Eq. ( 15), a measure of
the difference between the average network xhiproduced by
neuroevolution and the network produced by gradient descent, as
Fig. 4 Numerical illustration of correspondence for a deep net. We show all 7489 parameters xiof the deep net of Fig. 3at training time t=5. As
predicted analytically, the neural network created by averaging (green symbols) over a noninteracting population of neuroevolutionary processes (gray
symbols) is essentially the same network as that produced by gradient descent (black symbols). For clarity, weights are ordered by their ﬁnal values under
gradient descent.
Fig. 5 Illustration of the learning dynamics. Loss versus time and comparison of the target function f0ðθÞ¼sinðπθÞand the net function fx(θ) at three
different training times, for the learning dynamics of Fig. 3(λ=1/10 for the neuroevolution results).ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-26568-2
6 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:6317 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-26568-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications