In broad terms there are two types of method used to train
neural networks, divided according to whether or not they
explicitly evaluate gradients of the loss function. Gradient-
based methods include the backpropagation algorithm1–8. The
non-gradient-based methods (sometimes called “black box ”
methods) include stochastic processes in which changes to a
neural network are proposed and accepted with certain prob-
abilities, and encompass Monte Carlo9,10and genetic
algorithms11–13. Both gradient-based and non-gradient-based
methods have been used to train neural networks for a variety of
applications, and, where comparison exists, perform similarly
well14–17. For instance, recent numerical work shows that sto-
chastic evolutionary strategies applied to neural networks are
competitive with explicit gradient-based methods on hard
reinforcement-learning problems16.
Gradient-based- and non-gradient-based strategies are differ-
ent in implementation and are sometimes thought of as entirely
different approaches18. Here, we show that the two sets of
methods have a fundamental connection. We demonstrate ana-
lytically an equivalence between the dynamics of neural-network
training under conditioned stochastic mutations, and under
gradient descent. This connection follows from one identi ﬁed in
the 1990s between the overdamped Langevin dynamics and
Metropolis Monte Carlo dynamics of a particle in an external
potential19,20. In the limit of small Monte Carlo trial moves, those
things are equivalent. Similarly, we show here that a single copy
of a neural network (a single individual) exposed to parameter
mutations that are accepted probabilistically is equivalent, in the
limit of small mutation size, to gradient descent on the loss
function in the presence of Gaussian white noise. The details of
the resulting dynamics depend on the details of the acceptance
criterion, and encompass both standard- and clipped gradient
descent. Such a mutation scheme corresponds to the simple limit
of the set of processes called “neuroevolution ”13,16,21–23. This
connection demonstrates explicitly that optimization without
access to gradients can, nonetheless, enact noisy gradient descent
on the loss function.
In simple gradient descent, equivalent to noise-free over-
damped Langevin dynamics, the parameters (weights and biases)
xof a neural network evolve with training time according to the
prescription _x¼/C0α∇UðxÞ. Here, αis a learning rate, and ∇U(x)
is the gradient of a loss function U(x) with respect to the network
parameters. Now consider a simple neuroevolution scheme in
which we propose a mutation x→x+ϵof all neural-network
parameters, where ϵis a set of independent Gaussian random
numbers of zero mean and variance σ2. Let us accept the proposal
with the Metropolis probability min 1 ;e/C0βΔU/C0/C1
. Here, βis a
reciprocal temperature, and ΔUis the change of the loss function
under the proposal. This is a Metropolis Monte Carlo algorithm,
a Markovian dynamics that constitutes a form of importance
sampling, and a common choice in the physics literature9,10,24.I n
physical systems, βis inversely proportional to the physical
temperature, and we consider ﬁnite values of βin order to make
contact with that literature. However, in the context of training a
neural network it is interesting to consider the zero-temperaturelimit β=∞, where mutations are accepted only if the loss does
not increase. That regime is not normally considered in particle-
based simulations.
Our main results can be summarized as follows. When β≠∞
the weights of the network evolve, to leading order in σ,a s _x¼
/C0ðβσ
2=2Þ∇UðxÞplus Gaussian white noise. Averaged over
independent realizations of the learning process, this form of
neuroevolution is therefore equivalent to simple gradient descent,
with learning rate βσ2/2. In the limit β=∞, where mutations are
accepted only if the loss function does not increase, weights underneuroevolution evolve instead as _x¼/C0 ð σ=ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2πp
Þj∇UðxÞj/C01∇UðxÞ
plus Gaussian white noise, which corresponds to clipped gradient
descent on U(x)25. Note that conditioning the acceptance of
neural-network parameter mutations on the change of the loss
function for a single copy of that network is suf ﬁcient to enact
gradient descent: a population of individuals is not required.
In this paper, we use the term “neuroevolution ”to refer to a
sequence of mutation steps applied to the parameters of a single
copy of a neural network and accepted probabilistically. In
general, neuroevolutionary al gorithms encompass a broader
variety of processes, including mutations of populations of
communicating neural networks16and mutations of network
topologies21,26,27. Similarly, the set of procedures for particles
that can be described as “Monte Carlo algorithms ”is large, and
ranges from local moves of single particles —roughly equivalent
to the procedure used here —to nonlocal moves and moves of
collections of particles24,28–31. The dynamics of those
collective-move Monte Carlo algorithms and of the more
complicated neuroevolutionary schemes21,26,27do not corre-
spond to simple gradient descent. Here, we demonstrate a
correspondence between one member of this set of algorithmsand gradient descent, the implication being that, given any
potentially complicated set of neuroevolutionary methods, it is
enough to add a simple mutation-acceptance protocol in order
to ensure that gradient descent is also approximated. The
neuroevolution-gradient descent correspondence is similar to
the proofs that neural networks with enough hidden nodes can
represent any smooth function
32: it does not necessarily suggest
how to solve a given problem, but provides understanding of
the limits and capacity of the tool and its relation to other
methods of learning.
Our work provides a rigorous connection between gradient
descent and what is arguably the simplest form of neuroevolution.
It complements studies that demonstrate a numerical similarity
between gradient-based methods and population-based evolu-
tionary methods16,17, and studies that show analytically that the
gradients approximated by those methods are, under certain
conditions, equivalent to the ﬁnite-difference gradient33–35.
The paper is structured as follows. We summarize the
neuroevolution-gradient descent correspondence in section
“Results ”, and derive it in section “Methods ”. Our derivation uses
ideas developed in ref.20to treat physical particles, and applies
them to neural networks: we consider a different set-up (in effect,
we work with a single particle in a high-dimensional space, rather
than with many particles in three-dimensional space) and pro-
posal rates, and we consider the limit β=∞that is rarely con-
sidered in the physics literature but is natural in the context of a
neural network. We can associate the state xof the neural net-
work with the position of a particle in a high-dimensional space,
and the loss function U(x) with an external potential. The result is
a rewriting of the correspondence between Langevin dynamics
and Monte Carlo dynamics as a correspondence between the
simplest forms of gradient descent and neuroevolution. Just as the
Langevin-Monte Carlo correspondence provides a basis forunderstanding why Monte Carlo simulations of particles can
approximate real dynamics
31,36–41, so the neuroevolution-
gradient descent correspondence shows how we can effectively
perform gradient descent on the loss function without explicit
calculation of gradients. The correspondence holds exactly only in
the limit of vanishing mutation scale, but we use numerics to
show in section “Numerical illustration of the neuroevolution-
gradient descent correspondence ”that it can be observed for
neuroevolution done with ﬁnite mutations and gradient descent
enacted with a ﬁnite timestep. We conclude in section
“Conclusions ”.ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-26568-2
2 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:6317 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-26568-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications