where
fxðθÞ¼∑M/C01
i¼0x3iþ1tanhðx3iþ2θþx3iþ3Þ ð11Þ
is the output of a single-layer neural network with one input
node, one output node, M=30 hidden nodes, and N=3M
parameters xi. These parameters are initially chosen to be
Gaussian random numbers with zero mean and variance
σ2
0¼10/C04. The correspondence is insensitive to the choice of
initial conditions, and we shall show that it holds for different
choices of initial network.
We performed gradient descent with learning rate α=10−5.
We chose the learning rate arbitrarily, and veri ﬁed that the results
of gradient-descent simulations were unchanged upon a changing
learning rate by a factor of 10 and 1/10. We used Euler
integration of the noise-free version of Eq. ( 6), updating all
weights xiat each timestep tgd=1, 2,…according to the
prescription
xiðtgdþ1Þ¼xiðtgdÞ/C0α
j∇UðxÞj∂UðxÞ
∂xi; ð12Þ
where
∂UðxÞ
∂xi¼2
K∑K/C01
j¼0fxðj=KÞ/C0f0ðj=KÞ/C2/C3 ∂fxðj=KÞ
∂xi; ð13Þ
and
∂fxðθÞ
∂xi¼tanhðθxiþ1þxiþ2Þ ifi;mod 3 ¼1
θxi/C01sech2ðθxiþxiþ1Þifimod 3 ¼2
xi/C02sech2ðθxi/C01þxiÞifimod 3 ¼0:8
><
>:
We did neuroevolution following the Monte Carlo procedure
described in section “Neuroevolution ”, in the limit β=∞, i.e., we
accepted only moves that did not increase the loss function. We
chose the mutation scale
σ¼λαﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2πp
; ð14Þ
where λis a parameter. According to ( 6) and ( 12), this
prescription sets the neuroevolution timescale tevolto be a factor
λtimes that of the gradient-descent timescale. Thus, one
neuroevolution step corresponds to λintegration steps of the
gradient descent procedure. In ﬁgures, we compare gradient
descent with neuroevolution as a function of common (scaled)
time t=αtgd=αλtevol.
In Fig. 1(a) we show the evolution of four individual weights
under neuroevolution (using mutation scale λ=1/10) and
gradient descent (weights are distinguishable because they always
have the same initial values). The correspondence predicted
analytically can be seen numerically: individual neuroevolution
trajectories (gray) ﬂuctuate around the gradient descent result
(black), and when averaged over individual trajectories the results
of neuroevolution (green) approximate those of gradient descent.
In Fig. 1(b) we show the individual and averaged values of the
weights of neuro-evolved networks at time t=10 compared to
those of gradient descent. In general, the weights generated by
averaging over neuroevolution trajectories approximate those of
gradient descent, with some discrepancy seen in the values of the
largest weights. In Fig. 1(c) we show the loss under neuroevolu-
tion and gradient descent. As predicted by ( 9), averaged
neuroevolution and gradient descent are equivalent.
In Supplementary Fig. 1 we show similar quantities using a
different choice of initial neural network; the correspondence
between neuroevolution and gradient descent is again apparent.
In Fig. 2(a) we show the time evolution of a single weight of the
network under gradient descent and neuroevolution, the latter for
three sizes of mutation step σ.A s σincreases, the size ofﬂuctuations of individual trajectories about the mean increase, as
predicted by ( 6). As a result, more trajectories are required to
estimate the average, and for ﬁxed number of trajectories (as used
here) the estimated average becomes less precise. In addition, as σ
increases, the assumptions underlying the correspondence
derivation eventually break down, in which case the neuroevolu-
tion average will not converge to the gradient descent result even
as more trajectories are sampled.
In Fig. 2(b) we show the mean-squared difference of the
parameter vector of the model under gradient descent and
neuroevolution,
ΔðtÞ/C171
N∑N
i¼1xgradient
i ðtÞ/C0 xevolution
i ðtÞ/C10/C11 /C16/C172
: ð15Þ
Here, Nis the number of network parameters; xgradient
i ðtÞis the
time evolution of neural-network parameter iunder the gradient
descent equation Eq. ( 12); and xevolution
i ðtÞ/C10/C11
is the mean value of
neural-network parameter iover the ensemble of neuroevolution
trajectories. The smaller the neuroevolution step size, the smaller
isΔ(t), and the closer the neuroevolution-gradient descent
correspondence.
In Supplementary Fig. 2 we show the evolution with time of the
loss for different mutation scales (the left-hand plot is a
reproduction of Fig. 1(c)). The trend shown is similar to that of
the weights in Fig. 2.
Deep net, β=∞. One feature of the correspondence derivation is
that the architecture of the neural network does not appear. As
long as the loss U(x) is a deterministic function of the neural-
network parameters x, correspondence between gradient descent
and neuroevolution will be observed if the mutation scale is small
enough (it is likely that what constitutes “small enough ”does
depend on neural-network architecture, as well as the problem
under study. The required mutation scale can be determined
empirically, even without access to gradient-descent results: when
correspondence holds, the results of neuroevolution simulations
will be statistically similar, when scaled as we have described).
To demonstrate invariance to architecture we repeat the
previous comparison, now using a deep neural network (we train
the net to reproduce the target function f0ðθÞ¼sinðπθÞon the
interval θ∈[−1, 1]). The network has 8 fully-connected hidden
layers, each 32 nodes wide, and 7489 total parameters. As before
we use tanh activations on the hidden nodes, and have one input
node and one output.
Results are shown in Fig. 3. In panel (a) we show the evolution
of two parameters of the network, under gradient descent and for
neuroevolution with step-size parameter λ=1/10 [see ( 17)]. As
for the shallow net, the correspondence is apparent. Neuroevolu-
tion averages (green lines) are taken over 100 trajectories. In
panel (b) we show the loss, for gradient descent and two different
neuroevolution step-size parameters. As expected, the correspon-
dence is more precise for smaller λ. As before, for large enough λ
the correspondence breaks down: see Supplementary Fig. 3.
In Fig. 4we show all parameters of the deep net at training
time t=5, under the two dynamics. We show the results of
gradient descent in black, and independent neuroevolution
trajectories in gray. As predicted analytically, the neuroevolution
results fall either side of the gradient-descent result, and the
network constructed by averaging over independent neuroevolu-
tion trajectories (green) is essentially identical to the network
produced by gradient descent.
In Fig. 5, we illustrate the dynamics of learning and the scale of
the loss function by showing a comparison between the target
function f0ðθÞ¼sinðπθÞand the net function fx(θ). We show theARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-26568-2
4 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:6317 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-26568-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications