a function of n, the number of trajectories included in the average.
If correspondence holds, this quantity should vanish in the limit
of large n; the observed trend is consistent with this behavior.
In Supplementary Fig. 4, we compare a gradient-descent
trajectory with a set of neuroevolution trajectories, periodically
resetting the latter to the gradient-descent solution. The periodic
resetting tests the correspondence for a range of initial conditions.
The correspondence between gradient descent and the averaged
neuroevolution trajectory is approximate (averages were taken
over 152 trajectories, fewer than in Supplementary Fig. 4) but
apparent.
Conclusions . We have shown analytically that training a neural
network by neuroevolution of its weights is equivalent, in thelimit of small mutation scale, to noisy gradient descent on the loss
function. Conditioning neuroevolution on the Metropolis
acceptance criterion at ﬁnite evolutionary temperature is
equivalent to a noisy version of simple gradient descent, while at
inﬁnite reciprocal evolutionary temperature the procedure is
equivalent to clipped gradient descent on the loss function.
Averaged over noise, the evolutionary procedures correspond to
forms of gradient descent on the loss function. This correspon-
dence is described by Equations ( 3), (5), (6), and ( 8).
Correspondence in the sense described above means that each
neural-network parameter evolves the same way as a function of
time under the two dynamics. Correspondence implies that the
convergence properties of the two methods are the same (see e.g.,
Fig. 3(b)) and that the neural networks produced by the same
methods are the same (see e.g., Fig. 4). The generalization
properties of those networks will then also be the same.
The correspondence is formally exact only in the limit of zero
mutation scale, and holds approximately for small but ﬁnite
mutations. It will fail when the assumptions underlying the
derivation are violated, such as when the terms neglected in ( 22)
and ( 23) are not small, or when the passage from ( 28)t o( 29)i s
not valid because the change βU(x+ϵ)−βU(x) is not small. It is
straightforward to determine empirically where correspondence
holds, even without access to gradient-descent results: the results
of neuroevolution, with time scaled as described, will be
statistically similar when the mutation size is small enough. The
time duration for which the correspondence holds increases with
decreasing mutation scale (see e.g., Fig. 2(b)). We have shown
here that the correspondence can be observed for a range of
mutation scales, and for different neural-net architectures.
More generally, several dynamical regimes are contained
within the neurevolution master equation ( 19), according to the
scale σof mutations: for vanishing σ, neurevolution is formally
noisy gradient descent on the loss function; for small but
nonvanishing σit approximates noisy gradient descent enacted byexplicit integration with a ﬁnite timestep; for larger σit enacts a
dynamics different to gradient descent, but one that can still
learn; and for suf ﬁciently large σthe steps taken are too large for
learning to occur on accessible timescales. An indication of these
various regimes can be seen in Fig. 2and Supplementary Fig. 2.
Separate from the question of its precise temporal evolution,
the master equation ( 19) has a well-de ﬁned stationary distribu-
tion ρ0(x). Requiring the brackets on the right-hand of ( 19)t o
vanish ensures that P(x,t)→ρ0(x) becomes independent of time.
Inserting ( 20) into ( 19) and requiring normalization of ρ0(x)
reveals the stationary distribution to be the Boltzmann one,
ρ0ðxÞ¼e/C0βUðxÞ=Rdx0e/C0βUðx0Þ. For ﬁnite βthe neuroevolution
procedure is ergodic, and this distribution will be sampled given
sufﬁciently long simulation time. For β→∞we have
ρ0ðxÞ! δUðxÞ/C0U0/C0/C1
, where U0is the global energy minimum;
in this case the system is not ergodic (moves uphill in U(x) are
not allowed) and there is no guarantee of reaching this minimum.
We have focused on the simple limit of the set of
neuroevolution algorithms, namely a non-interacting population
of neural networks that experience sequential probabilistic
mutations of their parameters. We have illustrated the corre-
spondence at the level of population averages, Equations ( 5) and
(8). However, no communication between individuals is required,
and each individually observes the correspondence de ﬁned by
Equations ( 3) and ( 6).
Our results are also relevant to population-based genetic
algorithms in which members of the population are periodically
reset to the identities of the individuals with lowest loss
values11–13. For instance, when correspondence holds, individuals
in the neuroevolution populations considered in this paper have
an averaged loss equal to that of the corresponding gradient
descent algorithm. Therefore, some individuals must have loss
less than that of the corresponding gradient descent algorithm
(see e.g. Fig. 1(a), and Fig. 3(b) for the case λ=1/10). This
observation indicates the potential for such methods to be
competitive with gradient-descent algorithms.
The neuroevolution-gradient descent correspondence we have
identi ﬁed follows from that between the overdamped Langevin
dynamics and Metropolis Monte Carlo dynamics of a particle in
an external potential19,20. Our work therefore adds to the existing
set of connections between machine learning and statistical
mechanics42,43, and continues a trend in machine learning of
making use of old results: the stochastic and deterministic
algorithms considered here come from the 1950s9,10and
1970s1–6, and are connected by ideas developed in the 1990s19,20.
Methods
Derivation of the neuroevolution-gradient descent correspondence . We start
by considering the quantity P(x,t), the probability that a neural network has the set
of parameters xat time tunder a given stochastic protocol. The time evolution of
Fig. 6 Illustration of the neuroevolution-gradient descent correspondence for the case of ﬁnite β.Panel ashows two parameters of the network, panel b
shows the loss, and panel cshows the parameter Δ, Eq. ( 15), a measure of the difference between the average network produced by neuroevolution and
the network produced by gradient descent.NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-26568-2 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:6317 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-26568-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 7