18
m(αk′+1)andM(αk′+1)are again from the set (64). This situation holds for all k≥k′. Using (61)
and the condition on h, we have
m(αk)−M(αk)< h(∆′)≤∆′,∀k≥k′,
a contradiction to (57). Thus, the required condition (62) h olds.
B. Shrinking and Caching
Shrinking and caching are two effective techniques to make t he decomposition method faster. If an
αk
iremains at 0orCfor many iterations, eventually it may stay at the same value . Based on this
principle,theshrinkingtechnique[10]reducesthesizeof theoptimizationproblemwithoutconsidering
some bounded variables. The decomposition method then work s on a smaller problem which is less
time consuming and requires less memory. In the end we put bac k the removed components and check
if an optimal solution of the original problem is obtained.
Another technique to reduce the training time is caching. Si nceQmay be too large to be stored,
its elements are calculated as they are needed. We can alloca te some space (called cache) to store
recently use Qij[10]. If during ﬁnal iterations only few columns of Qare still needed and the cache
contains them, we can save many kernel evaluations. [18, The orem II.3] has proved that during the
ﬁnal iterations of using WSS 1, only a small subset of variable s are still updated. Such a result supports
the use of shrinking and caching techniques. However, this p roof considers only any convergent sub-
sequence of{αk}or assumes the global convergence. In this subsection, we pr ovide a more general
theory without these two assumptions.
Theorem 6 Assume Qis positive semi-deﬁnite and the SMO-type method Algorithm 2 uses WSS 3.
LetIbe the set deﬁned in (44).
1)There is ¯ksuch that after k≥¯k, every αk
i,i∈Ihas reached the unique and bounded optimal
solution. It remains the same during all subsequent iterati ons and i∈Iis not in the following
set:
{t|M(αk)≤−yt∇f(αk)t≤m(αk)}. (67)
2)If(1)has an optimal solution ¯αsatisfying m(¯α)< M(¯α), then ¯αis the unique solution and
the decomposition method reaches it at a ﬁnite number of iter ations.
3)If{αk}is an inﬁnite sequence, then the following two limits exist a nd are equal:
lim
k→∞m(αk) = lim
k→∞M(αk) =m(¯α) =M(¯α), (68)
where ¯αis any optimal solution. Thus, (68)is independent of any optimal solution.
Proof: