30
VII. D ISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
This paper provides a comprehensive study on SMO-type decom position methods. Below we discuss
some issues for future investigation.
A. Faster Training via a Better Selection Rule
Under the general framework discussed in this paper, we can d esign various selection rules for prac-
tical implementations. Among them, the one using the maxima l violating pair has been widely applied
in SVM software. Developing better rules from the proposed f ramework is important. Otherwise, this
article has only theoretical values. A working set selectio n which leads to faster training should:
1) reduce the number of iterations of the decomposition meth od. In other words, the convergence
is faster, and
2) keep the cost of identifying the working set Bsimilar to that of ﬁnding the maximal violating
pair.
The challenge is that these two goals are often at odds. For ex ample, fewer iterations may not
reduce the training time if the cost of working set selection s is higher. We proposed some rules with
the above properties in [8]. This work shows that the “maxima l violating pair” uses only the ﬁrst-
order information of the objective function, and derives a b etter selection rule using the second-order
information. The new rule is a special case of WSS 2. The traini ng time is generally shorter than that
by using the “maximal violating pair.”
B. Necessary Conditions for the Convergence
Previous studies and the discussion in Section III provide “ sufﬁcient conditions” for the convergence
of decomposition methods. That is, under given working set s elections, we prove the convergence.
Investigating the“necessary conditions” isalsointerest ing. When thedecomposition method converges,
which conditions does its working set selection satisfy?
We may think that WSS 3 is general enough so that every converge nt SMO-type method satisﬁes
the condition (9). However, this may not be right. We suspect that even if some iterations select {i,j}
without enough violation (i.e. −yi∇f(αk)i+yi∇f(αk)j< h(m(αk)−M(αk))), the method may
still converge if other iterations have used appropriate wo rking sets. Therefore, ﬁnding useful necessary
conditions may be a challenging task.
It is worth mentioning another working set selection propos ed in [21]. This work requires the
following condition:
There is N >0such that for all k,
any violating pair of αkis selected at least once in iterations ktok+N.(123)