Malamute
Ant
School bus
Golden retriever
Theater curtain
Adaptation
Lion
School bus
Hourglass
Vase
Trifle
Adaptation
Trifle
Scoreboard
Golden retriever
Dalmatian
Vase
Adaptation
Golden retriever
Nematode
Lion
Dalmatian
Malamute
Adaptation(a)Acc↑:40.33%→55.33% (b)Acc↑:48.00%→69.60% (c)Acc↑:43.60%→63.33% (d)Acc↓:56.33%→47.13%
Figure 1: Qualitative visualization of model-based embedding adaptation procedure (implemented using FEAT ) on test tasks (refer to
§5.2.2 for more details). Each ﬁgure shows the locations of PCA projected support embeddings (class prototypes) before and after the
adaptation of FEAT . Values below are the 1-shot 5-way classiﬁcation accuracy before and after the the adaptation. Interestingly, the
embedding adaptation step of FEAT pushes the support embeddings apart from the clutter and toward their own clusters, such that they can
better ﬁts the test data of its categories. (Best view in colors!)
the embedding adaptation procedure (as results of our best
model). These class prototypes spread out in the embedding
space toward the samples cluster of each category, indicat-
ing the effectiveness of embedding adaptation.
In this paper, we implement the set-to-set transformation
using a variety of function approximators, including bidi-
rectional LSTM [ 12] (Bi-LSTM), deep sets [ 49], graph con-
volutional network (GCN) [ 16], and Transformer [ 24,41].
Our experimental results (refer to §5.2.1 ) suggest that
Transformer is the most parameter efﬁcient choice that at
the same time best implements the key properties of the de-
sired set-to-set transformation, including contextualization ,
permutation invariance ,interpolation andextrapolation ca-
pabilities (see §4.1). As a consequence, we choose the
set-to-set function instantiated with Transformer to be our
ﬁnal model and denote it as FEAT (Few-shot Embedding
Adaptation with Transformer). We further conduct compre-
hensive analysis on FEAT and evaluate it on many extended
tasks, including few-shot domain generalization, transduc-
tive few-shot learning, and generalized few-shot learning.
Our overall contribution is three-fold.
•We formulate the few-shot learning as a model-based em-
bedding adaptation to make instance embeddings task-
speciﬁc, via using a set-to-set transformation.
•We instantiate such set-to-set transformation with various
function approximators, validating and analyzing their
few-shot learning ability, task interpolation ability, and
extrapolation ability, etc. It concludes our model ( FEAT )
that uses the Transformer as the set-to-set function.
•We evaluate our FEAT model on a variety of extended
few-shot learning tasks, where it achieves superior per-
formances compared with strong baseline approaches.
2. Related Work
Methods speciﬁcally designed for few-shot learning fall
broadly into two categories. The ﬁrst is to control how a
classiﬁer for the target task should be constructed. Onefruitful idea is the meta-learning framework where the
classiﬁers are optimized in anticipation that a future up-
date due to data from a new task performs well on that
task [ 2,3,9,10,21,27,31,35], or the classiﬁer itself is
directly meta-predicted by the new task data [ 30,47].
Another line of approach has focused on learning gener-
alizable instance embeddings [ 1,4,5,13,17,26,37,40,43]
and uses those embeddings on simple classiﬁers such as
nearest neighbor rules. The key assumption is that the em-
beddings capture all necessarily discriminative representa-
tions of data such that simple classiﬁers are sufﬁced, hence
avoiding the danger of overﬁtting on a small number of la-
beled instances. Early work such as [ 17] ﬁrst validated the
importance of embedding in one-shot learning, whilst [ 43]
proposes to learn the embedding with a soft nearest neigh-
bor objective, following a meta-learning routine. Recent
advances have leveraged different objective functions for
learning such embedding models, e.g., considering the class
prototypes [ 38], decision ranking [ 40], and similarity com-
parison [ 39]. Most recently, [ 36] utilizes the graph convo-
lution network [ 16] to unify the embedding learning.
Our work follows the second school of thoughts. The
main difference is that we do not assume the embed-
dings learned on SEEN classes, being agnostic to the tar-
get tasks, are necessarily discriminative for those tasks.
In contrast, we propose to adapt those embeddings for
each target task with a set-to-set function so that the trans-
formed embeddings are better aligned with the discrimina-
tion needed in those tasks. We show empirically that such
task-speciﬁc embeddings perform better than task-agnostic
ones. MetaOptNet [ 20] and CTM [ 23] follow the same
spirit of learning task-speciﬁc embedding (or classiﬁers) via
either explicitly optimization of target task or using concen-
trator and projector to make distance metric task-speciﬁc.
3. Learning Embedding for Task-agnostic FSL
In the standard formulation of few-shot learning
(FSL) [ 9,43], a task is represented as a M-shotN-way
8809