Interpolation and extrapolation of classiﬁcation ways.
Next, we study different set-to-set functions on their capa-
bility of interpolating and extrapolating across the number
of classiﬁcation ways. To do so, we train each variant of em-
bedding adaptation functions with both 1-shot 20-way and
1-shot 5-way tasks, and measure the performance change as
a function to the number of categories in the test time. We
report the mean accuracies evaluated on few-shot classiﬁ-
cation withN={5,10,15,20}classes, and show results
in Figure 3. Surprisingly, we observe that FEAT achieves
almost the same numerical performances in both extrapo-
lation and interpolation scenarios , which further displays
its strong capability of learning the set-to-set transforma-
tion. Meanwhile, we observe that DEEPSETS works well
with interpolation but fails with extrapolation as its perfor-
mance drops signiﬁcantly with the larger N. In contrast,
GCN achieves strong extrapolation performances but does
not work as effectively in interpolation. BILSTM performs
the worst in both cases, as it is by design not permutation
invariant and may have ﬁtted an arbitrary dependency be-
tween instances.
Parameter efﬁciency. Table 3shows the number of ad-
ditional parameters each set-to-set function has introduced.
From this, we observe that with both ConvNet and ResNet
backbones, FEAT has the smallest number of parameters
compared with all other approaches while achieving best
performances from various aspects (as results discussed
above), which highlights its high parameter efﬁciency.
All above, we conclude that: 1) learning embedding
adaptation with a set-to-set model is very effective in mod-
eling task-speciﬁc embeddings for few-shot learning 2)
FEAT is the most parameter-efﬁcient function approximater
that achieves the best empirical performances, together with
nice permutation invariant property and strong interpola-
tion/extrapolation capability over the classiﬁcation way.
5.2.2. Ablation Studies
We analyze FEAT and its ablated variants on the
Mini ImageNet dataset with ConvNet backbone.
How does the embedding adaptation looks like qualita-
tively? We sample four few-shot learning tasks and learn
a principal component analysis (PCA) model (that projects
embeddings into 2-D space) using the instance embeddings
of the test data. We then apply this learned PCA projection
to both the support set’s pre-adapted and post-adapted em-
beddings. The results are shown in Figure 1(the beginning
of the paper). In three out of four examples, post-adaptation
embeddings of FEAT improve over the pre-adaption embed-
dings. Interestingly, we found that the embedding adap-
tation step of FEAT has the tendency of pushing the sup-
port embeddings apart from the clutter, such that they can
better ﬁt the test data of its categories. In the negative ex-
ample where post-adaptation degenerates the performances,
Drill Be
dTV Flowe
rScrewdrive
r
!"#$%& from 
“Clipart”
!"'("from 
“Real World”Classify
Test SetTrain Set
Train Set
Test Set!"#$%& from 
“Clipart”
!"'("from 
“Real World”
Be
dCurtains Refrigerato
rSneakers Drill
Classify
Figure 4: Qualitative results of few-shot domain-generalization
for FEAT . Correctly classiﬁed examples are shown in redboxes
and incorrectly ones are shown in blue boxes. We visualize one
task that FEAT succeeds (top) and one that fails (bottom).
we observe that the embedding adaptation step has pushed
two support embeddings “Golden Retriever” and “Lion” too
close to each other. It has qualitatively shown that the adap-
tation is crucial to obtain superior performances and helps
to contrast against task-agnostic embeddings.
5.3. Extended Few­Shot Learning Tasks
In this section, we evaluate FEAT on 3 different few-shot
learning tasks. Speciﬁcally, cross-domain FSL, transductive
FSL [ 25,33], and generalized FSL [ 6]. We overview the
setups brieﬂy and please refer to SM for details.
FS Domain Generalization assumes that examples in UN-
SEEN support and test set can come from the different do-
mains, e.g., sampled from different distributions [ 8,14].
The example of this task can be found in Figure 4. It re-
quires a model to recognize the intrinsic property than tex-
ture of objects, and is de facto analogical recognition.
Transductive FSL. The key difference between standard
and transductive FSL is whether test instances arrive one
at a time or all simultaneously. The latter setup allows the
structure of unlabeled test instances to be utilized. There-
fore, the prediction would depend on both the training (sup-
port) instances and all the available test instances in the tar-
get task from UNSEEN categories.
Generalized FSL. Prior works assumed the test instances
coming from unseen classes only. Different from them, the
generalized FSL setting considers test instances from both
SEEN and UNSEEN classes [ 32]. In other words, during the
model evaluation, while support instances all come from U,
the test instances come from S ∪ U , and the classiﬁer is
required to predict on both SEEN and UNSEEN categories. .
5.3.1. Few­Shot Domain Generalization
We show that FEAT learns to adapt the intrinsic structure
of tasks , and generalizes across domains ,i.e., predicting
8814