Few-Shot Learning via Embedding Adaptation with Set-to-Set Functions
Han-Jia Ye∗
Nanjing University
yehj@lamda.nju.edu.cnHexiang Hu
USC
hexiangh@usc.eduDe-Chuan Zhan
Nanjing University
zhandc@lamda.nju.edu.cnFei Sha†
USC & Google
fsha@google.com
Abstract
Learning with limited data is a key challenge for vi-
sual recognition. Many few-shot learning methods address
this challenge by learning an instance embedding function
from seen classes and apply the function to instances from
unseen classes with limited labels. This style of transfer
learning is task-agnostic: the embedding function is not
learned optimally discriminative with respect to the unseen
classes, where discerning among them leads to the tar-
get task. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to
adapt the instance embeddings to the target classiﬁcation
task with a set-to-set function, yielding embeddings that are
task-speciﬁc and are discriminative. We empirically investi-
gated various instantiations of such set-to-set functions and
observed the Transformer is most effective — as it naturally
satisﬁes key properties of our desired model. We denote this
model as FEAT (few-shot embedding adaptation w/ Trans-
former) and validate it on both the standard few-shot classi-
ﬁcation benchmark and four extended few-shot learning set-
tings with essential use cases, i.e., cross-domain, transduc-
tive, generalized few-shot learning, and low-shot learning.
It archived consistent improvements over baseline models
as well as previous methods, and established the new state-
of-the-art results on two benchmarks.
1. Introduction
Few-shot visual recognition [ 9,18,19,22,43] emerged
as a promising direction in tackling the challenge of learn-
ing new visual concepts with limited annotations. Con-
cretely, it distinguishes two sets of visual concepts: SEEN
and UNSEEN ones. The target task is to construct visual
classiﬁers to identify classes from the UNSEEN where each
class has a very small number of exemplars (“few-shot”).
The main idea is to discover transferable visual knowl-
edge in the SEEN classes, which have ample labeled in-
stances, and leverage it to construct the desired classiﬁer.
For example, state-of-the-art approaches for few-shot learn-
∗Work mostly done when the author was a visiting scholar at USC.
†On leave from USCing [ 35,38,40,43] usually learn a discriminative instance
embedding model on the SEEN categories, and apply it to
visual data in UNSEEN categories. In this common embed-
ding space, non-parametric classiﬁers ( e.g., nearest neigh-
bors) are then used to avoid learning complicated recogni-
tion models from a small number of examples.
Such approaches suffer from one important limitation.
Assuming a common embedding space implies that the dis-
covered knowledge – discriminative visual features – on
the SEEN classes are equally effective for anyclassiﬁcation
tasks constructed for an arbitrary set of UNSEEN classes. In
concrete words, suppose we have two different target tasks:
discerning “cat” versus “dog” and discerning “cat” versus
“tiger”. Intuitively, each task uses a different set of discrim-
inative features. Thus, the most desired embedding model
ﬁrst needs to be able to extract discerning features for either
task at the same time. This could be a challenging aspect in
its own right as the current approaches are agnostic to what
those “downstream” target tasks are and could accidentally
de-emphasize selecting features for future use. Secondly,
even if both sets of discriminative features are extracted,
they do not necessarily lead to the optimal performance for
aspeciﬁc target task. The most useful features for discern-
ing “cat” versus “tiger” could be irrelevant and noise to the
task of discerning “cat” versus “dog”!
What is missing from the current few-shot learning ap-
proaches is an adaptation strategy that tailors the visual
knowledge extracted from the SEEN classes to the UNSEEN
ones in a target task. In other words, we desire separate em-
bedding spaces where each one of them is customized such
that the visual features are most discriminative for a given
task. Towards this, we propose a few-shot model-based em-
bedding adaptation method that adjusts the instance embed-
ding models derived from the SEEN classes. Such model-
based embedding adaptation requires a set-to-set function : a
function mapping that takes all instances from the few-shot
support set and outputs the set of adapted support instance
embeddings, with elements in the set co-adapting with each
other. Such output embeddings are then assembled as the
prototypes for each visual category and serve as the near-
est neighbor classiﬁers. Figure 1qualitatively illustrates
8808