Classification 
Scores
CNN CNN CNN CNN
Soft Nearest 
Neighbor
(a) Instance Embedding
Classification 
ScoresEmbedding 
AdaptationCNN CNN CNN CNN
Soft Nearest 
Neighbor
Train Instance
Test Instance
Task Agnostic
Embedding
Task Specific 
Embedding
(b) Embedding AdaptationSet-to-Set Function
Figure 2: Illustration of the proposed Few-Shot Embedding
Adaptation Transformer ( FEAT ). Existing methods usually use the
same embedding function Efor all tasks. We propose to adapt the
embeddings to each target few-shot learning task with a set-to-set
function such as Transformer, BiLSTM, DeepSets, and GCN.
classiﬁcation problem with Nclasses sampled from a set
of visual concepts UandM(training/support) examples
per class. We denote the training set (also referred as
support sets in the literature) as Dtrain={xi,yi}NM
i=1,
with the instance xi∈RDand the one-hot labeling vec-
toryi∈ {0,1}N. We will use “support set” and “train-
ing set” interchangeably in the paper. In FSL, Mis of-
ten small ( e.g.,M= 1 orM= 5 ). The goal is to
ﬁnd a function fthat classiﬁes a test instance xtest by
ˆytest=f(xtest;Dtrain)∈ {0,1}N.
Given a small number of training instances, it is chal-
lenging to construct complex classiﬁers f(·). To this end,
the learning algorithm is also supplied with additional data
consisting of ample labeled instances. These additional data
are drawn from visual classes S, which does not overlap
withU. We refer to the original task as the target task which
discernsNUNSEEN classesU. To avoid confusion, we de-
note the data from the SEEN classesSasDS.
To learnf(·)usingDS, we synthesize many M-shotN-
way FSL tasks by sampling the data in the meta-learning
manner [ 9,43]. Each sampling gives rise to a task to clas-
sify a test set instance xS
testinto one of the NSEEN classes
byf(·), where the test instances set DS
testis composed of
the labeled instances with the same distribution as DS
train .
Formally, the function f(·)is learnt to minimize the aver-
aged error over those sampled tasks
f∗= argmin
f/summationdisplay
(xS
test,yS
test)∈DS
testℓ(f(xS
test;DS
train),yS
test)
(1)
where the loss ℓ(·)measures the discrepancy between the
prediction and the true label. For simplicity, we have as-
sumed we only synthesize one task with test set DS
test. The
optimalf∗is then applied to the original target task.
We consider the approach based on learning embeddings
for FSL [ 38,43] (see Figure 2(a) for an overview). In par-
ticular, the classiﬁer f(·)is composed of two elements. The
ﬁrst is an embedding function φx=E(x)∈Rdthat maps
an instance xto a representation space. The second compo-Algorithm 1 Training strategy of embedding adaptation
Require: Seen class set S
1:for all iteration = 1,...,MaxIteration do
2: SampleN-wayM-shot (DS
train ,DS
test) fromS
3: Computeφx=E(x), forx∈ XS
train∪XS
test
4: for all(xS
test,yS
test)∈ DS
testdo
5: Compute {ψx;∀x∈ XS
train}withTvia Eq. 3
6: PredictˆyS
testwith{ψx}as Eq. 4
7: Computeℓ(ˆyS
test,yS
test)with Eq. 1
8: end for
9: Compute ∇E,T/summationtext
(xS
test,yS
test)∈DS
testℓ(ˆyS
test,yS
test)
10: UpdateEandTwith∇E,Tuse SGD
11:end for
12:return Embedding function Eand set function T.
nent applies the nearest neighbor classiﬁers in this space:
ˆytest=f(φxtest;{φx,∀(x,y)∈ Dtrain}) (2)
∝exp/parenleftbig
sim(φxtest,φx)/parenrightbig
·y,∀(x,y)∈ Dtrain
Note that only the embedding function is learned by opti-
mizing the loss in Eq. 1. For reasons to be made clear in
below, we refer this embedding function as task-agnostic .
4. Adapting Embedding for Task-speciﬁc FSL
In what follows, we describe our approach for few-shot
learning (FSL). We start by describing the main idea ( §4.1,
also illustrated in Figure 2), then introduce the set-to-set
adaptation function ( §4.2). Last are learning ( §4.3) and
implementations details ( §4.4).
4.1. Adapting to Task­Speciﬁc Embeddings
The key difference between our approach and traditional
ones is to learn task-speciﬁc embeddings. We argue that the
embeddingφxis not ideal. In particular, the embeddings do
not necessarily highlight the most discriminative represen-
tation for a speciﬁc target task. To this end, we introduce an
adaption step where the embedding function φx(more pre-
cisely, its values on instances) is transformed. This trans-
formation is a set-to-set function that contextualizes over
the image instances of a set, to enable strong co-adaptation
of each item. Instance functions fails to have such co-
adaptation property. Furthermore, the set-to-set-function
receives instances as bags, or sets without orders, requiring
the function to output the set of reﬁned instance embeddings
while being permutation-invariant . Concretely,
{ψx;∀x∈ Xtrain}=T({φx;∀x∈ Xtrain}) (3)
=T(π{φx;∀x∈ Xtrain}))
8810