4.3 Ethical Principles for Trustworthy and Fair AI 29
4.3.1 Non-maleﬁcence
The principle of Non-maleﬁcence states that AI shall not harm people. AI systems
that harm people (and animals or property) are a risk, both for individuals as wellas for companies (cf. Chap. 6). In terms of trust and fairness, this extends to issues
such as bullying and hate speech which are salient examples of the principle of
non-maleﬁcence being violated online.
4.3.1.1 Social Media Bullying and Harassment
The cases of school children being bullied by classmates or employees bullied at
workplace are numerous. There are cases where this has even lead to suicide. While
such bullying certainly existed prior to the advent of digital technologies, it has,
through social networks, acquired a new level of concern, as indicated by surveys.
1
The risk of being exposed to large groups or to the public in general has risen
dramatically. Consequently, in a number of countries, laws have been passed against
bullying in digital media (Sweden was the ﬁrst country to do so in 1993).
4.3.1.2 Hate Speech
Hate speech has in recent years gained considerable media coverage. Hate speech
is a type of speech that is not just speciﬁcally directed against a particular person,but can also be directed against groups or entire parts of a population. It might, for
example, attack groups on the basis of their ethnic origin, sexual orientation, religion,
gender, identity, disability and others. Already the International Covenant on Civiland Political Rights”, in force since 1976, includes a statement according to which
“any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence shall be prohibited by law.
Laws against hate speech have since then been passed in a number of countries.
For example, Belgium passed a law in 1981 which states that incitements to discrimi-nation, hatred of violence against persons or groups of race, colour, origin or national
or ethnic dissent are illegal and subject to punishment according to the Belgian penal
code. Other countries like Canada, New Zealand or the United Kingdom have similarlaws (which might however vary in detail and punishment).
A new level of hate speech laws was however reached in 2017 in Germany, when
a bill was passed by the German Bundestag which speciﬁcally criminalises hatespeech on social media. The law also insists that social networks (like Facebook or
others) may be ﬁned very large sums of up to 50 million EUR—in case they do not
actively seek and successfully remove certain content within a week.
The passing of this law was controversial, with a number of German, but also
many international commentators, stating that such a law is very far-reaching and
1https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/aug/14/half-uk-girls-bullied-social-media-survey .