14 2 What Is AI?
algorithms and optimisation software can handle everything from airline reservation
systems to the management of nuclear power plants. But they only take well-deﬁned
actions within strictly deﬁned limits. In this section, we focus on some of the majorchallenges that make AI so difﬁcult. The limitations of sensors and the resulting lack
of perception have already been highlighted.
AI systems are rarely capable of generalising across learned concepts. Although
a classiﬁer may be trained on very related problems, typically classiﬁer performance
drops substantially when the data is generated from other sources or in other ways.
For example, face recognition classiﬁers may obtain excellent results when faces areviewed straight on, but performance drops quickly as the view of the face changes
to, say proﬁle. Considered another way, AI systems lack robustness when dealing
with a changing, dynamic, and unpredictable world. As mentioned, AI systems lackcommon sense. Put another way, AI systems lack the enormous amount of experi-
ence and interactions with the world that constitute the knowledge that is typically
called common sense. Not having this large body of experience makes even the mostmundane task difﬁcult for a robot to achieve. Moreover, lack of experience in the
world makes communicating with a human and understanding a human’s directions
difﬁcult. This idea is typically described as common ground.
Although a number of software systems have claimed to have passed the Turing
test, these claims have been disputed. No AI system has yet achieved strong AI, butsome may have achieved weak AI based on their performance on a narrow, well-
deﬁned task (like beating a grandmaster in chess or Go, or experienced players in
Poker). Even if an AI agent is agreed to have passed the Turing test, it is not clearwhether the passing of the test is a necessary and sufﬁcient condition for intelligence.
AI has been subject to many hype cycles. Often even minor advancements have
been hailed as major breakthroughs with predictions of soon to come autonomousintelligent products. These advancements should be considered with respect to the
narrowness of the problem attempted. For example, early types of autonomous cars
capable of driving thousands of miles at a time (under certain conditions) were alreadybeing developed in the 1980s in the US and Germany. It took, however, another 30+
years for these systems to just begin to be introduced in non-research environments.
Hence, predicting the speed of progression of AI is very difﬁcult—and in this regard,most prophets have simply failed.
2.5 Science and Fiction of AI
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and robotics are frequent topics in popular culture. In 1968, theStanley Kubrick classic “2001” featured the famous example of HAL, a spacecraft’sintelligent control system which turns against its human passengers. The Terminator
movies (since 1984) are based on the idea that a neural network built for military
defense purposes gains self-awareness and, in order to protect itself from deactiva-tion by its human creators, turns against them. The Steven Spielberg’s movie “A.I.”
(2001), based on a short story by Brian Aldiss, explores the nature of an intelligent