2W h a t I s A I ? 7
Alternatively, Siri might be designed to take a deontological approach. A deon-
tologist like Immanuel Kant might prioritise duty over happiness. Kant might advise
Chris that lying is wrong. He has a duty not to lie so he should tell the truth abouthis weight, even if this would decrease his chances of getting a date.
A third approach Siri could take would be a virtue ethics approach. Virtue ethics
tend to see morality in terms of character. Aristotle might advise Chris that hisconduct has to exhibit virtues such as honesty.
Lastly, Siri needs to consider whether it should give a recommendation at all.
Providing wrong advice might damage Siri’s relationship to Chris and he might con-sider switching to another phone with another digital assistant. This may negatively
impact Apple’s sales and stock value.
This little example shows that questions that seem trivial on the surface might be
very difﬁcult for a machine to answer. Not only do these machines need the ability
to process sensory data, they also need to be able to extract the correct meaning
from it and then represent this meaning in a data structure that can be digitallystored. Next, the machine needs to be able to process the meaning and conclude with
desirable actions. This whole process requires knowledge about the world, logical
reasoning and skills to learn and adapt. Having these abilities may make the machine
autonomous .
There are various deﬁnitions of “autonomy” and “autonomous” in AI, robotics and
ethics. At its simplest, autonomous simply refers to the ability of a machine to operate
for a period of time without a human operator. Exactly what that means differs from
application to application. What is considered “autonomous” in a vehicle is differentto what is considered “autonomous” in an weapon. In bioethics autonomy refers to
the ability of humans to make up their own minds about what treatment to accept
or refuse. In Kantian ethics autonomy refers to the ability of humans to decide whatto do with their lives and what moral rules to live by. The reader should be aware
that exactly what “autonomous” means is context-sensitive. Several meanings are
presented in this book. The unifying underlying idea is self-rule (from the Greekwords “auto” meaning self and “nomos” meaning rule).
On the ﬁrst of these deﬁnitions, Siri is an autonomous agent that attempts to answer
spoken questions. Some questions Siri tries to answer require more intelligence,meaning more background, reasoning ability and knowledge, than others. The chapter
that follows deﬁne and describe the characteristics that make something artiﬁcially
intelligent and an agent.
2.1 Introduction to AI
The ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) has evolved from humble beginnings to a
ﬁeld with global impact. The deﬁnition of AI and of what should and should not be
included has changed over time. Experts in the ﬁeld joke that AI is everything thatcomputers cannot currently do. Although facetious on the surface, there is a sense