Chapter 7
Psychological Aspects of AI
In this chapter we discuss how people relate to robots and autonomous systems
from a psychological point of view. Humans tend to anthropomorphise themand form unidirectional relationships. The trust in these relationships is the
basis for persuasion and manipulation that can be used for good and evil.
In this chapter we discuss psychological factors that impact the ethical design and
use of AIs and robots. It is critical to understand that humans will attribute desires
and feelings to machines even if the machines have no ability whatsoever to feelanything. That is, people who are unfamiliar with the internal states of machines
will assume machines have similar internal states of desires and feelings as them-
selves. This is called anthropomorphism. Various ethical risks are associated withanthropomorphism. Robots and AIs might be able to use “big data” to persuade and
manipulate humans to do things they would rather not do. Due to unidirectional
emotional bonding, humans might have misplaced feelings towards machines or
trust them too much. In the worst-case scenarios, “weaponised” AI could be used to
exploit humans.
7.1 Problems of Anthropomorphisation
Humans interact with robots and AI systems as if they are social actors. This effecthas called as the “Media Equation” (Reeves and Nass 1996 ). People treat robots with
politeness and apply social norms and values to their interaction partner (Broadbent
2017 ). Through repeated interaction, humans can form friendships and even intimate
relationships with machines. This anthropomorphisation is arguably hard-wired into
our minds and might have an evolutionary basis (Zlotowski et al. 2015 ). Even if the
designers and engineers did not intend the robot to exhibit social signals, users mightstill perceive them. The human mind is wired to detect social signals and to interpret
© The Author(s) 2021
C. Bartneck et al., An Introduction to Ethics in Robotics and AI ,
SpringerBriefs in Ethics, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-51110-4_755