78 9 Application Areas of AI
9.4.3 Forecasting Students’ Performance
Artiﬁcial Intelligence has been used to predict the dropout rate of students and their
grades (Gorr et al. 1994 ; Moseley and Mead 2008 ). The goal is typically to provide
students at risk with additional support, but also to carefully plan resource allocation.
This is particularly important in the context of the United States’ “No Child Left
Behind” policy, which strongly encourages schools to minimise dropout rates andensure good performance of most students.
There are, however, several ethical issues. First, the pressure applied under this
policy can incentivise teachers and administrators to manipulate the scores of theirstudents in order to meet the set targets. The Atlanta Public Schools cheating scandal
is an example for such a misconduct (Fantz 2015 ).
Second, if the performance of a student is calculated prior to taking a course
then both the student and the teacher might adapt to this score (Kolowich 2012 ).
A student might, because of the prediction, not even try to perform well in thecourse. The student may deem their own effort as ineffective, exhibiting signs of
learned helplessness. A teacher might also look at the list and decide that the students
with the lowest predicted score are likely to drop out anyway and would not beworth putting extra effort into. These are two possible negative effects of such a
forecasted performance, but both students and teacher might also decide to counteract
the prediction. The student might work extra hard because he/she knows that thiswill be hard or the teacher might allocate extra time and resources to those students
that are predicted to struggle. In any case, the consequences of using AI in predicting
student performance should be discussed and monitored to avoid abuse and bias.
9.5 Sex Robots
One of the more controversial applications of AI technology is the design of robots
for sexual purposes. Indeed, robots that engage in both sex and violence has been
a trope in several recent hit ﬁlms and TV shows such as Ex Machina ,Humans and
Westworld to name but three.
Those who argue against sex robots claim they will degrade people, especially
women, and perpetrate harmful stereotypes of submissive females (Richardson2016 ). It is certainly true that the vast majority of sex robots currently being produced
are female. There are also concerns that giving people who lack social skills access
to sex robots will cause them to not bother acquiring social skills. There are thosewho argue that sex is something humans should do with each other not machines.
Some of these arguments are similar to arguments made against pornography and
prostitution. There is even a Campaign Against Sex Robots
2where more detail on
these arguments can be found.
2https://campaignagainstsexrobots.org/ .