2.1 Introduction to AI 11
AI currently works best in constrained environments, but has trouble with open
worlds, poorly deﬁned problems, and abstractions. Constrained environments include
simulated environments and environments in which prior data accurately reﬂectsfuture challenges. The real world, however, is open in the sense that new challenges
arise constantly. Humans use solutions to prior related problems to solve new prob-
lems. AI systems have limited ability to reason analogically from one situation toanother and thus tend to have to learn new solutions even for closely related prob-
lems. In general, they lack the ability to reason abstractly about problems and to use
common sense to generate solutions to poorly deﬁned problems.
2.2 What Is Machine Learning?
Machine learning is a sub-ﬁeld of AI focused on the creation of algorithms that useexperience with respect to a class of tasks and feedback in the form of a performance
measure to improve their performance on that task. Contemporary machine learning
is a sprawling, rapidly changing ﬁeld. Typically machine learning is sub-categorised
into three types of learning.
Supervised learning centres on methods such as regression and classiﬁcation. To
solve a classiﬁcation problem experiences in the form of data are labelled with
respect to some target categorisation. The labelling process is typically accom-plished by enlisting the effort of humans to examine each piece of data and to label
the data. For supervised learning classiﬁcation problems performance is measured
by calculating the true positive rate (the ratio of the true positives over all positives,
correctly labelled or not) and the false positive rate (the ratio of false positives
over all negatively classiﬁed data, correctly and incorrectly labelled). The resultof this machine learning process is called a classiﬁer . A classiﬁer is software that
can automatically predict the label of a new piece of data. A machine learning
classiﬁer that categorises labelled data with a true positive rate of 100% and a falsepositive rate of 0% is a perfect classiﬁer. The supervised learning process then is
the process by which unlabelled data is fed to a developing classiﬁer and, over
the course of working through some training data, the classiﬁer’s performanceimproves. Testing the classiﬁer requires the use of a second label data-set called
the test data set. In practice, often one overall data-set is carved into a training and
test set on which the classiﬁer is then trained and tested. The testing and trainingprocess may be time-consuming, but once a classiﬁer is created it can be used to
quickly categorise incoming data.
Unsupervised learning is more focused on understanding data patterns and rela-
tions than on prediction. It involves methods such as principal components anal-
ysis and clustering. These are often used as exploratory precursors to supervised
learning methods.
Reinforcement learning is a third type of machine learning. Reinforcement learn-
ing does not focus on the labelling of data, but rather attempts to use feedback in