8.2 Why AI Needs Data 63
Let’s consider the case of Facebook. Mark Zuckerberg was summoned to appear
before a Senate Judiciary and Commerce Committee hearing on April 10, 2018.
During the hearing Senator Orrin Hatch asked: “How do you sustain a businessmodel in which users don’t pay for your service?”, to which Zuckerberg simply
responded: “Senator, we run ads.”.
John Wanamaker famously pointed out that “Half the money I spend on advertising
is wasted; the trouble is I don’t know which half.” What makes Facebook such an
attractive platform for placing advertisement is that it knows a lot about its users
and allows marketing experts to target speciﬁc groups. This targeting dramaticallyimproves the efﬁciency and effectiveness of the ads. Less than the famous 50% of the
advertisement gets wasted this way. The German online retailer Otto, for example,
was able to reduce the cost per click by 38% through highly targeted advertisements(Kleinz 2018 ). Facebook users that previously ‘liked’ a picture of a friend in Hawaii
were presented with advertisements for cheap ﬂights to that destination.
While the advertising industry might be one of the greatest beneﬁciaries of private
data, its use stretches far beyond this. A companion robot is likely to be perceived as
more relatable and friendly if it knows and adapts to its speciﬁc user. A smart home
might also learn when its inhabitants are present and adapt the heating to maximise
comfort and energy efﬁciency. In summary, the more and better information about
users is available, the better AI systems can learn from the data and adapt theirbehaviour.
8.3 Private Data Collection and Its Dangers
Gathering personal data has become dramatically easier with the arrival of certain key
technologies, such as smartphones, surveillance cameras and of course, the Internet.
These days it is in principle possible to track every step users take and every restaurantthey visit. People take photos of the food they eat and post them online. Within the
framework of the Self Optimisation movement people feverishly collect personal
data in an attempt to change their lives for the better. Much of this data is now beinguploaded to cloud computers, which has signiﬁcantly increased the possibility for
tracking private information.
Moreover, users of social networks voluntarily upload very private data and seem
to deliberately ignore that by uploading data they often transfer the copyright of this
data to the platform provider. Facebook and others own the data and use it and even
sell it to others.
One of the factors of Google’s success in gathering personal data is that people
cannot hide their interest when searching for information. While many would try toconceal delicate private issues they cannot search for information about this topic
without entering the terms into the search box. Stephens-Davidowitz and Pinker
(2017 ) analysed such personal search query patterns and identiﬁed a considerable
group of Indian husbands that desire to be breast-fed. How Google will respond to