2 1 About the Book
Christoph Lütge holds the Peter Löscher Chair of Business Ethics at Techni-
cal University of Munich (TUM). He has a background in business informatics
and philosophy and has held visiting positions in Harvard in Taipei, Kyoto andVenice. He was awarded a Heisenberg Fellowship in 2007. In 2019, Lütge was
appointed director of the new TUM Institute for Ethics in Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Among his major publications are: “The Ethics of Competition” (Elgar 2019),“Order Ethics or Moral Surplus: What Holds a Society Together?” (Lexington
2015), and the “Handbook of the Philosophical Foundations of Business Ethics”
(Springer 2013). He has commented on political and economic affairs on TimesHigher Education, Bloomberg, Financial Times, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung,
La Repubblica and numerous other media. Moreover, he has been a member of the
Ethics Commission on Automated and Connected Driving of the German FederalMinistry of Transport and Digital Infrastructure, as well as of the European AI
Ethics initiative AI4People. He has also done consulting work for the Singapore
Economic Development Board and the Canadian Transport Commission.
Alan R. Wagner is an assistant professor of aerospace engineering at the Penn-
sylvania State University and a research associate with the universities ethics
institute. His research interest include the development of algorithms that allow
a robot to create categories of models, or stereotypes, of its interactive partners,
creating robots with the capacity to recognize situations that justify the use ofdeception and to act deceptively, and methods for representing and reasoning
about trust. Application areas for these interests range from military to health-
care. His research has won several awards including being selected for by theAir Force Young Investigator Program. His research on deception has gained
signiﬁcant notoriety in the media resulting in articles in the Wall Street Journal,
New Scientist Magazine, the journal of Science, and described as the 13th mostimportant invention of 2010 by Time Magazine. His research has also won awards
within the human-robot interaction community, such as the best paper award at
RO-MAN 2007.
Sean Welsh holds a PhD in philosophy from the University of Canterbury and is
co-lead of the Law, Ethics and Society working group of the AI Forum of New
Zealand. Prior to embarking on his doctoral research in AI and robot ethics heworked as a software engineer for various telecommunications ﬁrms. His arti-
cles have appeared in The Conversation ,t h e Sydney Morning Herald ,t h e World
Economic Forum ,Euronews ,Quillette andJane’s Intelligence Review .H ei st h e
author of Ethics and Security Automata , a research monograph on machine ethics.
1.2 Structure of the Book
This book begins with introductions to both artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and ethics.
These sections are meant to provide the reader with the background knowledge nec-essary for understanding the ethical dilemmas that arise in AI. Opportunities for
further reading are included for those interested in learning more about these top-