6.2 Ethical Risks of AI 49
6.2.4 Social Risk
Social risk includes actions that may include the people, society or communities
around the business. These risks may include increased trafﬁc, noise pollution, andissues related to worker morale. Social risks related to AI may include technology
induced increased social isolation, increased inequality, and local community issues
surrounding the acceptable uses of technology and AI. For example, the use ofGoogle goggles generated numerous issues surrounding the privacy and the use of
an integrated camera in private places.
The examples above brieﬂy introduce some of the more ethically charged risks
that companies must manage to survive in the modern world. There are numerous
other risks besides these (currency risk, commercial risk etc.) which we do not cover
here.
6.3 Managing Risk of AI
One important question is how these risks can be assessed, and even quantiﬁed, if
possible. Usually, it makes a big difference especially to large companies, if a risk
can be estimated in money. We have already mentioned the loss in the value of acompany brand, in stock price and in legal ﬁnes, but there are also other attempts
in quantifying reputational risk, by a mix of asking external experts, doing surveys
with employees or other measurements. Again, this leads to a value which will thenhave consequences for a company, internally and externally.
For AI companies as well as in others, there are several ways of dealing with
these risks. First there are legal methods of establishing or improving existing safetyregulations. For example, in the case of autonomous cars, laws are being adjusted
to accommodate the inclusion of these technologies. At the same time, industry best
practices are also being developed and implemented.
Second, regulations surround ancillary industries may need to be developed. For
autonomous cars, this includes changes to insurance regulations, perhaps includingthe introduction or updating of compulsory insurance to meet the needs of this rapidly
developing technological.
Finally, many companies will certainly, voluntarily or not, be compelled to go
beyond the minimum legal standards for reasons of their own ethical values and
addressing risks. Being a good corporate citizen implies controlling risks—in your
own company as well as in the supply chain. For example, when the Rana Plazabuilding in Bangladesh collapsed in 2013, the public and many consumers viewed
this as a problem of large multinational companies in the clothing industry and not
just as a local problem. Similar viewpoints have been held in the case of Apple orSamsung as being responsible for child labour in the cobalt mines used in their supply
chain.