102 12 Ethics in AI and Robotics: A Strategic Challenge
Finland and China. By mid-2018 the European Commission published its Commu-
nication on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, thus effectively motivating its member states to
draft strategies for AI. In December 2018, the EU presented its plan for AI with moreconcrete actions from research to development, investments in AI, ensuring training
and education and a proper computing infrastructure.
AI strategies around the world mostly follow a general model that addresses the
actors in the AI and robotics environment, such as professionals, society, research
organisations, companies and government. These groups require support through
infrastructure , data, staff, ﬁnance, and information to productively create an envi-
ronment conducive to the deployment of AI solutions. The aim is to create AI solu-
tions , practices and improved benchmarking within industry. To support this, gov-
ernment strategies focus on a range of processes ranging from cooperation between
these actors, on improving research excellence, staff training, and regulation. In addi-
tion, many strategies emphasise the need for an elaborate societal discourse and an
ethical approach to AI.
It is not only the promises of increased competitiveness or new applications, which
are driving the development of national strategies for AI and robotics. On the contrary,
it seems that the public discussion in many countries is more focused on the potential
damages that AI may induce, for example in the labour market, but also regarding
human autonomy, privacy, and even the very future of society. There are two mainstreams that present one or another version of AI—and often robotics—dystopia.
From an economic perspective, authors like Ford ( 2015 ) studied the potential impact
of AI and robotics on (human) work. He predicts massive job losses in many sectorsthat have seemed to be immune to automation for a long time. The argument here
is that new AI technology is now capable of replacing much more of the work for
which human intelligence was required to date. This includes, for example, medicaldiagnostic knowledge, expert knowledge from tax advisory or the legal knowledge
of lawyers. The second line of dystopian publications stems from more journalistic
accounts of the potential future of AI. In several cases, these publications draw animage of our future in which AI overlords threaten humanity while others are more
careful predictions about losing our privacy and autonomy (Bartlett 2018 ).
These often rather pessimistic predictions about the impact of AI have been quite
successful in terms of their inﬂuence on the broader public. It is therefore unsurprising
that policy makers around the world include the potential damage created by AI and
robotics in their considerations and discussions. For example, the German AI strategyexplicitly calls for a broad discussion of AI’s societal impacts. In addition, it aims
to support a continued discussion between politics, science, industry, and society.
Several national policies emphasise the need to continuously monitor and study the
impact of AI technology on labour and society. For example, the French AI strategy
proposes to study the labour market impacts and to implement ethics-by-design.Thus, the central topics of such societal dialogues include questions of the potential
or real impact of AI and robotics on the work force and on society as a whole, and
also questions of privacy, security, safety and adequate regulation.