4.3 Ethical Principles for Trustworthy and Fair AI 31
treatment (Zalta 2003 ). This entails giving patients the right to refuse life-saving pro-
cedures and to decide not to take risk-reducing medications. For example, instances
are known in which people died as a result of refusing blood transfusion for religiousreasons. Generally, the courts have found that parents do not have a right to impose
their views, such as refusing a blood transfusion, on their children (Woolley 2005 ).
However, once a child becomes an adult, they can refuse treatment.
More generally, autonomy refers to the ability of a person to make decisions.
People can decide whether or not they want to take risks to earn more money or have
more fun. Sherpas carrying packs for mountaineers climbing Everest can earn ﬁvetimes more money than they can working in the ﬁelds of Nepal. However, they run
the risk of being caught in an avalanche that can injure or kill them. People should
be permitted to assume risks but they should know what risks they are assuming.An AI’s respect of human autonomy would support permitting a degree of human
self-harm and permitting humans to assume risks that might lead to harm. After all,
humans might like to go rock-climbing or ride motorcycles.
There are ethical limits to autonomy. Suppose a child says to a robot, “pull my
sister’s hair, she’s been mean to me and I hate her!” In this case, should the robot
obey the child? If an adult says, “smack my daughter, she’s been naughty” should
the robot obey? Generally speaking, systems should not help people pursue illegal or
immoral goals. Moreover, systems should not be used to perform illegal or immoralacts. There is no strong case for systems allowing users to employ the systems to harm
others unless there is good reason. One should also be very careful when considering
to design systems that permit machines to harm humans that ask to be harmed. Forexample, one might decline to develop an euthanasia robot. There is the risk such a
robot might not sense mental illness. Also, one might hesitate to delegate such grave
decisions to machines at all.
However, there are some cases in which robots are designed to use force against
humans. The police may need to harm people in some cases such as apprehending
violent offenders. For example, in 2016, the Dallas Police Chief ordered the use ofa tele-operated robot to carry an explosive to a perpetrator who had shot 10 ofﬁcers,
killing 5 and wounding 5 (Thielmann 2016 ). The explosion killed the offender.
Humans were in control of this particular robot. In the military domain, robots capableof violent action against humans have existed for some time. However, apart from
lawful violence carried out by the state, there are relatively few cases where people
are comfortable with robots and AIs being designed to harm humans.
Moral philosophy is directly linked to autonomy. If a person does not have auton-
omy or free will, then it can be argued that this person does not have moral responsi-
bility either. From the deontological point of view the connection between autonomy
and ethics can best be demonstrated by Immanuel Kant’s moral theory (Kant 1785 )
which consists of three main formulations:
1. Act only according to that maxim you can at the same time will as a universal
law without contradiction.