56 7 Psychological Aspects of AI
even the slightest behaviour as an indicator of some underlying motivation. This is
true even of abstract animations. Humans can project “theory of mind” onto abstract
shapes that have no minds at all (Heider and Simmel 1944 ). It is therefore the respon-
sibility of the system’s creators to carefully design the physical features and social
interaction the robots will have, especially if they interact with vulnerable users, such
as children, older adults and people with cognitive or physical impairments.
To accomplish such good social interaction skills, AI systems need to be able to
sense and represent social norms, the cultural context and the values of the people
(and other agents) with which they interact (Malle et al. 2017 ). A robot, for example,
needs to be aware that it would be inappropriate to enter a room in which a human is
changing his/her underwear. Being aware of these norms and values means that the
agent needs to be able to sense relevant behaviour, process its meaning and expressthe appropriate signals. A robot entering the bedroom, for example, might decide
to knock on the door prior to entering. It then needs to hear the response, even if
only non-verbal utterance, and understand its meaning. Robots might not need tobe perfectly honest. As Oscar Wilde observed “The truth is rarely pure and never
simple.” White lies and minor forms of dishonesty are common in human-human
interaction (Feldman et al. 2002 ; DePaulo et al. 1996 ).
7.1.1 Misplaced F eelings T owards AI
Anthropomorphism may generate positive feelings towards social robots. These pos-
itive feelings can be confused with friendship. Humans have a natural tendency to
assign human qualities to non-human objects. Friendships between a human and anautonomous robot can develop even when the interactions between the robot and
the human are largely unidirectional with the human providing all of the emotion.
A group of soldiers in Iraq, for example, held a funeral for their robot and createda medal for it (Kolb 2012 ). Carpenter provides an in-depth examination of human-
robot interaction from the perspective of Explosive Ordinance Disposal (EOD) teams
within the military (Carpenter 2016 ). Her work offers an glimpse of how naturally
and easily people anthropomorphise robots they work with daily. Robinette et al.
(2016 ) offered human subjects a guidance robot to assist them with quickly ﬁnding
an exit during an emergency. They were told that if they did not reach the exit withinthe allotted 30 s then their character in the environment would perish. Those that
interacted with a good guidance robot that quickly led them directly to an exit tended
to name the robot and described its behaviour in heroic terms. Much research has
shown that humans tend to quickly befriend robots that behave socially.