86 10 Autonomous V ehicles
Another (fatal) accident happened with Tesla cars in March 2018 in Mountain
View/California, and in Laguna Beach/California in May 2018. In both cases, it
turned out that the respective driver ignored several warnings by the “autopilot”system.
These (and similar) cases show we need clear rules about how A Vs are to be used
by customers. Drivers should not sit behind the wheel playing games or reading theiremail. Companies should be required to communicate these rules in adequate ways.
10.5 Ethical Guidelines for A Vs
Besides detailed regulations that have been passed in a number of countries, a broader
ethics code for A Vs has been adopted. In July 2016, the German Federal Minister
of Transport and Digital Infrastructure appointed a national ethics committee forautomated and connected driving. The committee was composed of 14 members,
among them professors of law, ethics and engineering, as well as representatives from
automotive companies and consumer organisations. The chairman was a former judge
of the German Federal Constitutional Court. In addition, hearings with additional
experts from technical, legal and ethical disciplines were conducted, as well as drivingtests with several A Vs. In June 2017, the committee presented 20 ethical guidelines
for A Vs (Federal Ministry of Transportation and Digital Infrastructure 2017 ). Many
of these will have a signiﬁcant direct or indirect bearing on the car industry and theirethics policies, both for Germany as well as the EU (Luetge 2017 ).
There are some researchers that feel that caution is necessary when discussing
the ethical beneﬁts of autonomous vehicles (Brooks 2017 ; Marshall 2018 ) and risks
associated with autonomous vehicles (Cummings 2017 ). One issue is that the data
of miles driven in autonomous mode might be skewed in terms of ideal driving con-
ditions, that the behaviour of autonomous vehicles differs from certain ‘unwritten’norms of human drivers (Surden and Williams 2016 ), and that people may place
themselves at greater risk because of the presence of autonomous vehicles (Rothen-
bücher et al. 2016 ). The RAND corporation suggested in 2016 that an A V must drive
275 million miles without a fatality to prove that they are safe (Kalra and Paddock
2016 ). RAND researchers later however also stated that A Vs should be deployed as
soon as possible in order to save lives (Marshall 2017 ).
10.6 Ethical Questions in A Vs
At least some of the accidents indicate that it may be ethically questionable to call
a certain mode “autopilot” (which Tesla does), suggesting false connotations, since
the driver of a Tesla car (which is ofﬁcially Level 2) is required to keep the handson the wheel at all times. Just stating that this is a matter of one’s own responsibility
is insufﬁcient—as with many other cases from different industries. In the 1970s, for