8 2 What Is AI?
that developing intelligent computers and robots means creating something that does
not exist today. Artiﬁcial intelligence is a moving target.
Indeed, even the deﬁnition of AI itself is volatile and has changed over time.
Kaplan and Haenlein deﬁne AI as “a system’s ability to correctly interpret external
data, to learn from such data, and to use those learnings to achieve speciﬁc goals and
tasks through ﬂexible adaptation” (Kaplan and Haenlein 2019 ). Poole and Mackworth
(2010 ) deﬁne AI as “the ﬁeld that studies the synthesis and analysis of computational
agents that act intelligently.” An agent is something (or someone) that acts. An agent
is intelligent when:
1. its actions are appropriate for its circumstances and its goals
2. it is ﬂexible to changing environments and changing goals3. it learns from experience, and
4. it makes appropriate choices given its perceptual and computational limitations.
Russell and Norvig deﬁne AI as “the study of [intelligent] agents that receive pre-
cepts from the environment and take action. Each such agent is implemented by
a function that maps percepts to actions, and we cover different ways to represent
these functions, such as production systems, reactive agents, logical planners, neural
networks, and decision-theoretic systems” Russell and Norvig ( 2010 , p. viii).
Russell and Norvig also identify four schools of thought for AI. Some researchers
focus on creating machines that think like humans. Research within this school of
thought seeks to reproduce, in some manner, the processes, representations, and
results of human thinking on a machine. A second school focuses on creatingmachines that act like humans. It focuses on action, what the agent or robot actually
does in the world, not its process for arriving at that action. A third school focuses on
developing machines that act rationally. Rationality is closely related to optimality.These artiﬁcially intelligent systems are meant to always do the right thing or act
in the correct manner. Finally, the fourth school is focused on developing machines
that think rationally. The planning and/or decision-making that these machines willdo is meant to be optimal. Optimal here is naturally relevant to some problems that
the system is trying to solve.
We have provided three deﬁnitions. Perhaps the most basic element common to
all of them is that AI involves the study, design and building of intelligent agents that
can achieve goals. The choices an AI makes should be appropriate to its perceptual
and cognitive limitations. If an AI is ﬂexible and can learn from experience as wellas sense, plan and act on the basis of its initial conﬁguration, it might be said to
be more intelligent than an AI that just has a set of rules that guides a ﬁxed set of
actions. However, there are some contexts in which you might not want the AI to
learn new rules and behaviours, during the performance of a medical procedure, for
example. Proponents of the various approaches tend to stress some of these elementsmore than others. For example, developers of expert systems see AI as a repository of
expert knowledge that humans can consult, whereas developers of machine learning
systems see AI as something that might discover new knowledge. As we shall see,each approach has strengths and weaknesses.