34 4 Trust and Fairness in AI Systems
moral intuition is a “black box” of “inscrutable” biological code. We do not fully
understand how humans make moral decisions. We do not even understand how
human brains store information. However, while there is little agreement on moraltheory, when it comes to moral practice, there are many actions that are generally
considered to be “right” and many that are considered to be “wrong.” While ethical
controversies rage on topics such as abortion, euthanasia, civil disobedience andcapital punishment, there are many moral problems that are far less difﬁcult.
If the scope of application is reduced and the information on which the moral
decisions are made can be obtained, then it is possible for AI to make some very spe-ciﬁc moral decisions. Often, there are clear regulations and laws that in very speciﬁc
applications can be taken as normatively deﬁnitive. In practice, AI has already led to
a number of implemented applications that may have moral and ethical implications.
4.3.4.1 Determining Creditworthiness
Banks and other credit institutions are already, in a number of countries, using AI
systems to pre-sort credit applications on the basis of the data available about the
applicant. This certainly has a number of advantages, one of which is to be able to
come to a decision more quickly and on the basis of more information, making itmore rational in theory. However, this may also entail disadvantages, in particular
leading to certain biases. For example, the personal information of a credit applicant
will in most cases contain information about their neighbourhood. On that basis, andmaking use of publicly available (or privately collected) further data, a systematic
bias against persons from certain residential areas may occur.
An in-depth examination of racial bias related to the use of algorithms for high-risk
care management demonstrates many of the challenges and issues associated with
the merged concepts of justice, algorithmic fairness, and accuracy (Obermeyer et al.
2019 ). Researchers examined the inputs, outputs, and objective function to algorithm
used to identify patients as high risk of needing acute care and thereby inﬂuenced the
treatment of millions of Americans. Even though the algorithm speciﬁcally excludes
race from consideration, the system reasonably uses information about healthcarecosts to predict healthcare need. The system uses machine learning to create a model
to predict future healthcare costs. It assumes that those individuals that will have
the highest healthcare costs will be the same individuals that need the most health-care, a very reasonable assumption. Yet, this assumption introduces disparities that
end up correlating to race. For example, poor patients face greater challenge access-
ing healthcare because they may lack access to transportation, childcare, or have
competing work related demands. They conclude that the central issue is problem
formulation: the challenge of developing precise computational algorithms that oper-ate on amorphous concepts. Inevitably the types of precise measures needed for such
algorithms include distortions that often reﬂect structural inequalities and related
factors. These issues may be endemic among many industry algorithms across manyindustries.