90 10 Autonomous V ehicles
10.6.5 Appropriate Design of Human-Machine Interface
The interface between a human driver and the A V is very important, since in a trafﬁc
situation, time is highly critical (Carsten and Martens 2018 ). It must be clear at all
times who is in control, the handover procedure must be clearly deﬁned, and the
logging of behaviour and car control must be programmed in an appropriate way.
10.6.6 Machine Learning
A V software will certainly use machine learning in an ofﬂine manner. The systemswill learn from trafﬁc scenarios they encounter, from accidents or from the data
generated by other vehicles. V ehicles, however, are not dynamically learning whoand what to avoid while they are driving. Moreover, learning typically occurs on
the level of an entire ﬂeet of cars. And even here, learning must be robust to an
extent where small mistakes (or external manipulations) cannot cause large-scalenegative effects. V ehicles that learn on their own, might become quite erratic and
unpredictable.
10.6.7 Manually Overruling the System?
Finally, one unresolved problem is whether a level 4 or 5 A V should be programmedin such a way as to allow the driver to overrule the autonomous system at any
point. Engineers regularly reject this possibility stating that this feature would makea system much more vulnerable than it could be. Waymo even argued that its car
would have avoided a collision in 2018 with a motorcyclist if the driver had not taken
back control (Laris 2018 ).
Others argue that to deny overruling would jeopardise acceptance of A Vs. At least
in the current situation where people are not yet familiar with the technology, it might
be better to allow for overruling, making a driver feel more comfortable. But thismay be reviewed at some point in the future.
10.6.8 Possible Ethical Questions in Future Scenarios
While the ethical questions mentioned above are relevant today, there are some ethicalaspects of A Vs which are frequently discussed in public, even though they may be
only relevant in the distant future. One of these is whether the introduction of A Vs on
a massive scale might lead to a critical centralisation of power in the control centresof this technology, which in turn might lead to a total surveillance of citizens and/or a
deliberate or accidental misuse. Certainly, there are some scenarios here that should
be kept in mind, even if a Big Brother scenario is unrealistic since it neglects thecompetition among different companies.