42 5 Responsibility and Liability in the Case of AI Systems
system was accurate. Blame might be shifted to the intelligence ofﬁcers who failed
to ﬁnd and load images of Jennifer into the system, or perhaps to the vendors of the
facial recognition system. On these facts it is hard to see the pilots being found guiltyof a war crime. Their intention was clearly to kill an enemy general. This would be
a legal act in the context of war.
It has been said that law ﬂoats on sea of ethics. It is easy to imagine that General
Jones would be furious to learn of the death of her sister. In the human case, she would
naturally hold the pilots who ﬁred the missile responsible. Perhaps she would hold
the ofﬁcer who ordered the mission responsible. Perhaps she would hold the politicalleadership of the Red State responsible. Regardless of who General Jones thinks is
responsible, to assign legal responsibility, evidence would need to be presented in a
court or legal proceeding. By bringing such proceedings, those who commit wrongscan be held accountable and those who do wrong can then be punished.
This is ﬁne for humans but in the case of an AWS what does it mean to “punish” a
system that cannot feel or suffer? If the AWS only does what it is programmed to door acts on the basis of the data humans input into it, how can it be “responsible” for
killing the wrong person? A pragmatic remedy is simply to assign responsibility for
the actions of an AWS to a human or the state that operates it. There is an established
legal concept called “strict liability” (described in the following section) which can
be used in this regard.
5.3 Strict Liability
Product liability is the legal responsibility to compensate others for damage or injuriesthat a certain product has caused. Product liability is a concept that companies around
the globe are familiar with and have to take into account. Clearly, when a company or
one of its employees causes harm to others by neglecting their duties, the companywill be held liable.
In some cases, there may not even have been a concrete wrongdoing. In the case of
“strict liability,” a company or a person can also be held liable even if they did not doanything wrong in the strict sense. For example, if someone owns a cat, and this cat
causes damage to someone else’s property, the owner is held liable in this sense. Or, a
technique that has many beneﬁcial consequences might also have some negative ones.For example, while vaccination is in general beneﬁcial for the members of a society,
there might be some cases where children suffer bad consequences from vaccines.
These must be compensated for within the framework of strict liability. In the US
the National V accine Injury Compensation Program provides this compensation.
A similar situation might arise in the context of autonomous vehicles or AI tech-
nologies in general, since a concrete (or even an abstract) harm may have been neither
intended nor planned (otherwise it would have been a case of deliberate injury or
fraud). Still, strict liability would be the framework within which to deal with theseissues. Moreover, in many cases of AI technologies, harm might not have been fore-
seeable. This might even be a signature characteristic of these technologies, since