72 9 Application Areas of AI
result in ethical dilemmas. Non-invasive mechanical and electrical devices, such as
exo-skeletons, are also being developed to make people stronger, faster, or more
capable in some ways. These systems may potentially be purchased by people forthe sake of enhancement.
9.1.2 Enhancement for the Purpose of Competition
Ethical issues arise when we consider the use of enhancements for the purpose of
job-related competition. Athletics offers an illustrative example. Athletes are often
looking for competitive advantage over their rivals, and invasive or non-invasiveaugmentations may soon generate considerable advantage for those with the money
to invest. Moreover, prosthetics are quickly becoming so capable that they offer
a competitive advantage to some athletes. An ethical dilemma arises when thesedevices prevent fair competition or when they endanger the health of the athletes.
Note that the Superhuman Sports Society
1promotes sports that explicitly invite the
use of enhancements, but at least these enhancements are open and transparent. They
even form an essential part of their games. Players without speciﬁc enhancements
would not be able to play those games or would perform at a very low level. But wemay ask how far will athletes go to be the best? In the 1990s, Goldman and Katz
posed the following question to elite athletes: “Would you take a drug that would
guarantee overwhelming success in your sport, but also cause you to die after ﬁveyears?” The authors report that ﬁfty percent stated yes (though other authors have
since then disputed the results) (Goldman et al. 1987 ).
We can also consider cognitive versus physical enhancement. Amphetamine
(methamphetamine in WWII) has been used to increase the wakefulness and energy
of pilots and soldiers in combat. These enhancers were used by the United States Air
Force until 2012. The United States Air Force still uses Modaﬁnil as stimulant forcombat pilots. Other militaries are suspected of using similar drugs.
Similarly, the number of college students using unprescribed Ritalin or Adderall
on college campuses has tripled since 2008 (Desmon-Jhu 2016 ). Experts estimate
that the total number of users may be more than 50% (Wilens et al. 2008 ). But is it
ethical to use these so-called “Smart Drugs” to gain an academic advantage? Is this
equivalent to doping in Olympic Sports?
More mechanical versions of cognitive enhancement are also becoming available.
For example, transcranial magnetic stimulation of deep brain regions has been shown
to improve cognitive performance. It may also soon be possible to make point-wise
gene changes to improve biological, cognitive, or physical enhancements.
Although these technologies clearly have major beneﬁts to society we must also
be cautious to understand the potentially negative consequences. For the technologies
described above, in particular, it is worth discussing and debating when an enhance-
ment becomes a shortcut to excellence. Moreover, we must question whether or not
1http://superhuman-sports.org/ .