2.3 What Is a Robot? 13
Finally, the robot acts in the world. The robot must use knowledge about its own
embodiment and body schema to determine how to move joints and actuators in a
manner dictated by the plan. Moreover, once the robot has acted it may need to thenprovide information to the sensing process in order to guide what the robot should
look for next.
It should be understood that AI agents and robots have no innate knowledge
about the world. Coming off the factory production line a robot or AI is a genuine
“blank slate” or to be more exact an unformatted drive. Babies, on the other hand,
enter the world “pre-programmed” so to speak with a variety of innate abilitiesand knowledge. For example, at birth babies can recognise their mother’s voice. In
contrast, AI agents know nothing about the world that they have not been explicitly
programmed to know. Also in contrast to humans, machines have limited ability togenerate knowledge from perception. The process of generating knowledge from
information requires that the AI system creates meaningful representations of the
knowledge. As mentioned above, a representation is a way of structuring informationin order to make it meaningful. A great deal of research and debate has focused
on the value of different types of representations. Early in the development of AI,
symbolic representations predominated. A symbolic representation uses symbols,
typically words, as the underlying representation for an object in the world. For
example, the representation of the object apple would be little more than “Apple.”Symbolic representations have the value of being understandable to humans but are
otherwise very limiting because they have no precise connection to the robot’s or
the agent’s sensors. Non-symbolic representations, on the other hand, tend not to beeasily understood, but tend to relate better to a machine’s sensors.
2.3.2 System Integration. Necessary but Difﬁcult
In reality, to develop a working system capable of achieving real goals in the real
world, a vast array of different systems, programmes and processes must be integrated
to work together. System integration is often one of the hardest parts of building aworking robotic system. System integrators must deal with the fact that different
information is being generated by different sensors at different times. The different
sensors each have unique limitations, uncertainties, and failure modes, and the actu-ators may fail to work in the real world. For all of these reasons, creating artiﬁcially
intelligent agents and robots is extremely challenging and fraught with difﬁculties.
2.4 What Is Hard for AI
The sections above have hinted at why AI is hard. It should also be mentioned that
not all software is AI. For example, simple sorting and search algorithms are notconsidered intelligent. Moreover, a lot of non-AI is smart. For example, control