50 6 Risks in the Business of AI
DuckDuckGo, a search engine competing with Google, heavily advertises the
fact that is does not collect data from people. As the saying goes in AI, “if you
are not paying, you’re the product.” Personal data has considerable value to thoseseeking to target their marketing. DuckDuckGo is seeking to differentiate themselves
from Google in the search engine market by not collecting user data. Whether it
can displace Google from its dominant position in search and targeted advertisingmarketing by doing this remains to be seen. The value placed on personal data for
the purposes of AI has been discussed in Sect. 8.2.
6.4 Business Ethics for AI Companies
Business ethics in a global environment has, to a signiﬁcant part, become an instance
of risk management for AI companies. Mechanisms like reputation, stock prices andlegal ﬁnes exhibit a business case for ethics and may help to convince companies to
be active in this area.
Let’s consider another example: The Malampaya project was a pipeline project
by the Shell corporation in the Philippines in 1998 (Pies 2010 ). There were three
possible ways to build this pipeline. First, it could have been built primarily onland, which would have been the cheapest way, but one which would have put the
biodiversity of the region at great risk.
The second option would have been to build the pipeline in a direct, more expen-
sive underwater route, but that route would have gone through a territory that was
considered holy by indigenous people (who, however, had no legal claim to it).
Still, Shell eventually decided to go for a third, and much more costly option: to
build the pipeline underwater, but on a different and much longer route around an
island, which led it far away from the holy territory. There was no legal obligation for
Shell to do so, and the additional cost was around 30 million US dollars. Although,this amount is not a signiﬁcant cost for a company like Shell, it still represents a cost
that would have been avoided if possible.
The deciding factor at the time probably was the aftermath of the 1995 Brent Spar
Case: Shell tried to sink an unused oil platform in the North Sea, resulting in protests
from Greenpeace and others and even in an initial boycott by consumers. Eventually,
Shell abandoned their plan (though Greenpeace was later forced to admit that therewas much less residual oil in the platform than it had alleged). Shell may have been
trying to avoid a similar scandal.
What is interesting, however, is that in 2007 independent calculations by the
World Resources Institute came to the conclusion that what seemed at ﬁrst to be the
most expensive option actually turned out to have been the more economical one,when taking into account other costs such as the costs of delayed completion. The
indigenous people in question, while not having been able to stop the project entirely,
still could have signiﬁcantly delayed it by going to court. The delays would haveresulted in penalties and other costs. Therefore, the overall calculation of all these
resulted in the chosen option actually being proven to have made economic sense.