62 8 Privacy Issues of AI
valid, but even in many public situations, most expectations of privacy need to be
curtailed.
Governmental control over privacy has often been asserted to be a crime prevention
method, but it can also serve the purpose of a general method of control. Limiting
privacy provides governments with information about which individuals within a
society need to be most controlled.
In the United States, questions about the right to privacy are ﬂuid and subject to
constant change as court decisions have, at times, awarded individuals more or less
privacy. The United States Supreme Court has often considered privacy as a functionof context, where a person’s physical environment determines what privacy they
should expect. But other considerations, such as the person’s age or mental capacity
may also be applied.
Companies and businesses are a third group that has traditionally been neutral in
this debate. Companies try to perform a balancing act by weighing the needs and
demands of customers against the needs and demands of government. Businessesoften attempt to protect their own privacy and the privacy of their customers. Apple,
for example, continues to deny government agencies systematic access to iPhones
that have been locked, even if the data in the phone might help in the prevention or
prosecution of crime (Holpuch 2016 ).
Companies may believe that if customers do not feel that their transactions with
a company are private then they will no longer be customers. But companies must
also rely on governments for a variety of policy, legal, and contractual obligations.
Governments may use these powers as a method of persuasion to inﬂuence companiesto hand over private data.
For centuries, this dynamic has existed, with groups not gaining much lever-
age over the other. Historically even the most authoritarian regimes had insufﬁcienttechnological prowess to actually capture and keep track of private actions of their
citizens. In the past 50 years this has changed. The development of computers and
methods of mass data storage has allowed governments and business to collect, store,and process voluminous amounts of data, not only about its citizens but about all
global citizens. Even more recently, the development of sensors capable of capturing
data has broadened the horizon of where, when, how, and what data can be collected.
Finally, AI companies, long neutral in the debate over privacy, have begun to ﬁnd
value in the data that they have. They can now use AI methods to locate, model, and
test potential products on populations of people. Using the psychological techniquesdiscussed in Chap. 7, they can use powerful methods that exploit human tendencies
for the purposes of improved advertising, marketing, and sales. The result is that the
right to privacy is eroding. So is there any need for these data? Or is data collection
simply done for its own sake?
8.2 Why AI Needs Data
Current robots and AI systems collect enormous quantities of data about their users.
These data collections require considerable effort, and it might not be obvious at ﬁrstsight what the beneﬁt of this collection epidemic is.