58 7 Psychological Aspects of AI
credit standing to convince a person to do something they would not normally do.
The result might be that the person’s autonomy is diminished or compromised when
interacting with the robot. Imagine, for example, encountering the ultimate roboticcar sales person who knows everything about you, can use virtually imperceptible
micro expression to game you into making the purchase it prefers. The use of these
“superpowers” for persuasion can limit a person’s autonomy and could be ethicallyquestionable.
Persuasion works best with friends. Friends inﬂuence us because they have inti-
mate knowledge of our motivations, goals, and personality quirks. Moreover, psy-chologists have long known that when two people interact over a period of time
they begin to exchange and take on each other subtle mannerisms and uses of lan-
guage (Brandstetter et al. 2017 ). This is known as the Michelangelo phenomenon.
Research has also shown that as relationships grow, each person’s uncertainty about
the other person reduces fostering trust. This trust is the key to a successful persua-
sion. Brandstetter and Bartneck ( 2017 ) showed that it only takes 10% of the members
of a community to own a robot at which changes in the use of language in the whole
community can take place.
More importantly, people might be unaware of the persuasive power of AI systems
similar to how people were unaware of subliminal advertising in the 1950s. It is
unclear who will be in control of this persuasive power. Will it be auctioned off foradvertisers? Will the users be able to set their own goals, such as trying to break
a bad habit? Unsophisticated people might be exploited and manipulated by large
corporations with access to their psychological data. Public scrutiny and review ofthe operations of businesses with access to such data is essential.
7.3 Unidirectional Emotional Bonding with AI
The emotional connection between the robot or AI system and its user might be unidi-
rectional. While humans might develop feelings of friendship and affection towards
their silicon friends and these might even be able to display emotional expressions andemit signals of friendship, the agent might still be unable to experience any “authen-
tic” phenomenological friendship or affection. The relationship is thereby unidirec-
tional which may lead to even more loneliness (Scheutz 2014 ). Moreover, tireless and
endlessly patient systems may accustom people to unrealistic human behaviour. In
comparison, interacting with a real human being might become increasingly difﬁcult
or plain boring.
For example, already in the late 1990s, phone companies operated ﬂirt lines. Men
and women would be randomly matched on the phone and had the chance to ﬂirtwith each other. Unfortunately, more men called in than women and thus not all of
the men could be matched with women. The phone companies thus hired women
to ﬁll the gap and they got paid by how long they could keep the men on the line.These professional talkers became highly trained in talking to men. Sadly, when a
real woman called in, men would often not be interested in her because she lacked