40 5 Responsibility and Liability in the Case of AI Systems
fully autonomous vehicles which do not require a driver at all (see Sect. 10.1 ). The
crucial leap happens from level 2 to level 3. On level 3 a driver is not required to
monitor the functions of their car at any time. This implies that a car has to be able todeal with a broad range of cases, including critical situations, on its own. The vehicle
needs to do this at least for a certain amount of time. Car manufacturers often set this
time frame to 10 s before requiring the driver to take control again.
So if an accident happens during the time that the car was in control, who would
be held responsible or liable? The driver was not in control, not even required to do
so. The technology did just as it was programmed to do. The company maybe? Butwhat if they did everything possible to prevent an accident—and still it happened?
5.2 Example 2: Mistargeting by an Autonomous Weapon
In Chap. 11we talk about the military use of artiﬁcial intelligence in more detail.
Here, we will focus our attention on only the liability aspects of autonomous weapons.
In the military context the system in question is typically an autonomous weapon.
International Humanitarian Law (IHL) permits combatants to kill, wound and capture
enemy combatants. They are also allowed to destroy enemy war materiel, facilitiesand installations that support the enemy war effort. However, combatants are not
allowed to kill non-combatants unless they are actively engaged in the enemy war
effort. Thus it is lawful to bomb an enemy factory, phone exchange or power station.Indeed, it is lawful to kill civilians assisting the enemy war effort if they are working
in factories making military equipment that contributes to the war effort. However
there are many objects that are speciﬁcally protected. One cannot bomb a hospital orschool or attack an ambulance. In this example, we discuss the questions of blame,
responsibility and liability with respect to an autonomous weapon killing a person it
is not permitted to kill under IHL.
Let us suppose there is a war between a Red state and a Blue state. The commander
of the Red Air Force is Samantha Jones. It so happens, she has an identical twin
sister, Jennifer Jones, who is a hairdresser. She makes no direct contribution to thewar effort. She does not work in an arms factory. She does not bear arms. One day
during the war, Jennifer takes her child to a kindergarten as she does every day.
Blue has facial data of Samantha but knows nothing about her twin sister, Jennifer.An “autonomous” drone using facial recognition software spots Jennifer taking her
daughter to kindergarten. It misidentiﬁes Jennifer as a “high value target” namely
her sister, Samantha. Just after she drops her child off at the school, the drone ﬁres
a missile at her car, killing her instantly.
In this situation, who or what is to blame for the wrongful killing of Jennifer?
Who or what should be held responsible for this wrong. Who or what is liable to be
prosecuted for a war crime for this killing? Who or what would be punished?
First let’s clarify what would happen if the drone was remotely piloted by human
pilots. In the human scenario, the pilots also use facial recognition software. They
manoeuvred the drone into good position to get clear images. They ran several images