22 3 What Is Ethics?
3.5 Relationship Between Ethics and Law
Often, ethics and law are seen as being clearly distinct from each other, sometimes
even as opposites, in the sense, for example, that ethics starts where the law ends.Persons or companies would then have legal duties and ethical duties, which have
little relationship with each other. However, such a view can be challenged, in several
ways. First, legal rules often have an ethical side, too. For example, legal norms thatmake environmental pollution illegal still remain ethical norms, too. Much of the
legal framework of a society (like anti-trust laws) has a great ethical importance for a
society. Second, ethics can (and has) to some extent become a kind of “soft law”, inthe sense that companies need to follow certain ethical standards even if the law in a
particular country does not strictly require it. For fear of damaging their reputation,
or decreasing the value of their stock, for example, companies are, in many cases,
adhering to ethical rules which for them have nearly the same consequences and
impact as legal rules (“hard law”). At times the speciﬁc ethical process of a businessis even used as a unique sales argument, such as companies selling “fair trade” coffee
instead or just plain legal coffee.
3.6 Machine Ethics
Machine ethics attempts to answer the question: what would it take to build an
ethical AI that could make moral decisions? The main difference between humansmaking moral decisions and machines making moral decisions is that machines do
not have “phenomenology” or “feelings” in the same way as humans do (Moor
2006 ). They do not have “moral intuition” or “acculturation” either. Machines can
process data that represents feelings (Sloman and Croucher 1981 ), however, no one,
as yet, supposes that computers can actually feel and be conscious like people. Life-
like robots have been developed (e.g. Hanson Robotics Sophia—see Fig. 3.3)b u t
these robots do not possess phenomenal consciousness or actual feelings of pleasure
or pain. In fact, many argue that the robot Sophia represents more of a corporatepublicity stunt than a technological achievement and, as such, represents how the
mystique around robots and artiﬁcial intelligence can be harnessed for attention.
In this section we discuss how to design an AI that is capable of making moraldecisions. Technical and philosophical elements are presented. Yet we should note
that the goal of creating machines that make moral decisions is not without detractors
(van Wynsberghe and Robbins 2019 ). Van Wynsberghe and Robbins note that outside
of intellectual curiosity, roboticists have generally failed to present strong reasons
for developing moral robots.
The philosophical element is a detailed moral theory. It will provide us with
an account of what features of the world have moral signiﬁcance and a decision
procedure that enables us to decide what acts are right and wrong in a given situation.