20 3 What Is Ethics?
Kant is responsible for developing one of the most frequently cited deontological
ethics. He argues that an action is only obligatory if it satisﬁes the “categorical
imperative”. There are many different wordings of the categorical imperative, whichis best understood as a way of determining ethically permissible types of behaviour.
The most frequently cited version states, “Act only according to that maxim you can
at the same time will as a universal law without contradiction.” (see Sect. 4.3.3 ).
3.2.2 Consequentialist Ethics
Consequentialism is another important ethical theory. Consequentialist theories
determine the ethical correctness of an action or a norm solely on the basis of their
(foreseeable) consequences. The difference between consequentialism and deonto-
logical ethics can be seen in the previously used example. From the perspective ofconsequentialism, the motives of a company to invest in CSR play no role. For this
ethical evaluation of a company’s CSR programme, the only decisive considerations
relate to the impact on society, wildlife, nature or maybe social harmony. As long as
a CSR programme promotes certain values or, more generally, helps to solve certain
social problems, the program can be considered ethical. This also applies if a partic-ular CSR programme was merely motivated by the desire to improve the image of a
company or increase sales.
3.2.3 Virtue Ethics
The concept of virtue ethics mainly goes back to the Greek philosophers Plato (see
Fig.3.2), who developed the concept of the cardinal virtues (wisdom, justice, forti-
tude, and temperance), and Aristotle, who expanded the catalogue into eleven moral
virtues and even added intellectual virtues (like Sophia =theoretical wisdom). The
classical view on virtues held that acting on their basis was equally good for theperson acting and for the persons affected by their actions. Whether this is still the
case in modern differentiated societies is controversial.
3.3 Meta-ethics
If ethics can be regarded as the theory of morality, meta-ethics is the theory of
(normative) ethics. Meta-ethics is concerned, in particular, with matters of existence
(ontology), meaning (semantics) and knowledge (epistemology). Moral ontology is
an account of what features of the world have moral signiﬁcance or worth. Moral