Chapter 12
Ethics in AI and Robotics: A Strategic
Challenge
The recent success of AI and robotics has massively increased the international
awareness of and the interest in these topics as a factor of economic competitive-
ness. This concerns not only businesses, but also regional and national governments.There are many claims about the potential for AI to create new service and product
innovation. Such claims include the beneﬁts of AI for healthcare such as improved
diagnosis or therapy; for transport due to improved efﬁciency; for energy based onmore accurate predictions of energy consumption; or ease of computer use with more
natural user interfaces as, for example, in the case of speech understanding, gesture
and face recognition and automatic translation.
In general, many smart or intelligent technologies have been considered a major
driver of innovation (Lee and Trimi 2018 ; Makridakis 2017 ), and also an impor-
tant source of knowledge for innovation (Fischer and Fröhlich 2013 ). As a result of
these promises, there is today a plethora of regional, national, and even supranational
strategies and policy papers that aim at maximising the beneﬁts of AI for their citi-
zens. Examples of national strategies range from Canada to Mexico, Japan or India.
Regional strategies have been developed in Bavaria and in the Northern Baltic coun-
tries. Supranational AI strategies, or at least joint studies and papers are the subject ofwork in the OECD and the United Nations International Telecommunication Union
(ITU).
In early 2019, a broad range of policy papers (Agrawal et al. 2019 ) and marketing
studies from consulting companies have been published. Many of these make the
case for the innovation potential and economic beneﬁts of AI (Li et al. 2017 ; Seifert
et al. 2018 ). Governments around the world have responded to the massive increase
in AI applications, but also to an even greater number of predictions of future AI
applications and their societal beneﬁts. As early as 2017, the Canadian government
published a pan-Canadian AI strategy. It was followed by developed countries tradi-tionally interested in the creating information technology such as Japan, Singapore,
© The Author(s) 2021
C. Bartneck et al., An Introduction to Ethics in Robotics and AI ,
SpringerBriefs in Ethics, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-51110-4_12101