2.5 Science and Fiction of AI 15
robotic boy (Aldiss 2001 ). In the movie “I, Robot” (2004), based on motives from
a book by Isaac Asimov, intelligent robots originally meant to protect humans are
turning into a menace. A more recent example is the TV show “Westworld” (since2016) in which androids entertain human guests in a Western theme park. The guests
are encouraged to live out their deepest fantasies and desires.
For most people, the information provided through these shows is their ﬁrst expo-
sure to robots. While these works of ﬁction draw a lot of attention to the ﬁeld and
inspire our imagination, they also set a framework of expectations that can inhibit
the progress of the ﬁeld. One common problem is that the computer systems orrobots shown often exhibit levels of intelligence that are equivalent or even supe-
rior to that of humans or current systems. The media thereby contributes to setting
very high expectations in the audience towards AI systems. When confronted withactual robots or AI systems, people are often disappointed and have to revise their
expectations. Another issue is the frequent repetition of the “Frankenstein Complex”
as deﬁned by Isaac Asimov. In this trope, bands of robots or an AI system achieveconsciousness and enslave or kill (all) humans. While history is full of examples of
colonial powers exploiting indigenous populations, it does not logically follow that
an AI system will repeat these steps. A truly intelligent system will (hopefully) have
learned from humanity’s mistakes. Another common and rather paradoxical trope is
the assumption that highly intelligent AI systems desire to become human. Often thescript writers use the agent’s lack of emotions as a the missing piece of the puzzle
that would make them truly human.
It is important to distinguish between science and ﬁction. The 2017 recommen-
dation to the European Parliament to consider the establishment of electronic per-
sonalities (Delvaux 2017 ) has been criticised by many as a premature reﬂex to the
depiction of robots in the media.
1For example, granting the robot “Sophia” Saudi
Arabian citizenship in October 2017 can in this respect be considered more as a
successful public relations stunt (Reynolds 2018 ) than as a contribution to the ﬁeld
of AI or its ethical implications. Sophia’s dialogues are based on scripts and can-not therefore be considered intelligent. It does not learn nor is it able to adapt to
unforeseen circumstances. Sophia’s presentation at the United Nation is an uncon-
vincing demonstration of artiﬁcial intelligence. People do anthropomorphise robotsand autonomous systems, but this does not automatically justify the granting of per-
sonhood or other forms of legal status. In the context of autonomous vehicles, it may
become practical to consider such a car a legal entity, similar to how we consider anabstract company to be a legal person. But this choice would probably be motivated
more out of legal practicality than out of existential necessity.
1http://www.robotics-openletter.eu/ .