76 9 Application Areas of AI
9.3.4 Exoskeletons
Looking at one ﬁnal technology, exoskeletons have been developed to assist individ-
uals with lower-limb disabilities. These systems are most often used for rehabilitationand training. Recently they have allowed paraplegic patients to stand and take small
steps. Ethical issues arise when these systems are incorrectly viewed as a cure for
disease rather than a tool.
9.3.5 Quality of Care
Overall, robotics and AI have the potential to revolutionise healthcare. These tech-
nologies may well provide lasting beneﬁts in many facets of care ranging from
surgery to diagnose disease. Certainly, a society must carefully analyse the beneﬁtsand costs of these systems. For instance, computer aided detection of cancer affects
decisions in complex ways. Povyakalo et al. ( 2013 ) examined the quality of decisions
that result when healthcare providers use computer-aids to detect cancer in mam-mograms. They found that the technology helped more novice mammogram readers
but hindered more experienced readers. They note that this differential effect, even
if subtle, may be clinically signiﬁcant. The authors suggest that detection algorithmsand protocols be developed that include the experience of the user in the type of deci-
sion support it provides. In 2019, a study on more than 9,400 women published by
the Journal of the National Cancer Institute found that AI is overwhelmingly betterin detecting pre-cancerous cells than human doctors (Hu et al. 2019 ).
9.4 Education
In education, AI systems and social robots have been used in a variety of contexts.
Online courses are widely used. For example, the University of Phoenix is now(technically) one of the largest universities in the world—since hundreds of thousands
of students are enrolled in their online courses. In such a highly digital learning
environment, it is much easier to integrate AI that helps students not only with theiradministrative tasks, but also with their actual learning experiences.
9.4.1 AI in Educational Administrative Support
AI systems, such as Amelia from IPSoft, may one day advise students on their course
selecting and provide general administrative support. This is not fundamentally dif-
ferent from other chatbot platforms such as Amazon’s Lex, Microsoft’s Conversation