5.3 Strict Liability 43
they often operate in ways which are, in a sense, opaque to observers. Even to the
programmers themselves it is often not clear how exactly the system arrived at this
or that conclusion or result.
In the case of autonomous vehicles a several shifts have been made to move the
liability from the driver or car owner to the car manufacturer or, if applicable, the
company operating or developing the software. This shift was made possible throughthe adaptation of the Vienna Convention on Road Trafﬁc. More speciﬁcally through
its update from the 1968 version to the 2014 that took effect inf 2016 (United Nations
1968 ).
In the German Ethics Code for Automated and Connected Driving (Luetge 2017 ),
this step is explicitly being taken, for those cases where the car’s system was in
control. This implies, among others, that monitoring (black box) devices will haveto be installed in those cars which clearly record who was in control at each moment
the driver or the car.
5.4 Complex Liability: The Problem of Many Hands
In the AWS case we can see that “many hands” may be involved in a wrongful death.
General Blue ordered the mission which went wrong. The pilots conﬁrmed the target
based on faulty intelligence and pressed the button that launched the missile. The
facial recognition system made a decision based on incomplete data. Those whodesigned the system will say the fault lies with those who input the data. How will
a judge determine who is responsible?
In a complex liability matter it is often the case that no one is found to be at fault.
Intuitively, people want to blame someone but in complex events, often there is no
single person who can be blamed. In such cases, the normal legal solution is to assign
blame to a collective entity. In this case, blame would be assigned to the Blue Statenot any particular individual. Strict liability can be assigned to States operating an
AWS. Even if no person deserves blame, the collective entity is held responsible and
sanctioned accordingly.
5.5 Consequences of Liability: Sanctions
What sanctions would eventually be imposed must be left open at this point. In many
cases, there might be a focus on sanctions against a company rather than against
individuals, since programmers will have to work with a certain company strategy orpolicy. Corporate liability will be a key solution here, as in the case of ﬁnes against
V olkswagen (around EUR 25 billion in 2016) or Bank of America (around USD 16
billion in 2014). This shows that the sanctions can actually be very substantial.