Chapter 4
Trust and Fairness in AI Systems
This chapter discusses the role that trust and fairness play in the acceptance of
AI systems. We then relate trust and fairness in AI systems to ﬁve principles:Non-maleﬁcence, Beneﬁcence, Autonomy, Justice and Explicability.
There are many contexts in which one can use the word trust. For example, one
might ask a person if they trust their spouse, if they trust a company such as Facebook
or Google with their data, if they trust the government with their health data, or if
they trust their housekeeper or their babysitter.
In human contexts, these questions all involve some kind of vulnerability to harm.
Facebook and Google might sell data to some disreputable ﬁrm seeking to use it for
manipulative purposes. People might believe that the government will hand over theirhealth data to insurers which might raise their premiums. A housekeeper might steal.
A babysitter might neglect the children in his or her care. In all of these cases, the
person trusting has a vulnerability to some kind of harm or damage. If we do not trust
people, we will be on our guard. We will not entrust them with anything important.
We might even seek to avoid them completely if we can. Furthermore, uncertainty isa prerequisite for trust because vulnerability is diminished if one knows the outcome
upfront.
Lee and See ( 2004 ) deﬁned trust as “the attitude that an agent will help achieve
an individual’s goals in a situation by uncertainty and vulnerability.” In the context
of robots and AI systems, the question of trust is similar but differs in some respects.
When a human trusts another human, the trustor knows that they are making them-selves vulnerable to the actions of the other person. When a person trusts an AI agent,
it is unclear if the machine is making it’s own decision or following some prede-
ﬁned scripted behaviour. Furthermore, people have experiences with other peopleand have certain expectations about the behaviours, norms and values. We may trust
a pilot to safely land an aircraft. When a user is interacting with a robot or an AI
system, these experiences may become useless or even misleading. We cannot be
© The Author(s) 2021
C. Bartneck et al., An Introduction to Ethics in Robotics and AI ,
SpringerBriefs in Ethics, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-51110-4_427