11.1 Deﬁnitions 95
target without a human operator. Given the speeds involved, human control of a
Patriot missile is not be possible.
Non-Lethal Autonomy An AWS may have “autonomy” in many other functions.
It might be able to take-off and land autonomously and it might be able to navigate
autonomously. However, this non-lethal “autonomy” is generally not regarded as
morally controversial.
Killer robots Autonomous weapons are often called “killer robots” in mass media
reports. Some object to the use of the term. Lokhorst and van den Hoven describe
the phrase as an “insidious rhetorical trick” (Lokhorst and V an Den Hoven 2012 ).
However, this is favoured by the “Campaign to Stop Killer Robots”.1This is
umbrella group of human rights organisations seeking an international ban on
lethal autonomous weapons systems.
11.2 The Use of Autonomous Weapons Systems
Arguments can and are made against the use of an autonomous weapons system.
Generally these arguments focus on the following issues.
11.2.1 Discrimination
Proponents typically concede that machines cannot, in general, discriminate as well
as humans. However in some particular cases they can discriminate better thanhumans. For example, Identiﬁcation Friend or Foe (IFF) technology sends a chal-
lenge message to an unindentiﬁed object in the sky which the object must answer or
risk being shot down. Typically in air war, contested airspace is known to civilianair trafﬁc control and neutral aircraft will not enter it. However, in 2014, a civilian
airliner, Malaysia Airlines ﬂight MH 17 en route from Amsterdam to Kuala Lumpur
was shot down by a Russian Surface to Air Missile (SAM) operated by Russiansecessionists in the Eastern Ukraine. This SAM system was human-operated and not
equipped with IFF. Some have observed that a more advanced system would have
known the target was a civilian airliner.
Proponents also note that vision systems are continuously improving. Advancing
technology has dramatically improved the ability of vision, auditory, LIDAR and
infra-red systems which are quickly reaching parity with humans in terms of object
discrimination. A possible ethical dilemma may be approaching if an autonomous
system demonstrates clear superiority to humans in terms of targeting. We may beethically obligated to consider their use. Even so, it remains difﬁcult for machines to
distinguish between different types of behavior such as acting peaceful or ﬁghting
in a conﬂict.
1http://stopkillerrobots.org .