8.3 Private Data Collection and Its Dangers 67
seem to be willing to accept this. The use of unmanned aerial vehicles (UA Vs) for
the purpose of surveillance can also raise privacy issues. These systems have been
used by individuals to spy on their neighbours. Regulations related to drone use varyfrom none at all to a complete prohibition on drone imports and use. The European
Union, for example, has strong privacy protections in place which extend to data
collected using a drone.
8.3.2 Usage of Private Data for Non-intended Purposes
While the availability of users’ private data enables AI systems to perform better,there are also considerable risks associated with this data collection. One of the main
issues is the usage of data for non-intended purposes. Users are often unaware how
their data will be processed, used and even sold.
The success of programmatic advertisement demonstrates how personal data can
be used to make people buy products. This speciﬁc form of marketing has in general
been accepted by society, and people have developed protection mechanisms. We
know that advertisements can only be trusted to some degree. But we have not yet
developed such a critical awareness towards AI. We might not even be aware ofmanipulation taking place.
But there are serious forms of manipulation that use the exact same mechanisms
that marketing experts applied so successfully: AI systems and social robots can beused to manipulate opinions on anything, including political views. Chapter 7talks
in more detail about the inﬂuence of AI on the public discourse. The Cambridge
Analytica scandal in 2018 demonstrated how private data gathered through Facebookcan be used in attempts to manipulate elections.
From a privacy perspective, the ability of modern AI to impersonate people has
become a true danger. In 2016, Adobe demonstrated their V oCo system that canimitate the voice of any speaker after listening to approximately 20 min of conver-
sation. But AI did not stop at speech. The manipulation of video, in particular the
exchange of faces, has become a major issue that takes the problems of revenge pornto a new level. Spiteful ex-partners are able to mount the face of their previous love
onto actors in porn movies and share them online. These so called “deep fakes” use
neural networks to manipulate videos (see Fig. 8.3).
Another problem with the large scale collection of private data is that many people
are unaware of the contracts they enter when signing up for various online services.
The Terms and Conditions of social networks, for example, are not an easy read.
The consequences, however, are not to be underestimated. As mentioned above,
Facebook owns all the photos, messages and videos uploaded, and so does Google.And they do not shy away from selling this data to others. The General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) in effect in the European Union since 2018 forced companies
to seek consent from users before sharing their personal data with others. It shouldhowever also be noted that critics of the GDPR say that it leads to counterproductive
results, by making small organisations and individuals shut down their websites for