8.3 Private Data Collection and Its Dangers 69
8.3.3 Auto Insurance Discrimination
Lack of privacy and the amount of data collected may lead to different rules being
applied to different groups. Insurance companies, for example, value data in orderto predict the cost of a policy and to assign premiums. Auto insurance companies
use data to evaluate the driving behaviour of their drivers and to assign them to risk
classes. AI use could lead to bias and discrimination here.
8.3.4 The Chinese Social Credit System
The Chinese government started work on a Social Credit System in 2014 that collects
vast amounts of information about its citizens. While credit rating agencies have been
operating for far longer, the Chinese government intends to extend the reach of itsdata collection far beyond what other organisations typically cover. The Chinese
Social Credit System is already operational to the level of providing a ﬁnancial
credit score. In the future, it is intended to consider more private data, such as webbrowsing behaviour, and calculate how good a citizen is. This would have much
further consequences than the denial of credit. Chinese citizens with a low score
might be banned from ﬂying and excluded from private schools, hotels and evencareers.
Given the centralised authority of the Chinese government, its technical abilities
and its plans for the future the Social Credit system could become the archetype fora tight control of the collection and use of private data. Its potential for use and abuse
are still unclear. The opaque nature of the current system and the lack of a free press
make it vulnerable to systematic bias.
8.4 Future Perspectives
From a technical perspective, it is relatively easy to apply the principles of pro-
grammatic advertisement to other application areas. Autonomous vehicles could, for
example, make real-time bids for the lives of their passengers based on their socialcredit score in the face of an imminent crash. The passengers with the higher score
would less likely to be harmed, while passengers with a lower social credit score
would be exposed to greater risks of harm. The technical problems could be solvedand only our societal discourse could prevent such a dystopian future.
It is also of concern that many have become ambivalent to how their private data
is being shared, used and sold. Not long ago, people would have hesitated sharing aphoto of themselves with the whole world. Today, social inﬂuencers ﬂood the internet
with revealing photos.