10.6 Ethical Questions in A Vs 89
guideline, the exact consequences of which cannot be foreseen, and which reduces
the overall risk for all people affected by it. In this way, the risk could be regarded
as similar to the risk that comes with vaccination.
Finally, parties not involved in the trafﬁc situation with an A V should not be
sacriﬁced. This implies that an algorithm should not unconditionally save the driver
of an A V . However, as the German Ethics Code states, the driver should not comelast either: after all, who would want to buy such a car?
10.6.3 Privacy Issues
The problem of privacy, which has come to the forefront especially with develop-
ments like the European General Data Protection Regulation, effective 2018 (see
Sect. 8), is also relevant for A Vs. These cars collect massive amounts of data every
second they move, which is essential for evaluating their performance and improv-
ing their safety. On the other hand, such data may be very personal, tracking the
passengers’ locations and the behaviour of the driver. Such data might be used for
purposes for which they were not intended. Ultimately, starting the engine of an
A V will probably imply that the driver (and/or the passengers) accept the terms ofconditions of the car manufacturer who will require access to such data.
It should also be noted that this problem is seen from different perspectives in
different regions around the globe, especially considering the US or China, wheredata collection is seen as being less problematic than, for example, in Germany or
other EU countries.
Autonomous vehicles generate data as they move from one location to another.
This data may include observations of the individuals inside the car. Moreover, obser-
vations can be used to evaluate whether or not a person should be allowed to drive the
car. Technology could be used to prevent people with suspended license or drinkingproblems from driving. For an autonomous vehicle, the vehicle itself may determine
if the person’s behaviour indicates intoxication and decide whether or not to allow
the person to drive. Perhaps more of a concern, is when an autonomous vehicle usesdata about the person’s emotional state, mood, or personality to determine if their
driving privileges should be curtailed.
10.6.4 Security
Security of A Vs is an important issue, since hackers might breach the security of cars
or their systems and cause substantial harm. In 2015, for example, hackers were able
to remotely control a Jeep Cherokee while driving (Greenberg 2015 ). Cars might be
reprogrammed to deliberately crash, even on a massive scale. Therefore, state-of-theart security technology will have to be involved in order to make A Vs as secure as
possible.