10 2 What Is AI?
human would have to talk to the machine before making a decision. Still, the Turing
Test marked an important attempt to avoid ill-deﬁned vague terms such as “thinking”
and instead deﬁne AI with respect to a testable task or activity.
2.1.2 Strong and Weak AI
John Searle later divided AI into two distinct camps. Weak AI is limited to a single,narrowly deﬁned task. Most modern AI systems would be classiﬁed in this category.
These systems are developed to handle a single problem, task or issue and are gen-
erally not capable of solving other problems, even related ones. In contrast to weakAI, Searle deﬁnes strong AI in the following way: “The appropriately programmed
computer with the right inputs and outputs would thereby have a mind in exactly the
same sense human beings have minds” (Searle 1980 ). In strong AI, Searle chooses to
connect the achievement of AI with the representation of information in the human
mind. While most AI researchers are not concerned with creating an intelligent agent
that meets Searle’s strong AI conditions, these researchers seek to eventually create
machines for solving multiple problems which are not narrowly deﬁned. Thus one
of the goals of AI is to create autonomous systems that achieve some level of generalintelligence. No AI system has yet achieved general intelligence.
2.1.3 Types of AI Systems
There are many different types of AI systems. We will brieﬂy describe just a few.
Knowledge representation is an important AI problem that tries to deal with how
information should be represented in order for a computer to organise and use thisinformation. In the 1960s, expert systems were introduced as knowledge systems that
can be used to answer questions or solve narrowly deﬁned problems in a particular
domain. They often have embedded rules that capture knowledge of a human expert.Mortgage loan advisor programs, for example, have long been used by lenders to
evaluate the credit worthiness of an applicant. Another general type of AI system
are planning systems. Planning systems attempt to generate and organise a seriesof actions which may be conditioned on the state of the world and unknown uncer-
tainties. The Hubble telescope, for example, utilised an AI planning system called
SPIKE.
Computer vision is a subﬁeld of AI which focuses on the challenge of converting
data from a camera into knowledge representations. Object recognition is a commontask often undertaken by computer vision researchers. Machine learning focuses
on developing algorithms the allow a computer to use experience to improve its
performance on some well-deﬁned task. Machine learning is described in greaterdetail in the sections below.