4.3 Ethical Principles for Trustworthy and Fair AI 35
4.3.4.2 Use in Court
Depending on the country, AI software is being used in courts. One relatively simple
example is the use to determine the order in which cases are brought up to a judge,
making use of information on the severity of cases, prior convictions, and more, in
order to make a court’s work more efﬁcient (Lin et al. 2019 ). A more impactful use
is in supporting judges to determine whether an inmate gets released on probation
or not. A 2016 study by ProPublica found that the COMPAS system exhibited a
systematic bias against African-American defendants in Broward County, Florida interms of assess recidivism risk (Angwin et al. 2016 ).
This case generated considerable controversy. The developers of COMPAS
(Northpointe, now Equivant) in their response to ProPublica’s statistical analysisargued that ProPublica had “focused on classiﬁcation statistics that did not take into
account the different base rates of recidivism for blacks and whites” (Dieterich et al.
2016 ). This is a highly technical argument. Several commentators have observed
there are multiple conceptions of “fairness” in the machine learning literature. With
particular reference to the Broward County recidivism rates it has been demonstrated
mathematically that “an instrument that satisﬁes predictive parity cannot have equal
false positive and negative rates across groups when the recidivism prevalence differs
across those groups” (Chouldechova 2017 ).
In many of these cases, countermeasures are not easily devised. There are multiple
conceptions of fairness which might conﬂict. One might be faced with a possible
trade-off between fairness, on the one hand, and accuracy on the other. In fact, someargue that efforts to ’blind’ algorithms to objectionable categorical information, such
as race, may be harmful and a better approach would be to alter how we use machine
learning and AI (Kleinberg et al. 2018 ). While one certainly wants to avoid systematic
biases in their AI programming, data should also reﬂect the actual situation, i.e.
“what is the case”, otherwise these data will not be very useful for drawing further
conclusions and acting on their basis.
It is critical to appreciate the limits of classiﬁcations based on statistical models.
While much of the Broward County recidivism controversy centred on the difference
between false positives between blacks and whites, one study found the underlyingpredictive accuracy of COMPAS was only around 65%. The authors observed:“these
predictions are not as accurate as we might want, particularly from the point of view
of a defendant whose future lies in the balance” (Dressel and Farid 2018 ).
4.3.5 Explicability
The principle of Explicability states that it shall be possible to explain why an AI
system arrived at a certain conclusion or result.