96 11 Military Uses of AI
Opponents note that it has been frequently claimed that AWS cannot discrimi-
nate between combatants and non-combatants. Noel Sharkey, a leading campaigner
against AWS, has wondered if a robot could discriminate between a child holdingan ice-cream cone and a young adult holding a gun (Sharkey 2010 ).
11.2.2 Proportionality
Proponents, on the other hand, state that “excessive” is a relative concept which
is not well-deﬁned in International Humanitarian Law (IHL). Enemark makes the
point that politicians generally do not advertise their proportionality calculations(Enemark 2013 ). Situations in which intelligence reveals the location of a high value
target demand a decision.
Opponents claim that AWS cannot calculate proportionality (Braun and Brun-
stetter 2013 ). Proportionality is the ability to decide how much collateral damage is
acceptable when attacking a military target. The standard is that “collateral damage”
must not be “excessive” compared to the concrete military advantage gained. Pro-
portionality calculations typically attempt to estimate the number of civilians that
may be killed versus the military necessity of the target. Generating such calcula-tions often involves input from a variety of experts including lawyers. It is difﬁcult
to imagine how an AWS could successfully complete such a calculation.
11.2.3 Responsibility
Opponents of AWS argue that machines cannot be held morally responsible. They
then argue that this is a reason to ban AWS. It is indeed hard to imagine how amachine can be assigned moral responsibility. However those defending the use of
AWS are inclined to assign moral responsibility for the actions of the machine to
those that design, build and conﬁgure it. Thus those humans deploying an AWS canbe held responsible for its actions (Arkin 2008 ). This raises the “problem of many
hands” (Thompson 1980 ) in which the involvement of many agents in a bad outcome
makes it unclear where responsibility lies. Clearly if an incident were to occur aninvestigation would result to determine fault. Legally it is easier to hold the collective
entity responsible. There is a concept of “strict liability” in law that could be used to
assign responsibility to the state that operates the weapon in an AWS regulation. We
discuss liability with the more speciﬁc example of an mistargeting by an autonomous
weapon in Sect. 5.2.
Opponents also argue that, unlike a human, an AWS cannot be held responsible
for its actions or decisions. While machines can be grounded for performance errors
there is no true way to punish these systems in a metaphysical sense. Moreover, itmay not be just to punish the commanders of these systems if they utilize automatic
targeting.