28 4 Trust and Fairness in AI Systems
certain that a system will act in our best interest. The rest of this chapter discusses
trust and fairness in the context of humans trusting machines such as AIs and robots.
4.1 User Acceptance and Trust
Trust is critical to user acceptance. People will avoid using systems they do not
trust. Obviously, businesses that make products that are not trusted will not seetheir products being used—and will thus struggle in the marketplace. For example,
companies in the U.S. are obliged to comply with the Patriot Act that empowers
the government to access data stored on cloud computers. Customers from Europemight feel uncomfortable about granting the U.S. government such a privilege. After
the European Court of Justice overturned the long-standing US-EU Safe Harbor
agreements in 2015, several cloud storage companies opened data centers in Europeto regain the trust of their European customers.
Culture inﬂuences the trust that people place in AI systems and robots. Haring
et al. ( 2014a ) shows that these cultural differences impact how people view robots.
Cross-cultural studies also demonstrate differences in positivity (Haring et al. 2014b )
which in turn impacts trust. Cultural factors may also inﬂuence the extent to whichpeople follow a robot’s recommendations (Wang et al. 2010 ).
In the case of machines, the question of trust can be broken up into “functional”
and “ethical” elements.
4.2 Functional Elements of Trust
According to Lee and See ( 2004 ), users calibrate their trust in a machine based on
a variety of factors including the system’s reliability. Hancock et al. ( 2011 ) looked
at a variety of factors inﬂuencing trust in automation. These included performance-
based factors such as a system’s dependability, false alarm rate, transparency, andtask complexity. This work showed that performance and reliability are the dominant
factors determining if a person trusts a machine.
People will be wary and suspicious of machines that are potentially harmful or
dangerous. The possibility of loss of life or injury tends to cause people to reconsider
whether or not to trust a machine.
4.3 Ethical Principles for Trustworthy and Fair AI
The European ethical principles for AI, presented by the AI4People group in 2018
(Floridi et al. 2018 ), suggest ﬁve principles for ethics of AI, which can be tied to
trust and fairness in the following way.