6.1 General Business Risks 47
6.1.2 Systemic Risk
Systemic risks are risks that affect a whole system. Systemic risk in ﬁnance, for
example, is the risk of the entire ﬁnancial system collapsing. The Global FinancialCrisis of 2007–08 was caused by widespread loan defaults in the US subprime market.
Subprime loans are given to people with weak credit ratings. Defaults stressed the
major US mortgage lenders Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and many home ownersabandoned their houses. This led to a collapse in conﬁdence that exposed inadequate
risk models. One of the causes of the collapse of Lehman Brothers was wholesale
underpricing of the risk of mortgage defaults and lowering real estate prices. Thiswas due to faulty ﬁnancial models. When Lehman Brothers ﬁled for bankruptcy in
2008, banks stopped trusting each other and started to refuse to lend to each other.
The global ﬁnancial system required massive bailouts from governments.
Sophisticated AI systems are widely used in ﬁnance. Indeed automated trading
systems are widely used by investment bankers and ﬁnancial traders. The Flash Crashof 2010 which lasted for 36 min caused the US stock market to lose 9% of its value.
High-frequency traders that used AI systems were involved in this incident. There
are fears that use of such systems might “blow up” the market and cause a recessionor even a depression.
6.1.3 Risk of Fraud
Computer systems have been used to perpetrate fraud. One of the largest was the
Dieselgate scandal. V olkswagen deliberately designed their emissions reduction sys-
tem to only function during laboratory tests. As a result of this criminal deceptiontheir cars passed tests in labs but emitted up to forty times these volumes on the road.
Even so, V olkswagen promoted their fraudulently obtained “green” credentials. The
software used to detect the laboratory test was relatively simple and used parameters,
such as the steering wheel inclination (Contag et al. 2017 ). Still, this is an example
of how a computer system can be used in large scale frauds.
6.1.4 Safety Risk
Robots that control industrial production present physical risks to the people thatwork around them. People may be harmed by force of collisions or harmed by the
objects that a robot carries or moves. The Deepwater Horizon explosion is an example
of a situation where a system failure led to a catastrophe that killed eleven workers.Similarly, autonomous vehicles have, on occasion, caused accidents that have led to
fatalities. Uber and Tesla A Vs have been involved in fatal collisions.