24 3 What Is Ethics?
“Socrates is mortal” can be proved. With the right logical rules, the premises we may
need to deduce action will be based on symbols sensed in the environment by the
robot.
To illustrate, we can assume that our robot is tasked with issuing tickets to speeding
cars. We can also assume also that the minimal input the system needs to issue a ticket
is the symbol representing the vehicle (e.g. the license plate number) and a symbolrepresenting whether or not the vehicle was speeding (Speeding or NOT Speeding).
A logical rule of of inference can be stated as “If driver X is speeding then the robot
U is obligated to issue a ticket to driver X.” In much the same was as we can deduce“Socrates is a mortal” from two premises, we can derive a conclusion such as “the
robot U is obligated to issue ticket” from the rule of inference above and a statement
like “the driver of car X is speeding.”
Now consider a more difﬁcult problem for the machine that is still morally obvious
to a human. Imagine a robot is walking to the post ofﬁce to post a letter. It walks along
a path by a stream. Suddenly a toddler chases a duck which hops into the stream.The toddler slips and falls into the water which is one metre deep. The toddler is in
imminent danger of drowning. The robot is waterproof. Should it enter the water and
rescue the toddler or should it post the letter? This question is morally obvious to a
human but a robot does not have empathy and feelings of urgency and emergency.
Hence, it needs rules to make the decision. To solve the toddler problem the robotmust have an understanding of causation. If the toddler remains in the water he or she
will drown but the letter can be posted at any time. If the robot rescues the toddler, it
will not drown, but it may miss an opportunity to post the letter. As a result the letterwill arrive a day late.
How does the robot determine what to do? It needs to represent the value of a
saved life compared to the value of a one day delay in the arrival of a posted letter atits destination. In deontological terms the robot has two duties, to save the toddler
and to post the letter. One has to be acted on ﬁrst and one deferred. To resolve the
clash between duties we need a scale on which the value of the consequences of thetwo actions can be compared. Such a scale would value saving the toddler’s life over
promptly posting a letter. One can assign a utility (a number) to each outcome. The
robot can then resolve the clash of duties by calculating these utilities. Thus to solvethe toddler versus delayed letter problem we compare the two numbers. Clearly the
value of a saved life is orders of magnitude larger than a delayed letter. So, the duty
to post the letter can yield to the duty to save the toddler.
Now suppose that the value we give to the living toddler was +1,000,000 and the
value we gave to an on time letter was +1. Clearly there are orders of magnitude
of difference between the value of the toddler and a promptly posted letter. Now
consider a scenario in which the robot is travelling to the post ofﬁce driving a truck
with a million and one letters each valued +1. The robot sees the toddler fall into the
stream and using the same logic as was used in the previous example determines not
to stop and help the toddler. The moral arithmetic in this case is 1,000,001 to post
the letters versus 1,000,000 to save the toddler. It is a narrow call but posting theletters wins by one point. To implement deontology in machines one needs a way to
resolve clashes between duties. If you take a naive consequentialist approach and just