Chapter 2
What Is AI?
In this chapter we discuss the different deﬁnitions of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AI). We then discuss how machines learn and how a robot works in general.Finally we discuss the limitations of AI and the inﬂuence the media has on our
preconceptions of AI.
chris: Siri, should I lie about my weight on my dating proﬁle?
siri: I can’t answer that, Chris.
Siri is not the only virtual assistant that will struggle to answer this question
(see Fig. 2.1). Toma et al. ( 2008 ) showed that almost two thirds of people provide
inaccurate information about their weight on dating proﬁles. Ignoring, for a moment,
what motivates people to lie about their dating proﬁles, why is it so difﬁcult, if notimpossible, for digital assistants to answer this question?
To better understand this challenge it is necessary to look behind the scene and
to see how this question is processed by Siri. First, the phone’s microphone needs
to translate the changes in air pressure (sounds) into a digital signal that can then be
stored as data in the memory of the phone. Next, this data needs to be sent throughthe internet to a powerful computer in the cloud. This computer then tries to classify
the sounds recorded into written words. Afterwards, an artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
system needs to extract the meaning of this combination of words. Notice that iteven needs to be able to pick the right meaning for the homophone “lie”. Chris does
not want to lie down on his dating proﬁle, he is wondering if he should put inaccurate
information on it.
While the above steps are difﬁcult and utilise several existing AI techniques,
the next step is one of the hardest. Assuming Siri fully understands the meaning
of Chris’s question, what advice should Siri give? To give the correct advice, itwould need to know what a person’s weight means and how the term relates to their
attractiveness. Siri needs to know that the success of dating depends heavily on both
© The Author(s) 2021
C. Bartneck et al., An Introduction to Ethics in Robotics and AI ,
SpringerBriefs in Ethics, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-51110-4_25