98 11 Military Uses of AI
war. Moreover, an AWS may be capable of non-lethal offensive action where human
units must use lethal force.
Other argue that AI and military robots are necessary for defensive purposes. Some
research has shown that in certain circumstances, such as aerial combat, autonomous
systems have clear advantages over human systems (Ernest et al. 2016 ). Hence,
sending humans to ﬁght an AWS is unlikely to succeed and may result in substantialcasualties. In this situation, leaders have an ethical obligation to reduce their own
casualties even if this means developing AWS for their own purposes.
11.4.2 Arguments Against
It has been claimed that the advent of artiﬁcial intelligence technologies for military
use could lead to an arms race between nations. Vladimir Putin, the President ofthe Russian Federation, said in 2017 that “the nation that becomes the leader in
AI will rule the world.” (James 2017 ). China has similarly increased spending on
AI (Herman 2018 ) and the United States has long made the development of AI for
defense purposes a priority (Department of Defense 2012 ). Experts generally agree
that AWS will generate a clear and important military advantage (Adams 2001 ).
Relatedly, some argue that use of an AWS is unfair in that such weapons do not
result in equal risk to all combatants.
Researchers also note that the possession and use of autonomous weapons systems
may actually instigate wars because the human cost of war is reduced. There is some
evidence for this claim based on targeting killings in Iraq by the United States. The
transition in Iraq from human piloted missions to unmanned aerial vehicles resulted ina dramatic increase in the number of targeting missions (Singer 2009 ). This evidence,
although important, should not discount the political and technological factors that
may also have contributed to the increase in targeted killings.
Perhaps the most philosophically interesting argument levelled against the use
of AWS is the dignity argument claiming that “death by algorithm” is the ultimate
indignity. In its more complex forms, the argument holds that there is a fundamentalhuman right not to be killed by a machine. From this perspective, human dignity,
which is even more fundamental than the right to life, demands that a decision to
take human life requires consideration of the circumstances by a human being (Arkinet al. 2012 ; Heyns 2016 ). A related claim is that meaningful human control of an
autonomous weapon requires that a human must approve the target and be engaged
at the moment of combat.
11.5 Conclusion
To conclude we have sought to present, relevant deﬁnitions associated with
autonomous weapons systems, the ideas behind the regulations that govern these sys-