5.2 Example 2: Mistargeting by an Autonomous Weapon 41
of Jennifer through their facial recognition system. They also looked at the photos of
Samantha Jones they had themselves. All the images identiﬁed the image as General
Samantha Jones. None identiﬁed the image as Jennifer Jones. This is because thefacial recognition system only had images of high values targets, not of the entire
enemy population. They were following orders from General Smith of the Blue Air
Force to seek and destroy his counterpart in the Red Air Force.
5.2.1 Attribution of Responsibility and Liability
To blame an agent for a wrong, we must ﬁrst establish the causal chain of events thatled to the wrong. Also, we must understand who or what made the decisions that
resulted in the wrong. In the human case, the humans relied on software to identify
the target. They also used their own senses. The humans pressed the trigger that ﬁredthe missile. They did so because the software identiﬁed the target. The mistake was
made because the software had incomplete information. There was an intelligence
failure.
Is there much difference (if any) with regard to the Autonomous Weapon System
(AWS) case? The AWS was following the same rules as the humans did. It ﬁred forthe same reason as the humans did. A computer database of facial images returned
a match. Jennifer Jones did look like her sister and that is what led to her death.
There are one or two differences but both cases are very similar. Does it make
sense to “blame” the AWS? Does it make sense to “blame” the humans? The fault
lies in what was not in the facial recognition system. If Jennifer Jones was in the
system the system might have reported that this image could be either Jennifer orSamantha. Then the humans would have to make a call as to what to do. With the
facial recognition reporting “that is Samantha” and no one else, then a human would
most likely assume they had their target too.
5.2.2 Moral Responsibility V ersus Liability
We might well ask who is morally responsible for the wrongful death of Jennifer? Wemight consider the following people: the political leader who declared war, the pilot
who ﬁred the missile in the human case, the programmers who programmed the drone
to ﬁre missiles in the AWS case, or the intelligence ofﬁcers who missed Samantha’s
sister. In reality, these are all “contributing factors” to the death of Jennifer. However,
we can make some distinctions between moral responsibility and legal responsibility(i.e., liability).
Legal responsibility has to be proven in a court. If the human pilots were to be
subject to a court martial for the unlawful killing of a civilian, then the facts wouldhave to be proven to a standard beyond reasonable doubt. Certainly, the defence would
argue the human pilots had a “reasonable expectation” that the facial recognition