9.1 Ethical Issues Related to AI Enhancement 73
the purchasing of cognitive aids cheapens success. At some point success may sim-
ply depend on one’s ability to purchase the necessary shortcuts. Less wealthy people
would be disadvantaged in professional or academic success.
Another form of enhancement could be based on the brain-computer interfaces
that are currently being developed. One of its prime applications is Neuroprosthetics,
in which the neurons of a patient are connected to a computer which in turn controls aprosthetic device. Thinking about closing one’s hand will then result in the prosthetic
hand closing.
9.2 Ethical Issues Related to Robots and Healthcare
Healthcare is another application of AI and robotics that raises ethical issues. Robots
have been proposed for a wide variety of roles in healthcare including assisting olderadults in assisted living, assisting with rehabilitation, surgery, and delivery. Currently
robot-assisted surgery is the predominant application of robots within the healthcare
industry. Robots are also being developed to deliver items in a hospital environment
and for using ultraviolet light to disinfect hospital and surgical rooms.
9.3 Robots and T elemedicine
Robots have been suggested as an important method for performing telemedicine
whereby doctors perform examinations and determine treatments of patients from adistance (see Fig. 9.1).
The use of robots for telemedicine offers both beneﬁts and risks. This technology
may afford a means for treating distantly located individuals that would otherwiseonly be able to see a doctor under extreme circumstances. Telemedicine may thus
encourage patients to see the doctor more often. It may also decrease the cost of pro-
viding healthcare to rural populations. On the negative side, the use of telemedicinemay result in and even encourage a substandard level of healthcare, when being used
in an exaggerated way. It might also result in the misdiagnosis of certain ailments
which are not easily evaluated remotely.
9.3.1 Older Adults and Social Isolation
Robots are also being introduced as a beneﬁt to older adults to combat social isolation.
Social isolation occurs for a variety of reasons such as children entering adulthood
and leaving the home, friends and family ageing and passing away. Older adults thatreside in nursing homes may feel increasingly isolated which can result in depression.