6.4 Business Ethics for AI Companies 51
Not all cases have happy endings. Still, it is valuable for companies to consider
examples such as this. These case studies may encourage companies to include
ethics and environmental information in their calculates and to invest money inCorporate Social Responsibility initiatives. The same might hold in the area of AI,
these companies should improve their inclusion of ethics related considerations,
calculating over the long run, and consider systematically the interests of others whomay be relevant for their future sustainable operations.
From a more general point of view, taking on ethical responsibilities (without
waiting for changes in the legal framework) has become both a necessity as wellas a competitive advantage for companies. Studies show that it helps raise proﬁts
(Wang et al. 2016 ), secure the capability for innovation, improve market position
(Martinez-Conesa et al. 2017 ), improve risk management (Shiu and Yang 2017 ) and
customer satisfaction (Lins et al. 2017 ) and also motivate employees and recruit new
talent (Saeidi et al. 2015 ).
One word of caution seems appropriate: Companies can do a lot of things on their
own, but they cannot do everything. In some sectors of the industry, it will be more
difﬁcult for a company to take responsibility on their own. Consider the banking
sector. Broadly speaking, there is not as much room for direct action by banks as in
other industries, simply because the banking sector is very tightly regulated.
The situation in AI could become similar. As a product developed by AI may be
capable of making important decisions in the world and as it is difﬁcult or impossible
to argue or appeal to these programs or algorithms, we will need speciﬁc ethical
guidelines for AI. This does not necessarily mean detailed regulation. But ratherguidelines that are the subject and focus of societal discussion. Hence, they need to
address important problems that people care about—even if they might not be able
to solve each of these problems.
6.5 Risks of AI to Workers
Many writers have predicted the emergence of “mass technological unemployment”resulting from the increasing use of AI and robots. The pessimistic line is that humans
will all eventually be made redundant by machines. Numerous reports have made
alarming predictions that huge numbers of human jobs will be automated away (Freyand Osborne 2017 ). For example, there are around three million truck drivers in the
United States. If a viable autonomous truck were available tomorrow, in theory, all
three million truck drivers could be made redundant very quickly. There are many
stories about how AI and robotic will make everyone redundant. However, these
stories are based on uncritically accepted assumptions.
For example, Frey and Osborne’s projections have been widely criticised. They
predicted that nearly half the jobs in the workforce were vulnerable to automation
over the next 20–30 years. However, an OECD report using different assumptionsarrived at a much less alarming ﬁgure of 9% (Arntz et al. 2016 ).