36 4 Trust and Fairness in AI Systems
Explicability is not to be equated with transparency. While some call for maximal
transparency of programs and codes, when it comes to AI systems this might not
solve a problem and might even create new problems. Suppose software containingmillions of lines of code is made transparent, what would be the beneﬁt of this?
First, the software would probably not be intelligible to non-experts, and even experts
would struggle with what it means. Second, maximal transparency of software mightcreate a risk vis-a-vis competitors, and hinder further investment in this sector. Due to
considerations like these, some parts of the discussion have switched to the concept
of “explicability”.
Explicability, as Floridi et al. ( 2018 ) deﬁne it, means both intelligibility and
accountability. It is desirable in moral applications that those using AI systems or
whose interests are affected by AI systems can “make sense“ of the precise way inwhich an AI made a particular decision. Intelligibility means that the workings of the
AI can be understood by a human. The system is not a mysterious “black box” whose
internals are unintelligible. Someone, even if only an experienced programmer, canunderstand the system’s workings and explain it to judges, juries and users.
The European Union implemented a legal requirement for the “right to infor-
mation” (originally called the “right to explanation”) within the framework of the
General Data Protection Regulation. This holds that people whose interests have been
affected by an algorithmic decision have to right to have the algorithm explained thedecision to them. Obviously, this poses a challenge for some “inscrutable” machine
learning methods such as neural networks. There are some who are untroubled by
“inscrutability” in machine learning. They take the view that they can test the systemempirically. So long as it works in practice, they do not care if they cannot understand
or explain how it works in practice (Weinberger 2018 ).
For many machine learning applications this may be ﬁne. Yet, in morally charged
situations that might be subject to judicial review, there will be a requirement to
explain the decision. There may also be a requirement to justify the decision. A key
element of moral functioning is not just doing the right thing but justifying what theagent did is right. Moral justiﬁcation cannot be based on an “inscrutable” black box.
However, there is ongoing research into “explainable AI” which seeks to generate
explanations for why neural networks make the decisions they make (Wachter et al.2017 ). It may be that such research eventually enables machine learning to generate
adequate explanations for decisions it makes.
Even so, in practical terms, the use of the COMPAS system to assess recidivism
risk and thus affect prospects for probation has been tested in court. In the case
of Loomis versus Wisconsin, the plaintiff argued that he was denied “due process”
because of the proprietary nature of the COMPAS algorithm meant that his defence
could not challenge the scientiﬁc basis on which his score was calculated. However,
his appeals failed. The judges held that sentencing decisions were not entirely basedon COMPAS risk scores. Judges could not base sentences on risk scores alone but
could consider such scores along with other factors in making their assessment of
recidivism risk.
Accountability at its most basic can be provided in the form of log ﬁles. For exam-
ple, commercial airlines are required to have a ﬂight recorder that can survive a crash.