48 6 Risks in the Business of AI
6.2 Ethical Risks of AI
There are ethical risks for AI and robotic technologies. Managing them becomes a
crucial task for managers in the globalised economy. With this in mind what are therisks of AI technologies and robotics? Some of the main ethical risks are.
6.2.1 Reputational Risk
Systems that appear biased or prejudiced can cause great reputational damage. Hot
topics in this area include facial recognition and loan approval systems. However
a spirited campaign of “testing, naming and shaming” has dramatically increased
the ability of commercial systems to correctly recognise the faces of females and
minorities (Buolamwini and Raji 2019 ).
One of the ﬁrst major scandals in the still young social media economy is the
Cambridge Analytica scandal, which greatly damaged the reputation of Facebook.
Facebook supplied data obtained by Cambridge Analytica and which was used fortargeted political advertising.
6.2.2 Legal Risk
Legal risk encompasses situations where a system becomes too successful and
is viewed as causing an anti-competitive environment. This situation may attract
the attention of governmental regulators capable of levying large ﬁnes. In 2004,Microsoft, for example, was ﬁned EUR 497 million by the European Union for anti-
competitive behaviour. In 2018, the European Commission imposed a record ﬁne of
USD 5 billion on Google for antitrust violations of the Android technology.
6.2.3 Environmental Risk
Similarly system failures can cause environmental disasters. The Bhopal disaster
in India, for example, was the result of a gas leak at an Union Carbide factory in
Bhopal India. The leak resulted in an explosion and release of methyl isocyanate.The immediate explosion caused the death of nearly 4,000 people. The gas release
however may have harmed more than half a million people. Several thousand would
eventually be determined to have suffered permanent damage from exposure to thetoxic substance. Union Carbide eventually paid approximately USD 470 million in
ﬁnes and restitution.