3.1 Descriptive Ethics 19
without descriptive elements of empirical insights. In recent years, “experimental
ethics” has even been formed as a sub-discipline of its own (Lütge et al. 2014 ). For
the remainder of the book, we use the term ‘ethics’ to mean ‘normative ethics.’
3.2 Normative Ethics
Ethics can be deﬁned as the analysis of human actions from the perspective of “good”and “evil,” or of “morally correct” and “morally wrong.” If ethics categorises actions
and norms as morally correct or wrong, one then speaks of normative or prescrip-
tive ethics. An example of a norm is that the action of stealing is morally wrong.Normative ethics is usually not regarded as a matter of subjectivity, but of general
validity. Stealing is wrong for everybody. Different types of normative ethics make
judgements about actions on the basis of different considerations. The most impor-tant distinction usually made here is between two types of theories: deontological
and consequentialist ethics.
3.2.1 Deontological Ethics
Deontological ethics is characterised by the fact that it evaluates the ethical cor-
rectness of actions on the basis of characteristics that affect the action itself. Such
a feature, for example, may be the intention with which an action is performed or
the compatibility with a particular formal principle. The consequences of an actionmay be considered in addition, but does not form the exclusive basis of the judge-
ment. The term deontology or deontological ethics derives from the Greek “deon”,
which essentially means duty or obligation. Deontology can thus be translated asduty ethics.
To give a practical example of deontological ethics, since the 2000s large and
medium-sized companies have increasingly tried to project a social or environmen-tally friendly image through certain marketing and PR measures. Often, as part
of these measures, companies donate sizeable sums to combat certain social ills,
improve their environmental footprint, or work with NGOs to more effectively mon-itor the conditions of production among suppliers. Nevertheless, many citizens refuse
to positively assess this commitment of companies as ethically genuine. The public
discussion sometimes ridicules such programmes of Corporate Social Responsibil-
ity (CSR). Critics argue that in these cases companies are not really concerned with
rectifying grievances, but only with polishing up their own image and ultimately max-imising their bottom line, albeit in a more sophisticated way. Regardless of whether
the CSR projects in question contribute to improving some of the (environmental or
social) issues, critics are more concerned with the companies motivations than withtheir action or the results. The companies motivations being the key deontological
element for this argument.