32 4 Trust and Fairness in AI Systems
2. Act in such a way that you treat humanity, whether in your own person or in the
person of any other, never merely as a means to an end, but always at the same
time as an end.
3. The third practical principle follows from the ﬁrst two as the ultimate condition
of their harmony with practical reason: the idea of the will of every rational being
as a universally legislating will.
The formula of universal law tells us that to morally justify an action, one must
be able to universalise the moral rule or “maxim.” One way to think about this is to
pose the question: what if everybody followed this rule? What would the world look
like then?
The principle of humanity tells us we should respect the ends (goals, wishes)
of other persons. We should not treat other human beings as “mere means” alone.
Rather we must consider the ends they have as well as our own.
Kant also formulated his moral philosophy in the so-called “Kingdom of Ends”
version of the Imperative which states that: “Act according to maxims of a univer-
sally legislating member of a merely possible kingdom of ends.” The principle ofautonomy and the Kingdom of Ends formulation tell us that we must walk our own
moral talk. That is, we are bound to obey the moral rules we expect others to follow.
As autonomous beings, Kant holds, we are obliged to rationally consider our moralstandards. Simply following the law is not good enough. It follows that an artiﬁcial
intelligent system must have autonomy in the Kantian sense to be able to act in an
ethical way.
Many writers bundle moral responsibility and moral decision making together
in their deﬁnitions of what an “ethical agent” is. Some separate these two notions
holding that an AI can make moral decisions without being responsible for such deci-
sions. (Welsh 2018 ). On Kant’s conception, a system that is programmed to simply
follow rules such as Asimov’s Three Laws of Robotics would not be considered anethical agent.
Isaac Asimov (2 January 1920–6 April 1992) proposed three rules of robotics
that would safeguard humanity from malevolent robots.
1. A robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human
being to come to harm.
2. A robot must obey the orders given it by human beings except where such
orders would conﬂict with the First Law.
3. A robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection does not
conﬂict with the First or Second Laws.
While his work is highly visible in the public media, it has been criticised byphilosophers. Asimov eventually added a zeroth law:
0. A robot may not harm humanity, or, by inaction, allow humanity to come
to harm.