8.3 Private Data Collection and Its Dangers 65
Amazon has put a number of features in place to limit the data collecting ability of its
devices. According to Amazon, features such as using the word “Alexa” to wake the
device up prevents the device from being used as a means for persistent surveillance(Hildrenbrand 2018 ). Yet, as shown through the Wikileaks release of NSA docu-
ments, backdoors and vulnerabilities can be exploited in these types of technologies
which could theoretically convert them into a means of persistent surveillance.
Another prominent example of private data collection is the “Hello Barbie” doll
built by Mattel. It uses cloud-based speech recognition, conversation management
and speech synthesis. While this is not unlike Alexa or Google Home, “Hello Barbie”was targeted at young girls. They were encouraged to talk with Barbie about their
lives, and since they might not have been aware of the technical and social impli-
cations, they would likely have shared unﬁltered thoughts with Mattel. Of course,Mattel vowed to respect the privacy of its customers, but it remains a question of
trust whether parents believed them (Fig. 8.2).
Consumers, on the other hand, seem somewhat ambivalent towards privacy con-
cerns about these devices. In a study conducted by Shields (Shields 2018 ), for
instance, consumers report that they like the home security features of a digital
assistant, yet also fear being spied on. Privacy-related events can cause citizens to
catch on to privacy-related issues. A study by Anton et al. ( 2010 ) found that internet
users had become more concerned about privacy even as their usage increased from2002 to 2008.
In contrast to digital assistants which are willingly placed in the home by a person,
persistent surveillance can also be conducted from a distance. Drone surveillancedeveloped for the battleﬁeld allows for continuous observation of individuals, i.e., the
collection of information about individuals including the creation of social networks,
and the creation of behavioural models that capture patterns of behaviour. In warfare,these social networks are used to distinguish non-combatants from enemy soldiers
and to predict upcoming attacks. Recently, these practices have been adapted from
the battleﬁeld and applied to domestic locales. In 2005, Baltimore created a groundlevel surveillance system called CitiWatch which contained more than 700 cameras
placed around the city.
In October 2014, CitiWatch expanded to create a database which privately owned
surveillance cameras could contribute to on a voluntary basis. Later on, the Balti-
more program began to include aerial surveillance from camera-laden air planes. On
the one hand, Baltimore law enforcement ofﬁcials claim that these programs workto reduce crime. On the other hand, privacy advocates claim that these programs
greatly restrict privacy and inhibit personal freedom. Informal polls conducted by
the Baltimore Business Journal and the Baltimore Sun found that 82% of people felt
“comfortable” with the surveillance program “as long as it’s keeping people safe.”
Moreover, an online Baltimore Sun poll found that 79% of people believed that thepolice department’s level of secrecy around the program was acceptable (National
Police Foundation 2017 ).
Similarly, airline authorities have considered continuously streaming the audio
from airplane cockpits. Doing so would reduce the need for retrieving black box
recorders. But pilots have hitherto resisted streaming audio from the cockpit on the