Chapter 6
Risks in the Business of AI
This chapter discusses the general risks that businesses face before considering
speciﬁc ethical risks that companies developing AI systems and robots need
to consider. Guidance on how to manage these risks is provided. It is arguedthat companies should do what is ethically desirable not just the minimum that
is legally necessary. Evidence is given that this can be more proﬁtable in the
long run.
AI is not just a technology that concerns engineers and technical staff. It is a
matter of business. Risks associated with advanced technology are likely to increaseenormously in the years to come. Doing business with AI comes with many risks.
Among the most signiﬁcant are the risks associated with severe accidents. Take the
example of autonomous vehicles, an A V out of control might cause great harm to
other people and property. An AI system for controlling the power grid or other
infrastructure functions might cause enormous damage if control is lost.
Such risks are not a matter for individuals only. They have consequences for
companies, which can be critical and put them out of business entirely. Therefore,
many large companies have entire departments for risk management. It is not ourpurpose here to discuss the more classic risks. Such risks include country risks,
political risks, currency risks and related risks. These are well-known and well-
understood by companies and insurers. However, the largest multinational globalcompanies, who have the greatest number of skilled personnel and advanced scientiﬁc
capabilities, are becoming increasingly aware of ethical risks. The more obvious
ethical risks are corruption, discrimination or systematic abuse of human rights. Thedevelopment of advanced technology capable of psychologically inﬂuencing people
is also a risk. In the globalised world however, such risks might turn into economic
risks eventually. There are several mechanisms through which this can occur:
© The Author(s) 2021
C. Bartneck et al., An Introduction to Ethics in Robotics and AI ,
SpringerBriefs in Ethics, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-51110-4_645