9.4 Education 77
or Google’s Chatbase. They all provide companies and organisations with tools to
create their own chatbot that users can interact with on their respective websites
or even on dedicated messaging platforms. While these bots may be able to pro-vide some basic support, they do have to fall back to a human support agent when
encountering questions that go beyond the knowledge stored in their databases.
Another form of supporting education with AI from an organisational perspective
is plagiarism checking. In an age where students are able to copy and paste essays
easily from material found online, it is increasingly important to check if the work
submitted is truly the student’s original work or just a slightly edited Wikipediaarticle. Students are of course aware of their teachers’ ability to google the texts in
their essays, and therefore are aware that they need to do better than a plain copy and
paste. Good plagiarism checking software goes far beyond matching identical phrasesand is able to detect similarities and approximations even search for patterns in the
white space. Artiﬁcial intelligence is able to detect the similarities of text patterns and
empowers teachers to quickly check student work against all major sources on theinternet including previously submitted student contributions that were never openly
published.
9.4.2 Teaching
AI systems have several advantages over human teachers that make them attractive
for online learning. First, they are extremely scalable. Each student can work with a
dedicated AI system which can adapt the teaching speed and difﬁculty to the students’
individual needs. Second, such a system is available at any time, for an unconstrainedduration at any location. Moreover, such an agent does not get tired and does have an
endless supply of patience. Another advantage of AI teaching systems is that students
might feel less embarrassed. Speaking a foreign language to a robot might be morecomfortable for a novice speaker.
The autonomous teaching agents work best in constrained topics, such as math, in
which good answers can be easily identiﬁed. Agents will fail in judging the beautyof a poem or appreciate the novelty in thought or expression. Section 2.4discusses
the limitations of AI in more detail.
Another teaching context in which robots and AI systems show promising results
is teaching children with special needs, more speciﬁcally children with Autism
Spectrum Disorder. The robots’ limited expressivity combined with its repetitive
behaviour (that is perceived by many as boring) is in this context actually a key
advantage (Diehl et al. 2012 ). The use of robots for general purpose childcare is
ethically questionable (Sharkey and Sharkey 2010 ).