11.3 Regulations Governing an AWS 97
11.3 Regulations Governing an A WS
States at the UN agree that an AWS must be used in compliance with existing
IHL. The Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons is generally consideredthe appropriate forum to discuss AWS regulations. These regulating bodies require
meaningful human control over the AWS. In particular, this means the following:
1. an AWS must be able to distinguish between combatants and non-combatants;
2. an AWS must be able to calculate proportionality;3. an AWS must comply with the principle of command responsibility.
11.4 Ethical Arguments for and Against AI for Military
Purposes
11.4.1 Arguments in F avour
In IHL the doctrine of military necessity permits belligerents to do harm during the
conduct of a war. Moreover, just war theory states that, although war is terrible, there
are situations in which not conducting a war may be an ethically and morally worse
option (International Committee of the Red Cross 2015 ). For example, war may be
justiﬁable to prevent atrocities. The purpose of just war theory is to create criteria that
ensures that war is morally justiﬁable. Just war theory includes criteria for (1) going
to war (jus ad bellum) and (2) conducting war (jus in bello). The criteria for going
to war include: just cause, comparative justice, competent authority, right intention,
probability of success, last resort, and proportionality. The criteria for conducting warinclude: distinction, proportionality, military necessity, fair treatment of prisoners of
war, and not using means and methods of warfare that are prohibited. Examples of
prohibited means of warfare include chemical and biological weapons. Examplesof prohibited means include mass rape and forcing prisoners of war to ﬁght against
their own side. The overall intent of IHL is to protect the rights of the victims of war.
This entails rules that minimise civilian harm.
With respect to the use of AI and robots in warfare, some have argued that AMS
may reduce civilian casualties (Arkin 2010 ). Unlike humans, artiﬁcially intelligent
robots lack emotions and thus acts of vengeance and emotion-driven atrocities areless likely to occur at the hands of a robot. In fact, it may be the case that robots can be
constructed to obey the rules of engagement, disobeying commands to violate civilian
and enemy combatant rights (Arkin 2008 ). If nothing else, units being observed by
a military robot may be less inclined to commit such atrocities. If, in fact, robots
can be used to prevent atrocities and ensure the minimisation of civilian casualties,
then military leaders may have an ethical obligation to use such robots. For, to not
use such robots, condemns a greater number of civilians to die in a morally justiﬁed