12.1 The Role of Ethics 103
12.1 The Role of Ethics
The question of what should be considered right and wrong in the development
and deployment of AI and robotics is central to many published policy papers. Forexample, the European Commission (EC) now asks for the inclusion of ethics in
the development and use of new technologies in programmes and courses and the
development of ethical guidelines for the use and development of AI in full respect of
fundamental rights . The EC plan goes as far as aiming to set a global ethical standard
towards becoming a world leader in ethical, trusted AI. Whatever we may think of
this aspiration, it is certainly true that there is a lack of practical, agreed guidelinesand rules regarding systems that are much more autonomous in their calculations,
actions and reactions than what we have been used to in the past. Such autonomous
systems—or more speciﬁcally intelligent autonomous systems—act; they dothings.
Now, what one should do is the famous Kantian question underlying all ethical
considerations.
Today, most jurisdictions around the world have only just started to investigate
regulatory aspects of AI. In this book we have given preliminary answers to many
of these issues, however industry has made the case that it requires clear rules forspeedy innovation based on AI. Companies may steer away from AI applications
in states of uncertainty in which the legal implications of bringing AI and robotic
applications to the market are unclear.
Ethics therefore becomes important at many layers of the policy discussion. It
is a topic for the engineer designing the system, including the student learning to
build AI systems. It is also a topic for society to value the impacts of AI technologyon the daily lives of citizens. Consequently, it is a key question for policy makers
in discussions about AI and robotic technologies. Note that ethical aspects are not
only discussed in questions of regulation. Much more importantly, ethical questionsunderpin the design of AI and robotic systems from deﬁning the application to the
details of their implementation. Ethics in AI is therefore much broader and concerns
very basic design choices and considerations about which society we would like to
live in.
12.2 International Cooperation
In its AI Action Plan, the EC identiﬁes a need for coordinated action in ethics and in
addressing societal challenges, but also the regulatory framework. It calls upon itsmember states to create synergies and cooperation on ethics. At the time of writing
this book, countries around the world are looking for best practices in regulating—
or deregulating—AI and robotics. Information and communication technologies ingeneral have a tendency to generate impact across country borders. Already today,
AI systems such as Google’s translation service, for example, provide good quality
translations to people all over the world. These translations are based on documents