10.6 Ethical Questions in A Vs 87
example, a massive scandal erupted for the Nestle company, as people believed it
did not give adequate rules for mothers how to use their baby milk products. In the
not-so-distant future, A Vs might be introduced on a massive scale. Companies havea responsibility lay out drivers’ responsibilities very clearly.
In addition, there are a number of other ethical questions usually associated with
AV s .
10.6.1 Accountability and Liability
The question of liability will be critical. According to the 1968 Vienna Conventionon Road Trafﬁc (Vienna Convention on Road Trafﬁc 1968, updated 2014, effective
since 2016 (United Nations 1968 ), the driver is the one responsible for their car.
However, in cases where an autonomous system is in control, this responsibilitydoes not make much sense. The German Ethics Code therefore states that in these
cases, the liability has to be turned over to the car manufacturer and the company
operating or developing the software. Liability in autonomous driving will become
a case of product liability and it will also require monitoring devices to be built into
A Vs. Future A V driving recorders might be similar to the ﬂight recorders used oncontemporary aircraft.
10.6.2 Situations of Unavoidable Accidents
Much of the literature on ethics of A Vs revolves around situations similar to the
“trolley problem” where an accident is unavoidable and an A V has to choose between
two evils (Bonnefon et al. 2016 ;L i n 2016 ). Should the car choose to swerve to avoid
hitting four people and hit one person instead? Does it matter if the people are
children, or older adults? Should it hit someone crossing the street at a red light
rather than someone observing the trafﬁc rules (see Fig. 10.2 )?
How frequent these situations will be in practice is controversial. Some have
argued that these situations will be quite rare, given that the conditions for them are
extremely narrow. But if we accept their possibility for the moment, then one issue isto avoid creating a machine or an algorithm that selects targets according to personal
characteristics (such as age or gender, which the German Ethics Code prohibits, or
Social Credit Score), but still allowing a company to program code that reduces the
overall number of fatalities or injuries. This is a complex problem, which is usually
not as simple as selecting one of several targets to be killed with a guarantee. Forexample, there will probably be different probabilities for injuries or casualties of
different targets. This may result in complicated situations in which it would not be
ethical to forego the opportunity to reduce the overall damage to persons. We shouldmake it clear that current autonomous vehicles do not engage in trolley problem