46 6 Risks in the Business of AI
1.Ethical risk to reputation
The reputation of a company may get damaged signiﬁcantly. This is something not
to be underestimated. The brand of large companies is often their most importantasset. For example, in 2018, the value of the brand Apple was estimated to be
USD 182 billion by Forbes. BMW’s brand was valued at USD 31.4 billion. It
would be foolish for such a company to damage their brand for very short-runpurposes.
2.Ethical risk to stock price
The stock price of a company might be affected greatly by ethical scandals. BP ,for example, suffered great value to its stock price as a result of the Deepwater
Horizon disaster in the Gulf of Mexico. In the month following this crisis, its
stock price fell from USD 60 to USD 27 in a month. A fall in stock price can besomething that destroys careers or leads to takeovers of the entire company. So
this is something successful CEOs will seek to avoid.
3.Ethical risk of legal ﬁnes
Finally, underestimating ethical risks can lead to signiﬁcant legal ﬁnes. This is
something that a number of large companies had to learn the hard way. For exam-
ple, in the aftermath of the Deepwater Horizon scandal, BP has been forced to pay
more than USD 65 billion in damages, ﬁnes and clean up costs. Also, Siemens
had, before 2006, completely underestimated the issue of systematic corruptionwithin their company. This risk was not regarded as signiﬁcant, as it did not result
in economic problems. However, eventually Siemens had to pay around EUR 2
billion in legal ﬁnes, which is a sum that even such a large company would preferto avoid. As of 2017, according to CNN, the cumulative costs of the Dieselgate
scandal for VW are in the order of USD 30 billion.
6.1 General Business Risks
Some of the key risks faced by companies are:
6.1.1 Functional Risk
Functional risk is simply the risk of the functionality of the system failing. For
example, in any software and hardware system there is always the risk that the
system may fail when released to the general public. A component may fail in certain
unanticipated situations. Sometimes an update patch for a software system may failand cause the “breaking” of the system itself or another system it interacts with it.
Updates often break integration between systems provided by different vendors.