Figure 5: Visualization of TSP100 instances.
We could consider “harder” TSP/routing problems where traditional solvers like Gurobi/LKH-3 can
only provide weaker solutions or would take very long to solve. We could also work on “harder”
combinatorial problems where traditional solvers s.a. Gurobi cannot be used.
Another attractive research direction is to leverage learning techniques to improve traditional solvers.
For example, traditional solvers leverage Branch-and-Bound technique [ 4,16]. Selecting the variables
to branch is critical for search efﬁciency, and relies on human-engineered heuristics s.a. Strong
Branching [ 1] which is a high-quality but expensive branching rule. Recent works [ 13,32] have
shown that neural networks can be successfully used to imitate expert heuristics and speed-up the BB
computational time. Future work may focus on going beyond imitation of human-based heuristics,
and learning novel heuristics for faster Branch-and-Bound technique.
8 Conclusion
The ﬁeld of Combinatorial Optimization is pushing the limit of deep learning. Traditional solvers still
provide better solutions than learning models. However, traditional solvers have been studied since
the 1950s and the interest of applying deep learning to combinatorial optimization has just started.
This topic of research will naturally expend in the coming years as combinatorial problems problems
s.a. assignment, routing, planning, scheduling are used every day by companies. Novel software may
also be developed that combine continuous, discrete optimization and learning techniques.
9 Acknowledgement
Xavier Bresson is supported by NRF Fellowship NRFF2017-10.
References
[1]Tobias Achterberg, Thorsten Koch, and Alexander Martin. 2005. Branching rules revisited.
Operations Research Letters 33, 1 (2005), 42–54.
[2]David L Applegate, Robert E Bixby, Vasek Chvatal, and William J Cook. 2006. The traveling
salesman problem: a computational study . Princeton university press.
[3]Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Neural machine translation by
jointly learning to align and translate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473 (2014).
8