The Transformer Network for the
Traveling Salesman Problem
Xavier Bresson
School of Computer Science and Engineering
NTU, Singapore
xbresson@ntu.edu.sgThomas Laurent
Department of Mathematics
Loyola Marymount University
tlaurent@lmu.edu
Abstract
The Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) is the most popular and most studied
combinatorial problem, starting with von Neumann in 1951. It has driven the
discovery of several optimization techniques such as cutting planes, branch-and-
bound, local search, Lagrangian relaxation, and simulated annealing. The last
ﬁve years have seen the emergence of promising techniques where (graph) neural
networks have been capable to learn new combinatorial algorithms. The main
question is whether deep learning can learn better heuristics from data, i.e. replacing
human-engineered heuristics? This is appealing because developing algorithms
to tackle efﬁciently NP-hard problems may require years of research, and many
industry problems are combinatorial by nature. In this work, we propose to adapt
the recent successful Transformer architecture originally developed for natural
language processing to the combinatorial TSP. Training is done by reinforcement
learning, hence without TSP training solutions, and decoding uses beam search.
We report improved performances over recent learned heuristics with an optimal
gap of 0.004% for TSP50 and 0.39% for TSP100.
1 Traditional TSP Solvers
The TSP was ﬁrst formulated by William Hamilton in the 19th century. The problem states as follows;
given a list of cities and the distances between each pair of cities, what is the shortest possible
path that visits each city exactly once and returns to the origin city? TSP belongs to the class of
routing problems which are used every day in industry such as warehouse, transportation, supply
chain, hardware design, manufacturing, etc. TSP is an NP-hard problem with an exhaustive search
of complexity O( n!). TSP is also the most studied combinatorial problem. It has motivated the
development of important optimization methods including Cutting Planes [ 10], Branch-and-Bound
[4, 16], Local Search [8], Lagrangian Relaxation [12], Simulated Annealing [24].
There exist two traditional approaches to tackle combinatorial problems; exact algorithms and
approximate/heuristic algorithms. Exact algorithms are guaranteed to ﬁnd optimal solutions, but
they become intractable when ngrows. Approximate algorithms trade optimality for computational
efﬁciency. They are problem-speciﬁc, often designed by iteratively applying a simple man-crafted
rule, known as heuristic. Their complexity is polynomial and their quality depends on an approximate
ratio that characterizes the worst/average-case error w.r.t the optimal solution.
Exact algorithms for TSP are given by exhaustive search, Dynamic or Integer Programming.
A Dynamic Programming algorithm was proposed for TSP in [ 16] with O(n22n) complex-
ity, which becomes intractable for n > 40. A general purpose Integer Programming (IP)
solver with Cutting Planes (CP) and Branch-and-Bound (BB) called Gurobi was introduced in
[15]. Finally, a highly specialized linear IP+CP+BB, namely Concorde, was designed in [ 2].
Concorde is widely regarded as the fastest exact TSP solver, for large instances, currently in existence.arXiv:2103.03012v1  [cs.LG]  4 Mar 2021