Enhancing Adversarial Robustness for Deep Metric Learning
Mo Zhou
Johns Hopkins University
mzhou32@jhu.eduVishal M. Patel
Johns Hopkins University
vpatel36@jhu.edu
Abstract
Owing to security implications of adversarial vulnerabil-
ity, adversarial robustness of deep metric learning models
has to be improved. In order to avoid model collapse due to
excessively hard examples, the existing defenses dismiss the
min-max adversarial training, but instead learn from a weak
adversary inefficiently. Conversely, we propose Hardness
Manipulation to efficiently perturb the training triplet till a
specified level of hardness for adversarial training, accord-
ing to a harder benign triplet or a pseudo-hardness function.
It is flexible since regular training and min-max adversarial
training are its boundary cases. Besides, Gradual Adversary,
a family of pseudo-hardness functions is proposed to gradu-
ally increase the specified hardness level during training for
a better balance between performance and robustness. Ad-
ditionally, an Intra-Class Structure loss term among benign
and adversarial examples further improves model robust-
ness and efficiency. Comprehensive experimental results
suggest that the proposed method, although simple in its
form, overwhelmingly outperforms the state-of-the-art de-
fenses in terms of robustness, training efficiency, as well as
performance on benign examples.
1. Introduction
Given a set of data points, a metric gives a distance value
between each pair of them. Deep Metric Learning (DML)
aims to learn such a metric between two inputs ( e.g., im-
ages) leveraging the representational power of deep neural
networks. As an extensively studied task [21, 27], DML has
a wide range of applications such as image retrieval [37] and
face recognition [6, 28], and widely influences some other
areas such as self-supervised learning [21].
Despite the advancements in this field thanks to deep
learning, recent studies find DML models vulnerable to ad-
versarial attacks, where imperceptible perturbations can in-
cur unexpected retrieval result, or covertly change the rank-
ings [53, 54]. Such vulnerability raises security, safety, and
fairness concerns in the DML applications. For example,
impersonation or recognition evasion are possible on a vul-
Figure 1. Comparison in robustness, training cost, and recall@1 be-
tween our method ( i.e., “HM[ S, gLGA]&ICS”) and the state-of-the-
art method ( i.e., “ACT[ R]” and “ACT[ S]”) on the CUB Dataset.
nerable DML-based face-identification system. To counter
the attacks ( i.e., mitigating the vulnerability), the adversarial
robustness of DML models has to be improved via defense.
Existing defense methods [53,55] are adversarial training-
based, inspired by Madry’s min-max adversarial training [20]
because it is consistently one of the most effective methods
for classification task. Specifically, Madry’s method involves
a inner problem to maximize the loss by perturbing the inputs
into adversarial examples, and an outer problem to minimize
the loss by updating the model parameters. However, in
order to avoid model collapse due to excessively hard ex-
amples, the existing DML defenses refrain from directly
adopting such min-max paradigm, but instead replace the in-
ner problem to indirectly increase the loss value to a certain
level, which suffers from low efficiency and weak adversary
(and hence weak robustness). Since training cost is already
a serious issue of adversarial training, the efficiency in gain-
ing higher adversarial robustness under a lower budget is
inevitable and important for DML defense.
Inspired by previous works [53, 55], we conjecture that
an appropriate adversary for the inner maximization problem
should increase the loss to an “intermediate” point between
that of benign examples ( i.e., unperturbed examples) and the
theoretical upper bound. Such point should be reached by an
efficient adversary directly. Besides, we speculate the triplet
sampling strategy has a key impact in adversarial training,
because it is also able to greatly influence the mathematical
expectation of loss even without adversarial attack.
15325