(b) Shrinked                    valueEpoch
Epoch
EpochValue
Value
Value
Value
Loss
Epoch
(a) Relationship between loss
and hardness when leads to weak attack(c) Slightly Boosting
for slightly stronger attackWeak attackStrong attack
(d) Linear Gradual Adversary
for balanced trainingFigure 4. Illustration of (linear) gradual adversary.
Destination Hardness .HM[HS, HD]is flexible as vari-
ous types of HDcan be specified, e.g., a constant, the hard-
ness of another benign triplet, or a pseudo-hardness func-
tion. The case of maximizing the triplet loss is equivalent to
HM[HS,2], where 2is the upper bound of hardness, while
HM[HS, HS]is regular DML training, as shown in Fig. 2.
As pushing ˜HStowards the upper bound will easily ren-
der model collapse, a valid HDshould be chosen within
the interval [HS,2]. Thus, intuitively, HDcan be the hard-
ness of another benign triplet (with the same anchor) sam-
pled with a strategy with a higher hardness expectation, i.e.,
E[HD]> E[HS]. Or at least the Var[HD]of another benign
triplet has to be large enough (for a small portion of triplets
HD> H S) in order to create a notable number of valid adver-
sarial examples. For instance, HDcan be the hardness of a
Semihard [28] triplet when the source triplet is sampled with
Random sampler. Predictably, the model performance will
be significantly influenced by the triplet sampling strategies
we chose for HDin this case. For convenience of further
discussion, we denote the hardness of a Random, Semihard,
and Softhard triplets as R,M,S, respectively.
If we have a strong prior knowledge on what the desti-
nation hardness should be, then we can even use a pseudo-
hardness function g(·),i.e., a customized scalar function.
3.2. Gradual Adversary
Even if HDis calculated from another triplet harder than
thesource triplet, the adversarial example may become weak
in the late phase of training. The optimizer aims to reduce the
expectation of loss E[LT]towards zero as possible over the
distribution of triplets, and thus the E[H]of any given triplet
will tend to −γ, reducing the hardness of adversarial triplets
from HM as E[HD−HS]decreases accordingly. Weakened
adversarial examples are insufficient for robustness.
Intuitively, such deficiency can be alleviated with a
pseudo-hardness function that slightly increases the value
ofHDin the late phase of training. Denoting the loss value
from the previous training iteration as ℓt−1, we first normal-
ize it into [0,1]as¯ℓt−1= min( u, ℓt−1)/u, where uis a
manually specified constant. Then we can linearly shift the
E[HD]by a scaled constant ξ,i.e.,
gB(HD;ξ,¯ℓt−1) =HD+ξ·(1−¯ℓt−1). (6)
The deficiency can be alleviated in HM [HS, gB(HD)].
(a) Benign & Adversarial
     Triplets = Sextuplet Embeddings
(b) Loss on Benign and
     Adversarial Triplets Loss on BenignTriplet
Loss onAdversarial Triplet
(c) Intra-Class Structure
     Loss Term Intra-Class StructureLoss Term
Inter-ClassFigure 5. Illustration of intra-class structure loss term.
Apart from the deficiency in the late phase of training,
we speculate that relatively strong adversarial examples may
hinder the model from learning good embedding space for
the benign examples in the very early phase of training,
hence influence the model performance on benign examples.
Thus, HDshould lead to (1) relatively weak adversarial
examples in the early training phase (indicated by a large loss
value), and (2) relatively strong adversarial examples in the
late training phase (indicated by a small loss value), in order
to automatically balance the training objectives ( i.e., perfor-
mance on benign examples v.s.robustness). A satisfactory
pseudo-hardness function is a “Gradual Adversary”.
As an example, we propose a “Linear Gradual Adversary”
(LGA) pseudo-hardness function that is independent to any
benign triplets, incorporating our empirical observation that
HDshould remain Semihard [28], as follows:
gLGA(¯ℓt−1) =−γ·¯ℓt−1∈[−γ,0]. (7)
Our empirical observation is obtained from Sec. 4.1. And
the training objectives, namely performance on benign ex-
amples and robustness will be automatically balanced in
HM[HS, gLGA], leading to a better eventual overall perfor-
mance, as illustrated in Fig. 4. More complicated or non-
linear pseudo-hardness functions are left for future study.
3.3. Intra-Class Structure
During adversarial training with HM, the adversarial
counterpart of each given sample triplet is fed to the model,
and the triplet loss will enforce a good inter-class structure.
Since the anchor, positive sample, and their adversarial coun-
terpart belongs to the same class, it should be noted that the
intra-class structure can be enforced as well, but this has
been neglected by the existing DML defenses. Intra-class
structure is also important for robustness besides the inter-
class structure, because the attack may attempt to change the
rankings of samples in the same class [53].
We propose an additional loss function term to enforce
such intra-class structure, as shown in Fig. 5. Specifically,
the anchor aand its adversarial counterpart are separated
from the positive sample pby reusing the triplet loss, i.e.,
LICS=λ·LT(a, ϕ(A+ˆra),p; 0), (8)
where λis a constant weight for this loss term, and the
margin is set as zero to avoid negative effect. The LICSterm
can be appended to the loss function for adversarial training.
15328