Healthcare 2023 ,11, 1808 17 of 21
Several strategies were used in the preprocessing stage to prepare the data for anal-
ysis. These techniques included test–train splitting, random oversampling to address
the class imbalance, feature selection, k-fold validation, missing value handling, outlier
elimination, scaling, data imputation, label encoding, resampling methods like SMOTE,
feature engineering, feature extraction, discretisation, and PCA (Principal Component
Analysis). Optimisation strategies and hybrid feature selection methods were also used in
some approaches. Researchers use these strategies singly or in combination, depending
on the speciﬁc data and analysis requirements. These preprocessing procedures were
designed to ensure data quality, resolve missing values, deal with class imbalance, reduce
dimensionality, and prepare the dataset for later analysis and modelling activities.
The stacking method is the best choice for selecting an ensemble approach that can
produce more accurate results because it has demonstrated better forecast accuracy in the
reviewed studies. This literature review showed that stacking had the highest performance
accuracy, with 82.6% of the cases when researchers used this approach. The stacking
approach predicted liver and diabetes diseases with 100% success, as revealed in this
review study. Researchers used bagging (41 out of 45) and boosting (37 out of 45) more
frequently than stacking (23 out of 45) and voting (7 out of 45), but stacking and voting
showed better performance than the other two. In only 26.8% of the cases when it was
used, bagging showed the best performance. For the boosting approach, it was only
40.5%. According to this literature review, the most popular strategy is stacking, which has
produced more reliable outcomes than bagging and boosting despite being used in fewer
studies. Voting is the second most popular strategy, producing better results than bagging
and boosting but used less frequently compared with them.
Data leakage could lead to overly optimistic performance estimates, which could be a
concern in ensemble techniques for disease identiﬁcation. To address this issue, researchers
used techniques such as suitable cross-validation [ 63], train–validation–test split [ 64], fea-
ture engineering precautions, and model stacking precautions [ 65]. A three-way data split
divides the dataset into training, validation, and test sets, and cross-validation techniques
such as k-fold ensure an accurate separation of training and testing data. Commonly used
feature engineering procedures are scaling, imputation and feature selection which are
performed during the cross-validation cycle to prevent leakage. Because of model stacking
safety precautions, metalearners are educated on predictions that were not used during
training. These methods aided in lowering the risk of data leakage to ensure the legitimacy
and dependability of results.
Like other studies, we have some limitations in this research. First, we limited our
literature search to 2016–2023 for ﬁve major chronic diseases. This study, therefore, may
not include some crucial articles published before 2016 or considered conditions other
than these ﬁve. Second, we considered only four classic ensemble approaches (bagging,
boosting, stacking, and voting) for disease prediction. By deﬁnition, an ensemble approach
combines two or more weak classiﬁers to generate a stronger classiﬁer to obtain a better
predictive performance than each of its constituent classiﬁers. Although many different
ensemble approaches are in the current literature, including the ones based on time series
data [ 66–68], this study emphasised the four classic techniques. A future study could
ﬁll this gap. Third, when searching current literature, this study considered Australia’s
ﬁve prevalent chronic diseases. This prevalence could differ across different countries,
potentially leading to a selection bias. Therefore, broader coverage of chronic diseases
would make this study’s ﬁndings applicable across more countries. Fourth, there may be
articles in the literature that met our selection criteria but remained unnoticed by our search
criteria, potentially leading to another selection bias. The abovementioned limitations also
create potential research opportunities that researchers in the future could address.
6. Conclusions
Various early disease prediction strategies are being developed and improved using
machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence. In machine learning, the ensemble approach is