Healthcare 2023 ,11, 1808 5 of 21
loss by augmenting the existing model with the suitably weighted predictor at each it-
eration [ 10]. AdaBoost optimises the exponential loss function, whereas Gradient Boost
extends this approach to any differential loss function.
2.3. Stacking
Stacking is an assembly method in which one or more base-level classiﬁers are stacked
with a metalearner classiﬁer. The original data is used as input to numerous distinct models
in stacking [ 5]. The metaclassiﬁer is then utilised to estimate the input as well as the output
of each model, as well as the weights [ 7]. The best-performing models are chosen, while
the rest are rejected. Stacking employs a metaclassiﬁer to merge multiple base classiﬁers
trained using different learning methods on a single dataset. The model predictions are
mixed with the inputs from each successive layer to generate a new set of predictions [ 17].
Ensemble stacking is also known as mixing because all data is mixed to produce a forecast
or categorisation. Multilinear response (MLR) and probability distribution (PD) stacking
are the most advanced techniques. Groupings of numerous base-level classiﬁers (with
weakly connected predictions) are widely known to work well. Nahar et al. [ 3] propose
a stacking technique that employs correspondence analysis to ﬁnd correlations between
base-level classiﬁer predictions. Figure 4 depicts the framework for the stacking approach.
Healthcare 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 20 
 
 loss by augmenting the existing model with the suitably weighted predictor at each itera-
tion [10]. AdaBoost optimises the exponential loss function, whereas Gradient Boost ex-
tends this approach to any differential loss function.  
2.3. Stacking  
Stacking is an assembly method in which one or more base -level cla ssifiers are 
stacked with a metalearner classifier. The original data is used as input to numerous dis-
tinct models in stacking [5]. The metaclassifier is then utilised to estimate the input as well 
as the output of each model, as well as the weights [7]. The best -performing models are 
chosen, while the rest are rejected. Stacking employs a metaclassifier to merge multiple 
base classifiers trained using different learning methods on a single dataset. The model 
predictions are mixed with the inputs fr om each successive layer to generate a new set of 
predictions [17]. Ensemble stacking is also known as mixing because all data is mixed to 
produce a forecast or categorisation. Mul tilinear response (MLR) and probability distri-
bution (PD) stacking are the most advanced techniques. Groupings of numerous base -
level classifiers (with weakly connected predictions) are widely known to work well. Na-
har et al. [3] propose a stacking technique that employs correspondence analys is to find 
correlations between base -level classifier predictions. Figu re 4 depicts the framework for 
the stacking approach.  
 
Figure 4. The framework for the stacking approach. Different models are used on the input dataset, 
and the metalearner uses the ou tput from all the models to make the final predictions.  
The dataset is randomly divided into 𝑛 equal sections in this procedure. One set is 
utilised for testing and the rest for training in the nth -fold cross -validation [8]. We derive 
the predictions of various learning models using these training testing pair subsets, which 
are then used as metadata to build the metamodel [18]. The metamodel produces the final 
forecast, commonly known as the winner -takes-all technique [5]. Stacking is an integrated 
approach that uses the metalearning model to integrate the output of base models. If the 
final decision element is a linear model, the stacking is also kno wn as “model blending” 
or just “blending” [8]. Stacking involves fitting multiple different types of models to the 
same data and then using a different model to determine how to combine the results most 
efficiently [3]. 
2.4. Voting  
The Voting Classifier ensemble approach is a strategy that aggregates predictions 
from numerous independent models (base estimators) to make a final prediction [19]. It 
uses the “wisdom of the crowd” notion to create more accurate predictions by taking into 
account the aggregate judgement of numerous models rather than depending on a  single 
model. In the Voting Classifier, there are two types of voting: hard voting, in which each 
Figure 4. The framework for the stacking approach. Different models are used on the input dataset,
and the metalearner uses the output from all the models to make the ﬁnal predictions.
The dataset is randomly divided into nequal sections in this procedure. One set is
utilised for testing and the rest for training in the nth-fold cross-validation [ 8]. We derive
the predictions of various learning models using these training testing pair subsets, which
are then used as metadata to build the metamodel [ 18]. The metamodel produces the ﬁnal
forecast, commonly known as the winner-takes-all technique [ 5]. Stacking is an integrated
approach that uses the metalearning model to integrate the output of base models. If the
ﬁnal decision element is a linear model, the stacking is also known as “model blending”
or just “blending” [ 8]. Stacking involves ﬁtting multiple different types of models to the
same data and then using a different model to determine how to combine the results most
efﬁciently [3].
2.4. Voting
The Voting Classiﬁer ensemble approach is a strategy that aggregates predictions
from numerous independent models (base estimators) to make a ﬁnal prediction [ 19]. It
uses the “wisdom of the crowd” notion to create more accurate predictions by taking into
account the aggregate judgement of numerous models rather than depending on a single
model. In the Voting Classiﬁer, there are two types of voting: hard voting, in which each
model makes a prediction, and soft voting, in which each model forecasts the probability
or conﬁdence ratings for each class or label. The ﬁnal prediction is made by summing the