Healthcare 2023 ,11, 1808 14 of 21
4.1. Advantages and Limitations
Table 6 below details the beneﬁts and drawbacks of this study’s four main classes of
ensemble approaches.
Table 6. Advantages and limitations of the four ensemble classes considered in this study.
Ensemble Approach Advantages Limitations
Bagging- One beneﬁt of bagging is that it enables
several weak learners to work together
to outperform a single strong student.
- The variance in performance measures
is greatly reduced by bagging while
keeping the bias almost the same [3].
- Since sampling is performed by
bootstrapping, the training data
become more diversiﬁed, making this
approach effective [10].
- If the training set is particularly large,
training the model on a smaller data set
can still improve model accuracy while
saving computation time.- The fundamental drawback of bagging
is that it increases model accuracy at
the expense of interpretability [8]. For
example, if a single tree were used as
the base model, the diagram would be
more appealing and easier to
understand, but when bagging is
employed, this interpretability is lost.
- Another drawback is that we cannot
determine which features are being
chosen during sampling, which
increases the likelihood that crucial
data may be lost if some characteristics
are never used [10].
Boosting- As an ensemble model, boosting has a
simple-to-read and
easy-to-comprehend algorithm, making
it simple to interpret its predictions [5].
- Boosting is a robust technique that
efﬁciently reduces overﬁtting [3].- Boosting has the drawback of being
sensitive to outliers because every
classiﬁer is required to correct the
mistakes made by the predecessors. As
a result, the technique is overly reliant
on outliers [3].
- It is challenging to streamline the
process because every estimator rests
its accuracy on prior predictions.
Stacking- The advantage of stacking is that it can
use a variety of effective models to
accomplish classiﬁcation or regression
tasks and produce predictions that
perform better than any one model in
the ensemble.
- Stacking increases the precision of
model prediction.- Huge datasets will require more
computation time since each classiﬁer
must individually process the entire
dataset during training, which
increases computational time [5].
Voting- Voting takes advantage of distinct
classiﬁers’ strengths while
compensating for their ﬂaws, resulting
in increased performance [56].
- The voting can handle various data
types, including categorical, numerical,
and text data, allowing for a more
in-depth examination [57].
- It can also provide insights into
decision-making by analysing voting
patterns [21].- More complex, sensitive to correlated
classiﬁers, lack of interpretability, and
the potential for overﬁtting [19].
- The individual classiﬁers may not
signiﬁcantly improve accuracy if they
are closely connected.
- Classiﬁer diversity is critical for
improved performance.
- It may overﬁt training data if they are
not correctly regularised [7].
4.2. Frequency and Accuracy Comparison
Table 7 compares usage frequency and best performance for bagging, boosting, stack-
ing and voting algorithms used in the reviewed articles, as outlined in Tables 1–5. Although
boosting has been frequently employed (37 of 45), the frequency of the most accurate in
percentage is only 40.5%. Stacking, on the other hand, was used in 23 of the 45 studies,
but the accuracy rate is 82.6%. Random forest and random subspace are the upgraded