Citation: Mahajan, P .; Uddin, S.;
Hajati, F.; Moni, M.A. Ensemble
Learning for Disease Prediction: A
Review. Healthcare 2023 ,11, 1808.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
healthcare11121808
Academic Editor: Joaquim Carreras
Received: 6 May 2023
Revised: 19 June 2023
Accepted: 19 June 2023
Published: 20 June 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
healthcare
Review
Ensemble Learning for Disease Prediction: A Review
Palak Mahajan1
, Shahadat Uddin2,*
, Farshid Hajati1
and Mohammad Ali Moni3
1College of Engineering and Science, Victoria University, Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia
2School of Project Management, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney,
Forest Lodge, NSW 2037, Australia
3School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, Faculty of Health and Behavioural Sciences,
The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia
*Correspondence: shahadat.uddin@sydney.edu.au
Abstract: Machine learning models are used to create and enhance various disease prediction
frameworks. Ensemble learning is a machine learning technique that combines multiple classiﬁers
to improve performance by making more accurate predictions than a single classiﬁer. Although
numerous studies have employed ensemble approaches for disease prediction, there is a lack of
thorough assessment of commonly used ensemble approaches against highly researched diseases.
Consequently, this study aims to identify signiﬁcant trends in the performance accuracies of ensemble
techniques (i.e., bagging, boosting, stacking, and voting) against ﬁve hugely researched diseases
(i.e., diabetes, skin disease, kidney disease, liver disease, and heart conditions). Using a well-deﬁned
search strategy, we ﬁrst identiﬁed 45 articles from the current literature that applied two or more of the
four ensemble approaches to any of these ﬁve diseases and were published in 2016–2023. Although
stacking has been used the fewest number of times (23) compared with bagging (41) and boosting
(37), it showed the most accurate performance the most times (19 out of 23). The voting approach is
the second-best ensemble approach, as revealed in this review. Stacking always revealed the most
accurate performance in the reviewed articles for skin disease and diabetes. Bagging demonstrated
the best performance for kidney disease (ﬁve out of six times) and boosting for liver and diabetes
(four out of six times). The results show that stacking has demonstrated greater accuracy in disease
prediction than the other three candidate algorithms. Our study also demonstrates variability in the
perceived performance of different ensemble approaches against frequently used disease datasets.
The ﬁndings of this work will assist researchers in better understanding current trends and hotspots
in disease prediction models that employ ensemble learning, as well as in determining a more suitable
ensemble model for predictive disease analytics. This article also discusses variability in the perceived
performance of different ensemble approaches against frequently used disease datasets.
Keywords: machine learning; bagging; boosting; stacking; voting; disease prediction
1. Introduction
Ensemble learning is a machine learning approach that attempts to improve predictive
performance by mixing predictions from many models. Employing ensemble models aims
to reduce prediction generalisation error [ 1]. The ensemble technique decreases model
prediction error when the base models are diverse and independent. The technique turns to
the collective output of individuals to develop a forecast. Despite numerous base models,
the ensemble model operates and performs as a single model [ 2]. Most real data mining
solutions employ ensemble modelling methodologies. Ensemble approaches combine
different machine learning algorithms to create more accurate predictions than those made
by a single classiﬁer [ 3]. The ensemble model’s main purpose is to combine numerous weak
learners to form a powerful learner, boosting the model’s accuracy [ 4]. The main sources of
the mismatch between real and predicted values when estimating the target variable using
any machine-learning approach are noise, variation, and bias [5].
Healthcare 2023 ,11, 1808. https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare11121808 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/healthcare