Healthcare 2023 ,11, 1808 2 of 21
Disease diagnosis refers to the process of determining which disease best reﬂects a
person’s symptoms. The most challenging issue is diagnosis because certain symptoms and
indications are vague, and disease identiﬁcation is vital in treating any sickness [ 6]. Machine
learning is a ﬁeld that can help anticipate disease diagnosis based on prior training data [ 7].
Many scientists have created various machine learning algorithms to effectively identify a
wide range of conditions. Machine learning algorithms can create a model that predicts
diseases and their treatments [ 7]. Because of the vast amount of data available, disease
prediction has become a signiﬁcant research subject. Using these databases, researchers
create disease prediction models for decision-making systems, allowing for better disease
prediction and treatment at an early stage. Early diagnosis and timely treatment are the
most effective ways to lower disease-related mortality rates [ 8]. As a result, most medical
scientists are drawn to emerging machine learning-based predictive model technologies for
disease prediction.
Diabetes, skin cancer, kidney disease, liver disease, and heart conditions are common
diseases that can signiﬁcantly impact patients’ health. This research explores the literature
for disease prediction models based on these diseases. We initially identiﬁed several
types of disease prediction models by reviewing the current literature based on the ﬁve
disease categories considered using a search strategy. The scope of this study is to ﬁnd
essential trends among ensemble approaches used on various base model learners, their
accuracy, and the diseases being studied in the literature. Given the increasing relevance
and efﬁciency of the ensemble approach for predictive disease modelling, the ﬁeld of
study appears to be expanding. We found limited research that thoroughly evaluates
published studies applying ensemble learning for disease prediction. As a result, this study
aims to uncover critical trends across various ensemble techniques (i.e., bagging, boosting,
stacking, and voting), their performance accuracies, and the diseases being researched.
Furthermore, the beneﬁts and drawbacks of various ensemble techniques are summarised.
The outcomes of this study will help researchers better understand current trends and
hotspots in disease prediction models that use ensemble learning and help them establish
research priorities accordingly.
Following is a summary of the remaining sections of the article: the ensemble methods
(bagging, boosting, stacking, and voting ensemble approaches) are brieﬂy outlined in the
Section 2. The Section 3 of the document contains information on the scientiﬁc material
that was analysed from 2016 to 2023. A summary of the articles that used at least two of the
four classical ensemble approaches for one of the ﬁve major chronic diseases considered in
this study, and their performance accuracy, beneﬁts, and drawbacks are then outlined in
the Section 4. We also provided a comparison of the usage frequency and top performances
of the ensemble classes based on diseases taken into consideration in this section. Then, we
discuss the ﬁndings of this study, followed by the Section 6.
2. Ensemble Learning
Ensemble learning is a machine learning approach that combines predictions from
multiple models to increase predictive performance [ 7]. Ensemble techniques integrate
various machine learning algorithms to make more accurate predictions than a single
classiﬁer. The use of ensemble models is intended to reduce the generalisation error.
This technique reduces model prediction error when the base models are diverse and
independent. As outlined in Figure 1, The approach relies on the collective output of
individuals for generating forecasting. Although several base models exist, the ensemble
model works and behaves as a single model [7].