Healthcare 2023 ,11, 1808 4 of 21
dictions of the decision tree’s base classiﬁer [ 13]. For generating multiple split trees, this
technique uses a subset of training samples as well as a subset of characteristics. Multiple
decision trees are created to ﬁt each training subset. The dataset’s distribution of attributes
and samples is normally performed at random.
Another bagging technique is the extra trees, in which many decision trees combine
forecasts. It mixes a vast number of decision trees, like the random forest. On the other
hand, the other trees employ the entire sample while selecting splits at random. Although
assembling may increase computational complexity, bagging can be parallelisable. This
can signiﬁcantly reduce training time, subject to the availability of hardware for running
parallel models [ 5]. Because deep learning models take a long time to train, optimising
several deep models on various training bags is not an option.
2.2. Boosting
Boosting algorithms use weighted averages to transform poor learners into strong
ones. During boosting, the original dataset is partitioned into several subgroups. The
subset is used to train the classiﬁer, which results in a sequence of models with modest
performance [ 7]. The elements that were incorrectly categorised by the prior model are
used to build new subsets. The ensembling procedure then improves its performance by
integrating the weak models using a cost function. It explained that, unlike bagging, each
model functions independently before aggregating the inputs, with no model selection at
the end. Boosting is a method of consecutively placing multiple weak pupils in a ﬂexible
manner. Intuitively, the new model focuses on the discoveries that have been shown to be
the most difﬁcult to match up until now, resulting in a good learner with less bias at the end
of the process [ 10]. Boosting can be used to solve regression and identiﬁcation problems,
such as bagging. Figure 3 illustrates the framework of the boosting approach.
Healthcare 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  4 of 20 
 
 technique uses a subset of training samples as well as a subset of characteristics. Multiple 
decision trees are created to fit each training subset. The dataset’s distribution of attributes 
and samples is normall y performed at random.  
Another bagging technique is the extra trees, in which many decision trees combine 
forecasts. It mixes a vast number of decision trees, like the random forest. On the other 
hand, the other trees employ the entire sample while selecti ng splits at random. Although 
assembling may increase computational complexity, bagging can be parallelisable. This 
can significantly reduce training time, subject to the availability of hardware for running 
parallel models [5]. Because deep learning models take a long time to train, optimising 
several deep models on various training bags is not an option.  
2.2. Boosting  
Boosting algorithms u se weighted averages to transform poor learners into strong 
ones. During boosting, the original dataset is partitioned into several subgroups. The sub-
set is used to train the classifier, which results in a sequence of models with modest per-
formance [7]. The elements that were incorrectly categorised by the prior model are used 
to build new subsets. The ensembling procedur e then improves its performance by inte-
grating the weak models using a cost function. It explained that, u nlike bagging, each 
model functions independently before aggregating the inputs, with no model selection at 
the end. Boosting is a method of consecuti vely placing multiple weak pupils in a flexible 
manner. Intuitively, the new model focuses on the discoveries that have been shown to be 
the most difficult to match up until now, resulting in a good learner with less bias at the 
end of the process [10]. Boosting can be used to solve regression and identification prob-
lems, such  as bagging. Figure 3 illustrates the framework of the boosting approach.  
Figure 3. The framework used in the boosting approach. Different models are consid-
ered, and each model tries to com pensate for the weakness of its predecessor by reduc-
ing the error.  
When compared to a single weak learner, strategies such as majority voting in clas-
sification problems or a linear combination of weak learners in regression problems result 
in superior pred iction [14]. The boosting approach trains a weak learner, computes its 
predictions, selects training samples that were mistakenly categorised, and then trains a 
subsequent weak learner with an updated training set that includes the incorrectly classi-
fied instances from  the previous training session [15]. Boosting algorithms such as Ada-
Boost and Gradient Boosting have been applied in various secto rs [16]. AdaBoost employs 
a greedy strategy to minimise a convex surrogate function upper limit by  misclassification 
Training 
dataset  
Combine 
Output  
Final 
Output  
Weighted 
Data 2  
Weighted 
Data N  
Model 1  
 Model 2  
 Model 3  
 Model N  
Error  
Error  
Error  
Weighted
Data 1  
Figure 3. The framework used in the boosting approach. Different models are considered, and each
model tries to compensate for the weakness of its predecessor by reducing the error.
When compared to a single weak learner, strategies such as majority voting in classi-
ﬁcation problems or a linear combination of weak learners in regression problems result
in superior prediction [ 14]. The boosting approach trains a weak learner, computes its
predictions, selects training samples that were mistakenly categorised, and then trains a
subsequent weak learner with an updated training set that includes the incorrectly classiﬁed
instances from the previous training session [ 15]. Boosting algorithms such as AdaBoost
and Gradient Boosting have been applied in various sectors [ 16]. AdaBoost employs a
greedy strategy to minimise a convex surrogate function upper limit by misclassiﬁcation