Healthcare 2023 ,11, 1808 16 of 21
other machine learning methods, the performance of the stacking approach can be affected
by various factors, including dataset attributes, clinical features, and modelling choices.
Ensemble approaches that balance performance and interpretability differently include
bagging, boosting, stacking, and voting. Bagging combines many models, producing great
accuracy but no comprehensive understanding of feature relationships. Boosting enhances
the model by giving samples that were incorrectly classiﬁed as more weight, but it might
make the model more complex and challenging to understand [ 32]. Stacking is more
difﬁcult to understand and uses a metalearner to combine many models. Forecasts are
gathered through voting using the majority or weighted voting method, balancing accuracy,
and interpretability [ 21,45]. The selection is based on the application’s requirements,
considering accuracy, interpretability, and issue domain complexity.
4.3. Ensemble Performance against Datasets
Our reviewed 45 articles used 23 distinct datasets from various open-access sources,
including Kaggle and UCI, as evident in Tables 1–5. The ﬁve most used datasets are
UCI Cleveland Heart Disease [ 58], UCI Chronic Kidney [ 59], UCI Dermatology [ 60], UCI
Indian Liver Patient [ 61], and Pima Indians Diabetes [ 62]. All four ensemble approaches
considered in this study have been applied to these datasets. However, not each of these
four ensemble approaches has been found as the best-performing against each dataset,
as revealed in Figure 6. The voting approach was found as the best performing only for
two datasets (Pima Indians Diabetes and UCI Cleveland Heart Disease). It does not show
the highest accuracy for the other three datasets. Stacking has been found to offer the
best accuracy in four datasets, except for the UCI Chronic Kidney. Only the boosting
approach delivered the best accuracy for all ﬁve datasets. Bagging has been found as the
best performing for three datasets.
Healthcare 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  15 of 20 
 
 producing great accuracy but no comprehensive understanding of feature relationships. 
Boosting enhances the model by giving samples that were incorrectly classified as more 
weight, but it might make the model more complex and challenging to understand [32]. 
Stacking is more difficult to understand and uses a metalearner to combine many models. 
Forecasts are gathered through voting using the majority or weighted voting method, bal-
ancing accuracy , and interpretability  [21,45]. The selection is based on the application’s 
requirements, considering accuracy, interpretability , and issue domain complexity . 
4.3. Ensemble Performance against Datasets  
Our reviewed 45 articles used 23 distinct datasets from various open -access sources, 
including Kaggle and UCI, as evident in Tables 1–5. The five most used datasets are UCI 
Cleveland Heart Disease [58], UCI Chronic Kidney [59], UCI Dermatol ogy [60], UCI In-
dian Liver Patient [61], and Pima Indians Diabetes [62]. All four ensemble approach es 
considered in this study have been applied to these datasets. However, not each of these 
four ensemble approaches has been found as the best -performing against each dataset, as 
revealed in Figure 6. The voting approach was found as the best  performing o nly for two 
datasets (Pima Indians Diabetes and UCI Cleveland Heart Disease). It does not show the 
highest accuracy for the other three datasets. Stacking has been found to offer the best 
accuracy in four datasets , except for the UCI Chronic Kidney. Only the boosting approach 
delivered the best accuracy for all five datasets. Bagging has been found as the best  per-
forming for three datasets.  
 
Figure 6. The number of times each ensemble approach has been found as the best  performing 
against the five frequently used datasets.  
5. Discussion  
Through machine learning, numerous methods for the early identification of diseases 
are being produced and enhanced. The ensemble method in machine learning increases 
disease forecast accuracy by reducing bias and variation. As a result, it is the best way to 
identify diseases. Although there are other ensemble approach variations, we have con-
sidered bagging, boosting, stacking, and voting for disease prediction. Heart disease pre-
diction has received more research a ttention than skin cancer, liver, diabetes, and kidney 
diseases, according to our study of the five chronic diseases. Our review also shows that 
the accuracy of the basic classifier can be improved by applying an ensemble method to 
other machine learning a lgorithms. Disease prediction models may assist doctors in 24
23
11
133
242
23
0123456789
UCI-Dermatology Pima Indians
DiabetesUCI-Chronic
KidneyUCI-Cleveland
Heart DiseaseUCI-Indian Liver
PatientDataset performance against four ensemble approaches
Bagging Boosting Stacking Voting
Figure 6. The number of times each ensemble approach has been found as the best performing
against the ﬁve frequently used datasets.
5. Discussion
Through machine learning, numerous methods for the early identiﬁcation of diseases
are being produced and enhanced. The ensemble method in machine learning increases
disease forecast accuracy by reducing bias and variation. As a result, it is the best way
to identify diseases. Although there are other ensemble approach variations, we have
considered bagging, boosting, stacking, and voting for disease prediction. Heart disease
prediction has received more research attention than skin cancer, liver, diabetes, and kidney
diseases, according to our study of the ﬁve chronic diseases. Our review also shows that the
accuracy of the basic classiﬁer can be improved by applying an ensemble method to other
machine learning algorithms. Disease prediction models may assist doctors in identifying
high-risk individuals, improving individual health outcomes and care cost-effectiveness.