Healthcare 2023 ,11, 1808 18 of 21
the best for disease prediction because it reduces bias and variance, improving the model’s
disease prediction accuracy. Bagging, boosting, stacking, and voting are the four main
ensemble approaches that are frequently used for disease prediction. According to this liter-
ature review, using an ensemble approach on other machine learning algorithms improves
the accuracy of the base classiﬁer. This paper provides a complete evaluation of the litera-
ture on disease prediction models utilising various ensemble classes and an overview of the
ensemble technique. The descriptions of the literature-based publications provide essential
information regarding how these algorithms fared in various combinations. We extracted
the 45 papers reviewed in this study using the search approach speciﬁed in Section 3. This
research can help scholars decide whether ensemble approaches are suited for their project.
This research can also assist them in determining the most accurate ensemble strategy for
disease prediction. We found that stacking has been used in half the studies considered for
comparison with bagging and boosting, but it has shown 82.6% best performance accuracy.
On the other hand, bagging has been used in most of the studies but showed the least
prominent results of just 26.8%, followed by boosting, which has shown the best results
40.5% of the time.
Funding: This research received no speciﬁc grant from public, commercial, or not-for-proﬁt
funding agencies.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Data can be shared upon request.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare that they do not have any conﬂict of interest.
Abbreviations
ANN Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
CART Classiﬁcation and Regression Tree
CAFL Chaos Fireﬂy Attribute Reduction and Fuzzy Logic
DT Decision Tree
DS Data Science
ETC Extra Tree Classiﬁer
GBC Gradient Boosting Classiﬁer
G-NB Gaussian Naive Bayes
KFUH King Fahad University Hospital
KNN K-Nearest Neighbour
LR Logistic Regression
LDA Linear Discriminant Analysis
MLP Multilayer Perceptron
MLR Multi-linear Response
NB Naive Bayes
NHANES National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
NN Neural Network
PART Projective Adaptive Resonance Theory
PCA Principal Component Analysis
QDA Quadratic Discriminant Analysis
RF Random Forest
SCRL Spatially Consistent Representation Learning
SGD Stochastic Gradient Classiﬁer
SMO Sequential Minimal Optimisation
SMOTE Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique
SVC Support Vector Classiﬁer
SVM Support Vector Machine