Healthcare 2023 ,11, 1808 6 of 21
expected probabilities across all models and choosing the class with the highest average
probability [ 20]. Weighted voting allows multiple models to have different inﬂuences on
the ﬁnal forecast, which can be assigned manually or learned automatically based on the
performance of the individual models. Because of this diversity, different models can affect
the ﬁnal prediction differently [19].
By combining the strengths of several models, the Voting Classiﬁer increases overall
performance and robustness, especially when distinct models have diverse properties and
generate independent predictions. The Voting Classiﬁer can overcome biases or limits
in a single model and produce more accurate and trustworthy predictions by using the
collective decision-making of numerous models. Overall, Voting Classiﬁer is a versatile
ensemble strategy that can be applied to a variety of machine learning applications by
using the capabilities of different models to make more accurate predictions [ 7]. The
Voting Classiﬁer is a versatile ensemble approach in machine learning that provides a
number of beneﬁts. By integrating various models with diverse strengths and weaknesses,
it enhances accuracy, robustness, and model diversity while minimising bias and variance
in predictions.
The Voting Classiﬁer’s ensemble nature improves model stability by decreasing over-
ﬁtting and increasing model variety [ 21]. It offers various voting procedures like as hard
voting, soft voting, and weighted voting, allowing for customisation based on the tasks
and characteristics of speciﬁc models. Furthermore, the Voting Classiﬁer can improve
interpretability by analysing the contributions of many models, assisting in understanding
the underlying patterns and decision-making process [ 22]. Overall, the Voting Classiﬁer is
an effective tool for enhancing predictive performance in various machine learning tasks.
3. Methods
This study examined the scientiﬁc literature for ﬁve major chronic diseases and the
algorithms used for their predictive analytics. This study examined research articles from
IEEE, ScienceDirect, PubMed, Springer, and Scopus from 2016 to 2023. The research studies
reviewed here were based on ﬁve important disease prediction categories: heart, skin,
liver, kidney, and diabetes, all of which are known to cause a variety of ailments. These
are the major chronic diseases (MCDs) around the world. Governments worldwide are
concerned about the disease burden caused by MCDs. Almost 1 in 2 Australians (47%)
had one or more MCDs in 2017–2018, and nearly 9 in 10 (89%) of deaths in Australia in
2018 were associated with them [ 23]. The World Health Organization (WHO) considers
MCDs an “invisible epidemic” that continues to be widely ignored and hinders many
countries’ economic development [ 24]. For these reasons, we considered these diseases.
Furthermore, signiﬁcant research was conducted to identify publications that used two or
more of the four classical ensemble approaches (bagging, boosting, stacking, and voting)
for disease prediction.
Springer is the world’s largest online repository of scientiﬁc, technological, and medical
periodicals. Elsevier’s Scopus is an online bibliometric database. It was picked for its high
level of accuracy and consistency. PubMed supports the open discovery and retrieval of
biomedical and life sciences publications to enhance individual and global health. More
than 35 million links and summaries from biomedical publications are available in the
PubMed database [ 25]. Nearly four million veriﬁed journal and conference articles are
available in the IEEE Xplore digital collection to help you feed creativity, build on earlier
research, and inspire new ideas. We followed a thorough literature search approach to
discover all relevant publications in this study. On 30 May 2023, we used the following
search phrases for this search.
 “Disease prediction” and “ensemble method”
 “Disease prediction” and “ensemble machine learning”
 “Disease diagnosis” and “ensemble machine learning”
 “Disease diagnosis” and “ensemble learning”