Random Noises
GAN DiscriminatorFake visual samples
Real/Fake?
GAN GeneratorReal Seen Samples
Unseen SamplesClassifier
Zebra(Seen)
(Unseen)Semantic Attributes
Soul Samples Regularization
Leverage the confident results
Classification Loss
Figure 2. Idea illustration of our LisGAN (Leveraging invariant side GAN). We train a conditional WGAN to generate fake unseen images
from random noises and semantic attributes. Multiple soul samples for each class are introduced to regularize the generator. Unseen
samples classiﬁed with high conﬁdence are leveraged to ﬁne-tune ﬁnal results.
mapping function. Recently, by taking advantage of gener-
ative adversarial networks [3, 8], several methods [34, 40]
are proposed to directly generate unseen samples from their
corresponding attributes, which converts the conventional
zero-shot learning to a classic supervised learning problem.
2.2. Generative Adversarial Nets
A typical generative adversarial networks (GANs) [8]
consists of two components: a generator and a discrimina-
tor. The two players are trained in an adversarial manner.
Speciﬁcally, the generator Gtries to generate fake images
from input noises to fool the discriminator, while the dis-
criminator Dattempts to distinguish real images and fake
ones. In general, the input of Gis random noise and the
output is the synthesized image. The inputs of Dare both
real images and fake images, the output is a probability dis-
tribution. In this paper, we deploy Gto generate sample
features instead of image pixels.
Although GANs has shown quite impressive results and
profound impacts, the vanilla GAN is very hard to train.
Wasserstein GANs (WGANs) [3] presents an alternative to
traditional GAN training. WGANs can improve the sta-
bility of learning, get rid of problems like mode collapse,
and provide meaningful learning curves useful for debug-
ging and hyperparameter searches. In addition, conditional
GANs [23] are proposed to enhance the outputs of tradi-
tional GANs. With conditional GANs, one can incorporate
the class labels and other information into the generator and
discriminator to synthesize speciﬁed samples.
3. The Proposed Method
3.1. Deﬁnitions and Notations
Givennlabeled seen samples with both visual features
X∈Rd×nand semantic descriptions A∈Rm×nfor train-
ing, zero-shot learning aims to recognize nuunknown vi-
sual samples Xu∈Rd×nuwhich only have semantic at-
tributesAu∈Rm×nufor training. Let YandYube thelabel space of XandXu, respectively, in zero-shot learning
we haveY∩Yu=∅. Suppose that we have CandCucat-
egories in total for seen data and unseen data, respectively,
classical zero-shot learning recognizes Xuby only search-
ing inCu, while generalized zero-shot learning searches in
C∪Cs. The semantic descriptions AandAuare either pro-
vided as binary/numerical vectors or word embedding/RNN
features. Each semantic description acorresponds to a cat-
egoryy. Formally, given {X,A,Y}and{Au,Yu}for
training, the task of zero shot learning is to learn a function
f:Xu→ Yuand generalized zero shot learning is to learn
a function f:{X,Xu} → Y ∪Y u.
3.2. Overall Idea
In this paper, we take advantage of GANs to directly gen-
erate fake visual features for unseen samples from random
noises and the semantic descriptions. Then, the synthesized
visual features are used as references to classify real unseen
samples. Since we only have Auand the GAN discrim-
inator cannot access Xuin the training stage, the real or
fake game, therefore, cannot be played. Thus, we mainly
train our GAN on the seen classes. At the same time, we
deploy the conditional GANs so that the class embedding
can be incorporated into both generator Gand discrimina-
torD. Since{A,Y}and{Au,Yu}are interconnected,
i.e.,AandAuhave the same semantic space, the condi-
tional GAN which generates high-quality samples for seen
classes is also expected to generate high-quality samples for
unseen categories. The main idea of this paper is illustrated
in Fig 2. Compared with existing methods which also de-
ploy GANs for zero-shot learning, our novelty comes from
two aspects. The ﬁrst one is that we introduce multiple soul
samples per class to regularize the generator. The second
is that we leverage the unseen samples which are classi-
ﬁed with high conﬁdence to facilitate the subsequent un-
seen samples. Experiments reported in section 5 show that
we can achieve a signiﬁcant improvement against state-of-
the-art methods on various datasets.
7404