problem. In such a learning paradigm, however, the chal-
lenges of zero-shot learning have been also passed on to the
GANs. In the GANs based paradigms for zero-shot learn-
ing, we have to address the spurious and soulless generating
problem. Speciﬁcally, we generally have only one seman-
tic description, e.g., one attributes vector, one article or one
paragraph of texts, for a speciﬁc category, but the semantic
description is inherently related to a great mass of images in
the visual space. For instance, “a tetrapod with a tail” can
be mapped to many animals, e.g., cats, dogs and horses. At
the same time, some objects from different categories have
very similar attributes, such as “tigers” and “ligers”. Thus,
the generative adversarial networks for zero-shot learning
must challenge two issues: 1) how to guarantee the genera-
tive diversity based on limited and even similar attributes?
2)how to make sure that each generated sample is highly
related with the real samples and corresponding semantic
descriptions? However, since deploying GANs to address
the ZSL problem is a new topic, most of existing works did
not explicitly address the two issues. In this paper, we pro-
pose a novel approach which takes the two aspects into con-
sideration and carefully handles them in the formulation.
At ﬁrst, to guarantee that the generated samples are
meaningful, we propose to generate samples from random
noises which are conditioned with the class semantic de-
scriptions. At the same time, we also introduce the super-
vised classiﬁcation loss in the GAN discriminator to pre-
serve the inter-class discrimination during the adversarial
training. Furthermore, to ensure that each synthesized sam-
ple (the varying side of generative zero-shot learning) is
highly related with the real ones and corresponding seman-
tic descriptions (the invariant side), we introduce soul sam-
ples in this paper, as shown in Fig. 3. For unseen classes,
the visual characteristics of a generated sample only depend
on the semantic descriptions. Thus, the semantic informa-
tion is the soul of the generated samples. The soul sample
must be not very speciﬁc so that it can plainly visualize the
most semantically-meaningful aspects and relate to as many
samples as possible. For the seen images, therefore, we de-
ﬁne that a soul sample is an average representation of them.
For the generated samples, we regularize them to be close to
soul samples. Thus, we can guarantee that each generated
sample is highly related with the real ones and correspond-
ing semantic descriptions.
To summarize, the main contributions of this paper are:
1) We propose a novel ZSL method LisGAN which takes
advantage of generative adversarial networks. Speciﬁ-
cally, we deploy the conditional GANs to tackle the two
issues: generative diversity and generative reliability. To
improve the quality of generated features, we introduce
soul samples which are deﬁned as the representations of
each category. By further considering the multi-view na-
ture of different images, we propose to deﬁne multiplesoul samples for each class. We regularize each gener-
ated sample to be close to at least one soul sample so that
the varying side in generative zero-shot learning would
not be divorced from the invariant side.
2) At the zero-shot recognition stage, we propose that if we
have high conﬁdence in recognizing an unseen sample,
the sample (with its assigned pseudo label) will be lever-
aged as the reference to recognize other unseen samples.
Speciﬁcally, we propose to use two classiﬁers, which are
deployed in a cascade way, to achieve a coarse-to-ﬁne
result. We also report a simple yet efﬁcient method to
measure the classiﬁcation conﬁdence in this paper.
3) Extensive experiments on ﬁve widely used datasets ver-
ify that our proposed method can outperform state-of-
the-art methods with remarkable improvements.
2. Related Work
2.1. Zero­Shot Learning
Inspired by the human ability that one can recognize an
object at the ﬁrst glance by only knowing some semantic
descriptions of it, zero-shot learning [4, 6, 13, 17, 35] aims
to learn a model with good generalization ability which can
recognize unseen objects by only giving some semantic at-
tributes. A typical zero-shot learning model is trained on
visual features which only contain the seen samples and se-
mantic features which contain both seen and unseen sam-
ples. Since the seen objects and unseen ones are only con-
nected in the semantic space and the unseen objects need
to be recognized by the visual features, zero-shot learning
methods generally learn a visual-semantic embedding with
the seen samples. At the zero-shot classiﬁcation stage, un-
seen samples are projected into the semantic space and la-
beled by semantic attributes [5,15,16,29]. Instead of learn-
ing a visual-semantic embedding, some previous works also
propose to learn a semantic-visual mapping so that the un-
seen samples can be represented by the seen ones [12, 30].
In addition, there are also some works to learn an interme-
diate space shared by the visual features and semantic fea-
tures [4, 38, 39]. Besides, ZSL is also related with domain
adaptation and cold-start recommendation [18–21].
From the recent literatures, typical zero-shot learning
tasks are zero-shot classiﬁcation [11, 36], zero-shot re-
trieval [22] and generalized zero-shot recognition [32]. The
main difference between zero-shot learning and generalized
zero-shot recognition is that the former only classiﬁes the
unseen samples in the unseen category and the latter rec-
ognizes samples, which can be either seen ones and unseen
ones, in both seen and unseen categories.
It is easy to observe that conventional zero-shot learning
methods are indirect . They usually need to learn a space
7403