Leveraging the Invariant Side of Generative Zero-Shot Learning
Jingjing Li1, Mengmeng Jing1, Ke Lu1, Zhengming Ding2, Lei Zhu3, Zi Huang4
1University of Electronic Science and Technology of China;3Shandong Normal Unversity
2Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis;4University of Queensland
lijin117@yeah.net
Abstract
Conventional zero-shot learning (ZSL) methods gener-
ally learn an embedding, e.g., visual-semantic mapping,
to handle the unseen visual samples via an indirect man-
ner. In this paper, we take the advantage of generative
adversarial networks (GANs) and propose a novel method,
named leveraging invariant side GAN (LisGAN), which can
directly generate the unseen features from random noises
which are conditioned by the semantic descriptions. Specif-
ically, we train a conditional Wasserstein GANs in which
the generator synthesizes fake unseen features from noises
and the discriminator distinguishes the fake from real via a
minimax game. Considering that one semantic description
can correspond to various synthesized visual samples, and
the semantic description, ﬁguratively, is the soul of the gen-
erated features, we introduce soul samples as the invariant
side of generative zero-shot learning in this paper. A soul
sample is the meta-representation of one class. It visualizes
the most semantically-meaningful aspects of each sample in
the same category. We regularize that each generated sam-
ple (the varying side of generative ZSL) should be close to
at least one soul sample (the invariant side) which has the
same class label with it. At the zero-shot recognition stage,
we propose to use two classiﬁers, which are deployed in
a cascade way, to achieve a coarse-to-ﬁne result. Experi-
ments on ﬁve popular benchmarks verify that our proposed
approach can outperform state-of-the-art methods with sig-
niﬁcant improvements1.
1. Introduction
In general, a computer vision algorithm can only handle
the objects which appeared in the training dataset. In other
words, an algorithm can only recognize the objects which
are seen before. However, for some speciﬁc real-world ap-
plications, we either do not have the training sample of one
object or the sample is too expensive to be labeled. For
1Codes and datasets are available at github.com/lijin118/LisGAN
Seen Samples
Unseen Sample
Semantic Attributes Generated fake samples
G
A
N
Train
Input
Recognize
Figure 1. Zero-shot learning with GANs, i.e., generative ZSL.
instance, we want the approach to trigger a message when
it encounters a sample with a rare gene mutation from one
species. Unfortunately, we did not have the visual features
of the sample for training. The things we have are merely
the images taken from normal instances and some semantic
descriptions which describe the characteristics of the muta-
tion and how it differs from normal ones. Conventional ma-
chine learning algorithms would fail in this task, but a hu-
man being would not. A human being is able to recognize
an unseen object at the ﬁrst glance by only reading some
semantic descriptions. Inspired by this, zero-shot learning
(ZSL) [5,32,35,36] is proposed to handle unseen objects by
the model which is trained on only seen objects and seman-
tic descriptions about both seen and unseen categories.
Since the seen and unseen classes are connected by the
semantic descriptions, a natural idea is to learn a visual-
semantic mapping so that both seen and unseen samples can
be compared in the semantic space. For instance, previous
works [5, 37–39] learn either shallow or deep embeddings
for zero-shot learning. These methods handle the unseen
samples via an indirect way. Considering that one semantic
description can correspond to enormous number of visual
samples, the performance of zero-shot learning is restricted
with the limited semantic information.
Recently, thanks to the advances in generative adversar-
ial networks (GANs) [8], a few approaches are proposed to
directly generate unseen samples from the random noises
and semantic descriptions [24, 34, 40], as shown in Fig. 1.
With the generated unseen samples, zero-shot learning can
be transformed to a general supervised machine learning
7402