rather than learning directly from the shared feature pool,
a soft attention mask is applied at each convolution block
in the shared network. In this way, each attention mask
automatically determines the importance of the shared fea-
tures for the respective task, allowing learning of both task-
shared and task-speciﬁc features in a self-supervised, end-
to-end manner. This ﬂexibility enables much more expres-
sive combinations of features to be learned for generali-
sation across tasks, whilst still allowing for discriminative
features to be tailored for each individual task. Further-
more, automatically choosing which features to share and
which to be task speciﬁc allows for a highly efﬁcient archi-
tecture with far fewer parameters than multi-task architec-
tures which have explicit separation of tasks [ 26,20].
MTAN can be built on any feed-forward neural network
depending on the type of tasks. We ﬁrst evaluate MTAN
with SegNet [ 1], an encoder-decoder network on the tasks
of semantic segmentation and depth estimation on the out-
door CityScapes dataset [ 4], and then with an additional
task of surface normal prediction on the more challenging
indoor dataset NYUv2 [ 21]. We also test our approach with
a different backbone architecture, Wide Residual Network
[31], on the recently proposed Visual Decathlon Challenge
[23], to solve 10 individual image classiﬁcation tasks. Re-
sults show that MTAN outperforms several baselines and is
competitive with the state-of-the-art for multi-task learning,
whilst being more parameter efﬁcient and therefore scaling
more gracefully with the number of tasks. Furthermore, our
method shows greater robustness to the choice of weight-
ing scheme in the loss function compared to baselines. As
part of our evaluation of this robustness, we also propose a
novel weighting scheme, Dynamic Weight Average (DWA),
which adapts the task weighting over time by considering
the rate of change of the loss for each task.
2. Related Work
The term Multi-Task Learning (MTL) has been broadly
used in machine learning [ 2,8,6,17], with similarities to
transfer learning [ 22,18] and continual learning [ 29]. In
computer vision, multi-task learning has been used to for
learning similar tasks such as image classiﬁcation in mul-
tiple domains [ 23], pose estimation and action recognition
[9], and dense prediction of depth, surface normals, and se-
mantic classes [ 20,7]. In this paper, we consider two impor-
tant aspects of multi-task learning: how can a good multi-
task network architecture be designed, and how to balance
feature sharing in multi-task learning across all tasks?
Most multi-task learning network architectures for com-
puter vision are designed based on existing CNN architec-
tures. For example, Cross-Stitch Networks [ 20] contain one
standard feed-forward network per task, with cross-stitch
units to allow features to be shared across tasks. The self-
supervised approach of [ 6], based on the ResNet101 archi-tecture [ 30], learns a regularised combination of features
from different layers of a single shared network. UberNet
[16] proposes an image pyramid approach to process im-
ages across multiple resolutions, where for each resolution,
additional task-speciﬁc layers are formed top of the shared
VGG-Net [ 27]. The Progressive Networks [ 26] uses a se-
quence of incrementally-trained networks to transfer knowl-
edge between tasks. However, architectures such as Cross-
Stitch Networks and Progressive Networks require a large
number of network parameters, and scale linearly with the
number of tasks. In contrast, our model requires only a
rough 10% increase in parameters for per learning task.
On the balancing of feature sharing in multi-task learn-
ing, there is extensive experimental analysis in [ 20,14],
with both papers arguing that different amounts of sharing
and weighting tend to work best for different tasks. One
example of weighting tasks appropriately is with the use
of weight uncertainty [ 14], which modiﬁes the loss func-
tions in multi-task learning using task uncertainty. Another
method is that of GradNorm [ 3], which manipulates gradi-
ent norms over time to control the training dynamics. As an
alternative to using task losses to determine task difﬁculties,
Dynamic Task Prioritisation [ 10] encourages prioritisation
of difﬁcult tasks directly using performance metrics such as
accuracy and precision.
3. Multi-Task Attention Network
We now introduce our novel multi-task learning archi-
tecture, the Multi-Task Attention Network (MTAN). Whilst
the architecture can be incorporated into any feed-forward
network, in the following section we demonstrate how to
build MTAN upon an encoder-decoder network, SegNet
[1]. This example conﬁguration allows for image-to-image
dense pixel-level prediction, such as semantic segmenta-
tion, depth estimation, and surface normal prediction.
3.1. Architecture Design
MTAN consists of two components: a single shared net-
work, and Ktask-speciﬁc attention networks. The shared
network can be designed based on the particular task, whilst
each task-speciﬁc network consists of a set of attention
modules, which link with the shared network. Each at-
tention module applies a soft attention mask to a particular
layer of the shared network, to learn task-speciﬁc features.
As such, the attention masks can be considered as feature
selectors from the shared network, which are automatically
learned in an end-to-end manner, whilst the shared network
learns a compact global feature pool across all tasks.
Figure 2shows a detailed visualisation of our network
based on VGG-16 [ 27], illustrating the encoder half of Seg-
Net. The decoder half of SegNet is then symmetric to VGG-
16. As shown, each attention module learns a soft attention
mask, which itself is dependent on the features in the shared
1872