on three learning tasks: 13-class semantic segmentation de-
ﬁned in [ 5], true depth data which is recorded by depth cam-
eras from Microsoft Kinect, and surface normals which are
provided in [ 7]. To speed up training, all training and vali-
dation images were resized to [288×384] resolution.
Compared to CityScapes, NYUv2 contains images of in-
door scenes, which are much more complex since the view-
points can vary signiﬁcantly, changable lighting conditions
are present, and the appearance for each object class shifts
widely in texture and shape. We evaluate performance on
different datasets, together with different numbers of tasks,
and further with different class complexities, in order to at-
tain a comprehensive understanding on how our proposed
method behaves and scales under a range of scenarios.
2-class 7-class 19-class
backgroundvoid void
ﬂat road, sidewalk
construction building, wall, fence
object pole, trafﬁc light, trafﬁc sign
nature vegetation, terrain
sky sky
foregroundhuman person, rider
vehicle carm truck, bus, caravan, trailer, train, motorcycle
Table 1: Three levels of semantic classes for the CityScapes
data used in our experiments.
4.1.2 Baselines
Most image-to-image multi-task learning architectures are
designed based on speciﬁc feed-forward neural networks,
or implemented on varying network architectures, and thus
they are typically not directly comparable based on pub-
lished results. Our method is general and can be applied to
any feed-forward neural network, and so for a fair compar-
ison, we implemented 5 different network architectures (2
single-task + 3 multi-task) based on SegNet [ 1], which we
consider as baselines:
•Single-Task, One Task: The vanilla SegNet for single
task learning.
•Single-Task, STAN: A Single-Task Attention Network,
where we directly apply our proposed MTAN whilst only
performing a single task.
•Multi-Task, Split (Wide, Deep): The standard multi-
task learning, which splits at the last layer for the ﬁnal
prediction for each speciﬁc task. We introduce two ve-
rions of Split :Wide , where we adjusted the number of
convolutional ﬁlters, and Deep , where we adjusted the
number of convolutional layers, until Split had at least
as many parameters as MTAN.•Multi-Task, Dense: A shared network together with
task-speciﬁc networks, where each task-speciﬁc network
receives all features from the shared network, without
any attention modules.
•Multi-Task, Cross-Stitch: The Cross-Stitch Network
[20], a previously proposed adaptive multi-task learning
approach, which we implemented on SegNet.
Note that all the baselines were designed to have at least
as many parameters than our proposed MTAN, and were
tested to validate that our proposed method’s better perfor-
mance is due to the attention modules, rather than simply
due to the increase in network parameters.
4.1.3 Dynamic Weight Average
For most multi-task learning networks, training multiple
tasks is difﬁcult without ﬁnding the correct balance between
those tasks, and recent approaches have attempted to ad-
dress this issue [ 3,14]. To test our method across a range
of weighting schemes, we propose a simple yet effective
adaptive weighting method, named Dynamic Weight Aver-
age (DWA). Inspired by GradNorm [ 3], this learns to av-
erage task weighting over time by considering the rate of
change of loss for each task. But whilst GradNorm requires
access to the network’s internal gradients, our DWA pro-
posal only requires the numerical task loss, and therefore
its implementation is far simpler.
With DWA, we deﬁne the weighting λkfor taskkas:
λk(t) :=Kexp(wk(t−1)/T)/summationtext
iexp(wi(t−1)/T),wk(t−1) =Lk(t−1)
Lk(t−2),
(7)
Here,wk(·)calculates the relative descending rate in the
range(0,+∞),tis an iteration index, and Trepresents a
temperature which controls the softness of task weighting,
similar to [ 12]. A large Tresults in a more even distri-
bution between different tasks. If Tis large enough, we
haveλi≈1, and tasks are weighted equally. Finally, the
softmax operator, which is multiplied by K, ensures that/summationtext
iλi(t) =K.
In our implementation, the loss value Lk(t)is calculated
as the average loss in each epoch over several iterations.
Doing so reduces the uncertainty from stochastic gradient
descent and random training data selection. For t= 1,2,
we initialise wk(t) = 1 , but any non-balanced initialisation
based on prior knowledge could also be introduced.
4.1.4 Results on Image-to-Image Predictions
We now evaluate the performance of our proposed MTAN
method in image-to-image multi-task learning, based on
the SegNet architecture. Using the 7-class version of the
1875