End-to-End Multi-Task Learning with Attention
Shikun Liu Edward Johns Andrew J. Davison
Department of Computing, Imperial College London
{shikun.liu17, e.johns, a.davison }@imperial.ac.uk
Abstract
We propose a novel multi-task learning architecture,
which allows learning of task-speciﬁc feature-level at-
tention. Our design, the Multi-Task Attention Network
(MTAN), consists of a single shared network containing a
global feature pool, together with a soft-attention module
for each task. These modules allow for learning of task-
speciﬁc features from the global features, whilst simulta-
neously allowing for features to be shared across different
tasks. The architecture can be trained end-to-end and can
be built upon any feed-forward neural network, is simple
to implement, and is parameter efﬁcient. We evaluate our
approach on a variety of datasets, across both image-to-
image predictions and image classiﬁcation tasks. We show
that our architecture is state-of-the-art in multi-task learn-
ing compared to existing methods, and is also less sen-
sitive to various weighting schemes in the multi-task loss
function. Code is available at https://github.com/
lorenmt/mtan .
1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have seen great
success in a range of computer vision tasks, including im-
age classiﬁcation [ 11], semantic segmentation [ 1], and style
transfer [ 13]. However, these networks are typically de-
signed to achieve only one particular task. For more com-
plete vision systems in real-world applications, a network
which can perform multiple tasks simultaneously is far
more desirable than building a set of independent networks,
one for each task. This is more efﬁcient not only in terms
of memory and inference speed, but also in terms of data,
since related tasks may share informative visual features.
This type of learning is called Multi-Task Learning
(MTL) [ 20,14,6], and in this paper we present a novel ar-
chitecture for MTL based on feature-level attention masks,
which add greater ﬂexibility to share complementary fea-
tures. Compared to standard single-task learning, training
multiple tasks whilst successfully learning a shared repre-
sentation poses two key challenges:Shared Features
Task-Specific
Attention Modules
Task-Specific
Attention Modules
Figure 1: Overview of our proposal MTAN. The shared net-
work takes input data and learns task-shared features, whilst
each attention network learns task-speciﬁc features, by ap-
plying attention modules to the shared network.
i)Network Architecture (how to share) : A multi-task
learning architecture should express both task-shared
andtask-speciﬁc features. In this way, the network is en-
couraged to learn a generalisable representation (to avoid
over-ﬁtting), whilst also providing the ability to learn
features tailored to each task (to avoid under-ﬁtting).
ii)Loss Function (how to balance tasks) : A multi-task
loss function, which weights the relative contributions of
each task, should enable learning of all tasks with equal
importance, without allowing easier tasks to dominate.
Manual tuning of loss weights is tedious, and it is prefer-
able to automatically learn the weights, or design a net-
work which is robust to different weights.
However, most prior MTL approaches focus on only one
of these two challenges, whilst maintaining a standard im-
plementation of the other. In this paper, we introduce a uni-
ﬁed approach which addresses both challenges cohesively,
by designing a novel network which (i) enables both task-
shared and task-speciﬁc features to be learned automati-
cally, and consequently (ii) learns an inherent robustness to
the choice of loss weighting scheme.
The proposed network, which we call the Multi-Task At-
tention Network (MTAN) (see Figure 1), is composed of a
single shared network, which learns a global feature pool
containing features across all tasks. Then for each task,
1
1871