Here,f(j),g(j)
i,h(j)
iare convolutional layers with batch
normalisation, following a non-linear activation. Both g(j)
i
andh(j)
iare composed of [1×1]kernels presenting the ith
task-speciﬁc attention mask in block j.f(j)is composed
of[3×3]kernels representing a shared feature extractor for
passing to another attention module, following by a pooling
or sampling layer to match the corresponding resolution.
The attention mask, following a sigmoid activation to en-
surea(j)
i∈[0,1], is learned in a self-supervised fashion
with back-propagation. If a(j)
i→1such that the mask be-
comes an identity map, the attended feature maps are equiv-
alent to global feature maps and the tasks share all the fea-
tures. Therefore, we expect the performance to be no worse
than that of a shared multi-task network, which splits into
individual tasks only at the end of the network, and we show
results demonstrating this in Section 4.
3.3. The Model Objective
In general multi-task learning with Ktasks, input Xand
task-speciﬁc labels Yi,i= 1,2,···,K, the loss function
is deﬁned as,
Ltot(X,Y1:K) =K/summationdisplay
i=1λiLi(X,Yi). (3)
This is the linear combination of task-speciﬁc losses Liwith
task weightings λi. In our experiments, we study the effect
of different weighting schemes on various multi-task learn-
ing approaches.
For image-to-image prediction tasks, we consider each
mapping from input data Xto a set of labels Yias one task
with total three tasks for evaluation. In each loss function,
ˆYrepresents the network’s prediction, and Yrepresents the
ground-truth label.
•For semantic segmentation, we apply a pixel-wise cross-
entropy loss for each predicted class label from a depth-
softmax classiﬁer.
L1(X,Y1) =−1
pq/summationdisplay
p,qY1(p,q)logˆY1(p,q).(4)
•For depth estimation, we apply an L1norm comparing
the predicted and ground-truth depth. We use true depth
for the NYUv2 indoor scene dataset, and inverse depth in
CityScapes outdoor scene dataset as standard, which can
more easily represent points at inﬁnite distances, such as
the sky:
L2(X,Y2) =1
pq/summationdisplay
p,q|Y2(p,q)−ˆY2(p,q)|. (5)•For surface normals (only available in NYUv2), we ap-
ply an element-wise dot product at each normalised pixel
with the ground-truth map:
L3(X,Y3) =−1
pq/summationdisplay
p,qY3(p,q)·ˆY3(p,q).(6)
For image classiﬁcation tasks, we consider each dataset
as one task for which each dataset represents each individ-
ual classiﬁcation task for one domain. We apply standard
cross-entropy loss for all classiﬁcation tasks.
4. Experiments
In this section, we evaluate our proposed method on two
types of tasks: one-to-many predictions for image-to-image
regression tasks in Section 4.1and many-to-many predic-
tions for image classiﬁcation tasks (Visual Decathlon Chal-
lenge) in Section 4.2.
4.1. Image­to­Image Prediction (One­to­Many)
In this section, we evaluate MTAN built upon SegNet
[1] on image-to-image prediction tasks. We ﬁrst introduce
the datasets used for validation in Section 4.1.1 , and sev-
eral baselines for comparison in Section 4.1.2 . In Section
4.1.3 , we introduce a novel adaptive weighting method, and
in Section 4.1.4 we show the effectiveness of MTAN with
various weighting methods compared with single and multi-
task baseline methods. We explore how the performance
of our method scales with task complexity in Section 4.1.5
and we show visualisations of the learned attention masks
in Section 4.1.6 .
4.1.1 Datasets
CityScapes. The CityScapes dataset [ 4] consists of high
resolution street-view images. We use this dataset for two
tasks: semantic segmentation and depth estimation. To
speed up training, all training and validation images were
resized to [128×256]. The dataset contains 19 classes for
pixel-wise semantic segmentation, together with ground-
truth inverse depth labels. We pair the depth estimation
task with three levels of semantic segmentation using 2, 7
or 19 classes (excluding the void group in 7 and 19 classes).
Labels for the 19 classes and the coarser 7 categories are
deﬁned as in the original CityScapes dataset. We then fur-
ther create a 2-class dataset with only background and fore-
ground objects. The details of these segmentation classes
are presented in Table 1. We perform multi-task learning
for 7-class CityScapes dataset in Section 4.1.4 . We compare
the 2/7/19-class results in Section 4.1.5 , with visualisation
of these attention maps in Section 4.1.6 .
NYUv2. The NYUv2 dataset [ 21] is consisted with
RGB-D indoor scene images. We evaluate performances
1874