4 
 Context Enhancement Block s (CEBs ) to the shallow layers in SSD, an advance d one-stage detector 
CEBNet  is proposed in [26]. 
In this study, we focus on the improvement of Faster R -CNN using local keypoints.  Although 
DeNet  [21] and CornerNet  [24] are point -based CNN method s, their flowcha rts are complex . As a 
two-stage method, DeNet need s to jointly  optimize the costs of both stage s, i.e., the corner  probability 
distribution, final classification distribution and  bounding box regression cost  [21]. The network of 
CornerNet may be divided in three modules: an hourglass backbone network and two prediction 
streams  . In our design, t he network modules are similar with Faster R -CNN. The main task of K-
Faster is to couple keypoint anchors with Faster anchors  to cover the deficiency of Faster R -CNN, 
which initializes anchor boxes with preset aspect ratios and sizes.  
3. Proposed method  
3.1 Overview of methodology  
The main design  of our proposed method is to use local information to train  candidate s. In this 
study, we employ keypoint anchors to achieve the design . Fig. 2 shows the main design of our method.  
Fig. 2a shows the input image I with a size  WH. Fig. 2b shows the produced keypoints. Fig. 2c 
shows all the resulting anchor boxes, which total 
2
NC , and  N is the number of total keypoints. To train 
an RPN, a positive or negative anchor with a high or low Intersect ion over Union  (IoU) overlap with a 
ground -truth box, called the Anchor of Interest (AoI), should be assigned a positive or negative label. 
The bias between the anchor box and ground truth box, which is called the ground bias, should be 
calculated to super vise bounding box regression. To arrange the labels and ground biases to 3 -
Dimensional (3-D) tensors, which serve as supervision information for the RPN, the anchors in Fig.  
2c are partitioned into kS groups based  on the  ARoAI , as shown in Fig. 2d. All labels of the AoIs in 
each group are arranged on a corresponding 2 -Dimensional (2-D) feature map, which indicates the 
convolution results of one channel  [27] (Fig. 2e). For every AoI, its label is mapped to a layer position 
based on the coordinates of the anchor center (Fig. 2e). Every ground bias is parameterized by 4 
coordinates and therefore is encoded on 4 feature maps in a similar way, as shown in  Fig. 2f. Figs. 2g 
and 2h are label and ground bias tensors obtained from Faster R -CNN, respectively. Fig. 2i shows 
supervision information for RPN, and Figs. 2i1 and 2i2 show coupled tens ors. Based on the integrated 
supervision information, our method follows a network similar to that of Faster R -CNN.