5 
  
Fig. 2. Flowchart of the construction of the supervision information for RPN. (a) Input image. (b) Local keypoints. 
(c) The resulting anch or boxes after enumerating all 2 -combinations. (d) Area -based boxes partition. (e) 3 -D label 
tensor induced by the keypoints. (f) 3 -D ground bias tensor induced by keypoints. (g) and (h) are label and bias 
tensors of Faster R -CNN, respectively. (i) The sup ervision information of our method for RPN. ( i1) and ( i2) show 
label and bias tensors for RPN, respectively.  
3.2 Keypoint detection  
In order to improve the smartness of the region proposal, the keypoint, which involves local 
information, is employed to improve the coverage ability of anchors. Generally, the keypoint is 
coupled with a descriptor. In this work, a sparse descriptor, which first detects the points of interest in 
a given image and then samples a local patch and describes its invariant feature s [28], is employed to 
produce the keypoint.  
During the last two decades, a large variety of sparse descriptors have been developed, including 
classi cal Scale -Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT ) [29] and Speeded -Up Robust Feature (SURF ) [30] 
descriptors, binary descriptor s [31], and learning -based descriptor s [32][33]. Although learning 
methods can achieve great accuracy, they usually  produce large dimension features and are 
computationally expensive  [32][33]. In addition, the preparation of s ubstantial data for training is not 
a trivial subject. In order to produce as many AoI as possible, a robust keypoint detector that detects 
as many corresponding keypoints on the image is needed. Although binary descriptors are usually 
proposed in a simple  presentation, they may be insufficient for producing massive keypoints based on 
experiments in  [34]. Although SURF is more efficient for registration types of tasks, it is insufficient 
for producing enough keypoints  [34]. In this paper, a Global OPtimized SIFT (GOP), which was 
demonstrated to produce many more keypoints in  [34], is employed for keypoint detection.  
3.3 Generating keypoint anchors  
All 2 -combinations of the produced keypoints are enumerated to generate anchors. Let the number 
of keypoints produced by GOP be 
GN . Because multiple descriptors may be produced at one