1 Local Keypoint -based Faster R -CNN  
Xintao Ding1,2,* Qingde Li3,* Yongqiang Cheng3 Jinbao Wang1,2 Weixin Bian1,2 Biao Jie1,2 
1 School of Computer and Information,  Anhui Normal University , Wuhu, China  
2 Anhui  Province Key Lab oratory of  Network and Information Security, Wuhu, China  
3 School of Engineering and Computer Science, University of Hull, Hull, HU67RX, UK  
*Corresponding author
Abstract . Region -based Convolutional Neural Network ( R-CNN) detectors have achieved state -of-
the-art results on various challenging benchmarks. Although R -CNN has achieved high  detection 
performance,  the research of local  information in producing candidates  is insufficient . In this paper, 
we design a Keypoint -based Faster R -CNN (K -Faster) method for object detection. K -Faster 
incorporates local keypoints in Faster R -CNN to improve the detection performance. In detail, a 
sparse descriptor, which first detects the points of interest in a given image and then samples a local 
patch and describes its invar iant features, is first employed to produce keypoints. All 2 -combinations 
of the produced keypoints are second selected to generate keypoint anchors , which are helpful for 
object detection . The heterogeneously distributed anchors are then encoded in featur e maps based on 
their areas and center coordinates. Finally, the keypoint anchors are coupled with the anchors 
produced by Faster R -CNN, and the coupled anchors are used for Region Proposal Network (RPN) 
training. Comparison experiments are implemented on PASCAL VOC 07/12 and MS COCO. The 
experimental results show that our K -Faster approach not only increases the mean Average Precision  
(mAP ) performance but also improves the positioning precision of the detected boxes .  
Keywords  - Keypoint ; SIFT ; Convolutional Neural Network ; Faster R -CNN 
1.Introduction
General object detection is a complex problem. One of the main tasks for object detection is the
localization problem , which is used to assign accurate bounding boxes to different objects  [1]. In the 
last two decades, object detectors based on Convolutional Neural Network s (CNN s) [2-5] have 
achieved state -of-the-art results on various challenging benchmarks [6-8]. As two representative 
Region-based CNN (R-CNN) methods,  both Fast/Faster R -CNN [3, 4]  and Region -based Fully 
Convolutional Network  (R-FCN ) [9] use a Region Proposal Network (RPN) to generat e region 
proposals. RPN in itializes anchors of different scales and aspect ratios at each convolutional feature 
map location [4]. Although the anchor potentially covers the object of interest, it does not focus on 
local information. When a human identifies an object, both global structural information and local 
individual information are used in the identification  [10].  
Our work is motivated by the following two questions.  First, is it possible to use local information 
to generat e region proposals ? Second, if the first answer is positive, are the generated proposals 
helpful for the performance  of object detection ? To meet this goal, we employ a keypoint as a kind of 
local information and fuse it in RPN  in this study . 
Fig. 1 shows an example of object detection by combining Faster and keypoint anchors. Faster R -
CNN cannot produce proposals for the bus, partially due to the error between the ground truth and the 
initialized anchor box. Although Faster R -CNN uses bounding -box re gression to adjust the error from This is a post-peer-review, pre-copyedit version of an article published in Applied Intelligence. The final authenticated version is available 
online at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10489-020-01665-9