2 
 an anchor box to a ground -truth box, the regression may be powerless when the error between them is 
too large. By combining the two kinds of anchors, both the bus and car in Fig.  1a can be correctly 
detected.  
 
Fig. 1 An e xample of object detection by combining Faster and keypoint anchors.  
In this work, we propose the keypoint -based Faster R -CNN method (K -Faster), which incorporates 
local keypoints in Faster R -CNN for object detection. All 2 -combinations of the produced key points 
on an image are selected to generate bounding boxes, which are keypoint anchors  (Fig. 1c) . Every  
keypoint anchor is arranged in a convolutional network based on an Area Ratio of the Anchor to  the 
Image (ARoAI) and the center coordinates of the anchor. On the one hand, a feature map with a lower 
index is designed to encode an anchor with a greater  ARoAI, while a feature map with a higher index 
is used to encode an anchor with a small er ARoAI. On th e other hand, a grid point in a feature map is 
used to encode an anchor if the center coordinates of the anchor are convolved to the grid. The 
keypoint anchors together with Faster anchors, which are boxes with fixed scales and aspect ratios  [4], 
are trained by RPN to produce proposals. Our approach employs the keypoint as a kind of local 
information and fuses it with Faster R -CNN for region proposal. The keypoin ts around the object may 
produce a keypoint anchor with a certain aspect ratio or size that cannot be covered by the anchors of 
Faster R -CNN. The keypoint anchor is helpful for region proposals, and the coupling anchors make 
the model have a more powerful ability. Extensive experiments implemented on PASCAL VOC 
07/12 and MS COCO demonstrate that K -Faster can improve the detection performance.  
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:  
1. We incorporate local keypoints in Faster R -CNN to improve objec t detection. The designed 
keypoint anchors are coupled with Faster anchors to cover the deficiency of Faster R -CNN, which 
initializes anchor boxes with preset aspect ratios and sizes.  
2. We design an area -based technology to encode anchors with a heterogen eous distribution. 
Because the keypoints are attracted to pixels with heterogeneous intensity, the heterogeneously 
distributed anchors are partitioned in groups using ARoAI and are encoded in feature maps for RPN 
training.  
3. Compar ed with Faster R -CNN, our K-Faster approach not only increases the mean Average 
Precision  (mAP ) performance but also improves the positioning precision of the detected  boxes .