974 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. 23, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2019
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF CURRENT TESTPROBLEMS AND THE PROPOSED TESTPROBLEMS .“√”AND “×”D ENOTE THE PRESENCE AND
ABSENCE OF THE CORRESPONDING CHARACTERISTIC ,RESPECTIVELY ,AND “”D ENOTES THAT THE
CORRESPONDING CHARACTERISTIC ISSATISFIED PARTIALLY
versions of the DTLZ problems used in the ﬁeld of uncon-
strained multiobjective optimization. Speciﬁcally, three kinds
of constraints are introduced.
1) The ﬁrst kind of constraints provides an infeasible bar-
rier, and the unconstrained PF remains feasible (i.e.,
C1-DTLZs).
2) The second kind of constraints deﬁnes several isolated
feasible regions along the unconstrained PF, and the
constrained PF is a part of the unconstrained PF (i.e.,
C2-DTLZs).
3) The third kind of constraints makes the unconstrained
PF infeasible and the constrained PF is made up of the
boundary of the feasible region (i.e., C3-DTLZs).
According to our classiﬁcation of CMOPs, C1-DTLZs,
C2-DTLZs, and C3-DTLZs belong to types I, II, and IV ,
respectively. It is worth noting that the constraints of C-DTLZs
are not sufﬁciently nonlinear, because the shape of the feasi-
ble region is regular and simple (e.g., spherical feasible regionin C2-DTLZ2), and the boundary of the feasible region has
very small curvature (e.g., linear boundary in C1-DTLZ1 and
C3-DTLZ1). Besides, the feasibility ratios of some C-DTLZs(e.g., C1-DTLZ3, C3-DTLZ1, and C3-DTLZ4) are greater
than 30% based on our calculation.
Based on the above discussions, present artiﬁcial test prob-
lems fail to comprehensively represent the characteristics of
real-world CMOPs.
1) It is common that real-world CMOPs have very small
feasible regions and complex nonlinear constraints [22],
[23]. However, the feasibility ratios of current test prob-
lems are always large and/or their constraints are notsufﬁciently nonlinear. Note that if the feasibility ratio of
a CMOP is very large, it is hard to identify the ability
of a constraint-handling technique (CHT).
2) Most of current test problems have a single con-
straint, which is much less than the number of con-straints in real-world CMOPs. For example, there are
9 and 11 constraints in the ship parametric design
problem [24] and the speed-reducer design problem [25],respectively.
3) Real-world CMOPs may have an arbitrary number of
objectives [26]. But current test problems (except C-DTLZs) are CMOPs with two objectives, which cannot
be scalable in terms of the number of objectives.
4) Some test problems consider few decision variables. For
example, the most commonly used test problems, i.e.,
SRN, TNK, OSY , and CTPs, have no more than six
decision variables.In addition, some other limitations of current test problems
make them unsuitable for general use. First, some test prob-
lems are unable to provide proper difﬁculties of convergence.
Second, some special geometries of constrained PFs are notsuggested in current test problems, such as the jagged geom-
etry in the aircraft landing scheduling problem [27]. Third,
there is no test suite containing all the four types of CMOPsaccording to our taxonomy.
D. Motivation
Table I summarizes the drawbacks of current test problems.
It is clear from Table I that it is necessary to further investi-
gate the construction of artiﬁcial test problems in constrained
multiobjective optimization. Motivated by the above consider-ation, we propose a new constraint construction method. This
method enables us to design CMOPs with controllable sizes
of the feasible regions and complex geometries of constrainedPFs. Afterward, we suggest three kinds of distance functions
that can provide appropriate difﬁculties of convergence for
CMOPs. Based on the constraint construction method and
the distance functions, we propose a test suite containing 14
instances. They cover all of the four types of CMOPs.
Besides, we choose several popular CHTs for performance
comparisons on our test suite, since the comparative stud-
ies among CHTs have been scarcely reported. We comparesix and four representative CHTs under the frameworks
of NSGA-II [28] and MOEA/D [29], respectively, which
are two well-known paradigms of multiobjective EAs [30].The performance comparisons evaluate the performance
of different CHTs on different types of CMOPs and
help us to select/design a suitable CHT for a speciﬁcscenario.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents the constraint construction method. Section III givesthe details of the distance functions and test suite. The
performance comparisons among CHTs are conducted in
Section IV. Finally, Section V concludes this paper.
II. P
ROPOSED CONSTRAINT CONSTRUCTION METHOD
The constraint construction method suggested in this paper
provides a way to design CMOPs with desirable constraints.
It consists of two main processes: 1) a global control processand 2) a local adjustment process. The global control process
aims to control the size of the feasible region in the objec-
tive space, while the local adjustment process helps to adjust