MA AND WANG: EVOLUTIONARY CONSTRAINED MULTIOBJECTIVE OPTIMIZATION 973
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Fig. 1. Classiﬁcation of CMOPs. (a) Type I. (b) Type II. (c) Type III.
(d) Type IV . For the sake of clarity, in our following discussions, the feasi-ble region and the boundary of the feasible region speciﬁcally refer to their
counterparts in the objective space.
unconstrained counterpart [6]. Compared with unconstrained
multiobjective optimization, some original Pareto optimal
solutions may become infeasible in a CMOP and/or some solu-
tions on the boundary of the feasible region of a CMOP maybecome the Pareto optimal solutions. In order to identify the
relationship between unconstrained and constrained PFs, we
classify CMOPs into the following four types.
1)Type I: As shown in Fig. 1(a), the whole unconstrained
PF remains feasible, that is, the constrained PF is thesame with the unconstrained PF. Some CMOPs with
loose constraints often belong to this type, such as the
optimization of biped robot gaits [7], [8].
2)Type II: As plotted in Fig. 1(b), the constrained PF
is a part of the unconstrained PF, since constraints
make a portion of the unconstrained PF infeasible. Thistype exists widely in real-world CMOPs and a simi-
lar engineering problem can be found in the topology
optimization of multicell tubes [9].
3)Type III: The constrained PF consists of a part of the
unconstrained PF and a part of the boundary of the fea-
sible region. As shown in Fig. 1(c), constraints make apart of the unconstrained PF infeasible and some solu-
tions on the boundary of the feasible region become the
Pareto optimal solutions. A real-world CMOP belongingto this type is the reliability design problem in the ﬁeld
of automotive body optimization [10], [11].
4)Type IV: As plotted in Fig. 1(d), the unconstrained PF
is entirely located outside the feasible region. Thus, the
constrained PF is composed of a part of the boundaryof the feasible region. A typical CMOP of this type is
the robot gripper optimization problem [12].
When solving CMOPs, it is well known that we need to
seek a balance between objectives and constraints in the search
process [13]. However, there is little awareness on how toreasonably apply this principle when facing the different types
of CMOPs mentioned above. In particular, from types I to IV ,the search bias should be gradually switched from the objec-
tives to constraints. For type I, to obtain the Pareto optimal
solutions on the constrained PF, more focus should be placedon objectives. Instead, for type IV , more emphasis should
be put on constraints since the Pareto optimal solutions are
completely located on the boundary of the feasible region.
C. Present Artiﬁcial Test Problems/Suites and Their
Drawbacks
In general, it is impractical to assess the performance of
an algorithm by a speciﬁc real-world CMOP [14]. The rea-
son is because this assessment process may require some
domain knowledge and cannot effectively demonstrate an algo-
rithm’s generality. An alternative way is to use the artiﬁcialtest problems that cover as many characteristics extracted from
real-world CMOPs as possible. If an algorithm achieves desir-
able results on artiﬁcial test problems, we could believe that ithas good potential to solve real-world CMOPs. Some attempts
have been made on the design of artiﬁcial test problems for
CMOPs. Examples include SRN [15], TNK [16], OSY [17],CTPs [18], CFs [19], NCTPs [20], and C-DTLZs [21].
SRN, TNK, and OSY are perhaps the earliest three test
problems and have been frequently considered for performancecomparisons of algorithms. SRN has a continuous constrained
PF that is a part of the unconstrained PF (i.e., type II). TNK
has a disconnected constrained PF that completely lies onthe boundary of the feasible region (i.e., type IV). OSY is
a type-IV CMOP and has six constraints. OSY’s constrained
PF has ﬁve parts and each part is the intersection of certain
constraints.
Deb et al. [18] pointed out that the above three test problems
have the following shortcomings: 1) they have few decision
variables; 2) their objectives and constraints are not sufﬁ-
ciently nonlinear; and 3) their difﬁculties are not tunable interms of constraints. Therefore, a general framework is sug-
gested in [18] to design CMOPs with constraints that have
tunable difﬁculties. Based on the proposed framework, seveninstances are proposed (called CTPs). Most of them have dis-
connected or discrete constrained PFs. Note that, CTPs have
large feasibility ratios.
Following the framework of CTPs, Zhang et al. [19] con-
structed ten test problems (called CFs). CFs have disconnected
geometries of constrained PFs and belong to the type-II andtype-III CMOPs. CFs also introduce complicated variable link-
ages. As a result, when solving CFs, an algorithm always
struggles on convergence. Besides, most of CFs have largefeasible regions.
Inspired by CTPs, Li et al. [20] proposed 18 new test
problems (called NCTPs). Compared with the original CTPs,
these test problems make the following improvements: 1) the
Ronsenbrock function is employed as the distance functionto increase the difﬁculty of convergence; 2) high-dimensional
decision spaces are considered; and 3) an extra constraint is
added to explicitly decrease the feasibility ratio.
Jain and Deb [21] designed a test suite of ﬁve CMOPs
with a scalable number of objectives, which are the extended