984 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. 23, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2019
evenly distributed weights. As /epsilon1decreases, the infeasible
solutions close to the unconstrained PF can be pulled tothe boundary of the feasible region through the weights
(note that these infeasible solutions are directly elimi-
nated under the framework of NSGA-II). Actually, whenthe boundary of the feasible region is not very com-
plicated, this mechanism is also effective, even on the
type-IV test problems (e.g., MW11).
2) However, for the type-IV CMOPs, the superiority of the
/epsilon1-constrained method degrades because the nonlinear-
ity of the boundary of the feasible region increases. Forthese test problems, overall, CDP and SP perform better
than the /epsilon1-constrained method. This phenomenon can
be explained in the following. SP maintains two penalty
factors and gives a stronger punishment to the infea-
sible solutions with higher constraint violations thanthose with lower constraint violations. This property
enables the population to converge toward the bound-
ary of the feasible region from both the feasible andinfeasible sides. In addition, with the aid of uniformly
distributed weights, CDP can concentrate on the search
of the boundary of the feasible region.
G. Comparisons Cross Two Frameworks
The comparisons cross two frameworks (i.e., NSGA-II and
MOEA/D) were conducted in this section. The four CHTs
used in both NSGA-II and MOEA/D in the previous exper-iments were considered: CDP, SP, SR, and /epsilon1.A ss h o w ni n
Table S-R-VII in the supplementary ﬁle, for each CHT, the
results of IGD obtained under the frameworks of NSGA-IIand MOEA/D were compared on each test problem, and the
better one was highlighted in boldface. Note that the results
in Table S-R-VII were directly taken from Tables S-R-I andS-R-IV .
It can be seen from Table S-R-VII that NSGA-II performs
better than MOEA/D on most test problems, which are mainlyCMOPs with disconnected/discrete constrained PFs. While,
MOEA/D is better than NSGA-II on MW4, and similar to
NSGA-II on MW9, MW11, and MW12, which are mainly
CMOPs with connected constrained PFs. Therefore, MOEA/D
is sensitive to the geometry of the constrained PF. The reasonis straightforward: the disconnected constrained PF contains
some disconnected segments caused by the infeasible regions
and/or Pareto dominance; thus, the weight vectors distributedoutside these disconnected segments have no intersection with
the constrained PF. This will result in several weight vectors
corresponding to the same Pareto optimal solution. In this way,there exist many duplicates in the ﬁnal population, leading to
two consequences: 1) the computational resources are wasted
and 2) the population cannot cover the constrained PF as wellas that obtained by NSGA-II.
H. Comparisons Under the Framework of NSGA-III on
MWs With Higher Numbers of Objectives
As pointed out in [51], the proportion of nondominated solu-
tions in the population grows exponentially with the increase
of the number of objectives. Therefore, multiobjective EAs(e.g., NSGA-II [28]) that employ Pareto dominance as a
major selection criterion are not able to provide sufﬁcientselection pressure to guide the population toward the true
PF. Due to this fact, a well-known many-objective EA, i.e.,
NSGA-III [52], was considered as the optimization algorithmon MW4, MW8, and MW14 with higher numbers of objec-
tives. Under the framework of NSGA-III, ﬁve representative
CHTs (i.e., CDP [28], SP [39], SR [40], /epsilon1[42], and ATM [46])
were compared. The corresponding algorithms were denoted
as CDP-NSGA-III (i.e., the constrained version of NSGA-III
in [21]), SP-NSGA-III, SR-NSGA-III, /epsilon1-NSGA-III, and ATM-
NSGA-III, respectively. NSGA-III works with a set of weight
vectors that are predeﬁned according to the number of
objectives and the population size. For the CHT based on
multiobjective optimization (i.e., MO [44]), the population is
divided into a feasible subpopulation and an infeasible subpop-ulation, and they are sorted separately. Note that, the infeasible
subpopulation has a varying size and an extra objective mea-
sured by the constraint violation of an infeasible solution.Therefore, MO is absent in the comparison, since NSGA-III is
not able to process these two subpopulations simultaneously
using one set of weight vectors. Besides, as a hybrid CHT,ATM treats the constraints as an extra objective if there is no
feasible solution in the population. For the same reason, we
used CDP as the replacement in this scenario.
For MW4, MW8, and MW14, we tested ﬁve numbers of
objectives, i.e., m=3, 5, 8, 10, and 15, and the number of
decision variables was set as n=m−1+k, where k=13.
According to the suggestions in [52], the number of weight
vectors ( N
W) and the population size ( NP) for different num-
bers of objectives were summarized in Table S-R-VIII in the
supplementary ﬁle. For other parameter settings, they were
consistent with the suggestions in Section IV-C.
Table S-R-IX in the supplementary ﬁle provides the average
and standard deviation of IGD values obtained by the ﬁve
compared algorithms over 100 independent runs. It can beseen that /epsilon1-NSGA-III surpasses others on all the test problems
except MW4 with m=3 and 5 and MW14 with m=8, where
CDP-NSGA-III and ATM-NSGA-III are better. To be speciﬁc,CDP-NSGA-III achieves the best on MW4 with m=3 and 5,
and ATM-NSGA-III obtains the best result on MW14 with
m=8. In addition, the Wilcoxon’s rank-sum test at a 0.05
signiﬁcance level was conducted to demonstrate the statistical
differences between the results obtained by the best algorithm
and its competitors on each test problem. We can observe that/epsilon1-NSGA-III is the best algorithm and CDP-NSGA-III is also
competitive.
The excellent performance of /epsilon1-NSGA-III is mainly
attributed to the fact that the constrained PFs of MW4, MW8,
and MW14 are derived from the unconstrained PFs. As ana-
lyzed in Section IV-F, the /epsilon1-constrained method has natural
advantages in ﬁnding the unconstrained PF. Besides, the reason
for the competitive performance of CDP-NSGA-III is obvious.With the aid of uniformly distributed weight vectors, CDP is
able to provide sufﬁcient selection pressure for solutions to
approach the feasible region and make the population approxi-mate the constrained PF from diverse directions. This is similar
to the situation in CDP-MOEA/D.