MA AND WANG: EVOLUTIONARY CONSTRAINED MULTIOBJECTIVE OPTIMIZATION 983
the remaining three test problems (i.e., MW9, MW10, and
MW12), SP-MOEA/D surpasses others. It is interesting to notethat although CDP-MOEA/D has the best results on MW4 and
MW9 in terms of both IGD and MS, the corresponding results
provided by CDP-MOEA/D are not good in terms of GD.
In summary, /epsilon1-MOEA/D has the best overall performance
under the framework of MOEA/D, especially on types I–III.
Similar to NSGA-II, on each test problem, the best IGDvalue is supported by the best or near-best MS value, which
means that maintaining a good spread of population plays an
important role in solving our test problems.
F . Performance Analysis
In order to further analyze the performance of CHTs, the
Wilcoxon’s rank-sum test at a 0.05 signiﬁcance level wasimplemented to demonstrate whether the result obtained by
an algorithm is signiﬁcantly different from that resulting from
another compared algorithm in terms of IGD on each testproblem. In this paper, “ b/e/w” indicate the number of CHTs
that the current one is signiﬁcantly better than, equivalent to,
and signiﬁcantly worse than, respectively. Then, CHTs areranked in the lexicographical order: a CHT that has a higher
“b” will have a better ranking; if two CHTs have the same
“b”, their values of “ e” will be compared, and so forth; and
if two CHTs have the same “ b/e/w”, they will share the
same ranking. Clearly, a CHT with a better ranking indicates
that it has better performance. The rankings of differentCHTs under the frameworks of NSGA-II and MOEA/D are
shown in Tables III and IV, respectively. Due to the space
limitation, these tables only show the CHTs that rank the
ﬁrst (i.e., 1st) and the second (i.e., 2nd). First, based on the
rankings in Table III, we provide the following analysis onthe performance of different CHTs under the framework of
NSGA-II.
1) On the type-II CMOPs, the /epsilon1-constrained method
performs the best. This method relaxes the constraint
violations of all infeasible solutions in the early search
process; thus, some infeasible solutions satisfy the/epsilon1-level and are considered as feasible solutions (called
pseudo-feasible solutions). Under this condition, these
pseudo-feasible solutions will be evolved toward theunconstrained PF. Due to the fact that the constrained
PF of each type-II CMOP is a part of the uncon-
strained PF, the population will promptly approachthe constrained PF. As /epsilon1reduces to zero, the found
objective-optimal solutions that are in the infeasible
region will be eliminated and the real feasible solutionsare maintained in the population. In a word, the
/epsilon1-constrained method switches from “optimality prior-
ity” to “feasibility priority”. This property makes the
/epsilon1-constrained method suitable for this type of CMOPs.
In addition, SR outperforms others on MW5 (i.e., thetest problem with the discrete constrained PF). SR
deﬁnes a certain probability that an infeasible solution
is compared with others based on objectives. Therefore,some infeasible solutions with good objective values
are likely to be preserved. This property encouragesthe infeasible solutions near the discrete Pareto optimal
solutions. In contrast, the /epsilon1-constrained method will
eliminate the promising infeasible solutions with good
objective values after /epsilon1reduces to zero. As a result, it
is not as competitive as SR on MW5.
2) ATM performs the best on the type-I test problems.
Since their feasible regions contain some narrow parts,
it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd feasible solutions in these narrowparts. For ATM, as the feasibility proportion of popula-
tion rises, the degree of penalty on infeasible solutions
decreases (i.e., [46, Property 3]). That is, the infeasiblesolutions with relatively small constraint violations are
likely to survive if there exist enough feasible solutions
in the population, which encourages the search around
these narrow parts. The /epsilon1-constrained method obtains
competitive results on these test problems. The reasonis similar to that explained in type II. But this method
cannot well exploit infeasible solutions, making it not
as good as ATM.
3) On the type-III CMOPs, SP outperforms others. SP
prefers those solutions with better objective values
and lower constraint violations. Therefore, during theevolution, the population is capable of approaching
the unconstrained PF and the boundary of the feasible
region simultaneously. Moreover, in the later stage ofevolution, contrary to ATM, SP increases the degree of
penalty with the increase of the feasibility proportion
of population [39]. This property ensures the feasibil-ities of solutions. Besides, the /epsilon1-constrained method
achieves the best result on MW10. It is because over
three-fourths of the constrained PF is the unconstrained
PF. Therefore, this method has an advantage in solving
MW10, as illustrated previously.
4) MO clearly surpasses others on the type-IV CMOPs.
There are two main reasons:
a) When not all solutions are feasible, this method
always preserves a certain number of infeasible
solutions.
b) It considers the constraint violation as an extra
objective when infeasible solutions are compared
with each other, which supports the infeasible
ones with lower constraint violations.
As the constrained PF is a part of the boundary of
the feasible region in each of these test problems,
the population can approximate the boundary of thefeasible region from both feasible and infeasible sides
by utilizing such infeasible solutions.
Subsequently, based on the rankings in Table IV, we analyze
the performance of the compared CHTs under the framework
of MOEA/D in the following.
1) Obviously, the /epsilon1-constrained method shows the best
performance on types I–III, for which the constrained
PFs entirely/partly come from the unconstrained PFs.As analyzed previously, the /epsilon1-constrained method has
natural advantages in approaching the unconstrained PF.
Different from /epsilon1-NSGA-II, /epsilon1-MOEA/D achieves good
performance on type III. This is mainly attributed to
MOEA/D’s ability of maintaining diversity via a set of