work using classical image processing techniques.2{6,12Additionally, we show that our architecture outperforms
leading image segmentation networks developed for other applications.13
Our paper is structured as follows: after reviewing a selection of the existing literature in Section 2, we
discuss our dataset in Section 3 - how we collect and label the data, and the augmentation methods to prevent
overtting; in Section 4 we address the design and structure of our CNN, covering training and testing stages; the
results of the network are discussed in Section 5, where we also address the post-processing stage of false positive
reduction; a comparison of our results with other works from the classical and machine learning literature is
presented in Section 6, after which we discuss future applications and developments in Section 7.
2. RELATED WORK
Note that we provide this section not as an extensive literature review, but to lay the groundwork for where
the methodology and results of this work sit in the current research landscape. We include work from which
we have drawn important insights and information, while attempting to provide a pedagogical introduction to
the development of the eld of X-Ray image segmentation, along with modern image segmentation methods in
a broader context.
Methods for segmenting X-Ray images have been a constant topic in the literature for many years, due to
its role in image processing and other analysis based operations. Much previous work focuses on using classical
image processing techniques.11,14Pixel clustering based on similarity in certain parameters is a commonly
employed technique. Kubilay Pakin et al.2use clustering as a component of their segmentation algorithm,
achieving high accuracy scores, but requiring hyperparameter tuning for each body part class, while struggling
to produce smooth boundaries. Similarly, good results have been achieved by Wu and Mahfouz,3who employ
spectral clustering methods and produce much smoother boundaries, however, this application was tuned purely
to knee image analysis. Entropy-based approaches have been employed by Bandyopadhyay et al. ,5,6which have
enabled clean boundary identication, yet suer from extraneous edges such as bone cracks or image distortions.
Kazeminia et al.4build on this work, employing existing edge detection algorithms such as Sobel15andCanny ,16
while analysing the intensity 
uctuations in pixel rows to more accurately select the bone boundary. This work
is less sensitive to noise, however, loses some boundary continuity. Similarly, atlas models have been developed
for medical image segmentation, and an application to rib cage segmentation is given by Candemir et al.12From
such techniques the authors are able to generate complete segmentations, however, the boundaries remain noisy
and the area under the ROC curve (AUC) is highly dependent on the dataset analysed.
The growth of machine learning applications in the healthcare sector has been considerable in recent years.
Indeed, due to the large amount of information encoded in X-Ray images, focused research into their analysis
has been signicant. Aiding this advancement of research has been an increase in availability of X-Ray image
datasets, each tailored to dierent applications.7{10Using such datasets, many machine learning approaches
for the detection of anomalies, such as pneumonia,17pulmonary tuberculosis,18and thoracic diseased19have
been developed, as well as diagnosing a variety of diseases based on chest X-Rays.20Islam et al.21and Qin et
al.22provide comparisons of a range of neural networks applied to detecting anomalies in chest X-Rays. These
detection technologies usually perform image segmentation to localise the position of the anomaly, or of a certain
bone structure (most commonly the rib cage), and are carefully tuned to these applications. Additionally, due to
their architectures, many of the networks presented in the above literature would not be suitable for performing
a pixel-level segmentation over the entirety of the image.
Complete multi-class image segmentation is an active, high-growth area of research, most recently driven by
autonomous vehicle development. Neural networks have been at the forefront of this research and take various
forms including the encoder-decoder design similar to that presented in this paper,23{27and fully connected
networks.28Several applications of these networks also utilise the technique of image augmentation to aid
network generalisation and reduce the risk of overtting. Similarly, Badrinarayanan, Handa and Cipolla13
present a simplied version of the widely applied SegNet architecture,23showing improved performance on
small datasets. Indeed, it is against this simplied network, known as SegNet-Basic ,13that we benchmark our
network performance. It is noted that some networks have been specically designed for the total segmentation of
medical images, yet these applications have been largely constrained to the segmentation of cell structures.27,29,30