on a dataset consisting of 150 images, articially augmented to generate 7000 training images. Evaluating the
network performance we nd an overall accuracy of 92% and F1 score of 0.92, with an AUC of 0.98.
We benchmark our network against the popular SegNet design. Starting with the Segnet-Basic architecture,13
and carrying out a hyperparameter search similar to the one we do for XNet, the best result obtained gives a 2%
improvement on bone classication accuracy with respect to XNet, but at the expense of only having a 75% true
positive rate and 25% false positive rate in the soft tissue category (in comparison to our network which achieves
an 82% TP ratio, see Figure 2a). Additionally, we signicantly outperform this network when detecting the open
beam region. SegNet-Basic achieves F1 scores of 0.96, 0.83, and 0.90 for open beam, soft tissue and bone regions
respectively, with an overall weighted F1 score of 0.89, thus giving a lower F1 score in every category compared
to XNet (see Table 2). The full implementation of SegNet23has too many parameters to eectively t to such
a small dataset. Similarly, its size requires signicantly more computational power, thus making it impractical
for the purpose of being trainable by many medical institutions.
We also see a signicant improvement when benchmarking against state-of-the-art classical image processing
techniques. Figure 5 shows a comparison between our architecture and the work of Kazeminia et al. ,4who built
upon that of Bandyopadhyay et al.5,6The XNet segmentation produces smoothly connected boundaries around
the bone regions, in addition to dierentiating well between bone and soft tissue regions. It should be noted
that in producing this output, our algorithm was trained on a set of high resolution TIF images, as produced
by the X-Ray scanner, whereas this analysis was run on signicantly lower quality JPEG images, meaning our
network could not achieve its full potential on this image. Additionally, our training set does not contain any
feet viewed from the angle as seen in Figure 5, thus demonstrating the generalisability of our network.
Another classical example is the clustering based method presented by Kubilay Pakin et al. ,2which gives a
92% accuracy averaged over 14 images belonging to 5 body part classes. This accuracy score is calculated after
each of the two free parameters of the algorithm are ne-tuned for each individual image. Our approach obtains a
similar accuracy score in a larger, more diverse dataset, generalising well to 19 body part classes without specic
tuning.
Figure 5: Comparison of our algorithm, right, with the work of Kazeminia et al. ,4left, showing signicant improvement
in boundary smoothness
7. FUTURE WORK
As an improvement to our implementation, we wish to focus on reducing the false positive rate at the post-
processing stage. Additionally, there have been several attempts at rening segmentation mask outputs, such
as using conditional random elds.26Such methods could be applied to our work to further improve boundary
smoothness, and reduce the likelihood of false islands appearing in the mask. Another approach could be to train
an adversarial network, along with XNet, to detect inconsistencies between the network generated segmented
maps and the ground truth. However, such an implementation would signicantly increase the training time of
the network, while also increasing the risk of falling into local minima during training.