XNet: A convolutional neural network (CNN)
implementation for medical X-Ray image segmentation
suitable for small datasets
Joseph Bullock, Carolina Cuesta-L azaro, and Arnau Quera-Bofarull
Department of Physics, Durham University, UK
ABSTRACT
X-Ray image enhancement, along with many other medical image processing applications, requires the segmen-
tation of images into bone, soft tissue, and open beam regions. We apply a machine learning approach to this
problem, presenting an end-to-end solution which results in robust and ecient inference. Since medical insti-
tutions frequently do not have the resources to process and label the large quantity of X-Ray images usually
needed for neural network training, we design an end-to-end solution for small datasets, while achieving state-of-
the-art results. Our implementation produces an overall accuracy of 92%, F1 score of 0.92, and an AUC of 0.98,
surpassing classical image processing techniques, such as clustering and entropy based methods, while improving
upon the output of existing neural networks used for segmentation in non-medical contexts. The code used for
this project is available online.1
Keywords: X-Ray image segmentation, medical image processing, machine learning.
1. INTRODUCTION
X-Ray image segmentation is of great importance in many medical applications such as image enhancement, and
other processing tasks, computer assisted surgery, and anomaly detection. These applications regularly require
the segmentation of images into 3 categories: open beam, soft tissue and bone. Current methods rely heavily
on a complex system of classical image processing techniques, such as clustering approaches,2,3line 
uctuation
analysis,4or entropy-based methods,5,6which often require the tuning of hyperparameters for each body part
class. However, utilising machine learning oers several advantages over these traditional methods since: (i) it
naturally addresses noise, (ii) it generalises well to dierent body parts, and (iii) the segmented regions have
continuous boundaries.
Although the use of machine learning in the healthcare sector has grown signicantly in recent years, and
with it open source datasets have become more readily available,7{10we know of no publicly available labelled
dataset of X-Ray images that can be used in training a neural network for segmentation tasks as presented in
this paper. This means institutions wishing to train such a network must provide and label their own images.
X-Ray images are expensive to obtain, and manual labelling is time consuming, thus acquiring a large and varied
database may not be possible; a common issue raised when discussing the feasibility of neural networks for X-Ray
segmentation.11
We design a unique Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architecture to perform segmentation by extracting
ne grained features, while controlling the number of trainable parameters to prevent overtting. The network is
trained on 150 X-Ray images, with no scatter correction and comprising of 19 body parts in an imbalanced way.
This dataset, we believe, is of a manageable size to be created by a medical institution. We present our network,
and a full end-to-end description of it's implementation, including post-processing stages for the minimisation of
false positives, and optimisation of the F1 score. Despite our dataset being small compared to those used in many
machine learning applications, we achieve an overall accuracy signicantly higher, and more generalisable, than
Further author information: (Send correspondence to Joseph Bullock)
Joseph Bullock: E-mail: j.p.bullock[at]durham.ac.uk,
Carolina Cuesta-L azaro: E-mail: carolina.cuesta-lazaro[at]durham.ac.uk,
Arnau Quera-Bofarull: E-mail: arnau.quera-bofarull[at]durham.ac.ukarXiv:1812.00548v2  [cs.CV]  20 Apr 2019