A well calibrated network is dened as a network whose condence averaged over all output categories, is
close to the network's averaged accuracy.38We nd that our network is indeed well calibrated, as dened by this
metric, as can be seen in Figure 4. XNet is therefore well suited for the employment of a variety of post-processing
techniques to tailor the output depending on the use case.
0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 1.00
Probability020406080% of samples
Avg. weighted Accuracy
Avg. weighted ConfidenceOpen Beam accuracy
Open Beam confidence
Soft Tissue accuracy
Soft Tissue confidence
Average weighted accuracy
Average weighted confidence
Bone accuracy
Bone confidence
Figure 4: Condence histogram across all categories, showing that the network is well calibrated. For the individual
categories, the best calibrated is soft tissue with a dierence of 1%. For open beam the dierence is 3%. The least calibrated
category is bone, with a dierence of 9%. Note: as mentioned, in our case study, when we carry out hyperparamter
optimisation we are focusing on minimising soft tissue false positives, so these results are as expected.
5.3 False Positive Reduction
The simplest way of obtaining a segmentation from the network output is to assign each pixel to the most likely
category. Nonetheless, with our objective of reducing soft tissue false positives in the soft tissue category, we
classify a pixel as soft tissue only if the network predicted probability is higher than a given threshold. Since
our network is well calibrated, this probability threshold re
ects the condence that we demand for a pixel to
be in this category. We nd that increasing this probability threshold reduces the number of false positives at
the expense of the number of true positives. For example, with a probability threshold of 0.90, the false positive
rate in the soft tissue class is reduced to 3%, while reducing the true positive rate to 71%. Choosing the ideal
probability threshold depends on the particular use case. We choose more severe thresholds for the body parts
that the network struggles more to segment. We obtain an area under the curve of 1.00 for the open beam
region and 0.97 for both the bone and soft tissue classes, thus demonstrating the high classication ability of our
network.
6. CONCLUSION
We develop a fully automatic method to segment medical X-Ray images given a small dataset. As a compromise
between having a deep network to extract high-level features and ne-grained detail, and a network that avoids
overtting to small datasets, we present an architecture with two encoder-decoder modules. We train this network