Sensors 2021 ,21, 6340 17 of 35
3.3. Planning
Once the low-level robotic control is in good shape, the high-level robotic planning, as
another critical part of realizing autonomous robotic systems, comes into play. Unlike the
low-level control subﬁeld, which emphasizes the system response and robustness, high-
level planning focuses more on strategically ﬁnding a close-to-optimal solution among
all feasible options, under speciﬁc constraints. Compared with traditional search-based
motion planning algorithms, reinforcement learning has demonstrated huge potentials
in bringing intelligence to complex systems planning, e.g., a humanoid robot with high
degrees of freedom (DOFs) [ 286]. However, it is usually difﬁcult to train reinforcement
learning because obtaining the data from the real physical system is both ﬁnance- and
time-consuming. The curse of dimensionality may also disable the system from learning
something useful [287]. As a robotic system’s digital twin grows up and provides reliable
data, the combination “DT + RL” seems to be a promising approach ( SG-factor): in [ 265],
Matulis et al. integrated digital twin and reinforcement learning for a 6DOF robotic
manipulator to plan pick-and-place motions; in [ 266], Liu et al. proposed a multitasking-
oriented robot arm motion planning scheme based on deep reinforcement learning and
twin synchro-control; in [ 267], Xia et al. proposed a DT to train deep reinforcement learning
agent for automating smart manufacturing systems; and in [ 268], Zhao et al. demonstrated
collision avoidance for a number of UAVs in a conﬁned airspace, using LSTM-MACG.
While RL has become popular in recent years, it is not the only AI strategy that is integrated
with DTs. For example, Bansal et al. developed an ant colony optimization algorithm for
industrial robot programming in a digital twin [269].
Figure 8. An illustration of DT in robotics: Altair digital twin platform [288]. ©Altair.
3.4. HRI and HRC
Under the context of Industry 4.0, one of the very important beneﬁts that DT could
bring to robot-involved scenarios is safer human–robot interaction and human–robot
collaboration [ 289,290] (SG-factor). HRI and HRC scenarios are, intuitively, more complex
and challenging than robot-only applications, due to not only the uncertainties in the
environment and sensors, but also the randomness and diversity of human behavior. One
of the advantages of AI-equipped DTs over conventional ones is the ability to better respond
to these (sometimes implicit, such as [ 291]) variables that are nontrivial to exhaustively
model and analyze. For example, in [ 292], Wang et al. proposed a real-time process-
level digital twin for collaborative human–robot construction work. The proposed DT