Sensors 2021 ,21, 6340 2 of 35
boundary conditions and provide a demand-oriented, real-time capable evaluation ba-
sis to efﬁciently support decision making in multi-objective problems. There is already
much research that discusses and characterizes DT from the view of general concepts and
technologies [ 1,6–11] as well as certain ﬁelds, without targeted focus on AI, this novel
enabler, i.e., product design [ 12,13], modeling and simulation [ 14], fault diagnostics and
prognostics [ 15]. Practically, different engineering application scenarios have separate
challenges and concerns. The grounding of DT and AI is even more dependent on the
systematic and in-depth integration of domain-speciﬁc expertise. Currently, there is still a
lack of comprehensive industry-oriented review of “AI + DT” technologies in the context
of sustainability and circular economy. To further contribute to developing and landing of
these general-purpose technologies (GPT) in smart manufacturing and advanced robotics,
the following research questions (RQ) are proposed in conducting this survey:
RQ1: What are the current research and concrete case solutions on DTs?
RQ2: What is the current state of AI integration in DTs in the above two areas?
RQ3: What are the beneﬁts of AI-enabled DTs, considering sustainability?
RQ4: What are the challenges in practice and future work with AI-enabled DTs?
This paper endeavors to address this research gap by revisiting current developments
on DTs from a domain-speciﬁc perspective, analyzing implemented AI methods in each
subarea, sorting out the role they play in sustainable development, and summarizing
practical challenges in various application ﬁelds. The following contributions are delivered
in this study:
1. The general development and application cases with common AI methods in
AI-driven DTs of Industry 4.0 are concluded.
2. The advantages of AI-driven DTs in sustainable development are elaborated regard-
ing the FESG factors, which enable a quantitative assessment of sustainability.
3. Challenges and development prospects of AI-driven DTs in smart manufacturing
and advanced robotics are discussed with a respective focus on different levels.
4. A route for AI-integration in multiscale/ﬁdelity DTs with multiscale/ﬁdelity data
sources along the product lifecycle is outlined.
1.1. Topic Deﬁnitions
1.1.1. Digital Twin
The concept of DT was described by the National Aeronautics and Space Adminis-
tration (NASA) as a multiphysics, multiscale, probabilistic simulation that uses physical
models, sensor updates, ﬂeet history, etc., to mirror the life of its twin [ 16]. Later, DT
was indicated by Grieves and Vickers as a dynamic model based on massive amounts of
information and computing capability that change over the lifecycle, including creation,
production, operations and disposal [ 17]. Based on the architecture in [ 18], Tao et al. pro-
posed an extended ﬁve-dimension DT model, comprising a physical entity, a virtual entity,
service, data and connection [15].
1.1.2. Digital Shadow
The concept “digital shadow” was mainly advocated by the German Academic So-
ciety for Production Engineering (WGP), whereby it is understood to be the sufﬁciently
accurate representation of the processes in production, development and adjacent areas
with the aim of generating a real-time capable evaluation basis of all relevant data [ 19].
Compared with the DT, a digital shadow does not require a high-resolution database, but a
complete one [ 20]. Together with all of its subsystems, the digital shadow is designed as
an information system or a multi-perspective information model to allow a more efﬁcient
operation of value creation systems, and is thus considered an enabler for data analytics in
product lifecycle management (PLM) [21,22].