Sensors 2021 ,21, 6340 12 of 35
Table 3. Cont.
Subﬁeld AI-Category Key Methods Application-Case Ref.
JoiningSupervised
LearningDNN, GA Prediction of distortion in welding [211]
FormingSupervised
LearningANNPrediction of the ingate velocity during sand
mold ﬁlling[212]
PIO: Pigeon-Inspired optimization; DDPG: Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient; PSO: Particle Swarm Optimization; HMM: Hidden
Markov Model; PML: Probabilistic Machine Learning; ISRES: Improved Stochastic Ranking Evolution Strategy.
2.4.2.1. Metal Cutting
For conventional metal cutting techniques, e.g., milling and drilling, the part quality is
primarily determined by sophisticated machine behavior and cutter-workpiece engage-
ment, which can become particularly intricate in multi-axis machining or for parts with
thin-walled structures. Zhao et al. constructed a self-learning surface roughness predic-
tion model based on pigeon-inspired optimization and SVM in order to stabilize the part
quality with a self-adaptation adjustment method [ 195]. Approaches combining ANN
and semantic modeling for fatigue and quality prediction were discussed in [ 196–198].
Following the philosophy of DfX (Design for X), Zhou et al. utilized the DDPG (deep
deterministic policy gradient) approach to optimize decision making, according to the
performance and machinability of parts, which could shorten cycles and save costs in the
product development [ 199] (SG-factor). At the material scale, evolutionary algorithms,
such as PSO, were investigated by Hardt et al. to inversely identify the material model
parameters in ﬁnite element (FE) simulations of orthogonal cutting processes [200].
2.4.2.2. Metal AM and Laser Material Processing
For advanced metal AM and laser material processing techniques, e.g., laser powder bed
fusion (LPBF) and laser melting deposition (LMD), research efforts focus on the subtle
impacts of thermal effects on materials, such as the microstructure and parts’ distortion,
during such non-contact processes. As Gaikward et al. in [ 201] presented the temperature
distribution of parts, predicted based on a graph–theoretical computational heat transfer
approach and subsequently combined it with an SVM model in order to detect potential
quality faults in printing processes. Another attempt of grey box modeling for build quality
in dependency of process parameters and in situ sensor signatures was proposed in [ 202] by
Gaikward et al., where the a priori knowledge of physical processes was incorporated into
three sequentially connected shallow ANNs and consequently achieved better performance
in comparison with purely data-driven methods (CNN, LSTM, RNN, among others). With
respect to DfX and knowledge engineering, Ko et al. employed CART to predict additive
manufacturability, which was further fed back to a knowledge-query formulation phase in
order to continuously construct and broaden an AM knowledge base [ 203] (EG-factor). In
addition, HMM and k-means demonstrated their applications for quality assessing and
monitoring in [204,205].
2.4.2.3. Composite Material Processing
For similarly novel but not yet matured composite material processing techniques, e.g.,
lightweight production of ﬁber-reinforced polymers, hybrid modeling of non-measurable
process variables and process signatures reﬁned therefrom, are anticipated to provide more
process understanding and transparency ( EG-factor). Stieber et al. proposed a CNN-based
transfer learning approach to in situ monitor the polymerization progress of resin transfer
molding (RTM) [ 206]. Hürkamp et al. implemented AdaBoost, XGBoost, and random
forest as ﬁnite element surrogate models to predict temperature distribution during the
fabrication of overmolded thermoplastic composites [ 207]. Similarly, DNN was applied by
Pfrommer et al. as surrogate modeling to optimize the manufacturing process parameters
of a composite textile draping process [ 208]. A probabilistic ML approach with statistical