Sensors 2021 ,21, 6340 3 of 35
1.1.3. Digital Thread
The concept of “digital thread” was initially proposed by the U.S. Air Force as a
framework to merge detailed design models with model-based systems engineering (MBSE)
conceptual and top-level architectural models [ 23]. This idea was further driven by the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) with the purpose of exchanging
information, including product design and quality and equipment performance and health,
across the product lifecycle [ 24]. A single digital thread is, thus, created with the model-
based ensemble of data in design, manufacturing, and inspection, which enables full-
process traceability in a seamless, real-time, collaborative development among the project
participants [25].
1.2. Topic Delimitation and Coverage
This survey provides in-depth insight into the current progress of AI-driven DT tech-
nologies, including the three aforementioned concepts, in Industry 4.0. Although there
are various interpretations of the connotations and extensions of the DT, they share the
same philosophy, namely, how to utilize digital replicas with near real-time capabilities
to effectively enhance traditional organizations and processes across the product lifecycle,
thereby improving industry competitiveness and optimizing resource allocation. Cor-
respondingly, 5G communication and Internet of Things (IoT) technologies as well as
standalone machine learning (ML) technologies without digital replicas are not the focus
here. Over 300 manuscripts are covered on this basis.
1.3. Paper Organization
As illustrated in Figure 1, the rest of the review paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2 , we analyze the digital production twins toward sustainable resilient manufac-
turing at three different levels; in Section 3, we discuss the applications of DT in robots
and human–robot interaction/human–robot collaboration. After dissecting AI-enabled
case studies and branch-speciﬁc challenges of the development and deployment of DTs in
industry verticals, Section 4 compares AI methods horizontally; Section 5 concludes the
contributions of this paper and addresses the future work.
Figure 1. Overview of the review.