Sensors 2021 ,21, 6340 18 of 35
utilized immersive virtual reality (VR) and combined the as-designed BIM model and
the evolving as-built workspace geometry obtained from on-site sensors, to provide the
capability for both planning and improvising. Similarly, in [ 270], Li et al. proposed DL-
based human standing-posture recognition in HRC. Other supervised learning applications,
such as visual question answering for the HMC system, are included in Table 4 [ 271–273].
A supervised/unsupervised learning example is [ 274], where Wang et al. used FFT–
PCA–SVM–based DT for human–robot interactive welding and welder behavior analysis.
In [275], Lv et al. proposed a reinforcement learning–based DT for improving medical
equipment assembly efﬁciency during COVID-19.
3.5. Robot Maintenance and Other Applications
Robotic systems, like other machines with a physical entity, have downtime and
need maintenance as well ( E-factor). Without explicitly mentioning the concept of DT,
Khalastchi et al. and Vallachira et al. reported applications of using data-driven methods
in robot anomaly/failure detection in [ 293] and [ 294], respectively. In [ 276], Anton et al.
used deep learning equipped DT for global system health monitoring as well as predictive,
customized maintenance. Similarly, in [ 277], Aivaliotis et al. integrated degradation
curves in the predictive maintenance of industrial robots. Some other applications, such
as using the Monte Carlo learning method in calculating the workspace of a serial robot
manipulator [ 278] and random forest based estimation of lawn grass lengths for robotic
lawn mower [279], can be found in Table 4.
3.6. Challenges and Outlook
There are several key challenges in developing and implementing digital twins in the
ﬁeld of robotics [ 295,296]. First, the multibody physical simulation is intrinsically difﬁcult,
due to the complex interaction properties at the interfaces of robot–robot, robot–human,
and robot–environment. In addition, since robot movement can often be extremely fast
(e.g., in an assembly line), real-time feedback from sensors is critical to the digital twin’s
effectiveness in making short-term decisions. Many researchers in academia choose to use
simulators, such as Gazebo (e.g., [ 297,298]), as the simulation environment for developing
robots, but even after years of evolution, those robotic simulators still have many unsolved
limitations and may require high-performance computing (HPC) platforms. Second, inputs
and disturbances from the human user add another layer of uncertainty and unpredictabil-
ity to the whole collaborative system/workspace, and thus, compromise HRI/HRC safety.
While standard-compliant (e.g., ISO 13482) safety measures must be facilitated on both
physical and digital sides, having virtual reality or augmented reality (AR) technologies
involved is another thread to make the human–robot interaction intuitive [ 299]. Rückert et
al. also suggested the consolidation of product life cycle information within human–robot
collaborative assembly tasks [300].
4. Discussion
DTs have shown remarkable potentials to contribute to industrial economic growth or
F-factor (i.e., the productivity, availability, and quality of manufacturing) while continu-
ously upgrading sustainable aspects, such as the E-factor (e.g., reduced carbon emission
and resource consumption through CM, PdM, 3D printing and lightweight production of
metals and polymers) and SG-factor (e.g., enhanced working conditions, collaboration and
innovation through HRI/HRC, XaaS model, and intelligent/soft sensing of novel produc-
tion indicators) as summarized in Table 5. In this range of cross-domain engineering cases,
AI techniques arm digital twins with tools to create models based on observed behavior
and historical data, which improves the efﬁciency of data analysis and increases prediction
accuracy by integrating data from a collection of disparate and incompatible sources.