Sensors 2021 ,21, 6340 4 of 35
2. Sustainable Resilient Manufacturing
2.1. Overview
The core task of manufacturing industry lies in producing qualitative products in a
productive and available manner. Balancing these partially competing objectives under
time-varying boundary conditions is becoming a challenge in the course of ever-shortened
decision-making horizons [ 26]. In recent years, intensive research has been conducted
in the areas of Industry 4.0 [ 27], cyber–physical production systems [ 28,29], and inte-
grative production techniques [ 30] to address the VUCA (volatile, uncertain, complex,
ambiguous) market environment. The widespread application of simulation models and
ubiquitous connectivity provide a solid foundation for building digital production twin
throughout the product lifecycle, which is considered a key enabler for future manufac-
turing transformation and upgrading in the era of big data [ 1,31,32]. In the context of
the circular economy and sustainability pledges (e.g., European Green Deal), traditional
resource-intensive productivity thinking is being replaced by a future vision of a more
ecologically minded society, namely “sustainable productivity” [ 33]. This understanding
of productivity incorporates FESG factors as a novel indicator for quantitatively assessing
sustainable production as well as the performance (with tangible and intangible services as
well as business models) and value creation systems (consisting of resource, process, and
organization) of manufacturing companies, thus pushing them to embrace the required
sustainability transformation, as illustrated in Figure 2. Various research of DTs, including
general developments and AI-integrated cases, in terms of enhancing the trilemma of
productivity, availability, and quality ( ﬁnancial ) toward sustainable resilient manufacturing
(environmental ,social ,governance ) are discussed in the following three levels: factory and
shop ﬂoor (Section 2.2), machinery and equipment (Section 2.3), as well as process and
material (Section 2.4).
Figure 2. An illustration of holistic assessment of sustainable production [33]. © WZL—RWTH Aachen.
2.2. Factory and Shop Floor
2.2.1. General Developments
The megatrend toward the volatile market environment and individual customer
demand poses new challenges, primarily for production systems and management in
industrial enterprises, which can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the proﬁtability and productivity of
manufacturing. Within the various presented concepts and frameworks [ 34–39], automated
production systems, including mixed reality assistance systems [ 40,41], could be rapidly
modularized [ 42] and reconﬁgured [ 43–45], enhanced with AI [ 46,47] and sensors [ 48,49]
and, in combination with cloud and edge computing [ 50], transformed into distributed
control systems, while detailed production environments can be generated and updated
in the form of 3D point clouds [ 51–56]. Based on these infrastructures, DT demonstrates
the capability of handling increasingly complex operational problems, such as production