Sensors 2021 ,21, 6340 13 of 35
inference was developed by Ghanem et al. to efﬁciently update numeric simulations of a
composite material system and reveal multi-scaling relationships of mechanical properties
and behaviors [ 209]. Kanyuck et al. introduced a methodology for identifying sheet
material parameters using the ISRES algorithm and implemented a thin-shell simulator for
predicting the material behavior, which enabled a defect-free layup of prepreg composite
sheets in human–robot collaborative cells [210] ( ES-factor).
2.4.3. Interim Summary
AI-driven digital process twins are envisioned to learn and interpret implicit correla-
tions between manufacturing processes and material/process/environmental parameters
from an aggregation of (heterogeneous) data with the objective of optimizing process devel-
opment, production ramp-up, and quality assurance cycle. From an engineering implemen-
tation perspective, we have noted that despite the signiﬁcance of algorithms and models,
novel sensor technologies [ 167,213–217] and networked digital process chains [218–222]
should not be neglected, as they are essential pillars for constructing DTs and can consid-
erably inﬂuence the effectiveness and efﬁciency of their development and deployment in
practice. Figure 5 shows an example of a DT dynamically mapping the manufacturing
process of an aerospace part and the data sources involved from the contextualized CAD-
CAM-CNC-CAQ process chain. As yet, these immature manufacturing techniques, such
as 3D printing and lightweight production of metals and composites, are still set up in a
trial-and-error manner [ 223]. Their maturation will not only lead to innovative concepts
(SG-factor) and resource savings ( E-factor) in the design and manufacturing phase, but
also provides a pivotal basis for the sustainable operation, maintenance, and reuse of the
product downstream, thus reducing energy consumption and carbon emissions across the
product lifecycle. The resulting sustainability upgrades are, therefore, all-encompassing.
Figure 5. An illustration of DT in manufacturing: workpiece quality monitor [26]. © WZL—RWTH Aachen.
2.5. Challenges and Outlook
Key practical challenges and future work are included as follows.
1. Vertical interoperability in the production context ( basis/infrastructure ): despite
various proposed concepts and cases, a standard framework for developing and deploying
multi-scale DTs combining with AI methods has not yet been established. A valid reference
framework covering separate manufacturing levels should be deﬁned in the future. For
this purpose, interdisciplinary cooperation is indispensable [224].
2. Horizontal interoperability in the production context ( basis/data ): sufﬁciently high
data quality is a fundamental prerequisite for building AI-driven DTs. In the production