Sensors 2021 ,21, 6340 7 of 35
2.2.2.2. Production Control
At the production control stage, DNN [ 92], decision tree [ 93,94], and tree-based ensem-
ble models, such as AdaBoost [ 93,94] and XGBoost [ 94], were implemented in assorted
digital production twins to optimize resource allocation and manufacturing performance
indicators in a timely manner ( E-factor). However, the multi-objective problems at the
factory level are usually interpreted as non-deterministic, polynomial-time hard, due to
the complexity and dynamics in production environments. To address this challenge,
reinforcement learning (RL), such as DQN and deep RL, were employed as a substitute
for heuristic optimization and supervised approaches in various investigations, where the
major task is normally mathematically formalized as a Markov decision process (MDP),
with the objective of autonomously achieving the global optimal economic and logistic KPIs
in a factory or logistic simulation environment [ 96–99] (EG-factor). In order to incorporate
humans as a critical element in smart manufacturing, May et al. presented a concept for the
situational selection of production control agents by forecasting human behavior modeled
through a reinforcement learner [100] ( ES-factor).
2.2.2.3. Quality Control
At the quality control stage, classical supervised ML models, such as ANN, decision
tree, and SVM, were expected to detect or predict potential deformations and surface
deviations in production [ 101,102]. Deep learning (DL) computer vision models, including
residual and convolutional neural networks were deployed to recognize eventual quality
issues during the automatic production and machining features of parts [ 103,104], which
could be further utilized to enhance the quality and efﬁciency of assembly processes [ 108]
(E-factor), or retraced to the production planning stage in order to support decision making
on the basis of historical production knowledge [ 109], as a “smart expert” in a collaborative
environment ( SG-factor). Following the general concept of integrating ML methods into
the digital production twins [ 110], DTs of production systems in combination with MBSE
can be modeled and adapted modularly as a virtual testbed, which in turn could provide a
runtime environment for simulation-based optimization [111,112].
2.2.3. Interim Summary
Business proﬁtability remains the prerequisite for sustainable operation. DTs at this
level elevate the productivity, resilience, and transparency of production processes, which
enable end-to-end availability of data along the entire value chain as well as a holistic
sustainability assessment on this basis. From a business development perspective, AI-
enabled DT can additionally be considered a service agent [ 113], providing innovative
smart services via DT network platforms [ 114] and subscription business models [ 115], thus
contributing sustainably to long-term innovation for manufacturers, and helping them in
accomplishing a paradigm shift from the one-time provision of production hardware to the
ongoing delivery of manufacturing solutions ( SG-factor). The importance of a diversiﬁed
product and service portfolio is particularly evident in times of global crisis. For small- and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), innovative services from research institutes and major
manufacturing equipment suppliers can facilitate the conduction of the comprehensive
balance sheet assessment covering FESG factors in order to achieve a smooth transition
to sustainability.
2.3. Machinery and Equipment
2.3.1. General Developments
The availability of production machinery and equipment has a direct impact on the ef-
ﬁciency of manufacturing processes and overall equipment effectiveness, and is, therefore,
equally signiﬁcant for sustainable production, especially regarding energy consumption
and resource utilization ( E-factor). Since their degradation and damage level can be affected
by working operations as well as other disturbances in harsh manufacturing environments,
such as lubricants, soiling, and temperature, the results from traditional wear and fatigue