Sensors 2021 ,21, 6340 20 of 35
production environments, time-sensitive sensing and manipulation rely on the in-depth in-
sight of physical processes gained through reﬁning scale modeling. Horizontally, datasets
of varying difﬁculty and ﬁdelity are constructed from heterogeneous sources over the
product lifecycle. In the development phase, simulation tools and laboratory experiments
separately provide comparatively large amounts of data with a moderate degree of ﬁdelity
and limited high-accuracy data under controlled conditions. As products are manufac-
tured and utilized, obtaining reliable labeled data, such as quality indicators and RUL,
becomes increasingly scarce and expensive. On this basis, AI methods can be developed
and deployed in pipelines. In general, supervised learning remains the most stable and
extensively used approach in digital twins. Reinforcement learning is often advantageous
in scenarios with complex environments and long response cycles, unsupervised and
semi-supervised learning are quite proactive in state detection and lifetime prediction, and
traditional intelligence methods are still commonly used and can be ﬂexibly combined
with other learning methods.
Figure 9. An illustration of AI-integration in multiscale/ﬁdelity DTs along the product lifecycle.
5. Summary
Traditional proﬁt-maximizing industrial technologies have transformed human society
while causing signiﬁcant—and mostly irreversible—negative impacts on the environment
and climate. Sustainable development strategies are gaining attention, but still have a
long way to go, as all aspects within the FESG dimensions have to be balanced in real
implementation. According to a report from the WBA Tooling Academy Aachen [ 301],
classic evaluation for manufacturing companies with a focus on value added and equity
ratio could show a signiﬁcantly worse outcome in the extended analysis that incorporates
ESG criteria in the balance sheet. For sustainable thinking and practices, which have been
increasingly deliberated and advocated worldwide, digitalization and AI are powerful
enablers. Through consistently linking, processing, and analyzing all available data across
the entire value chain, and connecting them to a digital twin or shadow, a holistic assess-
ment of sustainability, namely, the consideration of ESG factors alongside proﬁtability
(F-factor), can be achieved so that companies can develop and operate sustainably. For
Industry 4.0, which is facing new challenges from climate-neutral products and production,
AI-driven DTs are expected to provide the additional manufacturing transparency and