Sensors 2021 ,21, 6340 21 of 35
understanding that enable a demand-oriented and real-time capable analytical foundation,
considering FESG factors along the product lifecycle. The main contributions of this study
are concluded as follows.
1. The general development and application cases with common AI methods in
AI-driven DTs of Industry 4.0 are concluded.
2. The advantages of AI-driven DTs in sustainable development are elaborated regard-
ing the FESG factors, which enable a quantitative assessment of sustainability.
3. Challenges and development prospects of AI-driven DTs in smart manufacturing
and advanced robotics are discussed with a respective focus on different levels.
4. A route for AI integration in multiscale/ﬁdelity DTs with multiscale/ﬁdelity data
sources along the product lifecycle is outlined.
In the past, typical production issues, such as predicting the behavior of machine tools
as single systems, were already well approximated by complex analytical and empirical
models; their application in industry environments, however, has often been handicapped,
due to both the lack of real-time capabilities and transferability in varying frameworks.
AI promises in this circumstance to extend the model boundaries of traditional model-
based approaches, particularly within changing boundary conditions. As regards the
relatively sparse and expensive datasets in engineering, incorporating prior knowledge can
reduce the dependence of pure data-driven approaches on the amount of historical data
and improve the predictivity and transferability of models. Moreover, statistically-based
uncertainty quantiﬁcation similarly plays an essential role in building AI-driven DTs, as it
allows to assess the reliability of the modeled results and, thus, inﬂuences their acceptance
and the decision-making based thereon in real, high-risk engineering.
Meanwhile, we have noted that the development and deployment of AI-enabled
algorithms and models, the coreof the DT, are still constrained by the current infrastructure
and that constructing the latter requires interdisciplinary collaboration and integration of
domain-speciﬁc expertise ( basis level). New breakthroughs in novel sensors and beneﬁts
from 5G communications and OPC UA TSN are expected in the near future. In terms of
theapplication level, while smart service and new business models facilitate the paradigm
shift for manufacturers, a prerequisite is the willingness to share data and knowledge with
partners to a healthy extent. Standardized concepts for data ownership and data security
must constitute the basis for this. A further survey on the AI-driven DT technologies in
the application ﬁelds of renewable energy, smart city and mobility, and healthcare will be
covered in future work. By reorganizing and aggregating several highly relevant topics
both horizontally and vertically, we believe that a synergistic effect will emerge that can
allow the work in this study to contribute to more AI-driven, DT-related research and help
various branches build new developments in their respective sustainable and smart areas.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, Z.H. and Y.S.; writing, Z.H., Y.S. and J.L.; supervision:
M.F. and C.B. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was partially funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, Ger-
man Research Foundation) through the Cluster of Excellence “Internet of Production”—390621612.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank the German Research Foundation DFG for
the support within the Cluster of Excellence “Internet of Production”—390621612. The authors
would also like to thank Altair Engineering, Inc., Fraunhofer IPT, as well as the Chair of Production
Metrology and Quality Management, and Production Engineering of the Laboratory for Machine
Tools and Production Engineering (WZL) for their permission to reuse the images.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.