Sensors 2021 ,21, 6340 14 of 35
context, however, the usage of heterogeneous data sources from different software and
hardware across the product life cycle is associated with high costs. Through consistently
and comprehensively contextualizing and interconnecting of these data silos, the full
potential of DTs can be exploited in terms of further optimizing the agility, traceability,
resiliency, and transparency of current manufacturing. Interfaces for standard information
exchange are, therefore, imperative [225].
3. High-ﬁdelity, lightweight models with uncertainty quantiﬁcation ( core): real manu-
facturing processes are characterized by numerous, partly stochastic variables with highly
complicated cause–effect relationships. In the course of increasing product variants driven
by the market, frequently changing technical boundary conditions bring more parame-
terization efforts and potential uncertainties. Conventional, complex and non-real-time
capable models are, therefore, gradually reaching their limits in the industrial environment.
In this sense, data-driven approaches with the incorporation of prior knowledge promise
to extend the current model boundaries, thereby improving the industrial objectives in
terms of productivity, availability, and quality ( F-factor).
4. Smart services and business models ( application ): novel digital platforms contribute
to long-range collaboration and innovation, ensembling isolated AI-equipped DT-solutions
from diverse levels, and thus offering new opportunities for manufacturers to deliver prod-
ucts and solutions sustainably, e.g., through the X-as-a-Service (XaaS) model. Moreover,
the transparency distilled from the entire product value chain serves as an on-demand and
real-time capable analytical foundation for the holistic assessment of sustainable resilient
manufacturing in order to achieve a balance in the ﬁnancial ,environmental ,social , and gov-
ernance dimensions. The concept of “sustainable productivity” based thereon is depicted
in Figure 6 selected from the white paper by Boos [ 33]. Therein, the vision of “Internet
of Production” provides the infrastructure for harnessing data along the product lifecy-
cle [226], while the transparency generated from the (AI-powered) DTs enables product
design, manufacturing, and usage exclusively, according to actual demand-, quantity-, and
user-oriented requirements [33].
Figure 6. An illustration of sustainable resilient manufacturing [33]. © WZL—RWTH Aachen.
3. Advanced Robotics
3.1. Overview
Along with the widespread deployment of robotic systems in industry and daily
life [ 227], having a digital twin of robots becomes more and more critical in practical scenar-
ios, such as multi-robot coordination/collaboration as well as those that require safe human–
robot interaction (HRI) and/or complex human–robot collaboration (HRC) [228–231] ,
which place human safety as a high priority, thus helping to create a sustainable work-
ing environment ( SG-factor). Many have used traditional simulation/cloud framework to