20
ofﬂoading decision for each mobile user. To limit the size of
action space, a pre-classiﬁcation step is proposed to check the
mobile users’ feasible set of actions.
In contrast to [94], multiple BSs in an ultra-dense network
is considered in [95] and [96], as shown in Fig. 8(c), with
the objective of minimizing the long-term cost of delay in
computation ofﬂoading. All computational tasks are ofﬂoaded
to the shared MEC server via different BSs. Besides the
allocation of computational resources and transmission con-
trol, the ofﬂoading policy also has to optimize the asso-
ciation between mobile users and the BSs. With dynamic
network conditions, the mobile users’ decision-making can
be formulated as an MDP. The system states are the channel
conditions between the mobile user and the BSs, the states
of energy and task queues. The cost function is deﬁned
as a weighted sum of the execution delay, the handover
delay and the computational task dropping cost. The authors
in [96] ﬁrstly propose a DDQN-based DQL algorithm to learn
the optimal ofﬂoading policy without knowing the network
dynamics. By leveraging the additive structure of the utility
function, the Q-function decomposition combined with the
DDQN further leads to a novel online SARSA-based DRL
algorithm. Numerical experiments show that the new algorithm
achieves a signiﬁcant improvement in computation ofﬂoading
performance compared with the baseline policies, e.g., the
DQN-based DQL algorithm and some heuristic ofﬂoading
strategies without learning. The high density of SBSs can
relieve the data ofﬂoading pressure in peak trafﬁc hours but
consume a large amount of energy in off-peak time. Therefore,
the authors in [97], [98], and [99] propose a DQL-based
strategy for controlling the (de)activation of different SBSs
to minimize the energy consumption without compromising
the quality of provisioning. In particular, in [97], the on/off
decision framework uses a DQL scheme to approximate both
the policy and value functions in an actor-critic method.
The reward of the DQL agent is deﬁned as a cost function
relating to energy consumption, QoS degradation, and the
switching cost of SBSs. The DDPG approach is also employed
together with an action reﬁnement scheme to expedite the
training process. Through extensive numerical simulations, the
proposed scheme is shown to greatly outperform other baseline
methods in terms of both energy and computational efﬁciency.
With a similar model to that in [96], computation ofﬂoading
ﬁnds a proper application for cloud-based malware detection
in [100]. A review of the threat models and the RL-based
solutions for security and privacy protection in mobile ofﬂoad-
ing and caching are discussed in [101]. With limited energy
supply, computational resources, and channel capacity, mobile
users cannot always update the local malware database and
process all application data in time and thus are vulnerable to
zero-day attacks [102]. By leveraging the remote MEC server,
all mobile users can ofﬂoad their application data and detection
tasks via different BSs to the MEC/security server with larger
and more sophisticated malware database, more computa-
tional capabilities, and powerful security services. This can
be modeled by a dynamic malware detection game in which
multiple mobile users interact with each other in resource
competition, e.g., the allocation of wireless channel capacitiesand the computational capabilities of the MEC/security server.
A DQL scheme is proposed for each mobile user to learn its
ofﬂoading data rate to the MEC/security server. The system
states include the channel state and the size of application
traces. The objective is to optimize the detection accuracy of
the security server, which is deﬁned as a concave function
in the total amount of malware samples. The Q-value is
estimated by using a CNN in the DQL framework. The
authors also propose the hotbooting Q-learning technique that
provides a better initialization for Q-learning by exploiting
the ofﬂoading experiences in similar scenarios. It can save
exploration time at the initial stage and accelerate the learning
speed compared with a standard Q-learning algorithm with all-
zero initialization of the Q-value [103]. The proposed DQL
scheme not only improves the detection speed and accuracy,
but also increases the mobile users’ battery life. The simulation
results reveal that compared with the hotbooting Q-learning,
the DQL-based malware detection has the faster learning rate,
the higher accuracy, and the shorter detection delay.
Multiple MEC servers have been considered in [104], [105],
as illustrated in Fig. 8(d). The authors in [104] aim to
design optimal ofﬂoading policy for IoT devices with energy
harvesting capabilities. The system consists of multiple MEC
servers, such as BSs and APs, with different capabilities
in computation and communications. The IoT devices are
equipped with energy storage and energy harvesters. They
can execute computational tasks locally and ofﬂoad the tasks
to the MEC servers. The IoT device’s ofﬂoading decision
can be formulated as an MDP. The system states include the
battery status, the channel capacity, and the predicted amount
of harvested energy in the future. The IoT device evaluates
the reward based on the overall delay, energy consumption,
the task drop loss and the data sharing gains in each time
slot. Similar to [100], the authors in [104] enhance Q-learning
by the hotbooting technique to save the random exploration
time at the beginning of learning. The authors also propose a
fast DQL ofﬂoading scheme that uses hotbooting to initialize
the CNN and accelerates the learning speed. The authors
in [105] view the MEC-enabled BSs as different physical
machines constituting a part of the cloud resources. The cloud
optimizes the MUs’ computation ofﬂoading to different virtual
machines residing on the physical machines. A two-layered
DQL algorithm is proposed for the ofﬂoading problem to
maximize the utilization of cloud resources. The system state
relates to the waiting time of each computational task and the
number of virtual machines. The ﬁrst layer is implemented by
a CNN-based DQL framework to estimate an optimal cluster
for each computational task. Different clusters of physical
machines are generated based on the K-NN algorithm. The
second layer determines the optimal serving physical machine
within the cluster by Q-learning method.
The aforementioned works all focus on data or computation
ofﬂoading in cellular system via BSs to remote MEC servers,
e.g., [93]–[96], [100], [104], [105]. In [107] and [106], the
authors study QoS-aware computation ofﬂoading in an ad-hoc
mobile network. By making a certain payment, the mobile user
can ofﬂoad its computational tasks to nearby mobile users
constituting a mobile cloudlet, as shown in Fig. 8(d). Each