3
Applications of deep reinforcement learning 
for communications and networking
Network access and rate 
control Miscellaneous issuesSecurity and 
connectivity preservationCaching and offloading 
  Network
 access
Adaptive 
rate controlProactive 
caching
Data  
offloadingNetwork 
security
Connectivity
preservationTraffic 
routing
Resource 
scheduling
Data 
collection
Fig. 2: A taxonomy of the applications of deep reinforcement learning for communications and networking.
directions are outlined in Section VII. Section VIII concludes
the paper. The list of abbreviations commonly appeared in
this paper is given in Table I. Note that DRL consists of two
different algorithms which are Deep Q-Learning (DQL) and
policy gradients [10]. In particular, DQL is mostly used for
the DRL related works. Therefore, in the rest of the paper, we
use “DRL” and “DQL” interchangeably to refer to the DRL
algorithms.
II. D EEPREINFORCEMENT LEARNING : ANOVERVIEW
In this section, we ﬁrst present fundamental knowledge of
Markov decision processes, reinforcement learning, and deep
learning techniques which are important branches of machine
learning theory. We then discuss DRL technique that can
capitalize on the capability of the deep learning to improve
efﬁciency and performance in terms of the learning rate for
reinforcement learning algorithms. Afterward, advanced DRL
models and their extensions are reviewed.
A. Markov Decision Processes
MDP [4] is a discrete time stochastic control process. MDP
provides a mathematical framework for modeling decision-
making problems in which outcomes are partly random and
under control of a decision maker or an agent. MDPs are useful
for studying optimization problems which can be solved by
dynamic programming and reinforcement learning techniques.
Typically, an MDP is deﬁned by a tuple (S;A;p;r)where
Sis a ﬁnite set of states, Ais a ﬁnite set of actions, pis
a transition probability from state sto states0after action
ais executed, and ris the immediate reward obtained after
actionais performed. We denote as a “policy” which is
a mapping from a state to an action. The goal of an MDP
is to ﬁnd an optimal policy to maximize the reward function.
An MDP can be ﬁnite or inﬁnite time horizon. For an inﬁnite
time horizon MDP, we aim to ﬁnd an optimal policy to
maximize the expected total reward deﬁned by1P
t=0
rt(st;at),
whereat=(st), and
2[0;1]is the discount factor.1) Partially Observable Markov Decision Process: In
MDPs, we assume that the system state is fully observ-
able by the agent. However, in many cases, the agent only
can observe a part of the system state, and thus Partially
Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs) [11] can
be used to model the decision-making problems. A typical
POMDP model is deﬁned by a 6-tuple (S;A;p;r; 
;O),
whereS;A;p;r are deﬁned the same as in the MDP model, 
andOare deﬁned as the set of observations and observation
probabilities, respectively. At each time step, the system is at
states2S. Then, the agent takes an action a2A and the
system transits to state s02S. At the same time, the agent
has a new observation o2
with probabilityO(ojs;a;s0).
Finally, the agent receives an immediate reward rthat is
equal tor(s;a)in the MDP. Similar to the MDP model, the
agent in POMDP also aims to ﬁnd the optimal policy in
order to maximize its expected long-term discounted reward
1P
t=0
rt(st;(st)).
2) Markov Games: In game theory, a Markov game, or
a stochastic game [12], is a dynamic game with proba-
bilistic transitions played by multiple players, i.e., agents.
A typical Markov game model is deﬁned by a tuple
(I;S;fAigi2I;p;frigi2I), where
I,f1;:::;i;:::;Igis a set of agents,
S,fS1;:::;Si;:::;SIgis the global state space of the
all agents withSibeing the state space of agent i,
fAigi2Iare sets of action spaces of the agents with Ai
being the action space of agent i,
p,SA1AI![0;1]is the transition probability
function of the system.
frigi2Iare payoff functions of the agents with
ri,SA1AI!R, i.e., the payoff of agent i
obtained after all actions of the agents are executed.
In a Markov game, the agents start at some initial state
s02 S . After observing the current state, all the agents
simultaneously select their actions a=fa1;:::;aIgand they
will receive their corresponding rewards together with their
own new observations. At the same time, the system will
transit to a new state s02S with probability p(s0js;a). The