23
BS
AttackerPU
Attacker
PU
SU 
(agent ) ReceiverBS
Move ? Jamming
Jamming
Fig. 9: Jamming attack in cognitive radio network [111].
A. Network Security
This section discusses the applications of DQL to address
the jamming attack and the cyber-physical attack.
1) Jamming Attack: A pioneer work using the DQL for
the anti-jamming is [111]. The network model is a Cognitive
Radio Network (CRN) as shown in Fig. 9 which consists of
one Secondary User (SU), multiple Primary Users (PUs), and
multiple jammers. The network has a set of frequency channels
for hopping. At each time slot, each jammer can arbitrarily
select one of the channels to send its jamming signal, and
the SU, i.e., the agent, needs to choose a proper action based
on the SU’s current state. The action is (i) selecting one of
the channels to send its signals or (ii) leaving the area to
connect to another BS. The jammers are assumed to avoid
causing interference to the PUs, and thus the SU’s current
state consists of the number of PUs and the discretized SINR
of the SU signal at the last time slot. The objective of the
SU is to maximize its expected discounted utility over time
slots. Note that when the SU chooses to leave the area to
connect to another BS, it spends a mobility cost. Thus, the
utility is deﬁned as a function of the SINR of the SU signal
and the mobility cost. Since the number of frequency channels
may be large that results in a large action set, the CNN is
used for the DQL to quickly learn the optimal policy. As
shown in the simulation results, the proposed DQL has a
faster convergence speed than that of the Q-learning algorithm.
Moreover, considering the scenario with two jammers, the
proposed DQL outperforms the frequency-hopping method in
terms of the SINR and the mobility cost.
The model in [111] is constrained to two jammers. As the
number of jammers in the network increases, the proposed
scheme may not be effective. The reason is that it becomes
hard for the SU to ﬁnd good actions when the number
of jammed channels increases. An appropriate solution, as
proposed in [112], allows the receiver of the SU to leave its
current location. Since the leaving incurs the mobility cost, the
receiver, i.e., the agent, needs an optimal policy, i.e., staying
at or leaving the current location, to maximize its utility. In
this scenario, the DQL based on CNN can be used for the
receiver to ﬁnd the optimal action to maximize its expected
utility. Here, the utility and state of the receiver are essentially
deﬁned similarly to that of the agent in [111]. In particular,
the state includes the discretized SINR of the signal measured
by the receiver at the last time slot.The above approaches, i.e., in [111] and [112], deﬁne states
of the agents based on raw SINR values of the signals. In
practical wireless environments, the number of SINR values
may be large and even inﬁnite. Moreover, the raw SINR can be
inaccurate and noisy. To cope with the challenge of the inﬁnite
number of states, the DQL can use a recursive Convolutional
Neural Network (RCNN) as proposed in [113]. By using
the pre-processing layer and recursive convolution layers, the
RCNN is able to remove noise from the network environment
and extract useful features of the SINR, i.e., discrete spectrum
sample values greater than a noise threshold, thus reducing
the computational complexity. The network model and the
problem formulation considered in [113] are similar to those
in [111]. However, instead of directly using the raw SINR, the
state of the SU is the extracted features of the SINR. Also,
the action of the SU includes only frequency-hopping decision.
The simulation results show that the proposed DQL based on
the RCNN can converge in both ﬁxed and dynamic jamming
scenarios while the Q-learning cannot converge in the dynamic
jamming one. Furthermore, the proposed DQL can achieve
the average throughput close to that of the optimal scheme,
i.e., an anti-jamming scheme with completely known jamming
actions.
Instead of ﬁnding the frequency-hopping decisions, the
authors in [114] propose the use of DQL to ﬁnd an optimal
power control policy for the anti-jamming. The model is an
IoT network including IoT devices and one jammer. The
jammer can observe the communications of the transmitter and
chooses a jamming strategy to reduce the SINR at the receiver.
Thus, the transmitter chooses an action, i.e., transmit power
level, to maximize its utility. Here, the utility is the difference
between the SINR and the energy consumption cost due to the
transmission. Note that choosing the transmit power impacts
the future jamming strategy, and thus the interaction between
the transmitter and the jammer can be formulated as an MDP.
The transmitter is the agent, and the state is SINR measured
at its receiver at the last time slot. The DQN using the CNN
is then adopted to ﬁnd an optimal power control policy for the
transmitter to maximize its expected accumulated discounted
reward, i.e., the utility, over time slots. The simulation results
show that the proposed DQL can improve the utility of the
transmitter up to 17.7% compared with the Q-learning scheme.
Also, the proposed DQL reduces the utility of the jammer
around 18.1% compared with the Q-learning scheme.
To prevent the jammer’s observations of communications,
the transmitter can change its communication strategy, e.g., by
using relays that are far from the jamming area. The relays can
be UA Vs as proposed in [115]. The model consists of one UA V ,
i.e., a relay, one jammer, one mobile user and its serving BS
(see Fig. 10). The mobile user transmits messages to its server
via the serving BS. In the case that the serving BS is heavily
jammed, the UA V helps the mobile user to relay the messages
to the server through a backup BS. In particular, depending
on the SINR and Bit Error Rate (BER) values sent from the
serving BS, the UA V as an agent decides the relay power level
to maximize its utility, i.e., the difference between the SINR
and the relay cost. The relay power level can be considered to
be the UA V’s actions, and the SINR and BER are its states. As