17
size. For each request, the BS as an agent makes a decision
on whether or not to store the currently requested content in
the cache. If the new content is kept, the BS determines which
local content will be replaced. The state is the feature space of
the cached contents and the currently requested content. The
feature space consists of the total number of requests for each
content in a speciﬁc short-, medium-, and long-term. There
are two types of actions: (i) to ﬁnd a pair of contents and
exchange the cache states of the two contents and (ii) to keep
the cache states of the contents unchanged. The aim of the BS
is to maximize the long-term cache hit rate, i.e., reward.
The DQL scheme in [70] trains the policy by using
the DDPG method [71] and employs Wolpertinger architec-
ture [72] to reduce the size of the action space and avoid miss-
ing an optimal policy. The Wolpertinger architecture consists
of three main parts: an actor network, K-Nearest Neighbors
(K-NN), and a critic network. The actor network is to avoid a
large action space. The critic network is to correct the decision
made by the actor network. The DDPG method is applied
to update both critic and actor networks. K-NN can help to
explore a set of actions to avoid poor decisions. The actor
and critic networks are then implemented by using FNNs.
The simulation results show that the proposed DQL scheme
outperforms the ﬁrst-in ﬁrst-out scheme in terms of long-term
cache hit rate.
Maximizing the long-term cache hit rate in [70] implies
that the cache stores the most popular contents. In a dynamic
environment, contents stored in a cache have to be replaced
according to the users’ dynamic requests. An optimization of
the placement or replacement of cached contents is studied
in [73] by a deep learning method. The optimization algorithm
is trained by a DNN in advance and then used for real-
time caching or scheduling with minimum delay. The authors
in [74] propose an optimal caching policy to learn the cache
expiration times, i.e., Time-To-Live (TTL), for dynamically
changing requests in content delivery networks. The system
includes a cloud database server and multiple mobile devices
that can issue queries and update entries in a single database.
The query results can be cached for a speciﬁed time interval
at server-controlled caches. All cached queries will become
invalid if one of the cached records has been updated. A large
TTL will strain cache capacities while a small TTL increases
latencies signiﬁcantly if the database server is physically
remote.
Unlike the DDPG approach used in [70], the authors in [74]
propose to utilize Normalized Advantage Functions (NAFs)
for continuous DQL scheme to learn optimal cache expiration
duration. The key problem in continuous DQL is to select an
action maximizing the Q-function, while avoiding performing
a costly numerical optimization at each step. The use of NAFs
obviates a second actor network that needs to be trained sepa-
rately. Instead, a single neural network is used to output both
a value function and an advantage term. The DQL agent at the
cloud database uses an encoding of a query itself and the query
miss rates as the system states, which allows for an easier
generalization. The system reward is linearly proportional to
the current load, i.e., the number of cached queries divided
by the total capacity. This reward function can encouragelonger TTLs when fewer queries are cached, and shorter TTLs
when the load is close to the system capacity. Considering
incomplete measurements for rewards and next-states at run-
time, the authors introduce the Delayed Experience Injection
(DEI) approach that allows the DQL agent to keep track of
incomplete transitions when measurements are not immedi-
ately available. The authors evaluate the learning algorithm
by Yahoo! cloud serving benchmark with customized web
workloads [75]. The simulation results verify that the learning
approach based on NAFs and DEI outperforms a statistical
estimator.
2) Joint Caching and Transmission Control: The caching
policies determine where to store and retrieve the requested
content efﬁciently, e.g., by learning the contents’ popular-
ities [70] and cache expiration time [74]. Another impor-
tant aspect of caching design is the transmission control of
the content delivery from caches to end users, especially
for wireless systems with dynamic channel conditions. To
avoid mutual interference in multi-user wireless networks,
the transmission control decides which cached contents can
be transmitted concurrently as well as the most appropriate
control parameters, e.g., transmit power, precoding, data rate,
and channel allocation. Hence, the joint design of caching
and transmission control is required to enable efﬁcient content
delivery in multi-user wireless networks.
The authors in [76]–[78] propose a DQL framework to
address the joint caching and interference alignment to tackle
mutual interference in multi-user wireless networks. The au-
thors consider an MIMO system with limited backhaul capac-
ity and the caches at the transmitter. The precoding design for
interference alignment requires the global CSI at each trans-
mitter. A central scheduler is responsible for collecting CSI
and cache status from each user via the backhaul, scheduling
the users’ transmission, and optimizing the resource allocation.
By enabling content caching at individual transmitters, we can
decrease the demand for data transfer and thus save more back-
haul capacity for real-time CSI update and sharing. Using the
DQL-based approach at the central scheduler can reduce the
explicit demand for CSI and the computational complexity in
matrix optimization, especially with time-varying channel con-
ditions. The DQL agent implements the DNN to approximate
the Q-function with experience replay in training. To make the
learning process more stable, the target Q-network parameter
is updated by the Q-network for every a few time instants.
The collected information is assembled into a system state and
sent to the DQL agent, which feeds back an optimal action
for the current time instant. The action indicates which users
to be active, and the resource allocation among active users.
The system reward represents the total throughput of multiple
users. An extended work of [76] and [77] with a similar DQL
framework is presented in [78], in which a CNN-based DQN
is adopted and evaluated in a more practical conditions with
imperfect or delayed CSI. Simulation results show that the
performance of the MIMO system is signiﬁcantly improved
in terms of the total throughput and energy efﬁciency.
Interference management is an important requirement of
wireless systems. The application-related QoS or user experi-
ence is also an essential metric. Different from [76]–[78], the