18
authors in [79] propose a DQL approach to maximize Quality
of Experience (QoE) of IoT devices by jointly optimizing
the cache allocation and transmission rate in content-centric
wireless networks. The system state is speciﬁed by the nodes’
caching conditions, e.g., the service information and cached
contents, as well as the transmission rates of the cached
contents. The aim of the DQL agent is to minimize continu-
ously the network cost or maximize the QoE. The proposed
DQL framework is further enhanced with the use of PER and
DDQN. PER replays important transitions more frequently so
that DQN can learn from samples more efﬁciently. The use
of DDQN can stabilize the learning by providing two value
functions in separated neural networks. This avoids an over-
estimation of the DQN with the increasing number of actions.
These two neural networks are not completely decoupled as
the target network is a periodic copy of estimation network. A
discrete simulator ccnSim [80] is used to model the caching
behavior in various graph structures. The output data trace of
the simulator is then imported to Matlab and used to evaluate
the learning algorithm. The simulation results show that the
DQL framework by using PER and DDQN outperforms the
standard penetration test scheme in terms of QoE.
The QoE can be used to characterize the users’ percep-
tion of Virtual Reality (VR) services. The authors in [81]
address the joint content caching and transmission strategy
in a wireless VR network, where UA Vs capture videos on live
games and transmit them to small-cell BSs servicing the VR
users. Millimeter wave (mmWave) downlink backhaul links
are used for VR content transmission from the UA Vs to BSs.
The BSs can also cache the popular contents that may be
requested frequently by end users. The joint content caching
and transmission problem is formulated as an optimization to
maximize the users’ reliability, i.e., the probability that the
content transmission delay satisﬁes the instantaneous delay
target. The maximization involves the control of transmission
format, users’ association, the set and format of cached con-
tents. A DQL framework combining the Liquid State Machine
(LSM) and Echo State Network (ESN) is proposed for each
BS to ﬁnd the optimal transmission and caching strategies. As
a randomly generated spiking neural network [82], LSM can
store information about the network environment over time
and adjust the users’ association policy, cached contents and
formats according to the users’ content requests. It has been
used in [83] to predict the users’ content request distribution
while having only limited information regarding the network
and different users. Conventional LSM uses FNNs as the
output function, which demands high complexity in training
due to the computation of gradients for all of the neurons.
Conversely, the proposed DQL framework uses an ESN as the
output function, which uses historical information to ﬁnd the
relationship between the users’ reliability, caching, and content
transmission. It also has a lower complexity in training and
a better memory for network information. Simulation results
show that the proposed DQL framework can yield 25.4%
gain in terms of users’ reliability compared to the baseline
Q-learning.
3) Joint Caching, Networking, and Computation: Caching
and transmission control will become more involved in a Het-Net that integrates different communication technologies, e.g.,
cellular system, device-to-device network, vehicular network,
and networked UA Vs, to support various application demands.
The network heterogeneity raises the problem of complicated
system design that needs to address challenging issues such
as mutual interference, differentiated QoS provisioning, and
resource allocation, hopefully in a uniﬁed framework. Obvi-
ously this demands a joint optimization far beyond the extent
of joint caching and transmission control.
Accordingly, the authors in [84] propose a DQL framework
for energy-efﬁcient resource allocation in green wireless net-
works, jointly considering the couplings among networking,
in-network caching and computation. The system consists
of a Software-Deﬁned Network (SDN) with multiple virtual
networks and mobile users requesting for video on-demand
ﬁles that require a certain amount of computational resource
at either the content server or at local devices. In each virtual
network, an authorized user issues a request to download ﬁles
from a set of available SBSs in its neighborhood area. The
wireless channels between each mobile user and the SBSs
are characterized as Finite-State Markov Channels (FSMC).
The states are the available cache capacity at the SBSs,
the channel conditions between mobile users and SBSs, the
computational capability of the content servers and mobile
users. The DQL agent at each SBS decides an association
between each mobile user and SBS, where to perform the
computational task, and how to schedule the transmissions of
SBSs to deliver the required data. The objective is to minimize
the total energy consumption of the system from data caching,
wireless transmission, and computation.
The DQL scheme proposed in [84] has been applied to
improve the performance of Vehicular Ad doc NETworks
(V ANETs) in [85]–[87]. The network model includes multiple
BSs, Road Side Units (RSUs), MEC servers, and content
servers. All devices are controlled by a mobile virtual network
operator. The vehicles request for video contents that can be
cached at the BSs or retrieved from remote content servers.
The authors in [85] formulate the resource allocation problem
as a joint optimization of caching, networking, and comput-
ing, e.g., compressing and encoding operations of the video
contents. The system states include the CSI from each BS, the
computational capability, and cache size of each MEC/content
server. The network operator feeds the system state to the
FNN-based DQN and gets the optimal policy that determines
the resource allocation for each vehicle. To exploit spatial
correlations in learning, the authors in [86] enhance Q-learning
by using CNNs in DQN. This makes it possible to extract
high-level features from raw input data. Two schemes have
been introduced in [87] to improve stability and performance
of the ordinary DQN method. Firstly, DDQN is designed to
avoid over-estimation of Q-value in ordinary DQN. Hence, the
action can be decoupled from the target Q-value generation.
This makes the training process faster and more reliable.
Secondly, the dueling DQN approach is also integrated in the
design with the intuition that it is not always necessary to
estimate the reward by taking some action. The state-action Q-
value in dueling DQN is decomposed into one value function
representing the reward in the current state, and the advantage