1
Applications of Deep Reinforcement Learning in
Communications and Networking: A Survey
Nguyen Cong Luong, Dinh Thai Hoang, Member, IEEE , Shimin Gong, Member, IEEE , Dusit Niyato, Fellow,
IEEE , Ping Wang, Senior Member, IEEE , Ying-Chang Liang, Fellow, IEEE , Dong In Kim, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract —This paper presents a comprehensive literature re-
view on applications of deep reinforcement learning in com-
munications and networking. Modern networks, e.g., Internet
of Things (IoT) and Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UA V) networks,
become more decentralized and autonomous. In such networks,
network entities need to make decisions locally to maximize the
network performance under uncertainty of network environment.
Reinforcement learning has been efﬁciently used to enable the
network entities to obtain the optimal policy including, e.g.,
decisions or actions, given their states when the state and
action spaces are small. However, in complex and large-scale
networks, the state and action spaces are usually large, and the
reinforcement learning may not be able to ﬁnd the optimal policy
in reasonable time. Therefore, deep reinforcement learning, a
combination of reinforcement learning with deep learning, has
been developed to overcome the shortcomings. In this survey,
we ﬁrst give a tutorial of deep reinforcement learning from
fundamental concepts to advanced models. Then, we review deep
reinforcement learning approaches proposed to address emerging
issues in communications and networking. The issues include
dynamic network access, data rate control, wireless caching,
data ofﬂoading, network security, and connectivity preservation
which are all important to next generation networks such as
5G and beyond. Furthermore, we present applications of deep
reinforcement learning for trafﬁc routing, resource sharing,
and data collection. Finally, we highlight important challenges,
open issues, and future research directions of applying deep
reinforcement learning.
Keywords - Deep reinforcement learning, deep Q-learning, net-
working, communications, spectrum access, rate control, security,
caching, data ofﬂoading, data collection.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning [1] is one of the most important
research directions of machine learning which has signiﬁcant
impacts to the development of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) over
the last 20 years. Reinforcement learning is a learning process
in which an agent can periodically make decisions, observe
the results, and then automatically adjust its strategy to achieve
the optimal policy. However, this learning process, even though
N. C. Luong and D. Niyato are with School of Computer Science
and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. E-mails:
clnguyen@ntu.edu.sg, dniyato@ntu.edu.sg.
D. T. Hoang is with the Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology,
University of Technology Sydney, Australia. E-mail: hoang.dinh@uts.edu.au.
S. Gong is with the Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China. E-mail: sm.gong@siat.ac.cn.
P. Wang is with Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science,
York University, Canada. E-mail: pingw@yorku.ca.
Y .-C. Liang is with Center for Intelligent Networking and Communications
(CINC), with University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu, China. E-mail: liangyc@ieee.org.
D. I. Kim is with School of Information and Communication Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, Korea. Email: dikim@skku.ac.kr.proved to converge, takes a lot of time to reach the best policy
as it has to explore and gain knowledge of an entire system,
making it unsuitable and inapplicable to large-scale networks.
Consequently, applications of reinforcement learning are very
limited in practice. Recently, deep learning [2] has been
introduced as a new breakthrough technique. It can overcome
the limitations of reinforcement learning, and thus open a new
era for the development of reinforcement learning, namely
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL). The DRL embraces
the advantage of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) to train
the learning process, thereby improving the learning speed
and the performance of reinforcement learning algorithms.
As a result, DRL has been adopted in a numerous applica-
tions of reinforcement learning in practice such as robotics,
computer vision, speech recognition, and natural language
processing [2]. One of the most famous applications of DRL
is AlphaGo [3], the ﬁrst computer program which can beat a
human professional without handicaps on a full-sized 19 19
board.
In the areas of communications and networking, DRL
has been recently used as an emerging tool to effectively
address various problems and challenges. In particular, modern
networks such as Internet of Things (IoT), Heterogeneous
Networks (HetNets), and Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UA V)
network become more decentralized, ad-hoc, and autonomous
in nature. Network entities such as IoT devices, mobile users,
and UA Vs need to make local and autonomous decisions, e.g.,
spectrum access, data rate selection, transmit power control,
and base station association, to achieve the goals of different
networks including, e.g., throughput maximization and energy
consumption minimization. Under uncertain and stochastic
environments, most of the decision-making problems can be
modeled by a so-called Markov Decision Process (MDP) [4].
Dynamic programming [5], [6] and other algorithms such
as value iteration, as well as reinforcement learning tech-
niques can be adopted to solve the MDP. However, the
modern networks are large-scale and complicated, and thus the
computational complexity of the techniques rapidly becomes
unmanageable. As a result, DRL has been developing to be
an alternative solution to overcome the challenge. In general,
the DRL approaches provide the following advantages:
DRL can obtain the solution of sophisticated network
optimizations. Thus, it enables network controllers, e.g.,
base stations, in modern networks to solve non-convex
and complex problems, e.g., joint user association, com-
putation, and transmission schedule, to achieve the op-arXiv:1810.07862v1  [cs.NI]  18 Oct 2018