19
CacheCellular BS
Small cell BS
Cloud
Joint design of caching, networking, 
and transmission control strategies
Fig. 7: Joint caching, networking, and transmission control to
optimize cache hit rate [70], cache expiration time [74], interfer-
ence alignment [76]–[78], Quality of Experience [79], [81], energy
efﬁciency [84], resource allocation [85]–[87], trafﬁc latency, or re-
dundancy [89], [91].
function that measures the relative importance of a certain
action compared with other actions. The enhanced DQL agent
combining these two schemes can achieve better performance
and faster training speed.
Considering the huge action space and high complexity with
the vehicle’s mobility and service delay deadline Td, a multi-
time scale DQN framework is proposed in [88] to minimize
the system cost by the joint design of communication, caching
and computing in V ANET. The policy design accounts for
limited storage capacities and computational resources at the
vehicles and the RSUs. The small timescale DQN is for every
time slot and aims to maximize the exact immediate reward.
Additionally, the large timescale DQN is designed for every
Tdtime slots within the service delay deadline, and used to
estimate the reward considering the vehicle’s mobility in a
large timescale.
The aforementioned DQL framework for V ANETs, e.g.,
[85]–[87], has also been generalized to smart city applica-
tions in [89], which necessitates dynamic orchestration of
networking, caching, and computation to meet different ser-
vicing requirements. Through Network Function Virtualization
(NFV) [90], the physical wireless network in smart cities
can be divided logically into several virtual ones by the
network operator, which is responsible for network slicing
and resource scheduling, as well as allocation of caching
and computing capacities. The use cases in smart cities are
presented in [91], [92], which apply the generalized DQL
framework to improve the security and efﬁciency for trust-
based data exchange, sharing, and delivery in mobile social
networks through the resource allocation and optimization
of MEC allocation, caching, and D2D (Device-to-Device)
networking.
B. Data and Computation Ofﬂoading
With limited computation, memory and power supplies,
IoT devices such as sensors, wearable devices, and handhelddevices become the bottleneck to support advanced applica-
tions such as interactive online gaming and face recognition.
To address such a challenge, IoT devices can ofﬂoad the
computational tasks to nearby MEC servers, integrated with
the BSs, Access Points (APs), and even neighboring Mobile
Users (MUs). As a result, data and computation ofﬂoading can
potentially reduce the processing delay, save the battery en-
ergy, and even enhance security for computation-intensive IoT
applications. However, the critical problem in the computation
ofﬂoading is to determine the ofﬂoading rate, i.e., the amount
of computational workload, and choose the MEC server from
all available servers. If the chosen MEC server experiences
heavy workloads and degraded channel conditions, it may take
even longer time for the IoT devices to ofﬂoad data and receive
the results from the MEC server. Hence, the design of an
ofﬂoading policy has to take into account the time-varying
channel conditions, user mobility, energy supply, computation
workload and the computational capabilities of different MEC
servers.
The authors in [93] focus on minimizing the mobile user’s
cost and energy consumption by ofﬂoading cellular trafﬁc to
WLAN. Each mobile user can either access the cellular net-
work, or the complimentary WLAN as illustrated in Fig. 8(a),
but with different monetary costs. The mobile user also has to
pay a penalty if the data transmission does not ﬁnish before
the deadline. The mobile user’s data ofﬂoading decision can
be modeled as an MDP. The system state includes the mobile
user’s location and the remaining ﬁle size of all data ﬂows.
The mobile user will choose to transmit data through either
WLAN or cellular network, and decide how to allocate channel
capacities to concurrent ﬂows. Without knowing the mobility
pattern in advance, the DQL is proposed for each mobile user
to learn the optimal ofﬂoading policy from past experiences.
CNNs are employed in the DQL to predict a continuous
value of the mobile user’s remaining data. Simulation results
reveal that the DQN-based scheme generally outperforms the
dynamic programming algorithm for the MDP. The reason is
that the DQN can learn from experience while the dynamic
programming algorithm cannot obtain the optimal policy with
incorrect transition probability.
The allocation of limited computational resources at the
MEC server is critical for cost and energy minimization. The
authors in [94] consider an MEC-enabled cellular system, in
which multiple mobile users can ofﬂoad their computational
tasks via wireless channels to one MEC server, co-located with
the cellular BS as shown in Fig. 8(b). Each mobile user has
a computational-intensive task, characterized by the required
computational resources, CPU cycles, and the maximum tol-
erable delay. The capacity of the MEC server is limited to
accommodate all mobile users’ task loads. The bandwidth
sharing between different mobile users’ ofﬂoading also affects
the overall delay performance and energy consumptions. The
DQL is used to minimize the cost of delay and power
consumptions for all mobile users, by jointly optimizing the
ofﬂoading decision and computational resource allocation. The
system states include the sum of cost of the entire system
and the available computational capacity of the MEC server.
The action of BS is to determine the resource allocation and