15
state, includes the video quality of the last downloaded video
segment. The video segment is raw which may cause “state
explosion” to the state space [63]. To reduce the state space
and to improve the QoE, the authors in [63] propose to use
a video quality prediction network. The prediction network
extracts useful features from the raw video segments using
CNN and RNN. Then, the output of the prediction network,
i.e., the predicted video quality, is used as one of the inputs of
the DQL which is proposed in [60]. The simulation results
based on the broadband dataset from [64] show that the
proposed DQL can improve the average QoE up to 25%
compared with the Google Hangout, i.e., a communication
platform developed by Google. Moreover, the proposed DQL
can reduce the average latency of video transmission around
45% due to the small state space.
Apart from the DASH systems, the DQL can be effectively
used for the rate control in High V olume Flexible Time
(HVFT) applications. HVFT applications use cellular networks
to deliver IoT trafﬁc. The HVFT applications have a large
volume of trafﬁc, and the trafﬁc scheduling, e.g., data rate
control, in the HVFT applications is necessary. One common
approach is to assign static priority classes per trafﬁc type, and
then trafﬁc scheduling is based on its priority class. However,
such an approach does not evolve to accommodate new trafﬁc
classes. Thus, learning methods such as DQL should be used to
provide adaptive rate control mechanisms as proposed in [65].
The network model is a single cell including one BS as a
central controller and multiple mobile users. The problem at
the BS is to ﬁnd a proper policy, i.e., data rate for the users,
to maximize the amount of transmitted HVFT trafﬁc while
minimizing performance degradation to existing data trafﬁcs.
It is shown in [65] that the problem can be formulated as
an MDP. The agent is the BS, and the state includes the
current network state and the useful features extracted from
network states in the past time slots. The network state at
a time slot includes (i) the congestion metric, i.e., the cell’s
trafﬁc load, at the time slot, (ii) the total number of network
connections, and (iii) the cell efﬁciency, i.e., the cell quality.
The action that the BS takes is a combination of the trafﬁc
rate for the users. To achieve the BS’ objective, the reward
is deﬁned as a function of (i) the sum of HVFT trafﬁc, (ii)
trafﬁc loss to existing applications due to the presence of
the HVFT trafﬁc, and (iii) the amount of bytes served below
desired minimum throughput. The DQL using the actor and
critic networks with LSTM is then adopted. By using the real
network data collected in Melbourne, the simulation results
show that the proposed DQL increases the HVFT trafﬁc up to
2 times compared with the heuristic control scheme. However,
how the proposed scheme reduces the trafﬁc loss is not shown.
In the aforementioned approaches, the maximum number of
objectives is constrained, e.g., to 3 in [66]. The authors in [67]
show that the DQL can be used for the rate control to achieve
multiple objectives in complex communication systems. The
network model is a future space communication system which
is expected to operate in unpredictable environments, e.g.,
orbital dynamics, atmospheric and space weather, and dy-
namic channels. In the system, the transmitter needs to be
conﬁgured with several transmit parameters, e.g., symbol rateand encoding rate, to achieve multiple conﬂict objectives, e.g.,
low Bit Error Rate (BER), throughput improvement, power
and spectral efﬁciency. The adaptive coding and modulation
schemes, i.e., [68], can be used. However, the methods allow to
achieve only limited number objectives. Learning algorithms
such as the DQL can be thus used. The agent is the transmitter
in the system. The action is a combination of (i) symbol rate,
(ii) energy per symbol, (iii) modulation mode, (iv) number
of bits per symbol, and (v) encoding rate. The objective is to
maximize the system performance. Thus, the reward is deﬁned
as a ﬁtness function of performance parameters including (i)
BER estimated at the receiver, (ii) throughput, (iii) spectral
efﬁciency, (iv) power consumption, and (v) transmit power
efﬁciency. The state is the system performance measured by
the transmitter, and thus the state is the reward. To achieve
multiple objectives, the DQL is implemented by using a set of
multiple neural networks in parallel. The input of the DQL is
the current state and the channel conditions, and the output is
the predicted action. The neural networks are trained by using
the Levenberg-Marquardt backpropagation algorithm [69]. The
simulation results show that the proposed DQL can achieve the
ﬁtness score, i.e., the weighted sum of different objectives,
close to the ideal, i.e., the exhaustive search approach. This
implies that the DQL is able to select near-optimal actions
and learn the relationship between rewards and actions given
dynamic channel conditions.
Summary: This section reviews applications of DQL for
the dynamic network access and adaptive rate control. The
reviewed approaches are summarized along with the references
in Table III. We observe that the problems are mostly modeled
as an MDP. Moreover, DQL approaches for the IoT and DASH
systems receive more attentions than other networks. Future
networks, e.g., 5G networks, involve multiple network entities
with multiple conﬂicting objectives, e.g., provider’s revenue
versus users’ utility maximization. This poses a number of
challenges to the traditional resource management mechanisms
that deserve in-depth investigation. In the next section, we
review the adoption of DQL for the emerging services, i.e.,
ofﬂoading and caching.
IV. C ACHING AND OFFLOADING
As one of the key features of information-centric net-
working, in-network caching can efﬁciently reduce duplicated
content transmissions. The studies on wireless caching has
shown that access delays, energy consumption, and the total
amount of trafﬁc can be reduced signiﬁcantly by caching
contents in wireless devices. Big data analytics [70] also
demonstrate that with limited cache size, proactive caching
at network edge nodes can achieve 100% user satisfaction
while ofﬂoading 98% of the backhaul trafﬁc. Joint content
caching and ofﬂoading can address the gap between the
mobile users’ large data demands and the limited capacities
in data storage and processing. This motivates the study on
Mobile Edge Computing (MEC). By deploying both com-
putational resources and caching capabilities close to end
users, MEC signiﬁcantly improves energy efﬁciency and QoS
for applications that require intensive computations and low