32
in a dynamic heterogenous 5G network, which consists of
hierarchically nested IoT devices/networks with fast changing
service requirements and networking conditions. In such a
situation, the DQL agents for individual entities have to be
light-weighted and agile to the change of network conditions.
This implies a reduce to the state and action spaces in learning,
which however may compromise the performance of the
convergent policy. The interactions among multiple agents also
complicate the network environment and cause a considerable
increase to the state space, which inevitably slows down the
learning algorithms.
4) Training and Performance Evaluation of DRL Frame-
work: The DRL framework requires large amounts of data for
both training and performance evaluation. In wireless systems,
such data is not easily accessible as we rarely have referential
data pools as other deep learning scenarios, e.g., computer
vision. Most of the existing works rely on simulated dataset,
which undermines the conﬁdence of the DRL framework in
practical system. The simulated data set is usually generated
by a speciﬁc stochastic model, which is a simpliﬁcation of the
real system and may overlook the hidden patterns. Hence, a
more effective way for generating simulation data is required
to ensure that the training and performance evaluation of the
DRL framework are more consistent with practical system.
B. Open Issues
1) Distributed DRL Framework in Wireless Networks: The
DRL framework requires large amounts of training for DNNs.
This may be implemented at a centralized network controller,
which has sufﬁcient computational capacity and the capability
for information collection. However, for massive end users
with limited capabilities, it becomes a meaningful task to
design distributed implementation for the DRL framework that
decomposes resource-demanding basic functionalities, e.g.,
information collection, sharing, and DNN training, from rein-
forcement learning algorithms at individual devices. The basic
functionalities can be integrated with the network controller. It
remains an open issue for the design of network infrastructure
that supports these common functionalities for distributed
DRL. The overhead of information exchange between end
users and network controller also has to be well controlled.
2) Balance between Information Quality and Learning
Performance: The majority of the existing works consider the
orchestration of networking, transmission control, ofﬂoading,
and caching decisions in one DRL framework to derive the
optimal policy, e.g., [84]–[89], [91], [92]. However, from a
practical viewpoint, the network system will have to pay sub-
stantially increasing cost for information gathering. The cost
is incurred from large delay, pre-processing of asynchronous
information, excessive energy consumption, reduced learning
speed, etc. Hence, an open issue is to ﬁnd the optimal balance
between information quality and learning performance so that
the DQL agent does not consume too much resources only
to achieve insigniﬁcantly marginal increase in the learning
performance.C. Future Research Directions
1) DRL for Channel Estimation in Wireless Systems:
Massive MIMO will be deployed for 5G to achieve high-speed
communications at Gbps. For this, the channel estimation is
the prerequisite for realizing massive MIMO. However, in a
large-scale heterogeneous cellular network foreseen for 5G or
beyond, the required channel estimation is very challenging.
Thus, DRL will play an important role in acquiring the chan-
nel estimates with regard to dynamic time-varying wireless
channels.
Also, we expect that the combination of Wireless Power
Transfer (WPT) and Mobile Crowd Sensing (MCS), namely
Wireless-Powered Crowd Sensing (WPCS) will be a promising
technique for the emerging IoT services. To this end, a higher
power transfer efﬁciency of WPT is very critical to enable
the deployment of WPCS in low-power wide area network.
A "large-scale array antenna based WPT" will achieve this
goal of higher WPT efﬁciency, but the channel estimation
should be performed with minimal power consumption at a
sensor node. This is because of that the sensor must operate
with self-powering via WPT from the dedicated energy source,
e.g., power beacon, Wi-Fi or small-cell access point, and/or
ambient RF sources, e.g., TV tower, Wi-Fi AP and cellular
BS. In this regard, the channel estimation based on the receive
power measurements at the sensor node is one viable solution,
because the receive power can be measured by the passive-
circuit power meter with negligible power consumption. DRL
can be used for the time-varying wireless channels with
temporal correlations over time by taking the receive power
measurements from the sensor node as the input for DRL,
which will enable the channel estimation for WPT efﬁciently.
2) DRL for Crowdsensing Service Optimization: In MCS,
mobile users contribute sensing data to a crowdsensing service
provider and receive an incentive in return. However, due to
limited resources, e.g., bandwidth and energy, the mobile user
has to decide on whether and how much data to be uploaded
to the provider. Likewise, the provider aiming to maximize its
proﬁt has to determine the amount of incentive to be given.
The provider’s decision depends on the actions of the mobile
users. For example, with many mobile users contributing data
to the crowdsensing service provider, the provider can lower
the incentive. Due to a large state space of a large number of
users and dynamic environment, DRL can be applied to obtain
an optimal crowdsensing policy similar to [168].
3) DRL for Cryptocurrency Management in Wireless Net-
works: Pricing and economic models have been widely ap-
plied to wireless networks [169], [170]. For example, wireless
users pay money to access radio resources or mobile services.
Alternatively, the users can receive money if they contribute to
the networks, e.g., offering a relay or cache function. However,
using real money and cash in such scenarios faces many
issues related to accounting, security, and privacy. Recently,
the concept of cryptocurrency based on the blockchain tech-
nology has been introduced and adopted in wireless networks,
e.g., [171], which has been shown to be a secure and efﬁcient
solution. However, the value of cryptocurrency, i.e., token
or coin, can be highly dynamic depending on many market