11
according to a mixture of its average strategy and best response
strategy.
In the NSFP, all players of the game are controlled by
separate NFSP agents that learn from simultaneous play
against each other, i.e., self-play. An NFSP agent interacts
with its fellow agents and memorizes its experience of game
transitions and its own best response behaviour in two mem-
ories,MRLandMSL. NFSP treats these memories as two
distinct datasets suitable for DRL and supervised classiﬁcation,
respectively. The agent trains a neural network, Q(s;a;Q),
to predict action values from data in MRLusing off-policy
reinforcement learning. The resulting network deﬁnes the
agent’s approximate best response strategy, =-greedy(Q),
which selects a random action with probability and otherwise
chooses the action that maximizes the predicted action values.
The agent trains a separate neural network (s;a;)to
imitate its own past best response behavior by using supervised
classiﬁcation on the data in MSL. NFSP also makes use of
two technical innovations in order to ensure the stability of the
resulting algorithm as well as to enable simultaneous self-play
learning. Through experimental results, the authors show that
the NFSP can converge to approximate Nash equilibria in a
small poker game.
Summary: In this section, we have presented the basics of
reinforcement learning, deep learning, and DQL. Furthermore,
we have discussed various advanced DQL techniques and their
extensions. Different DQL techniques can be used to solve
different problems in different network scenarios. In the next
sections, we review DQL related works for various problems
in communications and networking.
III. N ETWORK ACCESS AND RATECONTROL
Modern networks such as IoT become more decentralized
and ad-hoc in nature. In such networks, entities such as
sensors and mobile users need to make independent decisions,
e.g., channel and base station selections, to achieve their
own goals, e.g., throughput maximization. However, this is
challenging due to the dynamic and the uncertainty of network
status. Learning algorithms such as DQL allow to learn and
build knowledge about the networks that are used to enable
the network entities to make their optimal decisions. In this
section, we review the applications of DQL for the following
issues:
Dynamic spectrum access: Dynamic spectrum access
allows users to locally select channels to maximize their
throughput. However, the users may not have full obser-
vations of the system, e.g., channel states. Thus, DQL
can be used as an effective tool for dynamic spectrum
access.
Joint user association and spectrum access: User asso-
ciation is implemented to determine which user to be
assigned to which Base Station (BS). The joint user
association and spectrum access problems are studied in
[37] and [38]. However, the problems are typically com-
binatorial and non-convex which require nearly complete
and accurate network information to obtain the optimal
strategy. DQL is able to provide distributed solutions
which can be effectively used for the problems.Adaptive rate control: This refers to bitrate/data rate con-
trol in dynamic and unpredictable environments such as
Dynamic Adaptive Streaming over HTTP (DASH). Such
a system allows clients or users to independently choose
video segments with different bitrates to download. The
client’s objective is to maximize its Quality of Experience
(QoE). DQL can be adopted to effectively solve the
problem instead of dynamic programming which has high
complexity and demands complete information.
A. Network Access
This section discusses how to use DQL to solve the spec-
trum access and user association in networks.
1) Dynamic Spectrum Access: The authors in [39] propose
a dynamic channel access scheme of a sensor based on the
DQL for IoT. At each time slot, the sensor selects one of
Mchannels for transmitting its packet. The channel state is
either in low interference, i.e., successful transmission, or in
high interference, i.e., transmission failure. Since the sensor
only knows the channel state after selecting the channel, the
sensor’s optimization decision problem can be formulated as
a POMDP. In particular, the action of sensor is to select
one ofMchannels. The sensor receives a positive reward
“+1” if the selected channel is in low interference, and a
negative reward “-1” otherwise. The objective is to ﬁnd an
optimal policy which maximizes the sensor’s the expected
accumulated discounted reward over time slots. A DQN1using
FNN with experience replay [40] is then adopted to ﬁnd the
optimal policy. The input of the DQN is a state of the sensor
which is the combination of actions and observations, i.e., the
rewards, in the past time slots. The output includes Q-values
corresponding to the actions. To balance the exploration of
the current best Q-value with the exploration of the better
one, the-greedy policy is adopted for the action selection
mechanism. The simulation results based on real data from
[41] show that the proposed scheme can achieve the average
accumulated reward close to the myopic policy [42] without
a full knowledge of the system.
[39] can be considered to be a pioneer work using the DQL
for the channel access. However, the DQL keeps following the
learned policy over time slots and stops learning a suitable
policy. Actual IoT environments are dynamic, and the DQN
in the DQL needs to be re-trained. An adaptive DQL scheme
is proposed in [43] which evaluates the accumulated reward
of the current policy for every period. When the reward is
reduced by a given threshold, the DQN is re-trained to ﬁnd a
new good policy. The simulation results [43] show that when
the states of the channels change, the adaptive DQL scheme
can detect the change and start re-learning to obtain the high
reward.
The models in [39] and [43] are constrained to only one
sensor. Consider a multi-sensor scenario, the authors in [44]
address the joint channel selection and packet forwarding
using the DQL. The model is shown in Fig. 5 in which
one sensor as a relay forwards packets received from its
neighboring sensors to the sink. The sensor is equipped with
1Remind that DQN is the core of the DQL algorithms.