14
Client
(agent )(Video segment & bitrate )
(Video segment )
Buffer
Content delivery 
networkServerVideo 
segmentsServer
Fig. 6: A dynamic adaptive streaming system based on HTTP
standard.
the DQL can be used to solve it. The UA Vs do not know
the users’ content requests, and thus the Liquid State Machine
approach (LSM) [53] is adopted to predict the content request
distribution of the users and to perform resource allocation.
In particular, predicting the content request distribution is
implemented at the cloud based on an LSM-based prediction
algorithm. Then, given the request distributions, each UA V as
an agent uses an LSM-based learning algorithm to ﬁnd its
optimal users association. Speciﬁcally, the input of the LSM-
based learning algorithm consists of actions, i.e., UA V-user
association schemes, that other UA Vs take, and the output
includes the expected numbers of users with stable queues
corresponding to actions that the UA V can take. After the user
association is done, the optimal content caching is determined
based on the results of [54, Theorem 2], and the optimal spec-
trum allocation is done by using linear programming. Based
on the Gordon’s Theorem [55], the proposed DQL is proved
to converge with probability one. The simulation results using
content request data from [56] show that the proposed DQL
can converge in around 400 iterations. Compared with the Q-
learning, the proposed DQN improves the convergence time up
to 33% . Moreover, the proposed DQL signiﬁcantly improves
the number of users with stable queues up to 50% compared
with the Q-learning without cache. In fact, energy efﬁciency is
also important for the UA Vs, and thus applying the DQL for a
joint user association, spectrum access, and power allocation
problem needs to be investigated.
B. Adaptive Rate Control
Dynamic Adaptive Streaming over HTTP (DASH) becomes
the dominant standard for video streaming [57]. DASH is able
to leverage existing content delivery network infrastructure
and is compatible with a multitude of client-side applications.
A general DASH system is shown in Fig. 6 in which the
videos are stored in servers as multiple segments, i.e., chunks.
Each segment is encoded at different compression levels to
generate representations with different bitrates, i.e., different
video visual quality. At each time slot, the client chooses
a representation, i.e., a segment with a certain bitrate, to
download. The client’s problem is to ﬁnd an optimal policy
which maximizes its QoE such as maximizing average bitrate
and minimizing rebuffering, i.e., the time which the video
playout freezes.
As presented in [58], the above problem can be modeled
as an MDP in which the agent is the client and the action
is choosing a representation to download. To maximize theQoE, the reward is deﬁned as a function of (i) visual quality
of the video, (ii) video quality stability, (iii) rebuffering event,
and (iv) buffer state. Given the reward formulation, the state
of the client should include (i) the video quality of the last
downloaded segment, (ii) the current buffer state, (iii) the
rebuffering time, and (iv) the channel capacities experienced
during downloading of segments in the past time slots. The
MDP can be solved by using dynamic programming, but the
computational complexity rapidly becomes unmanageable as
the size of the problem increases. Thus, the authors in [58]
adopt the DQL to solve the problem. Similar to [45], the
LSTM networks are used in which the input is the state of
the client, and the output includes Q-values corresponding to
the client’s possible actions. To improve the performance of
the standard LSTM, peephole connections are added into the
LSTM networks. The simulation results based on dataset from
[59] show that the proposed DQL algorithm can converge
much faster than Q-learning. Moreover, the proposed DQL
improves the video quality and reduces the rebuffering since
it is able to dynamically manage the buffer by considering the
buffer state and channel capacity.
The network model and the optimization problem in [58]
are also found in [60]. However, different from [58], the
authors in [60] adopt the Asynchronous Advantage Actor-
Critic (A3C) method [26] for the DQL to further enhance
and speed up the training. As presented in Section II-F1,
A3C includes two neural networks, namely, actor network and
critic network . The actor network is to choose bitrates for the
client, and the critic network helps train the actor network.
For the actor network, the input is the client’s state, and the
output is a policy, i.e., a probability distribution over possible
actions given states that the client can take. Here, the action is
choosing the next representation, i.e., the next segment with a
certain bitrate, to download. For the critic network, the input
is the client’s state, and the output is the expected total reward
when following the policy obtained from the actor network.
The simulation results based on the mobile dataset from [61]
show that the proposed DQL can improve the average QoE up
to 25% compared with the bitrate control scheme [62]. Also,
by having sufﬁcient buffer to handle the network’s throughput
ﬂuctuations, the proposed DQL reduces the rebuffering around
32.8% compared with the baseline scheme.
In practice, the DQL algorithm proposed in [60] can be
easily deployed in a multi-client network since A3C is able
to support parallel training for multiple agents. Accordingly,
each client, i.e., an agent, is conﬁgured to observe its reward.
Then, the client sends a tuple including its state, action, and
reward to a server. The server uses the actor-critic algorithm
to update its actor network model. The server then pushes the
newest model to the agent. This update process can happen
asynchronously among all agents which improves quality and
speeds up the training. Although the parallel training scheme
may incur a Round-Trip Time (RTT) between the clients and
the server, the simulation results in [60] show that the RTT
between the clients and the server reduces the average QoE by
only 3.5%. The performance degradation is small, and thus the
proposed DQL can be implemented in real network systems.
In [58] and [60], the input of the DQL, i.e., the client’s