12
  Relay
(agent )Sensor
(neighbor )
SinkChannels
Sensor
(neighbor )
Buffer
Fig. 5: Joint channel selection and packet forwarding in IoT.
a buffer to store the received packets. At each time slot, the
sensor selects a set of channels for the packet forwarding so
as to maximize its utility, i.e., the ratio of the number of
transmitted packets to the transmit power. Similar to [39], the
sensor’s problem can be formulated as an MDP. The action is
to select a set of channels, the number of packets transmitted
on the channels, and a modulation mode. To avoid packet loss,
the state is deﬁned as the combination of the buffer state and
channel state. The MDP is then solved by the DQL in which
the input is the state and the output is the action selection.
The DQL uses the stacked autoencoder to reduce the massive
calculation and storage in the Q-learning phase. The sensor’s
utility function is proved to be bounded which can guarantee
the convergence of the algorithm. As shown in the simulation
results, the proposed scheme can converge after a certain
number of iterations. Also, the proposed scheme signiﬁcantly
improves the system utility compared with the random action
selection scheme. However, as the packet arrival rate increases,
the system utility of the proposed scheme decreases since the
sensor needs to consume more power to transmit all packets.
Consuming more power leads to poor sensor’s performance
due to its energy constraint, i.e., a shorter IoT system lifetime.
The channel access problem in the energy harvesting-enabled
IoT system is investigated in [45]. The model consists of
one BS and energy harvesting-based sensors. The BS as a
controller allocates channels to the sensors. However, the
uncertainty of ambient energy availability at the sensors may
make the channel allocation inefﬁcient. For example, the
channel allocated to the sensor with low available energy may
not be fully utilized since the sensor cannot communicate later.
Therefore, the BS’s problem is to predict the sensors’
battery states and select sensors for the channel access so as
to maximize the total rate. Since the sensors are distributed
randomly over a geographical area, the complete statistical
knowledge of the system dynamics, e.g., the battery states
and channel states, may not be available. Thus, the DQL is
used to solve the problem of the BS, i.e., the agent. The DQL
uses a DQN consisting of two LSTM-based neural network
layers. The ﬁrst layer generates the predicted battery states
of sensors, and the second layer uses the predicted states
along with Channel State Information (CSI) to determine the
channel access policy. The state space consists of (i) channel
access scheduling history, (ii) the history of predicted battery
information, (iii) the history of the true battery information,
and (iv) the current CSI of the sensors. The action spacecontains all sets of sensors to be selected for the channel
access, and the reward is the difference between the total rate
and the prediction error. As shown in the simulation results, the
proposed scheme outperforms the myopic policy [42] in terms
of total rate. Moreover, the battery prediction error obtained
from the proposed scheme is close to zero.
The above schemes, e.g., [39] and [45], focus on the
rate maximization. In IoT systems such as Vehicle-to-Vehicle
(V2V) communications, latency also needs to be considered
due to the mobility of V2V transmitters/receivers and vital
applications in the trafﬁc safety. One of the problems of each
V2V transmitter is to select a channel and a transmit power
level to maximize its capacity under a latency constraint. Given
the decentralized network, a DQN is adopted to make optimal
decisions as proposed in [46]. The model consists of V2V
transmitters, i.e., agents, which share a set of channels. The
actions of each V2V transmitter include choosing channels
and transmit power levels. The reward is a function of the
V2V transmitter’s capacity and latency. The state observed
by the V2V transmitter consists of (i) the instantaneous
CSI of the corresponding V2V link, (ii) the interference to
the V2V link in the previous time slot, (iii) the channels
selected by the V2V transmitter’ neighbors in the previous
time slot, and (iv) the remaining time to meet the latency
constraint. The state is also an input of the DQN. The output
includes Q-values corresponding to the actions. As shown in
the simulation results, by dynamically adjusting the power
and channel selection when V2V links are likely to violate
the latency constraint, the proposed scheme has more V2V
transmitters meeting the latency constraint compared with the
random channel allocation.
To reduce spectrum cost, the above IoT systems often use
unlicensed channels. However, this may cause the interference
to existing networks, e.g., WLANs. The authors in [47]
propose to use the DQN to jointly address the dynamic channel
access and interference management. The model consists of
Small Base Stations (SBSs) which share unlicensed channels
in an LTE network. At each time slot, the SBS selects one
of channels for transmitting its packet. However, there may
be WLAN trafﬁcs on the selected channel, and thus the SBS
accesses the selected channel with a probability. The actions
of the SBS include pairs of channel selection and channel
access probability. The problem of the SBS is to determine an
action vector so as to maximize its total throughput, i.e., its
utility, over all channels and time slots. The resource allocation
problem can be formulated as a non-cooperative game, and the
DQN using LSTM can be adopted to solve the game. The input
of the DQN is the history trafﬁc of the SBSs and the WLAN
on the channels. The output includes predicted action vectors
of the SBSs. The utility function of each SBS is proved to
be convex, and thus the DQN-based algorithm converges to a
Nash equilibrium of the game. The simulation results based
on real trafﬁc data from [48] show that the proposed scheme
can improve the average throughput up to 28% compared with
the standard Q-learning [15]. Moreover, deploying more SBSs
in the LTE network does not allow more airtime fraction for
the network. This implies that the proposed scheme can avoid
causing performance degradation to the WLAN. However, the