30
to capture the hidden patterns in state transitions. Considering
inter-data correlations, the authors use the transfer learning
method to reduce the amount of data in training. That is, the
cell selection strategy learned for one task can beneﬁt another
correlated task. Hence, the parameters of DRQN can be ini-
tialized by another DRQN with rich training data. Simulations
are conducted based on two real-life datasets collected from
sensor networks, i.e., the Sensor-Scope dataset [159] in the
EPFL campus and the U-Air dataset of air quality readings
in Beijing [160]. The experiments verify that DRQN reduces
up to 15% of the sensed cells with the same inference quality
guarantee. The authors in [161] combine UA V and unmanned
vehicle in mobile crowdsensing for smart city applications.
The UA V cruises in the above of the target region for city-level
data collection. Meanwhile, the unmanned vehicle carrying
mobile charging stations moves on the ground and can charge
the UA V at a preset charging point.
The target region is divided into multiple subregions and
each subregion has a different sample priority. The authors
in [161] propose a DQL-based control framework for the
unmanned vehicle to schedule its data collection, constrained
by limited energy supply. The system state includes infor-
mation about the sample priority of each subregion, the
location of charging point, and the moving trace of the UA V
and unmanned vehicle. The UA V and unmanned vehicle can
choose the moving direction. The DQL framework utilizes
CNNs for extracting the correlation of adjacent subregions,
which can increase the convergence speed in training. The
DQL algorithm can be enhanced by using a feasible control
solution as the baseline during exploration. The PER method
is also used in DQL to assign higher priorities to important
transitions so that the DQL agent can learn from samples more
efﬁciently. The proposed scheme is evaluated by using real
dataset of taxi traces in Rome [162]. Simulation results reveal
that the proposed DQL algorithm can obtain the highest data
collection rate compared with the MDP and other heuristic
baselines.
Mobile crowdsensing is vulnerable to faked sensing attacks,
as selﬁsh users may report faked sensing results to save
their sensing costs and avoid compromising their privacy.
The authors in [163] formulate the interactions between the
server and a number of crowdsensing users as a Stackelberg
game. The server is the leader that sets and broadcasts its
payment policy for different sensing accuracy. In particular,
the higher payment is set for more sensing accuracy. Based
on the server’s sensing policy, each user as a follower then
chooses its sensing effort and thus the sensing accuracy to
receive the payment. The payment motivates the users to put
in sensing efforts and thus the payment decision process can
be modeled as an MDP. In a dynamic network, the server
uses the DQL to derive the optimal payment to maximize its
utility, based on the system state consisting of the previous
sensing quality and the payment policy. The DQL uses a
deep CNN to accelerate the learning process and improve the
crowdsensing performance against selﬁsh users. Simulation
results show that the DQL-based scheme produces a higher
sensing quality, lower attack rate, and higher utility of the
server, exceeding those of both the Q-learning and the randompayment strategies.
Social networking is an important component of smart
city applications. The authors in [164] aim to extract useful
information by observing and analyzing the users’ behaviors in
social networking. One of the main difﬁculties is that the social
behaviors are usually fuzzy and divergent. The authors model
pervasive social networking as a monopolistically competitive
market, which contains different users as data providers selling
information at a certain price. Given the market model, the
DQL can be used to estimate the users’ behavior patterns
and ﬁnd the market equilibrium. Considering the costly deep
learning structure, the authors in [164] propose a Decentralized
DRL (DDRL) framework that decomposes the costly deep
component from the RL algorithms at individual users. The
deep component can be a feature extractor integrated with
the network infrastructure and provide mutual knowledge for
all individuals. Multiple RL agents can purchase the most
desirable data from the mutual knowledge. The authors com-
bine well-known RL algorithms, i.e., Q-learning and learning
automata, to estimate users’ patterns which are described by
vectors of probabilities representing the users’ preferences
or altitudes to different information. In social networking
and smart city applications with human involvement, there
can be both labeled and unlabeled data and hence a semi-
supervised DRL framework can be designed, by combining
the strengths of DNNs and statistical modeling to improve
the performance and accuracy in learning. Then, the authors
in [165] introduce the semi-supervised DRL framework that
utilizes variational auto-encoders [166] as an inference engine
to infer the classiﬁcation of unlabeled data. As a case study,
the proposed DRL framework is customized to provide indoor
localization based on the RSS from Bluetooth devices. The
positioning environment contains a set of positions. Each
position is associated with the set of RSS values from the
set of anchor devices with known positions. The system state
includes a vector of RSS values, the current location, and the
distance to the target. The DQL agent, i.e., the positioning
algorithm itself, chooses a moving direction to minimize the
error distance to the target point. Simulations tested on real-
world dataset show an improvement of 23% in terms of the
error distance to the target compared with the supervised DRL
scheme.
Summary: In this section, we review miscellaneous uses
of DRL in wireless and networked systems. DRL provides
a ﬂexible tool in rich and diversiﬁed applications, conven-
tionally involving dynamic system modeling and multi-agent
interactions. All these imply a huge space of state transitions
and actions. These approaches are summarized along with the
references in Table VI. We observe that the NUM problems
in 5G ecosystem for trafﬁc engineering and resource alloca-
tion face very diversiﬁed control variables, including discrete
indicators, e.g., for BS (de)activation, user/cell association,
and path selection, as well as continuous variables such as
bandwidth allocation, transmit power, and beamforming opti-
mization. Hence, both DQL and policy gradient methods are
used extensively for discrete and continuous control problems,
respectively.