29
of network slicing is to divide the network resources into
multi-layer slices, managed by different service renderers
independently with minimal conﬂicts. The concept of Service
Function Chaining (SFC) is to orchestrate different VNFs to
provide required functionalities and QoS provisioning.
The authors in [149] propose a DQL scheme for QoS/QoE-
aware SFC in NFV-enabled 5G systems. Typical QoS metrics
are bandwidth, delay, throughput, etc. The evaluation of QoE
normally involves the end-user’s participation in rating the ser-
vice based on direct user perception. The authors quantify QoE
by measurable QoS metrics without end-user involvements,
according to the Weber-Fechner Law (WFL) [150] and expo-
nential interdependency of QoE and QoS hypothesis [151].
These two principles actually deﬁne nonlinear relationship
between QoE and QoS. The system state represents the
network environment including network topology, QoS/QoE
status of the VNF instances, and the QoS requirements of the
SFC request. The DQL agent selects a certain direct succes-
sive VNF instance as an action. The reward is a composite
function of the QoE gain, the QoS constraint penalty, and the
OPEX penalty. A DQL based on CNNs is implemented to
approximate the action-value function. The authors in [152]
review the application of a DQL framework in two typical
resource management scenarios using network slicing. For ra-
dio resource slicing, the authors simulate a scenario containing
one single BS with different types of services. The reward can
be deﬁned as a weighted sum of spectrum efﬁciency and QoE.
For priority-based core network slicing, the authors simulate
a scenario with 3 SFCs demanding different computational
resources and waiting time. The reward is the sum of waiting
time in different SFCs. Simulation results in both scenarios
show that the DQL framework could exploit more implicit
relationship between user activities and resource allocation in
resource constrained scenarios, and enhance the effectiveness
and agility for network slicing.
Resource allocation and scheduling problems are also im-
portant for computer clusters or database systems. This usually
leads to an online decision-making problem depending on
the information of workload and environment. The authors
in [153] propose a DRL-based solution, DeepRM, by em-
ploying policy gradient methods [140] to manage resources in
computer systems directly from experience. The same policy
gradient method is also used in [144] for user scheduling
and resource management in wireless systems. DeepRM is
a multi-resource cluster scheduler that learns to optimize
various objectives such as minimizing average job slowdown
or completion time. The system state is the current allocation
of cluster resources and the resource proﬁles of jobs in
the queue. The action of the scheduler is to decide how
to schedule the pending jobs. By simulations with synthetic
dataset, DeepRM is shown to perform comparably or better
than state-of-the-art heuristics, e.g., Shortest-Job-First (SJF). It
adapts to different conditions and converges quickly, without
any prior knowledge of system behavior. In [154], the authors
use the actor-critic method to address the scheduling prob-
lem in a general-purpose distributed data stream processing
systems, which deal with processing of continuous data ﬂow
in real time or near-real-time. The system model containsmultiple threads, processes, and machines. The system state
consists of the current scheduling decision and the workload
of each data source. The scheduling problem is to assign each
thread to a process of a machine. The agent at the scheduler
determines the assignment of each thread, with the objective of
minimizing the average processing time. The DRL framework
includes three components, i.e., an actor network, an optimizer
producing a K-NN set of the actor network’s output action,
and the critic network predicting the Q-value for each action
in the set. The action is selected from the K-NN set with the
maximum Q-value. The use of optimizer may avoid unstable
learning and divergence problems in conventional actor-critic
methods [155].
C. Power Control and Data Collection
With the prevalence of IoT and smart mobile devices,
mobile crowdsensing becomes a cost-effective solution for
network information collection to support more intelligent
operations of wireless systems. The authors in [156] con-
sider spectrum sensing and power control in non-cooperative
cognitive radio networks. There is no information exchange
between PUs and SUs. As such, the SU outsources the sensing
task to a set of spatially distributed sensing devices to collect
information about the PU’s power control strategy. The SU’s
power control can be formulated as an MDP. The system
state is determined by the Received Signal Strength (RSS)
at individual sensing devices. The SU chooses its transmit
power from the set of pre-speciﬁed power levels based on the
current state. A reward is obtained if both primary and SUs can
fulﬁll their SNR requirements. Considering the randomness in
RSS measurements, the authors propose a DQL scheme for the
SU to learn and adjust its transmit power. The DQL is then
implemented by a DQN by using FNN. The simulation results
show that the proposed DQL scheme is able to converge to a
close-to-optimal solution.
The authors in [157] leverage the DQL framework for
sensing and control problems in a Wireless Sensor and Actor
Network (WSAN), which is a group of wireless devices with
the ability to sense events and to perform actions based on the
sensed data shared by all sensors. The system state includes
processing power, mobility abilities, and functionalities of
the actors and sensors. The mobile actor can choose its
moving direction, networking, sensing and actuation policies
to maximize the number of connected actor nodes and the
number of sensing events.
The authors in [158] focus on mobile crowdsensing
paradigm, where data inference is incorporated to reduce
sensing costs while maintaining the quality of sensing. The
target sensing area is split into a set of cells. The objective of
a sensing task is to collect data (e.g., temperature, air quality)
in all the cells. A DQL-based cell selection mechanism is
proposed for the mobile sensors to decide which cell is a better
choice to perform sensing tasks. The system state includes the
selection matrices for a few past decision epochs. The reward
function is determined by the sensing quality and cost in the
chosen cells. To extract temporal correlations in learning, the
authors propose the DRQN that uses LSTM layers in DQL