13
proposed scheme requires synchronization between the SBSs
and the WLAN which is challenging in real networks.
In the same cellular network context, the authors in [22]
address the dynamic spectrum access problem for multiple
users sharing Kchannels. At a time slot, the user selects a
channel with a certain attempt probability or chooses not to
transmit at all. The state is the history of the user’s actions
and its local observations, and the user’s strategy is mapping
from the history to an attempt probability. The problem of the
user is to ﬁnd a vector of the strategies, i.e., the policy, over
time slots to maximize its expected accumulated discounted
data rate of the user.
The above problem is solved by training a DQN. The
input of the DQN includes past actions and the corresponding
observations. The output includes estimated Q-values of the
actions. To avoid the overestimation in the Q-learning, the
DDQN [20] is used. Moreover, the dueling DQN [49] is
employed to improve the estimated Q-value. The DQN is
then ofﬂine trained at a base station. Similar to [47], the
multichannel random access is modeled as a non-cooperative
game. As proved in [22], the game has a subgame perfect
equilibrium. Note that some users can keep increasing their
attempt probability to increase their rates. This makes the
equilibrium point inefﬁcient, and thus the strategy space of
the users is restricted to avoid the situation. The simulation
results show that the proposed scheme can achieve twice the
channel throughput compared with the slotted-Aloha [50]. The
reason is that in the proposed scheme, each user only learns
from its local observation without an online coordination or
carrier sensing. However, the proposed scheme requires the
central unit which may raise the message exchanges as the
training is frequently updated.
In the aforementioned models, the number of users is ﬁxed
in all time slots, and the arrival of new users is not considered.
The authors in [51] address the channel allocation to new
arrival users in a multibeam satellite system. The multibeam
satellite system generates a geographical footprint subdivided
into multiple beams which provide services to ground User
Terminals (UTs). The system has a set of channels. If there
exist available channels, the system allocates a channel to the
new arrived UT, i.e., the new service is satisﬁed. Otherwise, the
service is blocked. The system’s problem is to ﬁnd a channel
allocation decision to minimize the total service blocking
probability of the new UT over time slots without causing
the interference to the current UTs.
The system’s problem can be viewed as a temporal corre-
lated sequential decision-making optimization problem which
is effectively solved by the DQN. Here, the satellite system
is the agent. The action is an index indicating which channel
is allocated to the new arrived UT. The reward is positive
when the new service is satisﬁed and is negative when the
service is blocked. The state includes the set of current UTs,
the current channel allocation matrix, and the new arrived UT.
Note that the state has the spatial correlation feature due to
the co-channel interference, and thus it can be represented
in an image-like fashion, i.e., an image tensor. Therefore,
the DQN adopts the CNN to extract useful features of the
state. The simulation results show that the proposed DQNalgorithm converges after a certain number of training steps.
Also, by allocating available channels to the new arrived UTs,
the proposed scheme can improve the system trafﬁc up to
24.4% compared with the ﬁxed channel allocation scheme.
However, as the number of current UTs increases, the number
of available channels is low or even zero. Therefore, the
dynamic channel allocation decisions of the proposed scheme
become meaningless, and the performance difference between
the two schemes becomes insigniﬁcant. For the future work,
a joint channel and power allocation algorithm based on the
DQL can be investigated.
2) Joint User Association and Spectrum Access: The joint
user association and spectrum access problems are typically
non-convex. DQL is able to provide distributed solutions, and
thus it can be effectively used to solve the problems without
requiring complete and accurate network information.
The authors in [23] consider a HetNet which consists
of multiple users and BSs including macro base stations
and femto base stations. The BSs share a set of orthogonal
channels, and the users are randomly located in the network.
The problem of each user is to select one BS and a channel
to maximize its data rate while guaranteeing that the Signal-
to-Interference-plus-Noise Ratio (SINR) of the user is higher
than a minimum Qualtiy of Service (QoS) requirement. The
DQL is adopted to solve the problem in which each user is
an agent, and its state is a vector including QoS states of
all users, i.e., the global state. Here, the QoS state of the
user refers to whether its SINR exceeds the minimum QoS
requirement or not. At each time slot, the user takes an action.
If the QoS is satisﬁed, the user receives utility as its immediate
reward. Otherwise, it receives a negative reward, i.e., an action
selection cost. Note that the cumulative reward of one user
depends on actions of other users, then the user’s problem can
be deﬁned as an MDP. Similar to [22], the DDQN and the
dueling DQN are used to learn the optimal policy, i.e., the
joint BS and channel selections, for the user to maximize its
cumulative reward. The simulation results from [23] show that
the proposed scheme outperforms the Q-learning implemented
in [15] in terms of convergence speed and system capacity.
The scheme proposed in [23] is considered to be the
ﬁrst work using the DQL for the joint user association and
spectrum access problem. Inspired by this work, the authors
in [52] propose to use the DQL for a joint user association,
spectrum access, and content caching problem. The network
model is an LTE network which consists of UA Vs serving
ground users. The UA Vs are equipped with storage units and
can act as cached-enabled LTE-BSs. The UA Vs are able to
access both licensed and unlicensed bands in the network.
The UA Vs are controlled by a cloud-based server, and the
transmissions from the cloud to the UA Vs are implemented by
using the licensed cellular band. The problem of each UA V is
to determine (i) its optimal user association, (ii) the bandwidth
allocation indicators on the licensed band, (iii) the time slot
indicators on the unlicensed band, and (iv) a set of popular
contents that the users can request to maximize the number
of users with stable queue, i.e., users satisﬁed with content
transmission delay.
The UA V’s problem is combinatorial and non-convex, and