26
problem is to adjust the velocity of the followers such that the
algebraic connectivity is positive over time slots. This problem
can be formulated as an MDP in which the agent is the ground
BS, the state is a combination of the states of all robots, the
action is a set of possible velocity values for the followers.
The reward is +1 if the algebraic connectivity of the system
increases or holds, and becomes a penalty of -1 if the algebraic
connectivity decreases. Similar to [127], a DQN is adopted.
Due to the large action space of the followers, the actor-critic
neural network [26] is used. The simulation results show that
the followers always follow the motion of the leaders even
if the leaders’ trajectory dynamically changes. However, the
proposed DQN requires more time to converge than that in
[127] because of the presence of more followers.
The proposed schemes in [127] and [128] do not consider
a minimum distance between the leaders and followers. The
leaders and followers can collide with each other if the
distance between them is too short. Thus, the BS needs to
guarantee the minimum distance between them. One solution
is to have the minimum distance in the reward as proposed
in [130]. In particular, if the leader is too close to its follower,
the reward of the system is penalized regarding the minimum
distance. The DQL algorithm proposed in [128] is then used
such that the BS learns proper actions, e.g., turning left and
right, to maximize the cumulative reward.
When BSs are densely deployed, the UA Vs or mobile
users need to trigger a frequent handover to preserve the
connectivity. The frequent handover increases communication
overhead and energy consumption of the mobile users, and
interrupts data ﬂows. Thus, it is essential to maintain an
appropriate handover rate. The authors in [27] address the
handover decision problem in an ultra-density network. The
network model consists of multiple mobile users, SBSs, and
one central controller. At each time slot, the user needs to
decide its serving SBS. The handover decision process can
be modeled as an MDP, and the DQL is adopted to ﬁnd an
optimal handover policy for each user to minimize the number
of handover occurrences while ensuring certain throughput.
The state of the user, i.e., the agent, includes reference signal
quality received from candidate SBSs and the last action of the
user. The reward is deﬁned as the difference between the data
rate of the user and its energy consumption for the handover
process. Given a high density of users, the DQL using A3C
and LSTM is adopted to ﬁnd the optimal policy in short
training time. The simulation results show that the proposed
DQL can achieve better throughput and lower handover rate
than those of the upper conﬁdence bandit algorithm [131] with
similar training time.
To enhance the reliability of the communication between
the SBSs and the mobile users, the SBSs should be able
to handle network faults and failure automatically as self-
healing. The DQL can be applied as proposed in [132] to make
optimal parameter adjustments based on the observation of the
network performance. The model is the 5G network including
one MBS. The MBS as an agent needs to handle network
faults such as transmit diversity faults and antenna azimuth
change, e.g., because of wind. These faults are represented as
the MBS’s state that is the number of active alarms. Based onthe alarms, the MBS can take actions including (i) enabling
the transmit diversity and (ii) setting the antenna azimuth
to default value. The reward that the MBS receives is the
scores, e.g., -1, 0, and +1, depending on the number of faults
happening. The DQL is used to learn the optimal policy. The
simulation results show that the proposed DQL can achieve
network throughput close to that of the oracle-based self-
healing, i.e., the upper-performance bound, but incurs less fault
message passing overhead.
Summary: This section reviews applications of DQL for the
network security and connectivity preservation. The reviewed
approaches are summarized along with the references in Ta-
ble V. We observe that the CNN is mostly used for the DQL to
enhance the network security. Moreover, DQL approaches for
the anonymous system such as robot systems and ITS receive
more attentions than other networks. However, the applications
of DQL for the cyber-physical security are relatively few and
need to be investigated.
VI. M ISCELLANEOUS ISSUES
This section reviews applications of DRL to solve some
other issues in communications and networking. The issues
include (i) trafﬁc engineering and routing, (ii) resource sharing
and scheduling, and (iii) data collection.
A. Trafﬁc Engineering and Routing
Trafﬁc Engineering (TE) in communication networks refers
to Network Utility Maximization (NUM) by optimizing a path
to forward the data trafﬁc, given a set of network ﬂows from
source to destination nodes. Traditional NUM problems are
mostly model-based. However, with the advances of wire-
less communication technologies, the network environment
becomes more complicated and dynamic, which makes it hard
to model, predict, and control. The recent development of
DQL methods provides a feasible and efﬁcient way to design
experience-driven and model-free schemes that can learn and
adapt to the dynamic wireless network from past observations.
Routing optimization is one of the major control problems
in trafﬁc engineering. The authors in [133] present the ﬁrst
attempt to use the DQL for the routing optimization. Through
the interaction with the network environment, the DQL agent
at the network controller determines the paths for all source-
destination pairs. The system state is represented by the
bandwidth request between each source-destination pair, and
the reward is a function of the mean network delay. The DQL
agent leverages the actor-critic method for solving the routing
problem that minimizes the network delay, by adapting routing
conﬁgurations automatically to current trafﬁc conditions. The
DQL agent is trained using the trafﬁc information generated by
a gravity model [134]. The routing solution is then evaluated
by OMNet+ discrete event simulator [135]. The well-trained
DQL agent can produce a near-optimal routing conﬁguration
in a single step and thus the agent is agile for real-time network
control. The proposed approach is attractive as the traditional
optimization-based techniques require a large number of steps
to produce a new conﬁguration. The authors in [136] consider