25
IoT 
deviceLSTMCloud 
LSTMLSTM
IoT 
deviceIoT
deviceSignalProbs . of attacking IoT devices
Actions on 
IoT devices
SignalSignalLSTM
Fig. 12: Cyber-physical detection in IoT systems using DQL.
attack is proposed in [123]. The model is an IoT system
including a cloud and a set of IoT devices. The IoT devices
generate signals and transmit the signals to the cloud (see
Fig. 12). The cloud uses the received signals for estimation and
control of the IoT devices’ operation. An attacker can launch
the cyber-physical attack by manipulating the IoT devices’
output signals that causes control errors at the cloud and
degrades the performance of the IoT system. To detect the
attack, the cloud uses LSTM units to extract stochastic features
or ﬁngerprints such as ﬂatness, skewness, and kurtosis, of
the IoT devices’ signals. The cloud sends the ﬁngerprints
back to the IoT devices, and the IoT devices embed, i.e.,
watermark, the ﬁngerprints inside the signals. The cloud uses
the ﬁngerprints to authenticate the IoT devices’ signals to
detect the attack.
The algorithm proposed in [123] is also called dynamic
watermarking [124] which is able to detect the cyber-physical
attack and to prevent eavesdropping attacks. However, the
algorithm requires large computational resources at the cloud
for the IoT device signal authentication. Consequently, the
cloud can only authenticate a limited number of vulnerable
IoT devices. The cloud can choose the vulnerable IoT devices
by observing their security status. However, this can be im-
practical since the IoT devices may not report their security
status. Thus, the authors in [125] propose to use the DQL that
enables the cloud to decide which IoT devices to authenticate
with the incomplete information. Since IoT devices with more
valuable data are likely to be attacked, the reward is deﬁned
as a function of data values of IoT devices. The cloud’s state
includes attack actions of the attacker on the IoT devices in
the past time slots. The actions of the attacker on the IoT
devices can be obtained by using the dynamic watermarking
algorithm in [123] (see Fig. 12). The DQL then uses an LSTM
unit to ﬁnd the optimal policy. The input of the LSTM unit
is the state of the cloud, and the output includes probabilities
of attacking the IoT devices. By using a real dataset from the
accelerometers, the simulation results show that the proposed
DQL can improve the cloud’s utility up to 30% compared with
the case in which the cloud chooses the IoT devices with equal
probability.
Base stationControl 
signalsConnectivity
Connectivity
 Leader
FollowerFollower
Handover
Base stationFig. 13: Connectivity preservation of a multi-UA V network.
B. Connectivity Preservation
Multi-robot systems such as multi-UA V cooperative net-
works have been widely applied in many ﬁelds such as
military, e.g., enemy detecting. In the cooperative multi-robot
system, the connectivity among the robots, e.g., UA Vs in
Fig 13, is required to enable the communication and exchange
of information. To tackle the connectivity preservation prob-
lem, the Artiﬁcial Potential Field (APF) algorithm [126] has
been used. However, the algorithm cannot be directly adopted
when the robots are undertaking missions in dynamic and
complex environments. The DQL which allows each robot
to make dynamic decisions based on its own state can be
effectively applied to preserve the connectivity in the multi-
robot system. Such an approach is proposed in [127].
The model in [127] consists of two robots or UA Vs, i.e., one
leader robot and one follower robot. In the model, a central
control, i.e., a ground BS, adjusts the velocity of the follower
such that the follower stays in the communication range of the
leader at all time (see Fig 13). The connectivity preservation
problem can be thus formulated as an MDP. The agent is the
BS, and the states are the relative position and the velocity
of the leader with respect to the follower. The action space
consists of possible velocity values of the follower. Taking
an action returns a reward which is +1 if the follower is
in the range of the leader, and -1 otherwise. A DQN using
FNN is used which enables the BS to learn an optimal policy
to maximize the expected discounted cumulative reward. The
input of the DQN includes the states of the two robots, and
the output is the action space of the follower. The simulation
results show that the proposed scheme can achieve better
connectivity between the two robots than that of the APF
method. However, a general scenario with more than one
leader and one follower needs to be investigated.
Considering the general scenario, the authors in [128]
address the connectivity preservation between multiple lead-
ers and multiple followers. The robot system is deﬁnitely
connected if any two robots are connected via a direct link
or multi-hop link. To express the connectivity in such a
robot system, the authors introduce the concept of algebraic
connectivity [129] which is the second smallest eigenvalue
of a Laplacian matrix. The robot system is connected if the
algebraic connectivity of the system is positive. Thus, the