24
Serving BS
Attacker
Jamming
UserRelay UAV 
(agent )
Server (receiver )Backup BS MessagesMessages
Jamming Compromised 
UAV
Messages
Fig. 10: Anti-jamming scheme based on UA V [115].
such, the next state observed by the UA V is independent of all
the past states and actions. The problem is formulated as an
MDP. To quickly achieve the optimal relay policy for the UA V ,
the DQL based on CNN is then adopted. The simulation results
in [115] show that the proposed DQL scheme takes only 200
time slots to converge to the optimal policy, which is 83.3%
less than that of the relay scheme based on Q-learning [116].
Moreover, the proposed DQL scheme reduces the BER of the
user by 46.6% compared with the hill climbing-based UA V
relay scheme [117].
The scheme proposed in [115] assumes that the relay UA V is
sufﬁciently far from the jamming area. However, as illustrated
in Fig. 10, the attacker can use a compromised UA V close
to the relay UA V to launch the jamming attack to the relay
UA V . In such a scenario, the authors in [118] show that the
DQL can still be used to address the attack. The system model
is based on physical layer security and consists of one UA V
and one attacker. The attacker is assumed to be “smarter” than
that in the model in [115]. This means that the attacker can
observe channels that the UA V uses to communicate with the
BS in the past time slots and then chooses jamming power
levels on the target channels. Therefore, the UA V needs to
ﬁnd a power allocation policy, i.e., transmit power levels on
the channels, to maximize the secrecy capacity of the UA V-
BS communication. Similar to [115], the DQL based on CNN
is used which enables the UA V to choose its actions, i.e.,
transmit power levels on the channels, based on its state, i.e.,
the attacker’s jamming power level in the last time slot. The
reward is the difference between the secrecy capacity of the
UA V and BS and the energy consumption cost.
The simulation results in [118] show that the proposed DQL
can improve the UA V’s utility up to 13% compared with the
baseline scheme [119] which uses the Win or Learn Faster-
Policy Hill Climbing (WoLF-PHC) to prevent the attack. Also,
the safe rate of the UA V , i.e., the probability that the UA V
is attacked, obtained by the proposed DQL is 7% higher
than that of the baseline. However, the proposed DQL is
applied only to a single-UA V system. For the future work,
scenarios with multiple UA Vs need to be considered. In such a
AttackerFaulty data Sensing
data
SensorSensor
AV AV(agent )Safe spacing
AVSensor
Sensing
dataFig. 11: Car-following model with cyber-physical attack.
scenario, more computational overhead is expected and multi-
agent DQL algorithms can be applied.
2) Cyber-Physical Attack: In autonomous systems such as
ITSs, the attacker can seek to inject faulty data to information
transmitted from the sensors to the A Vs. The A Vs which
receive the injected information may inaccurately estimate
the safe spacing among them. This increases the risk of
A V accidents. Vehicular communication security algorithms,
e.g., [120], can be used to minimize the spacing deviation.
However, the attacker’s actions in these algorithms are as-
sumed to be stable which may not be applicable in practical
systems. The DQL that enables the A Vs to learn optimal ac-
tions based on their time-varying observations of the attacker’
actions can be thus used.
The ﬁrst work using the DQL for the cyber-physical attack
in an ITS can be found in [121]. The system is a car-
following model [122] of the General Motors as shown in
Fig. 11. In the model, each A V updates its speed based
on measurement information received from the closest road
smart sensors. The attacker attempts to inject faulty data to
the measurement information. However, the attacker cannot
inject the measurements of different sensors equally due to
its resource constraint. Thus, the A V can choose less-faulty
measurements by selecting a vector of measurement weights.
The objective of the attacker is to maximize the deviation, i.e.,
the utility, from the safe spacing between the A V and its nearby
A V while that of the A V is to minimize the deviation. The
interaction between the attacker and the A V can be modeled
as a zero-sum game. The authors in [121] show that the DQL
can be used to ﬁnd the equilibrium strategies. In particular,
the action of the A V is to choose a weight vector. Its state
includes the past actions, i.e., the weight vectors, and the
past deviation values. Since the actions and deviations have
continuous values, the state space is inﬁnite. Thus, LSTM
units that are able to extract useful features are adopted for the
DQL to reduce the state space. The simulation results show
that by using the past actions and deviations for learning the
attacker’s action, the proposed DQL scheme can guarantee
a lower steady-state deviation than the Kalmar ﬁlter-based
scheme [120]. Moreover, by using the LSTM units, the results
show that the proposed DQL scheme can converge much faster
than the baseline scheme.
Another work that uses the LSTM to extract useful features
from the measurement information to detect the cyber-physical