6
optimization algorithm to adjust the weights of neurons by
calculating the gradient of the loss function. This technique is
also sometimes called backward propagation of errors, because
the error is calculated at the output and distributed back
through the network layers.
A DNN is deﬁned as an ANN with multiple hidden layers.
There are two typical DNN models, i.e., Feedforward Neural
Network (FNN) and Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). In the
FNN, the information moves in only one direction, i.e., from
the input nodes, through the hidden nodes and to the output
nodes, and there are no cycles or loops in the network as shown
in Fig. 4. In FNNs, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is
the most well known model with a wide range of applications
especially in image and speech recognition. The CNN contains
one or more convolutional layers, pooling or fully connected,
and uses a variation of multilayer perceptrons discussed above.
Convolutional layers use a convolution operation to the input
passing the result to the next layer. This operation allows the
network to be deeper with much fewer parameters.
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN ) Feed -Forward Neural Network (FNN )
Fig. 4: RNN vs CNN.
Unlike FNNs, the RNN is a variant of a recursive artiﬁcial
neural network in which connections between neurons make
directed cycles. It means that an output depends not only
on its immediate inputs, but also on the previous further
step’s neuron state. The RNNs are designed to utilize sequen-
tial data, when the current step has some relation with the
previous steps. This makes the RNNs ideal for applications
with a time component, e.g., time-series data, and natural
language processing. However, all RNNs have feedback loops
in the recurrent layer. This lets RNNs maintain information
in memory over time. Nevertheless, it can be difﬁcult to train
standard RNNs to solve problems that require learning long-
term temporal dependencies. The reason is that the gradient
of the loss function decays exponentially with time, which is
called the vanishing gradient problem. Thus, Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) is often used in RNNs to address this issue.
The LSTM is designed to model temporal sequences and their
long-range dependencies are more accurate than conventional
RNNs. The LSTM does not use an activation function within
its recurrent components, the stored values are not modiﬁed,
and the gradient does not tend to vanish during training.
Usually, LSTM units are implemented in “blocks” with several
units. These blocks have three or four “gates”, e.g., input gate,
forget gate, output gate, that control information ﬂow drawing
on the logistic function.D. DeepQ-Learning
TheQ-learning algorithm can efﬁciently obtain an optimal
policy when the state space and action space are small.
However, in practice, with complicated system models, these
spaces are usually large. As a result, the Q-learning algorithm
may not be able to ﬁnd the optimal policy. Thus, Deep Q-
Learning (DQL) algorithm is introduced to overcome this
shortcoming. Intuitively, the DQL algorithm implements a
DeepQ-Network (DQN), i.e., a DNN, instead of the Q-table to
derive an approximate value of Q(s;a)as shown in Fig. 3(c).
As stated in [16], the average reward obtained by rein-
forcement learning algorithms may not be stable or even
diverge when a nonlinear function approximator is used.
This stems from the fact that a small change of Q-values
may greatly affect the policy. Thus, the data distribution and
the correlations between the Q-values and the target values
R+
maxa0Q(s0;a0)are varied. To address this issue, two
mechanisms, i.e., experience replay and target Q-network, can
be used.
Experience replay mechanism : The algorithm ﬁrst initial-
izes a replay memory D, i.e., the memory pool, with
transitions (st;at;rt;st+1), i.e., experiences, generated
randomly, e.g., through using -greedy policy. Then, the
algorithm randomly selects samples, i.e., minibatches,
of transitions from Dto train the DNN. The Q-values
obtained by the trained DNN will be used to obtain new
experiences, i.e., transitions, and these experiences will
be then stored in the memory pool D. This mechanism
allows the DNN trained more efﬁciently by using both
old and new experiences. In addition, by using the ex-
perience replay, the transitions are more independent and
identically distributed, and thus the correlations between
observations can be removed.
Fixed target Q-network: In the training process, the Q-
value will be shifted. Thus, the value estimations can
be out of control if a constantly shifting set of values
is used to update the Q-network. This leads to the
destabilization of the algorithm. To address this issue,
the targetQ-network is used to update frequently but
slowly the primary Q-networks’ values. In this way,
the correlations between the target and estimated Q-
values are signiﬁcantly reduced, thereby stabilizing the
algorithm.
The DQL algorithm with experience replay and ﬁxed target
Q-network is presented in Algorithm 2. DQL inherits and
promotes advantages of both reinforcement and deep learning
techniques, and thus it has a wide range of applications in
practice such as game development [3], transportation [17],
and robotics [18].
E. Advanced Deep Q-Learning Models
1) Double Deep Q-Learning: In some stochastic envi-
ronments, the Q-learning algorithm performs poorly due to
the large over-estimations of action values [19]. These over-
estimations result from a positive bias that is introduced be-
causeQ-learning uses the maximum action value as an approx-
imation for the maximum expected action value as shown in