28
minimizing both latency and interference caused to the ground
network along its path. The network state observable by each
UA V includes its distances and orientation angles to cellular
BSs, the orientation angle to its destination, and the horizontal
coordinates of all UA Vs. The action of each UA V includes an
optimal path, transmit power, and cell association along its
path. The interaction among UA Vs is cast as a dynamic game
and solved by a multi-agent DRL framework. The use of ESN
in the DRL framework allows each UA V to retain previous
memory states and make a decision for unseen network states,
based on the reward obtained from previous states. ESN is a
new type of RNNs with feedback connections, consisting of
the input, recurrent, and output weight matrices. ESN training
is typically quick and computationally efﬁcient compared with
other RNNs. Deep ESNs can exploit the advantages of a
hierarchical temporal feature representation at different levels
of abstraction, hence disentangling the difﬁculties in modeling
complex tasks. Simulation results show that the proposed
scheme improves the tradeoff between energy efﬁciency, wire-
less latency, and the interference caused to the ground network.
Results also show that each UA V’s altitude is a function of the
ground network density and the UA V’s objective function is
an important factor in achieving the UA V’s target.
Besides networked UA Vs, vehicle-to-infrastructure also con-
stitutes an important part and provides rich application impli-
cations in 5G ecosystem. The authors in [143] adopt the DQL
to achieve an optimal control policy in communication-based
train control system, which is supported by bidirectional train-
ground communications. The control problem aims to optimize
the handoff decision and train control policy, i.e., accelerate or
decelerate, based on the states of stochastic channel conditions
and real-time information including train position, speed,
measured SNR from APs, and handoff indicator. The objective
of the DQL agent is to minimize a weighted combination of
operation proﬁle tracking error and energy consumption.
B. Resource Sharing and Scheduling
System capacity is one of the most important performance
metrics in wireless communication networks. System capacity
enhancements can be based on the optimization of resource
sharing and scheduling among multiple wireless nodes. The
integration of DRL into 5G systems would revolutionize the
resource sharing and scheduling schemes from model-based to
model-free approaches and meet various application demands
by learning from the network environment.
The authors in [144] study the user scheduling in a multi-
user massive MIMO system. User scheduling is responsible for
allocating resource blocks to BSs and mobile users, taking into
account the channel conditions and QoS requirements. Based
on this user scheduling strategy, a DRL-based coverage and
capacity optimization is proposed to obtain dynamically the
scheduling parameters and a uniﬁed threshold of QoS metric.
The performance indicators are calculated as the average spec-
trum efﬁciency of all the users. The system state is an indicator
of the average spectrum efﬁciency. The action of the scheduler
is a set of scheduling parameters to maximize the reward as a
function of the average spectrum efﬁciency. The DRL schemeuses policy gradient method to learn a policy function (instead
of a Q-function) directly from trajectories generated by the
current policy. The policy network is trained with a variant
of the REINFORCE algorithm [140]. The simulation results
in [144] show that compared with the optimization-based
algorithms that suffer from incomplete network information,
the policy gradient method achieves much better performance
in terms of network coverage and capacity.
In [145], the authors focus on dynamic resource allocation
in a cloud radio access network and present a DQL-based
framework to minimize the total power consumption while
fulﬁlling mobile users’ QoS requirements. The system model
contains multiple Remote Radio Heads (RRHs) connected to
a cloud BaseBand Unit (BBU). The information of RRHs
can be shared in a centralized manner. The system state
contains information about the mobile users’ demands and
the RRHs’ working states, e.g., active or sleep. According
to the system state and the result of last execution, the
DQL agent at the BBU decides whether to turn on or off
certain RRH(s), and how to allocate beamforming weight
for each active RRH. The objective is to minimize the total
expected power consumption. The authors propose a two-step
decision framework to reduce the size of action space. In
the ﬁrst step, the DQL agent determines the set of active
RRHs by Q-learning and DNNs. In the second step, the
BBU derives the optimal resource allocation for the active
RRHs by solving a convex optimization problem. Through
the combination of DQL and optimization techniques, the
proposed framework results in a relatively small action space
and low online computational complexity. Simulation results
show that the framework achieves signiﬁcant power savings
while satisfying user demands and is robust in highly dynamic
network environment. The aforementioned works mostly focus
on simulations and numerical comparisons. With one step
further, the authors in [146] implement a multi-objective DQL
framework as the radio-resource-allocation controller for space
communications. The implementation uses modular software
architecture to encourage re-use and easy modiﬁcation for
different algorithms, which is integrated into the real space-
ground system developed by NASA Glenn Research Center.
In emerging and future wireless networks, BSs are deployed
with a high density, and thus the interference among the BSs
must be considered. The authors in [147] propose to use a
DQL scheme which allows the BSs to learn their optimal
power control policy. In the proposed scheme, each BS is
an agent, the action is choosing power levels, and the state
includes interference that the BS caused to its neighbors in
the last time slot. The objective is to maximize the BS’s data
rate. The DQN using FNN is then adopted to implement the
DQL algorithm. For the future work, a joint power control and
channel selection can be considered.
Network slicing [148] and NFV [90] are two emerging
concepts for resource allocation in the 5G ecosystem to
provide cost-effective services with better performance. The
network infrastructure, e.g., cache, computation, and radio
resources, is comparatively static while the upper-layer Vir-
tualized Network Functions (VNFs) are dynamic to support
time-varying application-speciﬁc service requests. The concept