21
Cloud
Cellular BSMEC Server
(b)
MEC Server
Cloud
(c)Cellular BS
 WLAN APCloud
(a)Mobile userData/Energy 
queue
Cloud
(d)Mobile 
cloudlets
Fig. 8: Data/computation ofﬂoading models in cellular networks: (a)
Ofﬂoading cellular trafﬁc to WLAN [93], (b) Ofﬂoading to a single
MEC-enabled BS [94], (c) Ofﬂoading to one shared MEC server
via multiple BSs [95], [96], [100], (d) Ofﬂoading to multiple MEC-
enabled BSs [104], [105] and mobile cloudlets [106], [107].
mobile user has a ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-out queue with limited buffer
size to store the arriving tasks arriving as a Poisson process.
The mobile user selects nearby cloudlets within D2D com-
munication range for task ofﬂoading. The ofﬂoading decision
depends on the states including the number of remaining tasks,
the quality of the links between mobile users and the cloudlet,
and the availability of the cloudlet’s resources. The objective
is to maximize a composite utility function, subject to the
mobile user’s QoS requirements, e.g., energy consumption and
processing delay. The utility function is ﬁrstly an increasing
function of the total number of tasks that have been processed
either locally or remotely by the cloudlets. It is also related to
the user’s beneﬁt such as energy efﬁciency and payment for
task ofﬂoading. This problem can be formulated as an MDP,
which can be solved by linear programming and Q-learning
approaches, depending on the availability of information about
the state transition probabilities. This work is further enhanced
by leveraging DNN or DQN to learn the decision strategy
more efﬁciently. A similar model is studied in [108], where the
computation ofﬂoading is formulated as an MDP to minimize
the cost of computation ofﬂoading. The solution to the MDP
can be used to train a DNN by supervised learning. The well-
trained DNN is then applied to unseen network conditions for
real-time decision-making. Simulation results show that the
use of deep supervised learning achieves signiﬁcant perfor-
mance gain in ofﬂoading accuracy and cost saving.
Data and computation ofﬂoading is also used in fog com-
puting. The mobile application demanding a set of data and
computational resources can be hosted in a container, e.g.,
virtual machine of a fog node. With user’s mobility, the
container has to be migrated or ofﬂoaded to other nodes anddynamically consolidated. With the container migration, some
nodes with low resource utilization can be switched off to
reduce power consumption. The authors in [109] model the
container migration as a multi-dimensional MDP, which is
solved by the DQL. The system states consist of the delay,
the power consumption and the migration cost. The action
includes the selection policy that selects the containers to be
emigrated from each source node, and the allocation policy
that determines the destination node of each container. The
action space can be optimized for more efﬁcient exploration by
dividing fog nodes into under-utilization, normal-utilization,
and over-utilization groups. By powering off under-utilization
nodes, all their containers will be migrated to other nodes
to reduce power consumption. The training process is also
optimized by using DDQN and PER which assigns different
priorities to the transitions in experience memory. This helps
the DQL agent at each fog node to perform better in terms
of faster learning speed and more stability. Simulation results
reveal that the DQL scheme achieves fast decision-making and
outperforms the existing baseline approaches signiﬁcantly in
terms of delay, power consumption, and migration cost.
Summary: This section reviews the applications of the
DQL for wireless caching and data/computation ofﬂoading,
which are inherently coupled with networking and allocation
of channel capacity, computational resources, and caching
capabilities, etc. We observe that the DQL framework for
caching is typically centralized and mostly implemented at
the network controller, e.g., the BS, service provider, and
central scheduler, which is more powerful in information col-
lection and cross-layer policy design. On the contrary, the end
users have more control over their ofﬂoading decisions, and
hence we observe more popular implementation of the DQL
agent at local devices, e.g., mobile users, IoT devices, and
fog nodes. Though an orchestration of networking, caching,
data and computation ofﬂoading in one uniﬁed DQL frame-
work is promising for network performance maximization,
we face many challenges in designing highly-stable and fast-
convergent learning algorithms, due to excessive delay and
unsynchronized information collection from different network
entities.
V. N ETWORK SECURITY AND CONNECTIVITY
PRESERVATION
Future networks become more decentralized and ad-hoc in
nature which are vulnerable to various attacks such as Denial-
of-Service (DoS) and cyber-physical attack. Recently, the DQL
has been used as an effective solution to avoid and prevent the
attacks. In this section, we review the applications of DQL in
addressing the following security issues:
Jamming attack: In the jamming attack, attackers as
jammers transmit Radio Frequency (RF) jamming signals
with high power to cause interference to the legitimate
communication channels, thus reducing the SINR at
legitimate receivers. Anti-jamming techniques such as the
frequency hopping [110] and user mobility, i.e., moving
out from the heavy jamming area, have been commonly
used. However, without being aware of the radio channel