2
timal solutions without complete and accurate network
information.
DRL allows network entities to learn and build knowl-
edge about the communication and networking environ-
ment. Thus, by using DRL, the network entities, e.g., a
mobile user, can learn optimal policies, e.g., base station
selection, channel selection, handover decision, caching
and ofﬂoading decisions, without knowing channel model
and mobility pattern.
DRL provides autonomous decision-making. With the
DRL approaches, network entities can make observation
and obtain the best policy locally with minimum or
without information exchange among each other. This not
only reduces communication overheads but also improves
security and robustness of the networks.
DRL improves signiﬁcantly the learning speed, especially
in the problems with large state and action spaces. Thus,
in large-scale networks, e.g., IoT systems with thousands
of devices, DRL allows network controller or IoT gate-
ways to control dynamically user association, spectrum
access, and transmit power for a massive number of IoT
devices and mobile users.
Several other problems in communications and network-
ing such as cyber-physical attacks, interference manage-
ment, and data ofﬂoading can be modeled as games, e.g.,
the non-cooperative game. DRL has been recently used
as an efﬁcient tool to solve the games, e.g., ﬁnding the
Nash equilibrium, without the complete information.
Although there are some surveys related to DRL, they do
not focus on communications and networking. For example,
the surveys of applications of DRL for computer vision and
natural language processing can be found in [7] and [8].
Also, there are surveys related to the use of only “deep
learning” for networking. For example, the survey of machine
learning for wireless networks is given in [9], but it does not
focus on the DRL approaches. To the best of our knowledge,
there is no survey speciﬁcally discussing the applications
of DRL in communications and networking. This motivates
us to deliver the survey with the tutorial of DRL and the
comprehensive literature review on the applications of DRL
to address issues in communications and networking. For
convenience, the related works in this survey are classiﬁed
based on issues in communications and networking as shown
in Fig. 2. The major issues include network access, data rate
control, wireless caching, data ofﬂoading, network security,
connectivity preservation, trafﬁc routing, and data collection.
Also, the percentages of DRL related works for different
networks and different issues in the networks are shown in
Figs. 1(a) and 1(b), respectively. From the ﬁgures, we observe
that the majority of the related works are for the cellular
networks. Also, the related works to the wireless caching and
ofﬂoading have received more attention than the other issues.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents the introduction of reinforcement learning and dis-
cusses DRL techniques as well as their extensions. Section III
reviews the applications of DRL for dynamic network access
and adaptive data rate control. Section IV discusses the ap-
IoT 9%
Cellular
31%
Ad-hoc
19%Space 
communications
13%Congitive 
radio
9%Others
28%(a)
Network access
13%
Rate 
control
8%
Wireless 
caching
19%
Computational 
offloading
13%Network security
12%Connectivity 
prevservation 
8%Traffic 
routing
9%Resource 
scheduling
9%Data collection
9% (b)
Fig. 1: Percentages of related work for (a) different networks and
(b) different issues in the networks.
TABLE I: List of abbreviations
Abbreviation Description
ANN/APF Artiﬁcial Neural Network/Artiﬁcial Potential Field
A3C Asynchronous Advantage Actor- Critic
CRN Cognitive Radio Network
CNN Convolutional Neural Network
DRL/DQL Deep Reinforcement Learning/Deep Q-Learning
DNN Deep Neural Network
DQN/DDQN/DRQN Deep Q-Network/Double DQN/Deep Recurrent Q-
Learning
DASH Dynamic Adaptive Streaming over HTTP
DoS Denial-of-Service
ESN Echo State Network
FNN/RNN Feedforward Neural Network/Recurrent Neural Network
FSMC Finite-State Markov Channel
HVFT High V olume Flexible Time
ITS Intelligent Transportation System
LSM/LSTM Liquid State Machine/Long Short-Term Memory
MEC Mobile Edge Computing
MDP/POMDP Markov Decision Process/Partially Observable MDP
NFSP Neural Fictitious Self-Play
NFV Network Function Virtualization
RDPG Recurrent Deterministic Policy Gradient
RCNN Recursive Convolutional Neural Network
RRH/BBU Remote Radio Head/BaseBand Unit
RSSI Received Signal Strength Indicators
SPD Sequential Prisoner’s Dilemma
SBS/BS Small Base Station/Base Station
SDN Software-Deﬁned Network
SU/PU Secondary User/Primary User
UDN/UAN Ultra-Density Network/Underwater Acoustic Network
UA V Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
V ANET/V2V Vehicular Ad hoc Network/Vehicle-to-Vehicle
plications of DRL for wireless caching and data ofﬂoading.
Section V presents DRL related works for network security
and connectivity preservation. Section VI considers how to use
DRL to deal with other issues in communications and network-
ing. Important challenges, open issues, and future research