ble” version of its original RNN, in which the in-
ternal activations act discretely. A growing body
of work—including this paper—ﬁnds that the satu-
rated theory predicts differences in practical learn-
able capacity for various RNN architectures (Weiss
et al., 2018; Merrill, 2019; Suzgun et al., 2019a).
We compare the expressive power of rational and
non-rational RNNs, distinguishing between state
expressiveness (what kind and amount of informa-
tion the RNN states can capture) and language
expressiveness (what languages can be recognized
when the state is passed to a classiﬁer). To do this,
we build on the theory of saturated RNNs.
State expressiveness We introduce a uniﬁed hi-
erarchy (Figure 1) of the functions expressible by
the states of rational and non-rational RNN en-
coders. The hierarchy is deﬁned by two formal
properties: space complexity, which is a measure of
network memory,2and rational recurrence, whether
the internal structure of the RNN can be described
by WFAs. The hierarchy reveals concrete differ-
ences between LSTMs and QRNNs, and further
separates both from a class containing convolu-
tional neural networks (CNNs, Lecun and Bengio,
1995; Kim, 2014), Elman RNNs, and gated recur-
rent units (GRU; Cho et al., 2014).
We provide the ﬁrst formal proof that LSTMs
can encode functions that rational recurrences can-
not. On the other hand, we show that the saturated
Elman RNN and GRU are rational recurrences with
constant space complexity, whereas the QRNN has
unbounded space complexity. We also show that
an unrestricted WFA has rich expressive power be-
yond any saturated RNN we consider—including
the LSTM. This difference potentially opens the
door to more expressive RNNs incorporating the
computational efﬁciency of rational recurrences.
Language expressiveness When applied to clas-
siﬁcation tasks like language recognition, RNNs
are typically combined with a “decoder”: addi-
tional layer(s) that map their hidden states to a pre-
diction. Thus, despite differences in state expres-
siveness, rational RNNs might be able to achieve
comparable empirical performance to non-rational
RNNs on NLP tasks. In this work, we consider
the setup in which the decoders only view the ﬁ-
2Space complexity measures the number of different con-
ﬁgurations an RNN can reach as a function of input length.
Formal deﬁnition deferred until Section 2.nal hidden state of the RNN.3We demonstrate that
a sufﬁciently strong decoder can overcome some
of the differences in state expressiveness between
different models. For example, an LSTM can rec-
ognizeanbnwith a single decoding layer, whereas
a QRNN provably cannot until the decoder has two
layers. However, we also construct a language that
an LSTM can recognize without a decoder, but a
QRNN cannot recognize with any decoder. Thus,
no decoder can fully compensate for the weakness
of the QRNN compared to the LSTM.
Experiments Finally, we conduct experiments
on formal languages, justifying that our theorems
correctly predict which languages unsaturated rec-
ognizers trained by gradient descent can learn.
Thus, we view our hierarchy as a useful formal
tool for understanding the relative capabilities of
different RNN architectures.
Roadmap We present the formal devices for our
analysis of RNNs in Section 2. In Section 3 we
develop our hierarchy of state expressiveness for
single-layer RNNs. In Section 4, we shift to study
RNNs as language recognizers. Finally, in Sec-
tion 5, we provide empirical results evaluating the
relevance of our predictions for unsaturated RNNs.
2 Building Blocks
In this work, we analyze RNNs using formal mod-
els from automata theory—in particular, WFAs and
counter automata. In this section, we ﬁrst deﬁne the
basic notion of an encoder studied in this paper, and
then introduce more specialized formal concepts:
WFAs, counter machines (CMs), space complexity,
and, ﬁnally, various RNN architectures.
2.1 Encoders
We view both RNNs and automata as encoders :
machines that can be parameterized to compute a
set of functions f: !Qk, where is an input
alphabet and Qis the set of rational reals. Given
an encoderMand parameters , we useMto rep-
resent the speciﬁc function that the parameterized
encoder computes. For each encoder, we refer to
the set of functions that it can compute as its state
expressiveness . For example, a deterministic ﬁnite
state acceptor (DFA) is an encoder whose parame-
ters are its transition graph. Its state expressiveness
is the indicator functions for the regular languages.
3This is common, but not the only possibility. For example,
an attention decoder observes the full sequence of states.