A Formal Hierarchy of RNN Architectures
William MerrillGail WeissyYoav Goldbergz
Roy SchwartzxNoah A. SmithxEran Yahavy
Allen Institute for AIyTechnionzBar Ilan UniversityxUniversity of Washington
fwillm,yoavg,roys,noah g@allenai.org
fsgailw,yahave g@cs.technion.ac.il
Abstract
We develop a formal hierarchy of the expres-
sive capacity of RNN architectures. The hi-
erarchy is based on two formal properties:
space complexity, which measures the RNN’s
memory, and rational recurrence, deﬁned as
whether the recurrent update can be described
by a weighted ﬁnite-state machine. We place
several RNN variants within this hierarchy.
For example, we prove the LSTM is not ratio-
nal, which formally separates it from the re-
lated QRNN (Bradbury et al., 2016). We also
show how these models’ expressive capacity is
expanded by stacking multiple layers or com-
posing them with different pooling functions.
Our results build on the theory of “saturated”
RNNs (Merrill, 2019). While formally extend-
ing these ﬁndings to unsaturated RNNs is left
to future work, we hypothesize that the prac-
tical learnable capacity of unsaturated RNNs
obeys a similar hierarchy. Experimental ﬁnd-
ings from training unsaturated networks on for-
mal languages support this conjecture. We re-
port updated experiments in Appendix H.
1 Introduction
While neural networks are central to the perfor-
mance of today’s strongest NLP systems, theoret-
ical understanding of the formal properties of dif-
ferent kinds of networks is still limited. It is estab-
lished, for example, that the Elman (1990) RNN
is Turing-complete, given inﬁnite precision and
computation time (Siegelmann and Sontag, 1992,
1994; Chen et al., 2018). But tightening these un-
realistic assumptions has serious implications for
expressive power (Weiss et al., 2018), leaving a sig-
niﬁcant gap between classical theory and practice,
which theorems in this paper attempt to address.
Recently, Peng et al. (2018) introduced rational
RNNs , a subclass of RNNs whose internal state
can be computed by independent weighted ﬁnite
automata (WFAs). Intuitively, such models have
Figure 1: Hierarchy of state expressiveness for satu-
rated RNNs and related models. The yaxis represents
increasing space complexity. ;means provably empty.
Models are in bold with qualitative descriptions in gray.
a computationally simpler recurrent update than
conventional models like long short-term memory
networks (LSTMs; Hochreiter and Schmidhuber,
1997). Empirically, rational RNNs like the quasi-
recurrent neural network (QRNN; Bradbury et al.,
2016) and unigram rational RNN (Dodge et al.,
2019) perform comparably to the LSTM, with a
smaller computational budget. Still, the underlying
simplicity of rational models raises the question of
whether their expressive power is fundamentally
limited compared to other RNNs.
In a separate line of work, Merrill (2019) intro-
duced the saturated RNN1as a formal model for
analyzing the capacity of RNNs. A saturated RNN
is a simpliﬁed network where all activation func-
tions have been replaced by step functions. The
saturated network may be seen intuitively as a “sta-
1Originally referred to as the asymptotic RNN .arXiv:2004.08500v4  [cs.CL]  19 Sep 2020