5
Fig. 4. Communication budget gain of the over-the-air compu tation with
parameter compression at the local clients and recovery/ag gregation at the
central server.
where the communication gain is measured as the ratio of
the communication overhead of the scheme without over-
the-air computation or gradients compression and that of th e
OverAir and CSOverAir. From the ﬁgure, the communication
overhead is reduced signiﬁcantly by over-the-air computat ion
as multiple clients could transmit their parameters to the c enter
server simultaneously by using the same channel. It is also
noted that the communication overhead can be reduced greatl y
by compressing the gradients at each local client. However, the
minimal compression ratio in the CSOverAir approach [11]
is heavily dependent on the compressive sensing techniques ,
which fails to consider the features of chanenl fading durin g
the recovery at the central server.
The frequency of global parameter aggregation is linked to
the communication overhead and the convergence speed of
model training. In [12], the convergence of gradient-desce nt
based federated learning is analyzed and a convergence boun d
is obtained. Then, a control algorithm is developed based
on the convergence bound. After learning data distribution ,
system dynamics, and model characteristics, the control al go-
rithm adjusts the frequency of aggregation to minimize the
global loss function with given communication resources. T o
efﬁciently exploit limited communication resources, join t op-
timization of parameter compression, communication resou rce
allocation, and model training/aggregation can be perform ed,
which is also a promising direction for further research.
IV. F EDERATED LEARNING FOR WIRELESS APPLICATIONS
In the above, we have introduced the principle of federated
learning and efﬁcient communication for distributed model
training. Federated learning also has many wireless applic a-
tions. In this section, we will provide three examples: vehi cular
communications [13], unmanned aerial vehicle (UA V) online
path control [14], and localization [15].
A. Distribution Estimation for Vehicular Communications
Vehicular communications will make our daily vehicular
operation safer, greener, and more efﬁcient and it also pave s
 
FPK 
 
HJB 
Federated 
Learning 
 
FPK 
 
HJB 
Source Destination 
Fig. 5. Massive UA V control based on mean-ﬁeld game and feder ated
learning.
the path to intelligent deriving. In addition to communicat e
with the infrastructure (V2X), vehicles also need to exchan ge
critical information, such as safety related messages, wit h
their surrounding vehicles (V2V) with ultra reliability an d
low latency, which is referred to as ultra-reliable low-latency
communication (URLLC).
To ensure URLLC by optimally allocate limited communi-
cation resources, i.e., frequency bands and transmission p ower,
we have to model and capture extremely low probability
events, such as the probability of the queue length over a
threshold or extreme high reliability of a wireless link, an d ﬁnd
their relationship with the assigned communication resour ces.
Considering high dynamics and high mobility of vehicular
networks, it is often impossible to ﬁnd an exact or closed-
form expression. Fortunately, extreme value theory (EVT) can
address the issue [13], which models a rare event by the
generalized Pareto distribution determined by several cri tical
parameters and converts to the issue into estimating these
critical parameters.
Federated learning has been used in [13] to estimate these
critical parameters and catch the relationship between ass igned
resources, link reliability, and transmission latency. Di fferent
from the classical maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) that
needs to transmit data from different vehicle users to the
roadside unite, the critical parameters can be obtained usi ng
federated learning based MLE, which can save communication
resources for data transmission and avoid privacy issues. I t
has been demonstrated in [13] that the federated learning
based estimation can save up to 79% data exchange but with
estimation accuracy similar to the central solution.
B. Massive UAV Online Path Control
Sometimes, a large population of UA Vs may ﬂy from a
source to a destination for mission-critical tasks, such as
helping ﬁreﬁghting or covering disaster areas as temporal
access points. Due to wind and other random factors, massive
UA V control becomes very challenging in order to avoid
collisions and reach the destination quickly as in Figure 5
from [14]. To limit inter-communications among UA Vs, mean-
ﬁeld game (MFG) is used for massive UA V control by solving