arXiv:2005.05265v2  [cs.IT]  12 May 20201
Federated Learning and Wireless Communications
Zhijin Qin, Geoffrey Ye Li, and Hao Ye
Abstract —Federated learning becomes increasingly attractive
in the areas of wireless communications and machine learnin g
due to its powerful functions and potential applications. I n
contrast to other machine learning tools that require no com mu-
nication resources, federated learning exploits communic ations
between the central server and the distributed local client s to
train and optimize a machine learning model. Therefore, how
to efﬁciently assign limited communication resources to tr ain
a federated learning model becomes critical to performance
optimization. On the other hand, federated learning, as a br and
new tool, can potentially enhance the intelligence of wirel ess
networks. In this article, we provide a comprehensive overv iew
on the relationship between federated learning and wireles s
communications, including basic principle of federated le arning,
efﬁcient communications for training a federated learning model,
and federated learning for intelligent wireless applicati ons. We
also identify some future research challenges and directio ns at
the end of this article.
Index Terms —Communication-efﬁcient learning, federated
learning, gradient compression, over-the-air computatio n.
I. I NTRODUCTION
With successes of machine learning (ML), especially deep
learning (DL), in the areas, such as image recognition and
natural language processing, researchers in the communica -
tions community have also applied DL to improve the perfor-
mance of communications or make networks more intelligent
recently. DL can improve signal processing performance of
communications systems [1]. Traditionally, a communicati on
system consists of several modules, such as coding and
decoding, modulation and demodulation, channel estimatio n
and signal detection. An intuitive approach is to use a deep
neural network (DNN) to represent one or more modules.
The whole transmitter or receiver can be even represented by
a DNN, which is emerging as end-to-end communications.
Of course, we can exploit expert knowledge in the area
of telecommunications accumulated in the past century to
simplify the structure of the DL model and speed up its
convergence, which is model-driven DL for physical layer
communications.
DL can be also applied in resource allocation in communi-
cation networks. Judicious resource allocation can signiﬁ cantly
improve the performance of a communication network. Tradi-
tionally, resource allocation is formulated as an optimiza tion
problem and then a resource allocation approach can be
obtained by solving the corresponding optimization proble m.
Usually, the optimization problems formulated for wireles s re-
source allocation are non-deterministic polynomial-time (NP)
hard and therefore are quite complicated, if not impossible ,
Zhijin Qin is with Queen Mary University of London, London E1 4NS,
UK (e-mail: z.qin@qmul.ac.uk)
Geoffrey Ye Li and Hao Ye are with Georgia Institute of Techno logy,
Atlanta, GA 30332 USA (e-mail: liye@ece.gatech.edu; yehao @gatech.edu).to obtain the optimal solutions. As indicated in [2], DL can
reduce the complexity and improve the performance on solvin g
the optimization problem. Deep reinforcement learning (DRL)
can be directly exploited in resource allocation, where the
environment contains channel quality, interference level , etc.,
the action space includes spectrum access, power allocatio n,
spatial resources, etc., and the reward could be composed
of latency, data rate, etc. Through DRL, a good policy for
resource allocation can be obtained to maximize the designe d
reward. More applications of ML in future wireless networks
can be found in [3].
Note that most works on ML for communications are based
on centralized learning. Recently, federated learning [4] , [5]
has been proposed to perform model training distributively
at multiple participating clients, each with a part of train ing
data, and coordinated by a central server. By doing so, the
computation is ofﬂoaded from the central server to the local
clients. Moreover, in federated learning, the participati ng local
clients communicate with the central server only on the
model parameters learnt locally rather than the raw data,
which preserves privacy in addition to signiﬁcant reductio n
on communication overhead. Therefore, federated learning is
desired in many privacy-sensitive applications, such as tr aining
an imagine classiﬁcation model based on the photos stored at
different mobile devices.
In brief, federated leaning is enabled by communications
between the local clients and the central server and can also
be used as a tool to improve the performance of wireless
systems. This article discusses the relationship between f eder-
ated learning and wireless communications. After introduc ing
the basis of federated learning in Section II, we present
efﬁcient communications for federated learning in Section III
and federated learning for wireless applications in Sectio n IV .
Then, we conclude our article by identifying some research
challenges and directions in Section V .
II. F EDERATED LEANING
Even if lots of related work had been done before, the
name of federated learning was ﬁrst used in [4] in 2016
for collaborative learning in wireless networks, where com -
munication resources, such as bandwidth and transmission
power, are limited and the privacy of local clients needs to
be preserved. As shown in Figure 1, we aim to train a global
model at the central server with parameters wby the whole
datasetD=∪K
k=1Dk, whereDkis the raw data stored at
clientk. A straightforward way is to let distributed local
clients send their data to the central server and then train t he
model as in centralized leaning. However, local clients may be
unwilling to share their raw data with others in some privacy -
sensitive applications even if they are willing to particip ate