3
through the gradient descent approach corresponding to the
local loss function, Fk(∗), based on the previous global
parameter set, w(t−1); therefore, Fk(w(t−1))> Fk(wk(t))
fork= 1,2. Local parameter sets are then send to the central
server for aggregation by w(t) =1
2(w1(t)+w2(t)), which
takes the gradients of both local clients into consideratio n. It is
obvious that Fk(w(t))> Fk(wk(t))sincewk(t)is obtained
based on the gradient descent for the local loss function whi le
w(t)is based gradient descent for the global loss function as
indicated by (2).
B. Practical Issues
So far, we have just introduced the basic principle of
federated learning. In the following, we identify some issu es
that cannot be neglected in the design and application of
federated learning.
1) Stochastic Gradient Descent: Since loss function
Fk(w(t))is determined by the raw data at the local client
k, there is no closed-form expression usually. Therefore, it is
impossible to analytically ﬁnd the gradients, ∇Fk(w(t)), that
is, we cannot carry out one step update as in (3). Usually,
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is used to ﬁnd the gradient
iteratively at the local clients for each iteration between the
central server and local clients. Readers can refer to [4], [ 6]
for more details.
2) Robust Aggregation: For the parameter aggregation in
(2), weighted average is used, which only considers the size s
of the raw data and is optimal only if the central server
receives local parameter sets accurately andsimultaneously . In
reality, it is difﬁcult to transmit parameter sets in full-p recision.
Nevertheless, there also exist corruption and noise during
parameter exchanges between the central server and the loca l
clients. Robust aggregation in [7] can address corrupted lo cal
parameter sets. As a result of heterogeneous computational
capabilities and communication links for different local c lients,
there may be some local clients, called stragglers , that deliver
their updated local parameter sets later than others and aff ect
timely model parameter updates. The coded federated learni ng
method in [8] may deal with stragglers and speed up the con-
vergence of model training. The broadband analog aggregati on
method in [9] considers signal distortion and interference
during parameter transmission and results in lowered laten cy.
3) Upload Frequency: In the above discussion, we assume
that all local clients participate in parameter update at ev ery
iteration, which is sometimes inefﬁcient. For example, if t he
corresponding local parameters update is negligible, then its
impact on the aggregation can be ignored. In wireless edge
learning, even if the local parameters are non-trivial, the
corresponding channel condition could be quite poor. As a
result, large amounts of wireless resources, e.g. transmis sion
power and bandwidth, are required to compensate for channel
distortion. In this situation, we should jointly consider t he
occupied communication resources and its contribution to
the performance improvement to optimize the whole learning
process [10].
4) Privacy Leakage: In federated learning, the local clients
communicate with the central server on the model parameters ,rather than the raw data, to preserve privacy. However, it ha s
been found recently that at least partial privacy informati on can
be recovered from the gradients, which implies that federat ed
learning cannot completely guarantee the privacy of client s.
5) Interplay of Federated Learning and Wireless Commu-
nications: Federated learning depends on wireless commu-
nications between the central server and the local clients.
Therefore, it is important to efﬁciently exploit limited wi reless
resources [11], [12], which will be discussed in Section III .
Even if originally proposed to address the concerns on
privacy, device computation and storage, and communicatio n
bandwidth, federated learning has already had many wireles s
applications [13], [14], [15], such as wireless resource al loca-
tion and localization, as we can see from Section IV .
C. Federated Learning vs Distributed Learning
Depending on applications and settings, federated learnin g
has different variants, such as cross-device and cross-silo
federated learning [5]. Even if not unanimously agreed, som e
researchers regard federated learning as a kind of distribu ted
learning. Nevertheless, the following prominent characte ris-
tics [5] distinguish federated learning from traditional d is-
tributed learning:
•Data is generated locally and remains descentralized at
different local clients;
•The central server conducts model training, but can never
see the raw data at the the local clients;
•The local clients only communicate (usually through
wireless links) with the central server to update the model
parameters.
In addition to the above, federated learning also has the
following characteristics, for instance, the central serv er has
no control over the local clients and each client can decide
whether participating in the collaboration or not; the loca l
clients can be different categories of devices with differe nt
distributions on the corresponding data.
In contrast to federated learning, communication capabili ty
in traditional distributed learning is not a bottleneck sin ce the
central server and the local clients are usually connected t o
each other using wirelines or optical ﬁbers, rather than thr ough
wireless channels. Most traditional distributed learning ap-
proaches have been developed in order to ofﬂoad computation
to the local clients, rather than addressing the privacy or
communications issues. Therefore, the whole dataset may be
stored at the central server, there could be raw data exchang e
between the central server and the local clients and among th e
local clients, or the whole dataset can be even re-partition ed if
required. In terms of the distribution scales, there are usu ally
up to 1,000 clients in distributed learning while it could be as
large as1010clients for federated learning.
Nevertheless, we have only noticed the strict deﬁnition of
federated learning in [5] so far. To the best of our knowledge ,
there are no unanimous deﬁnitions on distributed learning,
descentralized learning, or collaborative learning.
III. C OMMUNICATIONS IN FEDERATED LEARNING
In federated learning, the central server and the local clie nts
keep on exchanging the updated model parameter sets during