2
Client K Local Data 
Client k Local Data Client 1 Local Data 
Local Update Global Aggregation Content Server 
()tw ()tw
()tw( ) ktw1( ) tw( ) Ktw
( ) ( 1) ( ( 1)) k k t t F t µ = − − ∇ − w w w 
123
442
42
Fig. 1. Basic principles of federated learning.
in collaborative model training. Moreover, sending raw dat a
to the central server also consumes signiﬁcant communicati on
resources, especially when the data size is huge and the num-
ber of participating local clients is large. Federated lear ning
can be adopted to address the above issues.
A. Basic Principles
Following the broad deﬁnition in [5], federated learning
is a machine learning setting where multiple local clients
collaborate in training a model under the coordination of a
central server while the raw data is kept at the local clients
and the local clients and the central server only communicat e
on the model parameters. As shown in Figure 1, federated
learning include four steps:
1)Local update : Each client updates the learning model
locally and in parallel according to its raw data;
2)Weights upload : Each local client sends its intermediate
results, i.e., the updated parameters of the trained model
wk(t), to the central server;
3)Global aggregation : The central server calculates the
average weights, w(t), based on parameters received
from local clients;
4)Weights feedback : The server broadcasts the updated
parameters to each local client for the next iteration.
Without requiring the transmission of raw data, federated
learning addresses the privacy issue, reduces the communic a-
tion overhead, and ofﬂoads the computation from the central
server to the local clients. In the following, we introduce t he
details involved in the aforementioned four steps.
1) Loss Function: The empirical loss function depends on
both model parameters and raw data. Therefore, for raw data,
Dk, stored at different local clients, the corresponding loss
functions is usually different even for the learning model
with the same parameter set, w. Denote Fk(w)as the loss
function corresponding to client kwith raw data Dkand model
parameter set w. Then the global loss function corresponding
to the whole dataset, D=∪K
k=1Dk, can be expressed as
F(w) =/summationtextK
k=1|Dk|Fk(w)
/summationtextK
k=1|Dk|, (1)t-1 t t+1 
Loss Value 
Fig. 2. Parameter aggregation and gradient descent optimiz ation.
where|Dk|denotes the number of elements in Dkat the client
k, and|D|=/summationtextK
k=1|Dk|.
The model is trained to minimize loss function F(w),
for example using the gradient descent approach, to ﬁnd the
optimal parameter set, wo= argmin F(w). Since raw data
is distributed at different clients, we cannot directly ﬁnd the
gradient at the central server as in centralized learning.
2) Model Weights: If using the gradient descent approach
to minimize the global loss function, then we have
w(t) :=w(t−1)−µ∇F(w(t−1)) =/summationtextK
k=1|Dk|wk(t)
/summationtextK
k=1|Dk|,(2)
whereµ, a small positive number, is the step size, ∇F(∗)
represents the gradient of function F(∗),w(t)is the global
aggregated parameter set at the central server at time t,wk(t)
is the local parameter set of client kat timet, which can be
expressed as
wk(t) =w(t−1)−µ∇Fk(w(t−1)). (3)
Afterwards, the central server can calculate w(t)as long as
the local gradient, ∇Fk(w(t−1)), is obtained. Therefore, only
the local gradients need to be sent to the central server, whi ch
can save communication resource, especially when gradient
compression is used as we will discuss in Section III.A.
However, we still have to feed the locally updated parameter
set,wk(t), to the central server if the relationship between
the updated local parameter set, wk(t), and the previous global
parameter set, w(t−1), is nonlinear. In this case, the parameter
aggregation could be a more complicated function of wk(t)
fork= 1,···,Kother than that in (2).
It should be emphasized that (2) ensures that the gradient
descent optimization can be performed at the central server
through aggregating the gradients of the local loss functio ns at
the distributed clients. Figure 2 demonstrates a simple exa mple
for the case with two local clients containing data of the sam e
size. Denote the two local loss functions as F1(∗)andF2(∗)
and the global loss function as F(∗) =1
2(F1(∗)+F2(∗)).
With gradient descent iteration as in (2), F(w(t))decreases
astincreases, that is, F(w(t−1))> F(w(t))> F(w(t+1)) .
Moreover, the updated local parameter set, wk(t), is obtained