4
the training process, which still consumes signiﬁcant amou nts
of communication resources, especially when the distribut ed
local clients are wireless connected devices and with a huge
number, such as in Internet-of-Things (IoT) applications. To
address the issue, we can compress the information to be
transmitted and/or allocate limited communication resour ce ef-
ﬁciently. Many data compression and communication resourc e
management techniques developed for general purposes can
be used in federated learning. Furthermore, if the learning
model is a neural network, then we can perform neural
network pruning and parameter pruning. In this section, we
introduce gradient compression, over-the-air computatio n, and
join optimization techniques, which especially ﬁts federa ted
learning well.
A. Gradient Compression
It has been reported in [6] that redundancy in the stochastic
gradient could be as large as 99% in certain situations.
Therefore, spectrum bandwidth can be signiﬁcantly saved if
the stochastic gradient is compressed properly. In additio n to
those general data compression techniques, especially com -
pressive sensing, to address the issue, gradient compressi on
in [6] exploits the sparsity of stochastic gradient and has b een
designed speciﬁcally for federated learning.
Gradient compression includes quantization and sparsiﬁca -
tion. Gradient quantization converts gradient elements, w hich
are usually continuous, into (low-precision) discrete val ues to
facilitate digital transmission. A simple way is to quantif y
the original stochastic gradient into binary. Improved ver -
sions include three-level and four-level quantization. Gr adient
sparsiﬁcation refers to removing the gradient elements wit h
small amplitudes. An intuitive way is to turn the elements
with amplitudes below a threshold into zero. However, it is
sometimes hard to choose the threshold. Another way is to
turn off a certain number of elements with small amplitudes
into zero. It has been demonstrated that, by properly combin -
ing gradient quantization and sparsiﬁcation, the compress ion
ratio can reach as small as 2.5%in certain situations while
reasonable convergence performance of model training is st ill
maintained.
Deep gradient compression (DGC) proposed in [6] further
improves the performance of compression by the following
four steps: momentum correction, local gradient clipping,
momentum factor masking, and warm-up training. DGC can
achieve a compression radio of 0.17% in certain situations.
We should emphasize that the gradient compression perfor-
mance strongly depends on the learning models. Most models
currently studied are for image recognition and language
processing. Therefore, it is not clear whether these result s still
hold for wireless applications.
B. Over-the-Air Computation
If the multiple local clients transmit their updated local
parameter sets through the same wireless channel simulta-
neously, the received signal at the central server will be th e
superposition of all the local parameter sets. Surprisingl y, the
addition or weighted average is computed over the air. On the
( )i
i k k k 
kPw = + x h n 
m
kh lh
()i
l lPw ()i
k k P w 
...( )i H H H 
i i k k k 
ky Pw = = + m x m h m n 
Fig. 3. Parameter aggregation through over-the-air comput ation and exploiting
spatial freedom.
other hand, the aggregated global parameter set depends onl y
on the weighted average of the local parameter sets as in (2).
Inspired by this observation, a group of works exploit the over-
the-air computation property of the wireless multiple-access
channel to obtain the weighted average, that is, to perform
aggregation, directly at the central server, without requi ring
the individual local parameter set. In that case, signiﬁcan t
communication bandwidth can be saved, especially when ther e
are a massive number of local clients, as in IoT applications .
If there are multiple antennas at the receiver of the central
server, there will be more freedom to assign spatial resourc e
and optimize federated learning. Figure 3 demonstrates the
principle of the method in [10]. The local clients simultane -
ously send their i-th elements of the local parameter sets with
proper power scales,√pkw(i)
kfork= 1,···K, through the
wireless channel. Then the received signal vector at the cen tral
server will be xi=/summationtext
khk√pkw(i)
k+n, wherehkandnare
the channel gain vector corresponding to local client kand the
noise vector, respectively. After combining with beamform ing
vectorm, we have yi=mTxi=/summationtext
kmThk√pkw(i)
k+mTn.
The beamforming vector here provides freedom for efﬁcient
transmission. If there were no noise or maximum power
constraint for each local client, then mandpkshould be
selected such that mThk√pk=|Dk|/summationtext
l|Dl|for perfect aggre-
gation according to equation (2). With channel distortion a nd
a maximum transmission power constraint for each local clie nt
in reality, there may be no enough freedom for perfect aggre-
gation, especially when there are extensive number of local
clients. In [10], a sparse and low-rank optimization proble m is
formulated to address the issue. The effective approach in [ 10]
selects a subset of local clients with proper transmission p ower
and carefully adjusts the beamforming vector to optimize th e
statistical performance of federated learning.
C. Joint Local Compression and Global Aggregation
In [11], all local clients compress their gradients by com-
pressive sensing and then send to the central server through
the same wireless channel simultaneously, the central serv er
then reconstructs and aggregates the gradient information from
the noisy observation, which combines gradient compressio n
and over-the-air computation. The CSOverAir in [11] sparsiﬁes
the gradients by a compression ratio of 1% at each local
client. Figure 4 compares the communication gain of the over-
the-air computation approach (OverAir) and the CSOverAir,