NGBoost: Natural Gradient Boosting for Probabilistic Prediction
squared-error (RMSE) of the predictions on the test set.
We performed hyperparameter tuning for each of the com-
parator methods using the same validation procedure as de-
scribed above, although optimizing for RMSE instead of
NLL for all methods except NGBoost. We compare to:
Elastic Net : We used the Scikit-Learn implementation of
elastic net regularized linear models. We tuned over lasso-
ridge mixture parameters of 0.01, 0.7, and 0.99 and over
a range of regularization parameters between 0.00005 and
0.01. All other parameters were left to their default values.
Random Forest : We used the Scikit-Learn implementa-
tion of random forests. We set the number of trees to 500
and left all other parameters at their default values.
Gradient Boosting : We used the Scikit-Learn implemen-
tation of gradient boosted trees. We tuned over learning
rates of 0.01, 0.05, and 0.1, tree depths of 3 and 4, and num-
ber of boosting iterations between 0 and 1000. All other
parameters were left to their default values.
Our point prediction results are summarized in Table 3.
5. Conclusions
NGBoost is a method for probabilistic prediction with
competitive state-of-the-art performance on a variety of
datasets. NGBoost combines a multiparameter boosting
algorithm with the natural gradient to efﬁciently estimate
how parameters of the presumed outcome distribution vary
with the observed features.
NGBoost performs as well as existing methods for proba-
bilistic regression but retains major advantages: NGBoost
is ﬂexible, scalable, and easy-to-use. We have not rigor-
ously quantiﬁed these advantages in this paper (since they
would be largely irrelevant without ﬁrst establishing per-
formance), but many of the beneﬁts are self-evident. Un-
like problem-speciﬁc approaches, NGBoost handles clas-
siﬁcation, regression, survival problems, etc. using the
same software package and interface. NGBoost scales to
large numbers of features or observations with the same fa-
vorable complexity of traditional boosting algorithms. No
expert knowledge of deep learning, Bayesian statistics, or
Monte Carlo methods is required to use NGBoost. It works
out of the box.
Our ablation experiments demonstrate that multiparameter
boosting and the natural gradient work together to improve
performance. Assuming a uniform variance across all co-
variates works reasonably well for some datasets, as would
be expected, but this is not always the case. However, us-
ing multiparameter boosting to relax the homoscedasticity
assumption most often results in worse performance, likely
due to poor training dynamics. 2nd-order methods result
in even worse performance. NGBoost employs the naturalgradient to correct the training dynamics of multiparameter
boosting. The superiority to 2nd-order methods demon-
strates that this is due to exploiting the curvature of the
score in distributional space, not the curvature of the score
in parameter space. The result is performance that is almost
always better than assuming homoscedasticity, sometimes
by a large margin.
Furthermore, the advantages of probabilistic regression
come almost “for free”. On point estimation tasks NG-
Boost performs better than elastic net, about on par with
random forests, and within striking distance of gradient
boosting. This is despite the fact that the NGBoost mod-
els were (a) optimized for NLL, not to minimize RMSE
and (b) less aggressively tuned. Thus, although point pre-
diction will always be best with a dedicated model for that
purpose, the loss in RMSE is not substantial if NGBoost is
used in order to support probabilistic regression instead.
There are many avenues for future work. This paper is fo-
cused on regression problems for clarity of exposition, but
NGBoost is also applicable to classiﬁcation and to survival
problems with right-censored data (using the censored like-
lihood as a scoring rule). NGBoost could also be used for
joint prediction: by modeling two outcomes zandywith
a jointly parameterized conditional distribution P(z;yjx),
a single NGBoost model could answer any question like
“what is the probability that it rains more than 4 inches and
the temperature is greater than 17C tomorrow?”.
Some further technical innovations are also worth explor-
ing. The natural gradient loses its invariance property with
ﬁnite step sizes, which we can address with differential
equation solvers for higher-order invariance (Song et al.,
2018). Better tree-based base learners and regularization
(e.g. Chen and Guestrin (2016); Ke et al. (2017)) are also
likely to improve performance, especially in terms of scal-
ing to large datasets.
Although we have shown empirically that NGBoost is
useful for probabilistic prediction, it remains to be seen
whether it is useful for inference problems and under what
assumptions. For instance, if we assume that yjx
D((x))for some distribution Dwith parameters and we
estimate ^ngb(x)using NGBoost, under what conditions do
we have that ^ngb(x)!(x)as sample size increases? Are
there conditions where the convergence is uniform in x? If
the model is misspeciﬁed (i.e. Dis not correct), are there
conditions under which moment estimates from the model
are still consistent? Addressing these questions and others
like them would be of signiﬁcant value.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded in part by the National Institutes of
Health. We thank anonymous reviewers for feedback.