NGBoost: Natural Gradient Boosting for Probabilistic Prediction
(a) 0% ﬁt
 (b) 33% ﬁt
 (c) 67% ﬁt
 (d) 100% ﬁt
Figure 4. Contrasting the learning dynamics between using the ordinary gradient (top row) vs. the natural gradient (bottom row) for the
purpose of gradient boosting the parameters of a Normal distribution on a toy data set. With ordinary gradients, we observe that “lucky”
examples that are accidentally close to the initial predicted mean dominate the learning. This is because, under the ordinary gradient,
the variances of those examples that have the correct mean get adjusted much more aggressively than the wrong means of the “unlucky”
examples. This results in simultaneous overﬁtting of the “lucky” examples in the middle and underﬁtting of the “unlucky” examples at
the ends. Under the natural gradient, all the updates are better balanced.
Multiparameter Boosting. These wide-ranging exten-
sions of gradient boosting are made possible by turning the
distributional prediction problem into a problem of jointly
estimatingpfunctions of x, one per parameter, according
to the scoring rule objective. In this setting, an overall line
search for the stage multiplier (as opposed to per-leaf line
search) is an inevitable consequence. However, our use of
natural gradient makes this less of a problem as the gra-
dients of all the examples come “optimally pre-scaled” (in
both the relative magnitude between parameters, and across
examples) due to the inverse Fisher Information factor. The
use of ordinary gradients instead would be sub-optimal, as
shown in Figure 4. With the natural gradient the parameters
converge at approximately the same rate despite different
conditional means, variances, and “ distances ” from the ini-
tial marginal distribution, even while being subjected to a
common scaling factor (m)in each iteration. We attribute
this stability to the “optimal pre-scaling” property of the
natural gradient.
Parameterization. When the probability distribution is
in the exponential family and the choice of parameteriza-
tion is the natural parameters of that family, then a Newton-
Raphson step is equivalent to a natural gradient descent
step. However, in other parameterizations and distribu-
tions, the equivalence need not hold. This is especially im-
portant in the boosting context because, depending on the
inductive biases of the base learners, certain parameteriza-
tion choices may result in more suitable model spaces than
others. For example, one setting we are particularly inter-
ested in is the two-parameter Normal distribution. Though
it is in the exponential family, we use a mean ( ) and
log-scale ( log) parameterization for both ease of imple-
mentation and modeling convenience (to disentangle mag-
nitude of predictions from uncertainty estimates). Sincenatural gradients are invariant to parameterization this does
not pose a problem, whereas the Newton-Raphson method
would fail as the problem is no longer convex in this pa-
rameterization.
Computational Complexity. There are two computa-
tional differences between our algorithm and a standard
boosting algorithm which contribute to complexity. The
ﬁrst is that a series of learners must be ﬁt for each param-
eter in NGBoost, whereas standard boosting ﬁts only one
series of learners. The relative increase in computational
cost is thus linear in the number of distributional parame-
ters (p). The other difference is that we must compute the
natural gradient per observation, which requires as many
inversions of a ppmatrixISas there are observations
(N). The cost of doing so scales with p3, and linearly with
N. In practice, both costs are minimal because most com-
monly used distributions have only one or two parameters
and distributions with more than ﬁve are exceedingly rare.
Scaling in terms of pis therefore not a signiﬁcant concern.
However, even though these costs are otherwise linear in
N, it may be prudent to avoid inverting a large number
of small matrices by sub-sampling mini-batches of data in
each boosting iteration. This is done in most implemen-
tations of boosting algorithms. All in all, NGBoost scales
exactly like other boosting algorithms in terms of Nbut
with larger “constants” that depend on p100.
4. Experiments
Our experiments use datasets from the UCI Machine
Learning Repository, and follow the protocol ﬁrst proposed
in Hern ´andez-Lobato and Adams (2015). For all datasets,
we hold out a random 10% of the examples as a test set.
From the other 90% we initially hold out 20% as a valida-