NGBoost: Natural Gradient Boosting for Probabilistic Prediction
Tony Duan* 1Anand Avati* 1Daisy Yi Ding1Khanh K. Thai2Sanjay Basu3Andrew Ng1
Alejandro Schuler2
Abstract
We present Natural Gradient Boosting (NG-
Boost), an algorithm for generic probabilistic
prediction via gradient boosting. Typical regres-
sion models return a point estimate, conditional
on covariates, but probabilistic regression mod-
els output a full probability distribution over the
outcome space, conditional on the covariates.
This allows for predictive uncertainty estima-
tion — crucial in applications like healthcare and
weather forecasting. NGBoost generalizes gradi-
ent boosting to probabilistic regression by treat-
ing the parameters of the conditional distribu-
tion as targets for a multiparameter boosting al-
gorithm. Furthermore, we show how the Natural
Gradient is required to correct the training dy-
namics of our multiparameter boosting approach.
NGBoost can be used with any base learner, any
family of distributions with continuous parame-
ters, and any scoring rule. NGBoost matches or
exceeds the performance of existing methods for
probabilistic prediction while offering additional
beneﬁts in ﬂexibility, scalability, and usability.
An open-source implementation is available at
github.com/stanfordmlgroup/ngboost.
1. Introduction
Many important supervised machine learning problems are
regression problems. Weather forecasting (predicting tem-
perature of the next day based on today’s atmospheric vari-
ables (Gneiting and Katzfuss, 2014)) and clinical predic-
tion (predicting time to mortality with survival prediction
*Equal contribution1Stanford University, Stanford, Cal-
ifornia, United States2Unlearn.ai, San Francisco, Cal-
ifornia, United States3Harvard Medical School, Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts, United States. Correspondence
to: Anand Avati <avati@cs.stanford.edu >, Tony Duan
<tonyduan@cs.stanford.edu >, Alejandro Schuler <alejan-
dro.schuler@gmail.com >.
Proceedings of the 37thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the au-
thor(s).
xyPredicted mean
95% prediction intervalFigure 1. Prediction intervals for a toy 1-dimensional probabilis-
tic regression problem, ﬁt via NGBoost. The dots represent data
points. The thick black line is the predicted mean after ﬁtting
the model. The thin gray lines are the upper and lower quantiles
covering 95% of the prediction distribution.
on structured medical records of the patient (Avati et al.,
2018)) are important examples.
Most machine learning methods tackle this problem with
point prediction, returning a single “best guess” prediction
(e.g. the temperature tomorrow will be 16C). However,
in these ﬁelds it is often important to be able to quantify
uncertainty in the prediction or be able to answer multiple
questions on the ﬂy (e.g. what’s the probability it will be
between 18C and 20C? What about <15C?) (Kruchten,
2016).
In order to answer arbitrary questions about the probability
of events conditional on covariates, we must estimate the
conditional probability distribution P(yjx)for each value
ofxinstead of producing a point estimate like E[yjx]. This
is called probabilistic regression . Probabilistic regression
is increasingly being used in ﬁelds like meteorology and
healthcare (Gneiting and Raftery, 2007; Avati et al., 2019).
Probabilistic estimation is already the norm in classiﬁca-
tion problems. Although some classiﬁers (e.g. standard
support vector machines) only return a predicted class la-
bel, most are capable of returning estimated probabilities
for each class; effectively, a conditional probability mass
function.
However, existing methods for probabilistic regression are
either inﬂexible, slow, or inaccessible to non-experts. Any