NGBoost: Natural Gradient Boosting for Probabilistic Prediction
x Base Learners
f(m)(x)	M
m=1Distribution P(yjx) Scoring RuleS(P;y)y
Fit Natural Gradient ~r
Figure 2. NGBoost is modular with respect to choice of base learner, distribution, and scoring rule.
mean-estimating regression method can be made prob-
abilistic by assuming homoscedasticity and estimating
an unconditional noise model, but homoscedasticity is a
strong assumption and the process requires some statistical
know-how. Generalized Additive Models for Shape, Scale,
and Location (GAMLSS) allow heteroscedasticity but are
restricted to a pre-speciﬁed model form (Stasinopoulos
et al., 2007). Bayesian methods naturally generate predic-
tive uncertainty estimates by integrating predictions over
the posterior, but exact solutions to Bayesian models are
limited to simple models, and calculating the posterior dis-
tribution of more powerful models such as Neural Net-
works (NN) (Neal, 1996) and Bayesian Additive Regres-
sion Trees (BART) (Chipman et al., 2010) is difﬁcult. In-
ference in these models requires computationally expen-
sive approximation via, for example, MCMC sampling.
Moreover, sampling-based inference requires some statis-
tical expertise and thus limits the ease-of-use of Bayesian
methods. Bayesian approaches often also scale poorly to
large datasets (Rasmussen and Williams, 2005). Bayesian
Deep Learning is gaining popularity (Graves, 2011; Blun-
dell et al., 2015; Hern ´andez-Lobato and Adams, 2015)
but, while neural networks have empirically excelled at
perception tasks (such as with visual and audio input),
they usually perform only on par with traditional methods
when data are limited in size or tabular. Extensive hyper-
parameter tuning and informative prior speciﬁcation are
also challenges for Bayesian Deep Learning which make
it difﬁcult to use out-of-the-box.
Meanwhile, Gradient Boosting Machines (GBMs) (Fried-
man, 2001; Chen and Guestrin, 2016) are a set of highly-
modular methods that work out-of-the-box and perform
well on structured input data, even with relatively small
datasets. This can be seen in their empirical success on
Kaggle and other data science competitions (Chen and
Guestrin, 2016). In classiﬁcation tasks, their predictions
are probabilistic by default (by use of the sigmoid or soft-
max link function). But in regression tasks, they output
only a scalar value. Under a squared-error loss these scalars
can be interpreted as the mean of a conditional Gaussian
distribution with some (unknown) constant variance. How-
ever, such probabilistic interpretations have little use if the
variance is assumed constant. The predicted distributions
need to have at least two degrees of freedom (two parame-
ters) to effectively convey both the magnitude and the un-certainty of the predictions, as illustrated in Figure 1. It is
precisely this problem of simultaneous boosting of multiple
parameters from the base learners which makes probabilis-
tic forecasting with GBMs a challenge, and NGBoost ad-
dresses this with a multiparameter boosting approach and
the use of natural gradients (Amari, 1998).
2. Summary of Contributions
i. We present Natural Gradient Boosting, a modular
algorithm for probabilistic regression (section 3.4)
which uses multiparameter boosting and natural gra-
dients to integrate any choice of:
Base learner (e.g. Regression Tree),
Parametric probability distribution (Normal,
Laplace, etc.), and
Scoring rule (MLE, CRPS, etc.).
ii. We present a generalization of the natural gradient to
other scoring rules such as CRPS (section 3.2).
iii. We demonstrate empirically that NGBoost performs
competitively relative to other models in its predictive
uncertainty estimates, as well as in its point estimates
(section 4).
3. Natural Gradient Boosting
In standard prediction settings, the object of interest is an
estimate of a scalar function like E[yjx], wherexis a vector
of observed features and yis the prediction target. In our
setting we are interested in producing a probability distri-
butionP(yjx)(with CDFF). Our approach is to assume
P(yjx)is of a speciﬁed parametric form, then estimate the
pparameters2Rpof the distribution as functions of x.
3.1. Proper Scoring Rules
To begin, we need a learning objective. In point prediction,
the predictions are compared to the observed data with a
loss function. The analogue in probabilistic regression is
ascoring rule , which compares the estimated probability
distribution to the observed data.
Aproper scoring ruleStakes as input a forecasted proba-
bility distribution Pand one observation y(outcome), and
assigns a scoreS(P;y)to the forecast such that the true dis-
tribution of the outcomes gets the best score in expectation