Parnami & Lee
Usually people deﬁne few-shot classiﬁcation task as a standard M-way-K-shot task [ 13,14], where M is the number of
classes and K is the number of examples per class present in Dtrain. Usually K is a small number (ex., 1,5,10) and
jDtrainj=MK. The performance is measured by a loss function L(^y;y)deﬁned over the prediction ^y=f(x;)
and the ground truth y.
TheM-way-K-shot tasks are usually sampled from a larger dataset with classes much higher in number than M. Table
3 lists such commonly used datasets for conducting experiments for few-shot classiﬁcation.
Dataset Number of classes Samples per class Description
Omniglot [15] 1623 20 Handwritten characters from different languages.
miniImageNet [13] 100 600 100 classes randomly sampled from ImageNet.
FC100 [16] 100 600 Derived from CIFAR100 for FSL.
tiered ImageNet [17] 608 1280 (avg.) Like miniImageNet but ensures that there is a
wider degree of separation between training, val-
idation and test classes.
Table 3: Common datasets used for Few-Shot Learning
3.2 Meta-Learning-based Few-Shot Learning
The objective of meta-learning is to approximate the function fwith parameters such that the performance on any task
Tirandomly sampled from the task distribution p(T)is optimal (equation 5). We use this strategy for FSL such that the
distribution p(T)is now a distribution of few-shot tasks and each task Tiis a few-shot task. For example, consider
the M-way-K-shot few-shot classiﬁcation (FSC) task. During training, we meta-learn a prior over a distribution of
M-way-K-shot FSC tasks so that at test time we can solve for a new M-way-K-shot FSC task.
Meta-Learning-based FSL can be classiﬁed into three approaches [ 18]: metric-based, optimization-based and model-
based. Further, various meta-learning-based hybrid approaches were proposed to handle FSL problems such as
cross-domain FSL, generalized FSL, etc. We discuss the three main approaches in Section 3.2.1 and hybrid approaches
in Section 3.2.2.
3.2.1 Main Approaches
Consider a taskTwith support set Sand query set Q. Letfbe a few-shot classiﬁcation model with parameters . Then
for(x;y)2Q, the meta-learning approaches to FSL can be differentiated in the way they model the output probability
P(yjx)[18] (Table 4).
Metric-based Optimization-based Model-based
Key idea Metric Learning [19] Gradient Descent Memory; RNN
HowP(yjx)
is modeled? X
(xk;yk)2Sk(x;xk)yk;P0(yjx);
where0=g(;S)f(x;S):
Advantages Faster Inference. Offers ﬂexibility to optimize
in dynamic environments.Faster inference with mem-
ory models.
Easy to deploy. Scan be discarded post-
optimization.Eliminates the need for deﬁn-
ing a metric or optimizing at
test.
Disadvantages Less adaptive to optimization
in dynamic environments.Optimization at inference is
undesirable for real-world
deployment.Less efﬁcient to hold data in
memory asSgrows.
Computational complexity
grows linearly with size of
Sat test.Prone to overﬁtting. Hard to design.
Table 4: Meta-Learning Approaches
7