Parnami & Lee
3.2.1.3 Model-based Meta-Learning
Metric-based methods for FSL learn a function gto generate discriminative embeddings based on a metric where as
optimization-based methods learn a priors ;to optimize quickly from. Different from these approaches, model-based
meta-learning methods makes no assumption on the form of P(yjx). Rather it involves model architectures speciﬁcally
tailored for fast learning. Table 7 summarizes the methods in this category. Based on the kind of model architecture
(f), these methods are further categorized into memory-based, rapid-adaptation-based and miscellaneous models.
Method Type Key Idea
MANN [44] Memory Using NTM [45] for sequence prediction
MM-Net [46] Memory Key-Value Memory Networks [47] combined with Matching Networks [13]
MetaNets [48] Rapid Adaptation Fast-Weights stored in memory
CSN [49] Rapid Adaptation Task speciﬁc conditioning of activation values stored in memory
SNAIL [50] Miscellaneous Temporal Convolutions and Causal Attention layers for sequence prediction
Table 7: Model-based Meta-Learning Methods
3.2.1.3.1 Memory as a component
A family of model architectures integrates an external memory component to facilitate their learning process. This
external memory component is usually a 2D matrix called the memory bank, memory matrix or just plain memory .
The memory acts as a storage buffer to which neural networks can write new information and retrieve previously
stored information. Note that this memory component is different than internal memory found in vanilla RNNs or
LSTMs. Neural Turing Machines (NTM) [ 45] and Memory Networks [ 51], [52,47] are the examples of two such
model architectures which incorporates external memory in their learning process. In the context of FSL, memory as an
external component can relieve the burden of training in low data regime and can allow for faster generalization. Next,
we discuss such model architectures which integrates memory into their design and use meta-learning for learning from
few-examples.
Memory Augmented Neural Networks
Memory Augmented Neural Networks (MANN) [ 44] use a modiﬁed NTM to rapidly assimilate new data into memory
and leverage this data to make accurate predictions after only a few samples.
•Neural Turing Machine
A Neural Turing Machine (NTM) couples a controller neural network with external memory storage (Figure
14). Like most neural networks, the controller interacts with the external world via input and output vectors.
Unlike standard networks, the controller also learns to read and write memory rows by soft attention, while the
memory serves as a knowledge repository. The attention weights are generated by its addressing mechanism.
Figure 14: The architecture of NTM. The memory at time t, Mtis a matrix of size NM, containing N vector rows
and each has M dimensions (Source: [6]).
•Addressing Mechanism in MANN
The controllers in MANN are either LSTMS or feed-forward networks. Given some input xtat timet, the
20