Parnami & Lee
Transductive Few-Shot Learning
Although, meta-learning is an effective strategy for few-shot learning as it aims at generalizing to unseen classiﬁcation
tasks, the fundamental difﬁculty with learning with scarce data remains for a novel classiﬁcation task. One way to
achieve larger improvements with limited amount of training data is to consider relationships between instances in the
test set and thus predicting them as whole, which is referred to as transduction or transductive inference [ 61]. Therefore,
transductive few-shot learning techniques [ 32,62,63] utilize the information present in unlabeled examples in the
query set as whole to make prediction about individual queries. For example Liu et al. [ 62] proposed Transductive
Propagation Networks, where the examples in the support and query sets are modeled as nodes of a graph. The labels of
the support set nodes are known and the task is to predict the labels of the query set nodes which is achieved using their
label propagation algorithm.
Unsupervised Few-Shot Learning
In supervised few-shot learning, the labels of the examples in the support set are available during the training and the
label of the examples in the query set have to be estimated. In contrast, in unsupervised few-shot learning, the examples
in the support set are also unlabeled. Huang et al. [ 64] proposed a strategy for unsupervised few-shot classiﬁcation task
which involves ﬁrst performing clustering on the examples in the support set and then assigning the query to one of the
clusters.
Zero-Shot Learning
Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) [ 65] attempts to solve a task without the presence of any training examples for that task.
For an image classiﬁcation task, ZSL methods rely mostly on visual-auxiliary modality alignment. Often times, the
auxiliary data is image’s label i.e., samples for the same class from two modalities are mapped together so that two
modalities obtain the same semantic structure. Because ZSL does not have access to any visual information when
learning new concepts, ZSL models have no choice but to align the two modalities. This way, during test the image
query can be directly compared to auxiliary information for performing classiﬁcation [66].
3.3 Non-Meta-Learning based Few-Shot Learning
In this section, we discuss strategies other than meta-learning that can aid learning in limited data regime.
3.3.1 Transfer Learning
Transfer Learning [ 67] is the improvement of learning in a new task through the transfer of knowledge from a related
task that has already been learned. In few-shot learning scenario where the data is too limited to train a deep network
from scratch, transferring knowledge from another network can be a viable option. For a classiﬁcation task, this
knowledge transfer is achieved by pretraining a deep network on large amounts of training data on base classes (seen)
and then ﬁne-tuning it on a new few-shot classes (unseen). However, naive ﬁne-tuning using just few example can lead
to overﬁtting and thus poor generalization performance on the few-shot task. Therefore, in this section, we discuss
approaches which attempts to address this problem.
Distance Metric Classiﬁcation Using Embeddings from a Pretrained Network
In section 3.2.1.1, we discussed approaches that used meta-learning to extract feature embeddings and perform
classiﬁcation using a nearest neighbour classiﬁer with a distance metric. SimpleShot [ 68] instead uses a pretrained
deep network to get feature embeddings for the input and query images, perform centering & L2 normalization on the
obtained features and use euclidean distance as the distance measure for nearest neighbour classiﬁcation. This simple
approach has shown considerable improvement in accuracy in comparison to meta-learning approaches. Similarly chen
et al. [ 69], shows comparable results from using cosine metric for nearest neighbour classiﬁcation on embeddings
obtained from a network trained on base classes.
Training a New Classiﬁer Using Embeddings from a Pretrained Network
Training a classiﬁer from scratch isn’t possible when the number of training samples are limited, due to the poor
resulting representations. However one could still obtain the representations from a pre-trained network and then train a
new classiﬁer using them. Tian et al. [ 70], demonstrate this exactly. Along with using representations from a pre-trained
network, they also L2 normalize them before training a new classiﬁer for each few-shot task. They also show that this
approach outperforms the simple nearest neighbour classiﬁcation using pretrained embeddings.
Transductive Inference Using Embeddings from a Pretrained Network
Certain approaches attempt to exploit the structure of information present in the query set and collectively classify
the examples in the query set. This is know as transductive inference. For example, in section 3.2.2, we mentioned
Transductive Propagation Networks [ 62] which utilized meta-learning to transductively assign labels to the examples
in the query set. Alternatively, instead of using meta-learning, Dhillon et al. [ 71] choose to transductively ﬁne-tune a
25