Parnami & Lee
1 Introduction
The ﬁeld of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) has been through ups and downs since its inception in the 1950s. Yet, the last
few years have been marked by exceptional progress in the ﬁeld of AI. Much of this progress can be attributed to
recent advances in “deep learning” characterized by learning large neural network-style models with multiple layers
of representation. These models have shown great performance in a variety of tasks with large amounts of labeled
data in image classiﬁcation [ 1], machine translation [ 2] and speech modeling [ 3]. However, these achievements have
relied on the fact that the optimization of these deep, high-capacity models requires many iterative updates across many
labeled examples. This type of optimization breaks down in the small data regime where we want to learn from very
few labeled examples. In contrast, humans can quickly learn to solve a new problem just from a few examples. For
instance, given a few photos of a stranger, one can easily identify the same person from a large number of photos. This
is not only due to the human mind’s computational power but also to its ability to synthesize and learn new information
from previously learned information. For example, if a person has a skill for riding a bicycle, that skill can prove helpful
when learning to ride a motorcycle.
Recent years have seen a rise of research attempting to bridge this gap between human-like learning and machine
learning, which has given birth to this new sub-ﬁeld of Machine Learning known as Few-Shot Learning (FSL) i.e.,the
ability of machine learning models to generalize from few training examples . When there is only one example to
learn from, FSL is also referred to as One-Shot Learning. The motivation for FSL lies in the fact that models excelling at
this task would have many useful applications. First, we would not be required to collect thousands of labeled examples
to attain a reasonable performance on a new task which would help alleviate the data-gathering effort and reduce the
computation costs and time spent in training a model. Furthermore, in many ﬁelds, data is hard or impossible to acquire
due to reasons such as privacy and safety. Models that generalize from a few examples would be able to capture this
type of data effectively. Therefore in this survey, we study various approaches that have been recently proposed in an
attempt to solve the problem of Few-Shot Learning. We categorize the FSL approaches as seen in Figure 1.
Much of the work in this survey is inspired from prior works that attempted to summarize the ﬁeld of few-shot learning.
Wang et al. [ 4] deﬁnes the core issue of FSL as an unreliable empirical risk minimizer that makes it a hard problem.
Chen et al. [ 5] present a comparative analysis of several representative few-shot classiﬁcation algorithms. Similar
to ours, Weng [ 6] discusses meta-learning approaches to FSL. In addition, we discuss non-meta-learning and hybrid
meta-learning approaches to FSL. We also extend the discussion of main meta-learning approaches by including the
recent state-of-the-art methods.
The rest of the survey is organized as follows. Section 2 covers meta-learning which is a prerequisite to understand
recent FSL methods. Section 3 deﬁnes the few-shot classiﬁcation problem, introduces the available datasets, and divides
the approaches to FSL into two sub-sections: Meta-Learning-based FSL (Section 3.2 and Non-Meta-Learning-based
FSL (Section 3.3). Next, we list the performance of various FSL methods and progress made so far in Section 4. Finally,
we conclude with a discussion on challenges involved in Section 5.
2 Background
In this section, we discuss the necessary background required for understanding the recent few-shot learning algorithms.
2.1 Meta-Learning
Meta-Learning [ 7,8] or Learning to Learn [ 9] has been the basic technique which most few-shot learning algorithms
employ. Motivated by human development theory, meta-learning, a sub-ﬁeld of machine learning, focuses on learning
priors from previous experiences that can lead to efﬁcient downstream learning of new tasks. For instance, a simple
learner learns a single classiﬁcation task, but a meta-learner gains an understanding of learning to solve a classiﬁcation
task by exposing itself to multiple similar classiﬁcation tasks. Hence when presented with a similar but new task, the
meta-learner could solve it quickly and better than a simple learner which has no prior experience in solving the task. A
meta-learning procedure generally involves learning at two levels, within and across tasks. First, rapid learning occurs
within a task, for example, learning to accurately classify within a particular dataset. Next, this learning is guided by
knowledge accrued more gradually across tasks, which captures the way task structure varies across target domains.
Meta-Learning can be different from similar approaches such as transfer learning, multi-task learning, or ensemble
learning. In Transfer Learning [10], a model is trained on a single task known as the source task in the source domain
where the sufﬁcient training data is available. This trained model is then again retrained or ﬁnetuned on another single
task known as the target task in the target domain. The transfer of knowledge occurs from the source task to the target
task. Thus more similar the two domains are the better it performs . Multi-Task Learning [ 11], involves learning
3