Parnami & Lee
3.2.2 Hybrid Approaches
This section discusses the variations of the few-shot learning problem and the hybrid meta-learning based approach
towards them. Table 8 list the hybrid approaches and summarizes the key idea behind them.
Approach Key Idea
Cross-Modal FSL Leverage semantic data from a different modality .
Semi-Supervised FSL Using few training examples, label the given unlabeled examples and
improve the few-shot classiﬁer.
Generalized FSL Classify query into either one of the meta-training classes or a class
from the support set.
Generative FSL Learning to generate more samples from the given few.
Cross Domain FSL Training in one domain and testing in another .
Transductive FSL Jointly predict all the query examples.
Unsupervised FSL Support examples are unlabeled .
Zero-Shot Learning No support examples present.
Table 8: Hybrid Approaches
Cross-Modal Few-Shot Learning
The recent progress in few-shot image classiﬁcation has primarily been made in the context of unimodal learning. In
order to alleviate the problem of limited data in image domain, some approaches [ 53,54] employ data from different
modality (eg., text). This is referred to as Cross-Modal Few-Shot Learning. For example, Xing et al. [ 54] propose
an Adaptive Modality Mixture Mechanism (AM3) that combines information from an image and its label’s word
embedding to develop a better prototype of its class.
Semi-Supervised Few-Shot Learning
Semi-Supervised FSL considers the scenario when there is limited labeled data but sufﬁcient unlabeled data is available
during the training. For example in approaches which use meta-learning for few-shot classiﬁcation, a weakly supervised
classiﬁer trained on support set (labeled) learns to label unlabeled data and then use it to improve its performance on the
classiﬁcation task. Using metric-based meta-learning approach, Ren et al. [ 17] propose three semi-supervised variants
of Prototypical Networks [ 21], basically using Soft k-Means method to tune clustering centers with unlabeled data.
Alternatively, Sun et al. [ 55] use an optimization-based meta-learning approach for learning to initialize a classiﬁcation
model for semi-supervised FSL.
Generalized Few-Shot Learning
In general, FSL approaches involve meta-training on base (seen) classes and meta-testing on novel (unseen) classes.
Given a novel task sampled from the meta-testing set, the few-shot classiﬁer will classify a query into one of the classes
present in the novel task’s support set (task’s training set) and will not be able to recognize if the query example is from
a base class. Generalized Few-Shot Learning (GFSL) focuses on the joint classiﬁcation of both the base classes and
novel classes. In particular, the goal is, for the model trained on the seen categories to be capable of incorporating the
limited unseen class instances and make predictions for test/query instances in the both set of classes. Recent work of
Gidaris & Komodakis [56], Ye et al. [57] and Ren et al. [58] attempts to address this problem.
Generative Few-Shot Learning
One usual way one may think to alleviate the problem of learning from low data samples is to augment them with
synthesized samples. To this end, Wang et al. [ 59] propose a meta-learning approach for generating samples from
limited data. This generative model is referred to as hallucinator , a model that maps real examples to hallucinated
examples. The few-shot training set is ﬁrst fed to the hallucinator, and it produces an expanded training set, which is
then used by the learner. We refer to approaches of this kind as Generative Few-Shot Learning.
Cross Domain Few-Shot Learning
The FSL approaches discussed so far in the context of few-shot classiﬁcation aimed to recognize novel categories with
only few labeled examples in each class. One assumption that was followed was that all few-shot tasks belong to the
same distribution or domain. For example, most approaches sampled tasks from miniImageNet during training and
as well as testing. While promising results were observed following this assumption, the existing methods often fail
to generalize to unseen domains due to large discrepancy of the feature distribution across domains. This problem of
few-shot learning under domain shifts is referred to as Cross Domain FSL. To this end, the early works of Tseng et al.
[60] attempt to address this problem by simulating various feature distributions under different domains in the training
stage.
24