Parnami & Lee
3.2.1.1 Metric-based Meta-Learning
Metric Learning [ 19] is the task of learning a distance function over data samples. Consider two image-label pair
(x1;y1)and(x2;y2)and a distance function dto measure the distance between two images. If we were to assign a label
to a query image x3, we could compute the two distances d(x1;x3)andd(x2;x3))and assign the label corresponding
to the image with a shorter distance, which is also the key idea in nearest neighbors algorithms (k-NN). However, with
high dimensional inputs such as images, we typically use an embedding function gto transform the input to a lower
dimension before computing the distances:
g:Rn!Rmwheren>m:
Therefore, the core idea behind metric-based few-shot learning is to leverage meta-learning architecture to either learn
an embedding function g(;1)(parameterized by a neural network with parameters 1) given a distance function d
(such as euclidean distance) or to learn both the embedding function g(;1)(with parameters 1) and the distance
functiond(;2)(usually parameterized by another neural network with parameters 2). This is illustrated in Figure 3 .
Figure 3: Example metric-based meta-learning setup for a 4-way-1-shot classiﬁcation task. The embedding function g1
outputs the embedding vectors for support images (labeled) and the query image (unlabeled, denoted by ’?’). Distance
functiond2measures the distance between support and query vectors to output a similarity score.
Training proceeds by randomly sampling M-way-K-shot episodes from the training set. Each episode has a support set
and a query set. The average error computed on query sets across multiple training few-shot episodes is used to update
the parameters of the embedding function and the distance function (if any). Finally, new M-way-K-shot episodes are
sampled from the testing set to evaluate the performance of the network. This episodic training paradigm is explained
in Algorithm 1 .
Table 5 compares the recent metric-based meta-learning methods based on their characteristics like embedding function,
distance measure, prediction method, loss function and if the embedding function is ﬁxed for all tasks i.e., task-
independent ( T.I) or is adaptive (task-dependent). In the following paragraphs we discuss each of these methods in
further detail.
8