(a)
Q. Who is the author
of this book?
A. Detlef Ingo Lauf
Q. What type of book
is this?
A. Religion and
Spirituality
(b)
Q. Who wrote this
book?
A. Jacob Grier
Q. Is this book related
to cooking?
A. Yes
(c)
Q. Which year’s
calendar is this?
A. 2016
Q. Is this an exam
preparation book?
A. No
(d)
Q. Who wrote this
book?
A. Alan Fisher
Q. What is the edition
of this book?
A. 2
(e)
Q. What is the title of
this book?
A. My Kind of Girl
Q. Is this book related
to travel?
A. No
(f)
Q. Who wrote this
book?
A. Swami Sivananda
Q. Is this a religious
book?
A. Yes
Figure 2: A selection of images and question-ground truth answer pairs from OCR-VQA –200K dataset. The dataset contains
a large variations in type of questions and book covers.
question obtained in Stage 2. Some examples of paraphrased
questions are: (i) Template: Who is the author of this book?,
Paraphrased: Who wrote this book? (ii) Template: Is this
book related to Bank and Money?, Paraphrased: Is this a
ﬁnance book? (iii) Template: Which year’s calendar is this?
Paraphrased: What is the year printed on this calendar?
We randomly choose between paraphrased and template
questions for every image.
4) Stage 4 – preparing data split: We split images of
the dataset into train, validation and test. To this end, we
randomly divide 80%, 10% and 10% of images respectively
for train, test, and validation, respectively. This leads to
approximately 800K, 100K and 100K QA pairs in train,
validation and test splits.
B. Challenges in OCR-VQA –200K
Our dataset presents several practical challenges and re-
search avenues for the community as listed below:
Challenges for document image analysis commu-
nity: Our dataset presents two challenges for document
image analysis community - (i) robust layout analysis
scheme for handling wide variety of layouts present in
book covers, and (ii) good optical character recognition
engine which can read fancy fonts with different scales
and orientations.
Challenges for VQA community : Large answer-space,
need for reading and interpreting text in image, identi-
fying book category based on book cover, paraphrasedquestions, unseen answers during test time2, are few
of the practical challenges that do not appear in the
conventional VQA datasets.
IV. A PPROACH
In this section, we present our baseline approach to eval-
uate visual question answering performance on OCR-VQA –
200K. Leveraging well-established techniques in VQA and
OCR domains, our approach is composed of the following
four modules.
A. Text block extraction
Our ﬁrst step is to perform text block extraction in the
images so that subsequently each text block and correspond-
ing OCRed text can be represented as features for VQA
task. To this end, we use the following three approaches,
and choose the best performing approach for the subsequent
stage: (i) Tesseract3text block segmentation (with Otsu
binarization), (ii) EAST [26] and (iii) VGG text detector [9].
It should be noted that among the above three approaches
(i) is conventional OCR-style method, whereas, (ii) and (iii)
are modern scene text based methods. Further, (ii) and (iii)
only provide word bounding boxes. In order to obtain text
blocks from detected words, we ﬁrst make detected word
regions as black and no detection region as white, and then
run a projection proﬁle-based text block extraction, namely
X-Y cut [18]. We choose maximum ﬁve text blocks in this
2In contrast to conventional VQA, few answers in the test set are not
observed at training time, e.g., a particular book title or author name.
3https://github.com/tesseract-ocr/tesseract