our project website: https://ocr-vqa.github.io/.
3) We judiciously combine well-established techniques
in OCR and VQA literature, and demonstrate baseline
performance on OCR-VQA –200K. We are optimistic
that OCR-VQA –200K will open-up various new re-
search avenues for the document image analysis as
well as the VQA communities.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Traditional OCRs to recent advancements
Optical character recognition (OCR) is a historically
well-studied problem in the literature [17]. Many research
challenges such as binarization [11], skew correction [23],
digit recognition [23], document layout analysis [19] and
word spotting [7] have emerged as subproblems under the
bigger umbrella of OCR literature. Despite several success
cases, the problem of OCR is far from being solved in an
unconstrained setting. In other words, many of the classical
methods fall short when tested on the images captured
in the wild. Besides continuous research efforts in OCR
domain, the focus, of late, has shifted towards camera-
captured images, scene text and handwritten text images in
the wild. Especially, for the task of scene text recognition,
we have witnessed signiﬁcant boost in performance over the
past years [5, 9, 12, 14, 25, 20]. These approaches utilize the
availability of large annotated datasets and advancements in
deep learning, and are currently the best performing methods
for various OCR tasks. Despite these successes, OCR tasks
are often limited to detection and recognition. However,
down-stream important tasks like visual question answering
has not been studied in the OCR literature.
B. Dataset efforts
The area of OCR has greatly beneﬁted by the availability
of public datasets such as MNIST [3], GW [6], IIIT-5K [16],
SVT [24], etc. However, there does not exist a large-scale
dataset for studying visual question answering by reading
text, i.e., OCR-VQA task.1
C. Visual question answering literature
VQA has gained huge interest in recent years [4, 8].
Improvement in image classiﬁcation and introduction of
large-scale visual question answering benchmarks, such as
VQA [4] and VQA v2.0 [8] have played important role in
triggering a push in VQA research. However, most of these
conventional VQA datasets and methods are mainly focused
towards scene and object recognition, and they tend to ignore
text in images which can be useful for VQA tasks, especially
depending on the types of questions asked. We are optimistic
that our new dataset will ﬁll this gap in the traditional VQA
literature.
1Note that a couple of independent works in this area, viz. ICDAR 2019
Robust Reading Challenge on Scene Text Visual Question Answering [2]
and TextVQA [22], have appeared very recently and were not available at
the time of original submission of this manuscript.Summary of OCR-VQA –200K statistics:
Number of Images 207,572
Number of QA pairs 1,002,146
Number of unique authors 117,378
Number of unique titles 203,471
Number of unique answers 320,794
Number of unique genres 32
Average question length (in words) 6.46
Average answer length (in words) 3.31
Average number of questions per image 4.83
Table I: Composition of OCR-VQA –200K dataset in brief.
III. D ATASET
The available datasets for visual question answering are
not meant for the task of VQA by reading text as they
mainly focus on non-textual objects. We, therefore, introduce
a large-scale dataset speciﬁcally for the task of OCR-
driven VQA and to facilitate future research efforts on this
novel problem across document image analysis and VQA
communities. The contents as well as the data-collection
procedure for the proposed dataset, named as OCR-VQA –
200K, are explained in detail in the subsequent sections. The
summary of our dataset and a few selected sample images
and QA pairs are given in Table I and Figure 2 respectively.
A. Data collection and annotation
OCR-VQA –200K is constructed in the following stages.
1) Stage 1–obtaining images: In [13], Iwana et al. pro-
vided a dataset containing cover images of books including
meta-data containing author names, titles and genres. This
dataset was proposed towards classifying book covers into
one of the 32 genres, e.g., science, religion, art, children
book, comics, history, etc. using visual features. We adopt
these images for visual question answering task by obtaining
question and ground-truth answer pairs as discussed in Stage
2 and Stage 3 below.
2) Stage 2 – obtaining questions and ground-truth an-
swers: We begin with a set of template questions inquiring
about title, author name, genre (type) of book, year and
edition. It should be noted that while title and author name
are mostly available in all book covers, year and edition are
only available in a few. Further, we expect that genre can be
inferred from visual (e.g., graphics) and textual cues (e.g.,
title and surrounding text). The example template questions
include: What is the title of this book? Who is the author of
this book?, What type of book is this?, Is this book related
to religion? , etc. The ground truth answer is obtained using
meta-data made available with every book title.
3) Stage 3 – paraphrasing questions: As in any VQA
task, the main challenge comes from the large variability
and complexity in the set of possible natural language
questions that can be framed with the same target answers.
In order to add this natural complexity into our dataset,
we ask human annotators to paraphrase the template-based