Criteria Attacks Description
ObservationBlack-box The attacker can obtain the prediction vector f(x)on arbitrary input x, but cannot access the model parameters, nor
the intermediate computations of f(x).
x f f (x)
White-box The attacker has access to the full model f(x;W), notably its architecture and parameters W, and any hyper-parameter
that is needed to use the model for predictions. Thus, he can a lso observe the intermediate computations at hidden layers
hi(x).
x W1h1(x)W2h2(x)···Wi f(x)
TargetStand-alone The attacker observes the ﬁnal target model f, after the training is done (e.g., in a centralized manner) u sing dataset D.
He might also observe the updated model f∆after it has been updated (ﬁne-tuned) using a new dataset D∆.
xDf
D∆f∆ﬁne-tune
Federated The attacker could be the central aggregator, who observes i ndividual updates over time and can control the view of the
participants on the global parameters. He could also be any o f the participants who can observe the global parameter
updates, and can control his parameter uploads.
xAggregator (global parameters W)
D1f(x;W{t}
1)
D2f(x;W{t}
2)
DNf(x;W{t}
N)
···down=W{t}
up=W{t}
i
ModePassive The attacker can only observe the genuine computations by th e training algorithm and the model.
Active The attacker could be one of the participants in the federate d learning, who adversarially modiﬁes his parameter upload s
W{t}
i, or could be the central aggregator who adversarially modiﬁ es the aggregate parameters W{t}which he sends
to the target participant(s).
KnowledgeSupervised The attacker has a data set D′, which contains a subset of the target set D, as well as some data points from the same
underlying distribution as Dthat are not in D. The attacker trains an inference model hin a supervised manner, by
minimizing the empirical loss function/summationtext
d∈D′(1− /BDd∈D)h(d) + /BDd∈D(1−h(d)), where the inference model h
computes the membership probability of any data point din the training set of a given target model f, i.e.,h(d) =
Pr(d∈D;f).
Data Universe
D
D′D′
∼Pr(X=x)
∼Pr(X=x)
Unsupervised The attacker has data points that are sampled from the same un derlying distribution as D. However, he does not have
information about whether a data sample has been in the targe t setD.
TABLE I: Various categories of inference attacks against machine le arning models, based on their prior knowledge, observation , mode of
attack, and the training architecture of the target models.
3