Active attacks. The adversary, who is participating in the
training process, can actively inﬂuence the target model in
order to extract more information about its training set. Th is
could be the case notably for running inference attacks agai nst
federated learning. In this setting, the central parameter server
or a curious participant can craft adversarial parameter up -
dates for a follow-up inference attack. The inference model
architecture will be the same for passive and active attacks .
The active attacker can exploit the SGD algorithm to run the
active attack. The insight we use to design our attack is that
the SGD algorithm forcefully decreases the gradient of the l oss
on the training data, with the hope that this generalizes to t he
test data as well. The amount of the changes depends on the
contribution of a data point in the loss. So, if a training dat a
point leads to a large loss, the SGD algorithm will inﬂuence
some parameters to adapt themselves towards reducing the lo ss
on this point. If the data point is not seen by the model during
training, the changes in the gradient on this point is gradua l
throughout the training. This is what we exploit in our activ e
membership inference attack.
Letxbe a data record, which is targeted by the adversary
to determine its membership. Let us assume the adversary is
one of the participants. The attacker runs a gradient ascent on
x, and updates its local model parameters in the direction of
increasing the loss on x. This can simply be done by adding
the gradient to the parameters,
W←W+γ∂Lx
∂W, (2)
whereγis the adversarial update rate. The adversary then
uploads the adversarially computed parameters to the centr al
server, who will aggregate them with the parameter updates
from other participants. The adversary can run this attack o n
a batch of target data points all at the same time.
If the target record xis in the training set of a participant,
its local SGD algorithm abruptly reduces the gradient of the
loss onx. This can be detected by the inference model, and
be used to distinguish members from non-members. Repeated
active attacks, which happens in federated learning, lead t o
high conﬁdence inference attacks.
D. Prior Knowledge: Supervised vs. Unsupervised Inference
To construct his inference attack model, the adversary need s
to ﬁnd the meaningful mapping between the model’s behavior
on a data point and its membership in the training set. The
most straightforward way of learning such relationship is
through some known members of the training data, and some
data points from the same distribution which are not in the
training data set. This is illustrated in Table I. The advers ary
has a dataset D′that overlaps with the target dataset D. Given
this dataset, he can train the attack model in a supervised wa y,
and use it to attack the rest of the training dataset.
Lethbe the inference attack model. In the supervised
setting, we minimize the (mean square) loss of the attackerfor predicting the membership of the data points in its train ing
setD′:
/summationdisplay
d∈D′∩D(h(d)−1)2+/summationdisplay
d∈D′\D(h(d))2(3)
If the adversary does not have known samples from the
target training set, there are two possibilities for traini ng
the inference attack models: supervised training on shadow
models [6], and unsupervised training on the target model.
Shadow models are models with the same architecture as the
target model. The training data records for the shadow model s
are generated from the same distribution as the target train ing
data, but do not have a known overlap with the target training
set. The attacker trains the attack model on the shadow model s.
As the behavior of the shadow models on their training data is
more or less similar to the behavior of the target model on its
training data, the attack models trained on the shadow model s
are empirically shown to be effective.
The attack output for (shadow) supervised training setting
is the probability of membership.
h(d) = Pr(d∈D;f) (4)
Unsupervised training of inference models. We introduce
an alternative approach to shadow training, which is unsupe r-
vised training of the attack model on the target model. The
assumption for this attack is that the attacker has access to a
datasetD′which partially overlaps with the target training set
D, however, the adversary does not know which data points
are inD′∩D.
Our objective is to ﬁnd a score for each data point that rep-
resents its embedding in a space, which helps us easily separ at-
ing members from non-members (using clustering algorithms ).
The attack’s output should compute such representations. W e
make use of an encoder-decoder architecture to achieve this .
This is very similar to the auto-encoders for unsupervised d eep
learning. As shown in Figure 1, the output of the attack is fed
into a decoder. The decoder is a fully connected network with
one hidden layer.
The objective of the decoder is to reconstruct some key
features of the attack input which are important for member-
ship inference. These include the loss value L, whether the
target model has predicted the correct label /BDy=argmax f(x),
the conﬁdence of the model on the correct label f(x)y, the
prediction uncertainty (entropy) of the model H(f(x)), and the
norm of the gradients/vextenddouble/vextenddouble∂L
∂W/vextenddouble/vextenddouble. As previous work [6] as well
as our empirical results show, these features are strong sig nals
for distinguishing members from non-members. The encoder-
decoder architecture maximizes the information that the at tack
output contains about these features. Thus, it generates a
membership embedding for each data point. Note that after
training the attack model, the decoder plays no role in the
membership inference attack.
The attack in the unsupervised setting is a batch attack,
where the adversary attacks a large set of data records (disj oint
from his background knowledge). We will use the encoder to
for each target data record, and we compute the embedding
6