0 20 40 60 8000.10.20.30.40.50.60.7
Training epochGradient normMember instances
Non-member instances
Fig. 3: Gradient norms of the last layer during learning epochs for
member and non-member instances (for Purchase100).
tainties, where the attack accuracies are shown in Figure 6 f or
these classes. Similar to the differences in gradient norms ,the
classes with higher prediction uncertainty values leak mor e
membership information .
B. Stand-Alone Setting: Unsupervised Attacks
We also implement our attacks in an unsupervised scenario,
in which the attacker has data points sampled from the same
underlying distribution, but he does not know their member
and non-member labels. In this case, the attacker classiﬁes the
tested records into two clusters as described in Section II- D.
We implemented our attack and compared its performance
to Shadow models of Shokri et al. [6] introduced earlier. We
train our unsupervised models on various datasets based on t he
training and test dataset sizes in Table II. We train a single
Shadow model on each of Texas100 and Purchase100 datasets
using training sizes according to Table II. The training set s of
the Shadow models do no overlap with the training sets of
the target models. For the CIFAR100 dataset, however, our
Shadow model uses a training dataset that overlaps with the
target model’s dataset, as we do not have enough instances
(we train each model with 50,000 instances out of the total
60,000 available records).
After the training, we use the Spectral clustering algo-
rithm [14] to divide the input samples into two clusters. As
shown earlier (Figure 4), the member instances have smaller
gradient norm values. Therefore, we assign the member label
to the cluster with a smaller average gradient norm, and the
non-member label to the other cluster.
Table VII compares the accuracy of our unsupervised attack
with shadow training [6] on various datasets and architectu res.
We see that our approach offers a noticeably higher accuracy .
The intuition behind our attack working is that the encoded
values of our unsupervised algorithm present different dis tri-
butions for member and non-member samples. This can be
seen in Figure 5 for various datasets and architectures.C. Stand-Alone Setting: Attacking Fine-Tuned Models
We investigate privacy leakage of ﬁne-tuned target models.
In this scenario, the victim trains a model with dataset D, then
he uses a dataset D∆to ﬁne-tune the trained model to improve
its performance. Hence, the attacker has two snapshots of th e
trained model, one using only D, and one for the same model
which is ﬁne-tuned using D∆. We assume the attacker has
access to both of the trained models (before and after ﬁne-
tuning). We are interested in applying the membership infer -
ence attack in this scenario, where the goal of the adversary is
to distinguish between the members of D,D∆, and¯D, which
is a set of non-members.
We use the same training dataset as in the previous experi-
ments (Table II); we used 60% of the train dataset as Dand the
rest forD∆. Table IX shows the train, test, and attack accuracy
for different scenarios. As can be seen, the attacker is able to
distinguish between members (in DorD∆) and non-members
(¯D) with accuracies similar to previous settings. Additional ly,
the attacker can also distinguish between the members of D
andD∆with reasonably high accuracies.
D. Federated Learning Settings: Passive Inference Attacks
Table XI shows the dataset sizes used in our federated
attack experiments. For the CIFAR100 experiment with a
local attacker, each participant uses 30,000 instances to t rain,
which overlaps between various participants due to non-
sufﬁcient number of instances. For all the other experiment s,
the participants use non-overlapping datasets. In the foll owing,
we present the attack in various settings.
The Passive Global Attacker: In this scenario, the attacker
(the parameter aggregator) has access to the target model’s
parameters over multiple training epochs (see Section II-B ).
Thus, he can passively collect all the parameter updates
from all of the participants, at each epoch, and can perform
the membership inference attack against each of the target
participants, separately.
Due to our limited GPU resources, our attack observes each
target participant during only ﬁve (non-consecutive) trai ning
epochs. Table XII shows the accuracy of our attack when
it uses different sets of training epochs (for the CIFAR100
dataset with Alexnet). We see that using later epochs, sub-
stantially increases the attack accuracy . Intuitively, this is
because the earlier training epochs contain information of the
generic features of the dataset, which do not leak signiﬁcan t
membership information, however, the later epochs contain
more membership information as the model starts to learn the
outliers in such epochs [15].
Table X presents the results of this attack on different
datasets. For the Purchase100 and Texas100 datasets we use
the[40,60,80,90,100] training epochs, and for the CIFAR100
dataset we use epochs [100,150,200,250,300]. When the
attacker has access to several training epochs in the CIFAR1 00
target models, he achieves a high membership attack accurac y.
In Texas100 and Purchase100 datasets, however, the accurac y
of the attack decreases compare to the stand-alone setting.
10