differences in knowledge, observation, and actions of the
adversary, their objective is the same: membership inference .
A simple extension of existing black-box membership in-
ference attacks to the white-box setting would be using the
same attack on all of the activation functions of the model.
Our empirical evaluations show that this will not result in
inference accuracy better than that of a black-box attacker .
This is because the activation functions in the model tend to
generalize much faster compared to the output layer. The ear ly
layers of a trained model extract very simple features that
are not speciﬁc to the training data. The activation functio ns
in the last layers extract complex and abstract features, th us
should contain more information about the model’s training
set. However, this information is more or less the same as
what the output leaks about the training data.
We design white-box inference attacks that exploit the
privacy vulnerabilities of the stochastic gradient descen t
(SGD) algorithm . Each data point in the training set in-
ﬂuences many of the model parameters, through the SGD
algorithm, to minimize its contribution to the model’s trai ning
loss. The local gradient of the loss on a target data record,
with respect to a given parameter, indicates how much and
in which direction the parameter needs to be changed to ﬁt
the model to the data record. To minimize the expected loss
of the model, the SGD algorithm repeatedly updates model
parameters in a direction that the gradient of the loss over t he
whole training dataset leans to zero. Therefore, each training
data sample will leave a distinguishable footprint on the
gradients of the loss function over the model’s parameters .
We use the gradient vector of the model, over all parameters,
on the target data point, as the main feature for the attack. W e
design deep learning attack models with an architecture tha t
processes extracted (gradient) features from different la yers of
the target model separately, and combines their informatio n to
compute the membership probability of a target data point.
We train the attack model for attackers with different types
of background knowledge. Assuming a subset of the training
set is known to the attacker, we can train the attack model
in a supervised manner. However, for the adversary that lack s
this knowledge, we train the attack model in an unsupervised
manner. We train auto-encoders to compute a membership
information embedding for any data. We then use a clustering
algorithm, on the target dataset, to separate members from
non-members based on their membership embedding.
To show the effectiveness of our white-box inference at-
tack, we evaluate the privacy of pre-trained and publicly
available state-of-the-art models on the CIFAR100 dataset.
We had no inﬂuence on training these models. Our results
show that the DenseNet model—which is the best model on
CIFAR100 with 82% test accuracy—is not much vulnerable
to black-box attacks (with a 54.5%inference attack accuracy,
where50% is the baseline for random guess). However, our
white-box membership inference attack obtains a consider-
ably higher accuracy of 74.3%. This shows that even well-
generalized deep models might leak signiﬁcant amount
of information about their training data, and could bevulnerable to white-box membership inference attacks .
In federated learning, we show that a curious parameter
server or even a participant can perform alarmingly accurat e
membership inference attacks against other participants. For
the DenseNet model on CIFAR100, a local participant can
achieve a membership inference accuracy of 72.2%, even
though it only observes aggregate updates through the pa-
rameter server. Also, the curious central parameter server
can achieve a 79.2%inference accuracy, as it receives the
individual parameter updates from all participants. In fed erated
learning, the repeated parameter updates of the models over
different epochs on the same underlying training set is a key
factor in boosting the inference attack accuracy.
As the contributions (i.e., parameter updates) of an advers ar-
ial participant can inﬂuence the parameters other parties, in the
federated learning setting, the adversary can actively pus h
SGD to leak even more information about the participants’
data . We design an active attack that performs gradient ascent
on a set of target data points before uploading and updating
the global parameters. This magniﬁes the presence of data
points in others’ training sets, in the way SGD reacts by
abruptly reducing the gradient on the target data points if
they are members. On the Densenet model, this leads to a
76.7%inference accuracy for an adversarial participant, and
a signiﬁcant 82.1%accuracy for an active inference attack by
the central server. By isolating a participant during param eter
updates, the central attacker can boost his accuracy to 87.3%.
II. I NFERENCE ATTACKS
We use membership inference attacks to measure the in-
formation leakage through deep learning models about their
training data. There are many different scenarios in which d ata
is used for training models, and there are many different way s
the attacker can observe the deep learning process. In Table I,
we cover the major criteria to categorize the attacks. This
includes attack observations, assumptions about the adver sary
knowledge, the target training algorithm, and the mode of th e
attack based on the adversary’s actions. In this section, we
discuss different attack scenarios as well as the technique s
we use to exploit deep learning algorithms. We also describe
the architecture of our attack model, and how the adversary
computes the membership probability.
A. Attack Observations: Black-box vs. White-box Inference
The adversary’s observations of the deep learning algorith m
are what constitute the inputs for the inference attack.
Black-box. In this setting, the adversary’s observation is lim-
ited to the output of the model on arbitrary inputs. For any da ta
pointx, the attacker can only obtain f(x;W). The parameters
of the model Wand the intermediate steps of the computation
arenotaccessible to the attacker. This is the setting of machine
learning as a service platforms. Membership inference atta cks
against black-box models are already designed, which explo it
the statistical differences between a model’s predictions on its
training set versus unseen data [6].
2