as the attacker might need to design a speciﬁc attack for each
layer. This enables the inference attack to split the infere nce
task across different layers of the model, and then combine
them to determine the membership. This engineering of the
attack model architecture empowers the inference attack, a s it
reduces the capacity of the attack model and helps ﬁnding the
optimal attack algorithm with less background data.
The distinct inputs to the attack model are the set of
gradients∂L
∂W1,∂L
∂W2,···, the set of activation vectors for
different layers h1(x),h2(x),···, the model output f(x), the
one-hot encoding of the label y, and the loss of the model on
the target data L(f(x;W),y). Each of these are separately
fed into the attack model, and are analyzed separately using
independent components.
Inference attack components. The attack model is composed
of feature extraction components and an encoder component.
To extract features from the output of each layer, plus the
one-hot encoding of the true label and the loss, we use fully
connected network (FCN) submodules with one hidden layer.
We use convolutional neural network (CNN) submodules for
the gradients. When the gradients are computed on fully
connected layers (in the target model), we set the size of the
convolutional kernel to the input size of the fully connecte d
layer, to capture the correlation of the gradients in each
activation function. We reshape the output of each submodul e
component into a ﬂat vector, and then concatenate the output
of all components. We combine the outputs of all attack
feature extraction components using a fully connected enco der
component with multiple hidden layers. The output of the
encoder is a single score, which is the output of the attack.
This score (in the supervised attack raining) predicts the
membership probability of the input data.
B. Inference Target: Stand-alone vs. Federated Learning
There are two major types of training algorithms for deep
learning, depending on whether the training data is availab le
all in one place (i.e., stand-alone centralized training), or it
is distributed among multiple parties who do not trust each
other (i.e., federated learning) [8]. In both cases, the att acker
could be the entity who obtains the ﬁnal trained model. In
addition to such attack setting, the attacker might observe an
updated version of the model after ﬁne-tuning, for instance ,
which is very common in deep learning. Besides, in the
case of federated learning, the attacker can be an entity who
participates in the training. The settings of ﬁne-tunning and
federated learning are depicted in Table I.
Stand-alone ﬁne-tunning. A model fis trained on dataset
D. At a later stage it is updated to f∆after being ﬁne-tuned
using a new dataset D∆. If the attacker observes the ﬁnal
outcome, we want to measure the information leakage of the
ﬁnal model f∆about the whole training set D∪D∆. However,
given that two versions of the model exist (before and after
ﬁne-tuning), we are also interested in measuring the extra
information that could be learned about the training data, f rom
the two model snapshots. The attacker might also be interest ed
only in recovering information about the new set D∆. This isvery relevant in numerous cases where the original model is
trained using some unlabeled (and perhaps public) data, and
then it is ﬁne-tunned using sensitive private labeled data.
The model for inference attacks against ﬁne-tunned models
is a special case of our membership inference model for at-
tacking federated learning. In both cases, the attacker obs erves
multiple versions of the target model.
Federated learning. In this setting, Nparticipants, who have
different training sets Di, agree on a single deep learning task
and model architecture to train a global model. A central ser ver
keeps the latest version of the parameters Wfor the global
model. Each participant has a local model, hence a local set
of parameters Wi. In each epoch of training, each participant
downloads the global parameters, updates them locally usin g
SGD algorithm on their local training data, and uploads them
back to the server. The parameter server computes the averag e
value for each parameter using the uploaded parameters by
all participants. This collaborative training continues u ntil the
global model converges.
There are two possibilities for the position of the attacker
in federated learning: The adversary can be the centralized pa-
rameter server, or one of the participants. A curious parame ter
server can receive updates from each individual participan t
over time W{t}
i, and use them to infer information about
the training set of each participant. A malicious parameter
server can also control the view of each participant on the
global model, and can act actively to extract more informati on
about the training set of a participant (as we discuss under
active attacks). Alternatively, the adversary can be one of
the participants. An adversarial participant can only obse rve
the global parameters over time W{t}, and craft his own
adversarial parameter updates W{t}
ito gain more information
about the union of the training data of all other participant s.
In either of these cases, the adversary observes multiple
versions of the target model over time. The adversary can try
to run an independent membership inference attack on each of
these models, and then combine their results. This, however ,
might not capture the dependencies between parameter value s
over time, which can leak information about the training dat a.
Instead, in our design we make use of a single inference model ,
where each attack component (e.g., components for gradient s
of layeri) processes all of its corresponding inputs over the
observed models at once. This is illustrated in Figure 1. For
example, for the attack component that analyzes the loss val ue
L, the input dimension can be 1×T, if the adversary observes
Tversions of the target model over time. The output of the
attack component is also Ttimes larger than the case of
attacking a stand-alone model. These correlated outputs, o f all
attack components, are processed all at once by the inferenc e
model.
C. Attack Mode: Passive vs. Active Inference Attack
The inference attacks are mostly passive, where the ad-
versary makes observations without modifying the learning
process. This is the case notably for attacking models after
the training is over, e.g., the stand-alone setting.
5