TABLE II: Size of datasets used for training and testing the target
classiﬁcation model and the membership inference model
Target Model Inference Attack Model
Datasets Training TestTraining Training Test Test
Members Non-members Members Non-members
CIFAR100 50,000 10,000 25,000 5,000 5,000 5,000
Texas100 10,000 70,000 5,000 10,000 10,000 10,000
Puchase100 20,000 50,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000
positive rates of the attacker. Positive is associated with the
attacker outputting “member”.
Prediction uncertainty For a classiﬁcation model, we com-
pute its prediction uncertainty using the normalized entro py
of its prediction vector for a given input.
H=1
log(K)K/summationdisplay
i=1pilog(pi) (5)
whereKis the number of all classes and piis the prediction
probability for the ith class. We compute the probabilities
using a softmax function as pi=eh(d)(i)
/summationtextK
k=1eh(d)(k).
IV. E XPERIMENTS
We start by presenting our results for the stand-alone
scenario, followed by our results for the federated learnin g
scenario.
A. Stand-Alone Setting: Attacking Fully-Trained Models
We investigate the case where the attacker has access to the
fully-trained target model, in the white-box setting. Ther efore,
the attacker can leverage the outputs and the gradients of th e
hidden layers of the target model to perform the attack. We
have used pre-trained CIFAR100 models, and have trained
other target models and the attack models using the dataset
sizes which are presented in Table II.
Impact of the outputs of different layers: To understand
and demonstrate the impact of different layers’ outputs, we
perform the attack separately using the outputs of individual
layers . We use a pre-trained Alexnet model as the target model,
where the model is composed of ﬁve convolutional layers and
a fully connected layer at the end. Table III shows the accura cy
of the attack using the output of each of the last three layers .
As the table shows, using the last layers results in the highe st
attack accuracy, i.e., among the layer outputs, the last layer
(model output) leaks the most membership information
about the training data .The reason behind this is twofold. By
proceeding to the later layers, the capacity of the paramete rs
ramps up, which leads the target model to store unnecessary
information about the training dataset, and therefore leak more
information. Moreover, the ﬁrst layers extract simple feat ures
from the input, thus generalize much better compared to the
last layers, which are responsible for complex task of ﬁndin g
the relationship between abstract features and the classes . We
did not achieve signiﬁcant accuracy gain by combining the
outputs from multiple layers; this is because the leakage fr om
the last layer (which is equivalent to a black-box inferenceattack) already contains the membership information that l eaks
from the output of the previous layers.
Impact of gradients: In Section II-A, we discussed why
gradients should leak information about the training datas et. In
Table VIII, we compare the accuracy of the membership attack
when the attacker uses the gradients versus layer outputs,
for different dataset and models. Overall, the results show
thatgradients leak signiﬁcantly more membership information
about the training set, compared to the layer outputs .
We compare the result of the attack on pre-trained
CIFAR100-ResNet and CIFAR100-DenseNet models, where
both are designed for the same image recognition task, both
are trained on the same dataset, and both have similar gener-
alization error. The results show that these two models have
various degrees of membership leakage; this suggests that t he
generalization error is not the right metric to quantify
privacy leakage in the white-box setting. The large capacit y
of the model which enables it to learn complex tasks and
generalize well, leads to also memorizing more information
about the training data. The total number of the parameters
in pre-trained Densenet model is 25.62M , whereas this is only
1.7M parameters for ResNet.
We also investigated the impact of gradients of different
layers on attack accuracy. The results are shown in Table IV
show that the gradient of the later layers leak more
membership information . This is similar to our ﬁndings for
layer outputs: the last layer generalizes the least among al l the
layers in the model, and is the most dependent layer to the
training set. By combining the gradients of all layers, we ar e
able to only slightly increase the attack accuracy.
Finally, Table V shows the attack accuracy when we com-
bine the output layer and gradients of different layers. We s ee
that the gradients from the last layer leak the most membersh ip
information.
Impact of the training size: Table VI shows attack accuracy
for various sizes of the attacker’s training data. The model s
are tested on the same set of test instances, across all these
scenarios. As expected, increasing the size of the attacker ’s
training dataset improves the accuracy of the membership
inference attack.
Impact of the gradient norm: In this experiment, we
demonstrate that the norm of the model’s gradients is highly
correlated with the accuracy of membership inference, as it
behaves differently for member and non-member instances.
Figure 3 plots the last-layer gradient norms over consecuti ve
training epochs for member and non-member instances (for
the Purchase100 dataset). As can be seen, during training, t he
gradient norms of the member instances decrease over traini ng
epochs, which is not the case for non-member instances.
Figure 4 shows the distribution of last-layer gradient norm s
for members and non-members on three various pretrained
architectures on CIFAR100. Comparing the ﬁgures with Ta-
ble VIII, we see that a model leaks more membership infor-
mation when the distribution of the gradient norm is more
distinct for member and non-member instances . For instance,
8