x
target modelW1W2···Wi
L(f(x;W)),y
y∂L
∂W1∂L
∂W1∂L
∂W2∂L
∂W2···∂L
∂Wi∂L
∂WiLLh1(x)h1(x)h2(x)h2(x)··· f(x)f(x)attack model attack featuresCNN FCN CNN FCN CNN··· FCN FCN FCNEncoder (FCN)attack output :Decoder (FCN)unsupervised attack component
L
/BDy=argmax f(x)f(x)yH(f(x))/vextenddouble/vextenddouble∂L
∂W/vextenddouble/vextenddouble
Fig. 1: The architecture of our white-box inference attack. Given
target data (x,y), the objective of the attack is to determine its
membership in the training set Dof target model f. The attacker
runs the target model fon the target input x, and computes all the
hidden layers hi(x), the model’s output f(x), and the loss function
L(f(x),y;W), in a forward pass. The attacker also computes the
gradient of the loss with respect to the parameters of each la yer
∂L
∂Wi, in a backward pass. These computations, in addition to the o ne-
hot encoding of the true label y, construct the input features of the
inference attack. The attack model consists of convolution al neural
network (CNN) components and fully connected network (FCN)
components. For attacking federated learning and ﬁne-tuni ng, the
attacker observes each attack feature Ttimes, and stacks them before
they are passed to the corresponding attack component. For e xample,
the loss features are composed as L={L{1},L{2},···,L{T}}).
The outputs of the CNN and FCN components are appended togeth er,
and this vector is passed to a fully connected encoder. The ou tput
of the encoder, which is a single value, is the attack output. This
represents an embedding of the membership information in a s ingle
value. In the supervised attack setting, this embedding is t rained to
bePr{(x,y)∈D}. In the unsupervised setting, a decoder is trained
to reconstruct important features of the attack input (such as the
model’s output uncertainty H(f(x)), and the norm of its gradients /vextenddouble/vextenddouble∂L
∂W/vextenddouble/vextenddouble) from the attack output. This is similar to deep auto-encode rs.
All unspeciﬁed attack layers are fully connected. The detai ls of the
architecture of the attack is presented in Table XIV in Appen dix A.White-box. In this setting, the attacker obtains the model
f(x;W)including its parameters which are needed for pre-
diction. Thus, for any input x, in addition to its output, the
attacker can compute all the intermediate computations of
the model. That is, the adversary can compute any function
overWandxgiven the model. The most straightforward
functions are the outputs of the hidden layers, hi(x)on the
inputx. As a simple extension, the attacker can extend black-
box membership inference attacks (which are limited to the
model’s output) to the outputs of all activation functions o f
the model. However, this does not necessarily contain all th e
useful information for membership inference. Notably, the
model output and activation functions could generalize if t he
model is well regularized. Thus, there might not be much
difference, in distribution, between the activation funct ions of a
model on its training versus unseen data. This can signiﬁcan tly
limit the power of the inference attacks (as we also show in
our evaluations).
What we suggest is to exploit the algorithm used to train
deep learning models: the stochastic gradient descent (SGD )
algorithm. Let L(f(x;W),y)be the loss function for the
classiﬁcation model f. During the training, the SGD algorithm
minimizes the empirical expectation of the loss function ov er
the training set D:
min
WE(x,y)∼D/bracketleftbig
L(f(x;W),y)/bracketrightbig
(1)
The SGD algorithm solves this minimization by repeatedly
updating parameters, W, towards reducing the loss on small
randomly selected subsets of D. Thus, for any data record in
the training dataset, the gradient of the loss∂L
∂Wover the data
record is pushed towards zero, after each round of training.
This is exactly what we can exploit to extract information
about a model’s training data.
For a target data record (x,y), the adversary can compute
the loss of the model L(f(x;W),y), and can compute the
gradients of the loss with respect to all parameters∂L
∂W
using a simple back-propagation algorithm. Given the large
number of parameters used in deep neural networks (millions
of parameters), the vector with such a signiﬁcantly large
dimension cannot properly generalize over the training dat a
(which in many cases is an order of magnitude smaller in
size). Therefore, the distribution of the model’s gradient s on
members of its training data, versus non-members, is likely
to be distinguishable. This can help the adversary to run
an accurate membership inference attack, even though the
classiﬁcation model (with respect to its predictions) is we ll-
generalized.
Inference model. We illustrate the membership inference
attack in Figure 1. The signiﬁcance of gradient (as well as
activation) computations for a membership inference attac k
varies over the layers of a deep neural network. The ﬁrst laye rs
tend to contain less information about the speciﬁc data poin ts
in the training set, compared to non-member data record from
the same underlying distribution. We can provide the gradie nts
and activations of each layer as separate inputs to the attac ker,
4