arXiv:1812.00910v2  [stat.ML]  6 Jun 2020Comprehensive Privacy Analysis of Deep Learning:
Passive and Active White-box Inference Attacks
against Centralized and Federated Learning
Milad Nasr
University of Massachusetts Amherst
milad@cs.umass.eduReza Shokri
National University of Singapore
reza@comp.nus.edu.sgAmir Houmansadr
University of Massachusetts Amherst
amir@cs.umass.edu
Abstract —Deep neural networks are susceptible to various
inference attacks as they remember information about their
training data. We design white-box inference attacks to per form
a comprehensive privacy analysis of deep learning models. W e
measure the privacy leakage through parameters of fully tra ined
models as well as the parameter updates of models during
training. We design inference algorithms for both centrali zed and
federated learning, with respect to passive and active infe rence
attackers, and assuming different adversary prior knowled ge.
We evaluate our novel white-box membership inference attacks
against deep learning algorithms to trace their training da ta
records. We show that a straightforward extension of the kno wn
black-box attacks to the white-box setting (through analyz ing the
outputs of activation functions) is ineffective. We theref ore design
new algorithms tailored to the white-box setting by exploit ing
the privacy vulnerabilities of the stochastic gradient des cent
algorithm, which is thealgorithm used to train deep neural
networks. We investigate the reasons why deep learning mode ls
may leak information about their training data. We then show
that even well-generalized models are signiﬁcantly suscep tible
to white-box membership inference attacks, by analyzing st ate-
of-the-art pre-trained and publicly available models for t he
CIFAR dataset. We also show how adversarial participants,
in the federated learning setting, can successfully run act ive
membership inference attacks against other participants, even
when the global model achieves high prediction accuracies.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Deep neural networks have shown unprecedented gener-
alization for various learning tasks, from image and speech
recognition to generating realistic-looking data. This su ccess
has led to many applications and services that use deep learn -
ing algorithms on large-dimension (and potentially sensit ive)
user data, including user speeches, images, medical record s,
ﬁnancial data, social relationships, and location data poi nts.
In this paper, we are interested in answering the following
critical question: What is the privacy risk of deep learning
algorithms to individuals whose data is used for training de ep
neural networks? In other words, how much is the information
leakage of deep learning algorithms about their individual
training data samples?
We deﬁne privacy-sensitive leakage of a model, about its
training data, as the information that an adversary can lear n
from the model about them, which he is not able to infer from
other models that are trained on other data from the same
distribution. This distinguishes between the information thatwe can learn from the model about the data population, and
the information that the model leaks about the particular da ta
samples which are in its training set. The former indicates
utility gain, and the later reﬂects privacy loss. We design
inference attacks to quantify such privacy leakage.
Inference attacks on machine learning algorithms fall into
two fundamental and related categories: tracing (a.k.a. mem-
bership inference) attacks, and reconstruction attacks [1]. In
a reconstruction attack, the attacker’s objective is to inf er
attributes of the records in the training set [2], [3]. In a
membership inference attack, however, the attacker’s obje ctive
is to infer if a particular individual data record was includ ed in
the training dataset [4], [5], [6]. This is a decisional prob lem,
and its accuracy directly demonstrates the leakage of the mo del
about its training data. We thus choose this attack as the bas is
for our privacy analysis of deep learning models.
Recent works have studied membership inference attacks
against machine learning models in the black-box setting,
where the attacker can only observe the model predictions [6 ],
[7]. The results of these works show that the distribution of
the training data as well as the generalizability of the mode l
signiﬁcantly contribute to the membership leakage. Partic u-
larly, they show that overﬁtted models are more susceptible to
membership inference attacks than generalized models. Suc h
black-box attacks, however, might not be effective against deep
neural networks that generalize well (having a large set of
parameters). Additionally, in a variety of real-world sett ings,
the parameters of deep learning algorithms are visible to th e
adversaries, e.g., in a federated learning setting where mu ltiple
data holders collaborate to train a global model by sharing t heir
parameter updates with each other through an aggregator.
Our contributions. In this paper, we present a comprehensive
framework for the privacy analysis of deep neural networks,
using white-box membership inference attacks. We go beyond
membership inference attacks against fully-trained model s.
We take all major scenarios where deep learning is used
for training and ﬁne-tuning or updating models, with one
or multiple collaborative data holders, when attacker only
passively observes the model updates or actively inﬂuences
the target model in order to extract more information, and
for attackers with different types of prior knowledge. Desp ite
1