Speech-XLNet: Unsupervised Acoustic Model Pretraining
For Self-Attention Networks
Xingchen Song1;#, Guangsen Wang4;#, Yiheng Huang3, Zhiyong Wu1;2;, Dan Su3, Helen Meng1;2
1Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
2The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong SAR, China
3Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China4Salesforce Research Asia, Singapore
sxc19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, fzywu,hmmengg@se.cuhk.edu.hk,
guangsen.wang@salesforce.com, farnoldhuang,dansu g@tencent.com
Abstract
Self-attention network (SAN) can beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from the
bi-directional representation learning through unsupervised pre-
training paradigms such as BERT and XLNet. In this paper,
we present an XLNet-like pretraining scheme “Speech-XLNet”
to learn speech representations with self-attention networks
(SANs). Firstly, we ﬁnd that by shufﬂing the speech frame or-
ders, Speech-XLNet serves as a strong regularizer which en-
courages the SAN network to make inferences by focusing
on global structures through its attention weights. Secondly,
Speech-XLNet also allows the model to explore bi-directional
context information while maintaining the autoregressive train-
ing manner. Visualization results show that our approach can
generalize better with more ﬂattened and widely distributed op-
timas compared to the conventional approach. Experimental
results on TIMIT demonstrate that Speech-XLNet greatly im-
proves hybrid SAN/HMM in terms of both convergence speed
and recognition accuracy. Our best systems achieve a relative
improvement of 15.2% on the TIMIT task. Besides, we also
apply our pretrained model to an End-to-End SAN with WSJ
dataset and WER is reduced by up to 68% when only a few
hours of transcribed data is used.
Index Terms : speech recognition, self-attention, acoustic mod-
eling, unsupervised learning
1. Introduction
Recently, unsupervised representation learning paradigms such
as BERT [1], XLNet [2] have been highly successful for lan-
guage modeling with self-attention network (SAN) such as
transformer [3]. More speciﬁcally, SAN can beneﬁt from the
bi-directional context representation learning through unsuper-
vised pretraining with large-scale unlabeled data before ﬁnetun-
ing with labeled data. For automatic speech recognition (ASR),
SANs have been introduced for acoustic modeling in either at-
tention framework (also known as speech transformer [4]) or
with CTC loss [5, 6].
Unsupervised speech representation learning has also been
investigated by learning to predict the future either in latent
space [7, 8] or real frames [9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. The pre-
trained networks are then used as feature extractors ahead of
various downstream tasks, such as speaker and phone recog-
nition [9, 10], emotion recognition [11] and speech recogni-
tion [7, 8, 12, 13]. Among those works, Autoregressive Predic-
tive Coding (APC) was ﬁrst employed in [9] for speech recogni-
# Work done when the author was in Tencent AI Lab. * Corre-
sponding author.tion, where an RNN-based model was pretrained in an autore-
gressive (AR) manner to encode temporal information of past
acoustic sequence. Wav2vec [7] proposed a multi-layer convo-
lutional neural network optimized via a noise contrastive binary
classiﬁcation, which is also uni-directional. The constraints on
AR models are two-fold: 1) Because neighboring speech frames
are highly correlated, exploiting such local smoothness might
be already enough to predict next frames. Therefore, with-
out regularization, the pretraining process may have difﬁcul-
ties in capturing global structures. 2) AR pretraining also suf-
fers from the lack of bi-directional context information which is
helpful in sequence-to-sequence tasks. Unlike left-to-right uni-
directional approaches that only consider past sequences, The
works of [8, 10, 13] proposed a BERT-like autoencoding (AE)
scheme to train a bi-directional speech representation model.
However, the zero-masked frames used by BERT during pre-
training are absent from real data in the ﬁnetuning process, thus
lead to a pretrain-ﬁnetune discrepancy [2]. Moreover, BERT as-
sumes that the predicted frames are independent of each other
given the unmasked frames, so it is unable to model the joint
probability distributions using the product rule as used in the
AR models [2].
Given the success of XLNet [2] in language modeling, in
this paper, we present “Speech-XLNet”, a permutation-based
AR acoustic model pretraining scheme for SANs. Instead of
using a ﬁxed forward order as in AR models [7, 9, 11], Speech-
XLNet maximizes the expected log likelihood of a speech fea-
ture sequence with respect to all possible permutations of the
factorization order. We conjecture that by shufﬂing the frame
orders, the permutation helps to capture bi-directional contex-
tual information and global structures, leveraging the best of
both AE acoustic modeling and AR while avoiding their draw-
backs.
We evaluated the proposed method on two systems. For hy-
brid SAN/HMM, we reduce phone error rate (PER) from 15.1%
to 12.8% on TIMIT-test. For end-to-end (E2E) model, we ob-
tain relative word error rate reduction (WERR) from 68.3% to
8.5% on WSJ-eval92 when the amount of labeled WSJ-si284
increased from 7h to 81h. Besides, we also provide some vi-
sualizations to demonstrate the generalization properties of our
proposed method.
2. Related work
The most related work to this paper is XLNet [2]. Our scheme
is different from XLNet mainly in three aspects. 1) We don’t
use the next sentence prediction and segment recurrence mecha-
nism as mentioned in [2], both methods are used to extract long-arXiv:1910.10387v2  [cs.CL]  22 May 2020