Our goal is to measure the baseline performance of GPT-4 on medical multiple-choice questions
(MCQs) using a simple approach, without resorting to complex methods such as chain-of-thought
prompting [WWS+22b], retrieval augmented generation [NHB+21], or ensembling strategies [WWS+22a].
In prior work, these methods have shown to enhance the performance of LLMs on medical MCQs
considerably[SAT+22, WWS+22b]. However, we show that GPT-4 can attain outstanding results even
without these techniques, exceeding both human performance levels and that of other models employing
sophisticated prompting methods. We leave exploration of the larger space of performance optimization
to future work.
2.3 Model Comparison
We evaluate both GPT-4 and its predecessor model, GPT-3.5, against all benchmark datasets studied
in this paper. For each model, we consider both a zero-shot and 5-shot prompt following the template
described in Figure 2.1. For zero-shot evaluations, we directly report accuracy on each dataset. In the
5-shot setting, we report leave-one-out cross validation (LOOCV) [HTFF09] accuracy, where for each
evaluation sample, we draw the 5 few-shot exemplars randomly from the remainder of the dataset. We
also incorporate results reported in the literature from other models evaluated on the same datasets,
including ChatGPT, InstructGPT, Flan-PaLM 540B, and Med-PaLM. We note that Flan-PaLM 540B
and Med-PaLM are currently unavailable for public consumption; therefore, any results reported on
these models are sourced directly from [SAT+22].
3 Performance of GPT-4 on Medical Competency Exams
We analyze model performance on two sets of ocial practice materials for the United States Medical
Licensing Examination (USMLE). USMLE is a three-step examination program employed to assess clin-
ical competency. Licensure for independent provision of healthcare in the United States requires passing
the exam sequence. Each step marks a milestone in medical training. Step 1 of the USMLE exami-
nation is typically taken by medical students after completing their preclinical training. Step 1 covers
core clinical knowledge, including pathology and physiology, and the basis for medical conditions. Step
2, taken at the completion of an MD program, tests clinical understanding by probing the test-takers'
knowledge about diagnosis and patient management. Scores on Step 2 are often considered in decisions
about interviews and acceptance into residency programs. Step 3 is the nal examination in the USMLE
sequence. The exam assesses medical residents' ability to apply their working knowledge of medicine
in the unsupervised practice of medicine. The test probes working clinical and biomedical knowledge
deemed as essential for taking on independent responsibility for providing general medical care. Passing
performance on Step 3 is required for being licensed to practice medicine without supervision.
We emphasize that the materials we used in this section of our benchmarks are ocially purchased
and sourced from the National Board of Medical Examiners (NBME), which is one of the organizations
that develops and administers the USMLE. While some publicly available datasets and papers rely on
unocial, third-party sources to approximate USMLE performance (e.g., the MedQA dataset1, evaluated
in section 4), we believe the USMLE Sample Exam and USMLE Self Assessment are among the most
authentic sources of exam questions available for this type of study. More details about the datasets
can be found in Appendix A, with concerns about model memorization discussed in Section 6.2.
1See the discussion about MedQA and other unocial datasets from the USMLE: https://www.usmle.org/usmle-
program-discusses-chatgpt
5