Capabilities of GPT-4 on Medical Challenge Problems
Harsha Nori1, Nicholas King1, Scott Mayer McKinney2,
Dean Carignan1, and Eric Horvitz1
1Microsoft
2OpenAI
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in natural language
understanding and generation across various domains, including medicine. We present a compre-
hensive evaluation of GPT-4 [Ope23], a state-of-the-art LLM, on medical competency examinations
and benchmark datasets. GPT-4 is a general-purpose model that is not specialized for medical prob-
lems through training or engineered to solve clinical tasks. Our analysis covers two sets of ocial
practice materials for the United States Medical Licensing Examination (USMLE), a three-step
examination program used to assess clinical competency and grant licensure in the United States.
We also evaluate performance on the MultiMedQA suite of benchmark datasets. Beyond measur-
ing model performance, experiments were conducted to investigate the in
uence of test questions
containing both text and images on model performance, probe for memorization of content during
training, and study calibration of the probabilities, which is of critical importance in high-stakes
applications like medicine. Our results show that GPT-4, without any specialized prompt crafting,
exceeds the passing score on USMLE by over 20 points and outperforms earlier general-purpose
models (GPT-3.5) as well as models specically ne-tuned on medical knowledge (Med-PaLM, a
prompt-tuned version of Flan-PaLM 540B). In addition, GPT-4 is signicantly better calibrated
than GPT-3.5, demonstrating a much-improved ability to predict the likelihood that its answers
are correct. We also explore the behavior of the model qualitatively by presenting a case study that
shows the ability of GPT-4 to explain medical reasoning, personalize explanations to students, and
interactively craft new counterfactual scenarios around a medical case. Implications of the ndings
are discussed for potential uses of GPT-4 in medical education, assessment, and clinical practice,
with appropriate attention to challenges of accuracy and safety.
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have exhibited a remarkable ability to interpret and generate sequences
across a wide array of domains, such as natural language, computer code, and protein sequences. Nu-
merous powerful models are based on the transformer architecture [VSP+17], adapted to language and
trained in a self-supervised manner [RNS+18, DCLT18]. Scores on a variety of benchmarks have gen-
erally improved with scale, involving increasing model size, dataset size, and the amount of training
computation in tandem [KMH+20, LBL+22]. The empirical ndings resonate with a theoretical anal-
ysis [BS21] which shows the necessity of scale for robustness of inferences from large neural models
[BS21].
1arXiv:2303.13375v2  [cs.CL]  12 Apr 2023