GPT-4: Solving a question without seeing media.
QUESTION: A 45-year-old man comes to the physician because of a 10-year history of heartburn that occurs after he
eats late at night or consumes spicy food. He has had no weight loss or diculty swallowing. He takes over-the-counter
antacids as needed, but they relieve his discomfort only temporarily. Physical examination shows no abnormalities. An
endoscopy is done. The distal esophagus is shown in the photograph. Which of the following is the most likely cause of
this patient's symptoms?
ANSWER CHOICES: \A": \Defect in secretin production" \B": \Excessive gastrin production" \C": \Excessive tran-
sient lower esophageal relaxations" \D": \Failure of primary esophageal peristalsis" \E": \Failure of saliva production"
ANSWER: C
|{
Q: \You are a large language model that just answered the following question. Why did you pick the answer choice C?"
A: \The answer choice C,\Excessivetransient lower esophageal relaxations," isthemost likely cause ofthispatient's
symp toms because itisthemost common cause ofgastroesophageal re
uxdisease (GERD). GERD isacondition in
which stom achacid
ows back intotheesoph agus,causingheart burn andother symp toms. Thelower esophageal sphinc -
ter(LES) isaringofmuscleatthebottomoftheesoph agusthat normally prevents stom achacidfrom 
owingback into
theesoph agus.Tran sient lower esophageal relaxations (TLESRs) areepisodes inwhich theLES relaxes inappropriately,
allowingstom achacid to
ow back intotheesoph agus. TLESRs arethemost common cause ofGERD, andthey are
oftentriggered byfactorssuch aseatinglateatnight orconsumingspicy food, asdescribed inthepatient's history. The
other answer choices arelesslikely tobethecause ofthispatient's symp toms."
|{
Q: \Doesn't the question mention a photograph? How did you come up with the answer without seeing the photo?"
A: \You arecorrectthat thequestion mentions aphotograph ofthedistalesoph agus. However, theanswer choice C,
\Excessivetransient lower esophageal relaxations," isthemost likely cause ofthispatient's symp toms based onthe
clinicalhistory provided inthequestion, regardlessofthendingsonthephotograph. Thepatient's 10-year history of
heart burn that occurs aftereatinglateatnight orconsumingspicy food, andthetemporary reliefofsymp toms with
antacids, areconsistentwith adiagnosisofgastroesophageal re
uxdisease (GERD). Themost common cause ofGERD
isexcessivetransient lower esophageal relaxations (TLESRs), which iswhy answer choice Cisthemost likely cause of
thispatient's symp toms. Thephotograph ofthedistalesoph aguswould beusefulforconrmingthediagnosisofGERD
andassessingforanycomplications, butitisnotnecessary forselectingthemost likely cause ofthepatient's symp toms
based ontheclinicalhistory provided inthequestion."
Figure 3.1: GPT-4 is asked to answer and then explain how it (correctly) solved a question
which involves a photograph, without seeing the photo.
3.2 In
uence of Alignment and Safety Tuning
The results above demonstrate the capabilities of the publicly released version of GPT-4. As described
by [Ope23], GPT-4 was developed in two major phases. The pretraining phase focused on maximizing
the ability of the model to predict the next token in a document using a variety of data, both publicly
available and privately licensed. In a subsequent post-training phase, the model was ne-tuned using
RLHF [CLB+17] to enhance its ability to follow instructions and its propensity for producing fair and safe
outputs [OWJ+22]. Several stages of renement were aimed at minimizing undesirable behaviors such as
gender bias, toxic language and stereotyping, dangerous recommendations, and harmful manipulation.
OpenAI's experiments indicated that the RLHF-centric renement did not adversely aect the model's
capabilities on the exams they tested [Ope23].
8