Chain-of-Thought Prompt template for multiple choice questions
Question: {{question}}
Choices: {{answer_choices}}
Let's think step by step.
initialmodel generation
Therefore, among A through {{last_choice}} , the answer is
Figure 6.1: Two-stage chain-of-thought prompt template.
Few-shot example curation. The authors of [SAT+22] worked with a panel of qualied clinicians to
curate the best demonstration exemplars for the few-shot prompts, with custom prompts being designed
for each dataset. We conducted light experiments comparing the exact curated few-shot exemplars
sourced by [SAT+22] with our baseline random exemplar selection strategy on GPT-4 and GPT-3.5.
The performance dierence between the two modes was negligible across the datasets we were able to
test on. This nding suggests that expert exemplar curation may not be necessary to achieve strong
performance in the latest generation of LLMs. We leave deeper investigations of this phenomena to
future work.
DatasetGPT-4
(Random Exemplars)GPT-4
(Curated Exemplars)
MedQA US 5-option 78.63 78.24
MedQA US 4-option 81.38 82.33
MedMCQA 72.36 71.36
PubMedQA 74.40 74.00
Table 6: Random few-shot exemplar selection vs. expert curation.
6.2 Memorization
GPT-4's strong performance on benchmark datasets raises the possibility that the system is leveraging
memorization orleakage eects, which can arise when benchmark data is included in a model's training
set. Given that LLMs are trained on internet-scale datasets, benchmark data may inadvertently appear
in the model's training set. As the details of the training data for GPT-4 are not public, other methods
can be used to probe for memorization. We devised a heuristic algorithm to help identify potential
signs of leakage through black-box evaluation of the model. With this approach, we prompt a model to
generate a long set of near-exact matches to a given data sample and take similarity of the generation
to the initial data as evidence of memorization. The method, which we refer to as memorization eects
Levenshtein detector (MELD), can provide evidence that specic data is likely to be part of a model's
training set. Details of the procedure are provided in Appendix B.
We note that MELD has high precision but unknown recall. That is, if MELD detects a potential
match, it is likely to be in the training set and memorized by the model. However, if our algorithm does
not detect a match, it does not necessarily mean that the data was excluded from the training set.
MELD is unable to nd evidence of training data memorization in the ocial USMLE datasets
we tested. Conversely, when we use MELD to test other popular datasets like SQuAD 2.0 and the
Newsgroup Sentiment Analysis datasets, we are able to nd strong evidence of existence in the training
13