datasets. For example, GPT-4 is able to regenerate questions from SQuAD 2.0 with 99% overlap 17%
of the time, while it is completely unable to regenerate samples with even 50% overlap on either of the
USMLE datasets. We stress that this does not mean GPT-4 has not seen this data before, only that we
are unable to nd evidence of it through our blackbox testing method.
Given the ndings obtained via the MELD procedure, and our sourcing of USMLE examination
materials that are held behind an NMBE paywall, it is unlikely that ocial content in our examinations
were in GPT-4's training data. We further note that, even if contamination is present, GPT-4's per-
formance on USMLE examinations may not be signicantly boosted. We note that OpenAI found that
some contamination was prevalent across a large suite of publicly available benchmarks, but that the
model did not perform dierently on contaminated and uncontaminated data samples for the problems
that were studied [Ope23].
6.3 Focus on multiple choice
The benchmarking portions of this paper primarily focus on evaluating multiple choice exam questions,
which constitute the majority but not entirety of the USMLE examinations. Specically, Step 3 of the
USMLE also includes 13 computer-based case simulations (CCS) that require candidates to manage
patient care in a dynamic and interactive setting. While we qualitatively assess a hypothetical case
simulation in Section 7 below, quantitative metrics on interactive challenges were not considered in the
benchmarks. Furthermore, while we use a mixture of ocial and unocial sources of multiple choice
questions to test GPT-4, we do not have access to the actual USMLE questions used in recent exams or
their scoring criteria. Therefore, the metrics we report may not be indicative of the true performance
of GPT-4 on a live USMLE exam.
7 Beyond Correct Answers: Probing Capabilities
To move beyond statistical measures on exams and other benchmarks on medical challenge problems,
we can qualitatively explore several capabilities of GPT-4 by extending the challenge problems into
interactive sessions. Beyond providing insights about the power of model, such extensions demonstrate
directions with new forms of educational experiences and clinical applications that LLMs could enable.
We now share an illustrative case study of an interactive session nucleated by a single test question
that demonstrates GPT-4's capabilities for education. We initially provide GPT-4 with a prompt and
then simulate a dialog between the model and a medical student. On top of performing well on multiple-
choice exam questions, GPT-4 is able to provide rich explanations to the student about their errors.
The model also exhibits the ability to hypothesize why the student may have made a mistake, and even
conducts counterfactual analyses, delivering variants of the cinical problem with minimal rewrites to help
simulate alternative scenarios. We note that the veracity of information generated in such interactions,
as well as in real-world applications, cannot be trusted without review and conrmation by experts. We
return to concerns with accuracy in Section 8.
14