Over the last several years, LLMs trained on massive, cross-disciplinary corpora have become potent
building blocks in the creation of task-focused systems [BHA+21]. Methods for rening the models
toward a particular domain include ne-tuning with specialized datasets drawn from target applications
and general methods for steering the behavior of the models, such as reinforcement learning with hu-
man feedback (RLHF), which guides the system toward a better understanding of end-users' requests
[CLB+17, BJN+22].
There has also been great interest in the ability of LLMs to make useful inferences for a broad
range of specialized tasks without dedicated ne-tuning. The performance of general-purpose LLMs
using few- or even zero-shot prompting highlights their potential for assisting with tasks across problem
types, specialty areas, and disciplines [BMR+20]. Recently, researchers have investigated benchmarks
that provide insight into how LLMs encode clinical knowledge and might be harnessed to augment the
practice of medicine. Here we compare the performance of the recently released (text-only) GPT-4 model
with its predecessors in the GPT family on medical challenge problems. While details on measures of
scale for GPT-4, including the number of model parameters and the size and scope of training data,
have not been made public, it has been reported that both dimensions are signicantly bigger than for
GPT-3.5, the model behind ChatGPT [Ope23].
Exploration of the capabilities of LLMs on medical problem solving is part of a long-standing research
program on AI in medicine, going back to the classic work of Ledley and Lusted [LL59]. Over the
decades since, explorations of computational methods for assisting physicians have been marked by
shifting enthusiasm for dierent representations and reasoning methods, including core probabilistic
and decision-theoretic methods (e.g., [GB68, HHN92]), rule-based production systems (e.g., [Sho77,
BS84]), semantic graphs (e.g., [PSS81]), supervised learning from databases of medical information
(e.g., [WGH16, HHPS15, ELS+20, CLG+15]), and deep neural network models (e.g., [EKN+17, SHJ+17,
RIZ+17, MSG+20]). While the 
urry of eorts to use deep learning to attain human-level performance
on medical tasks began in the eld of computer vision for diagnostics, it has since grown to encompass
benchmarks for more general clinical reasoning mediated through natural language. The models deployed
in this context may be trained on specic medical corpora or foundation models trained on massive
amounts of general language and/or visual information and then adapted to medical data through
dedicated ne-tuning.
Our key contribution is to investigate the capabilities of GPT-4 on medical challenge problems. To
establish strong baselines for comparison, we evaluate GPT-4 against GPT-3.5 and reported results from
Flan-PaLM 540B. Our goal is to establish \out-of-the-box" performance numbers for GPT-4. To that
end, we use the simplest prompts possible (a zero-shot and randomly selected 5-shot prompt with direct
inference of the answer) and nd that GPT-4 obtains best-in-class performance without any need for
elaborate prompting techniques or domain-specic ne-tuning.
We begin by interrogating the performance of the models on challenge problems developed to assess
competencies of medical students and residents. This exploration consists of a comprehensive evaluation
of the performance of GPT-4 on Steps 1-3 of the United States Medical Licensing Examination (USMLE).
The exam is part of the ocial accreditation protocol though which medical licensure is determined in
the U.S. Our results are based on sample exams and self-assessment materials ocially published by the
National Board of Medical Examiners (NBME). The ndings show that zero-shot GPT-4 signicantly
outperforms earlier models, achieving an average score of 86.65% and 86.7% on the Self-Assessment
and Sample Exam of the USMLE tests, respectively, compared to 53.61% and 58.78% for GPT-3.5.
After reviewing results for the USMLE studies, we examine several other medical benchmarks. Zero-
shot GPT-4 signicantly outperforms GPT-3.5 and the recently introduced Flan-PaLM 540B model
on MultiMedQA[SAT+22], a suite of commonly used benchmark datasets in the literature on machine
learning for medicine.
2