the accuracy of machine recommendations and their in
uence on decision makers. Methods and metrics
have been developed for characterizing the performance of systems created via traditional supervised
machine learning. With these applications, characterizing overall accuracy of recommendations, as well
as context- and instance-specic rates of error [BEB+19, Mic23, NGP23, NJKC19], are enabled by the
closed-world of well-dened, highly-focused problem areas, such as detecting a specic type of cancer
[EKN+17, MSG+20], or predicting specic outcomes like readmissions [BBG+14], infection [WGH16],
sepsis [AHS+22], and in-hospital deterioration [ELS+20]. Unfortunately, similar characterizations of
reliability and condence are not yet available for the massive, open-world of generations that are output
from foundation models in response to prompts. Diculties with evaluation of the output of LLMs in
supporting real-world decisions include the challenge of stability and robustness of recommendations
and inferences generated in response to custom-tailored prompting in the wild. Generations are often
highly sensitive to details of the wording of prompts. Stability of generations can also be sensitive to
model revision that might be ongoing, including rebuilding or ne-tuning of models based on fresh data
[SNK+20].
While large language models show promise with providing support in healthcare administration and
delivery, caution is needed to mitigate potential negative in
uences of over-reliance on model-generated
recommendations. Signicant risks with uses of large language models include inaccurate recommen-
dations about rankings (e.g., with dierential diagnoses) and sequencing (e.g., information gathering,
testing), as well as blatant factual errors, particularly with important omissions and with erroneous gen-
erations, often referred to as hallucinations . LLM hallucinations can be particularly dicult to detect
given the high linguistic 
uency of the models and the ability to interleave inaccurate and ungrounded
assertions with accurate generations. Such hallucinations can include incorrect or misleading medical
information which necessitates careful review and fact checking. Thus, extreme caution is required when
using LLMs in high-stakes medical applications, where incorrect or incomplete information could have
serious consequences for patient care.
Additional research is needed to address the veracity of model output. Directions include employing
search and retrieval to help ground generations in the literature, doing checks of self-consistency, per-
forming evaluation studies to characterize the overall statistics of accurate generations, conditioned on
dierent contexts and usages, and renements of methods that generate and harness accurate calibration
signals. Trusted calibration information can be harnessed in numerous ways to enable practitioners to
better understand and assess model outputs[BNK+19b, BNK+19a, WHK20]. More generally, innovation
with human-computer interaction will be valuable in the elding of applications of LLMs in healthcare
[FCL+22, AWV+19, Hor99, MBFH22].
Healthcare providers relying on GPT-4 and other models will need to adhere to the highest standards
for verifying information generated by the model. Best practices for quality assurance must be developed
and shared among medical professionals to ensure safe and eective use. In the context of erroneous
omissions and inclusions, healthcare professionals and other consumers of health-related content will
need to be educated on the challenges with reliability and the need for ongoing vigilance. Education,
awareness, and promoting guidelines for best practices may help to minimize safety challenges.
Risks of Bias. Studies have revealed biases in the delivery of healthcare, noting disparities in care
received by people experiencing marginalization [CSM18, HCL+15]. Such biases in healthcare delivery
have been demonstrated to in
uence the systems and models that are developed to provide guidance
to healthcare organizations and practitioners. Without study to address and mitigate bias in data and
the systems constructed from that data, we risk elding systems that propagate long-term disparities
and inaccuracies [OPVM19]. Exploration of biases in healthcare and the potential re
ection of these
20