GPT-4: Counterfactual rewrites (continued)
interaction continued
...
!Can you shift the labs to make AKI even more likely?
Ofcourse, here's therevised case with changes tothelabresults tomake acute kidney injury (AKI) even
more likely:
A28-year-oldman comes totheofcewith anepisode ofblood inhisurine. Helived insub-SaharanAfrica untilhe
came totheUSA 6months agoforgraduateschool. Temperature is37.0C,pulse is60/min, respirations are16/min,
andblood pressure is110/84 mmHg.
General Serum Urine
Hemoglobin 12.3 g/dL Urea nitrogen 120 mg/dL Blood 3+
Hematocrit 37% Creatinine 6.5 mg/dL RBC 200/hpf
Leukocyte count 9,800/mm3 WBC 100/hpf
Segmented neutrophils 60% RBC casts absent
Bands 3% WBC casts absent
Eosinophils 2%
Lymphocytes 30%
Monocytes 5%
With these changes tothelabresults, acute kidney injury (AKI) becomes even more likely forthefollowing
reasons:
The patient's urea nitrogen(120 mg/dL) and creatinine (6.5 mg/dL) levelsarenow significantly elevated, which
indicates amore severe kidneydysfunctionthat isconsistent with AKI.
The leuko cyte count isstill slightly elevated butcloser tothenormal range, and theeosinophils percentagehas
decreased, makinganinfectious orparasitic cause, such asschistosomiasis,lesslikely.
The recent NSAID useremains animportant riskfactorforAKI, asthese medications cancause kidneyinjury by
reducingblood 
ow tothekidneys.
Insummary, with thechanges made tothepatient's history andlabresults, acute kidneyinjury becomes themost
likely explanationforthepatient's symp toms andlabndings. Thesignificant elevationinurea nitrogenandcreatinine
levels,along with therecent NSAID use,further supports AKI astheprimary diagnosis.
Figure 7.5: Per user request, GPT-4 provides a sophisticated reformulation of the question
focused by altering lab result values. (Case study continues in Appendix D.)
8 From Benchmarks to Real World
There is a large gap between competency on prociency examinations and other medical benchmarks and
the successful elding and use of GPT-4 in clinical applications. GPT-4 and its successors have the long-
term potential to exert a transformative in
uence on the eld of medicine. Creative and appropriate
uses of well-calibrated output could enhance the quality and reduce the costs of patient care. The
performance on benchmarks, in addition to qualitative probes of its clinical capabilities, highlights the
potential to assist physicians and other healthcare professionals with numerous aspects of healthcare
delivery. The demonstrated competencies, particularly on USMLE Step 3, suggest that GPT-4 and its
successors can make contributions to clinical reasoning and daily work
ows of medical practice. Beyond
uses in decision support, memory jogging, and administrative tasks, GPT-4 and its successors may one
day assist investigators with clinical and biomedical research.
Risks of erroneous generations. Great care must be taken with the introduction of various forms of
automation in healthcare, including uses of machine learning [WSS+19, CLG+15]. A critical concern is
19