Implications for the future. The leap in performance on medical challenge problems with the move
from GPT 3.5 to GPT-4 suggests that we can achieve impressive gains on intensive real-world challenges
with scale{and that we will likely continue to see advances with larger models for handling complex,
real-world problems. The rate of progress of LLMs has implications beyond the medical profession.
As observed in [SS18], large swaths of modern society are predicated on a \grand bargain" in which
professional classes invest years or even decades in technical education and training and are, in turn,
aorded certain benets by citizens and governments, including the exclusive right to practice in their
eld, social prestige, and above-average compensation. Technical disruption of this social contract can
have implications not only for the medical eld but for numerous other knowledge-intensive professions
including law, banking, engineering, accounting, and others.
9 Conclusion
We presented a comparative evaluation of GPT-4, GPT-3.5 and Flan-PaLM 540B on medical compe-
tency examinations and benchmark datasets. We explored zero-shot performance as a baseline. We rst
focused on answers to questions that are representative of those included in USMLE Step 1, Step 2, and
Step 3 exams, certication tests given to medical students and residents in the U.S. We studied per-
formance on questions relying solely on text versus questions referring to visual media. We found that
GPT-4 signicantly outperforms GPT-3.5 and Flan-PaLM 540B. Next, we demonstrated that GPT-4
signicantly surpasses GPT-3.5's performance on the MultiMedQA dataset. The model also outper-
formed Flan-PaLM 540B on all but one dataset. Our work also explored the calibration of the model's
output probabilities, highlighting the importance of calibration for medical applications. We provided
sample output that demonstrates GPT-4's capacity for reasoning about the concepts tested in USMLE
challenge problems, including explanation, counterfactual reasoning, dierential diagnosis, and testing
strategies. Finally, we touched on broader implications of applications of GPT-4 in medicine. We main-
tain that GPT-4's exceptional performance on benchmarks serves as an indicator of its potential for
being harnessed in medical education and for aiding healthcare professionals with numerous aspects of
healthcare delivery. Nonetheless, considering the possibility of errors and the challenges in assessing
performance in real-world scenarios, it is vital to practice prudence, seek to develop and evaluate appro-
priate uses, and pursue technical innovations to optimize advantages and mitigate risks associated with
applications.
Acknowledgments
We thank Miles Brundage, Pamela Mishkin, and Jack Rae for their feedback and assistance on this
eort. We are grateful for insights shared in earlier discussions by Rich Caruana, Scott Lundberg,
Matthew Lungren, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, and Nigam Shah.
References
[ABD+18] Alekh Agarwal, Alina Beygelzimer, Miroslav Dudik, John Langford, and Hanna Wallach.
A reductions approach to fair classication. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause, edi-
tors, Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 80 of
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 60{69. PMLR, 10{15 Jul 2018.
22