biases in AI systems come in the context of broader work on biases of AI systems. Several eorts
have demonstrated that the output of machine-learned models can be unfair and harmful to specic
groups of people, depending on backgrounds and demographics (e.g., [HZH17, BG18]). Progress has
been made on technical methods for detecting and mitigating harmful biases in task-specic systems
built via supervised machine learning (e.g., [ABD+18, KS21]). However, engineers and organizations
continue to face conceptual challenges with dening measures of fairness [JW21, BHN19].
We have a poor understanding of the biases accrued and transmitted by large-scale language models,
and how issues with fairness might arise for dierent types of healthcare-centric prompting and gen-
erations. In the absence of study, we must be wary of biases in both clinical practices and research
[AGHR22] with regard to race, socioeconomic background, gender, and other factors, which are laced
throughout the corpora used to train large-scale language models. Research is needed to understand
the fairness of healthcare-centric recommendations generated by LLMs.
In
uences on work
ows, tasks, and specialties. The competencies on the USMLE examinations
and other medical workloads suggest that GPT-4, properly harnessed with appropriate expert oversight,
can contribute to enabling precision clinical medicine. GPT-4 and its successors could be leveraged to
provide healthcare practitioners with analytics, reminders, and decision support, including assistance
with the formulation and revision of dierential diagnoses from patient history, physical ndings and
lab results, identication of relevant tests and their sequencing, and constructing therapy plans. With
eective management of errors, LLMs could help with memory jogging, alerting, and screening. As an
example, memory jogging might help to mitigate persistent challenges with adverse outcomes, including
those attributable to preventable human errors [BLS+23, Gri22] and diagnostic and therapeutic delays
[NTPB+22].
In the longer-term, GPT-4 and its descendants might be harnessed to shift the distribution of tasks
associated with daily 
ows of work for physicians and other healthcare practitioners in ways that reduce
the burden of programmatic, logistical, and administrative tasks. Reduction in the drudgery of writing
reports and performing other administrative tasks would permit healthcare providers to spend more time
on the uniquely human elements of the profession, such as patient engagement and coordinating and
collaborating with healthcare colleagues. The technology could also enable more time for physicians to
learn, re
ect, and engage in continuing medical education to become the best at what they are interested
in doing. In addition, LLMs could be harnessed to provide information, communication, screening, and
decision support in under-served regions. The models could help to raise the competency of physicians'
assistants and help with triage and communication with remote experts.
Social and societal issues. On a broader social and societal front, the capabilities demonstrated
by GPT-4 can in
uence decisions about the choice to pursue a medical career, the choice of residency
and ultimate speciality, and the sense of uniqueness of human contributions for today's healthcare
practitioners [Top19]. AI's accelerating performance on competency exams and other medical challenge
problems may contribute to the perception that the technology's inroads in medicine will eventually
devalue human intellect. Practitioners may be concerned about signicant shift in the way medical
specialties are practiced or valued. At earlier steps in the chain of training and commitment, AI's
growing competence could in
uence career choices in medicine, shifting perceptions of which tasks rely
on genuine human intellect. This may change decisions about medicine as a career path overall and, for
those already in medical training programs, their choice of speciality. Perhaps as early foreshadowing,
a recent study found that medical students' choice of radiology as a career is signicantly reduced by
their perception of the growing role of AI in radiology [RL22].
21