Beyond characterizing overall performance, our investigation covers several other facets of LLM
behavior in the medical domain. We study the performance of the text-only GPT-4 on examination
questions that are text-centric versus questions that rely on images. Given that reliable information
about the probability of correctness is critical in healthcare and other high-stakes applications, we
evaluate the calibration of the probabilities implicitly assigned to answers. We assess evidence that the
model has been exposed to (and memorized) the content of the examinations through its training data.
We further explore qualitative behavior of the model via a case study that demonstrates the capabilities
of GPT-4 to explain medical reasoning and interactively support students on counterfactual scenarios
around a medical case. Finally, we examine the implications of our ndings, including the potential
for GPT-4 and its successors to help with medical education and to provide assistance to healthcare
professionals, taking into consideration concerns related to accuracy, fairness, and broader impacts on
the practice of medicine. We particularly re
ect on the limitations of benchmark-based performance
evaluations, and discuss the precautions and advances needed to make use of models like GPT-4 in real
world settings. Signicant work remains to evaluate these systems comprehensively, and much caution
is needed. However, we expect multiple real world uses, such as lower stakes applications that include
expert oversight as part of generations and work
ows. In the longer-term, we see signicant potential
for GPT-4 and its successors to have a positive impact in medicine.
2 Methodology
While GPT-4 supports multi-modal capabilities [Ope23], our methodology focuses on a text-only version
of the model, referred to as GPT-4 (no vision) by OpenAI. For simplicity, all subsequent references to
GPT-4 in this paper refer to the text-only model without vision capabilities. Discussion of how the
text-only model performs on questions with images can be found in Section 3.1.1.
2.1 Datasets
To evaluate GPT-4, we consider six datasets that cover dierent aspects of medical knowledge and
reasoning. Two of these datasets, the USMLE Sample Exam and USMLE Self Assessments, are sourced
directly from the the National Board of Medical Examiners (NBME), the organization that governs and
administers the the examination process. The other four datasets, MedQA, PubMedQA, MedMCQA,
and MMLU, are publicly available benchmarks that contain questions based on medical literature,
clinical cases, and user-generated content. These four datasets have been widely used to benchmark
LLM performance on medical reasoning tasks. All four datasets constitute a large part of the recently
introduced \MultiMedQA" benchmark [SAT+22]. Details on each dataset are provided in Appendix A.
3