to the true positivity rate. We adapt our multiple-choice question-answering setting to this framework
by using the probability of the selected answer choice for each question. In Figure 5.1, we compare
GPT-4's calibration to that of GPT-3.5 on both ocial USMLE datasets. We nd that GPT-4 exhibits
signicantly better calibration than its predecessor on this type of data. For example, datapoints that
GPT-4 assigns an average probability of 0.96 tend to be correct 93% of the time. In contrast, datapoints
where GPT-3.5 assigns a similar probability are only correct 55% of the time.
We are only able to conduct this experiment in the multiple-choice question-answering setting where
we have the model score each option. Measuring calibration and probabilities of long-form generation
from generative models is an open area of research. However, our results on the multiple-choice problems
suggest that the probability calibration of language models may increase with scale.
6 Directions and Limitations
Our paper demonstrates the impressive potential of GPT-4 to answer multiple choice questions on the
USMLE, a medical licensing examination. We now review limitations and potential extensions of our
studies.
6.1 Richer Prompting Strategies
A key goal of this paper is to establish baseline model performance metrics|that is, to determine how
well GPT-4 can perform without requiring any specialized knowledge of LLMs and prompting . Histor-
ically, more sophisticated prompting methods like chain of thought prompting [WWS+22b, KGR+22],
ensemble approaches like self-consistency prompting [WWS+22a], or giving models access to informa-
tion retrieval tools [NHB+21] have all proven to signicantly improve performance. Furthermore, it is
possible that new prompting patterns that work optimally for a new model like GPT-4 have yet to be
discovered. It is very likely that careful exploration of prompting techniques and ne tuning can achieve
signicantly higher performance numbers. As solely maximizing benchmark performance is not the goal
of this paper, we largely leave those explorations to future work. We share the results of two preliminary
experiments we did below on chain-of-thought prompting and expert curation of few shot examples.
Chain of Thought. Following the work of [KGR+22] and [WWS+22b], we experiment with a two-
stage chain-of-thought prompt on the USMLE sample exam. We rst ask the model to \think step
by step" and lay out its reasoning. In a subsequent prompt, we then feed the entirety of the previous
generation to GPT-4 and ask for a nal prediction. An illustrative example of the template is shown in
Figure 6.1. As corroborated by other recent studies, we observe that basic chain-of-thought prompting
does not yield performance benets for GPT-4 on medical questions. However, as shown in [LHW22],
performance can vary signicantly based on the specic chain-of-thought prompt used, and it is possible
that a dierent prompt structure may yield stronger performance in future work.
12