•PubMedQA : PubMedQA contains tests requiring a model to answer yes, no, or maybe to biomed-
ical research questions when given context provided from PubMed abstracts [JDL+19]. There are
two settings for PubMedQA tests called reasoning-required and reasoning-free. In the reasoning-
free setting, a long-form answer that contains explanations of the abstracts is provided. We report
results for the reasoning-required setting, in which the model is only given context from abstracts
to use when answering the question. The yes, no, or maybe choices are formulated as a multiple
choice question, where A is yes, B is no, and C is maybe, matching the testing method done by
Li evin et al. [LHW22]
•MedMCQA : MedMCQA is a dataset of multiple choice questions sourced from mock exams and
published past exams of two Indian medical school entrance exams called AIIMS and NEET-PG
[PUS22]. The dev set contains 4183 questions, and the test set contains 6150 questions. Each
question has 4 choices.
•MMLU : MMLU is a large multiple choice question dataset spanning a wide variety of topics
[HBB+20]. MMLU has 57 subjects in total. Results of medicine related subjects are reported in
our benchmarks.
B Memorization analysis
The memorization eects Levenshtein detector (MELD) method works as follows: for each content
datapoint in a dataset, we partition the content in half. We pass in the rst half as context and ask
the model to generate up to the length of the second half. We then measure how similar the generated
content is to the held-out second half using Levenshtein distance ratio, which is dened as one minus the
ratio of Levenshtein distance to the maximum possible distance. We dene a near-exact match as having
a Levenshtein distance ratio of at least 0.95, meaning that less than 5% of the characters are dierent
between the generated and held out content. We measure the rate of near exact matches by computing
the percentage of datapoints that have a near-exact match in each dataset. While each individual sample
may not be regenerated exactly due to stochastics in the training process, the observed rate across the
entire dataset can provide strong empirical evidence that the model has seen the data before.
29