PersPective NaTurE CaTalysIscontrol the chemisorption behaviour, which corroborated earlier 
reports58,59. Notably, the GAM models suggested that the number of 
d electrons in the ligand metal describes the degree of Pauli repul -
sion between the alloy surface and the adsorbate. Specifically, the GAMs connected the opposite adsorption trends of electron-rich adsorbates, such as OH and Cl, compared with adsorbates that are 
relatively electron-poor, such as O and S, on platinum alloys to the 
number of ligand d electrons (Fig. 4e). A previous chemisorption study, which used a physics-based chemisorption model
60, attrib -
uted similar opposite trends in the chemisorption strength of OH and Cl compared with O and S on platinum alloys to Pauli repul
-
sion61. Additional analysis of adsorption trends on metals with 
completely full d bands, such as gold (Fig. 4f ), whose chemisorption 
trends should depend primarily on Pauli repulsion, corroborated 
this hypothesis as they mirrored the behaviour of the electron-rich 
adsorbates on platinum. We expect that modular ML models will be a valuable tool for catalysis researchers in the future, especially with the expanding availability of open-source software packages 
that contain these model classes, such as InterpretML
62.
Generally, interpretations can shed light on the physical correla -
tions between a catalyst’s performance and its geometric and chemi -
cal properties. Nonetheless, many of these methods require the 
catalysis researcher to interpret and validate the results to ensure that their ML models do not learn illogical causal connections. However, 
it is also possible to build models with an enforced causal structure 
to ensure that ML models will behave in a manner that is consis
-
tent with previous physical knowledge63–65. Recent work used such 
an approach to quantify and attribute the errors introduced during the construction of an activity volcano plot for the oxygen reduc
-
tion reaction (ORR) by platinum-group-metal-based catalysts63. 
Researchers used a probabilistic graphical model, represented by the directed graph in Fig. 4b , to enforce a causal structure between 
the primary microkinetic input (the oxygen binding energy) and potential error sources when predicting the optimal oxygen bind
-
ing energy for the ORR. The model accounted for errors in solva -
tion treatment, density functional theory (DFT), experiment and the empirical scaling correlations used to predict the activation and intermediate chemisorption energies. They found that the primary 
sources of error were errors in the DFT calculations and imper
-
fect correlations between OOH* and OH* binding energies and 
O* binding energies. There also exist methods, called causal infer -
ence methods, to determine causal structure from raw data alone66. 
Although there have only been limited applications of causal infer -
ence thus far in the physical sciences67, the diffusion of advances 
in causal inference to catalysis research is likely to have a notable impact.
In contrast to the information gap present when interpreting 
black-box models with grey-box methods, glass-box methods pro
-
vide a full-resolution explanation of their behaviour. As a result, glass-box methods are preferable for applications where develop
-
ing scientific insight is the central objective. Although glass-box models may have a worse predictive performance compared with black-box models in practice due to their functional forms that 
are constrained to enforce modularity, causal structure or simplic
-
ity, there is, in theory, no reason that glass-box models cannot be 
competitive in terms of predictive accuracy. For problems where the data are well structured and the features are physically linked to the 
target property, there are often little to no performance differences 
between black-box models and simpler glass-box models
39.
Challenges and opportunities for progress
Despite the successes of interpretable ML in catalysis thus far, the field is still nascent, with substantial challenges to be overcome for it to reach its full potential. Below we highlight the critical chal
-
lenges that are related to integration with experiment, dataset size, model reusability, and explaining interpretations. Addressing these 
 challenges will require close collaboration between experimental -
ists, theoreticians and computer scientists.
Integrating interpretable ML with experimental data. Most inter -
pretable ML studies in heterogeneous catalysis thus far have used 
computational datasets due to a lack of suitably large experimen -
tal datasets. Typical ML studies include 100–10,000 training data points
68, which can be prohibitively time-consuming to obtain 
experimentally. One possible avenue for constructing large experi -
mental datasets for interpretable ML studies is to data-mine the wealth of catalyst data already available in the literature. Despite this approach being the most straightforward because the data already 
exist, and such processes can be done by applying natural language 
processing (that is, text extraction
69), it is questionable if such an 
approach would yield a coherent dataset amenable to interpretable ML analysis. Data reporting in the field of heterogeneous catalysis 
often lacks common standards in both experimental operating con
-
ditions and catalyst characterization that may limit the interpret -
ability of insights gained from such a dataset. Another approach 
would be proliferating new combinatoric high-throughput catalyst synthesis and characterization techniques aided using flow reactors, 
robotics or computer vision
70,71. Advances in such approaches will 
facilitate the construction of large experimental datasets with com -
mon operating conditions, which may be more amenable to inter -
pretable ML.
Capturing the experimental complexity of catalysts with 
ML-derived descriptors. An additional challenge facing the inte -
gration of interpretable ML with experiments arises from the 
reliance of most existing interpretable ML studies on computa -
tional descriptors, such as the adsorption energies of surface reac -
tive intermediates2–5. Despite the successes of descriptor-based 
screening approaches in heterogeneous catalysis, we emphasize that they have their limitations and can often be inadequate for 
predicting the behaviour of real catalysts under reaction condi
-
tions. Descriptor-based approaches often neglect the complexities 
present in real catalytic materials, such as environment-induced changes to surface sites, an abundance of diverse surface sites and 
an inability to synthesize the desired surface sites, among many 
others. Consequently, generating new hypotheses and descriptor sets that can better predict the behaviour of real catalytic materials under reaction conditions is a critical challenge, but one that we are 
optimistic that future applications of interpretable ML can help to 
address.
Dataset size. Even though most ML applications in catalysis thus 
far have relied on computational datasets generated using quan
-
tum chemical calculations, these datasets are still expensive and time-consuming to generate, as many of the calculations rely on high-performance supercomputing resources. Merging black-box 
ML with interpretable ML may aid future efforts. For example, 
approaches that leverage black-box surrogate models (for exam
-
ple, active learning28, Bayesian global optimization72 and myopic 
multi-scale sampling73) show promise for efficiently constructing 
large computational datasets for high-throughput catalyst screen -
ing. Researchers could use such datasets not only for screening but also to uncover scientific insights using interpretable ML.
Model accessibility and reusability. Most published ML models are 
seldom reused. One reason for this is that models are usually learned on datasets generated ad hoc; the development of standardized datasets would certainly improve reusability
74. An additional bar -
rier to reusability is the considerable amount of domain expertise in mathematics and computer science that is required to leverage ML models beyond the typical skill set acquired by chemists, materials 
scientists and chemical engineers. Furthermore, the features used 
NAtuRE C AtALySIS | VOL 5 | MAr Ch 2022 | 175–184 | www.nature.com/natcatal 181