PersPective NaTurE CaTalysIsfor model surface sites that bind relevant adsorbates with desired 
adsorption energies. The motivation for using these approaches is that, in many cases, the design space of possible catalysts is too large 
to be studied using quantum chemical methods alone. ML models 
serve as computationally efficient surrogates to minimize expensive quantum chemical calculations, enabling an accelerated screening of the catalyst design space. For example, an ML-accelerated screen
-
ing of electrochemical carbon dioxide (CO2) reduction catalysts 
identified copper–aluminium alloys as active and selective mate -
rials based on the computed binding energy of carbon monoxide (CO), which has been proposed to be a descriptor of CO
2 reduction 
activity27.
Black-box ML models are referred to as such because the param -
eters (weights, rules or connections) they learn are so overwhelm -
ing in number that directly extracting meaningful insight regarding the different physical behaviours captured by these parameters is unfeasible. For example, in the case of the aforementioned cop
-
per–aluminium alloy, the model is too complex to interpret (that is, shed light on the features of aluminium atoms that electroni
-
cally change the copper atoms to modulate their interaction with the CO adsorbate) and is therefore too complex to explain (that is, contextualize the model’s behaviour within the framework of exist
-
ing CO2 reduction catalysis knowledge). Nonetheless, their large 
number of parameters enables black-box models to typically out -
perform glass-box models in terms of computational accuracy for large and complex datasets. This benefit is sufficient for specific ML applications in catalysis, such as high-throughput active-site screen
-
ing or creating machine-learned potentials for molecular dynamics or Monte Carlo simulations because accuracy is more desired than interpretation.
Grey-box methods
While a critical problem with black-box models is that it is chal -
lenging to interpret the internal logic that led to the conclusions of a model, there exists a class of methods for indirectly extracting interpretable information from black-box ML models after training. 
These approaches are called post-hoc analysis methods, referred 
to herein as grey-box methods. Many grey-box methods are model-agnostic and therefore usable with any class of ML model. The information from grey-box methods can take many forms 
but is usually a set of visualizations or sensitivity measures called 
feature-importance scores. Grey-box methods can generate expla
-
nations that are either global or local. Global explanations allow interpretation of the dataset-level relationships and patterns learned by black-box models, whereas local explanations allow practitioners 
to understand why black-box models make a specific prediction for 
a single data point.
The primary grey-box interpretation methods used in cataly
-
sis applications so far are global feature-importance scores25,26,29,30. 
A global feature-importance score is a sensitivity measure that describes how an individual feature or combination of features con
-
tributes to a model’s predictions at the dataset level. These scores yield insight into which features the model generally finds impor
-
tant and allow practitioners to quantify the relative importance of different features for describing a specific type of behaviour. For example, normalized sensitivity coefficients (a measure of feature T able 1 | Examples of black-box, grey-box and glass-box ML methods used in catalysis applications
Method Description Example application
Black box
 Neural networks77highly tunable and empirically state-of-the-art 
predictive models.high-throughput prediction of CO and h adsorption energies on diverse intermetallic alloys
38.
 Gaussian process models78Bayesian models that quantify the prediction uncertainty.Accelerating the construction of catalyst surface phase diagrams
8.
 AdaBoost regressor79Models that refine their focus during training to better fit difficult examples.Discovery of stable materials such as oxides, phosphides, sulfides and alloys
80.
Grey box
 Global feature-importance scores81Describes a feature’s contribution to predictions at 
the dataset level.Determining the physical properties that govern CO adsorption during CO
2 electroreduction catalyst 
screening25.
 Partial dependence plots31Visual explanations of how each feature affects the model output.Visualizing the impact of small-molecule and oxide-surface properties on chemisorption
34.
 Shapley additive explanations35Game-theoretic metric for describing a feature’s contribution to an individual prediction.Quantifying the influence of the catalyst composition and experimental conditions on the selectivity to C
2 products 
during the oxidative coupling of methane36.
Glass box
 Symbolic regression82Identifies simple closed-form models for predicting 
target properties.Identifying an easily calculable descriptor that predicts chemisorption for various adsorbates on alloys with different compositions and surface facets
40.
 Subgroup discovery83Identifies and characterizes subgroups that share common traits in data.Identifying single-atom catalysts that can break scaling relations for the nitrogen reduction reaction
51.
 Generalized additive models55Predictive models that are interpretable because the independent segments of the model decision-making process can be interpreted independently.Quantifying and understanding chemisorption on alloys
57.
 Principal component analysis84An unsupervised ML algorithm that projects the data onto a reduced basis while describing the maximum dataset variance.Finding electronic-structure descriptors for metal alloys and oxides
49.
 Probabilistic graphical models85Predictive models that can be used to enforce causal structure and quantify error.Quantitatively attributing errors in an activity volcano plot for the oxygen reduction reaction
63.
NAtuRE C AtALySIS | VOL 5 | MAr Ch 2022 | 175–184 | www.nature.com/natcatal 176