PersPective NaTurE CaTalysIsimportance) were generated for neural networks used to perform 
high-throughput screening of core–shell alloy catalysts for CO2 
electroreduction using the CO adsorption energy as an activity descriptor (Fig. 3a)
25. The sensitivity coefficients showed that the 
local Pauli electronegativity at a catalyst surface site plays a crucial role in predicting the CO adsorption energies, particularly for alloys 
that contain surface sites with fully occupied d bands such as cop
-
per (Cu), silver (Ag) and gold (Au). In addition, feature-importance 
scores of a random forest model have been used to determine the relative impact of the calculated geometric and electronic features 
of doped nickel phosphide (Ni
2P) catalysts on their hydrogen evolu -
tion reaction activity, ultimately identifying the Niβ–Niγ bond length 
(with the α, β and γ notation used by the authors shown in Fig. 3b) 
as the most important descriptor of hydrogen evolution reaction activity
29. These examples highlight the utility and relative ease with 
which feature-importance scores can extract insight from black-box 
models.
In addition to global feature-importance scores, there have 
also been limited efforts to bring post-hoc global visualizations to catalysis. Global visualization methods, such as partial dependence plots
31, accumulated local effects plots32 and transparent model dis -
tillation16,33, provide visual explanations of the change in the model 
behaviour subject to a change in only one or two feature values, which allows these effects to be plotted in a line chart or heat map, 
respectively. One recent application used partial dependence plots 
to visualize the marginal change in the predicted adsorption ener
-
gies of various adsorbates such as alkanes, aromatics and amines on group 13 metal oxide surfaces (for example, aluminium oxide and gallium oxide) from a regression model subject to changing the physical properties of the adsorbate and the oxide surface
34. 
The partial dependence plots indicated that the adsorbate’s highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy and the oxide’s surface 
energy play crucial roles in determining the adsorption energy (Fig. 
3c), with the adsorption strength increasing for a higher-in-energy HOMO and a higher surface energy. Although limited in their applications thus far, we believe that global visualizations will be a 
valuable tool for researchers to interpret their black-box catalysis 
models in the future.
Local explanations are an alternative approach for interpret
-
ing black-box models. The most common form of local expla -
nation is local feature-importance scores. In contrast to global feature-importance scores, which describe a feature’s general contri
-
bution across many different predictions, local feature-importance scores describe a feature’s contribution to an individual prediction (for example, giving insight into the contributions of electronic or 
geometric features to the performance of a specific material). One 
important method that assigns local feature-importance scores is Shapley additive explanations (SHAP)
35, which have been used in 
several recent catalysis studies36,37. For example, a recent study used 
SHAP in a literature meta-analysis of around 2,000 catalysts for the oxidative coupling of methane (OCM)
36. SHAP elucidated the 
relative influence of different catalysts and experimental conditions on the selectivity to desired C
2 products in OCM, suggesting that 
a high operating temperature, a higher partial pressure of meth -
ane relative to oxygen and the presence of lanthanum and sodium in the catalyst were critical parameters for steering OCM towards the desired C
2 products. There have also been efforts in catalysis at 
providing local explanations, such as generating post-hoc visualiza -
tions, for black-box adsorption energy prediction models that show the contributions of individual atoms to the predicted binding ener
-
gies (Fig. 3d)38.
Grey-box methods are a promising approach for interpreting 
black-box models that can often yield plausible explanations of the 
black-box model’s behaviour. Nevertheless, we add a warning that 
grey-box explanations can also be misleading and misrepresent black-box model behaviour
13,39. This is because, in most cases, there 
exists a gap between the simple explanations offered by a grey-box method and the complex behaviour learned by the black-box 
model. Nonetheless, developing higher resolution grey-box meth
-
ods remains an open field of research in ML that will undoubtedly 
benefit advances in catalysis research and in science and engineer -
ing in general.
Glass-box methods
Not all ML methods require a grey-box method to interpret the relationships they have uncovered. Some ML methods yield such insights directly, referred to herein as glass-box methods. Generally, 
these glass-box methods have constraints, such as enforced simplic
-
ity, that make direct interpretation of glass-box ML results possible. 
Glass-box methods are used to find simple analytical expressions that relate input variables to target properties, to identify hidden 
or underlying structures in the data, to make predictions under 
enforced modularity or causal structure, or to suggest causal struc
-
ture directly. It is our view that glass-box methods are preferred if extracting scientific insight is the central objective.
The most applied glass-box method in catalysis applications thus 
far is symbolic regression
40–44. Symbolic regression methods (for 
example, SISSO45 and genetic programming46) algorithmically com -
bine input features using mathematical operators (for example, +, −, ×, ÷ and log) to find functionally simple mathematical expres
-
sions that can predict target properties as a function of those fea -
tures. Models from symbolic regression methods are interpretable because the simplicity of their closed-form analytical expressions allows researchers to step through the models and understand the 
numerical relationships between the various input features and the 
?
?
Hypothesis
formationInterpretation
Black-box ML
Experimental/
computational validationFingerprinting
and recording
structure–property
dataPhysics-based explanations Materials discovery
Interpretable ML
Fig. 1 | Synergistic relationship between black-box and interpretable ML 
approaches. Both interpretable and black-box ML models can be used in materials discovery applications to identify promising catalysts. Validating ML-predicted catalysts via experimental synthesis and characterization and computational validation can lead to materials that exhibit desirable properties such as low cost, high stability, high activity and high selectivity. In addition, fingerprinting (that is, uniquely labelling) and recording the structure–property data from detailed characterization studies can be used to iteratively improve ML models and accelerate catalyst discovery. Interpretable ML algorithms have the advantage of outputting human-interpretable information regarding the patterns or dependencies learned by the ML model. These interpretations enable hypothesis formation about what underlying physical mechanisms might play a role in the task. This knowledge can guide feature selection such that features are linked to the target property and inform additional experiments, thereby improving the ML models and accelerating catalyst discovery further.
NAtuRE C AtALySIS | VOL 5 | MAr Ch 2022 | 175–184 | www.nature.com/natcatal 177