PersPective
https:/ / doi.org/10.1038/s41929-022-00744-z1Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 2Catalysis Science and T echnology Institute, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI, USA. ✉e-mail: bgoldsm@umich.edu; linic@umich.eduDespite their enormous importance, most commercial hetero -
geneous catalysts have been discovered using trial-and-error 
experimental approaches that rely on the chemical intuition 
of catalysis practitioners. The difficulties associated with moving 
away from empirical experimental approaches towards catalyst 
design using predictive models are multifaceted, including the fact that heterogeneous catalysis spans time and length scales of more than nine orders of magnitude
1, and that the catalyst performance 
depends on many variables, such as the catalyst composition, mor -
phology, support material and reaction environment (for example, temperature, solvent and external potential). This large parameter space makes the design and optimization of heterogeneous catalysts 
challenging.
Researchers have recently turned to machine learning (ML) to 
accelerate the study and discovery of heterogeneous catalysts, using 
these tools to navigate the parameter space more efficiently
2–5. ML 
is a subfield of artificial intelligence that encompasses methods that self-infer patterns from data. Catalysis researchers leverage these 
learned patterns to streamline their work in many areas, including 
the atomistic simulation of reaction conditions
6,7, catalyst surface 
phase diagram construction8, reaction mechanism prediction9,10 
and catalyst structure elucidation11,12. Most applications of ML in 
catalysis thus far have used black-box models (see Table 1) to make predictions of computable physical properties (descriptors), such as 
adsorption or formation energies, that can be related to the catalytic 
performance (that is, activity or stability)
2–5. Extracting meaningful 
physical insights from black-box models has proved challenging, as the internal logic of black-box models is not readily interpretable 
due to the high degree of complexity of these models.
Interpretable ML methods that merge the predictive capacity of 
black-box models with the physical interpretability of physics-based 
models offer an alternative to black-box models. Herein, we refer 
to interpretable ML as models that extract relevant knowledge 
about relationships between catalytic variables in the form of suc
-
cinct data formats such as visualizations, rule sets, or mathematical equations
13. For example, an interesting fundamental question that 
interpretable ML can help to address, which we elaborate on below, is determining which physical properties of a catalyst surface gov -
ern the chemisorption strength of different adsorbates. In our view, interpretable ML methods present a complementary approach to black-box methods (Fig. 1). Translating the hidden patterns identi
-
fied by ML models into interpretable information formats can lead to testable theories and hypotheses, further advancing scientific understanding. Knowledge gained from interpretation can help to 
explain why a model fails to make some predictions accurately and 
thus guide model improvement. The development and application of interpretable ML algorithms is an active area of research across law, healthcare, business, engineering and science
14–18.
In this Perspective, we discuss the interpretable ML methods 
that are available to catalysis researchers and the potential of inter -
pretable ML to accelerate hypothesis formation and knowledge generation in the field of heterogeneous catalysis. We frame our discussion by briefly describing black-box models, whose generally 
opaque internal logic makes extracting physical insights challenging 
 
(Fig. 2a). We then introduce two general categories of interpretable 
ML: grey-box ML methods, which rely on model-agnostic post-hoc 
analyses to interpret black-box models (Fig. 2b), and glass-box 
methods in which outputting an interpretation is an inherent fea -
ture of the method (Fig. 2c). We highlight studies in heterogeneous 
catalysis that use interpretable methods (Table 1) and studies from chemistry and materials science research that use methods that have 
yet to see use in catalysis but may be of interest to the catalysis com
-
munity. We note that interpretable ML is also helping to improve 
the design and study of homogeneous catalysts19–24, which in many 
respects is a more mature field due to its substantial crossover with molecular design, although discussion of these applications 
is beyond the scope of this Perspective. Finally, we outline critical 
challenges for interpretable ML in heterogeneous catalysis.
Black-box methods
Black-box models, such as Gaussian process models or neural net -
works, are widely used in catalysis. One area that has benefitted from black-box models is computational high-throughput cata
-
lyst screening25–28. In most cases, these screening studies search Interpretable machine learning for knowledge 
generation in heterogeneous catalysis
Jacques A. Esterhuizen   1,2, Bryan R. Goldsmith   1,2 ✉ and Suljo Linic   1,2 ✉
Most applications of machine learning in heterogeneous catalysis thus far have used black-box models to predict computable 
physical properties (descriptors), such as adsorption or formation energies, that can be related to catalytic performance (that is, 
activity or stability). Extracting meaningful physical insights from these black-box models has proved challenging, as the inter -
nal logic of these black-box models is not readily interpretable due to their high degree of complexity. Interpretable machine 
learning methods that merge the predictive capacity of black-box models with the physical interpretability of physics-based 
models offer an alternative to black-box models. In this Perspective, we discuss the various interpretable machine learning 
methods available to catalysis researchers, highlight the potential of interpretable machine learning to accelerate hypothesis formation and knowledge generation, and outline critical challenges and opportunities for interpretable machine learning in 
heterogeneous catalysis.
NAtuRE C AtALySIS | VOL 5 | MAr Ch 2022 | 175–184 | www.nature.com/natcatal 175