PersPective NaTurE CaTalysIscorresponding outputs. For example, researchers used symbolic 
regression to identify an activity descriptor for the oxygen evolu -
tion reaction (OER) on perovskite oxides (oxides with an ABO3 
structure)43. From a feature set containing numerous electronic 
(for example, valence electron structure and electronegativity) and structural features (for example, atomic radii and other structural 
parameters), symbolic regression identified an activity descrip
-
tor (μ/t) that combined two well-known structural parameters of 
perovskites, the Goldschmidt tolerance factor (t) and the octahe -
dral factor (μ). The identified μ/t descriptor (Fig. 4a) suggested 
that increasing t, by incorporating large cations at the A site, and decreasing μ, by incorporating small cations at the B site, should 
lead to higher OER activity. Ultimately, four perovskites with exper
-
imental activities higher than previously reported perovskite oxide catalysts were identified for the OER based on these criteria. This example highlights the potential of symbolic regression for build
-
ing accurate and interpretable models that relate geometric or elec -
tronic features of catalysts to their performance.
Another strategy for finding interpretable scientific insights 
is through unsupervised ML. Unsupervised ML algorithms are 
pattern-recognition algorithms that probe for underlying struc -
ture in the data47, which can help to accelerate an exploration of the 
dataset. The two primary methods of unsupervised learning used 
in catalysis thus far are clustering algorithms and dimensionality 
reduction algorithms. In clustering, the goal is to identify and seg -
ment similar subpopulations, or clusters, in the data. Interpreting 
the clusters can facilitate an understanding of the similarities and differences between data (for example, spectra, mechanisms and 
structures). For example, clustering has been used in homoge
-
neous catalysis to help identify the optimal phosphine ligands for 
a stereoselective Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction catalysed by phosphine-ligand-mediated palladium catalysis
48. To address 
this challenge, researchers used clustering for the rapid identifica -
tion of representative phosphine ligand motifs so that the choice of phosphine ligands could be optimized systematically. K-means clustering grouped 365 commercially available phosphines into 
24 chemically distinct clusters based on their molecular proper
-
ties such as the HOMO–LUMO gap, Fukui index and volume. One 
compound from each cluster was experimentally evaluated based on availability, price and anticipated stability, and one of the ligands, 2-(diphenylphosphino)-2′,6′-dimethoxy-1,1′-biphenyl, was identi
-
fied as having superior performance. Further investigation revealed that structurally similar triarylphosphine ligands were also effec
-
tive. We note that, in general, clusters are most likely to be interpre -
table when clustering is performed on low-dimensional data of two or three features, as the clusters and decision boundaries used for cluster assignment can then be easily visualized.
In dimensionality reduction, high-dimensional data (for exam
-
ple, signals, images or large feature sets) are transformed to a lower-dimensional subspace that still captures the essence of the data. In the lower-dimensional space, the data can be visualized and may 
be interpretable. Nonetheless, the transformation from high to low 
dimensions can be complex, non-linear and highly parameterized, making it difficult to understand how the lower-dimensional data relate to the original high-dimensional data. One method of devel
-
oping this understanding is through explanatory visualizations. For example, we recently used a dimensionality reduction technique called principal component analysis (PCA) to establish relationships 
between the geometric structures of subsurface alloys based on rho
-
dium (Rh), palladium (Pd), iridium (Ir) and platinum (Pt) (in which a 
ligand metal composes the layer immediately beneath the surface) and the chemisorption strengths of different adsorbates on the alloys
49. We 
used electronic-structure descriptors as a bridge to relate the chemi -
sorption strength to the geometric structure and composition of the alloys. To accomplish this goal, we employed PCA on the d -projected 
density of states at the adsorption site to derive principal compo
-
nent (PC) descriptors of the sites’ electronic structure. Interpretation of the PC descriptors using signal reconstruction showed that they mapped to the geometric structure of the sites. For example, one of the 
machine-learned PC descriptors (Fig. 4c), found to be negatively cor
-
related with the chemisorption energy, was associated with a broad -
ening and downshift in the surface electronic d  band. Relating this 
machine-learned descriptor to geometric structure revealed that this 
broadening and downshift is caused by increasing the surface metal 
size, increasing the ligand metal size and decreasing the number of 
ligand d electrons. Ultimately, the PCA-based approach led us to con -
clude that selecting larger surface metal atoms, larger ligand metal atoms or ligand metals with fewer d  electrons lowers the chemisorp
-
tion energies of most adsorbates. Such insights are critical to designing surface sites with a specific chemical activity.
a
b
c
Black box
Grey box
Glass boxy*x1x2
 xn …
y*x1x2
 xn …
y*x1x2
 xn …
Fig. 2 | Schematic depiction of black-box, grey-box and glass-box ML methods. The objective of supervised learning applications is to predict a target 
property, y*. The predictions are made using a set of variables, called features (x1,x2,...xn), that characterize the catalyst. T ypically, these features are 
compositional, electronic or geometric fingerprints of the catalytic system of interest. a, Many highly predictive ML approaches fall under the umbrella description of black-box methods because their models contain numerous interdependent weights, rules and connections. Although the many learned patterns can lead to a high predictive accuracy, interpreting them without additional processing is a task that is beyond the means of human cognition. b, Post-processing to extract insight from black-box models can be done using grey-box methods, which use a separate model or technique to derive explanations of the black-box model behaviour. c, Glass-box methods can output explanations directly. These methods typically have constraints on their functional behaviour that make their interpretation straightforward.
NAtuRE C AtALySIS | VOL 5 | MAr Ch 2022 | 175–184 | www.nature.com/natcatal 178