PersPective NaTurE CaTalysIsAnother class of models that probe for latent or underlying 
structure in a dataset are subgroup discovery (SGD) algorithms50. 
Applications of ML in heterogeneous catalysis often focus on learn -
ing a single global model to predict a target property for many dif -
ferent catalysts. However, global models can fail to account for the 
possibility that the physical mechanism governing a target property may differ across different subgroups of catalysts, with the global 
model obfuscating or misrepresenting the physics affecting the tar
-
get property. Therefore, it may sometimes be beneficial to identify 
and segment physically similar subgroups and learn local models for each subgroup. The interpretation of these subgroups can enable an 
understanding of the geometric and chemical similarities between 
the catalysts
51–53. A recent application of SGD identified single-atom 
catalysts capable of breaking scaling relations between reaction intermediates for the nitrogen reduction reaction (Fig. 4d)
51. This 
analysis demonstrated that scaling relations were only broken by early transition metal atoms, with additional electronic-structure 
analysis showing that early transition metals offer this advantage 
because of charge transfer to the support, limiting the amount of charge available for bonding electronegative adsorbates like N* and NH*, where the asterisk indicates an adsorbed species. SGD 
can also identify regions of feature space where an ML model’s pre
-dictions are trustworthy, called the domain of applicability. Recent 
work used such an approach to identify the domain of applicability for ML models predicting the stability of transparent conducting 
oxides
54. These examples highlight the potential of SGD for identi -
fying geometrically or chemically similar groupings of catalysts and 
improving predictive models.
There have also been efforts to leverage glass-box models with 
enforced modularity for extracting catalysis insights. A model is modular if each feature’s contribution to the model decision-making process can be independently interpreted. For example, generalized additive models (GAMs) make predictions by summing indepen
-
dent, potentially non-linear, functions of each input variable55,56. 
Because the overall model is a linear combination of functions that are dependent on only one or two variables of interest, each 
independent function can be visualized easily, thus shedding light 
on the model behaviour. We recently used GAMs to develop che
-
misorption models for OH, Cl, O and S adsorbates on Rh-, Pd-, Ag-, Ir-, Pt- and Au-based subsurface alloys (Fig. 4e)
57. The GAMs 
identified a few critical material properties that control the che -
misorption strength on the alloys, showing that for a fixed surface atom, the number of d electrons in the ligand subsurface metal and the size of the ligand atom are two critical parameters that 
b
c dNi/uni03B2–Ni/uni03B3
Importance<Ni–Ni>
AreaFeature
0 100 50Perimeter
Ni/uni03B1–Ni/uni03B3
qX2
Ni/uni03B1–Ni/uni03B3–Ni/uni03B2
Ni/uni03B1–Ni/uni03B2
/uni03C3qX
qX3A–A = bond length
A–A–A = bond angle
q = residual charge
/uni03C3 = standard deviation
143
526
–0.25
–0.50
–0.75
–1.00
–1.25
–1.50
–1.75
–2.00050
020
20 40 60 80 100 120 –10 –9 –8 –7 –6 –5 –4–2.0–1.5–1.0–0.50.0
aPartial dependence (Eads (eV))
Surface energy (meV Å–2) HOMO (isolated) (eV)Eads (eV) Normalized sensitivity coefficient2.4
2.0
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
0Ni Pd Pt Cu Ag AuLocal electronegativity
Kurtosis
Skewness
Width
Centred-band characteristics
/uni03B3/uni03B2
/uni03B1
Fig. 3 | Grey-box methods in catalysis applications. a, Normalized sensitivity coefficients are used to assess the feature importance in a neural network for 
predicting CO adsorption on Ni, Pd, Pt, Cu, Ag and Au core–shell alloys, where the listed metal is the shell. b, r elative feature importance on the hydrogen 
evolution reaction activity of Ni2P catalysts obtained using a random forest model. Features are defined based on the displayed Ni2P model system, in 
which nickel is coloured grey and phosphorus doping sites are coloured purple. The angled brackets on <Ni–Ni> indicate an average bond length. The 
X notation loosely relates to the dopants. For example, qX2 denotes the residual charge on the dopants when there are two dopants, and qX3 denotes the 
residual charge on the dopants when there are three. The standard deviation of the dopant charges is given by σqX. c, Partial dependence plots showing 
the marginal effect of an adsorbate’s hOMO energy and an oxide’s surface energy on the adsorption energy (Eads) of the corresponding system. The black 
lines indicate the partial dependence plot, and the points, coloured according to the adsorption strength, show the actual values. histograms showing the distribution of the actual values are displayed above. d, A saliency map for a crystal graph convolutional neural network model shows which individual atoms in a Cu(211) model contribute the most to the predicted CO binding energy (where O is coloured red, C is coloured dark grey and Cu atoms are coloured light grey and light brown), with the light brown Cu atomic colouring indicating a larger contribution. Panel a reproduced with permission from ref. 
25, American Chemical Society. Panels adapted with permission from: b, ref. 29, American Chemical Society; c, ref. 34, American Chemical Society;  
d, ref. 38, American Chemical Society.
NAtuRE C AtALySIS | VOL 5 | MAr Ch 2022 | 175–184 | www.nature.com/natcatal 179