andPrimp(a=ai)denote the predicted probability for
answerai, from the model trained with semantic, spatial
and implicit relations, respectively.
4. Experiments
We evaluate our proposed model on VQA 2.0 and VQA-
CP v2 datasets [ 3,19,1]. In addition, Visual Genome [ 27]
is used to pre-train the semantic relation classiﬁer. It is also
used to augment the VQA dataset when testing on the test-
dev and test-std splits. We use accuracy as the evaluation
metric:
Acc(ans) = min(1 ,#humans provided ans
3). (11)
4.1. Datasets
VQA 2.0 dataset is composed of real images from
MSCOCO [ 31] with the same train/validation/test splits.
For each image, an average of 3 questions are gener-
ated. These questions are divided into 3 categories: Y/N,
Number andOther . 10 answers are collected for each
image-question pair from human annotators, and the most
frequent answer is selected as the correct answer. Both
open-ended and multiple-choice question types are included
in this dataset. In this work, we focus on the open-ended
task, and take the answers that appeared more than 9 times
in the training set as candidate answers, which produces
3,129answer candidates. The model is trained on the train-
ing set, but when testing on the test set, both training and
validation set are used for training, and the max-probable
answer is selected as the predicted answer.
VQA-CP v2 dataset is a derivation of the VQA 2.0
dataset, which was introduced to evaluate and reduce the
question-oriented bias in VQA models. In particular, the
distribution of answers with respect to question types dif-
fers between training and test splits.
Visual Genome contains 108K images with densely an-
notated objects, attributes and relationships, which we used
to pre-train the semantic relation classiﬁer in our model. We
ﬁltered out those images that also appeared in the VQA val-
idation set, and split the relation data into 88K for train-
ing, 8K for validation, and 8K for testing. Furthermore,
we selected the top-14 most frequent predicates in the train-
ing data, after normalizing the predicates with relationship-
alias provided in Visual Genome. The ﬁnal semantic re-
lation classiﬁer is trained over 14 relation classes plus a
no-relation class.
4.2. Implementation Details
Each question is tokenized and each word is embedded
using 600-dimensional word embeddings (including 300-
dimensional GloVe word embeddings [ 42]). The sequence
of embedded words is then fed into GRU for each time stepup to the 14th token (similar to [ 24]). Questions shorter than
14 words are padded at the end with zero vectors. The di-
mension of the hidden layer in GRU is set as 1024. We em-
ploy multi-head attention with 16 heads for all three graph
attention networks. The dimension of relation features is set
to 1024. For implicit relation, we set the embedded relative
geometry feature dimension dhto be 64.
For the semantic relation classiﬁer, we extract pre-
trained object detection features with known bounding
boxes from Faster R-CNN [ 44] model in conjunction with
ResNet-101 [ 20]. More speciﬁcally, the features are the
output of the Pool5 layer after RoI pooling from Res4b22
feature map [ 58]. The Faster R-CNN model is trained over
1,600 selected object classes and 400 attribute classes, sim-
ilar to the bottom-up attention [ 2].
Our model is implemented based on PyTorch [ 40]. In
experiments, we use Adamax optimizer for training, with
the mini-batch size as 256. For choice of learning rate, we
employ the warm-up strategy [ 18]. Speciﬁcally, we begin
with a learning rate of 0.0005, linearly increasing it at each
epoch till it reaches 0.002 at epoch 4. After 15 epochs, the
learning rate is decreased by 1/2 for every 2 epochs up to
20 epochs. Every linear mapping is regularized by weight
normalization and dropout ( p= 0.2except for the classiﬁer
with0.5).
4.3. Experimental Results
This sub-section provides experimental results on the
VQA 2.0 and VQA-CP v2 datasets. By way of design, the
relation encoder can be composed into different VQA archi-
tectures as a plug-and-play component. In our experiments,
we consider three popular VQA models with different mul-
timodal fusion methods: Bottom-up Top-down [ 2] (BUTD),
Multimodal Tucker Fusion [ 4] (MUTAN), and Bilinear At-
tention Network [ 24] (BAN). Table 1reports results on the
VQA 2.0 validation set in the following setting:
•Imp /Sem /Spa: only one single type of relation
(implicit, semantic or spatial) is used to incorporate
bottom-up attention features.
•Imp+Sem /Imp+Spa /Sem+Spa : two different types
of relations are used via weighted sum.
•All: all three types of relations are utilized, through
weighted sum (e.g.: α= 0.4,β= 0.3). See Eqn. ( 10)
for details.
Compared to the baseline models, we can observe con-
sistent performance gain for all three architectures after
adding the proposed relation encoder. These results demon-
strate that our ReGAT model is a generic approach that can
be used to improve state-of-the-art VQA models. Further-
more, the results indicate that each single relation helps im-
prove the performance, and pairwise combination of rela-
tions can achieve consistent performance gain. When all
three types are combined, our model can achieve the best
10318