Relation-Aware Graph Attention Network for Visual Question Answering
Linjie Li, Zhe Gan, Yu Cheng, Jingjing Liu
Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI Research
{lindsey.li, zhe.gan, yu.cheng, jingjl }@microsoft.com
Abstract
In order to answer semantically-complicated questions
about an image, a Visual Question Answering (VQA) model
needs to fully understand the visual scene in the image,
especially the interactive dynamics between different ob-
jects. We propose a Relation-aware Graph Attention Net-
work (ReGAT), which encodes each image into a graph
and models multi-type inter-object relations via a graph
attention mechanism, to learn question-adaptive relation
representations. Two types of visual object relations are
explored: ( i) Explicit Relations that represent geometric
positions and semantic interactions between objects; and
(ii) Implicit Relations that capture the hidden dynamics be-
tween image regions. Experiments demonstrate that ReGAT
outperforms prior state-of-the-art approaches on both VQA
2.0 and VQA-CP v2 datasets. We further show that Re-
GAT is compatible to existing VQA architectures, and can
be used as a generic relation encoder to boost the model
performance for VQA.
1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning have driven tremen-
dous progress in both Computer Vision and Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP). Interdisciplinary area between
language and vision, such as image captioning, text-to-
image synthesis and visual question answering (VQA), has
attracted rapidly growing attention from both vision and
NLP communities. Take VQA as an example - the goal
(and the main challenge) is to train a model that can achieve
comprehensive and semantically-aligned understanding of
multimodal input. Speciﬁcally, given an image and a nat-
ural language question grounded on the image, the task is
to associate visual features in the image with the semantic
meaning in the question, in order to correctly answer the
question.
Most state-of-the-art approaches to VQA [ 56,11,38,33,
49] focus on learning a multimodal joint representation of
images and questions. Speciﬁcally, a Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) or Region-based CNN (R-CNN) is com-
Figure 1. An overview of the ReGAT model. Both explicit rela-
tions (semantic and spatial) and implicit relations are considered.
The proposed relation encoder captures question-adaptive object
interactions via Graph Attention.
monly used as a visual feature extractor for image encod-
ing, and a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) is used for
question encoding. After obtaining a sparse set of image
regions from the visual feature extractor, multimodal fusion
is applied to learn a joint representation that represents the
alignment between each individual region and the question.
This joint representation is then fed into an answer predictor
to produce an answer.
This framework has proven to be useful for the VQA
task, but there still exists a signiﬁcant semantic gap between
image and natural language. For example, given an image
of a group of zebras (see Figure 1), the model may recog-
nize the black and white pixels, but not which white and
black pixels are from which zebra. Thus, it is difﬁcult to
answer questions such as “ Is the zebra at the far right a
baby zebra? ” or “ Are all the zebras eating grass? ”. A VQA
system needs to recognize not only the objects (“ zebras “)
and the surrounding environment (“ grass ”), but also the se-
mantics about actions (“ eating ”) and locations (“ at the far
right ”) in both images and questions.
In order to capture this type of action and location in-
formation, we need to go beyond mere object detection in
image understanding, and learn a more holistic view of the
visual scene in the image, by interpreting the dynamics and
interactions between different objects in an image. One
possible solution is to detect the relative geometrical posi-
tions of neighboring objects (e.g., <motorcycle-next
1
10313