Figure 4. Visualization of attention maps learned from ablated in-
stances: The three bounding boxes shown in each image are the
top-3 attended regions. The numbers are attention weights.
To better understand how these two components help an-
swer questions, we further visualize and compare the atten-
tion maps learned by the ablated instances in Section 4.5.
4.5. Visualization
To better illustrate the effectiveness of adding graph at-
tention and question-adaptive mechanism, we compare the
attention maps learned by the complete ReGAT model in
a single-relation setting with those learned by two ablated
models. As shown in Figure 4, the second, third and last
rows correspond to line 1, 3 and 4 in Table 4, respectively.
Comparing row 2 with row 3 leads to the observation that
graph attention helps to capture the interactions between
objects, which contributes to a better alignment between
image regions and questions. Row 3 and row 4 show that
adding the question-adaptive attention mechanism produces
sharper attention maps and focuses on more relevant re-
gions. These visualization results are consistent with the
quantitative results reported in Table 4.
Figure 5provides visualization examples on how differ-
ent types of relations help improve the performance. In
each example, we show the top-3 attended regions and the
learned relations between these regions. As shown in these
examples, each relation type contributes to a better align-
ment between image regions and questions. For example,
in Figure 5(a), semantic relations “ Holding ” and “ Riding ”
resonate with the same words that appeared in the corre-
sponding questions. Figure 5(b) shows how spatial relations
Figure 5. Visualization of different types of visual object relation
in VQA task. The 3 bounding boxes shown in each image are the
top-3 attended regions. Green arrows indicate relations from sub-
ject to object. Labels and numbers in green boxes are class labels
for explicit relation and attention weights for implicit relation.
capture the relative geometric positions between regions.
To visualize implicit relations, Figure 5(c) shows the at-
tention weights to the top-1 region from every other region.
Surprisingly, the learned implicit relations are able to cap-
ture both spatial and semantic interactions. For example,
the top image in Figure 5(c) illustrates spatial interaction
“on” between the table and the vase, and the bottom image
illustrates the semantic interaction “ walking ” between the
trafﬁc light and the person.
5. Conclusion
We have presented Relation-aware Graph Attention Net-
work (ReGAT), a novel framework for visual question an-
swering, to model multi-type object relations with question-
adaptive attention mechanism. ReGAT exploits two types
of visual object relations: Explicit Relations and Implicit
Relations, to learn a relation-aware region representation
through graph attention. Our method achieves state-of-the-
art results on both VQA 2.0 and VQA-CP v2 datasets. The
proposed ReGAT model is compatible with generic VQA
models. Comprehensive experiments on two VQA datasets
show that our model can be infused into state-of-the-art
VQA architectures in a plug-and-play fashion. For future
work, we will investigate how to fuse the three relations
more effectively and how to utilize each relation to solve
speciﬁc question types.
10320