to-car>), to align with spacial descriptions in the ques-
tion. Another direction is to learn semantic dependencies
between objects (e.g., <girl-eating-cake >) to cap-
ture the interactive dynamics in the visual scene.
Motivated by this, we propose a Relation-aware Graph
Attention Network (ReGAT) for VQA, introducing a novel
relation encoder that captures these inter-object relations
beyond static object/region detection. These visual rela-
tion features can reveal more ﬁne-grained visual concepts
in the image, which in turn provides a holistic scene in-
terpretation that can be used for answering semantically-
complicated questions. In order to cover the high variance
in image scenes and question types, both explicit (e.g., spa-
tial/positional, semantic/actionable) relations and implicit
relations are learned by the relation encoder, where images
are represented as graphs and interactions between objects
are captured via a graph attention mechanism.
Furthermore, the graph attention is learned based on the
context of the question, permitting the injection of seman-
tic information from the question into the relation encoding
stage. In this way, the features learned by the relation en-
coder not only capture object-interactive visual contents in
the image, but also absorb the semantic clues in the ques-
tion, to dynamically focus on particular relation types and
instances for each question on the ﬂy.
Figure 1shows an overview of the proposed model.
First, a Faster R-CNN is used to generate a set of object re-
gion proposals, and a question encoder is used for question
embedding. The convolutional and bounding-box features
of each region are then injected into the relation encoder
to learn the relation-aware, question-adaptive, region-level
representations from the image. These relation-aware vi-
sual features and the question embeddings are then fed into
a multimodal fusion module to produce a joint representa-
tion, which is used in the answer prediction module to gen-
erate an answer.
In principle, our work is different from (and compatible
to) existing VQA systems. It is pivoted on a new dimension:
using question-adaptive inter-object relations to enrich im-
age representations in order to enhance VQA performance.
The contributions of our work are three-fold:
•We propose a novel graph-based relation encoder to
learn both explicit and implicit relations between vi-
sual objects via graph attention networks.
•The learned relations are question-adaptive, meaning
that they can dynamically capture visual object rela-
tions that are most relevant to each question.
•We show that our ReGAT model is a generic approach
that can be used to improve state-of-the-art VQA mod-
els on the VQA 2.0 dataset. Our model also achieved
state-of-the-art performance on the more challanging
VQA-CP v2 dataset.2. Related Work
2.1. Visual Question Answering
The current dominant framework for VQA systems con-
sists of an image encoder, a question encoder, multimodal
fusion, and an answer predictor. In lieu of directly us-
ing visual features from CNN-based feature extractors,
[56,11,41,33,49,38,63,36] explored various image at-
tention mechanisms to locate regions that are relevant to the
question. To learn a better representation of the question,
[33,38,11] proposed to perform question-guided image at-
tention and image-guided question attention collaboratively,
to merge knowledge from both visual and textual modalities
in the encoding stage. [ 15,25,60,4,24] explored higher-
order fusion methods to better combine textual information
with visual information (e.g., using bilinear pooling instead
of simpler ﬁrst-order methods such as summation, concate-
nation and multiplication).
To make the model more interpretable, some literature
[30,59,29,54,55,53] also exploited high-level semantic
information in the image, such as attributes, captions and
visual relation facts. Most of these methods applied VQA-
independent models to extract semantic knowledge from
the image, while [ 34] built a Relation-VQA dataset and di-
rectly mined VQA-speciﬁc relation facts to feed additional
semantic information to the model. A few recent studies
[48,35,29] investigated how to incorporate memory to aid
the reasoning step, especially for difﬁcult questions.
However, the semantic knowledge brought in by either
memory or high-level semantic information is usually con-
verted into textual representation, instead of directly used
as visual representation, which contains richer and more in-
dicative information about the image. Our work is com-
plementary to these prior studies in that we encode object
relations directly into image representation, and the relation
encoding step is generic and can be naturally ﬁt into any
state-of-the-art VQA model.
2.2. Visual Relationship
Visual relationship has been explored before deep learn-
ing became popular. Early work [ 10,14,7,37] pre-
sented methods to re-score the detected objects by consid-
ering object relations (e.g., co-occurrence [ 10], position and
size [ 5]) as post-processing steps for object detection. Some
previous work [ 16,17] also probed the idea that spatial re-
lationships (e.g., “above”, “around”, “below” and “inside”)
between objects can help improve image segmentation.
Visual relationship has proven to be crucial to many
computer vision tasks. For example, it aided the cogni-
tive task of mapping images to captions [ 13,12,58] and
improved image search [ 47,23] and object localization
[45,21]. Recent work on visual relationship [ 45,43,9] fo-
cused more on non-spatial relation, or known as “semantic
10314