dingq∈Rdq(dq= 1024 in our experiments). The fol-
lowing sub-sections will explain the details of the Relation
Encoder.
3.1. Graph Construction
Fully-connected Relation Graph By treating each ob-
jectviin the image as one vertex, we can construct a fully-
connected undirected graph Gimp= (V,E), whereEis the
set ofK×(K−1)edges. Each edge represents an im-
plicit relation between two objects, which can be reﬂected
by the learned weight assigned to each edge through graph
attention. All the weights are learned implicitly without any
prior knowledge. We name the relation encoder built on this
graphGimptheimplicit relation encoder.
Pruned Graph with Prior Knowledge On the other
hand, if explicit relations between vertices are available, one
can readily transform the fully-connected graph Gimpinto
an explicit relation graph, by pruning the edges where the
corresponding explicit relation does not exist. For each pair
of objects i,j, if<i-p-j>is a valid relation, an edge is cre-
ated from itoj, with an edge label p. In addition, we assign
each object node iwith a self-loop edge and label this edge
asidentical . In this way, the graph becomes sparse, and
each edge encodes prior knowledge about one inter-object
relation in the image. We name the relation encoder built
upon this graph the explicit relation encoder.
The explicit nature of these features requires pre-trained
classiﬁers to extract the relations in the form of discrete
class labels, which represent the dynamics and interactions
between objects explicit to the human eye. Different types
of explicit relations can be learned based on this pruned
graph. In this paper, we explore two instances: spatial and
semantic graphs, to capture positional and actionable rela-
tions between objects, which is imperative for visual ques-
tion answering.
Spatial Graph Letspai,j=<object i-predicate
-object j>denote the spatial relation that represents the
relative geometric position of object iagainstobject i.
In order to construct a spatial graph Gspa, given two ob-
ject region proposals object iandobject j, we classify
spai,jinto11different categories [ 58] (e.g.,object iis
insideobject j(class 1),object jis insideobject i
(class 2), as illustrated in Figure 3(a)), including a
no-relation class retained for objects that are too far
away from each other. Note that edges formed by spatial
relations are symmetrical: if <object i-pi,j-object j
>is a valid spatial relation, there must be a valid spatial
relationspaj,i=<object j-pj,i-object i>. However,
the two predicates pi,jandpj,iare different.
Semantic Graph In order to construct semantic graph
Gsem, semantic relations between objects need to be
extracted (e.g., <subject-predicate-object >).
(a)Spatial Relation
 (b)Semantic Relation
Figure 3. Illustration of spatial and semantic relations. The green
arrows denote the direction of relations (subject →object). Labels
in green boxes are class labels of relations. Red and Blue boxes
contain class labels of objects.
This can be formulated as a classiﬁcation task [ 58] by
training a semantic relation classiﬁer on a visual relation-
ship dataset (e.g., Visual Genome [ 27]). Given two ob-
ject regions iandj, the goal is to determine which pred-
icateprepresents a semantic relation <i-p-j>between
these two regions. Here, the relations between the sub-
jectjand the object iare not interchangeable, meaning
that the edges formed by semantic relations are not sym-
metric. For a valid <i-pi,j-j>, there may not exist a
relation<j-pj.i-i>within our deﬁnition. For example,
<man-holding-bat >is a valid relation, while there is
no semantic relation from bat toman.
The classiﬁcation model takes in three inputs: feature
vector of the subject region vi, feature vector of the ob-
ject region vj, and region-level feature vector vi,jof the
union bounding box containing both iandj. These three
types of feature are obtained from pre-trained object detec-
tion model, and then transformed via an embedding layer.
The embedded features are then concatenated and fed into
a classiﬁcation layer to produce softmax probability over
14 semantic relations, with an additional no-relation
class. The trained classiﬁer is then used to predict relations
between any pair of object regions in a given image. Exam-
ples of semantic relations are shown in Figure 3(b).
3.2. Relation Encoder
Question-adaptive Graph Attention The proposed rela-
tion encoder is designed to encode relational dynamics be-
tween objects in an image. For the VQA task, there might
be different types of relations that are useful for different
question types. Thus, in designing the relation encoder, we
use a question-adaptive attention mechanism to inject se-
mantic information from the question into relation graphs,
to dynamically assign higher weights to those relations that
are mostly relevant to each question. This is achieved by
ﬁrst concatenating the question embedding qwith each of
theKvisual features vi, denoted as
v′
i= [vi||q]fori= 1,...,K. (2)
Self-attention is then performed on the vertices, which gen-
erates hidden relation features {v⋆
i}K
i=1that characterize the
10316