Cross DQN: Cross Deep Q Network for Ads Allocation in Feed
Guogang Liao1†, Ze Wang1†, Xiaoxu Wu1, Xiaowen Shi1, Chuheng Zhang2‡, Yongkang Wang1,
Xingxing Wang1, Dong Wang1
1Meituan, Beijing, China2IIIS, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{liaoguogang,wangze18,wuxiaoxu04,shixiaowen03}@meituan.com,zhangchuheng123@live.com,
{wangyongkang03,wangxingxing04,wangdong07}@meituan.com
ABSTRACT
E-commerce platforms usually display a mixed list of ads and or-
ganic items in feed. One key problem is to allocate the limited slots
in the feed to maximize the overall revenue as well as improve
user experience, which requires a good model for user preference.
Instead of modeling the influence of individual items on user be-
haviors, the arrangement signal models the influence of the ar-
rangement of items and may lead to a better allocation strategy.
However, most of previous strategies fail to model such a signal
and therefore result in suboptimal performance. In addition, the
percentage of ads exposed (PAE) is an important indicator in ads
allocation. Excessive PAE hurts user experience while too low PAE
reduces platform revenue. Therefore, how to constrain the PAE
within a certain range while keeping personalized recommendation
under the PAE constraint is a challenge.
In this paper, we propose Cross Deep Q Network (Cross DQN) to
extract the crucial arrangement signal by crossing the embeddings
of different items and modeling the crossed sequence by multi-
channel attention. Besides, we propose an auxiliary loss for batch-
level constraint on PAE to tackle the above-mentioned challenge.
Our model results in higher revenue and better user experience
than state-of-the-art baselines in offline experiments. Moreover,
our model demonstrates a significant improvement in the online
A/B test and has been fully deployed on Meituan feed to serve more
than 300 millions of customers.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Information systems →Computational advertising ;Online ad-
vertising ;Ads allocation .
KEYWORDS
Ads Allocation, Deep Reinforcement Learning, Arrangement Signal,
Adaptive Ads Exposure
1 INTRODUCTION
Feed, mixed with organic items and ads, is a popular product on
many e-commerce platforms nowadays [ 7]. Platforms serve users
and gain revenue via feed. In general, there are two ways for plat-
forms to get revenue. Firstly, once users consume organic items
or ads, the e-commerce platform will gain the platform service fee
(hereinafter referred to as fee) according to the orders. Secondly, as
an ad is clicked by a user, the platform will charge the correspond-
ing advertiser. For the sake of the platform, displaying more ads is
beneficial to ads revenue but harmful to fee since ads are less likely
†Guogang Liao and Ze Wang are the corresponding authors.
‡This work was done when Chuhang Zhang was an intern in Meituan.engaging than organic items [ 23]. Usually, the number of ads is lim-
ited in feed to ensure good user experience and engagement. Hence,
how to allocate limited slots reasonably and effectively to maximize
overall revenue has become a very meaningful and challenging
problem [11, 16, 22].
The structure of an industrial ads allocation system is shown
in Figure 1. Blending Server takes ads sequence and organic items
sequence as input and outputs a mixed sequence of the two. For
Blending Server, there are two common strategies: fixed slots strat-
egy and dynamic slots strategy. Most platforms simply allocate
ads to pre-determined slots [ 10,13]. Such strategies may lead to
suboptimal overall performance. Dynamic slots strategy adjusts
the number and slots of ads according to the interest of users. For
instance, if a user has a higher tendency to consume commercial
ads, the platform will allocate more ads at conspicuous slots to
maximize possible benefits. Except for personalization, dynamic
slots strategies have lower ads blindness [ 21] and better adaptabil-
ity, significantly outperforming fixed slots strategy and gradually
becoming today’s trend. Early dynamic slots strategies use some
ads
organic
items
Ad
Ranking
Organic
Ranking
Blending
Serverranked ads
ad1
ad2
...
ranked organic items
oi 1
oi 2
...request result
oi 1
ad 1
ad 2
...
Logs
Learner
 Modeluser
Figure 1: Structure of an ads allocation system. The process
of ads allocation takes place in the Blending Server.
classic algorithms (e.g., Bellman-Ford, unified rank score) to allo-
cate ads slots. Since the feed is presented to the user in a sequence,
recent dynamic ads allocation strategies usually model the problem
as Markov Decision Process [ 14] and solve it using reinforcement
learning (RL) [4, 22, 25].
However, existing RL-based dynamic slots strategies encounter
several major limitations: i) Most approaches ignore the crucial
arrangement signal which is the influence of the arrangement of
displayed items on user behaviors. For example, as illustrated in Fig-
ure 2, once an ad is inserted into feed, the click-through rate (CTR)
of surrounding organic items and ads fluctuate. This signal receives
attention in the scenario of Re-Rank recently [ 2,5,6,19] but is
largely neglected in ads allocation. ii) Most of existing methods
lack an efficient balance between the personalization of differentarXiv:2109.04353v4  [cs.LG]  20 May 2022