ads
organic
items
Ad
Ranking
Organic
Ranking
SDMranked ads
ad1
ad2
...
oi1
oi2
...ranked organic itemsrequest result
oi1
ad1
ad2
...
Logs
Learner
 CrossDQN
 IRMuserFigure 5: Model decomposition for online service.
as ranking and ads bidding), we calculate the representation of the
items parallel to the previous modules, which further reduces the
latency. As shown in Figure 5, the Cross DQN is decomposed into
IRM and SDM for deployment. The two parts are trained end-to-end
but deployed on different services for real-time prediction. The IRM
is calculated parallel to Ad Ranking and Organic Ranking systems.
Hence, it is latency-free for real-time inference of SDM.
Parameter Sharing . Both of IRM and SDM use parameter shar-
ing (cf. Figure 4) across different ads/organic items. As for IRM, we
can calculate the representations for all recalled items at the same
time without ranking information through parameter sharing and
parallel computing. Meanwhile, in SDM, we use parameter sharing
across different actions to guarantee the consistency of the reward
evaluation of the actions and ensure that the batch-level constraint
is effective. In addition, parameter sharing can reduce the scale of
parameters, accelerate model training and reduce memory usage.
5 EXPERIMENTS
We will evaluate Cross DQN model through offline and online
experiments in this section. In offline experiments, we will compare
Cross DQN with existing baselines and analyze the role of different
designs in Cross DQN. In online experiments, we will compare
Cross DQN with the previous strategy deployed on the Meituan
platform using an online A/B test.
5.1 Experimental Settings
5.1.1 Dataset. We collect the dataset by running an exploratory
policy on the Meituan platform during March 2021. We present the
detailed statistics of the dataset in Table 1. Notice that each request
contains several transitions. The features for the ads/organic items
include the identity, the category, the comment score, etc. The
features for the user profile include the identity, the gender, etc.
5.1.2 Evaluation Metrics. We evaluate the model with revenue in-
dicators and experience indicators. As for revenue indicators, we
use ads revenue and service fee in a period to measure platform
revenue. Specifically, the ads revenue is gained from advertisers
calculated using Generalized Second Price (GSP) [ 3] and charged
Table 1: Statistics of the dataset.
#requests #users #ads #items
12,729,509 2,000,420 385,383 726,587per click. The total ads revenue is calculated as 𝑅ad=Í𝑟ad. The
service fee is charged from merchants’ orders according to a certain
percentage. and the total service fee is calculated as 𝑅fee=Í𝑟fee.
In our platform, user experience is measured by whether the user
demand (e.g., finding a satisfying product) can be fulfilled. As for
experience indicators, we use the average conversion rate and aver-
age experience score to measure user experience. The conversion
rate calculated as 𝑟cxr=ÍCTR×CVR is the ratio of the number
of orders placed by the user to the number of his/her requests.
The experience score 𝑟exdefined in Section 3 reflects the degree of
satisfaction of the user demand.
5.1.3 Hyperparameters. We implement Cross DQN with Tensor-
Flow and apply a gird search for the hyperparameters. The hidden
layer sizes of the IRM are (128,64,32,8,2)and the hidden layer sizes
of the SDM are(16,8,1). The learning rate is 10−3, the optimizer is
Adam [8] and the batch size is 8,192.
5.2 Offline Experiment
In this section, we train Cross DQN with offline data and evalu-
ate the performance using an offline estimator. Through extended
engineering, the offline estimator models the user preference and
aligns well with the online service. We conduct experiments to an-
swer the following two questions: i) How does Cross DQN perform
compared with other baselines? ii) How do different designs (e.g.,
SACU, MCAU) and hyperparameter settings (e.g., 𝛼,𝛽) affect the
performance of Cross DQN?
5.2.1 Baselines. We compare Cross DQN with the following five
representative methods:
•Fixed . This method displays ads in fixed slots, such as the
slot indexed by 3,6,9,···.
•GEA [21]. GEA is a non RL-based dynamic ads slots strategy.
It takes the impact of ads intervals into consideration and
ranks the ads and organic items jointly with a rank score
RS=(CTR×charge+GMV×takerate)exp(𝛽′𝑑), where
charge is the fee paid by advertisers, takerate is the take rate
(i.e., the fee charged on each transaction by the platform),
and𝑑is the interval between two ads.
•CTLRL [17]. Constrained Two-Level Reinforcement Learn-
ing (CTLRL) uses a two-level RL structure to allocate ads.
The upper level RL model decomposes the platform-level
constraint into hour-level constraints, and the lower level
RL model sets the hour-level constraint as the request-level
constraint.
•HRL-Rec [20]. HRL-Rec is an RL-based dynamic ads slots
strategy. It divides the integrated recommendation into two
levels of tasks and solves using hierarchical reinforcement
learning. Specifically, the model first decides the channel
(i.e., select an organic item or an ad) and then determine the
specific item for each slot.
•DEAR [24]. DEAR is also an RL-based dynamic ads slots
strategy. It designs a deep Q-network architecture to deter-
mine three related tasks jointly, i.e., i) whether to insert an
ad to the recommendation list, and if yes, ii) the optimal ad
and iii) the optimal location to insert.