Request
oi1
CTR = 0.12 
ad1
CTR = 0.06
oi2
CTR = 0.07  
...
...
ad
organic
item (oi)
insert ad2Request
oi1
CTR = 0.13  
ad1
CTR = 0.04
ad2
CTR = 0.03
oi2 
CTR = 0.10
...Figure 2: While inserting 𝑎𝑑2into feed, the CTR of organic
items increases while the CTR of 𝑎𝑑1decreases.
requests and the constraint on the percentage of ads exposed (PAE)
in a period. PAE is the most important constraint in ads allocation,
which balances the user experience and platform revenue. Previous
methods constrain all the requests or the requests within the same
hour [ 17] with the same target PAE, resulting in a lack of personal-
ization and differentiation in the allocation of ads between different
requests.
To address the limitations of existing methods, we present a
novel framework called Cross Deep Q Network (Cross DQN) based on
deep reinforcement learning. Specifically, we design two novel units
called State and Action Crossing Unit (SACU) and Multi-Channel
Attention Unit (MCAU) to explicitly extract the arrangement signal.
Besides, we propose an auxiliary loss for batch-level constraint to
balance the personalization of different requests and the constraint
on PAE in a period.
The contributions of our work are summarized as follows:
•A superior ads allocation strategy . In this paper, we propose
a novel RL-based framework named Cross DQN1to dynamically
adjust the number and the slots of ads in feed, which can effec-
tively extract the arrangement signal and reasonably balance
personalization of different requests and the constraint on PAE.
•Detailed industrial and practical experience . We success-
fully deploy Cross DQN on the Meituan feed and obtain signifi-
cant improvements in both platform revenue and user experience.
2 RELATED WORKS
Traditional strategy for ads allocation in feed is to display ads at
fixed slots. Recently, dynamic ads allocation strategies gains grow-
ing attention. According to whether RL is used, existing dynamic
ads allocation strategies can be roughly categorized into two cate-
gories: non RL-based and RL-based.
Non RL-based methods usually use classical algorithms to allo-
cate ads slots. Koutsopoulos [9]define ads allocation as a shortest-
path problem on a weighted directed acyclic graph where nodes
represent ads or slots and edges represent expected revenue. The
shortest path can be found by running Bellman-Ford algorithm. Fur-
thermore, Yan et al . [21] takes the impact of the interval between
1The code and data example are publicly accessible at https://github.com/weberrr/
CrossDQN.ads into consideration and re-ranks ads and organic items jointly
via a uniform ranking formula.
RL-based methods model the ads allocation problem as an MDP
and solved it with different RL techniques. Zhao et al . [25] proposes
a two-level RL framework to jointly optimize the recommending
and advertising strategies. Zhao et al . [24] proposes a DQN architec-
ture to determine the optimal ads and ads position jointly. Xie et al .
[20] proposes a hierarchical RL-based framework to first decide
the channel and then determine the specific item for each slot. In
contrast to the previous work, we incorporate the arrangement
signal into a RL-based dynamic ads allocation model to improve
the performance.
3 PROBLEM FORMULATION
In our scenario, we present 𝐾slots in one screen and handle the
allocation for each screen in the feed of a request sequentially.
The ads allocation problem is formulated as a Constrained Markov
Decision Process (CMDP) [ 1] (S,A,𝑟,𝑃,𝛾,C), the elements of
which are defined as follows:
•State spaceS. A state𝑠∈Sconsists of the information of
candidate items (i.e., the ads sequence and the organic items
sequence which are available on current step 𝑡), the user
(e.g., age, gender and historical behaviors), and the context
(e.g., order time).
•Action spaceA. An action𝑎∈A is the decision whether
to display an ad on each slot on the current screen, which is
formulated as follows:
𝑎=(𝑥1,𝑥2,...,𝑥𝐾), (1)
where𝑥𝑘=(
1display an ad in the 𝑘-th slot
0otherwise,∀𝑘∈ [𝐾].
In our scenario, we do not change the order of ads sequence
and organic items sequence in Blending Server.
•Reward𝑟. After the system takes an action in one state,
a user browses the mixed list and gives a feedback. The
reward is calculated based on the feedback and consists of
ads revenue 𝑟ad, fee𝑟feeand user experience 𝑟ex:
𝑟(𝑠,𝑎)=𝑟ad+𝑟fee+𝜂𝑟ex,
where𝑟ex= 
2click and order
1click and leave
0no click and leave.(2)
•Transition probability 𝑃.𝑃(𝑠𝑡+1|𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡)is defined as the
state transition probability from 𝑠𝑡to𝑠𝑡+1after taking the
action𝑎𝑡, where𝑡is the index for the screen/time step. The
action taken in the state affects user behaviors. When the
user pulls down, the state 𝑠𝑡transits to the state of next
screen𝑠𝑡+1. The items selected to present by 𝑎𝑡will be re-
moved from the state on the next step 𝑠𝑡+1. If the user no
longer pulls down, the transition terminates.
•Discount factor 𝛾. The discount factor 𝛾∈[0,1]balances
the short-term and long-term rewards.
•ConstraintC. The platform-level constraint is that the ab-
solute difference between the total PAE in a period and the
the target value 𝛿should be less than a threshold 𝜀to ensure