J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 ,13, 23 5 of 16
3. Data Collection and Feature Engineering
Data for the present study was collected from several sources. We have selected features that may
be driving Bitcoin prices and have performed feature engineering to obtain independent variables
for future price prediction. Bitcoin prices are driven by a combination of various endogenous
and exogenous factors (Bouri et al. 2017). Bitcoin time series data in USD were obtained from
bitcoincharts.com. The key features considered in the present study were Bitcoin price, Bitcoin daily lag
returns, price volatility, miners’ revenue, transaction volume, transaction fees, hash rate, money supply,
block size, and Metcalfe-UTXO. Additional features of broader economic and ﬁnancial indicators that
may impact the prices are interest rates in the U.S. treasury bond-yields, gold price, VIX volatility
index, S&P dollar returns, U.S. treasury bonds, and VIX volatility data were used to investigate the
characteristics of Bitcoin investors. Moving average convergence divergence (MACD) was constructed
to explore how moving averages can predict future Bitcoin prices. The roles of Bitcoin as a ﬁnancial
asset, medium of exchange, and as a hedge have been studied in the past (Selmi et al. 2018; Dyhrberg
2016). Dyhrberg (2016) proved that there are several similarities of Bitcoin with that of gold and dollar
indicating short term hedging capabilities. Selmi et al. (2018) studied the role of Bitcoin and gold in
hedging against oil price movements and concluded that Bitcoin can be used for diversiﬁcation and for
risk management purposes.
The speculative bubble in cryptocurrency markets are often driven by internet search and
regulatory actions by di erent countries (Filippi 2014). In that aspect, internet search data can be
considered important for predicting Bitcoin future prices (Cheah and Fry 2015; Yelowitz and Wilson
2015). Search data was obtained from Google trends for the keyword “bitcoin”. Price of cryptocurrency
Ripple (XRP), which is the third biggest cryptocurrency in terms of market capitalization, was also
considered as an exogenous factor for Bitcoin price prediction (Cagli 2019). Bitcoin data for all the
exogenous and endogenous factors for the period 01 /01/2010 to 30 /06/2019 were collected and a total of
3469 time series observations were obtained. Figure 3 depicts the time series plot for Bitcoin prices. We
provide the deﬁnitions of the 20 features and the data sources in Appendix A.
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 17 
 3. Data Collection and Feature Engineering 
Data for the present study was collected from se veral sources. We have selected features that 
may be driving Bitcoin prices and have perfor med feature engineering to obtain independent 
variables for future price prediction. Bitcoin prices are driven by a combination of various 
endogenous and exogenous factors (Bouri et al. 2017) . Bitcoin time series data in USD were obtained 
from bitcoincharts.com. The key features considered in the present study were Bitcoin price, Bitcoin 
daily lag returns, price volatility, miners’ revenue,  transaction volume, transaction fees, hash rate, 
money supply, block size, and Metcalfe-UTXO. A dditional features of broader economic and 
financial indicators that may impact the prices are interest rates in the U.S. treasury bond-yields, gold price, VIX volatility index, S&P dollar returns, U.S. treasury bonds, and VIX volatility data were used 
to investigate the characteristics of Bitcoin investors. Moving average convergence divergence 
(MACD) was constructed to explore how moving aver ages can predict future Bitcoin prices. The roles 
of Bitcoin as a financial asset, medium of exchange, and as a hedge have been studied in the past (Selmi et al. 2018; Dyhrberg 2016). Dyhrberg (2016) proved that there are several similarities of Bitcoin 
with that of gold and dollar indicating short term hedging capabilities. Selmi et al. (2018) studied the role of Bitcoin and gold in hedging against oil price movements and concluded that Bitcoin can be 
used for diversification and for risk management purposes. 
The speculative bubble in cryptocurrency markets are often driven by internet search and 
regulatory actions by different countries (Filippi 2014). In that aspect, internet search data can be considered important for predicting Bitcoin future prices (Cheah and John 2015; Yelowitz and Wilson 2015). Search data was obtain ed from Google trends for the keyword “bitcoin”. Price of 
cryptocurrency Ripple (XRP), which is the third biggest cryptocurrency in terms of market capitalization, was also considered as an exogenous factor for Bitcoin price prediction (Cagli 2019). Bitcoin data for all the exogenous and endogeno us factors for the period 01/01/2010 to 30/06/2019 
were collected and a total of 3469 time series obse rvations were obtained. Figure 3 depicts the time 
series plot for Bitcoin prices. We provide the defin itions of the 20 features and the data sources in 
Appendix A. 
 
Figure 3. Time series plot of Bitcoin price in USD. 
3.1. Data Pre-Processing 
Data from different sources were merged an d certain assumptions were made. Since, 
cryptocurrencies get traded twenty-four hours a da y and seven days a week, we set the end of day 
price at 12 a.m. midnight for each trading day. It is also assumed that the stock, bond, and commodity prices maintain Friday’s price on the weekends, th us ignoring after-market trading. The data-set 
values were normalized by first demeaning each da ta-series and then dividing it by its standard 
Figure 3. Time series plot of Bitcoin price in USD.
3.1. Data Pre-Processing
Data from di erent sources were merged and certain assumptions were made. Since,
cryptocurrencies get traded twenty-four hours a day and seven days a week, we set the end of
day price at 12 a.m. midnight for each trading day. It is also assumed that the stock, bond, and
commodity prices maintain Friday’s price on the weekends, thus ignoring after-market trading. The
data-set values were normalized by ﬁrst demeaning each data-series and then dividing it by its standard
deviation. After normalizing the data, the dataset is divided into a training set: observations between