J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 ,13, 23 10 of 16
5. Portfolio Strategy
We implement two trading strategies to evaluate our results in portfolio management of
cryptocurrencies. For simplicity, we considered only Bitcoin trading and we assumed that the
trader only buys and sells based on the signals derived from quantitative models. Based on our test
set evaluation, we have considered the GRU one layer with recurrent dropout as our best model for
implementing trading strategies. Two types of trading strategies were implemented, as discussed in
this section. The ﬁrst strategy was a long-short strategy, wherein the buy signal predicted from the
model will lead to buying the Bitcoin and a sell signal will essentially lead to short-selling the Bitcoin
at the beginning of the day based on the model predictions for that day. If the model predicted price
on a given day is lower than the previous day, then the trader will short sell the Bitcoin and cover them
at the end of the day. An initial portfolio value of 1 is considered and the transaction fees is taken to be
0.8% of the invested or sold amount. Due to daily settlement, the long-short strategy is expected to
incur signiﬁcant transaction costs which may reduce the portfolio value. The second strategy was a
buy-sell strategy where the trader goes long when a buy signal is triggered and sell all the Bitcoins
when a sell signal is generated. Once the trader sells all the coins in the portfolio, he /she waits for
the next positive signal to invest again. When a buy signal occurs, the trader invests in Bitcoin and
remains invested till the next sell signal is generated.
Most Bitcoin exchanges, unlike stock exchanges, do now allow short selling of Bitcoin, yet this
results in higher volatility and regulatory risks (Filippi 2014). Additionally, volatility depends on how
close the model predictions are to the actual market price of Bitcoin at every point of time. As can
be seen from Figure 7, Bitcoin prices went down during early June 2019, and the buy-sell strategy
correctly predicted the fall, with the trader selling the Bitcoins holding to keep the cash before investing
again when the price starts rising from mid-June. In comparison, due to short selling and taking long
positions simultaneously, the long-short strategy su ered during the same period of time with very
slow increase in portfolio value. However, long-short strategies might be more powerful when we
consider a portfolio consisting of multiple cryptocurrencies where investors can take simultaneous long
and short positions in currencies, which have signiﬁcant growth potential and overvalued currencies.
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 17 
 Most Bitcoin exchanges, unlike stock exchanges, do  now allow short selling of Bitcoin, yet this 
results in higher volatility and regulatory risks (Filippi 2014). Additionally, volatility depends on how close the model predictions are to the actual market price of Bitcoin at every point of time. As can be 
seen from Figure 7, Bitcoin prices went down during early June 2019, and the buy-sell strategy 
correctly predicted the fall, with the trader sellin g the Bitcoins holding to keep the cash before 
investing again when the price starts rising from mid-June. In comparison, due to short selling and 
taking long positions simultaneously, the long-short strategy suffered during the same period of time 
with very slow increase in portfolio value. Howeve r, long-short strategies might be more powerful 
when we consider a portfolio consisting of multiple cryptocurrencies where investors can take simultaneous long and short positions in currencies, which have significant growth potential and 
overvalued currencies. 
 
Figure 6. Bitcoin price as predicted by the GRU one-laye r model with dropout an d recurrent dropout. 
 
Figure 7. Above shows the change in portfolio value ov er time when the strategies long-short ( Left) 
and buy-sell ( Right ) are implemented on the test data. Due to short selling, daily settlement the long-
short portfolio incurs transaction fees which reduce s growth and increases vola tility in the portfolio. 
6. Conclusions 
There have been a considerable number of studies on Bitcoin price prediction using machine 
learning and time-series analysis (Wang et al. 2015; Guo et al. 2018; Karakoyun and C ̧ibikdiken 2018; 
Jang and Lee 2017; McNally et al. 2018). However, most of these studies have been mostly based on 
Figure 7. Above shows the change in portfolio value over time when the strategies long-short ( Left) and
buy-sell ( Right ) are implemented on the test data. Due to short selling, daily settlement the long-short
portfolio incurs transaction fees which reduces growth and increases volatility in the portfolio.
6. Conclusions
There have been a considerable number of studies on Bitcoin price prediction using machine
learning and time-series analysis (Wang et al. 2015; Guo et al. 2018; Karakoyun and Çıbıkdiken 2018;
Jang and Lee 2017; McNally et al. 2018). However, most of these studies have been mostly based on
predicting the Bitcoin prices based on pre-decided models with a limited number of features like price