J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 ,13, 23 2 of 16
analysis and prediction (Ciaian et al. 2016; Guo and Antulov-Fantulin 2018; Gajardo et al. 2018; Gandal
and Halaburda 2016). Sovbetov (2018) observed that crypto market-related factors such as market beta,
trading volume, and volatility are signiﬁcant predictors of both short-term and long-term prices of
cryptocurrencies. Constructing robust predictive models to accurately forecast cryptocurrency prices
is an important business challenge for potential investors and government agencies. Cryptocurrency
trading is actually a time series forecasting problem, and due to high volatility, it is di erent from price
forecasting in traditional ﬁnancial markets (Muzammal et al. 2019). Briere et al. (2015) found that
Bitcoin shows extremely high returns, but is characterized by high volatility and low correlation to
traditional assets. The high volatility of Bitcoin is well-documented (Blundell-Wignall 2014; Lo and
Wang 2014). Some econometric methods have been applied to predict Bitcoin volatility estimates such
as (Katsiampa 2017; Kim et al. 2016; Kristoufek 2015).
Traditional time series prediction methods include univariate autoregressive (AR), univariate
moving average (MA), simple exponential smoothing (SES), and autoregressive integrated moving
average (ARIMA) (Siami-Namini and Namin 2018). Kaiser (2019) used time series models to investigate
seasonality patterns in Bitcoin trading (Kaiser 2019). While seasonal ARIMA or SARIMA models
are suitable to investigate seasonality, time series models fail to capture long term dependencies in
the presence of high volatility, which is an inherent characteristic of a cryptocurrency market. On
the contrary, machine learning methods like neural networks use iterative optimization algorithms
like “gradient descent” along with hyper parameter tuning to determine the best ﬁtted optima
(Siami-Namini and Namin 2018). Thus, machine learning methods have been applied for asset
price /return prediction in recent years by incorporating non-linearity (Enke and Thawornwong 2005;
Huang et al. 2005; Sheta et al. 2015; Chang et al. 2009) with prediction accuracy higher than traditional
time series models (McNally et al. 2018; Siami-Namini and Namin 2018). However, there is a dearth of
machine learning application in the cryptocurrency price prediction literature. In contrast to traditional
linear statistical models such as ARMA, the artiﬁcial intelligence approach enables us to capture the
non-linear property of the high volatile crypto-currency prices.
Examples of machine learning studies to predict Bitcoin prices include random forests
(Madan et al. 2015), Bayesian neural networks (Jang and Lee 2017), and neural networks
(McNally et al. 2018). Deep learning techniques developed by Hinton et al. (2006) have been used
in literature to approximate non-linear functions with high accuracy (Cybenko 1989). There are a
number of previous works that have applied artiﬁcial neural networks to ﬁnancial investment problems
(Chong et al. 2017; Huck 2010). However, Pichl and Kaizoji (2017) concluded that although neural
networks are successful in approximating Bitcoin log return distribution, more complex deep learning
methods such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and long short-term memory (LSTM) techniques
should yield substantially higher prediction accuracy. Some studies have used RNNs and LSTM to
forecast Bitcoin pricing in comparison with traditional ARIMA models (McNally et al. 2018; Guo and
Antulov-Fantulin 2018). McNally et al. (2018) showed that RNN and LSTM neural networks predict
prices better than traditional multilayer perceptron (MLP) due to the temporal nature of the more
advanced algorithms. Karakoyun and Çıbıkdiken (2018), in comparing the ARIMA time series model
to the LSTM deep learning algorithm in estimating the future price of Bitcoin, found signiﬁcantly lower
mean absolute error in LSTM prediction.
In this paper, we focus on two aspects to predict Bitcoin price. We consider a set of exogenous
and endogenous variables to predict Bitcoin price. Some of these variables have not been investigated
in previous research studies on Bitcoin price prediction. This holistic approach should explain whether
Bitcoin is a ﬁnancial asset. Additionally, we also study and compare RNN models with traditional
machine learning models and propose a GRU architecture to predict Bitcoin price. GRU’s train faster
than traditional RNN or LSTM and have not been investigated in the past for cryptocurrency price
prediction. In particular, we developed a gated recurring unit (GRU) architecture that can learn the
Bitcoin price ﬂuctuations more e ciently than the traditional LSTM. We compare our model with
a traditional neural network and LSTM to check the robustness of the architecture. For application