J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 ,13, 23 11 of 16
volatility, order book, technical indicators, price of gold, and the VIX. The present study explores
Bitcoin price prediction based on a collective and exhaustive list of features with ﬁnancial linkages, as
shown in Appendix A. The basis of any investment has always been wealth creation either through
fundamental investment, or technical speculation, and cryptocurrencies are no exception to this. In
this study, feature engineering is performed taking into account whether Bitcoin could be used as an
alternative investment that o ers investors diversiﬁcation beneﬁts and a di erent investment avenue
when the traditional means of investment are not doing well. This study considers a holistic approach
to select the predictor variables that might be helpful in learning future Bitcoin price trends. The
U.S. treasury two-year and ten-year yields are the benchmark indicators for short-term and long-term
investment in bond markets, hence a change in these benchmarks could very well propel investors
towards alternative investment avenues such as the Bitcoin. Similar methodology can be undertaken
for gold, S&P returns and dollar index. Whether it is good news or bad news, increasing attraction or
momentum-based speculation, google trends, and VIX price data are perfect for studying this aspect of
the inﬂuence on the prices.
We also conclude that recurrent neural network models such as LSTM and GRU outperform
traditional machine learning models. With limited data, neural networks like LSTM and GRU can
regulate past information to learn e ectively from non-linear patterns. Deep models require accurate
training and hyperparameter tuning to yield results, which might be computationally extensive for
large datasets unlike conventional time-series approaches. However, for stock price prediction or
cryptocurrency price prediction, market data are always limited and computational complexity is not
a concern, and thus shallow learning models can be e ectively used in practice. These beneﬁts will
likely contribute signiﬁcantly to quantitative ﬁnance in the coming years.
In deep learning literature, LSTM has been traditionally used to analyze time-series. GRU
architecture on the other hand, seems to be performing better than the LSTM model in our analysis.
The simplicity of the GRU model, where the forgetting and updating is occurring simultaneously,
was found to be working well in Bitcoin price prediction. Adding a recurrent dropout improves the
performance of the GRU architecture; however, further studies need to be undertaken to explore the
dropout phenomenon in GRU architectures. Two types of investment strategies have been implemented
with our trained GRU architecture. Results show that when machine learning models are implemented
with full understanding, it can be beneﬁcial to the investment industry for ﬁnancial gains and portfolio
management. In the present case, recurrent machine learning models performed much better than
traditional ones in price prediction; thus, making the investment strategies valuable. With proper back
testing of each of these models, they can contribute to manage portfolio risk and reduce ﬁnancial losses.
Nonetheless, a signiﬁcant improvement over the current study can be achieved if a bigger data set
is available. Convolutional neural network (CNN) has also been used to predict ﬁnancial returns in
forecasting daily oil futures prices (Luo et al. 2019). To that end, a potential future research study can
explore the performance of CNN architectures to predict Bitcoin prices.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, data curation, validation, and draft writing, S.K.; methodology, formal
analysis, draft preparation, and editing, A.D.; draft writing, plots, M.B. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank the sta at the Haas School of Business, University of
California Berkeley and Katz Graduate School of Business, University of Pittsburgh for their support. A.D.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest. The views expressed are personal.