Hybrid  Intelligence: to automate or not to automate, that is the question  
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 9, No. 2, 2021 , 5-20 
◄ 8 ► The remainder of this viewpoint paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces Hybrid Intelligence (HI). Section 3 
provides a critical analysis of traditional BPM initiatives highlighting three main problems. Section 4 introduces RPA as 
a technology f or task automation. Section 5 introduces process mining as a technology to make BPM more data -driven 
and enable new forms of process automation. Section 6 relates the different topics, advocating a convergence of HI, 
BPM, RPA, ML, and process mining . Secti on 7 concludes the paper.  
2. Hybrid Intelligence  
Deep Blue, a chess -playing computer developed by IBM, won its first game against world champion Garry Kasparov in 
1996. AlphaGo, a Go -playing computer developed by DeepMind Technologies, defeated the best -ranke d Go player Ke 
Jie in 2017. The more powerful AlphaGo Zero learned by just playing games against itself, but was able to defeat any 
human player by the end of 2017. Speech recognition software has been around since the 1950s when Bell Laboratories 
presente d the “Audrey” system  that was able to recognize the numbers 1 to 9.  IBM’s “Shoebox ” system presented in 
1962 was able to recognize 16 words. Until a decade ago, speech recognition software would not function very well. 
However, today we are surrounded by  Amazon ’s Alexa, Apple ’s Siri, Microsoft ’s Cortana,  Google Assistant, etc. A 
similar development can be seen in image recognition and many tasks that before could only be done by humans. These 
successes can be attributed to progress in deep learning , where Artificial Neural Networks  (ANNs) having multiple 
layers  progressively extract higher -level features from the raw input [9,16]. Although neural networks  had been around 
for decades, these techniques started to outperform classical approaches around 2012. T oday, there is a lot of 
excitement about the amazing possibilities of deep learning. However, also the limitations become increasingly visible, 
especially in organizational settings and situations with limited data or many changes.  
It is not easy to clearl y define terms related to “intelligence ” and “learning ”. The “AI Effect ”, commonly known as 
Tesler ’s Theorem, says that “Artificial Intelligence is whatever hasn ’t been done yet ” (actually, Larry Tesler said 
“Intelligence is whatever machines haven ’t done yet”). Tesler ’s Theorem shows that things that were previously seen as 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) are removed from the definition of AI when they become standard. When people use the 
term AI today, they often refer to Machine Learning (ML) based on ANNs.  However, for most of its history, AI was 
dominated by symbolic AI , also known as “classical AI ”, “rule-based AI ”, and “good old -fashioned AI ”, and associated 
with expert systems and logical reasoning. In recent year s, AI got increasingly associated with ML. 
ML techniques are data -driven and learn from data without explicitly being programmed. We typically distinguish 
between training data and test data. For example, we train an ANN to distinguish dog and cat pictures that are labeled. 
While training , the A NN updates the weights in the internal representation until the number of incorrectly classified 
pictures is minimized. Then the trained ANN is used to classify test data, i.e., unseen dog and cat pictures that need to 
be classified correctly. Given enough  training data, such an ANN may perform amazingly well in practice , although it 
was never programmed to do so and has no explicit knowledge of cats and dogs. DeepMind ’s AlphaGo Zero learned to 
play Go in a superior manner by just knowing the rules and play ing against itself. There are many machine learning 
techniques ranging from classical approaches such as regression, decision trees, logistic regression, k -means clustering, 
and principal component analysis to support vector machines, convolutional neural networks, autoencoders, long short -
term memory networks, and generative adversarial networks. Approaches can be classified into supervised learning 
(using labeled data, e.g., for classification), unsupervised learning (using unlabeled data, e.g., to discov er unknown 
patterns), and reinforcement learning  (finding the balance between the exploration of uncharted territory and the 
exploitation of current knowledge).  
ML can be seen as part of data science, i.e., the broader interdisciplinary field aiming to tur n data into real value. Data 
may be structured or unstructured, big or small, static or streaming. Value may be provided in the form of predictions, 
automated decisions, models learned from data, or any type of data visualization delivering insights. Data science 
includes data extraction, data preparation, data exploration, data transformation, storage and retrieval, computing 
infrastructures, various types of mining and learning, presentation of explanations and predictions, and the exploitation 
of results  taking into account ethical, social, legal, and business aspects [19].