Hybrid  Intelligence: to automate or not to automate, that is the question  
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 9, No. 2, 2021 , 5-20 
◄ 7 ► 
 
Figure 1: PwC analysis of the PIAAC O ECD data predicting the proportion of existing jobs that may disappear due to 
automation by the mid -2030s in three overlapping waves [7].  
Figure 2 shows the two types of automation considered in this paper. Task automation  is limited to a single task, e.g., 
automatically performing a credit check or making a payment. Process automation  considers end -to-end processes. The 
Purchase -to-Pay (P2P) process shown in Figure 2 includes multiple activities. Some of these activities m ay be 
automated, but independent of this, processes need  to be coordinated, controlled, and continuously improved and 
adapted. BPM and process mining focus on end -to-end processes. For example, process mining can be used to detect 
performance and complianc e problems. Such problems can automatically trigger corrective workflows. Both types of 
automation may benefit from a human -machine symbiosis where human intellect is complemented by machine 
intelligence. How work is divided exactly remains a challenging q uestion in years to come (se e the three waves in 
Figure 1).  
Task automation : Activities 
previously conducted by 
people are now done by 
software /hardware robots .Process automation : The coordination , 
control , and improvement of end -to-end 
processes is now supported by data -driven 
technologies and low -code workflows .
 
Figure 2: Two types of automation: (1) task automation and (2) process automation. Data -driven technologies such as 
AI, ML,  RPA,  and process mining can support both types of automation. However, often a combination of human 
intelligence and machine intelligence  leads to the best results.  
Hybrid Intelligence  (HI) is one of the key elements in digital transformation  initiatives , i.e., the adoption of digital 
technology to transform services or businesses by replacing non -digital or manual processes with digital processes or 
replacing older digital technology with newer digital technology. This extends beyond traditional automation and  may 
include new types of innovation and creativity, e.g., new business models, new sales channels, new products , and new 
services. Such changes typically require, but also accelerate,  task and process automation.