Hybrid  Intelligence: to automate or not to automate, that is the question  
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 9, No. 2, 2021 , 5-20 
◄ 6 ► 1. Introduction  
Machine Learning (ML) and Robotic Process Automation (RPA) have lowered the threshold to automate tasks 
previously done by humans [5,7,10,11,17,23]. Yet organizations are struggling to apply ML and RPA, effectively 
causing many digital transformation initi atives to fail. Process mining techniques help to decide what should be 
automated and what not. Interestingly, most processes work best using a combination of human and machine 
intelligence. Therefore, we relate Hybrid Intelligence  (HI) to process manageme nt and process automation using RPA 
and process mining.  
As Niels Bohr once said “It is difficult to make predictions, especially about the future ” and, of course, this also applies 
to process management and automation. In 1964, the RAND Corporation publish ed a report with predictions about 
technological development based on the expectations of 82 experts across various fields [5]. For 1980, the report 
predicted that there would be a human -crew ed landing on Mars , and families would have robots as household s ervants. 
We are still not any way close to visiting Mars , and  40 years later, we only have robot vacuum cleaners. For 2020, the 
expectation was that we would breed apes and other animals to carry out our daily  chores. None of this happened.  
When it comes t o predictions about Artificial Intelligence (AI), we can witness periods with great optimism and periods 
with great skepticism (called “AI winters ”). In 1950, Alan Turing introduced the well -known Turing test centering 
around the following question: Can a human evaluator distinguish between a human and a machine using only natural 
language conversations? This question is still controversial and triggered questions like: Can a machine have a mind, 
mental states, and consciousness in the same way that a human  being can? Independent of this philosophical debate, we 
can see that more and more tasks are taken over by software trained based on examples. Alan Perlis wrote in 1982 “A 
year spent in Artificial Intelligence is enough to make one believe in God ” and, in deed, it is amazing how AI 
technology can recognize images and sound, transl ate texts, and play games like G o and chess without using a 
predefined strategy. However, there are still many tasks that are too difficult for AI.  In 2015, Elon Musk stated that  
“The Tesla that is currently in production has the ability to do automatic steering autopilot on the highway. That is 
currently being beta tested and will go into a wide release early next month. So, we are probably only a month away 
from having autonomous driving at least for highways and for relatively simple roads. My guess for when we will have 
full autonomy is approximately three years. ” In 2016, Turing award winner Geoffrey Hinton stated that “it is quite 
obvious that we should stop training radiologis ts” expecting that image recognition algorithms would outperform 
humans very soon. However, we are still driving our cars, and there is still a shortage of human radiologists. In short, 
we still need humans to do many tasks despite the amazing progress  in AI and ML . 
In this viewpoint paper, we focus on the question "To Automate or Not to Automate?" thereby linking Hybrid 
Intelligence (HI) [1,2,12,15], Artificial Intelligence (AI), and Machine Learning (ML) [9,13,16] to Business Process 
Management (BPM) [3,1 8] and Robotic Process Automation (RPA) [4,17,23]. This question is highly relevant because 
there is consensus that AI/ML will dramatically change the workplace [5,7,11]. Figure 1 shows the results of a PwC 
study based on OECD data collected in the context  of the Program for the International Assessment of Adult 
Competencies (PIAAC) of the Organization  for Economic Co operation and Development (OECD) [7]. Recalling Niels 
Bohr ’s quote and the RAND Corporation report mentioned before, one should take such anal yses with a grain of salt. 
Nevertheless, it is worthwhile to try and identify jobs that might be of high risk of automation. The PwC study 
anticipates three waves of automation until mid -2030: (1 ) algorithm wave  (early 2020s), (2) augmentation wave  (late 
2020s), and (3) autonomy wave  (mid 2030s) [7]. The first wave focuses on the automation of simple computational 
tasks and analysis of structured data in areas like finance, insurance, information, and communications. This wave is 
already a reality c onsidering , for example , the closing of local banks in  most countries. The second wave focuses on the 
automation of repeatable tasks such as filling in forms, communicating , and exchanging information using technologies 
such as RPA. The third wave will aut omate of physical labor and problem -solving in manufacturing and transport. 
Figure 1 shows the expected impact of the three waves. For sure, the three automation waves will disrupt labor markets. 
Initially, mostly administrative work (e.g., in banking and insurance) is impacted, but over time, also a substantial 
fraction of physical labor will disappear . For example, autonomous vehicles will soon become a reality in 
transportation, storage, manufacturing, and construction.