ISSN (print):2182 -7796,  ISSN (online):2182 -7788, ISSN ( cd-rom):2182 -780X  
Available online at www.sciencesphere.org /ijispm
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 9, No. 2, 2021 , 5-20 
◄ 5 ► Hybrid Intelligence: to automate or not to automate, that is 
the question  
Wil M.P. van der Aalst  
RWTH Aachen University  
Fraunhofer -Institut für Angewandte Informationstechnik  
Ahornstr. 55, D -52074, Aachen, Germany  
wvdaalst@pads.rwth -aachen.de  Viewpoint  
Abstract:  
There used to be a clear separation between tasks done by machines and tasks done by people. Applications of machine 
learning in speech recognition (e.g., Alexa and Siri), image  recognition, automated translation, autonomous driving, and 
medical diagnosis, have blurred the classical divide between human tasks and machine tasks. Although current 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) technologies outperform humans in many areas, tasks requiring 
common sense, contextual knowledge, creativity, adaptivity, and empathy are still best performed by humans. Hybrid 
Intelligence (HI) blends human intelligence and machine intelligence to combine the best of both worlds. Hence , 
current and future Business Process Management (BPM) initiatives need to consider HI and the changing boundaries 
between work done by people and work done by software robots. Consider, for example, the success of Robotic Process 
Automation (RPA), which d emonstrates that gradually taking away repetitive tasks from workers is possible. In this 
viewpoint paper, we argue that process mining is a key technology to decide what to automate and what not. Moreover, 
using process mining, it is possible to systemati cally monitor and manage processes where work is distributed over 
human workers and software robots.  
Keywords:  
Hybrid intelligence; data science; process science; machine learning; business process management.  
DOI:  10.12821/ijispm090201  
Manuscript received:  3 May 2021  
Manuscript accepted:  23 May 2021  
 
Copyright © 2021, SciKA. General permiss ion to republish in print or electronic forms, but not for profit, all or part of th is material is gran ted, provided that the 
International Journal of  Information Systems and Project Management  copyright notice is given and that reference made to the publication, to its  date of issue, and to 
the fact that reprinting privileges were granted by permiss ion of SciKA - Associatio n for Promotion and Disseminat ion of Scientific Knowledge.