Hybrid  Intelligence: to automate or not to automate, that is the question  
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 9, No. 2, 2021 , 5-20 
◄ 11 ► WFM systems would be an integral part of any information system. Many people, including the author, expected that 
these  systems would be come  as common as database management systems. However, this did not happen. WFM 
systems were succeeded by Business Process Management (BPM) systems that were broader in scope, but were also 
never widely adopted. Examples of BPM systems include the software prod ucts from Pegasystems, Appian, IBM, 
Bizagi, Oracle, Software AG, TIBCO Software, Bonitasoft, Kofax, and Signavio.  However, despite the availability of 
WFM/BPM systems, process management was never subcontracted to such systems at a scale comparable to dat abase 
management systems. Actually, a few years ago, many considered the area of Business Process Management (BPM) to 
be dead. Organizations associated BPM with making process models rather than diagnosing and improving processes. 
There were three main rea sons for this skepticism:  
 Applying WFM/BPM technology was rather expensive . Processes are hardcoded in application software or not 
supported at all. Many processes also use software from different vendors, making a seamless integration 
difficult and time-consuming.  
 Although the “M” in WFM and BPM refers to “Management ”, the focus is on modeling and automation rather 
than management. Traditional WFM/BPM systems fail to learn from the event data they collect.  
 Real-life processes are more complex  than pe ople like to believe. The well -known 80 -20 rule applies to 
processes, i.e., 80% of all cases are rather simple, but explain only 20% of the complexity of the process. The 
remaining 20% of cases tend to be neglected by software and management, but consume 8 0% of the resources 
of an organization.  
classic
BPMhuman 
behaviordata-driven 
systems
actual/effective 
process improvements
O2C, P2P processes having 
hundreds of thousands of variants.Information systems having thousands 
of tables with complex dependencies 
recording what people really do.
Transforming insights 
into actions (not models 
or PowerPoints).
 
Figure 5: Old -school BPM tends to be (1) unable to capture human behavior, (2) unable to deal with the complexity of 
real-life systems , and (3) unable to realize actual improvements.  
Figure 5 hypothesizes about possible reasons for the limited success of traditional WFM/BPM systems and approaches. 
Human behavior and information systems tend to be oversimplified , leading to a disconnect  with reality . Moreover, it is 
often impossible to show that the process actually improved.  In the remainder of this section, we elaborate on each of 
the three problems highlighted in Figure 5.