Hybrid  Intelligence: to automate or not to automate, that is the question  
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 9, No. 2, 2021 , 5-20 
◄ 16 ► 
discover
align
replay
enrich
apply
compare
information 
systems
extract
process 
models
explore
 select
filter
clean
conformance
performance 
diagnostics
predictions
improvements
transform
act
 show
model
adapt
show
interpret
drill down
ML
+
 +
event 
data 
Figure 9: A high -level overview of process mining, showing also the different activities.  
One can witn ess a shift in focus from backward -looking to forward -looking  process mining [22] . Organizations are 
more interested in what is happing now or what is going to happen next. Backward -looking process mining can be used 
to fundamentally improve processes, but provides little support for the day -to-day management of processes. Therefore, 
even t data need to be updated continuously and process -mining techniques need to be able to analyze cases that are still 
running. This is needed to control and influence the running process instances. Techniques for operational support (i.e., 
detecting complia nce and performance problems at runtime, predicting such problems, and recommending actions) have 
been around for more than a decade. However, the challenge is to make these techniques more reliable and also trigger 
the actions needed.  
Action -Oriented Proc ess Mining  (AOPM) focuses on automated corrections actions based on process mining 
diagnostics [14]. AOPM  turns observed events into management actions when needed. The goal is not to support the 
operational process itself (that already exists in some form ), but to support the management of the process. Process 
mining diagnostics related to compliance and performance combined with process knowledge and reinforcement 
learning provide the ingredients for a reactive system that automatically triggers managemen t workflows , improving the 
process. The goal of AOPM is not to automate the tasks, but the management of the process.  Note that, like RPA, 
AOPM does not aim at replacing the original information system. The acquisition of Integromat, a low -code online 
automation platform , by Celonis illustrates this development. Integromat provides over 500 application connectors  to 
interact with the most widely used information systems (Salesforce, Office, Teams, Twitter, etc.). When the Celonis 
process mining system detec ts a known problem, Integromat  can trigger the required corrective actions.  
6. Towards the convergence of HI, BPM, RPA, ML, and Process Mining  
In Section 3, we argued that o ld-school BPM tends to be (1) unable to capture human behavior, (2) unable to deal wi th 
the complexity of real -life systems, and (3) unable to realize actual improvements.  Process mining helps to address (1) 
and (3) by looking at the real processes in an objective manner before and after interventions. Moreover, just like RPA 
process minin g does not try to replace existing systems and face the complexity of real -life systems  (2). 
Often, a small percentage of activities account for most of the events, and a small percentage of trace variants account 
for most of the traces. For example, 20% o f the activities may account for 80% of the events. Similarly, the 20% most 
frequent process variants may explain 80% of the cases. Traditional process automation focuses on the most frequent 
activities and process variants. Only for high -frequent activiti es and process variants, it may be cost -effective to 
automate tasks and introduce classic WFM/BPM software. Less frequent activities and process variants need to be