Hybrid  Intelligence: to automate or not to automate, that is the question  
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 9, No. 2, 2021 , 5-20 
◄ 10 ► 
Human Intelligence in the 
Loop of Machine IntelligenceMachine Intelligence in the 
Loop of Human Intelligence
 
Figure 4: Human in the loop or machine in the loop?  
Figure 4 shows how human intelligence and machine intelligence can be combined. The left -hand side shows the 
traditional use of AI/ML in organizations. AI/ML is used to provide decision support or assist in performing  repetitive 
tasks. For example, a  data-driven sales forecast supports decision -making in logistics and production , or ML algorithms 
help to speed up standard routines of image acquisition in radiography. The human is in control , and AI/ML is used as a 
tool. The right -hand side of Figure 4  shows the opposite situation. Machine intelligence is used to automatically 
processes cases without human intervention. However, the machine can call the human for help in exceptional cases.  
For example, credit scoring or X -ray diagnostics are performed automatically, but boundary cases are evaluated by 
human experts.  
The interplay between human intelligence and machine intelligence may lead to new insights. AlphaGo showed human 
players new strategies for playing Go, as has been acknowledged by the world ’s leading Go players. Shi Yue said 
“AlphaGo’s game last year transformed the industry of Go and its players. The way AlphaGo showed its level was far 
above our expectations and brought many new elements to the game. ” Zhou Ruiyang said “I believe players m ore or 
less have all been affected by Professor Alpha. AlphaGo’s play makes us feel more free and no move is impossible to 
play anymore. Now everyone is trying to play in a style that has  not been tried before. ” This example shows that 
humans can learn fro m machines. This also applies to operational processes e.g. , in healthcare or sales. Therefore, 
organizations need to embrace HI and actively manage the constantly shifting distribution of work between workers and 
robots.  
3. Business Process Management: a critical analysis  
In this paper, we focus on the relation between  HI and Business Process Management  (BPM)  [3,18],  considering new 
technologies such as ML, RPA, and process mining.  
Already in the 1970s, people like Skip Ellis and Michael Zisman worked on so -called office information systems, which 
were driven by explicit process models. Systems such as Officetalk and SCOOP can be seen as early Workflow 
Management (WFM) systems. However, it took another 15 years until WFM technology was ready to be applied on a 
large scale. In the mid -nineties, many commercial WFM systems were available and there was the expectation that