Hybrid  Intelligence: to automate or not to automate, that is the question  
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 9, No. 2, 2021 , 5-20 
◄ 17 ► handled by workers that exploit human flexibility and creativity. As shown using Figure 7, RPA focuses on the middle 
part, i.e., routine work that is not frequent enough to be automated in the traditional sense. Process mining is a crucial 
technology to identify routine work that can be supported using RPA. Therefore, we claim that process minin g can be 
used to pick the “automation battles” that are cost -effective and feasible.  
This vision matches well with the notion of Hybrid Intelligence (HI). We should not aim for a strict divide between 
work done by software robots and work done by humans. P rocess mining can be used to detect routine work that can be 
automated by mimicking the behavior of workers. Rather than manually programming robots, process discovery can be 
used to configure the robots correctly. Part of the work formerly done by workers  is now done by software robots. 
Process mining can be used to check whether the processes run as planned. If a software robot malfunctions due to 
technical glitches, exceptions, changing user interfaces, or changing contextual factors, then this can be de tected using 
conformance checking techniques. Note that a lack of human oversight of the work produced by robots constitutes a 
real risk of catastrophic outcomes.  
Using combinations of process mining and machine learning, it is possible to flexibly distribute work over workers and 
software robots. For example, tasks are initially performed by robots and are escalated to workers the moment there is a 
complication or exception. Similarly, workers can hand off work to robots using an “auto-complete ” option. Moreover, 
the RPA solution may adapt due to changes in the underlying process (e.g., concept drift).  
The goal of RPA is to partially automate tasks in the process, a nd process mining can help identify where this makes the 
most sense. However, RPA builds on top of existing systems ranging from SAP and Salesforce to homegrown 
applications. It is unr ealistic to assume that RPA and ML  will replace these systems. Hybrid In telligence (HI) should 
not only combine human intelligence and machine intelligence; it should also do this in a complex landscape of existing 
systems. Hence, it is naïve to assume that process -mining results will replace existing systems handling the oper ational 
tasks. However, there are many opportunities to use process -mining results to automatically manage the process better.  
7. Conclusion  
This viewpoint paper discussed Hybrid Intelligence  (HI) from the viewpoint of task and process automation.  We started 
with the question “To automate or not to automate?”. The question of what to automate is not new. However, with the 
uptake of Machine Learning (ML) and Artificial Intelligence (AI), the tradeoffs are changing rapidly . Due to advances 
in AI/ML, the answer t o the question will change continuously. HI suggests that for many of the more challenging 
tasks, we will need to mixture of human and machine intelligence to get the best results. Although deep learning has 
had an amazing success in areas such as speech r ecognition, automated translation, image recognition, smart 
maintenance, and sentiment analysis, there are also obvious limitations.  Machine intelligence tends to fast, efficient, 
cheap, scalable, and consistent , but also in flexible, non-creative, non-emph atic, non-instinctive, and lacking common 
sense. In HI, human intelligence (i.e., people having experience and domain expertise) complements m achine 
intelligence . We introduced HI and indicated the relevance for task and process automation.  
We also provide d a critical analysis of traditional WFM/BPM approaches.  We identified weaknesses of traditional 
approaches that were not data -driven while trying to replace existing systems based on process models. In hindsight, 
these approaches can be considered naïve f or two reasons. First of all, real processes have a lot of variability due to 
human behavior. Simple P2P or O2C processes may have thousands of variants, and this is in stark contrast with the 
oversimplified models produced by humans. Second, information s ystems like SAP’s ERP system are extremely 
complex with thousands of database tables. Therefore, attempts to simply replace such systems are destined to fail. 
Robotic Process Automation (RPA)  and process mining address these limitations by better using the  available data and 
systems. RPA  builds upon existing systems by taking over repetitive tasks from humans. RPA is often used in a bottom -
up manner realizing quick wins. Process mining can be used for identifying RPA opportunities. However, process 
mining a lso views processes in a more holistic top -down manner.  A recent development in the field of process mining is 
that performance and conformance problems automatically trigger corrective workflows leveraging both the data and 
systems present. However, data -driven techniques should also be able to say “I do not know” or “I’m not sure” and 
leave decisions to people. This is the true spirit of HI where people, data, and software augment each other.