Hybrid  Intelligence: to automate or not to automate, that is the question  
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 9, No. 2, 2021 , 5-20 
◄ 9 ► 
Human Intelligence
Machine IntelligenceHybrid 
Intelligencefast
efficient
cheap
scalable
consistentflexible
creative
emphatic
instinctive
commonsensical 
data and algorithmspeople and experiences 
Figure 3: Hybrid Intelligence (HI) aims to combine the best of human intelligence and machine intelligence.  
Hybrid Intelligence  (HI), sometimes also called Augmented Intelligence , emphasizes the assistive role ML, i.e., deep 
neural nets and other data -driven techniques are there to enhance human intelligence rather than to replace it (just like 
telescopes are there to enhance huma n vision). Dellermann et al. [2] define Hybrid Intelligence (HI) as “the ability to 
achieve complex goals by combining human and artificial intelligence, thereby reaching superior results to those each 
of them could have accomplished separately, and contin uously improve by learning from each other ”. 
Figure 3 illustrates that Hybrid Intelligence  (HI) combines both two forms of intelligence : 
 Human intelligence  is about people and experiences and can be characterized by terms such as flexible, 
creative, emphatic, i nstinctive, and commonsensical.  
 Machine intelligence  is about data and algorithms and can be characterized by terms such as fast, efficient, 
cheap, sc alable, and consistent.   
HI aims to combine the best of both worlds. The spectacular developments in ML have extended the reach of software 
and hardware robots. Once a robot is able to perform a repetitive task at a similar level of quality, it is often al so more 
cost-effective. The rise of the “platform economy ” has accelerated this. Transaction platforms that match supply and 
demand (e.g., Amazon, Alibaba, Airbnb, Uber, and Baidu) and technology platforms (e.g., Microsoft’s software 
platform and the App s tores of Google and Apple)  have the characteristic that they grow very fast and that, in the end, 
often one winner remains (due to the traditional economy of scale, low marginal costs, and network effects). Due to 
these platforms new technologies can be ad opted fast at a global scale. However, humans still have unique capabilities. 
Consider , for example , disruptive events like the COVID -19 pandemic where one is confronted with completely new 
challenges that require flexibility, creativity, and intuition. Pe ople have the ability to transfer experiences from one 
problem domain to another. Moreover, empathy (i.e., the capacity to understand or feel what another person is 
experiencing) and ethics (i.e., reasoning about moral concepts such as good and evil, right  and wrong, virtue and vice, 
justice and crime) require human intelligence  [21]. In HI,  human intelligence and machine intelligence complement 
each other.