Hybrid  Intelligence: to automate or not to automate, that is the question  
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 9, No. 2, 2021 , 5-20 
◄ 12 ► 3.1 Inability to capture human behavior  
Simple processes such as Order -to-Cash (O2C) and Purch ase-to-Pay (P2P) tend to be much more complicated than 
expected. It is not uncommon to find thousands of process variants, i.e., unique ways of executing O2C or P2P 
processes (just considering the ordering for activities). Some of these variants may be und esirable. However, deviations 
often have good reasons. People are adapting to contextual factors, not present in the process model. It is also very 
difficult to create simulation models that exhibit the real behavior of an organization. It is possible to c reate so -called 
“digital twins” of highly -structured production processes. However, in processes where human actors are in the lead and 
where people need to distribute attention over multiple processes, it is still impossible to create meaningful “digital 
twins” that have an acceptable predictive value. These difficulties show why traditional WFM/BPM systems and 
approaches  failed. Assuming that reality can be captured in the form of a BPMN ( Business Process Model and 
Notation ) and implemented using a WFM/BP M system is a recipe for disaster.  
3.2 Inability to deal with the complexity of real -life systems  
Moreover, real -life information systems are more complicated than stakeholders like to think. When making process 
models and talking about new systems, people te nd to underestimate the complexity of the underlying data. Standard 
systems like SAP’s S/4HANA contain hundreds of thousands of tables. Of course, a typical organization uses only a 
subset of these tables. However, it shows the complexity of real -life info rmation systems. Data related to one process 
may be scattered over dozens or even hundreds of tables connected through primary key and foreign key relationship s. 
Although relational databases are well -understood and more structured than NoSQL-based non -relational databases, 
these cannot be described using a UML class diagram and BPMN model. Nevertheless, many WFM/BPM vendors 
suggested that it would be easy to replace existing systems using a properly configured WFM/BPM system. This is, of 
course, not the ca se. It is very naïve to think that existing systems can be replaced easily.  There are numerous examples 
of failed ERP systems implementations that  drove companies into bankruptcy (e.g., Shane Co., American LaFrance, 
FoxMeyer Corp., etc.).  These bankruptcy cases had in common that people underestimated the complexity. The author 
has witnessed numerous organizations that selected a WFM/BPM system that never went into production. Therefore, it 
is important to try and realize process improvements while keeping the existing information systems. RPA (see Section 
4) builds on top of existing information systems while automating repetitive work.  
3.3 Inability to realize actual improvements  
The third  problem highlighted in Figure 5  is the limited ability to provide actio nable results. Making process models, 
organizing workshops/meetings, and implementing new information systems do not necessarily lead to process 
improvements. Some of the larger organizations have invested in creating repositories of process models. Howeve r, 
such repositories become outdated quickly and do not necessarily impact the operational processes. Actually, most 
workers are not aware of their existence. Wallpaper -sized BPMN models that aim to be close to reality are too abstract 
because they are not  connected to the actual data, and stakeholders can always question their validity. Process mining  
(see Section 5) addresses this by showing continuously updated process maps that show the current situation.  
The problems highlighted in Figure 5  explain wh y organizations embraced RPA and process mining during the last 
decade . Both helped to revive  the interest in BPM.  RPA can be used to automate routine work that would normally not 
be cost -effective. Process mining plays a key role in deciding what to autom ate and how. Moreover, process mining 
helps to capture the actual end -to-end processes while acknowledging their complexity and focusing on the real 
problems.