Hybrid  Intelligence: to automate or not to automate, that is the question  
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 9, No. 2, 2021 , 5-20 
◄ 14 ► 
process variants sorted in frequencyfrequencytraditional 
automation
candidates for RPA
(traditional automation 
is not cost effective )low-frequent process variants 
that cannot be automated and 
still require human involvementprocess mining is able to diagnose the full process spectrum
from high -frequent to low -frequent and from automated to manual
RPA shifts the boundary of 
cost-effective automation 
Figure 7: RPA shifts the boundary of cost -effective automation and can therefore be seen as n be seen as “the poor 
man’s workflow management solution ”. Process mining complements RPA by identifying routine work and monitoring 
processes before and after the introduction of RPA.  
Before introducing RPA, one needs to analyze the processes to be automated. Process mining can help to identify 
promising candidates  [3,21,24] . Moreover, after RPA has been implemented, process mining can be used to monitor 
processes and systems even if these use a mixture of RPA, workers, and traditional automation.  This is illustrated by 
Figure 7. The figure shows that processes and process variants can be sorted by frequency. Obviously, one would like to 
automate the most frequent processes and process variants first. Because traditional automation (e.g., using WFM/BPM 
systems or writing ABAP code to change SAP) is rather expensive, there often exist many repetitive tasks which are not 
automated. This corres ponds to the middle of the spectrum depicted in Figure 7. After introducing RPA there are three 
types of tasks: (1) tasks handled by the information system using traditional automation, (2) tasks handled by software 
robots, and (3) low -frequent tasks still  done manually. The whole can be monitored and analyzed using process mining 
as is discussed next.  
5. Process Mining: f ocusing on end-to-end processes  
RPA can be seen as a bottom -up activity, i.e., removing repetitive tasks. Process mining can help to identify and 
automatically learn such tasks [3,21,24]. However, the primary use case of process mining is the top -down analysis of 
end-to-end processes [19 ,22,23]. Process mining techniques use event data to show what people, machines, 
applications, and organizations are really doing. Process mining provides novel insights that can be used to identify and 
address performance and compliance problems. Just lik e spreadsheets can do anything with numbers, process mining 
can do anything with event data, i.e., it is a generic, domain -independent technology to improve processes. There are 
over 35 commercial offerings of process mining software (e.g., Celonis, Disco,  ProcessGold, myInvenio, PAFnow, 
Apromore, Minit, QPR, Mehrwerk, Puzzledata, LanaLabs, Process Diamond, Everflow, Time linePI, Signavio, and 
Logpickr), next to open -source tools like ProM, PM4Py, bupaR , and RapidProM.  
All process -mining tools start from event data . An event log is a collection of events stored using a format like XES  
(xes-standard.org) . An event may have many different attributes, but at least a case identifier , an activity name , and a 
timestamp . Additional attributes may refer to locations,  resources, costs, transactional information, and energy 
consumed. Events are grouped using the case identifier and sorted using the timestamps. Hence, each case corresponds 
to a trace, i.e., a sequence of events. Focusing on the activity names only, these  traces can be grouped into variants, i.e., 
sequences of activities.