Hybrid  Intelligence: to automate or not to automate, that is the question  
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, Vol. 9, No. 2, 2021 , 5-20 
◄ 15 ► Figure 8 illustrates the typical use of process mining using a small event log with 71,043 events, 12,666 cases, and 7 
unique activities . A possible trace is the sequence <place order, se nd invoice, pay, prepare delivery, make delivery, 
confirm payment> . There are over 8000 cases corresponding to this activity sequence. Using process mining, one can 
uncover compliance and performance problems . Initially, process mining efforts focused on p rocess discovery . 
However, over time it has become clear that process discovery is just the starting point to process improvement. One 
can witness an uptake in conformance checking and performance analysis techniques. Moreover, process mining is 
often comb ined with ML techniques to find root causes for inefficiencies and deviations.  As was illustrated by Figure 7, 
event logs often follow  a Pareto distribution, i.e., a few variants explain a large proportion of the event log.  
No 
modeling
needed!
 
Figure 8: Event data serve as the starting point for process mining. Such data can be used to discover what the real 
process is, where the bottlenecks are, where the process deviates, and what the root -causes are. If there is enoug h data 
and the process is stable, then it is even possible to predict performance and conformance problems.  
Figure 9 provides another, more high -level, view on process mining. Process mining starts by extracting event data 
from information systems. This ma y be quite involved since traditional process mining techniques assume an event log 
with a single case notion. Using object -centric process mining, this requirement can be relaxed, i.e., each event may 
refer to any number of objects and it is possible to d iscover more holistic process models [24]. However, most 
approaches still assume a single case notation and logs in the form of an XES file or a similar database table. Such event 
data are used to discover process models showing the real process. Such mode ls can be enriched with frequency and 
timing information. Given a discovered or normative process model it is also possible to do conformance checking and 
highlight deviations. Next to visualizing conformance and performance problems, it is possible to exp lain and predict 
these. Note that process discovery and conformance checking are unrelated to mainstream AI/ML techniques. However, 
process mining can be used to generate standard classification problems, e.g., what are the characteristics of the cases 
that deviate, fail, or get delayed. This can be used to predict such problems and recommend actions.