BIO-POWER AND NECRO-POLITICS 
Rosi Braidotti  

Published as : ‘Biomacht und nekro-Politik. Uberlegungen zu einer Ethik der 
Nachhaltigkeit’, in: Springerin, Hefte fur Gegenwartskunst, Band XIII Heft 2, 
Fruhjahr 2007, pp 18-23 

The context 

Contemporary debates in the fields of social theory and cultural 

analysis have been concentrating on the politics of life itself, with special 
emphasis on the shifting boundaries between life and death. Bio-power, 
as Foucault  argued (1976, 1984a; 1984b), refers not only to the 
government of the living, but also to multiple practices of dying.  ‘The 
politics of life itself’ designates the extent to which the notion of bio-
power has emerged as an organizing principle for the proliferating 
discourses that make technologically mediated ‘life’ into a contested 
political field (Rose, 2001). Living matter itself becomes the subject and 
not the object of enquiry and this shift towards a bio-centred perspective 
affects the very structure and the interaction of social relations.  

One of the manifestations of this historical context is what has been 

called the genetic social imaginary  (Franklin, Lury and Stacey, 2000). 
This is manifested in the market economy through a tendency to use a 
terminology borrowed from genetics and evolutionary theory for the 
purpose of commercial and political discourses. An instance of this is the 
emphasis on the ‘next generation’of gadgets, cars and consumers’ 
electronics. Contemporary media and culture also spreads a sort of 
genetic citizenship as a form of spectatorship by promoting the 
visualization of the life of genes in medical practices, popular culture, 
cinema and advertising. Another aspect to this phenomenon is the uses of 
genetics in political debates on race, ethnicity and immigration, as well as 
public debates ranging from abortion and stem-cell research to new 
kinship and family structures. Discourses about vitalism  (Fraser, Lury 
and Kember, 2005) and vital politics are also circulating. 

Issues of power and power relations are central to this project. The 

notion of ‘life itself’ lies at the heart of bio-genetic capitalism ( Parisi, 
2004) as a site of financial investments and potential profit. 
Technological interventions neither suspend nor do they automatically 
improve the social relations of exclusion and inclusion that historically 
had been predicated along the axes of class and socio-economics, as well 
as along the sexualized and racialized lines of demarcation of ‘otherness’. 
Also denounced as ‘bio-piracy’ (Shiva,1997), the on-going technological 
revolution often intensifies patterns of traditional discrimination and 
exploitation. We have all become the subjects of bio-power, but we differ 

1 

 
 
 
considerably in the degrees and modes of actualisation of that very 
power.  

This explosion of discursive interest in the politics of life itself 

affects also the question of death and new ways of dying. Bio-power and 
necro-politics are two sides of the same coin ( Mbembe, 2003). 
‘Life’ can be a threatening force, as evidenced by new epidemics and 
environmental catastrophes that blur the distinction between the natural 
and the cultural dimensions. Another obvious example of the politics of 
death is the new forms of industrial-scale warfare, the privatization of the 
army and the global reach of conflicts, specifically the case of suicide 
bombers in the war on terror. Equally significant are the changes that 
have occurred in the political practice of bearing witness to the dead as a 
form of activism, from the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo to humanitarian 
aid. From a post-human perspective comes the proliferation of viruses, 
from computers to humans, animals and back.  

Relevant cultural practices that reflect this changing status of death 

can be traced in the success of forensic detectives in contemporary 
popular culture. The corpse is a daily presence in global media and 
journalistic news, while it is also an object of entertainment. The 
dislocation of gender roles in relation to death and killing is reflected in 
the image of women who kill, from the revival of classical figures like  
Medea and Hecuba to Lara Croft.  

A rather complex relationship to death has emerged in the 
technologically mediated  universe we inhabit: one in which the link 
between the flesh and the machine is symbiotic and therefore establishes 
a bond of mutual dependence. This engenders some significant 
paradoxes: the human body is simultaneously denied, in a fantasy of 
escape, and strengthened or re-enforced. Balsamo (1996) stresses the 
paradoxical concomitance of effects surrounding the new  posthuman 
bodies as enabling both a fear of dispossession and a fantasy of 
immortality and total control:  “And yet, such beliefs about the 
technological future 'life' of the body are complemented by a palpable 
fear of death and annihilation from uncontrollable and spectacular body-
threats: antibiotic-resistant viruses, random contamination, flesh-eating 
bacteria" (Balsamo 1996: 1-2).  In other words, the new practices of ‘life’ 
mobilize not only generative forces, but also new and subtler degrees of 
extinction 

These concerns have both the neo-liberal ( Fukuyama,20020) and 
the neo-kantian thinkers struck by high levels of anxiety about the sheer 
thinkability of human future ( Habermas, 2003). In opposition to this,  I 
would like to defend the politics of ‘life itself’ and approach these 

2 

 
 
 
phenomena in a non normative manner. They are the social 
manifestations of the shifting relation between living and dying in the era 
of the politics of ‘life itself’. 

 In opposition to the nostalgic trend that is so dominant in 

contemporary politics and also to a tendency to melancholia on the part of 
the progressive Left (Butler, 2004), I want to argue that the emphasis on 
life itself can engender affirmative politics. For one thing it produces a 
more adequate cartography of our real-life conditions: it focuses with 
greater accuracy on the complexities of contemporary technologically 
mediated bodies and on social practices of human embodiment.  
Furthermore, this type of vitality, unconcerned by clear-cut distinctions 
between living and dying, composes the notion of ‘zoe’as a non-human 
yet affirmative life-force. This vitalist materialism, inspired by  Deleuze’s 
philosophy, has nothing in common with the postmodern emphasis on the 
inorganic and the aesthetics of fake, pastiche and camp simulation. It also 
moves beyond ‘high’ cyber studies (Hayles, 1999), into post-cyber 
materialism (Haraway, 2003). More on this in my conclusion. 

The theoretical debates 
The theoretical context for these debates rotates round the legacy of 
Focault’s unfinished project on contemporary governamentality in an era 
that marks the official end of postmodernist deconstructions.  The 
unfinished nature of Foucault’s project has been complicated by two 
elements in the reception of his work: the first is the split that has 
occurred between the so-called ‘second’ Foucault – who through the 
history of sexuality defined as technologies of self-styling, posits a new 
model of ethical inter-relation – and the earlier Foucault, who 
concentrated on the analysis of power formations and patterns of 
exclusion.   

This split reception institutionalises a new division of labour 

between power analyses on the one hand and ethical discourses on the 
other. This allows for a residual type of Kantianism to emerge on 
Foucault’s back, to so speak. It is therefore urgent to assess the state of 
the theoretical debates on bio-power after Foucault, especially in terms of 
its legal, political and ethical implications. Some thinkers, for instance, 
stress the role of moral accountability as a form of bio-political 
citizenship, thus inserting into the ethical debates the notion of ‘bio 
power’ as an instance of governmentality that is as empowering as it is 
confining (Rose 2001; Rabinow, 2003; Esposito, 2004). This school of 
thought locates the political moment in the relational and self-regulating 
accountability of a bio-ethical subject that takes full responsibility for 
his/her genetic existence. The advantage of this position is that it calls for 
a higher degree of lucidity about one’s bio-organic existence – which 

3 

 
 
 
means that the naturalist paradigm is definitely abandoned. The 
disadvantaged of this position, however, in a political context of 
dismantling the welfare state and increasing privatisation, is that it allows 
a neo-liberal perversion of this notion. Bio-ethical citizenship indexes 
access to and the cost of basic social services like health care to an 
individual’s manifest ability to act responsibly by reducing the risks and 
exertions linked to the wrong life style. In other words here bio-ethical 
agency means taking adequate care of one’s own genetic capital. The 
recent campaigns against smoking, excessive drinking and overweight 
constitute evidence of this neo-liberal normative trend that supports 
hyper-individualism.  Other social examples of neo-liberal bio-citizenship 
are the social drive towards eternal youth, which is linked to the 
suspension of time in globally mediated societies (Castells, 1996) and can 
be juxtaposed to euthanasia and other social practices of assisted death.  
The second problematic element in the reception of Foucault’s bio-
power is the fast rate of progress and change undergone by contemporary 
bio-technologies and the challenges they throw to the human and social 
sciences. Here Foucault’s work has been criticized, notably by Donna 
Haraway (1997), for relying on an outdated vision of how technology 
functions. It is argued that Foucault’s bio-power provides a cartography 
of a world that no longer exists. Haraway suggests that we have now 
entered instead the age of the informatics of domination.  In feminist 
theory – a very relevant area of scholarship that I find missing from far 
too much of the  
scholarship on bio-politics, globalization and technology studies – this 
point has been taken very seriously (Barad, 2003). Feminist, 
environmentalist and race theorists who have addressed the shifting status 
of ‘difference’ in advanced capitalism in a manner that respects the 
complexity of social relations and critiques liberalism, while highlighting 
the specificity of a gender and race approach (Gilroy, 2000; Butler, 2004; 
Braidotti, 2002; Grosz, 2004). 

The central piece of the discrepancy between Foucault’s bio-power 
and the contemporary structure of scientific thought concerns the issue of 
anthropocentrism. Contemporary technologies are not man-centred but 
have shifted away, towards a new emphasis on the mutual 
interdependence of material, bio-cultural and symbolic forces in the 
making of social and political practices. The focus on life itself may 
encourage a sort of bio-centred egalitarianism (Ansell-Pearson, 1997), 
forcing a reconsideration of the concept of subjectivity in terms of ‘life-
forces’. It dislocates but also redefines the relationship between self and 
other by shifting the traditional axes of  difference - genderization, 
racialization and naturalization - away from a binary opposition into a 
more complex and less oppositional mode of interaction.  

4 

 
 
Bio-politics thus opens up an eco-philosophical dimension of 
reflection (Braidotti, 2006) and inaugurates alternative ecologies of 
belonging both in kinship systems and in forms of social and political 
participation. I would like to suggest that these ‘hybrid’ social identities 
and the new modes of multiple belonging they enact may constitute the 
starting point for mutual and respective accountability, and pave the way 
for an ethical re-grounding of social participation and community 
building.  

Bio-power revisited 

This has consequences for the status of social and political theory itself.  
Thinkers that take their lead from Heidegger and are best exemplified by 
Agamben (1998). It defines ‘bios’ as the result of the intervention of 
sovereign power as that which is capable of reducing the subject to ‘bare 
life’, that is to say ‘zoe’. The being-alive-ness of the subject (zoe) is 
identified with its perishability, its propensity and vulnerability to death 
and extinction. Bio-power here means Thanatos-politics and results, 
among others, in the indictment of the project of modernity.  
My understanding of ‘life’ as bios-zoe ethics of sustainable 
transformations differs considerably from what Giorgio Agamben (1998) 
calls ‘bare life’ or ‘the rest’ after the humanized ‘bio-logical’ wrapping is 
taken over. ‘Bare life’ is that in you which sovereign power can kill: it is 
the body as disposable matter in the hands of the despotic force of power 
(potestas). Included as necessarily excluded, ‘bare life’ inscribes fluid 
vitality at the heart of the mechanisms of capture of the state system. 
Agamben stresses that this vitality, or ‘aliveness’, however, is all the 
more mortal for it. This is linked to Heidegger’s theory of Being as 
deriving its force from the annihilation of animal life.  

The position of zoe in Agamben’s system is analogous to the role 

and the location of language in psychoanalytic theory: it is the site of 
constitution or ‘capture’ of the subject. This ‘capture functions by 
positing – as an a posteriori construction, a pre-linguistic dimension of 
subjectivity which is apprehended as ‘always already’ lost and out of 
reach. Zoe – like the pre-discursive in Lacan, the chora of Kristeva and 
the maternal feminine of Irigaray – becomes for Agamben the ever-
receding horizon of an alterity which has to be included as necessarily 
excluded in order to sustain the framing of the subject in the first place. 
This introduces finitude as a constitutive element within the framework of 
subjectivity, which also fuels an affective political economy of loss and 
melancholia at the heart of the subject (Braidotti, 2002).  

In his important work on the totalitarian edge of regimes of ‘bio-
power’ Agamben perpetuates the philosophical habit, which consists in 

5 

 
 
 
taking mortality, or finitude as the trans-historical horizon for discussions 
of ‘life’. This fixation on Thanatos – which Nietzsche criticized over a 
century ago – is still very present in critical debates today. It often 
produces a gloomy and pessimistic vision not only of power, but also of 
the technological developments that propel the regimes of bio-power. I 
beg to differ from the habit that favours the deployment of the problem of 
bios-zoe on the horizon of death, or of liminal state of not-life. 

I find this over-emphasis on the horizons of mortality and perishability 

inadequate to the vital politics`of our era. I therefore turn to another  
significant community of scholars works within a Spinozist framework, 
and includes Deleuze and Guattari(1972, 1980); Guattari (1995); Glissant 
(1990); Balibar (2002), Hardt and Negri (2000).  The emphasis falls on 
the politics of life itself as a relentlessly generative force. This requires an 
interrogation of the shifting inter-relations between human and non-
human forces. The latter are defined both as in-human and as post-
human.  

Speaking from the position of an embodied and embedded female 
subject I find the metaphysics of finitude to be a myopic way of putting 
the question of the limits of what we call ‘life’. It is not because Thanatos 
always wins out in the end that it should enjoy such conceptual high 
status. Death is overrated. The ultimate subtraction is after all only 
another phase in a generative process. Too bad that the relentless 
generative powers of death require the suppression of that which is the 
nearest and dearest to me, namely myself, my own vital being-there. For 
the narcissistic human subject, as psychoanalysis teaches us, it is 
unthinkable that Life should go on without my being there. The process 
of confronting the thinkability of a Life that may not have ‘me’ or any 
‘human’ at the centre is actually a sobering and instructive process. I see 
this post-anthropocentric shift as the start for an ethics of sustainability 
that aims at shifting the focus towards the positivity of zoe.  

This project aims to elaborate sets of criteria for a new social and 
political theory that steers a course between humanistic nostalgia and 
neo-liberal euphoria about the bio-capitalism. Social and political 
practices that take life itself as the point of reference need not aim at the 
restoration of unitary norms, or the celebration of the master-narrative of 
global profit, but rather at social cohesion, the respect for diversity and 
sustainable growth. At the heart of my research project lays an ethics that 
respects vulnerability while actively constructing social horizons of hope.  

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

6 

 
 
 
 
Agamben,  Giorgio  (1998)  Homo  Sacer.  Sovereign  Power  and  Bare  Life.  Stanford; 

University Press. 
   Ansell  Pearson,  Keith  (1997)  Viroid  Life.  Perspectives  on  Nietzsche  and  the 
Transhuman Condition. London and New York; Routledge. 
      Balibar, Etienne (2002) Politics and the Other Scene. London; Verso. 
Balsamo, Anne (1996) Technologies of the Gendered Body Durhman: Duke University 
Press. 

   Barad,  Karen  (2003) ‘Posthumanist  Performativity.  Toward  an  Understanding of 

How Matter Comes to Matter’ in: Signs.Vol 28, no 3, pp 801-831. 
Braidotti,  Rosi  (2002)  Metamorphoses.  Towards  a  Materialist  Theory  of  Becoming. 
Cambridge, UK and Malden, USA; Polity Press/Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 
Braidotti, Rosi (2006) Transpositions. On Nomadic Ethics Cambridge, Polity Press). 
   Butler, Judith (2004) Precarious Life. London; Verso. 

Castells, Manuel (196) The Rise of the Network Society Oxford: Blackwell. 
        Deleuze,  Gilles  and  Felix  Guattari  (1972)  L'anti-Oedipe.  Capitalisme  et 
schizophrénie I. Paris; Minuit. English translation: (1977) Anti-Oedipus. Capitalism and 
Schizophrenia. New York; Viking Press/ Richard Seaver; translation by R. Hurley, M. 
Seem and H.R. Lane. 
   Deleuze, Gilles and Felix Guattari (1980) Mille plateaux. Capitalisme et schizophrénie 
II.  Paris;  Minuit.  English  translation:  (1987)  A  Thousand  Plateaus:  Capitalism  and 
Schizophrenia.  Minneapolis;  University  of  Minnesota  Press.  Translation  by  Brian 
Massumi. 
   Foucault,  Michel  (1976)  Histoire  de  la  sexualité  I.  La  volontée  de  savoir.  Paris; 
Gallimard.  English  translation:  (1978)  The  History  of  Sexuality.  Vol.  I,  New  York; 
Pantheon. Translation by Robert Hurley 
   Foucault,  Michel  (1984a)  Histoire  de  la  sexualité  II:  L'usage  des  plaisirs.  Paris; 
Gallimard. English translation: (1985) History of Sexuality, vol. II: The Use of Pleasure. 
New York; Pantheon Books. Translation by Robert Hurley. 
   Foucault,  Michel  (1984b)  Histoire  de  la  sexualité  III:  Le  souci  de  soi.  Paris; 
Gallimard. English translation: (1986) History of Sexuality, vol. III: The Care of the 
Self. New York: Pantheon Books. Translation by Robert Hurley.  
   Franklin,  Sarah,  Celia  Lury,  Jackie  Stacey  (2000)  Global  Nature,  Global  Culture. 
London; Sage. 

Fraser, Mariam, Sarah Kember, Celia Lury (2005) ‘Inventive Life. Approaches to the 

(2002)  Our  Posthuman  Future.  Consequences  of 

New Vitalism’ in: Theory, Culture & Society Vol 22, no 1, pp 1-14. 
  Fukuyama,  Francis 
BioTechnological Revolution. London; Profile Books. 
   Gilroy, Paul (2000) Against race. Imaging Political Culture Beyond the Colour Line. 
Cambridge, MA; Harvard University Press. 
   Glissant,  Edouard  (1990)  Poetique  de  la  Relation.  Paris;  Gallimard.  English 
translation:  (1997)  Poetics  of  Relation.  Ann  Arbor;  University  of  Michigan  Press. 
Translation by Betsy Wing. 

the 

Grosz, Elizabeth (ed) (1999) Becomings. Explorations in Time, Memory and Futures. 

Ithaca; Cornell University. 

Grosz, Elizabeth (2004) The Nick of Time. Durham; Duke University Press. 

Guattari, Felix (2000) The Three Ecologies. London; The Athlone Press. 
Habermas, Jurgen (2001) The Future of Human Nature 

m,  Judith  and  Ira  Livingston  (eds)  (1995)  Posthuman  Bodies.  Bloomington;  Indiana 

University Press. 

7 

 
 
   Haraway, Donna (1997) Modest_Witness@Second_Millennium. 
FemaleMan©_Meets_ Oncomouse. London and New York; Routledge. 
   Haraway,  Donna  (2003)  The  Companion  Species  Manifesto.  Dogs,  People  and 
Significant Otherness. Chicago; Prickly Paradigm Press. 
   Hayles,  Katherine  (1999)  How  We  Became  Posthuman.  Virtual  Bodies  in 
Cybernetics, Literature and Informatics. Chicago; The University of Chicago Press. 

Mbembe, Achille (2003) ‘Necropolitics’ in: Public Culture. Vol 15, no 1, pp 11-40. 

Translation by Libby Meintjes.  

Rabinow, Paul (2003) Anthropos Today. Princeton; Princeton University Press.    

Rose, Nicholas (2001)   ‘The politics of life itself’, Theory, Culture & Society. Vol. 

18, no 6, pp 1-30.  

 Parisi, Luciana (2004) Abstract Sex. London: Continuum. 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
