PRE-PRINT. FINAL VERSION IN IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING 5
Fig. 4. Extent of the HR dataset with a zoom on the Portland, Manhattan (New
York City) and Philadelphia areas. Each point represent one image (generally
of size 50005000 ) which was later split into tiles. The images cover the
New York City/Long Island region, Philadelphia and Portland. Red points
represent training samples, green pentagons represent validation samples, and
blue indicators are for the test sets (blue triangles for test set 1, blue stars for
test set 2).
covers most urban areas of the USA, along with a few areas
of interest (e.g. national parks). For most areas covered by the
dataset, only one tile is available with acquisition dates ranging
from year 2000 to 2016, with various sensors. The tiles are
openly accessible through USGS’ EarthExplorer tool2.
From this collection, we extracted 161 tiles belonging to
the North-East coast of the USA (see Figure 4) that were split
into100659images of size 512512(each covering 5898m2).
We constructed 100660316questions and answers following the
methodology presented in subsection II-A. We split the data
in a training set ( 61:5%of the tiles), a validation set ( 11:2%),
and test sets ( 20:5%for test set 1, 6:8%for test set 2). As it
can be seen in Figure 4, test set 1 covers similar regions as
the training and validation sets, while test set 2 covers the city
of Philadelphia, which is not seen during the training. Note
that this second test set also uses another sensor (marked as
unknown on the USGS data catalog), not seen during training.
Differences between the two datasets :
Due to their characteristics, the two datasets represent two
different possible use cases of VQA:
The LR dataset allows for large spatial and temporal
coverage thanks to the frequent acquisitions made by
Sentinel-2. This characteristic could be of interest for
future applications of VQA such as large scale queries
(e.g. rural/urban questions) or temporal (which is out of
the scope of this study). However, due to the relatively
low resolution (10m), some objects can not be seen on
such images (such as small houses, roads, trees, . . . ).
This fact severely limits the questions to which the model
2https://earthexplorer.usgs.gov/could give an accurate answer.
Thanks to the much ﬁner resolution of the HR dataset,
a quantity of information of interest to answer typical
questions is present. Therefore, in contrast to the LR
dataset, questions concerning objects’ coverage or count-
ing relatively small objects can possibly be answered
from such data. However, data of such resolution is
generally less frequently updated and more expensive to
acquire.
Based on these differences, we constructed different types
of questions for the two datasets. Questions concerning the
area of objects are only asked in the HR dataset. On the other
hand, questions about urban/rural area classiﬁcation are only
asked in the LR dataset, as the level of zoom of images from
the HR dataset would prevent a meaningful answer from being
provided.
To account for the data distributions and error margins we
also quantize different answers in both datasets:
Counting in LR: as the coverage is relatively large
(6.55km2), the number of small objects contained in one
tile can be high, giving a heavy tailed distribution for the
numerical answers, as shown in Figure 6. More precisely,
while 26.7% of the numerical answers are ’0’ and 50%
of the answers are less than ’7’, the highest numerical
answer goes up to ’17139’. In addition to making the
problem complex, we can argue that allowing such a
range of numerical answer does not make sense on data
of this resolution. Indeed, it would be in most cases
impossible to distinguish 17139 objects on an image of
65536 pixels. Therefore, numerical answers are quantized
into the following categories:
–’0’;
–’between 1 and 10’;
–’between 11 and 100’;
–’between 101 and 1000’;
–’more than 1000’.
In a similar manner, we quantize questions regarding
the area in the HR dataset. A great majority (60.9%) of
the answer of this type are ’0m2’, while the distribution
also presents a heavy tail. Therefore, we use the same
quantization as the one proposed for counts for the LR
dataset. Note that we do not quantize purely numerical
answers (i.e. answers to questions of type ’count’) as
the maximum number of objects is 89 in our dataset.
Counting answers therefore correspond to 89 classes in
the model in this case (see section III).
C. Discussion
Questions/Answers distributions :
We show the ﬁnal distribution of answers per question type
for both datasets in Figure 5. We can see that most question
types (with the exception of ’rural/urban’ questions in the
LR dataset, asked only once per image) are close to evenly
distributed by construction. The answer ’no’ is dominating
the answers’ distribution for the HR dataset with a frequency
of 37.7%. In the LR dataset, the answer ’yes’ occurs 34.9%
of the time while the ’no’ frequency is 34.3%. The strongest