PRE-PRINT. FINAL VERSION IN IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING 2
VQA is a new task in computer vision, introduced in its
current form by [5]. The objective of VQA is to answer a
free-form and open-ended question about a given image. As
the questions can be unconstrained, a VQA model applied
to remote sensing data could serve as a generic solution
to classical problems involving remote sensing data (e.g.
”Is there a thatched roof in this image?” for thatched roof
detection), but also very speciﬁc tasks involving relations
between objects of different nature (e.g. ”Is there a thatched
roof on the right of the river?”). Examples of potential
questions are shown in Figure 1.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time (after
the ﬁrst exploration in [6]) that VQA has been applied to
extract information from remote sensing data. It builds on the
task of generating descriptions of images through combining
image and natural language processing to provide the user
with easily accessible, high-level semantic information. These
descriptions are then used for image retrieval and intelligence
generation [7]. As seen in this introduction, VQA systems rely
on the recent advances in deep learning. Deep learning based
methods, thanks to their ability to extract high-level features,
have been successfully developed for remote sensing data as
reviewed in [8]. Nowadays, this family of methods is used to
tackle a variety of tasks; for scene classiﬁcation, an early work
by [9] evaluated the possibility to adapt networks pre-trained
on large natural image databases (such as ImageNet [10]) to
classify hyperspectral remote sensing images. More recently,
[11] used an intermediate high level representation using recur-
rent attention maps to classify images. Object detection is also
often approached using deep learning methods. To this effect,
[12] introduced an object detection dataset and evaluated clas-
sical deep learning approaches. Methods taking into account
the speciﬁcity of remote sensing data have been developed,
such as [13] which proposed to modify the classical approach
by generating rotatable region proposal which are particularly
relevant for top-view imagery. Deep learning methods have
also been developed for semantic segmentation. In [14], the
authors evaluated different strategies for segmenting remote
sensing data. More recently, a contest organized on the dataset
of building segmentation created by [15] has motivated the
development of a number of new methods to improve results
on this task [16]. Similarly, [17] introduced a contest including
three tasks: road extraction, building detection and land cover
classiﬁcation. Best results for each challenge were obtained
using deep neural networks: [18], [19], [20].
Natural language processing has also been used in remote
sensing. For instance, [21] used a convolutional neural
network (CNN) to generate classiﬁcation probabilities for a
given image, and used a recurrent neural network (RNN) to
generate its description. In a similar fashion, [7] used a CNN
to obtain a multi semantic level representation of an image
(object, land class, landscape) and generate a description
using a simple static model. More recently, [22] uses an
encoder/decoder type of architecture where a CNN encodes
the image and a RNN decodes it to a textual representation,
while [23] projects the textual representation and the image to
a common space. While these works are use cases of naturallanguage processing, they do not enable interactions with the
user as we propose with VQA.
A VQA model is generally made of 4 distinct components:
1) a visual feature extractor, 2) a language feature extractor, 3)
a fusion step between the two modalities and 4) a prediction
component. Since VQA is a relatively new task, an important
number of methodological developments have been published
in both the computer vision and natural language processing
communities during the past 5 years, reviewed in [24]. VQA
models are able to beneﬁt from advances in the computer
vision and automatic language processing communities for
the features extraction components. However, the multi-modal
fusion has been less explored and therefore, an important
amount of work has been dedicated to this step. First VQA
models relied on a non-spatial fusion method, i.e.a point-wise
multiplication between the visual and language feature vectors
[5]. Being straightforward, this method does not allow every
component from both feature vectors to interact with each
other. This interaction would ideally be achieved by multiply-
ing the ﬁrst feature vector by the transpose of the other, but
this operation would be computationally intractable in practice.
Instead, [25] proposed a fusion method which ﬁrst selects
relevant visual features based on the textual feature (attention
step) and then, combines them with the textual feature. In [26],
the authors used Tucker decomposition to achieve a similar
purpose in one step. While these attention mechanisms are
interesting for ﬁnding visual elements aligned with the words
within the question, they require the image to be divided in a
regular grid for the computation of the attention, and this is not
suitable to objects of varying size. A solution is presented in
[27], which learns an object detector to select relevant parts of
the image. In this research, we use a non-spatial fusion step to
keep the model part relatively simple. Most traditional VQA
works are designed for a speciﬁc dataset, either composed
of natural images (with questions covering an unconstrained
range of topics) or synthetic images. While interesting for
the methodological developments that they have facilitated,
these datasets limit the potential applications of such systems
to other problems. Indeed, it has been shown in [28] that
VQA models trained on a speciﬁc dataset do not generalize
well to other datasets. This generalization gap raises questions
concerning the applicability of such models to speciﬁc tasks.
A notable use-case of VQA is helping visually impaired
people through natural language interactions [29]. Images
acquired by visually impaired people represent an important
domain shift, and as such a challenge for the applicability
of VQA models. In [30], the authors conﬁrm that networks
trained on generic datasets do not generalize to their speciﬁc
one. However, they manage to obtain much better results
by ﬁne-tuning or training models from scratch on their
task-speciﬁc dataset.
In this study, we propose a new application for VQA,
speciﬁcally for the interaction with remote sensing images.
To this effect, we propose the ﬁrst remote sensing-oriented
VQA datasets, and evaluate the applicability of this task on
remote sensing images. We propose a method to automatically