PRE-PRINT. FINAL VERSION IN IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING 10
Yes No Rural Urban 0 1-10 101-1000 1000+
Yes
No
Rural
Urban
0
1-10
11-100
101-1000
1000+11-100True
Predicted06544022980
Fig. 10. Confusion matrix for the low resolution dataset (logarithm scale)
on the test set. Red lines group answers by type (”Yes/No”, ”Rural/Urban”,
numbers).
undetected by the model in Figure 8(h), while the parkings
can still be detected in Figure 8(g) possibly thanks to the
cars. This decrease in performance could be reduced by
using domain adaptation techniques. Such a method could
be developed for the image space only (a review of domain
adaptation for remote sensing is done in [39]) or at the
question/image level (see [40], which presents a method for
domain adaptation in the context of VQA).
Answer’s categories:
The confusion matrices indicate that the models generally
provide logical answers, even when making mistakes
(e.g. it might answer ”yes” instead of ”no” to a question
about the presence of an object, but not a number). Rare
exceptions to this are observed for the ﬁrst test set of the
HR dataset (see Figure 11(a)), on which the model gives 23
illogical answers (out of the 316941 questions of this test set).
Language biases:
A common issue in VQA models, raised in [41], is the fact
that strong language biases are captured by the model. When
this is the case, the answer provided by the model mostly
depends on the question, rather than on the image. To assess
this, we evaluated the proposed models by randomly selecting
an image from the test set for each question. We obtained an
overall accuracy of 73.78% on the LR test set, 73.78% on
the ﬁrst test set of the HR dataset and 72.51% on the second
test set. This small drop of accuracy indicates that indeed,
the models rely more on the questions than on the image to
provide an answer. Furthermore, the strongest drop of accuracy
is seen on the HR dataset, indicating that the proposed model
extracts more information from the high resolution data.
Importance of the number of training samples:
We show in Figure 12 the evolution of the accuracies when the
model is trained with a fraction of the HR training samples.
When using only 1% of the available training samples, the
model already gets 65% in average accuracy (vs 83% for themodel trained on the whole training set). However, it can be
seen that, for numerical tasks (counts and area estimation),
larger amounts of samples are needed to achieve the perfor-
mances reported in Table III. This experiment also shows that
the performances start to plateau after 10% of the training data
is used: this indicates that the proposed model would not proﬁt
substantially from a larger dataset.
Restricted set of questions:
While not appearing in the numerical evaluation, an important
issue with our results is the relative lack of diversity in the
dataset. Indeed, due to the source of our data (OSM), the
questions are only on a speciﬁc set of static objects (e.g.
buildings, roads, . . . ). Other objects of interest for applications
of a VQA system to remote sensing would also include differ-
ent static objects (e.g. thatched roofs mentioned in section I),
moving objects (e.g. cars), or seasonal aspects (e.g. for crop
monitoring). Including these objects would require another
source of data, or manual construction of question/answer
pairs.
Another limitation comes from the dataset construction
method described in subsection II-A. We deﬁned ﬁve types
of questions (count, comparison, presence, area, rural/urban
classiﬁcation). However, they only start to cover the range of
questions which would be of interest. For instance, questions
about the distance between two points (deﬁned by textual
descriptions), segmentation questions (e.g. ”where are the
buildings in this image?”) or higher semantic level question
(e.g. ”does this area feel safe?”) could be added.
While the ﬁrst limitation (due to the data source) could be
tackled using other databases (e.g. from national institutes) and
the second limitation (due to the proposed method) could be
solved by adding other question construction functions to the
model, it would be beneﬁcial to use human annotators using
a procedure similar to [5] to diversify the samples.
V. C ONCLUSION
We introduce the task of Visual Question Answering from
remote sensing images as a generic and accessible way of ex-
tracting information from remotely sensed data. We present a
method for building datasets for VQA, which can be extended
and adapted to different data sources, and we proposed two
datasets targeting different applications. The ﬁrst dataset uses
Sentinel-2 images, while the second dataset uses very high
resolution (30cm) aerial orthophotos from USGS.
We analyze these datasets using a model based on deep
learning, using both convolutional and recurrent neural
networks to analyze the images and associated questions. The
most probable answer from a predeﬁned set is then selected.
This ﬁrst analysis shows promising results, suggesting the
potential for future applications of such systems. These re-
sults outline future research directions which are needed to
overcome language biases and difﬁcult tasks such as counting.
The former can be tackled using an attention mechanism [24],
while the latter could be tackled by using dedicated compo-
nents for counting questions [33] in a modular approach.