PRE-PRINT. FINAL VERSION IN IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING 6
(a) Distribution of answers for the LR dataset
yesno
yes
no0m2between 10m2 and 100m2more than 1000m2presencecount
comparea (b) Distribution of answers for the HR dataset (numerical answers are ordered,
and 0 is the most frequent)
Fig. 5. Distributions of answers in the Low resolution (LR) and High resolution (HR) datasets.
Fig. 6. Frequencies of exact counting answers in the LR dataset. Only the
left part of the histogram is shown (until 200 objects), the largest (single)
count being 17139. 50% of the answers are less than 7 objects in the tile.
imbalance occurs for the answer ’0’ in the HR dataset
(with a frequency of 60.9% for the numerical answer). This
imbalance is greatly reduced by the quantization process
described in the previous paragraph.
Limitations of the proposed method :
While the proposed method for image/question/answer triplets
generation has the advantage of being automatic and easily
scalable while using data annotated by humans, a few lim-
itations have been observed. First, it can happen that some
annotations are missing or badly registered [4]. Furthermore,
it was not possible to match the acquisition date of the imagery
to the one of OSM. The main reason being that it is impossible
to know if a newly added element appeared at the same time
in reality or if it was just entered for the ﬁrst time in OSM.
As OSM is the main source of data for our process, errors in
OSM will negatively impact the accuracy of our databases.
Furthermore, due to the templates used to automatically
construct questions and provide answers, the set of questions
and answers is more limited than what it is in traditional VQA
datasets (9 possible answers for the LR dataset, 98 for the HRdataset).
III. VQA M ODEL
We investigate the difﬁculty of the VQA task for remote
sensing using a basic VQA model based on deep learning. An
illustration of the proposed network is shown in Figure 7. In
their simple form, VQA models are composed of three parts
[24]:
A. feature extraction;
B. fusion of these features to obtain a single feature vector
representing both the visual information and the question;
C. prediction based on this vector.
As the model shown in Figure 7 is learned end-to-end, the
vector obtained after the fusion (in green in Figure 7) can be
seen as a joint embedding of both the image and the question
which is used as an input for the prediction step. We detail
each of these 3 parts in the following.
A. Feature extraction
The ﬁrst component of our VQA model is the feature extrac-
tion. Its purpose is to obtain a low-dimensional representation
of the information contained in the image and the question.
1) Visual part: To extract information from a 2D image,
a common choice is to use a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN). Speciﬁcally, we use a Resnet-152 model [32] pre-
trained on ImageNet [10]. The principal motivation for this
choice is that this architecture manages to avoid the un-
desirable degradation problem (decreasing performance with
deeper networks) by using residual mappings of the layers’
inputs which are easier to learn than the common choice of
direct mappings. This architecture has been succesfully used
in a wide range of work in the remote sensing community
(e.g. [8], [17], [33]). The last average pooling layer and fully
connected layer are replaced by a 112D convolution which
outputs a total of 2048 features which are vectorized. A ﬁnal