PRE-PRINT. FINAL VERSION IN IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING 4
Scale Small Medium Large
Low resolution <3000m2<10000m210000m2
High resolution <100m2<500m2500m2
TABLE I
THRESHOLDS FOR SIZE ATTRIBUTES ACCORDING TO THE DATASET
SCALE . W HEN DEALING WITH LOW RESOLUTION DATA ,VISIBLE OBJECTS
OF INTEREST ARE LARGER . TO DEAL WITH THIS DISPARITY ,WE ADAPT
THE SIZE THRESHOLDS TO THE RESOLUTION OF THE IMAGES .
”next to” is handled as a hard threshold on the relative distance
between the two objects (less than 1000m). When looking at
relative positions, we select the second element following the
procedure previously deﬁned.
Question construction : At this point of the procedure, we
have an element (e.g. road), with an optional attribute (e.g.
small road) and an optional relative position (e.g. small road
on the left of a water area). The ﬁnal step is to generate
a ”base question” about this element. We deﬁne 5 types of
questions of interest (”Question catalog” in Figure 2(a)), from
which a speciﬁc type is randomly selected to obtain a base
question. For instance, in the case of comparison questions, we
randomly choose among ”less than”, ”equals to” and ”more
than” and construct a second element.
This base question is then turned into a natural language
question using pre-deﬁned templates for each question type
and object. For some question types (e.g. count), more than
one template is deﬁned (e.g. ’How many are there?’,
’What is the number of ?’ or ’What is the amount of ?’).
In this case, the template to be used is randomly selected. The
stochastic process ensures the diversity, both in the question
types and the question templates used.
2) Answer construction: : To obtain the answer to the
constructed question, we extract the objects from the OSM
database corresponding to the image footprint. The objects b
corresponding to the element category and its attributes are
then selected and used depending on the question type:
Count : In the case of counting, the answer is simply the
number of objects b.
Presence : A presence question is answered by comparing
the number of objects bto 0.
Area : The answer to a question about the area is the sum
of the areas of the objects b.
Comparison : Comparison is a speciﬁc case for which
a second element and the relative position statement is
needed. This question is then answered by comparing the
number of objects bto the ones of the second element.
Rural/Urban : The case of rural/urban questions is han-
dled in a speciﬁc way. In this case, we do not cre-
ate a speciﬁc element, but rather count the number of
buildings (both commercial or residential). This number
of buildings is then thresholded to a predeﬁned number
depending on the resolution of the input data (to obtain
a density) to answer the question. Note that we are using
a generic deﬁnition of rural and urban areas but this can
be easily adapted using the precise deﬁnition of each
Fig. 3. Images selected for the LR dataset over the Netherlands. Each point
represent one Sentinel-2 image which was later split into tiles. Red points
represent training samples, green pentagon represents the validation image,
and blue triangle is for the test image. Note that one training image is not
visible (as it overlaps with the left-most image).
country.
B. Data
Following the method presented in subsection II-A, we
construct two datasets with different characteristics.
Low resolution (LR) : this dataset is based on Sentinel-2
images acquired over the Netherlands. Sentinel-2 satellites
provide 10m resolution (for the visible bands used in this
dataset) images with frequent updates (around 5 days) at a
global scale. These images are openly available through ESA’s
Copernicus Open Access Hub1.
To generate the dataset, we selected 9 Sentinel-2 tiles cover-
ing the Netherlands with a low cloud cover (selected tiles are
shown in Figure 3). These tiles were divided in 772images of
size 256256(covering 6:55km2) retaining the RGB bands.
From these, we constructed 770232 questions and answers
following the methodology presented in subsection II-A. We
split the data in a training set ( 77:8%of the original tiles), a
validation set ( 11:1%) and a test set ( 11:1%) at the tile level
(the spatial split is shown in Figure 3). This allows to limit
spatial correlation between the different splits.
High resolution (HR) : this dataset uses 15cm resolution aerial
RGB images extracted from the High Resolution Orthoim-
agery (HRO) data collection of the USGS. This collection
1https://scihub.copernicus.eu/