Adversarial Machine Learning in Image Classification: A Survey Towards the Defender’s Perspective 13
Defenses based on adversarial training are usually considered in literature a brute force approach
to protect against adversarial examples. Essentially, the main objetive of adversarial training is
to make a classification model more robust by training it in a dataset containing legitimate and
adversarial images. Formally, given a tuple X=(x,y), where xis a legitimate image, ythe class x
belongs to and Ta training dataset having only the tuple X6, such as T={X}, an adversarial image
x′is crafted from xby an attack algorithm A, thus forming a new tuple X′that will have the same
labelyof the clean image x, such that X′={x′,y},x′=A(x). Afterwards, the training dataset Tis
augmented with X′and now contains two image tuples: T′={X,X′}. The learning model is then
retrained using the training dataset T′, resulting in a theoretically stronger model (see Figure 5).
Despite the good results adversarial training has presented in several works [ 66,85,90,99,123,
175,180,200], this gradient masking approach has basically two issues. The first issue is related to
the strong coupling adversarial training has with the attack algorithm used during the training
process. Retraining a model with adversarial training does not produce a generic model which
is able to resist against evasions of adversarial images generated by a different attack algorithm
not used in the training process. In order to have a more generic model, it would be necessary
to elaborate a training dataset Twith a massive amount of adversarial images generated using
different attack algorithms and amounts of disturbance. Therefore, the second issue concerning
adversarial training raises: this is a procedure computationally inefficient, given two facts: (i) the
great number of adversarial images that must be crafted from different attacks, which in turn does
not guarantee robustness against adversarial images generated from more complex algorithms
and (ii) after generating these malicious images, the model must train using a much larger dataset,
which exponentially grows the training time. A robust defense method must be decoupled from
any attack algorithm to increase its generalization. Notwithstanding the drawbacks, Madry et al .
[123] proposed training on adversarial samples crafted using Projected Gradient Descent (PGD)
attack which is, by the time of this writing, the most promising defense present in literature, since
it has shown robustness to various types of attacks in both white-box and black-box settings [ 187].
However, their method is not model-agnostic and, due to computational complexities, it has not
been tested on large-scale datasets such as ImageNet [133].
Defensive Distillation, in turn, is a proactive defense initially proposed by Papernot et al .[148].
This countermeasure is inspired by a technique based on transfer of knowledge among learning
models known as distillation [ 80]. In learning distillation, the knowledge acquired by a complex
model, after being trained using a determined dataset, is transfered to a simpler model. In a similar
way, defensive distillation firstly trains a model fusing a dataset containing samples Xand labels
Ywith a temperature t, resulting as output a probabilistic vector f(X). The label set Yis then
replaced by the probabilistic vector f(X)and a model fdwith the same architecture of fis created
and trained with the sample set X, but now using as labels the novel label set f(X). By the end of
training, the destilled probabilistic output fd(X)is produced. Figure 6 depicts the schematic model
of defensive distillation.
Defenses based on gradient masking usually produce models containing smoother gradients in
certain regions of space, making harder for the attacker to find promising directions to perturb an
image. However, the attacker can instead use an non-differentiable attack, such as BPDA [ 5] or SPSA
[183] as well as perform a black-box attack by training a surrogate model. This surrogate model
reproduces the behaviour of the targeted model, since the attacker queries it using images carefully
crafted by him and watches the outputs the targeted model gives. Then, the attacker takes advantage
of the transferibility property of adversarial examples by using the gradients of the surrogate model
6For didactic purposes, consider the training dataset Tformed by only one image.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2020.