20 Machado, et al.
make them susceptible to adversarial attacks [ 59,97]. Despite the absence of an unanimous accepted
explanation for the adversarial paradox10, this section will describe some common hypotheses
present in literature regarding the existence of adversarial images.
5.1 High Non-Linearity Hypothesis
Szegedy et al .[175] firstly concerned about the existence of adversarial examples. The authors have
argued that adversarial examples exist due to the high non-linearity of deep neural networks, what
contributes to the formation of low probability pockets in the data manifold that are hard to reach
by sampling an input space around a given example (see Figure 9a). According to Gu and Rigazio
and Song et al .[70,166], the emergence of such pockets is given chiefly due to some deficiencies
of objective functions, training procedures and datasets limited in size and diversity of training
samples, thus leading models to poor generalizations.
5.2 Linearity Hypothesis
Goodfellow et al .[66] contradicted the non-linearity hypothesis of Szegedy et al .by assuming
DNNs have a very linear behaviour caused by several activation functions like ReLU and sigmoid
that perpetuates small perturbed inputs in a same wrong direction. As an attempt to underlie their
explanation, the authors have elaborated the FGSM attack. Fawzi et al .[53] said that the robustness
of a classifier is independent of the training procedure used and the distance between two classes
is larger in high-order classifiers than in linear ones, suggesting that it is harder to find adversarial
examples in deeper models. This explanation also goes against the non-linearity hypothesis of
Szegedy et al .. However, in contrast to the linearity hypothesis, Tabacof and Valle [ 176] has found
evidences the phenomenon of adversarial paradox may be a more complex problem, since results
obtained from empirical experiments have suggested that shallow classifiers present a greater
susceptibility to adversarial examples than deeper models. Despite some works that criticize the
linearity hypothesis, some relevant attacks (such as FGSM [ 66] and DeepFool [ 132]) and defenses
(such as Thermometer Encoding [17]) have been based on it.
5.3 Boundary Tilting Hypothesis
Tanay and Griffin [ 177], on the other hand, have rejected the linear hypothesis proposed by
Goodfellow et al .by assuming that it is "insufficient" and "unconvincing". They have proposed
instead a boundary tilting perspective to explain the adversarial paradox. This assumption, according
to the authors, is more related to the explanation given by Szegedy et al ., where a learnt class
boundary lies close to the training samples manifold, but this learnt boundary is "tilted" with
respect to this training manifold. Thereby, adversarial images can be generated by perturbing
legitimate samples towards the classification boundary until they cross it. The amount of required
perturbation is smaller as the tilting degree decreases, producing high-confidence and misleading
adversarial examples, containing visually imperceptible perturbations. The authors also believe
this effect might be a result of an overfitted model. Figure 9b shows a simplified illustration of the
boundary tilting perspective compared with the Szegedy et al. hypothesis.
5.4 High Dimensional Manifold
Gilmer et al .[61], in concordance with other works such as Mahloujifar et al ., Shafahi et al .and
Fawzi et al .[52,125,160], said that the phenomenon of adversarial examples is result from the high
10Tanay and Griffin [ 177] have defined this paradox as the disparity between high performance classification of state-
of-the-art deep learning models against their susceptibility to small perturbations that differ so close from one class to
another.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2020.