10 Machado, et al.
3.3 Algorithms for Generating Adversarial Images
In Computer Vision, the algorithms used to generate adversarial perturbations are optimization
methods that usually explore generalization flaws in pretrained models in order to craft and insert
perturbations into legitimate images. The next sections will describe with more details four attack
algorithms frequently used, namely (i) FGSM [66],(ii) BIM [98],(iii) DeepFool [132] and (iv) CW
Attack [23]. Afterwards, Table 1 organizes, according to the taxonomies presented in Sections 3.1
and 3.2, other important attack algorithms.
3.3.1 Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM). FGSM is a sequential algorithm proposed by Goodfellow
et al.[66] to sustain his linear hypothesis for explaining the existence of adversarial examples
(see Section 5.2). The main characteristic of FGSM is its low computational cost, resulted from
perturbing, in just one step (limited by a given upper bound ϵ), a legitimate image at the direction
of the gradient that maximizes the model error. Despite its efficiency, the perturbations generated
by FGSM are usually greater and less effective to fool models than the perturbations generated
by iterative algorithms. Given an image x∈Rw×h×c, FGSM generates an adversarial image x′
according to Equation 2:
x′=x−ϵ·siдn(®∇xJ(Θ,x,y)) (2)
where®∇xrepresents the gradient vector, Θrepresents the network parameters, ythe class associated
tox,ϵthe maximum amount of perturbation that can be inserted into xandJ(Θ,x,y)the cost
function used to train the neural network.
3.3.2 Basic Iterative Method (BIM). This attack is a iterative version of FGSM, initially proposed
by Kurakin et al .[98]. In constrast to FGSM, BIM executes several minor steps α, where the total
size of the perturbation is limited by an upper bound defined by the attacker. Formally, BIM can be
defined as a recursive method, which generates x′according to Equation 3:
x′=(
x′
0=0
x′
i=x′
i−1−clip(α·sign(®∇xJ(Θ,x′
i−1,y))(3)
where cliplimits values to the lower and higher edges outside the given interval.
3.3.3 DeepFool. The main ideia behind DeepFool, proposed by Moosavi-Dezfooli et al .[132],
consists of finding the nearest decision boundary of a given legitimate image xand then subtly
perturb this image to make it cross the boundary and fool the classifier. Basically, DeepFool
approximates, for each iteration, the solution of this problem by linearizing the classifier around an
intermediate x′. The intermediate x′is then updated towards the direction of an optimal direction
by a small step α. This process is repeated until the small perturbation computed by DeepFool
makes x′cross the decision boundary. Similarly to FGSM, DeepFool is also based on the linearity
hypothesis to craft perturbations.
3.3.4 Carlini & Wagner Attack. The CW attack has been proposed by Carlini and Wagner [ 23] and
currently represents the state-of-the-art algorithm for generating adversarial images. Formally,
given an DNN fhaving a logits layer zand a input image xbelonging to a class t, CW uses the
gradient descent to solve iteratively Equation 4:
minimize||x−x′||22+c·ℓ(x′) (4)
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2020.