22 Machado, et al.
as is simulated by grey and black-box settings. Adversarial transferability can be formally defined
as the property that some adversarial samples have to mislead not only a target model f, but also
other models f′even when their architectures greatly differ [ 146]. Papernot et al .[145] have split
adversarial transferability into two main categories: (i) intra-technique transferability , which occurs
between two models that share a similar learning algorithm (e.g. DNNs) and are trained using
the same dataset, however initialized with different parameters (e.g. transferability between two
DNN architectures, such as VGG-16 and ResNet-152); (ii) cross-technique transferability , that occurs
between two models which respectivelly belong to different learning algorithms (e.g. DNN and
SVM), where can even perform different learning tasks, such as image classification and object
detection (see Appendix 8 for more details). According to Wiyatno et al .[187], understanding the
transferability phenomenon is critical not only to explain the existence of adversarial examples,
but to create safer machine learning models.
Some assumptions have arisen in literature as an attempt to explain adversarial transferability.
The linearity hypothesis assumed by Goodfellow et al .[66] suggests the direction of perturbations
may be the crucial factor that allows the adversarial effect transfer among models, since the
disturbances end up acquiring similar functions through training. Tramèr et al .[181], in turn, have
hypothesized if adversarial transferability is actually a consequence of the intersection between the
adversarial subspace of two different models. By estimating the number of orthogonal adversarial
directions using a techinique called Gradient Aligned Adversarial Subspace (GAAS) , they found that
the separating distance between the decision boundaries of two models was, on average, smaller
than the distances between any inputs to the decision boundaries, even on adversarially trained
models. This suggests their adversarial subspaces were overlapped. At last, they also concluded
that transferability is inherent to models that preserve non-robust properties when trying to learn
feature representations of the input space, what according to the authors is not a consequence of a
lack of robustness, but actually a intrinsic property of the learning algorithms themselves. Their
findings agreed with the works of Liu et al. [115] and Ilyas et al. [87].
6 PRINCIPLES FOR DESIGNING AND EVALUATING DEFENSES
Defending robustly against adversarial attacks is still an open question. Carlini et al .[19] assert
defenses often claim robustness against adversarial examples without carrying out common security
evaluations, what in fact contributes to the construction of brittle and limited architectures which
are rapidly broken by novel and adaptive attacks. For this reason, the authors have defined a basic
set of principles and methodologies that should be followed by both defenders and reviewers to
check whether a defense evaluation is thorough and follows currently accepted best practices.
This is crucial to prevent researchers from taking deceitful statements and conclusions about their
works. In the following are listed and briefly explained some basic and relevant principles based on
the Carlini et al .’s guide for properly evaluating general defenses. For further orientations, it is
recommended consult the authors’ paper [19].
6.1 Define a Threat Model
A defense should always define a threat model where it states to be robust against adversarial attacks.
It is important the threat model be described in details, preferably following the taxonomy defined
in Section 3.2, so that reviewers and attackers can restrict their evaluations under the requirements
the defense affirms to be secure. For instance, a certain defense claims robustness under a threat
model formed by: evasive attacks conducted in a white-box scenario where adversarial examples
are generated by gradient and approximation-based attacks with L2norm and perturbation size
less than 1.5. Based on this information, fair attackers which are interested in this defense must
follow exactly what is specified by this threat model when designing their attacks.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2020.