Adversarial Machine Learning in Image Classification: A Survey Towards the Defender’s Perspective 23
6.2 Simulate Adaptive Adversaries
A good evaluation must test the limits of a defense by simulating adaptive adversaries which
make use of its threat model to elaborate strong attacks. All settings and attacks scenarios that
stand a chance to bypass the defense should be taken into consideration without exceptions. An
evaluation conducted only based on non-adaptive adversaries is of very limited utility since the
results produced by the experiments do not bring reliable conclusions that support the defense’s
claims and its robustness bounds. A good evaluation will not try to support or assist the defense’s
claims, but will try to break it under its threat model at all costs. Therefore, weak attack settings and
algorithms, such as FGSM attack11must not be solely used. It is worth mentioning there are some
relevant libraries available online for helping researchers to perform evaluations by simulating
adaptive adversaries, such as CleverHans [142],Adversarial Robustness Toolbox (ART) [139],Foolbox
[151], DEEPSEC [109] andAdvBox [67].
6.3 Develop Provable Lower Bounds of Robustness
Most works make use of empirical and heuristic evaluations to assess the robustness of their
defenses. However, provable approaches are preferred since they provide, when the proof is correct,
lower bounds of robustness which ensure the performance of the evaluated defense will never fall
below that level. Nevertheless, provable evaluations usually suffer from the lack of generalization,
since they get attached to the network architecture and a specific set of adversarial examples X,
crafted using a certain attack algorithm, that has been used in the experiments. This evaluation does
not give any proofs that extend for other adversarial examples x′<X, what makes the statement
less powerful. Circumvent these problems when developing provable lower bounds is an active
research path (see Section 7.1).
6.4 Perform Basic Sanity Tests
Sanity tests are important to identify anomalies and antagonic results that can lead authors to take
incorrect conclusions. Carlini et al .[19] has listed some basic sanity tests that should be run to
complement the experiments and support the results.
•Report model accuracy on legitimate samples: while the protection of learning models
against adversarial examples is a relevant security issue, a significant decrease on legitimate data
on behalf of increasing the robustness of the model might be unreasonable for scenarios where
the probability of an actual adversarial attack is low and the cost of a misclassification is not
high. For reactive defenses, it is important to evaluate how the rejection of perturbed samples
can affect the accuracy of the model on legitimate samples. An analysis of a Receiver Operating
Characteristic (ROC) curve may be helpful to check how the choice of a threshold for rejecting
adversarial inputs can decrease the model’s clean accuracy;
•Iterative vs.sequential attacks: iterative attacks are more powerful than sequential attacks. If
adversarial examples crafted by a sequential algorithm are able to affect classification models
more than examples crafted by iterative ones, it can indicate that the iterative attack is not
properly calibrated;
•Increase the perturbation budget: attacks when allowed to produce larger amounts of distor-
tion in images usually fool classifiers more often than attacks with smaller perturbation budgets.
Therefore, if the attack success rate decreases as the perturbation budget increases, this attack
algorithm is likely flawed;
11FGSM originally was implemented to support the linearity hypothesis made in Goodfellow et al .[66]. For this and other
reasons related to the attack configurations, such as its sequential execution when computing perturbations, this attack is
considered weak and untrustworthy to fully test defenses, usually used only to run sanity tests (see Section 6.4).
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2020.