Adversarial Machine Learning in Image Classification: A Survey Towards the Defender’s Perspective 25
7.3 Devising of Efficient Attack Algorithms
Crafting strong adversarial examples is computationally expensive even on vanilla datasets. Ap-
plications which count on small response times, such as the traffic signal recognition system of a
autonomous vehicle, require efficiency from attack algorithms when intercepting and perturbing
the inputs. Attacks in black-box environments also impose more difficulties to the attacker since
he usually has available only a limited number of queries to the oracle12in order to generate the
perturbations. Regarding defenses, a good evaluation also needs testing numerous attacks, what can
be computationally infeasible depending on the algorithms and datasets used. Therefore, devising
strong and efficient adversarial attacks is a relevant research path for both fields of Adversarial
Machine Learning.
7.4 Comparison to Prior Work
As previously mentioned, a large amount of adversarial defenses emerges in literature, however
few of them perform a comparative study with other methods. A well-conducted study compar-
ing different security approaches could help fomenting results in addition to reveal promising
architectures for specific threat models.
7.5 Development of Hybrid Defense Architectures
It is worth mentioning as a encouraging research path the development of hybrid defenses. The term
hybrid defense stands for an architecture formed by different countermeasures which are organized
on individual processes, called modules . Each module would be responsable for performing some
security procedure according to the approach that represents it. On each module, a component
(represented by a defense or preprocessing method) would be randomly picked from a repository
when receiving the input image. For instance, a hybrid defense could consist of three modules: a (i)
reactive module , which randomly chooses a reactive defense from a repository to detect adversarial
images; a (ii) preprocessing module that randomly processes the detected adversarial images that
came from the reactive module, and a (iii) proactive module which similarly chooses at random
a proactive defense to finally classify the input image. To the best of knowledge, it has not been
found in literature any work that has adopted similar approach or study, what, in turn, make this
path open for future opportunities.
8 FINAL CONSIDERATIONS
Deep Learning models have revealed to be susceptible to attacks of adversarial nature despite
shown impressive abilities when solving complex cognitive problems, specially tasks related to
Computer Vision, such as image classification and recognition. This vulnerability severely menaces
the application of these learning algorithms in safety-critical scenarios, what in turn may jeopardize
the development of the field if this security issue persists in the future. The scientific community
has been struggling to find alternatives to defend against adversarial attacks practically since this
problem was firstly spotted by the work of Szegedy et al .[175]. The numerous proposed defenses,
albeit promising at first, have shown to be brittle and innefective to stop strong and adaptive attacks
though. This arms race between attacks and defenses makes the field of Adversarial Machine
Learning fairly dynamic and active, where the emergence of novel defense approaches almost daily
plays a role in becoming review papers quickly outdated.
Before this chaotic scenario, this work has aimed to attend the interested readerships by elab-
orating a comprehensive and self-contained survey that gathers the most relevant research on
Adversarial Machine Learning. It has covered topics regarding since Machine Learning basics to
12In black-box attacks, the term oracle often represents the target model the attacker wants to fool.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2020.