Adversarial Machine Learning in Image Classification: A
Survey Towards the Defender’s Perspective
GABRIEL R. MACHADO, Military Institute of Engineering (IME), Brazil
EUGÊNIO SILVA, State University of West Zone (UEZO), Brazil
RONALDO R. GOLDSCHMIDT, Military Institute of Engineering (IME), Brazil
Deep Learning algorithms have achieved the state-of-the-art performance for Image Classification and have
been used even in security-critical applications, such as biometric recognition systems and self-driving cars.
However, recent works have shown those algorithms, which can even surpass the human capabilities, are
vulnerable to adversarial examples. In Computer Vision, adversarial examples are images containing subtle
perturbations generated by malicious optimization algorithms in order to fool classifiers. As an attempt
to mitigate these vulnerabilities, numerous countermeasures have been constantly proposed in literature.
Nevertheless, devising an efficient defense mechanism has proven to be a difficult task, since many approaches
have already shown to be ineffective to adaptive attackers. Thus, this self-containing paper aims to provide
all readerships with a review of the latest research progress on Adversarial Machine Learning in Image
Classification, however with a defender’s perspective. Here, novel taxonomies for categorizing adversarial
attacks and defenses are introduced and discussions about the existence of adversarial examples are provided.
Further, in contrast to exisiting surveys, it is also given relevant guidance that should be taken into consideration
by researchers when devising and evaluating defenses. Finally, based on the reviewed literature, it is discussed
some promising paths for future research.
CCS Concepts: •Information systems →Decision support systems ;•Security and privacy →Domain-
specific security and privacy architectures ;•Computing methodologies →Neural networks .
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Computer Vision, Image Classification, Adversarial Images, Deep Neural
Networks, Adversarial Attacks, Defense Methods.
ACM Reference Format:
Gabriel R. Machado, Eugênio Silva, and Ronaldo R. Goldschmidt. 2020. Adversarial Machine Learning in Image
Classification: A Survey Towards the Defender’s Perspective. 1, 1 (September 2020), 35 pages. https://doi.org/---
1 INTRODUCTION
In the last years, Deep Learning algorithms have made an important and rapid progress in solving
numerous tasks involving complex analysis of raw data. Among some relevant cases, it can be
mentioned major advances in speech recognition and natural language processing [ 39,194], games
[162], finacial market analysis [ 78], fraud and malware detection [ 38,94], prevention of DDoS
attacks [ 199] and Computer Vision [ 74,83,96,173,174]. In the field of Computer Vision, the
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have become the state-of-the-art Deep Learning algorithms
since Krizhevsky et al .[96] have presented innovative results in image classification tasks using
Authors’ addresses: Gabriel R. Machado, gabriel.rmachado@ime.eb.br, Military Institute of Engineering (IME), Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil; Eugênio Silva, State University of West Zone (UEZO), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, eugeniosilva@uezo.rj.gov.br; Ronaldo R.
Goldschmidt, ronaldo.rgold@ime.eb.br, Military Institute of Engineering (IME), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
©2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
XXXX-XXXX/2020/9-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/---
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2020.arXiv:2009.03728v1  [cs.CV]  8 Sep 2020