Adversarial Machine Learning in Image Classification: A Survey Towards the Defender’s Perspective 21
Fig. 9. Comparison between the Szegedy et al .and Tanay and Griffin’s hypotheses [ 177]. a) Szegedy et al .’s
hypothesis lies on the assumption that an image space is densely filled with low probability adversarial pockets.
Similarly, b) Tanay and Griffin’s hypothesis indicates the existence of tilted boundaries what contributes to
the emergence of adversarial examples.
dimensional nature of the data manifold. In order to show evidences, Gilmer et al .have created a
synthetic dataset for better controlling their experiments, and used it afterwards to train a model.
After training it, the authors observed that inputs correctly classified by the model were close to
nearby misclassified adversarial inputs, meaning that learning models are necessarily vulnerable to
adversarial examples, independently of the training procedure used. At last, based on empirical
results, Gilmer et al .have also denied the assumption that states adversarial examples lie on a
different distribution when compared to legitimate data [60, 126, 155, 166].
5.5 Lack of Enough Training Data
Schmidt et al .[158] claim learning models must generalize in a strong sense, i.e.with the help of
robust optimization, in order to achieve robustness. Basically, the authors observed the existence
of adversarial examples is not necessarily a shortcoming of specific classification models, but an
unavoidable consequence of working in a statistical setting. After gathering some empirical results,
the authors concluded that, currently, there are no working approaches which attain adversarial
robustness mainly because existing datasets are not large enough to train strong classifiers.
5.6 Non-Robust Features Hypothesis
Ilyas et al .[87] have provided a different explanation based on the assumption the existence
of adversarial perturbations does not necessarily indicate flaws regarding learning models or
training procedures, but actually regarding images’ features. By taking into account the human’s
perception, the authors split the features into (i) robust features, that lead models to correctly
predict the true class even when they are adversarially perturbed, and (ii) non-robust features,
which are features derived from patterns in the data distribution that are highly predictive yet
brittle, incomprehensible to humans and more susceptible to be perturbed by an adversary. In order
to underlie their assumption, the authors proposed constructing a novel dataset formed by images
containing solely robust features which have been filtered out from the original input images by
using the logits layer of a trained DNN. Then, this dataset has been used to train another DNN that
has been used to perform a comparative study. The results has led the authors to find evidences
that adversarial examples might really arise as a result of the presence of non-robust features, what
goes in a opposite direction of what it is commonly believed: that adversarial examples are not
necessarily tied to the standard training framework. Their conclusion is somehow related to the
Schmidt et al. [158] work.
5.7 Explanations for Adversarial Transferability
As briefly mentioned in Section 4.1.2, adversarial examples make heavy use of the transferability
property to drastically affect the performance of learning models even in more realistic scenarios,
where the attacker does not have access to much or any information regarding the target classifier,
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2020.