2 Machado, et al.
the AlexNet architecture. Thereafter, motivated by the continuous popularization of GPUs and
frameworks, the CNNs have kept growing in performance, being currently even used in security-
critical apllications, such as medical sciences and diagnostics [ 33,110], autonomous vehicles [ 14],
surveillance systems [43] and biometric and handwritten characterers recognition [7, 168, 179].
Nevertheless, some researchers have begun to argue if the same deep learning algorithms,
which could even surpass the human performance [ 92], were actually robust enough to be used
in safety-critical environments. Unfortunately, since the paper of Szegedy et al .[175], various
works have highlighted the vulnerability of deep learning models in different tasks such as speech
recognition [ 24], text classification [ 47], malware detection [ 69] and specially image classification
[23,66,147] before adversarial attacks . Adversarial attacks are usually conducted in the form of
subtle perturbations generated by an optimization algorithm and inserted into a legitimate image
in order to produce an adversarial example which, in the field of Computer Vision is specifically
known as adversarial image . After being sent to be classified, an adversarial image is often able
to lead CNNs to produce a prediction different from the expected, usually with a high confidence.
Adversarial attacks on image classifiers are the most common in the literature and, for this reason,
are the focus of this paper.
The vulnerability of CNNs and other Deep Learning algorithms to adversarial attacks have
forced the scientific community to revisit all the processes related to the construction of intelligent
models, from the elaboration of architectures to the formulation of the training algorithms used, as a
attempt to hypothesize some possible reasons concerning this lack of robustness1and thus propose
countermeasures that may hold future attacks of adversarial nature. This arms race between attacks
and defenses against adversarial examples has ended up forming a recent research area called
Adversarial Machine Learning that, in a nutshell, struggles to construct more robust Deep Learning
models.
Adversarial Machine Learning in Image Classification is currently a very active research path
which is responsible for most of the work in the area, with novel papers produced almost daily.
However, there is neither a known efficient solution for securing Deep Leanirng models nor any
fully accepted explanations for the existence of adversarial images yet. Taking into account the
dynamism and relevance of this research area, it is crucial to be available in literature comprehensive
and up-to-date review papers in order to position and orientate their readers about the actual
scenario. Although there are already some extensive surveys [ 2,187,198], they have already become
somewhat outdated due to the great activity in the area. Moreover, they bring out a general overview
of the Adversarial Machine Learning field, what, in turn, contributes to these papers neither have
focused enough in works that have proposed defenses against adversarial attacks nor have provided
proper guidance for those who wishes to invest in novel countermeasures.
Therefore, keeping in mind the importance of Adversarial Machine Learning in Image Classifi-
cation to the development of more robust defenses and architectures against adversarial attacks,
this self-contained paper aims to provide for all readerships an exhaustive and detailed review of
the literature, however with a defender’s perspective. The present survey covers from the back-
ground needed to clarify the reader essential concepts in the area to the techinical formalisms
related to adversarial examples and attacks. Futhermore, a comprehensive survey of defenses and
coutermeasures against adversarial attacks is made and categorized on a novel taxonomy. Then,
based on the works of Carlini and Wagner [ 21] and Carlini et al .[19], the present paper discusses
some principles for designing and evaluating defenses which are intended to guide researchers
1Robustness can be defined as the capacity of a model or defense to tolerate adversarial disturbances by delivering reliable
and stable outputs [190].
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2020.