16 Machado, et al.
this added step results in a substantial reduction of any potential adversarial noise. In turn, Liu
et al.[113] have adopted an approach based on noise layers. These noise layers have been inserted
among the hidden layers of a CNN in order to apply a gaussian noise randomly crafted on each
vector of the input image. According to the authors, this procedure avoids gradient-based attacks.
Gu and Rigazio [ 70] have elaborated the Deep Contractive Networks (DCNs), which are proactive
defense methods that make use denoising autoencoders and evolutionary algorithms as alternatives
to remove perturbations from adversarial images.
In addition, there are countermeasures that preprocesses input images using dimensionality
reduction techniques [ 79,104,195]. These works are based on the hypothesis that, by reducing the
dimensions of an input, the likelihood of an attacker creating a perturbation that can affect the
classifier’s performance decreases, given the fact the attack algorithm will have less information
concerning the hyperspace of the image [ 195]. Keeping this hypothesis in mind, Hendrycks and
Gimpel [ 79] have elaborated a reactive defense based on Principal Component Analysis (PCA)8. The
authors have inferred that adversarial images assign greater weights on larger principal components
and smaller weights on initial principal components. Li and Li [ 104] have applied PCA on values
produced by the convolution layers of a DNN and then used a cascate classifier to detect adversarial
images. The cascate classifier Cclassifies an image xas legitimate only if all its subclassifiers Ci
classify xas legitimate, but rejects xif some classifier Cireject x. In this work, the L-BFGS attack
has been used to perform the experiments.
Xu et al .[195] have introduced Feature Squeezing , which is reactive defense that makes use of
two techniques to reduce de dimensionality of a input image: (i) color bit reduction and (ii) spatial
smoothing. According to the authors, these techniques have been chosen since they complement
each other by treating two different types of perturbation. The bit reduction aims to eliminate
small perturbations by covering various pixels, while spatial smoothing aims to eliminate big
perturbations by covering some pixels. During the detection process, Feature Squeezing generates
two reduced versions of an input image x: (i)ˆx1, which represents image xwith the color bits
reduced and (ii) ˆx2, which represents xreduced with spatial smoothing. Later, Feature Squeezing
sends the images x,ˆx1eˆx2to be classified by a DNN fand compares the softmax outputs f(x),f(ˆx1)
ef(ˆx2)using the L1metric. If the L1metric exceeds a predefined threshold τ, Feature Squeezing
classifies xas an adversarial example and discarts it. Figure 7 depicts this workflow.
Fig. 7. The Feature Squeezing workflow [195].
Ensemble of Classifiers .Defenses based on ensemble of classifiers are countermeasures formed
by two or more classification models that can be chosen in runtime. This approach is based on
the assumption that each model reciprocally compensates the weaknesses other model eventually
might have when classifying a given input image [ 77]. Works such as Abbasi and Gagné, Strauss
et al., Tramèr et al .and Sengupta et al .[1,159,170,180] have adopted different techniques to
8PCA is a dimensionality reduction technique that reduces, by appling a linear transformation, a set of points in n-dimensional
space to a k-dimensional space, where k≤n.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2020.