18 Machado, et al.
Carrara et al .[25] have introduced a reactive defense that resembles somehow the DkNN
architecture [ 144]. The reactive method proposed by Carrara et al ., at first, make use of a DNN f
to classify an input image x. Afterwards, the inner representations regarding image x, obtained
from a hidden layer of f(such layer is chosen empirically), are used by an kNN algorithm to
perform a search in the training dataset in order to recover the kimages containing the most similar
representations to the corresponding representations of x. Therefore, it is obtained a confidence
metric conf related to the prediction f(x), where conf is computed based on the score of the
kNN algorithm. If the confidence is below a predefined threshold, the input image is classified as
adversarial and discarted afterwards; otherwise, the prediction f(x)is valid with a confidence level
ofc.
In turn, Meng and Chen [ 126] have proposed MagNet: a non-deterministic and reactive archi-
tecture composed of two defense layers: (i) a detection layer, which rejects adversarial images
containing large perturbations and, for this reason, considered further from the decision boundary,
and (ii) the reform layer, which reforms the images derived from the detection layer as an attempt
to remove any existing perturbations that are still present in them. According to the authors, the
reform layer acts as a "magnet", drawing the adversarial images that evaded the detection layer to
the regions of the decision boundary corresponding to their respective correct classes. For both
layers, MagNet randomly chooses from a repository two defense components, implemented as
autoencoders (trained beforehand using legitimate images): one autoencoder for the detection layer
and the other for the reformer layer. The non-deterministic choice of the components is, according
to the authors, inspired on cryptography techniques to reduce the chances of evasions.
In Vorobeychik and Kantarcioglu [ 184] is said that a defense based on randomness may be an
inportant strategy to secure machine learning algorithms. Since randomness can significantly
increase the size of perturbations and the computational cost needed to craft adversarial images,
Machado. et al .[122] have extended the non-deterministic effect of MagNet by proposing a defense
called MultiMagNet, which randomly chooses multiple defense components at runtime instead of
just one, how is originally made by MagNet. In a way similar to MagNet, the MultiMagNet’s defense
components have also been implemented as autoencoders trained on legitimate images. Later, the
authors have split the MultiMagNet’s architecture into two stages, namely (i) calibration stage and
(ii) deployment stage . In calibration stage, MultiMagNet makes use of a validation dataset to find
the best set of hyperparameters. Once calibrated, MultiMagNet goes to the (ii) deployment stage ,
where it analyzes input images in order to protect the application classifier against adversarial
examples. The authors have made a comparative study with MagNet using legitimate and adversarial
images crafted by FGSM, BIM DeepFool and CW attacks, and concluded the increasing of the
non-deterministic effect by choosing multiple components can lead to better defense architectures.
Table 2 makes a comprehensive overview of some relevant defenses against adversarial attacks
in Computer Vision available in literature, following the taxonomy presented in Section 4.1. It also
shows which of them have already been circumvented by mentioning the corresponding works on
adversarial attacks.
5 EXPLANATIONS FOR THE EXISTENCE OF ADVERSARIAL EXAMPLES
Developing an understanding about the existence and the properties of adversarial examples, by
reasoning why they affect the prediction of machine learning models, is usually the first step
taken into consideration when elaborating attacks and defenses in Adversarial Machine Learning
[121]. The vulnerability that CNNs and other machine learning algorithms present before the
malicious effects of adversarial attacks is popularly known as Clever Hans Effect , term somewhat
popularized by the advent of CleverHans library [ 142]. This effect has been named after a german
horse called Hans. His owner used to claim Hans has owned intellectual abilities by answering
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2020.