Adversarial Machine Learning in Image Classification: A Survey Towards the Defender’s Perspective 15
to verify whether a legitimate dataset S1belongs to the same distribution of another dataset S2,
which may contain adversarial images. Formally, given two datasets S1andS2, it is initially defined
a=MMD(S1,S2). Later, there is a permutation of elements of S1andS2in two new datasets S′
1
andS′
2, and it is defined b=MMD(S′
1,S′
2). Ifa<b, the null hypothesis is rejected and then it is
concluded that the two datasets belong to different distributions. This process is repeated several
times and the p-value is defined as the fraction of the number of times which the null hypothesis
was rejected.
Feinman et al .[54] have also proposed a reactive defense called Kernel Density Estimation (KDE).
KDE makes use of Gaussian Mixture Models7to analyze the outputs of the logits layer of a DNN
and to verify whether the input images belong to the same distribution of legitimate images. Given
an image xclassified as a label y, the KDE estimates the probability of xaccording to Equation 6:
KDE(x)=1XyÕ
s∈Xyexp©­
«Fn−1(x)−Fn−1(s)2
σ2ª®
¬(6)
where Xyis the training dataset containing images pertaining the class yandFn−1(x)is the logits
output Zrelated to input x. Therefore, the detector is built by the selection of a threshold τwhich
classifies xas adversarial if KDE(x)<τor legitimate, otherwise.
Preprocessing Techniques .Other works have elaborated countermeasures based on prepro-
cessing techniques, such as image transformations [ 71,191], GANs [ 155,161], noise layers [ 113],
denoising autoencoders [ 70] and dimensionality reduction [ 79,104,195]. In the following, each
work will be explained in more details.
Xie et al .[191] have elaborated a proactive defense called Random Resizing and Padding (RRP)
that inserts a resizing and a padding layer in the beginning of a DNN architecture. The resizing
layer alters the dimensions of a input image, and later, the padding layer inserts null values in
random positions on the surrondings of the resized image. In the end of the padding procedure, the
resized image is classified by the proactive model.
Guo et al .[71] have applied various transformations in input images before classification, such as
cropping and rescaling, bit-depth reduction, JPEG compression, total variance minimization (TVM)
and image quilting. Guo et al .have implemented TVM as a defense by randomly picking pixels
from an input and performing iterative optimization to find an image whose colors are consistent
with the randomly picked pixels. On the other hand, image quilting has involved reconstructing an
image using small patches taken from the training database by using a nearest neighbor procedure
(e.g. kNN). The intuition behind image quilting is to construct an image that is free from adversarial
perturbations, since quilting only uses clean patches to reconstruct the image [ 187]. The authors
claimed that TVM and image quilting have presented the best results when protecting the classifier
since both (i) introduce randomness, (ii) are non-differentiable operations which hinders the attacker
to compute the model gradient and (iii) are model-agnostic which means the model does not need
to be retrained or fine-tuned.
Shen et al .[161] have proposed a proactive defense method which have adapted a GAN to
preprocess input images before they be sent to the application classifier. Samangouei et al .[155] have
also elaborated a defense based on a GAN framework that uses a generative transformation network
Gwhich projects an input image xonto the range of the generator by minimizing the reconstruction
error||G(z)−x||2. After the transformation, the classifier is fed with the reconstruction G(z). Since
the generator was trained to model the unperturbed training data distribution, the authors claimed
7Gaussian Mixture Models are unsupervised learning models that clusters data by representing sub-populations, using
normal distributions, within a general population.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2020.