12 Machado, et al.
4.1.1 Defense Objective. According to its main objetive, a defense can be (i) proactive or(ii) reactive .
Proactive defenses aim to turn classification models more robust to adversarial images. A model is
considered robust when it is able to correctly classify an adversarial image as if it were a legitimate
image. On the other hand, reactive defenses focus on detecting adversarial images by acting as
a filter that identifies malicious images before they reach the classifier. The detected images are
usually either discarted or sent to a recovery procedure.
4.1.2 Defense Aproach. Defenses can adopt different approaches when protecting models against
adversarial images. Each approach groups a set of similar procedures, which can range from
brute force solutions to preprocessing techniques. Based on a systematic review of literature,
this paper also categorizes the most relevant proactive and reactive countermeasures according
to their operational approach, which can be: (i) gradient masking ,(ii) auxiliary detection models ,
(iii) statistical methods ,(iv) preprocessing techniques .(v) ensemble of classifiers and(vi) proximity
measurements .
Gradient Masking: defenses based on gradient masking (effect also known as obfuscated gradi-
ent[5]) produce, sometimes unintentionally, models containing smoother gradients that hinders
optimization-based attack algorithms from finding wrong directions in space, i.e.without useful
gradients for generating adversarial examples. According to Athalye et al .[5], defenses based
on gradient masking can be organized in: (i) shattered gradients, (ii) stochastic gradients and(iii)
exploding/vanishing gradients .
•Shattered gradients: are caused by non-differentiable defenses, thus introducing nonexistent or
incorrect gradients;
•Stochastic gradients: are caused by randomized proactive/reactive defenses or randomized pre-
processing on inputs before being fed to the classifier. This strategy of gradient masking usually
leads an adversarial attack to incorrectly estimate the true gradient;
•Exploding/vanishing gradients: are caused by defenses formed by very deep architectures, usually
consisting of multiple iterations of a neural network evaluation, where the output of one layer is
fed as input of the next layer.
Fig. 5. Adversarial training increases the robustness of classifiers by training them using an augmented
training dataset containing adversarial images. Adapted from Shen et al. [161].
Basically, there are many countermeasures based on different strategies of gradient masking, as
can be seen in Table 2. However, two distinct strategies are frequently mentioned by related work
in literature, which in turn make them relevant to describe in more details: (i) Adversarial Training
and(ii) Defensive Distillation .
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2020.