6 Machado, et al.
3.1.1 Perturbation Scope. Adversarial images may contain individual-scoped perturbations or
universal-scoped perturbations.
•Individual-scoped perturbations: individual-scoped perturbations are the most common in
literature. They are generated individually for each input image;
•Universal-scoped perturbations: universal-scoped perturbations are image-agnostic pertur-
bations, i.e.they are perturbations generated independently from any input sample. Nevertheless,
when they are applied to an legitimate image, the resulting adversarial example is often able to
lead models to misclassification [ 128,131]. Universal perturbations permit adversarial attacks
being conducted more easily in real-word scenarios, since these perturbations are crafted just
once to be inserted into any sample belonging to a certain dataset.
3.1.2 Perturbation Visibility. The efficiency and visibility of perturbations can be organized as:
•Optimal perturbations: these perturbations are imperceptible to human eyes, but are useful to
lead deep learning models to misclassification, usually with a high confidence on the prediction;
•Indistinguishable perturbations: indistinguishable perturbations are also imperceptible to
human eyes, however they are insufficient to fool deep learning models;
•Visible perturbations: perturbations that, when inserted into a image, are able to fool deep
learning models. However they can also be easily spotted by humans [16, 91];
•Physical perturbations: are perturbations designed outside the digital scope and physically
added to real-world objects themselves [ 50]. Although some works have adapted physical pertur-
bations to Image Classification [ 98], they are usually directed to tasks involving Object Detection
[32, 50, 178] (see Appendix C);
•Fooling images: perturbations which corrupt images to the point of making them unrecogniz-
able by humans. Nevertheless, the classification models believe these corrupted images belong
to one of the classes of the original classification problem, sometimes assigning to them a high
confidence on the prediction [ 138]. Fooling images are also known as rubbish class examples [66];
•Noise :in contrast to the malicious nature of perturbations, noises are non-malicious or non-
optimal corruptions that may be present or inserted into a input image. An example of noise is
the gaussian noise.
3.1.3 Perturbation Measurement. Given the fact that it is difficult to define a metric that measures
the capability of human vision, the p-norms are most used to control the size and the amount of the
perturbations that are inserted into a image [ 126]. The p-norm Lpcomputes the distance ∥x−x′∥p
in the input space between a legitimate image xand the resulting adversarial example x′, where
p∈{0,1,2,∞}. In Equation 1 is defined the p-norm when p=1(Manhattan Distance) and p=2
(Euclidean Distance):
Lp=pqÕ
|x−x′|p(1)
When p=0, it is counted up the number of pixels that have been modified in a legitimate sample in
order to generate the adversarial image. On the other hand, the L∞measures the maximum difference
among all pixels in the corresponding positions between two images. For L∞norm, each pixel is
allowed to be modified within a maximum limit of perturbation, without having any restriction for
the number of modified pixels. Formally, L∞=∥x−x′∥∞=maxx1−x′
1,x2−x′
2,···,xn−x′
n
.
Despite the norms p∈{0,1,2,∞}be the most used when computing perturbations, there are some
works that have defined custom metrics, as can be seen in Table 1.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2020.