24 Machado, et al.
•Try brute force attacks: it can be an alternative in scenarios where the attacks do not succeed
very often. By performing a random search attack within the defense’s threat model can help
the attacker or reviewer to find adversarial examples which have not been found by standard
adversarial attacks, what indicates these algorithms must be somehow improved. Carlini et al .
recommend starting this sanity test by sampling random points at larger distances from the
legitimate input, limiting the search to strictly smaller distortions whenever an adversarial
example is found.
•White-box vs. black-box attacks: white-box attacks are generally more powerful than black-
box attacks, since the attacker has complete access to the model and its parameters. For this
reason, gradient-based attacks should, in principle, present better success rates. If gradient-based
attacks have worse performance when compared to other attack approaches, it can indicate the
defense is somehow performing a kind of gradient masking and the gradient-based attack needs
calibration.
•Attack similar undefended models: proactive and reactive defenses typically introduce a
couple of modifications in the networks in order to increase their robustness. However, it can
be worth trying remove these security components out from the model and evaluate it under
attacks without any protection. If the undefended model appears robust nevertheless, it can infer
that the defense itself is not actually protecting the model.
6.5 Releasing of Source Code
It is crucial that all source code used to implement the experiments and pre-trained models referred
in the defense’s paper, including even their hyperparameters, be available to the community through
online repositories so that interested reviewers can reproduce the evaluations made by the original
work and ensure their correctness.
7 DIRECTIONS OF FUTURE WORK
During the development of this paper, it has been noticed adversarial defenses are still in their
infancy, despite the impressive growth of published works in the last years. There are numerous
important questions waiting for answers, specially those referring to how defend robustly against
adversarial examples. This opens some promising research paths that will be detailed in the
following.
7.1 Development of Theoretical Lower Bounds of Robustness
Most defenses are limited to empirical evaluations and do not claim robustness to unknown attacks
[187]. Other works, in turn, devise theoretical robustness bounds which do not generalize to
different attacks and threat models studied. A promising research path is the investigation of
properties that can theoretically guarantee general lower bounds of robustness to adversarial
attacks (see Section 6.3).
7.2 Unanimously Explanations Concerning the Existence and Transferability of
Adversarial Examples
As can be seen in Section 5, there are already some explanations for the existence and transferability
of adversarial examples. However, none of them is universally accepted due to the lack of proofs.
Developing unanimously provable explanations for these phenomena is relevant for the field of
Adversarial Machine Learning, since they will guide future defenses to focus on solving the actual
flaw and help the community understand better the inner workings of deep learning models.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2020.