Adversarial Machine Learning in Image Classification: A Survey Towards the Defender’s Perspective 3
to introduce stronger security methods. Essentially, the main contributions of this work are the
following:
•The update of some existing taxonomies in order to categorize different types of adversarial
images and novel attack approaches that have raised in literature;
•The discussion and organization of defenses against adversarial attacks based on a novel taxon-
omy;
•The address of relevant explanations for the existence of adversarial examples;
•The provision of some important guidances that should be followed by researchers when devising
and evaluating defenses;
•The discussion of promising research paths for future works in the field.
The remaining of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 brings an essential background
which covers important topics and concepts for the proper understanding of this work. Section 3
formalizes and also categorizes adversarial examples and attacks. Section 4 makes a deep review
on defenses existing in literature and proposes a novel taxonomy for organizing them. Section
5 addresses and formalizes relevant explanations for the existence of adversarial examples that
have supported the development of attacks and defenses. Section 6 provides close guidance based
on relevant work to help defenders and reviewers to respectivelly design and evaluate security
methods. Section 7 lists promising research paths in Adversarial Machine Learning for Image
Classification. Finally, Section 8 brings the final considerations.
2 BACKGROUND
Conventional Machine Learning models (also known as shallow models [11]) have begun to have
high dependency of domain experts and present critical limitations when attempting to extract
useful patterns from complex data, such as images and audio speech [198]. Therefore, it has been
necessary to develop traditional learning algorithms into more elaborated architectures, forming
a recent area in Artificial Intelligence called Deep Learning [81]. Deep Learning is a subfield of
Machine Learning where its algorithms simulate the operation of the human brain in order to extract
and learn hidden representations from raw inputs, oftentimes without any human intervention.
Mostly, Deep Learning is based on Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), which are formed by many
layers containing numerous processing units, which gathers knowledge from a massive amount
of data by appling several linear and non-linear transformations on the received inputs, which in
turn, allows these models to learn high-level abstractions from simpler concepts [63, 72, 124].
This paper focuses mostly on Convolutional Neural Networks. CNNs are a special type of
Deep Neural Network and currently are the state-of-the-art algorithms for Image Classification
[184]. However, Appendix A briefly covers other tasks Adversarial Machine Learning takes part
in Computer Vision. The next section explains, in a nutshell, the main components of a CNN, in
addition to list the state-of-the-art architectures over the years, according to the ILSVRC challenge
[154].
2.1 Convolutional Neural Networks
CNN architectures usually perform feature learning by making use of (i) convolution and (ii)
pooling layers which, respectivelly, extracts useful features from images and reduces their spatial
dimensionality. After feature learning, comes the fully connected layer (FC), which works in a
way similar to a common neural network. In a classification task, FCs produce a single probability
vector as output, which is called the probability vector . The probability vector contains membership
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2020.