8 Machado, et al.
can be similar to the targeted model. The input/output attack is usually the first step to perform
black-box attacks (see Section 3.2.2).
3.2.2 Attacker’s Knowledge. Taking into consideration the attacker’s knowlegde with respect to
the targeted model, three types of attacks can be performed: (i) white-box attacks ,(ii) black-box
attacks and(iii) grey-box attacks .
•White-box attacks : in a white-box attack, the attacker has fully access to the model’s and
even the defense’s parameters and architectures, whenever such defense exists. This attack
scenario probably would be the least frequent in real-world applications, due to the adoption
of protection measures (such as users control, for example) in order to prevent unauthorized
people access to the system components. By contrast, white-box attacks are usually the most
powerful type of adversarial attack, and for this reason, are commonly used to evaluate the
robustness of defenses and/or classification models when they are undergone to harsh conditions.
Unfortunately, elaborating countermeasures resistant to white-box attacks is, so far, an open
problem;
•Black-box attacks : in this scenario, the attacker neither has access nor knowledge about any
information concerning the classification model and the defense method, when present. Black-box
attacks impose more restrictions to attackers, nonetheless they are important when reproducing
external adversarial attacks aiming deployed models, which in turn, better represent real-world
scenarios [ 146]. Despite the greater difficulty to perform black-box attacks, the attacker still might
be able to evade the target model due to the transferability of adversarial examples . Works such
as Szegedy et al .and Papernot et al .[146,175] have shown the malicious effect of an adversarial
image, generated using a certain classifier, is able to transfer and fool other classifiers, including
the ones created by different learning algorithms (check Section 5.7 for more details). With
this property in favor of the attacker, he can create an empirical model through a causative
attack called substitute orsurrogate model , which has similar parameters to the targeted model’s.
Therefore, the attacker can use this surrogate model to craft adversarial images and, afterwards,
deploy them to be, oftentimes, misclassified by the targeted model;
•Grey-box attacks :this attack scenario has been firstly proposed by Meng and Chen [ 126]. In
grey-box attacks, the attacker has access to the classification model, but does not have access to
any information concerning the defense method. Grey-box attacks are an intermediate alternative
to evaluate defenses and classifiers, since they impose a greater threat level when compared
to the black-box attacks, but without giving a wide advantage to the attacker when providing
him as well with all the information concerning the defense method, as performed in white-box
scenarios.
3.2.3 Security Violation. Security violations are often associated with the attacker’s objective when
performing an adversarial attack against a classifier. The security violations caused by adversarial
attacks can affect the (i) integrity , (ii) availability and the (iii) privacy of the targeted classifiers.
•Integrity violation : this is the most common violation provoked by an adversarial attack. The
integrity is affected when adversarial images, crafted by an certain attacker, are able to stealthily
bypass existing countermeasures and lead targeted models to misclassification, but without
compromising the functionality of the system;
•Availability violation : occurs when the functionality of the system is also compromised, causing
a denial of service. Availability violations mainly affect the reliability of learning systems by
raising uncertainty of their predictions;
•Privacy violation : happens when the attacker is able to gain access to relevant information
regarding the targeted model, such as its parameters, architecture and learning algorithms used.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2020.