Adversarial Machine Learning in Image Classification: A Survey Towards the Defender’s Perspective 5
the autoencoder is actually trying to learn the inner representations of the input, regarding the
structure of data. Autoencoders are useful for two main purposes: (i) dimensionality reduction,
retaining only the most important data features [ 82,112,157] and (ii) data generation process [ 41].
Fig. 3. An example of an autoencoder architecture.
2.2.2 Generative Adversarial Networks. Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are a framework
introduced by Goodfellow et al. [ 65] for building generative modelsPGwhich resembles the data
distributionPdata used in the training set. GANs can be used to improve the representation of
data, to conduct unsurpevised learning and to even construct defenses against adversarial images
[65,198]. There are works that have also used GANs for other purposes, such as image-to-image
translation and visual style transfer [ 88,203]. The GANs are composed by two models (usually
deep networks) trained simultaneously: a generator Gand a discriminator D. The generator receives
an input xand tries to generate an output zfrom a probability distribution PG. In contrast, the
discriminator classifies z, producing a label that determines if zbelongs to the distribution Pdata
(benign orreal input ) orPG(fake oradversarial input ). In other words, the generator Gis actually
being trained to fool the classifier D. In this competing scenario, GANs are usually capable of
generating data samples that looks close to benign examples.
3 ADVERSARIAL IMAGES AND ATTACKS
Formally, an adversarial image can be defined as follows: let fbe a classification model trained
with legitimate images ( i.e.images which do not have any malicious perturbations) and let xbe a
legitimate image (where x∈Rw×h×c, such that wandhare the dimensions of the image and cis its
amount of color channels), then it is crafted, from x, an image x′, such that x′=x+δx, where
δxis the perturbation needed to make xcross the decision boundary, resulting f(x),f(x′)(see
Figure 4a). The perturbation δxcan also be interpreted as a vector ®δx, where its magnitude ∥®δx∥
represents the amount of perturbation needed to translate the point represented by the image x
in the space beyond the decision boundary. Figure 4b illustrates a didactic example of inserting
a perturbation δxinto a legitimate image xon a 2D space. According to Cao and Gong [ 18], an
adversarial image is considered optimal if it satisfies two requirements: (i) if the perturbations
inserted on this image are imperceptible to human eyes and (ii) if these perturbations are able to
induce the classification model to produce an incorrect output, preferably with a high confidence.
3.1 Taxonomy of Adversarial Images
This section is based on the works of Barreno et al ., Huang et al ., Kumar and Mehta, Xiao, Yuan et al .
and Brendel et al .[10,15,84,97,190,198] to propose a broader4taxomomy to adversarial images
formed by three diferent axes: (i) perturbation scope ,(ii) perturbation visibility and(iii) perturbation
measurement . The next sections explain each axis in details.
4For comparative purposes, the novel topics proposed by this paper are underlined.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2020.