Adversarial Machine Learning in Image Classification: A Survey Towards the Defender’s Perspective 9
Privacy violations in deep learning are strictly related to black-box attacks, where the attacker
queries the targeted model in order to reverse-engineer it and produce a surrogate model, which
crafts adversarial examples closer to the original data distribution.
3.2.4 Attack Specificity. With respect to specificity, an attacker can perform a (i) targeted attack
and an (ii) untargeted (or indiscriminate) attack . Targeted attacks aim to craft an adversarial image
in order to lead the model to misclassify it in a predetermined class, chosen beforehand by the
attacker. On the other hand, in untargeted attacks, the attacker just seeks to fool the model by
aiming any class different from the legitimate class corresponding to the original example. Formally,
letxbe a legitimate image, ythe original class of the image xandfa classification model; then,
an adversarial image x′=x+δxis crafted from x. In a targeted attack, the attacker seeks to craft
a perturbation δxin order to produce in fas output a specific class y′, such that f(x+δx)=y′
andy′,y. Conversely, in an untargeted attack, it is generated an adversarial image x′, such that
f(x),f(x′). Targeted attacks usually present higher computational costs when compared to
untargeted attacks.
3.2.5 Attack Computation. The algorithms used to compute perturbations can be (i) sequential
and(ii) iterative . The sequential algorithms compute in just one iteration, the perturbation that will
be inserted into a legitimate image. Iterative algorithms, in turn, make use of more iterations in
order to craft the perturbation. Since iterative algorithms make use of more iterations to compute
perturbations, they have a higher computational cost when compared to sequential algorithms.
However, the perturbations generated by iterative algorithms are usually smaller and more eficient
to fool classification models than those generated by one-step procedures.
3.2.6 Attack Approach. Adversarial attacks can also be organized with respect to the approach used
by the attack algorithm to craft the perturbation. According to [ 15], the approach of adversarial
attacks can be based on (i) gradient ,(ii) transferibility/score ,(iii) decision and(iv) approximation .
•Gradient-based attacks: this attack approach is the most used in literature. The gradient-based
algorithms make use of detailed information of the target model concerning its gradient with
respect to the given input. This attack approach is usually performed in white-box scenarions,
when the attacker has full knowledge and access to the targeted model;
•Transfer/Score-based attacks: these attack algortihms either depend on getting access to the
dataset used by the targeted model or the scores predicted by it in order to approximate a gradient.
Usually, the outputs obtained by querying a targeted deep neural network are used as scores.
These scores are then used along with the training dataset to fit a surrogate model which will
craft the perturbations that will be inserted into the legitimate images. This attack approach is
often useful in black-box attacks;
•Decision-based attacks: this approach has been firstly introduced by Brendel et al .[15], and it
is considered by the authors as a simpler and more flexible approach, since requires few changes
in parameters than gradient-based attacks. A decision-based attack usually queries the softmax
layer of the targeted model and, iteratively, computes smaller perturbations by using a process of
rejection sampling;
•Approximation-based attacks: attacks algorithms based on this approach try to approximate a
gradient for some targeted model or defense formed by a non-differentiable technique usually by
applying numerical methods. These approximated gradients are then used to compute adversarial
perturbations.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2020.