Adversarial Machine Learning in Image Classification: A Survey Towards the Defender’s Perspective 17
elaborate defenses based on ensemble of classifiers. Sengupta et al .[159] have used a bayesian
algorithm to chose a optimal model from an ensemble so as to minimize the chances of evasion
and, at the same time, maximize the correct predictions on legitimate images. Abbasi and Gagné
[1] have formed ensembles of specialist models which detects and classifies an input image by
majority vote. Strauss et al .[170] have made empirical evaluations based on four types of different
ensembles and trainings. Tramèr et al .[180], in turn, have used a variation of adversarial training
to train the main classifier with adversarial images crafted by an ensemble of DNNs.
Proximity Measurements .There are other works such as Cao and Gong, Carrara et al ., Machado.
et al., Meng and Chen, Papernot and McDaniel which have proposed defenses based on proximity
measurements among legitimate and adversarial images to the decision boundary. Papernot and
McDaniel [ 144] have elaborated an proactive defense method called Deep k-Nearest Neighbors
(DkNN), which makes use of a variation of the kNN algorithm9to compute uncertainty and
reliability metrics from the proximity among the hidden representations of training and input
images, obtained from each layer of a DNN. The labels representing points in space of training
images are analyzed after the input image goes through all the layers of the DNN. In case of the
prediction related to the input x, given by the DNN, be in accordance with the labels representing
the nearest training images to x, the uncertainty metric tends to be small. In contrast, in case of the
labels of the training images be divergent among them, the uncertainty metric tends to be large
[141]. Figure 8 depicts the DkNN operation.
Fig. 8. The DkNN computes uncertainty and reliability metrics to support a prediction made by a DNN for a
given input image x, by performing a search among the training images with internal representations closest
tox[141].
Cao and Gong [ 18] have also adopted an approach based on proximity metrics to elaborate a
proactive countermeasure, called Region-based Classification (RC). RC is a variation of the kNN
which defines a region Rin hyperspace, having as centroid an input image x, assigning it a label
corresponding to the class which most intersects the area of this region R. Formally, for a given
input image xand a DNN fthat splits the hyperspace in Cdistinct regions R={R1,R2,···,RC}
(being Cthe number of classes and Rithe predicted class for f(x)), it is created a hypercube B(x,r)
around x(being xthe centroid of B(x,r)) with length r.Ai(B(x,r))is the area of hypercube B(x,r)
that intersects the region Ri. The classifier RCformed from fis defined as RCf,rand its prediction
forxis based on the region Riwhich has the largest intersection with the area of hypercube, namely
RCf,r=argmaxi(Ai(B(x,r))).
9kNN stands for k-Nearest Neighbors. It is an supervised classification algorithm that assigns, to a given input x, the most
frequent class camong the knearest training samples from x, according to a certain distance metric.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2020.