Algorithm 1 Improved baseline with class-level mining
Parameters K,η
1:fort= 1 :Tdo
2: Random sample anchor class cafromY
3:B← Sampleηinstances from{x|yx=ca}
4: GetNof size(K−1)by Eq. ( 8)
5: forc∈N do
6:Bc←Sampleηinstances from{x|yx=c}
7:B←B∪B c
8: end for
9: Perform one iteration of training to minimize the
loss Eq. ( 12) using minibatchB
10:end for
and helpful to diversify the identiﬁed nearest classes. In ad-
dition, the reﬁned instance-level search only from the se-
lected classes reduces the computational cost.
For a formal description, let us ﬁrst deﬁne a similarity
Sg(·,·)between a set of vectors Uand a vector v∈ V ,
which is given by
Sg(U,v)≡max
u∈US(u,v), (9)
whereUandVare sets of vectors.
We ﬁrst search for nearest neighbor classes from an an-
chor class based on distances from samples in the anchor
class to the signatures of the rest of classes, which is given
by
Pc= argmax
V′⊂W\{wca}/summationdisplay
v∈V′Sg(Bca,v) (10)
subject to|V′|=α(K−1),
whereWdenotes a set of class signatures and α(≥1)is
chosen randomly at each iteration, for sample diversiﬁca-
tion. In a nutshell, Pcconsists of top α(K−1)negative
class signatures, which have largest similarities Sgfrom the
set of sampled anchor instances, Bca. We usePcas class
candidates for the reﬁned search, thereby reducing the num-
ber of candidate instances. For a given Pc, to diversify the
training examples, we randomly sample (K−1)ηinstances
among the instance pool, Psby
Ps= argmax
V′⊂{x|yx=c,c∈Pc}/summationdisplay
v∈V′Sg(Bca,v) (11)
subject to|V′|=β(K−1)η,
whereβ(≥1)is to increase the number of candidates for
the ﬁnal selection of examples to be included in a minibatch.
In a nutshell,Psconsists of top β(K−1)ηsamples from
the class setPc, which have largest similarities Sgfrom the
set of sampled anchor instances, Bca. Note that each mini-
batch contains Kηinstances, which include the elements inAlgorithm 2 Training with stochastic hard example mining
Parameters K,η
1:fort= 1 :Tdo
2: Random sample α(≥1)
3: Random sample an anchor class ca
4:Bca←Sampleηinstances from{x|yx=ca}
5:B←B ca
6: Get a class poolPcusing Eq. ( 10).
7: Get a instance pool PsusingPcand Eq. ( 11).
8:Ba←Random sample (K−1)ηelements fromPs
9:B←B∪B a
10: Perform one iteration of training to minimize the
loss Eq. ( 12) using minibatchB
11:end for
Bcaand the subsampled instances from the nearest neighbor
classes. Algorithm 2summarizes the overall training pro-
cess.
Figure 4(b) illustrates the diversity of the selected nega-
tive classes over iterations. Compared with Figure 4(a), the
proposed stochastic hard example mining strategy allows to
identify more diverse classes over iterations and learns the
model more efﬁciently.
3.3.4 Computation efﬁciency
Suppose that there are nsamples in each of |Y|classes.
The na ¨ıve approach to ﬁnd hard negative examples would
require to scan the whole dataset, which requires |Y|nfor-
ward passes of the network in total for feature extraction.
In contrast, our algorithm reduces the computational cost
for feature extraction by ﬁrst identifying a small set of near-
est classes based on the learned class signatures and then
searching for the nearest instances only within the set. Con-
sequently, the proposed method extracts features only from
cnsamples, where cis a number of the candidate nearest
classes. Note that one needs to repetitively recompute fea-
tures during training due to gradual update of embedding
space. Since the feature extraction dominates the computa-
tion time, our approach still has the advantage over the na ¨ıve
one despite the potentially large value of n.
3.4. Loss
We jointly train the parameters of feature extractor and
the class signatures Wto minimize both triplet loss and the
class signature loss. We hope that joint learning of triplet
and classiﬁcation loss improves the accuracy of both tasks
as reported in [ 6,40]. The loss function is formally given by
L(W,X) =LT(X)+LC(W,X), (12)
whereLT(·)andLC(·,·)denote the triplet and the class
signature loss, respectively. Note that the gradient from the
7255