Figure 3. The average sample-to-sample distance between classes
with respect to the rank of their class-to-class distances in In-
shop retrieval and SOP dataset, averaged over 100random anchor
classes. This result shows that expected sample-to-sample distance
is proportional to the corresponding class-to-class distance.
Iteration1 2000Class index Class index(a)
(b)
Figure 4. For a given anchor class ca, the diversity of chosen nega-
tive classes in each minibatch are illustrated in the In-shop retrieval
dataset. The x-axis and y-axis correspond to the training iteration
and class index, respectively. The highlighted cells denote the se-
lected classes. It shows that the selected classes in a minibatch are
diverse over the iteration in the stochastic hard example mining
(b) while mostly ﬁxed in the deterministic class-level mining in
Algorithm 1(a).
3.3. Batch Construction
We now discuss how to construct minibatches and facil-
itate training using the identiﬁed hard examples.
3.3.1 Baseline protocol [ 38]
We adopt the approach in Zhao et al . [38] as the base-
line batch construction protocol. At each iteration, it con-
structs a minibatch by ﬁrst randomly sampling Kclasses
and then randomly sampling ηimages from each of theclasses, which makes the minibatch size M=Kη. The
loss is given by every possible triples composable from a
minibatch. This approach is popularly used [ 38,23,7] due
to its simplicity and performance. Note that [ 23] is a special
case when K=M/2andη= 2.
3.3.2 Improving baseline by hard class mining
We increase the expected number of hard triplets in each
minibatch compared to the baseline protocol by composing
each minibatch with the instances randomly sampled from
an anchor class and its (K−1)-nearest classes. Formally,
given an anchor class caat each iteration, its (K−1)-nearest
classesNare identiﬁed by the following optimization:
argmax
N⊂Y/summationdisplay
c∈NS(wc,wca) (8)
subject to ca/∈N and|N|=K−1,
whereYis a set of class labels. Once the nearest classes
are selected, ηinstances are randomly sampled from each
of the classes, which constructs a minibatch B. Algorithm 1
describes the detailed procedure.
A drawback of this approach is that the variation of
sample-to-sample distances within a class becomes large
when its intra-class variation is large. As a result, the class
similarity measured by class signatures has too much error
to approximate the similarity of instances belonging to the
classes. A more serious issue is the limited diversity of the
sampled hard negative classes in the na ¨ıve approach. As il-
lustrated in Figure 4(a), given an anchor class ca, only a few
hard negative classes are sampled repeatedly over iterations
while most of them fail to be selected. It implies that only a
limited number of negative classes are used for training for
each anchor class. To alleviate these limitations, we propose
a stochastic hard example mining approach.
3.3.3 Stochastic hard example mining
Instead of relying only on class signatures to ﬁnd nearest
neighbor classes, we employ the distances computed be-
tween a set of instances in the anchor class and the class
signatures of the rest of the classes. At every iteration, we
ﬁrst randomly select an anchor class and a subset of exam-
ples from it; given an anchor class ca, we constructBca,
which is a subset of minibatch B, withηexamples ran-
domly sampled from the class. Then, we search for a pool
of nearest neighbor classes based on instance-to-class dis-
tances between the anchor instances in Bcaand the set of
class signaturesW\{ca}. The nearest neighbor samples are
ﬁnally identiﬁed by collecting the sampled instances within
this pool. The use of instance-to-class distances is effective
to cope with the classes with a large intra-class variation
7254