Hyperparameters We set the batch size to 60 ( M= 60 ).
Given the batch size, we choose η= 10 for the small
datasets (CARS- 196and CUB- 200-2011 ), which has 60 to
80 samples per class, and η= 5 for the larger datasets (In-
shop retrieval and Stanford Online Products), which only
has 5 to 7 examples per class. In Algorithm 2,αis ran-
domly chosen from {3,4,5}at each iteration with β= 5
for CARS- 196and CUB- 200-2011 , and from{15,20,25}
withβ= 1for In-shop retrieval and SOP.
Optimization We use Adam [ 9] for optimization. The ini-
tial learning rate and weight decay are set to 1×10−4and
5×10−4, respectively. The learning rate is exponentially
decayed to 1×10−7from epoch 200to400.
4.3. Evaluation Metrics
We employ the Recall@ K(R@K) metric for evaluation.
For each sample, Knearest neighbors are retrieved from the
remaining test set. If retrieved images include at least one
sample from the same class, it is considered to be correct.
The Recall@ Kmetric measures the number of correct sam-
ple over entire sample. For the distance measure, Euclidean
distance is used, which is equivalent to the cosine distance
in our case, because the feature are ℓ2-normalized.
4.4. Effect of the Stochastic Hard Example Mining
We evaluate the proposed stochastic hard example min-
ing method in aspect of the hardness.Figure 5illustrates the
number of triplets with non-zero losses within the mini-
batch constructed in each iteration of training. Compared
to the random sampling [ 38] and class-level mining (Al-
gorithm 1), the proposed stochastic hard negative mining
strategy (Algorithm 2) is obviously more effective to ﬁnd
desirable triplets that have non-zero losses.
To evaluate the effect of the proposed stochastic hard
class mining, we compare our method (Algorithm 2) with
baseline protocol [ 38], hard class mining (Algorithm 1), and
two variants of ours. Table 2present the accuracies of all the
compared methods. It is known that training the feature ex-
tractor with joint loss of triplet and classiﬁcation enhances
the accuracy from the baseline which uses only triplet loss.
To discriminate the effect of the hard sample mining and
the addition of loss (Eq. 5), we show both results, only with
mining ( var2) and the full model. In var2, the class sig-
nature loss does not back-propagate to the feature extractor.
Another variant ( var1) replaces the proposed class signature
with the class-wise average of features, extracted from the
Inception v1 pre-trained on the ImageNet dataset. Table 2
shows that the proposed method consistently improves the
accuracy compared to the random sampling baseline in all
the datasets. We reimplemented three existing mining meth-
ods [ 6,21,30] for comparison with the proposed algorithm.
For fair comparison, we used the same setting in the algo-
Figure 5. Comparison of the number of triplets with non-zero loss
in a minbatch during training.
rithms except for the mining strategies, where the feature
extractor is trained by the triplet loss without the signature
loss. As shown in Table 2, the proposed approach ( var2)
achieves the best accuracy in general among the compared
methods.
4.5. Comparison with the Existing Methods
We compare our method to the state-of-the-art meth-
ods in Table. 3-6. Since the backbone network architec-
ture affects the retrieval accuracy, we show the architec-
ture in the parenthesis. When compared to the existing
hard sample mining method, SmartMining [ 6], ours achieve
higher accuracy. Note that they provided the result only on
small datasets. We also report the accuracy of proposed
mining method applied to the channel-correlation model
with higher input image resolution of 336×336(Channel-
correlation). In every dataset, our method outperforms
the previous state-of-the-art with comparable compuational
cost.
5. Conclusion
We proposed a stochastic hard negative example mining
method for triplet loss. Unlike existing works, our method
tracks the change of neighbor relations between classes in
during training with minor additional cost. Based on the
relations, it identiﬁes hard examples through a coarse-to-
ﬁne search and stochastically samples hard examples from
a pool of candidates to diversify the examples used for train-
ing. Experimental results show that our method consistently
improves the baseline.
Acknowledgement This work was partially supported by
Samsung Resaearch and the Visual Turing Test project
(IITP-2017-0-01780) from the Ministry of Science and ICT
of Korea.
References
[1] Shuo Chen, Chen Gong, Jian Yang, Xiang Li, Yang Wei, and
Jun Li. Adversarial metric learning. In IJCAI , 2018. 2
7257