Stochastic Class-based Hard Example Mining for Deep Metric Learning
Yumin Suh1Bohyung Han1Wonsik Kim2Kyoung Mu Lee1
1ECE & ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea2Samsung Research, Samsung Electronics
{n12345, bhhan, kyoungmu }@snu.ac.kr wonsik16.kim@samsung.com
Abstract
Performance of deep metric learning depends heavily
on the capability of mining hard negative examples dur-
ing training. However, many metric learning algorithms of-
ten require intractable computational cost due to frequent
feature computations and nearest neighbor searches in a
large-scale dataset. As a result, existing approaches often
suffer from trade-off between training speed and predic-
tion accuracy. To alleviate this limitation, we propose a
stochastic hard negative mining method. Our key idea is
to adopt class signatures that keep track of feature embed-
ding online with minor additional cost during training, and
identify hard negative example candidates using the signa-
tures. Given an anchor instance, our algorithm ﬁrst selects
a few hard negative classes based on the class-to-sample
distances and then performs a reﬁned search in an instance-
level only from the selected classes. As most of the classes
are discarded at the ﬁrst step, it is much more efﬁcient than
exhaustive search while effectively mining a large number
of hard examples. Our experiment shows that the proposed
technique improves image retrieval accuracy substantially;
it achieves the state-of-the-art performance on the several
standard benchmark datasets.
1. Introduction
Deep metric learning is a fundamental problem appli-
cable to various tasks in computer vision including image
retrieval [ 14,23,24,6,35], person re-identiﬁcation [ 38,7],
face recognition [ 20,30], and many others. The goal of deep
metric learning is to approximate a feature embedding func-
tion that maps data—images in our domain—onto a com-
mon feature space. After learning, visually similar images
are supposed to be clustered while the ones with heteroge-
neous contents are expected to be located apart from each
other. To meet this requirement, one can consider a triplet
loss [ 20], which is deﬁned on all the triplets of images in
the training set. The triplet loss penalizes the cases that the
distances between the images in the same classes are larger
than the ones between images with different labels.Batch Constructor
Step1:
Class-level stochastic mining
Step2:
Instance-level stochastic miningFeature
Extractor
Class
Signatures
Trainable
ParametersLoss
Figure 1. Overview of the training procedure with our stochastic
hard example mining
A critical drawback of the triplet loss is the high com-
putational cost in identifying hard negative examples for
training, which is partly because embedding functions are
changing throughout training procedure and one needs to
search for the new triplets violating the desired constraints
in each iteration [ 23,6,30,21,3,39]. A na ¨ıve implementa-
tion of a metric learning algorithm based on triplet loss re-
quires a forward propagation of the whole training dataset
through feature extractor and distance computation between
every pair of examples in each iteration, which is computa-
tionally infeasible in a large-scale datasets.
Existing approaches have explored two directions to re-
duce computational overhead while maintaining accuracy.
One is to search for hard negative examples only within in-
dividual mini-batches [ 20,7] constructed by random sam-
pling; this strategy requires a large mini-batch size, e.g., a
few thousands in case of [ 20], to ensure to have a sufﬁcient
number of hard examples. The other is to exploit a ﬁxed ap-
proximate global structure of dataset by using precomputed
features [ 18,6]. However, this approach is problematic be-
cause the representation of each example changes during
training procedure and, consequently, the global structure is
updated as well.
We propose a stochastic hard example mining technique
to tackle the limitations in the existing approaches. Specif-
1
7251