ically, we identify the nearest neighbor classes from a set
of stochastically sampled instances in an anchor class, and
draw hard examples from the classes only. Our key idea
is to use class signatures during training, which track the
change of the embedding function, and update the hard neg-
ative classes based on them during training. Assuming the
instance-level feature embeddings have small distances to
their class representatives, a sample-to-sample distance is
approximated by a sample-to-class distance while circum-
venting the need to compute a distance between every pair
of samples per iteration. The class signatures are updated at
every iteration in an efﬁcient way. Since the idea is much
more efﬁcient than exhaustive search, it allows us to change
embedding functions adaptively and update image represen-
tations in every iteration.
According to our experiment, the proposed hard exam-
ple mining technique improves accuracy in image retrieval
tasks compared to several baseline methods on the stan-
dard benchmark datasets including CARS-196 [ 10], CUB-
200-2011 [ 29], In-shop retrieval [ 11] and Stanford online
products [ 25]. In addition, by adopting a cross-channel cor-
relation technique [ 4] to further enhance the representa-
tion power, our method achieves the state-of-the-art perfor-
mance in the standard datasets.
2. Related Works
Hard example mining is a popular technique to speed up
convergence and enhance the discriminative power of the
learned embeddings in deep metric learning [ 20,7,2,23].
To reduce the computational overhead to identify hard ex-
amples, existing works have explored two directions: an ex-
act search within each minibatch [ 20,7,19] and an approx-
imate search from the whole dataset. In this paper, we fo-
cus on exploiting the class membership information to mine
hard negatives from the whole dataset efﬁciently.
There are several approaches that approximate distances
between instances by class-level distances to reduce the
computational cost for hard example mining. Their com-
mon strategy is to identify the neighboring classes with a
low computational cost and construct a minibatch based
only on the classes [ 19,30,32]. The underlying assump-
tion is that the neighboring classes are likely to contain hard
negative examples.
To this end, early works used the precomputed embed-
dings to ﬁnd the neighboring classes and ﬁxed them dur-
ing the training. However, this approach suffers from poor
embedding quality and results in inefﬁcient mining per-
formance since the embedding space is gradually updated
during the training. To ﬁgure out this issue, the neighbor-
ing class adaptation has been explored [ 23,21,18,5,22].
Among the techniques in this category, a nai ¨ve approach is
to use an embedding of a random sample to represent its
class label [ 23,21]. The representation quality can be im-proved by using the average embedding of the examples in
a class [ 18,5]. However, it requires high computational cost
because it repetitively feed forward the whole training sam-
ples through the network for adaptation. Also, since they
commonly use coarse class-level approximation, they of-
ten fail to identify the hardest examples, especially when
intra-class variation is large. Smirov et al. [22] attempt to
mitigate this problem by constructing a minibatch with the
hardest examples among the members in the mined hard
positive and negative classes. However, they employ pre-
computed features to detect the hardest examples with each
class, which is inaccurate due to embedding space updates.
We circumvent the abovementioned problems by intro-
ducing class signatures, which track the changes of embed-
ding space with minor additional cost. Speciﬁcally, our al-
gorithm ﬁrst selects a few hard negative classes based on
the class-to-instance distances and then performs a reﬁned
search in an instance-level only from the selected classes.
As most of the classes are discarded at the ﬁrst stage, it
is more efﬁcient than exhaustive search while effectively
mining a large number of hard examples. The methods pro-
posed by Movshovitz-Attias et al. [14] and Wen et al. [34]
are related to ours in a sense that class representatives are
jointly trained with the feature extractor. However, their
goal is to formulate new losses using the class representa-
tives whereas we use them for hard negative mining.
Recently, a few generation-based approaches have been
proposed to train hard example generators to avoid costly
mining process [ 1,3,39]. For a given anchor instance, they
generate a fake example that looks similar to the anchor
class but belongs to a negative class selected randomly. Al-
though they attempt to generate hard examples in the ran-
domly selected classes, their impact may not be signiﬁcant
if the selected classes can be trivially differentiated.
3. Proposed Method
3.1. Overview
Our goal is to obtain an optimal feature extractor that
maps an image Ito a vector xby deep metric learning.
The desired condition of the learned function is to make dis-
tances between the representations of similar images small
while locating dissimilar ones apart from each other. The
notion of similarity between two images is typically deﬁned
by their semantic information, which is often derived from
whether their class labels are same or not. A pair of images
with the same label are considered to be positive while a
pair with different labels are called negative.
Given a triplet of samples, τ= [xa,xp,xn]∈T, which
consists of an anchor xaand a positive sample xpwith la-
belya, and a negative sample xnwith label yn, the triplet
loss penalizes the case that the distance from an anchor to a
positive sample is not sufﬁciently smaller than the distance
7252