Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Shashi Narayan, Shay B. Cohen, and Mirella Lapata. Don’t give me the details, just the sum-
mary! Topic-aware convolutional neural networks for extreme summarization. In Proceedings of
EMNLP , 2018.
Jekaterina Novikova, Ond ˇrej Du ˇsek, and Verena Rieser. The E2E dataset: New challenges for
end-to-end generation. In Proceedings of the 18th Annual SIGdial Meeting on Discourse and
Dialogue , pp. 201–206, Saarbr ¨ucken, Germany, August 2017. doi: 10.18653/v1/W17-5525.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of ACL , 2002.
Matthew E Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and
Luke Zettlemoyer. Deep contextualized word representations. In Proceedings of NAACL , 2018.
Jonas Pfeiffer, Aishwarya Kamath, Andreas R ¨uckl´e, Kyunghyun Cho, and Iryna Gurevych. Adapter-
Fusion: Non-destructive task composition for transfer learning. In Proceedings of EACL , 2021.
Xipeng Qiu, Tianxiang Sun, Yige Xu, Yunfan Shao, Ning Dai, and Xuanjing Huang. Pre-trained
models for natural language processing: A survey. Science China Technological Sciences , 2020.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog , 2019.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text
transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 2020.
Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason Chuang, Christopher D Manning, Andrew Y Ng,
and Christopher Potts. Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment
treebank. In Proceedings of EMNLP , 2013.
Emma Strubell, Ananya Ganesh, and Andrew McCallum. Energy and policy considerations for deep
learning in NLP. In Proceedings of ACL , 2019.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Proceedings of NeurIPS ,
2017.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sen-
tence understanding through inference. In Proceedings of NAACL , 2018.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, R ´emi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick
von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger,
Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural
language processing. In Proceedings of EMNLP: System Demonstrations , 2020.
Yaoming Zhu, Jiangtao Feng, Chengqi Zhao, Mingxuan Wang, and Lei Li. Serial or parallel? plug-
able adapter for multilingual machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08154 , 2021.
12