Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Composition Function is how the modiﬁed vector his composed with the original hidden repre-
sentation hto form the new hidden representation. For example, adapters perform simple additive
composition, preﬁx tuning uses a gated additive composition as shown in Eq. 10, and LoRA scales
hby a constant factor and adds it to the original hidden representation as in Eq. 6.
We note that many other methods not present in Table 1 ﬁt into this framework as well. For example,
prompt tuning modiﬁes the head attention in the ﬁrst layer in a way similar to preﬁx tuning, and
various adapter variants (Pfeiffer et al., 2021; Mahabadi et al., 2021) can be represented in a similar
way as adapters. Critically, the uniﬁed framework allows us to study parameter-efﬁcient tuning
methods along these design dimensions, identify the critical design choices, and potentially transfer
design elements across approaches, as in the following section.
3.3 T RANSFERRING DESIGN ELEMENTS
Here, and in Figure 3, we describe just a few novel methods that can be derived through our uni-
ﬁed view above by transferring design elements across methods: (1) Parallel Adapter is the variant
by transferring the parallel insertion of preﬁx tuning into adapters. Interestingly, while we moti-
vate the parallel adapter due to its similarity to preﬁx tuning, concurrent work (Zhu et al., 2021)
independently proposed this variant and studied it empirically; (2) Multi-head Parallel Adapter is
a further step to make adapters more similar to preﬁx tuning: we apply parallel adapters to modify
head attention outputs as preﬁx tuning. This way the variant improves the capacity for free by uti-
lizing the multi-head projections as we discuss in §3.1. (3) Scaled Parallel Adapter is the variant by
transferring the composition and insertion form of LoRA into adapters, as shown in Figure 3e.
Our discussion and formulation so far raise a few questions: Do methods varying the design elements
above exhibit distinct properties? Which design dimensions are particularly important? Do the novel
methods described above yield better performance? We answer these questions next.
4 E XPERIMENTS
4.1 G ENERAL SETUP
Datasets: We study four downstream tasks: (1) XSum (Narayan et al., 2018) is an English sum-
marization dataset where models predict a summary given a news article; (2) English to Romanian
translation using the WMT 2016 en-ro dataset (Bojar et al., 2016); (3) MNLI (Williams et al., 2018)
is an English natural language inference dataset where models predict whether one sentence entails,
contradicts, or is neutral to another. (4) SST2 (Socher et al., 2013) is an English sentiment classiﬁ-
cation benchmark where models predict whether a sentence’s sentiment is positive or negative.
Setup: We use BART LARGE (Lewis et al., 2020) and a multilingual version of it, mBART LARGE (Liu
et al., 2020a), as the underlying pretrained models for XSum and en-ro translation respectively, and
we use RoBERTa BASE (Liu et al., 2019) for MNLI and SST2. We vary the bottleneck dimension
withinf1;30;200;512;1024gif needed.9We mainly study adapters, preﬁx tuning (preﬁx), and
LoRA which greatly outperform bitﬁt and prompt tuning in our experiments. In the analysis sections
(§4.3-4.5) we insert adapters either at the attention or FFN layers for easier analysis, but include the
results of inserting at both places in the ﬁnal comparison (§4.6). We re-implement these methods
based on their respective public code.10We use the huggingface transformers library (Wolf et al.,
2020) for our implementation. Complete setup details can be found in Appendix A.
Evaluation: We report ROUGE 1/2/L scores (R-1/2/L, Lin (2004)) on the XSum test set, BLEU
scores (Papineni et al., 2002) on the en-ro test set, and accuracy on the MNLI and SST2 dev set.
For MNLI and SST2, we take the median of ﬁve random runs. We also report the number of tuned
parameters relative to that in full ﬁne-tuning (#params).
Number of Tunable Parameters: BART and mBART have an encoder-decoder structure that has
three types of attention: encoder self-attention, decoder self-attention, and decoder cross-attention.
RoBERTa only has encoder self-attention. For each attention sub-layer, the number of parameters
9In some settings we use other values to match the number of added parameters of different methods.
10We verify that our re-implementation can reproduce adapter and preﬁx tuning on XSum, and LoRA on
MNLI, by comparing with the results of running the original released code.
6