Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5
Fine-tuned Parameters (%)20.2520.5020.7521.0021.25XSum ROUGE-2
2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5
Fine-tuned Parameters (%)35.035.536.036.537.0MT BLEU
Preﬁx (attn)
PA (attn)
LoRA (attn)
PA (ﬀn)
LoRA (ﬀn)
Figure 5: Results on XSum (left) and en-ro (right). PA represents parallel adapter. Blue and red markers apply
modiﬁcations at attention and FFN sub-layers respectively (best viewed in color).
XSum and 0.8 BLEU points on en-ro respectively. Given the superior results of parallel adapters
over sequential adapters, we focus on parallel adapter results in following sections.
4.4 W HICH MODIFIED REPRESENTATION – ATTENTION OR FFN?
Setup: We now study the effect of modifying different representations. We mainly compare at-
tention and FFN modiﬁcation. For easier analysis we categorize methods that modiﬁes any hidden
representations in the attention sub-layer (e.g. the head output, query, etc) as modifying the atten-
tion module. We compare parallel adapters at attention and FFN and preﬁx tuning. We also transfer
the FFN modiﬁcation to LoRA to have a LoRA (ffn) variant for a complete comparison. Speciﬁ-
cally, we use LoRA to approximate the parameter updates for the FFN weights W12Rddmand
W22Rdmd. In this case Wupin LoRA for W1(similar for WdownofW2) would have dimensions
ofrdm, wheredm= 4das described in §2.1. Thus we typically use smaller rfor LoRA (ffn)
than other methods to match their overall parameter size in later experiments.
Results: As shown in Figure 5, anymethod with FFN modiﬁcation outperforms allthe methods
with attention modiﬁcation in all cases (the red markers are generally above all the blue ones, the
only exception is ffn-PA with 2.4% params), often with fewer parameters. Second, the same method
applied at FFN always improves over its attention counterpart. For example, LoRA (ffn) improves
LoRA (attn) by 1 R-2 points on XSum. We also highlight that preﬁx tuning does not keep improving
when we further increase the capacity, which is also observed in Li & Liang (2021). These results
suggest that FFN modiﬁcation can utilize the added parameters more effectively than attention, no
matter what the functional form or composition function is . We hypothesize that this is because
the FFN learns task-speciﬁc textual patterns (Geva et al., 2021), while attention learns pairwise
positional interactions which do not require large capacity for adapting to new tasks.
Is the story different when we use 0:1%parameters? In §3.1 we reason that preﬁx tuning is
more expressive than adapters (attn), which, however, is not reﬂected in Figure 5. We conjecture
that this is because multi-head attention is only superior when the parameter budget is small. To
validate this hypothesis, we compare preﬁx tuning to parallel adapters when they add 0:1%of the
pretrained parameters. To ablate the impact of the composition function, we also report the results
of removing the gating in preﬁx tuning as h+ h. We include the results of the multi-head parallel
adapter variant (MH PA) described in §3.3. As shown in Table 4, the multi-head methods – preﬁx
tuning and MH PA (attn) – outperform all others by at least 1.6 BLEU points when using 0.1% of
the parameters. Surprisingly, reducing lfrom 200 to 30 only causes 0.4 BLEU loss for preﬁx tuning
while PA (attn) loses 1.9 points. The gating composition function in preﬁx tuning slightly helps the
results by 0.3 points. We highlight that the MH parallel adapter improves the single-headed version
by 1.6 points, which again veriﬁes the effectiveness of the multi-head formulation.
Combining the results in Figure 5 and Table 4, we conclude that modifying head attention shows the
best results when the parameter budget is very small, while the FFN can better utilize modiﬁcations
at larger capacities. This suggests that it may be effective to allocate a larger parameter budget to
FFN modiﬁcation instead of treating attention and FFN equally as in Houlsby et al. (2019).
4.5 W HICH COMPOSITION FUNCTION ?
We have presented three composition functions in §3.2: simple addition (adapter), gated addition
(preﬁx tuning) and scaled addition (LoRA). As it is unnatural to incorporate the exact gated ad-
dition into methods whose functional form does not use softmax, we examine the other two by
8