Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
ETHICS STATEMENT
Our work proposes a method for efﬁcient ﬁne-tuning of pre-trained models, in particular language
models. Pre-trained language models have a wide variety of positive applications, such as the appli-
cations to summarization, translation, or language understanding described in our paper. At the same
time, there are a number of ethical concerns with language models in general, including concerns
regarding the generation of biased or discriminative text (Bordia & Bowman, 2019), the leakage of
private information from training data (Carlini et al., 2020), and environmental impact of training or
tuning them (Strubell et al., 2019).
Our method attempts to train language models making minimal changes to their pre-existing param-
eters. While it is an interesting research question whether parameter-efﬁcient ﬁne-tuning methods
exacerbate, mitigate, or make little change to issues such as bias or information leakage, to our
knowledge no previous work has examined this topic. It is an interesting avenue for future work.
With respect to environmental impact, the methods proposed in this paper add a small number of
extra parameters and components to existing models, and thus they have a nominal negative impact
on training and inference time – for example, the ﬁnal MAM Adapter needs 100% - 150% training
time of full ﬁne-tuning in our four benchmarks since parameter-efﬁcient tuning typically needs more
epochs to converge; the inference time is roughly the same as the model obtained by full ﬁne-tuning.
On the other hand, as the methods proposed in this paper may obviate the need for full ﬁne-tuning,
this may also signiﬁcantly reduce the cost (in terms of memory/deployed servers) of serving models.
Notably, the great majority of the experimentation done for this paper was performed on a data center
powered entirely by renewable energy.
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
In addition to the setup description in §4.1, we have detailed the complete experiments setup such
as batch size, optimizer, learning rates in Appendix A. Besides, we have publicized our source code.
These resources should be sufﬁcient to reproduce results of the paper.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their comments. This work was supported in part by the
CMU-Portugal MAIA Project, a Baidu PhD Fellowship for Junxian He, and a CMU Presidential
Fellowship for Chunting Zhou.
REFERENCES
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.06450 , 2016.
Elad Ben Zaken, Shauli Ravfogel, and Yoav Goldberg. Bitﬁt: Simple parameter-efﬁcient ﬁne-tuning
for transformer-based masked language-models. arXiv e-prints , pp. arXiv–2106, 2021.
Ondˇrej Bojar, Rajen Chatterjee, Christian Federmann, Yvette Graham, Barry Haddow, Matthias
Huck, Antonio Jimeno Yepes, Philipp Koehn, Varvara Logacheva, Christof Monz, et al. Findings
of the 2016 conference on machine translation. In Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine
Translation: Volume 2, Shared Task Papers , 2016.
Shikha Bordia and Samuel R. Bowman. Identifying and reducing gender bias in word-level language
models. In Proceedings of the 2019 NAACL: Student Research Workshop , 2019.
Tom B Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
few-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165 , 2020.
Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-V oss, Katherine
Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn Song, Ulfar Erlingsson, et al. Extracting training data
from large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.07805 , 2020.
10