Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
TOWARDS A UNIFIED VIEW OF
PARAMETER -EFFICIENT TRANSFER LEARNING
Junxian He
Carnegie Mellon University
junxianh@cs.cmu.eduChunting Zhou
Carnegie Mellon University
chuntinz@cs.cmu.edu
Xuezhe Ma
University of Southern California
xuezhema@isi.eduTaylor Berg-Kirkpatrick
UC San Diego
tberg@eng.ucsd.eduGraham Neubig
Carnegie Mellon University
gneubig@cs.cmu.edu
ABSTRACT
Fine-tuning large pretrained language models on downstream tasks has become
the de-facto learning paradigm in NLP. However, conventional approaches ﬁne-
tune all the parameters of the pretrained model, which becomes prohibitive as
the model size and the number of tasks grow. Recent work has proposed a va-
riety of parameter-efﬁcient transfer learning methods that only ﬁne-tune a small
number of (extra) parameters to attain strong performance. While effective, the
critical ingredients for success and the connections among the various methods
are poorly understood. In this paper, we break down the design of state-of-the-art
parameter-efﬁcient transfer learning methods and present a uniﬁed framework that
establishes connections between them. Speciﬁcally, we re-frame them as modiﬁ-
cations to speciﬁc hidden states in pretrained models, and deﬁne a set of design
dimensions along which different methods vary, such as the function to compute
the modiﬁcation and the position to apply the modiﬁcation. Through comprehen-
sive empirical studies across machine translation, text summarization, language
understanding, and text classiﬁcation benchmarks, we utilize the uniﬁed view to
identify important design choices in previous methods. Furthermore, our uniﬁed
framework enables the transfer of design elements across different approaches,
and as a result we are able to instantiate new parameter-efﬁcient ﬁne-tuning meth-
ods that tune less parameters than previous methods while being more effective,
achieving comparable results to ﬁne-tuning all parameters on all four tasks.1
1 I NTRODUCTION
Transfer learning from pre-trained language models (PLMs) is now the prevalent paradigm in natural
language processing, yielding strong performance on many tasks (Peters et al., 2018; Devlin et al.,
2019; Qiu et al., 2020). The most common way to adapt general-purpose PLMs to downstream tasks
is to ﬁne-tune all the model parameters ( full ﬁne-tuning ). However, this results in a separate copy of
ﬁne-tuned model parameters for each task, which is prohibitively expensive when serving models
that perform a large number of tasks. This issue is particularly salient with the ever-increasing size
of PLMs, which now range from hundreds of millions (Radford et al., 2019; Lewis et al., 2020) to
hundreds of billions (Brown et al., 2020) or even trillions of parameters (Fedus et al., 2021).
To mitigate this issue, a few lightweight alternatives have been proposed to update only a small num-
ber of extra parameters while keeping most pretrained parameters frozen. For example, adapter tun-
ing(Houlsby et al., 2019) inserts small neural modules called adapters to each layer of the pretrained
network and only the adapters are trained at ﬁne-tuning time. Inspired by the success of prompting
methods that control PLMs through textual prompts (Brown et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021a), preﬁx
tuning (Li & Liang, 2021) and prompt tuning (Lester et al., 2021) prepend an additional ltunable
Equal Contribution. Order determined by random dice rolling.
1Code is available at https://github.com/jxhe/unify-parameter-efﬁcient-tuning.
1arXiv:2110.04366v3  [cs.CL]  2 Feb 2022