Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
layers: multi-head self-attention and a fully connected feed-forward network (FFN).2The conven-
tional attention function maps queries Q2Rndkand key-value pairs K2Rmdk;V2Rmdv:
Attn(Q;K;V) =softmax (QKT
pdk)V; (1)
wherenandmare the number of queries and key-value pairs respectively. Multi-head attention per-
forms the attention function in parallel over Nhheads, where each head is separately parameterized
byW(i)
q;W(i)
k;W(i)
v2Rddhto project inputs to queries, keys, and values. Given a sequence of
mvectors C2Rmdover which we would like to perform attention and a query vector x2Rd,
multi-head attention (MHA) computes the output on each head and concatenates them:3
MHA( C;x) = Concat(head 1;;head h)Wo;head i= Attn( xW(i)
q;CW(i)
k;CW(i)
v);(2)
where Wo2Rdd.dis the model dimension, and in MHA dhis typically set to d=Nhto save
parameters, which indicates that each attention head is operating on a lower-dimensional space. The
other important sublayer is the fully connected feed-forward network (FFN) which consists of two
linear transformations with a ReLU activation function in between:
FFN(x) = ReLU( xW 1+b1)W2+b2; (3)
where W12Rddm,W22Rdmd. Transformers typically use a large dm, e.g.dm= 4d. Finally,
a residual connection is used followed by layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016).
2.2 O VERVIEW OF PREVIOUS PARAMETER -EFFICIENT TUNING METHODS
Below and in Figure 1, we introduce several state-of-the-art parameter-efﬁcient tuning methods.
Unless otherwise speciﬁed, they only tune the added parameters while the PLM’s are frozen.
Adapters (Houlsby et al., 2019): The adapter approach inserts small modules (adapters) between
transformer layers. The adapter layer generally uses a down-projection with Wdown2Rdrto
project the input hto a lower-dimensional space speciﬁed by bottleneck dimension r, followed by
a nonlinear activation function f(), and a up-projection with Wup2Rrd. These adapters are
surrounded by a residual connection, leading to a ﬁnal form:
h h+f(hW down)Wup: (4)
Houlsby et al. (2019) places two adapters sequentially within one layer of the transformer, one after
the multi-head attention and one after the FFN sub-layer. Pfeiffer et al. (2021) have proposed a more
efﬁcient adapter variant that is inserted only after the FFN “add & layer norm” sub-layer.
Preﬁx Tuning (Li & Liang, 2021): Inspired by the success of textual prompting methods (Liu
et al., 2021a), preﬁx tuning prepends ltunable preﬁx vectors to the keys and values of the multi-
head attention at every layer. Speciﬁcally, two sets of preﬁx vectors Pk;Pv2Rldare concatenated
with the original key Kand value V. Then multi-head attention is performed on the new preﬁxed
keys and values. The computation of head iin Eq. 2 becomes:
head i= Attn( xW(i)
q;concat (P(i)
k;CW(i)
k);concat (P(i)
v;CW(i)
v)); (5)
PkandPvare split into Nhhead vectors respectively and P(i)
k;P(i)
v2Rld=N hdenote thei-th
head vector. Prompt-tuning (Lester et al., 2021) simpliﬁes preﬁx-tuning by only prepending to the
input word embeddings in the ﬁrst layer; similar work also includes P-tuning (Liu et al., 2021b).
LoRA (Hu et al., 2021): LoRA injects trainable low-rank matrices into transformer layers to
approximate the weight updates. For a pre-trained weight matrix W2Rdk, LoRA represents its
update with a low-rank decomposition W+W=W+WdownWup, where Wdown2Rdr;Wup2
Rrkare tunable parameters. LoRA applies this update to the query and value projection matrices
(Wq;Wv)in the multi-head attention sub-layer, as shown in Figure 1. For a speciﬁc input xto the
linear projection in multi-head attention, LoRA modiﬁes the projection output has:
h h+sxW downWup; (6)
2In an encoder-decoder architecture, the transformer decoder usually has another multi-head cross-attention
module between the self-attention and FFN, which we omit here for simplicity.
3Below, we sometimes ignore the head index ito simplify notation when there is no confusion.
3