Figure 1. An illustration of our Dynamic Head approach. It contains three different attention mechanisms, each focusing on a different
perspective: scale-aware attention, spatial-aware attention, and task-aware attention. We also visualize how the feature maps are improved
after each attention module.
feature using up-sampling or down-sampling. The re-scaled
feature pyramid can be denoted as a 4-dimensional tensor
F ∈ RL×H×W×C, whereLrepresents the number of lev-
els in the pyramid, H,W, andCrepresent height, width,
and the number of channels of the median level feature re-
spectively. We further deﬁne S=H×Wto reshape the
tensor into a 3-dimensional tensor F ∈ RL×S×C. Based on
this representation, we will explore the role of each tensor
dimension.
• The discrepancy of object scales is related to fea-
tures at various levels. Improving the representation
learning across different levels of Fcan beneﬁt scale-
awareness of object detection.
• Various geometric transformations from dissimilar ob-
ject shapes are related to features at various spatial lo-
cations. Improving the representation learning across
different spatial locations of Fcan beneﬁt spatial-
awareness of object detection.
• Divergent object representations and tasks can be re-
lated to the features at various channels. Improving the
representation learning across different channels of F
can beneﬁt task-awareness of object detection.
In this paper, we discover that all above directions can
be uniﬁed in an efﬁcient attention learning problem. Our
work is the ﬁrst attempt to combine multiple attentions on
all three dimensions to formulate a uniﬁed head for maxi-
mizing their improvements.3.2. Dynamic Head: Unifying with Attentions
Given the feature tensor F ∈ RL×S×C, the general for-
mulation of applying self-attention is:
W(F) =π(F)·F (1)
whereπ(·)is an attention function. A na ¨ıve solution to this
attention function is implemented by fully connected layers.
But directly learning the attention function over all dimen-
sions is computationally costly and practically not afford-
able due to the high dimensions of the tensor.
Instead, we convert the attention function into three se-
quential attentions, each focusing on only one perspective:
W(F) =πC/parenleftBigg
πS/parenleftbigg
πL(F)·F/parenrightbigg
·F/parenrightBigg
·F, (2)
whereπL(·),πS(·), andπC(·)are three different attention
functions applying on dimension L,S, andC, respectively.
Scale-aware Attention πL.We ﬁrst introduce a scale-
aware attention to dynamically fuse features of different
scales based on their semantic importance.
πL(F)·F=σ/parenleftBigg
f/parenleftbigg1
SC/summationdisplay
S,CF/parenrightbigg/parenrightBigg
·F (3)
wheref(·)is a linear function approximated by a 1×1
convolutional layer, and σ(x) =max(0,min(1,x+1
2))is a
hard-sigmoid function.
37375