Spatial-aware Attention πS.We apply another spatial-
aware attention module based on the fused feature to focus
on discriminative regions consistently co-existing among
both spatial locations and feature levels. Considering the
high dimensionality in S, we decompose this module into
two steps: ﬁrst making the attention learning sparse by us-
ing deformable convolution [ 7] and then aggregating fea-
tures across levels at the same spatial locations:
πS(F)·F=1
LL/summationdisplay
l=1K/summationdisplay
k=1wl,k·F(l;pk+∆pk;c)·∆mk,(4)
whereKis the number of sparse sampling locations, pk+
∆pkis a shifted location by the self-learned spatial offset
∆pkto focus on a discriminative region and ∆mkis a self-
learned importance scalar at location pk. Both are learned
from the input feature from the median level of F.
Task-aware Attention πC.To enable joint learning and
generalize different representations of objects, we deploy a
task-aware attention at the end. It dynamically switches ON
and OFF channels of features to favor different tasks:
πC(F)·F=max/parenleftbigg
α1(F)·Fc+β1(F),α2(F)·Fc+β2(F)/parenrightbigg
,
(5)
whereFcis the feature slice at the c-th channel and
[α1,α2,β1,β2]T=θ(·)is a hyper function that learns to
control the activation thresholds. θ(·)is implemented simi-
lar to [ 3], which ﬁrst conducts a global average pooling on
L×Sdimensions to reduce the dimensionality, then uses
two fully connected layers and a normalization layer, and
ﬁnally applies a shifted sigmoid function to normalize the
output to [−1,1].
Finally, since the above three attention mechanisms are
applied sequentially, we can nest Equation 2multiple times
to effectively stack multiple πL,πS, andπCblocks together.
The detailed conﬁguration of our dynamic head ( i.e.,Dy-
Head for simpliﬁcation) block is shown in Figure 2(a).
As a summary, the whole paradigm of object detection
with our proposed dynamic head is illustrated in Figure 1.
Any kinds of backbone network can be used to extract fea-
ture pyramid, which is further resized to the same scale,
forming a 3-dimensional tensor F ∈ RL×S×C, and then
used as the input to the dynamic head. Next, several Dy-
Head blocks including scale-aware, spatial-aware, and task-
aware attentions are stacked sequentially. The output of the
dynamic head can be used for different tasks and represen-
tations of object detection, such as classiﬁcation, center/box
regression, etc..
At the bottom of Figure 1, we show the output of each
type of attention. As we can see, the initial feature maps
from backbones are noisy due to the domain difference from
Figure 2. A detailed design of Dynamic Head. (a) shows the de-
tailed implementation of each attention module. (b) shows how to
apply our dynamic head blocks to one-stage object detector. (c)
shows how to apply our dynamic head blocks to two-stage object
detector.
ImageNet pre-training. After passing through our scale-
aware attention module, the feature maps become more sen-
sitive to the scale differences of foreground objects; After
further passing through our spatial-aware attention module,
the feature maps become more sparse and focused on dis-
criminative spatial locations of foreground objects. Finally,
after passing through our task-aware attention module, the
feature maps re-form into different activations based on the
requirements of different down-stream tasks. These visual-
izations well demonstrate the effectiveness of each attention
module.
3.3. Generalizing to Existing Detectors
In this section, we demonstrate how the proposed dy-
namic head can be integrated into existing detectors to ef-
fectively improve their performances.
One-stage Detector. One-stage detector predicts object
locations by densely sampling locations from feature map,
which simpliﬁes the detector design. Typical one-stage de-
tector ( e.g., RetinaNet [ 15]) is composed of a backbone net-
work to extract dense features and multiple task-speciﬁc
sub-network branches to handle different tasks separately.
As shown in previous work [ 3], object classiﬁcation sub-
network behaves very differently from bounding box re-
47376