gression sub-network. Controversial to this conventional
approach, we only attach one uniﬁed branch instead of mul-
tiple branches to the backbone. It can handle multiple tasks
simultaneously, thanks to the advantage of our multiple at-
tention mechanisms. In this way, the architecture can be fur-
ther simpliﬁed and the efﬁciency is improved as well. Re-
cently, anchor-free variants of one-stage detectors became
popular, for example, FCOS [ 25], ATSS [ 32] and RepPoint
[30] re-formulated objects as centers and key-points to im-
prove performance. Compared to RetinaNet, these meth-
ods require to attach a centerness prediction, or a keypoint
prediction to either the classiﬁcation branch or the regres-
sion branch, which makes the constructions of task-speciﬁc
branches non-trivial. By contrast, deploying our dynamic
head is more ﬂexible since it only appends various types of
predictions to the end of head, shown in Figure 2(b).
Two-stage Detector. Two-stage detectors utilize region
proposal and ROI-pooling [ 21] layers to extract interme-
diate representations from feature pyramid of a backbone
network. To cooperate this characteristic, we ﬁrst apply our
scale-aware attention and spatial-aware attention on feature
pyramid before a ROI-pooling layer and then use our task-
aware attention to replace the original fully connected lay-
ers, as shown in Figure 2(c).
3.4. Relation to Other Attention Mechanisms
Deformable. Deformable convolution [ 7,33] has signif-
icantly improved the transformation learning of traditional
convolutional layers by introducing sparse sampling. It has
been widely used in object detection backbones to enhance
the feature representations. Although it is rarely utilized
in object detection head, we can regard it as solely model-
ing theSsub-dimension in our representation. We ﬁnd the
deformable module used in the backbone can be comple-
mentary to the proposed dynamic head. In fact, with the de-
formable variant of ResNext-101-64x4d backbone, our dy-
namic head achieves a new state-of-the-art object detection
result.
Non-local. Non-Local Networks [ 27] is a pioneer work of
utilizing attention modules to enhance the performance of
object detection. However, it uses a simple formulation of
dot-product to enhance a pixel feature by fusing other pix-
els’ features from different spatial locations. This behavior
can be regarded as modeling only the L×Ssub-dimensions
in our representation.
Transformer. Recently, there is a trend to introduce the
Transformer module [ 26] from natural language processing
into computer vision tasks. Preliminary works [ 2,34,5]
have demonstrated promising results in improving objectdetection. Transformer provides a simple solution to learn
cross-attention correspondence and fuse features from dif-
ferent modalities by applying multi-head fully connected
layers. This behavior can be viewed as modeling only the
S×Csub-dimensions in our representation.
The aforementioned three types of attention works only
partially model sub-dimensions in the feature tensor. As a
uniﬁed design, our dynamic head combines attentions on
different dimensions into one coherent and efﬁcient imple-
mentation. The following experiments show such a dedi-
cated design can help existing object detectors achieve re-
markable gains. Besides, our attention mechanisms explic-
itly address the challenges of object detection, in contrast to
implicit working principles in existing solutions.
4. Experiment
We evaluate our approach on the MS-COCO dataset [ 16]
following the commonly used settings. MS-COCO con-
tains 80 categories of around 160K images collected from
the web. The dataset is split into the train2017, val2017,
and test2017 subsets with 118K, 5K, 41K images respec-
tively. The standard mean average precision ( AP) metric
is used to report results under different IoU thresholds and
object scales. In all our experiments, we only train on the
train2017 images without using any extra data. For exper-
iments of ablation studies, we evaluate the performances
on the val2017 subset. When comparing to state-of-the-art
methods, we report the ofﬁcial result returned from the test
server on test-dev subset.
4.1. Implementation Details
We implement our dynamic head block as a plugin,
based on the popular implementation of Mask R-CNN
benchmark [ 11]. If it is not speciﬁcally mentioned, our
dynamic head is trained with the ATSS framework [ 32] .
All models are trained using one compute node of 8 V100
GPUs each with 32GB memory.
Training. We use ResNet-50 as the model backbone in all
ablation studies and train it with the standard 1x conﬁgura-
tion. Other models are trained with the standard 2x training
conﬁgurations as introduced in [ 11]. We use an initial learn-
ing rate of 0.02with weight decay of 1e−4and momentum
of0.9. The learning rate is stepped down by a factor of 0.1
at the67% and89% of training epochs. Standard augmen-
tation with random horizontal ﬂipping is used. To compare
with previous methods trained with multi-scale inputs, we
also conduct multi-scale training for selective models.
Inference. To compare with state-of-the-art methods re-
ported using test time augmentation, we also evaluate our
57377