Computation 2023 ,11, 52 2 of 23
Computation 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  2 of 25 
 
 These application areas include robots, enterprises, cybersecurity, virtual assistants, 
image recognition, and healthcare. They also involve sentiment analysis and natural lan-
guage proc essing [8].  
 
Figure 1. Machine Learning Parts.  
The most established deep learning technique is the convolutional neural network 
(CNN), a subtype of an artificial neural network [12]. Since the astounding outcomes of 
the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recogni tion Competition, an object recognition compe-
tition, in 2012 [13,14 ], CNN has dominated computer vision tasks.  
CNN is useful in medical imaging because it can detect tumors and other irregulari-
ties more accurately in X -ray and MRI images. CNN models can an alyze a picture of a 
human body component, such as the lungs, and identify potential tumor locations as well 
as other abnormalities like fractured bones in X -ray images based on previously processed 
comparable images by CNN networks [15–17]. 
Convolutional neural networks (CNN), which are used to represent spatial infor-
mation, may be used to model images.  
Because of their greater capacity to extract features from pictures, such as barriers 
and road signs, CNNs are characterized as universal non -linear function approximators.  
CNN has been used for biometric user identity authentication by recognizing partic-
ular physical characteristics associated with a person ’s face. CNN models may be trained 
on photos or videos of individuals to recognize certa in features of their faces, such as the 
distance between their eyes, the shape of their nose s, and the curve of their lips [15–17]. 
Figure 1. Machine Learning Parts.
The most established deep learning technique is the convolutional neural network
(CNN), a subtype of an artiﬁcial neural network [ 12]. Since the astounding outcomes of the
ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Competition, an object recognition competition,
in 2012 [13,14], CNN has dominated computer vision tasks.
CNN is useful in medical imaging because it can detect tumors and other irregularities
more accurately in X-ray and MRI images. CNN models can analyze a picture of a human
body component, such as the lungs, and identify potential tumor locations as well as
other abnormalities like fractured bones in X-ray images based on previously processed
comparable images by CNN networks [15–17].
Convolutional neural networks (CNN), which are used to represent spatial informa-
tion, may be used to model images.
Because of their greater capacity to extract features from pictures, such as barriers and
road signs, CNNs are characterized as universal non-linear function approximators.
CNN has been used for biometric user identity authentication by recognizing particu-
lar physical characteristics associated with a person’s face. CNN models may be trained
on photos or videos of individuals to recognize certain features of their faces, such as the
distance between their eyes, the shape of their noses, and the curve of their lips [15–17].
Most of the time, convolutional neural networks have led to ground-breaking discov-
eries in many ﬁelds related to pattern recognition, such as voice and image processing.
The number of ANN parameters going down is the most important thing about
CNNs [18,19].