Computation 2023 ,11, 52 21 of 23
The choice of hyper-parameters has a substantial impact on CNN’s performance.
The overall CNN performance is sensitive to even a modest shift in the hyper-parameter
settings. As a result, it is crucial to take into account the importance of appropriate
parameter selection while designing optimization schemes.
The number of layers in a CNN has been increased from a few (AlexNet) to hundreds,
making it smaller and more effective (ResNet, ResNext, DenseNet). These networks have
billions of parameters, so training them takes a lot of data and powerful GPUs. Therefore,
scientists should take an interest in developing lightweight and compact networks in order
to reduce network redundancy further.
Selecting the best detection network for a given application and embedded hardware
strikes a balance between speed, memory usage, and accuracy. It is preferable to teach
compact models with few parameters, even if this results in a decrease in detection accuracy;
this could be remedied through the use of hint learning, knowledge distillation, and
improved pre-training schemes.
As a result of these enhancements, CNNs are better able to learn from data at varying
depths and with varying structural modiﬁcations. Modern research has shown that the
performance of CNN could be greatly improved if blocks were used instead of layers.
7. Conclusions
I have provided an organized and thorough overview of deep learning technology
in this paper, which is regarded as a fundamental component of both data science and
artiﬁcial intelligence.
It begins with a history of artiﬁcial neural networks before moving on to more modern
deep learning methods and innovations in several ﬁelds.
The main techniques in this ﬁeld are then examined, along with deep neural network
modeling in multiple dimensions.
For this, I have also provided a taxonomy that takes into account the various deep-
learning tasks and their many applications.
In this comprehensive research, I took into account both supervised learning using
deep networks and unsupervised learning using generative learning using deep networks.
I have also thought of hybrid learning, which may be used in a variety of real-world
contexts depending on the speciﬁcs of the problem at hand.
Finally, I summarize several important problems with convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) and describe how each parameter affects the network’s performance. The convolu-
tion layer is the heart of a CNN and is responsible for the vast majority of processing time.
A network’s performance can be affected by the number of layers it contains. In contrast,
training and testing the network takes more time as the number of layers grows.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Sarker, I.H. Machine Learning: Algorithms, Real-World Applications, and Research Directions. SN Comput. Sci. 2021 ,2, 1–21.
[CrossRef]
2. Du, K.-L.; Swamy, M.N.S. Fundamentals of Machine Learning. Neural Netw. Stat. Learn. 2019 , 21–63. [CrossRef]
3. ZZhao, Q.; Zheng, P .; Xu, S.; Wu, X. Object detection with deep learning: A review. IEEE Trans. Neural Networks Learn. Syst. 2019 ,
30, 3212–3232. [CrossRef]
4. Indrakumari, R.; Poongodi, T.; Singh, K. Introduction to Deep Learning. EAI/Springer Innov. Commun. Comput. 2021 , 1–22.
[CrossRef]
5. AI vs Machine Learning vs Deep Learning|Edureka. Available online: https://www.edureka.co/blog/ai-vs-machine-learning-
vs-deep-learning/ (accessed on 11 August 2022).
6. Cintra, R.J.; Duffner, S.; Garcia, C.; Leite, A. Low-complexity approximate convolutional neural networks. IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst. 2018 ,29, 5981–5992. [CrossRef]
7. Rusk, N. Deep learning. Nat. Methods 2017 ,13, 35. [CrossRef]