Citation: Taye, M.M. Theoretical
Understanding of Convolutional
Neural Network: Concepts,
Architectures, Applications, Future
Directions. Computation 2023 ,11, 52.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
computation11030052
Academic Editor: Demos T. Tsahalis
Received: 3 February 2023
Revised: 2 March 2023
Accepted: 3 March 2023
Published: 6 March 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
computation
Review
Theoretical Understanding of Convolutional Neural Network:
Concepts, Architectures, Applications, Future Directions
Mohammad Mustafa Taye
Data Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Philadelphia University, Amman 19392, Jordan;
mtaye@philadelphia.edu.jo
Abstract: Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are one of the main types of neural networks
used for image recognition and classiﬁcation. CNNs have several uses, some of which are object
recognition, image processing, computer vision, and face recognition. Input for convolutional neural
networks is provided through images. Convolutional neural networks are used to automatically learn
a hierarchy of features that can then be utilized for classiﬁcation, as opposed to manually creating
features. In achieving this, a hierarchy of feature maps is constructed by iteratively convolving the
input image with learned ﬁlters. Because of the hierarchical method, higher layers can learn more
intricate features that are also distortion and translation invariant. The main goals of this study are to
help academics understand where there are research gaps and to talk in-depth about CNN’s building
blocks, their roles, and other vital issues.
Keywords: artiﬁcial intelligence (AI); deep learning (DL); machine learning (ML); convolution neural
network (CNN); deep learning applications; image classiﬁcation; supervised learning
1. Introduction
There has been a dramatic surge in the usage of machine learning (ML) in recent
years [ 1–3] for a wide range of purposes, from research to practical applications, including
text mining, spam detection, video recommendation, picture categorization, and multime-
dia idea retrieval [4,5].
Deep learning (DL) is one machine learning (ML) approach that is commonly used
in these contexts [ 6,7]. The working domain of DL is a subset of that of ML and artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI); therefore, it may be seen as a function of AI that mimics the way the
human brain processes information [ 1]. The traditional neural network from which DL
originated has signiﬁcantly been surpassed by its superior performance. In addition, DL
uses transformations and graph technologies in tandem to construct multi-layer learning
models [8,9].
A closer examination of the “Learning sub-ﬁelds” reveals that deep learning (DL), a
subﬁeld of machine learning (ML), focuses on creating algorithms that simulate how the
human brain thinks and solves problems [5,8,10].
Recent years have seen a surge in interest in machine learning algorithms, which are
now being used in various ﬁelds, including image recognition, optical character recognition,
pricing prediction, spam ﬁltering, fraud detection, healthcare, transportation, and many
others [11]. The various machine-learning types and algorithms are depicted in Figure 1.
Over the past few years, deep learning has recently received a lot of attention and has
been applied successfully in addressing a wide range of problems in various application
ﬁelds. Diverse deep-learning techniques are applied in several application areas [4].
These application areas include robots, enterprises, cybersecurity, virtual assistants,
image recognition, and healthcare. They also involve sentiment analysis and natural
language processing [8].
Computation 2023 ,11, 52. https://doi.org/10.3390/computation11030052 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/computation