Computation 2023 ,11, 52 7 of 23
Computation 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  7 of 25 
 
 additional benefit of increasing the stride value is a decrease in the dimensionality of the 
resulting feature map [15 –17]. 
The border size of the supplied picture, however, is greatly influenced by padding.  
In contrast, the characteristics of the border side change dramatically over time.  
Padding makes the input picture bigger, which also makes the size of the feature map 
bigger.  
Each filter could represent a feature. The filter does not activate when it moves over 
an image and does  not discover a match. CNN employs this method to discover the most 
effective object –description filters.  
Figure 4 demonstrates how the matrix may be configured to find picture edges. Due 
to the fact that they behave like the conventional filters used in image processing methods, 
these matrices are also known as filters.  
 
Figure 4. Effects of different convolution matrices [21]. 
In CNN, however, these filters are started before the form filters used in the training 
process, which are better suited to the job at hand.  
Weight Sharing : Since the entire set of weights in a CNN act on each and every pixel 
of the input matrix, there are no assigned weights between any two neurons in nearby 
layers. Learning a single group of weights for the entire input will significantly reduce the 
necessary t raining time and various costs because additional weights for each neuron do 
not need to be learned.  
Stride: In fact, CNN offers additional options that provide several opportunities to 
further narrow the settings while also reducing some of the undesirabl e impacts. One of 
these options is called stride. In the aforementioned scenario, the next -layer node is as-
sumed to have numerous overlaps with its neighbors based only on an examination of the 
areas. We may modify the overlap by changing the stride. A uni que 6  × 6 image is shown 
in Figure 5. Since the filter can only be moved in one -node increments, the maximum out-
put size we can achieve is 4  × 4. As can be seen in Figure 5, there is an overlap between 
the output of the three left matrices (and the three m iddle ones together and the three 
Figure 4. Effects of different convolution matrices [21].
In CNN, however, these ﬁlters are started before the form ﬁlters used in the training
process, which are better suited to the job at hand.
Weight Sharing : Since the entire set of weights in a CNN act on each and every pixel
of the input matrix, there are no assigned weights between any two neurons in nearby
layers. Learning a single group of weights for the entire input will signiﬁcantly reduce the
necessary training time and various costs because additional weights for each neuron do
not need to be learned.
Stride: In fact, CNN offers additional options that provide several opportunities to
further narrow the settings while also reducing some of the undesirable impacts. One
of these options is called stride. In the aforementioned scenario, the next-layer node is
assumed to have numerous overlaps with its neighbors based only on an examination of the
areas. We may modify the overlap by changing the stride. A unique 6 6 image is shown
in Figure 5. Since the ﬁlter can only be moved in one-node increments, the maximum
output size we can achieve is 4 4. As can be seen in Figure 5, there is an overlap between
the output of the three left matrices (and the three middle ones together and the three right
ones also). However, if we walk, counting each step as 2, the total will be 3 times 3. In other
words, the total output size and total overlap will be reduced [5,12,16].
Computation 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  8 of 25 
 
 right ones also). However, if we walk, counting each step as 2, the total will be 3 times 3. 
In other words, the total output size and total overlap will be reduced [5,12,16].  
 
Figure 5. Stride 1, the filter windows move only one time for each connection . 
Equation (2) formalizes this, resulting in the output size O as shown in Figure 6, given 
the image’s NXN dimension and FXF filter size.  
  𝑂=1+(𝑁−𝐹)/𝑆                       (2) 
where N is the input size, F is the filter size, and S is the stride size.  
 
Figure 6. The effect of stride in the output.  
Padding : One disadvantage of the convolution step is the possible loss of detail at 
the image’s edges. They are only captured when the filter is moved, so they are never 
actually seen. One easy and practical solution is to use zero padding. You may also man-
age the output size with the aid of zero padding.  
In Figure 6, for instance, the output  will be 4 × 4 (which decreases from a 6 × 6 input) 
with N = 6, F = 3, and stride 1.  
However, by including one zero -padding, the result will be 6  × 6, which is identical 
to the initial input (the calculation for actual N now being 9). The formula is a modi fied 
formula with zero padding (3).  
Figure 5. Stride 1, the ﬁlter windows move only one time for each connection.