Computation 2023 ,11, 52 9 of 23
Computation 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  9 of 25 
 
 𝑂=1+𝑁+2𝑃−𝐹
𝑆    (3) 
where P is the number of the layers of the zero -padding (e.g., P = 1 in Fig ure 7), We can 
avoid network output size from decreasing with depth by using this padding concept. 
Consequently, any number of deep convolutional networks is feasible [2 1]. 
 
Figure 7. Zero -padding.  
Feature of CNNs : Due to the aforementioned weight distributi on, the model is also 
invariant under translational changes. The learn function may be filtered to help in any 
environment. If beginning with random values for the filters improves performance, then 
the filters will learn to detect the edge (as in Fig ure 3). It is crucial to note that a shared 
weight is a bad idea when evaluating an input ’s spatial significance.  
2.1.3. Pooling  
The pooling layer, also known as the down -sampling layer, is used to decrease the 
feature maps ’ dimensionality while retaining the most important data. A filter applies the 
pooling operation to the input data by sliding over it in the pooling layer (max, min, avg). 
In the literature, maximum pooling is most frequently utilized.  
The essential part of  pooling, which is utilized to reduce the complexity of upper 
layers, is down -sampling. In terms of image processing, it may be comparable to reducing 
the resolution. Filter count is unaffected by pooling. Max -pooling is one of the most often 
Figure 7. Zero-padding.
Feature of CNNs : Due to the aforementioned weight distribution, the model is also
invariant under translational changes. The learn function may be ﬁltered to help in any
environment. If beginning with random values for the ﬁlters improves performance, then
the ﬁlters will learn to detect the edge (as in Figure 3). It is crucial to note that a shared
weight is a bad idea when evaluating an input’s spatial signiﬁcance.
2.1.3. Pooling
The pooling layer, also known as the down-sampling layer, is used to decrease the
feature maps’ dimensionality while retaining the most important data. A ﬁlter applies the
pooling operation to the input data by sliding over it in the pooling layer (max, min, avg).
In the literature, maximum pooling is most frequently utilized.
The essential part of pooling, which is utilized to reduce the complexity of upper
layers, is down-sampling. In terms of image processing, it may be comparable to reducing
the resolution. Filter count is unaffected by pooling. Max-pooling is one of the most often
used pooling methods. The picture is divided into rectangular subregions, and only the
greatest value discovered inside each subregion is returned. One of the most prevalent
max-pooling sizes is 2 2.
As shown in Figure 8, when pooling is used on the 2-by-2 blocks in the top-left corner,
attention is diverted to the top-right corner, and two steps are moved. As a result, stride 2 is
used for pooling. It is possible to use stride 1, which is unusual, to prevent downsampling.
Keep in mind that downsampling does not preserve the position of the data.