Computation 2023 ,11, 52 14 of 23
A dropped neuron will not take part in either backward or forward propagation
during training. Testing makes use of the full-scale network to make predictions [29,30].
The drop-weight method is quite similar to the dropout strategy. Drop-weight training
differs from dropout in that only the weights (connections) between neurons are eliminated
after each training iteration.
Data augmentation may easily prevent over-ﬁtting when the model is trained using
an enormous amount of data. In order to do this, data augmentation is needed. There are
a few methods that may be utilized to increase the size of the training dataset artiﬁcially.
Finally, data augmentation methods are discussed in further depth.
Through batch normalization, the efficacy of the final activations may be ensured [31,32].
The one-unit Gaussian distribution describes this execution well. When normaliz-
ing the output at each layer, we will ﬁrst remove the mean and then divide it by the
standard deviation.
Despite being conceptualized as a pre-processing activity at each tier of the network,
this may be differentiated and integrated with other networks.
It is also employed to reduce “internal covariance shift” in the activation layers. The
activation distribution’s variability deﬁnes the change in internal covariance at each layer.
The continual update of weights during training, which might occur if training data
samples come from a wide range of sources, ampliﬁes this change (for example, day and
night images). However, the training period will lengthen since the model needs more
time for convergence. For this reason, we add a layer to the CNN design that mimics batch
normalization to help us deal with this issue [33–35].
The following are some beneﬁts of using batch normalization:
 It stops the disappearing gradient issue before it starts.
 It has the ability to effectively manage bad weight initialization.
 It signiﬁcantly reduces the amount of time needed for network convergence (which
will be very helpful for large datasets).
 It has difﬁculty reducing training dependence on various hyperparameters.
 Over-ﬁtting is less likely because it only slightly affects regularization [35].
4. Popular CNN Architecture
R-CNN [ 36–38] was the ﬁrst ground-breaking model to use convolution neural net-
works (CNN). For each image that needs to be classiﬁed, the model creates 2000 region
proposals and resizes them to 227 227. R-CNN employs a region-of-interest (RoI) clas-
siﬁer based on a deep convolutional neural network (DCN) to perform region-speciﬁc
classiﬁcation of input pictures. In addition, a convolutional neural network (CNN) is em-
ployed for feature extraction and model training, and then a support vector machine (SVM)
classiﬁer is used for object categorization. This model moves at a snail’s pace. Eventually,
in 2015, Fast R-CNN was offered as a solution to the accuracy and speed issues [ 37,38]. RoI
extraction from feature maps is the focus of SPPNet and Fast R-CNN, an enhanced form of
R-CNN. It was discovered that this method outpaced the standard R-CNN framework by a
signiﬁcant margin.
Faster R-CNN continues the trend by proposing region proposal networks for feature
extraction and to eliminate storage costs [ 37,38]. Faster R-CNN, an enhanced variant of Fast
R-CNN achieved using RPN-based fully-contained end-to-end training (region proposal
network). Regression-based region-of-interest (RoI) networks (RPNs) are a type of network
used in the process of producing RoIs.
Compared to earlier models, this one performs well in terms of accuracy and speed;
however, the ground truth and predicted bounding boxes are not aligned. To deal with
the issue of inaccuracy generated by the quantization process in the region of interest (RoI)
pooling layer, the authors introduce Mask R-CNN.
Mask R-CNN builds on top of the Faster R-CNN by including a mask prediction
branch; this allows it to detect objects and predict their masks simultaneously. R-FCN