Computation 2023 ,11, 52 15 of 23
swaps out the fully connected layers with position-aware score maps, which results in
improved object detection.
Several CNN Architectures
CNN has many architectures, such as VGG, AlexNet, Xception, Inception, and
ResNet [ 37–49], which can be used in different application domains depending on how
well they can learn.
The convolutional neural network (CNN) is the most emblematic deep learning model.
It comprises the input, convolution, pooling, and full connection layers [ 37–49]. The
majority of existing networks are based on a series of CNN enhancements. LeCun ﬁrst
presented the LeNet network for handwritten digit identiﬁcation in 1998 and extended
CNN to the ﬁeld of picture recognition. LeNet is an early neural network with only three
complete connection layers, two convolution layers, and two pooling layers. Due to the tiny
size of the model, it is unable to adequately ﬁt other data, which hinders the advancement
of computer vision areas.
In 2012, Krizhevsky proposed the AlexNet, resulting in a signiﬁcant learning spike
in computer vision. AlexNet has ﬁve convolutional layers and two fully linked layers for
learning features are present in AlexNet. After the ﬁrst, second, and ﬁfth convolutional
layers, it has max-pooling. It has 630M connections, 60M parameters, and 650K neurons
altogether. The AlexNet was the ﬁrst to demonstrate the use of deep learning for computer
vision applications [44].
LeNet and AlexNet used a single convolutional layer with big kernels of size 7 7
and 11 11, while the VGG-16 was built with stacks of convolutional layers with smaller
kernels of size 3 3.
By adding more non-linear rectiﬁcation layers, a stack of convolutional layers with
tiny ﬁlter sizes creates a more discriminatory decision function [39,44].
ZFNet [ 44] made modest modiﬁcations to the AlexNet network in 2013, mainly offer-
ing a new visualization technique. In the past, CNN was a black box; no theory or method-
ology was used to explain the network’s optimization and improvement process. Using
deconvolution, ZFNet visualizes the intermediate layer of features [ 44]. Simonyan [ 40]
introduced the VGG model in 2014, which investigates the effect of network depth on
accuracy. Unlike AlexNet, VGG uses many convolution layers of size 3 3 to replace
large-scale ﬁlters. The framework of the model is simple and effective, and it can be easily
ported to other networks; nevertheless, the parameters are too large and simple to adjust.
Researchers have effectively utilized VGG in numerous domains [ 31–33]. GoogLeNet [ 44]
is a network that not only investigates the impact of depth but also considers the breadth
of the network. The network eliminates the ﬁnal full connection layer and intelligently
implements the 1 1 convolution operation in order to lower the dimension and prevent
the over-ﬁtting issue caused by excessively large network parameters. The year 2015 saw
the proposal of the ResNet residual network and residual connection by He et al. [ 44]. As
a result, the depth of the network can reach 152 layers. The network employs a small
number of pooling layers and a high number of downsampling, which increases the for-
ward propagation efﬁciency of the network and obtains the greatest picture recognition
effect at that time, demonstrating the viability of residual connection [ 46,47]. Liu et al.
proposed DenseNet [ 39,44,45] in 2017. Using the ResNet network’s strategy for increasing
the depth and width of the network can also guarantee the model’s precision. DenseNet
created a network for typing. All information layers are concatenated (dimensionally
coupled) with one another. DenseNet may efﬁciently minimize the number of parameters
and increase the reusability of features across many convolutional layers [ 40–44]. Table 1.
is shown a comparison between different popular CNNs Architecture. In 2018, boosting
deep convolutional neural networks (BoostCNN). Use a deep learning architecture with a
least-squares-based objective function and add boosting weights to learn this model. This
model uses various network architectures within the proposed boosting framework, with
BoostCNN choosing the most effective network architecture after each iteration.