Computation 2023 ,11, 52 4 of 23
(4) Evaluate the applications of CNN.
“Deep Learning”, “Machine Learning”, “Convolution Neural Network”, “Convolution
Neural Network” and “Architectures”, “Convolution Neural Network” and “detection” or
“classiﬁcation” or “segmentation” and “Convolution Neural Network” and “Overﬁtting”
are the most common search terms for this review.
2. Convolutional Neural Network (CNN or ConvNet)
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are artiﬁcial intelligence systems based on
multi-layer neural networks that can identify, recognize, and classify objects as well as
detect and segment objects in images. In fact, CNN or ConvNet is a popular discriminative
deep learning architecture that could be learned directly from the input object without the
obligation for human feature extraction [15–17].
This network is frequently used in visual identiﬁcation, medical image analysis,
image segmentation, NLP , and many other applications since it is speciﬁcally designed
to deal with a range of 2D shapes [ 15–17]. It is more effective than a regular network
since it can automatically identify key elements from the input without the need for
human participation.
2.1. CNN Fundamentals
Understanding the various CNN components and their applications is critical to com-
prehending the advancements in CNN architecture. Figure 2 displays several CNN parts.
Computation 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 25 
 
  
Figure 2. The CNN Components.  
2.1.2. Convolutional Layer  
The convolutional layer is a crucial part of CNN ’s overall structure. It  is a set of fil-
ters—or kernels —applied to the data before it is used. Each kernel ’s width, height, and 
weight are used to extract characteristics from the input data. Weights in the kernel are 
first assigned at random but gradually become more informed by the training data.  
In other words, the feature map is made by combining the input image (which is 
shown by N -dimensional metrics) with these filters [15 –17]. 
A kernel is a set of discrete values or integers.  
For each number, the ke rnel weight is given as a reference. The initial kernel weights 
for a CNN are a set of integers picked at random. Additionally, the weights are initialized 
in various ways. In turn, the kernel learns to extract meaningful features because these 
weights are  tweaked during the training process.  
The kernel enables them to perform the operation in a high -dimensional, implicit 
feature space without calculating the coordinates of the data in that space. Instead, they 
compute the inner product of the pictures of a ll data pairings in feature space. By applying 
the kernel trick to a linear model, it can be transformed into a non -linear model.  
The CNN input format is first provided before the convolutional process begins. The 
classic neural network takes in data in a vector format, whereas the CNN takes in a multi -
channeled image. While an RGB image contains three color “channels, ” a grayscale image 
has just one. 
Examine this 4  × 4 grayscale image with a 2  × 2 random weight -initialized kernel to 
learn about convolution s in action. The kernel will first pan horizontally and vertically 
over the full picture. The dot product between the input picture and the kernel is also 
computed in parallel; this is accomplished by multiplying the corresponding values and 
Figure 2. The CNN Components.
CNN Layers
A CNN is typically composed of four types of layers
 Convolutional;
 Pooling;
 Function of Activation;
 Fully Connected.