Computation 2023 ,11, 52 11 of 23
Computation 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  11 of 25 
 
 Tanh: It is comparable to the sigmoid function in that it accepts real numbers as input, 
but its output range is only between one and one.  
ReLU is the most popular function in the CNN context. All of the input values are 
converted to the positive range. ReLU ’s primary benefit over other algorithms is the time 
and resources it saves when used.  
For a long time, the Tanh and sigmoid non -linearities were the most prevalent. Non -
linearities come in many forms, and they are shown in Figure 9. For these reasons, how-
ever, the rectified linear unit (ReLU) has seen a surge in popularity in recent years.  
 
Figure 9. Function of Activation.  
Function and gradient definitions using ReLU are simpler.  
Saturated functions, such as the sigmoid and the tanh, have issues with backpropa-
gation. This phenomenon, known as the “vanishing gradient, ” occurs when the gradient 
signal gradually decreases as the depth of the neural network architecture grows. This 
happens because the gradient of these functions is essentially zero on all sides of the cen-
ter. Nonetheless, the ReLU has a constant gradient for the positive input. While the func-
tion cannot be distinguished, it can be ignored during implementation.  
Third, t he ReLU generates a sparser representation because a complete zero is pro-
duced by a gradient zero. For sigmoid and tanh, the gradient outcomes are never zero, 
which may be counterproductive during training [22,23,26 –29]. 
When using ReLU, a few significant problems may occasionally arise.  
Consider a method for error backpropagation with a greater gradient flowing 
through it, for instance.  
The weights will be updated by passing this gradient through the ReLU function in 
a way that ensures that the neuron w ill not be stimulated again.  
This problem is known as “Dying ReLU ”. 
In order to address these problems, there are some ReLU substitutes.  
These are some of them, as discussed below.  
Leaky ReLU: This activation function makes sure that the negative inputs are n ever 
disregarded, as opposed to the negative inputs being downscaled by ReLU. It is used to 
address the Dying ReLU issue.  
2.1.5. Fully Connected Layer  
Neurons are organized into groups in the fully -connected layer that are reminiscent 
of those seen in trad itional neural networks. As shown in Figure 10, any node in a layer 
that is entirely linked is, therefore, directly connected to every node in the layer above and 
below it. Figure 10 shows that every node in the pooling layer ’s most recent frames is 
connec ted as a vector from the fully -connected layer to the top layer. These are the most 
Figure 9. Function of Activation.
Function and gradient deﬁnitions using ReLU are simpler.
Saturated functions, such as the sigmoid and the tanh, have issues with backpropa-
gation. This phenomenon, known as the “vanishing gradient,” occurs when the gradient
signal gradually decreases as the depth of the neural network architecture grows. This
happens because the gradient of these functions is essentially zero on all sides of the center.
Nonetheless, the ReLU has a constant gradient for the positive input. While the function
cannot be distinguished, it can be ignored during implementation.
Third, the ReLU generates a sparser representation because a complete zero is pro-
duced by a gradient zero. For sigmoid and tanh, the gradient outcomes are never zero,
which may be counterproductive during training [22,23,26–29].
When using ReLU, a few signiﬁcant problems may occasionally arise.
Consider a method for error backpropagation with a greater gradient ﬂowing through
it, for instance.
The weights will be updated by passing this gradient through the ReLU function in a
way that ensures that the neuron will not be stimulated again.
This problem is known as “Dying ReLU”.
In order to address these problems, there are some ReLU substitutes.
These are some of them, as discussed below.
Leaky ReLU: This activation function makes sure that the negative inputs are never
disregarded, as opposed to the negative inputs being downscaled by ReLU. It is used to
address the Dying ReLU issue.
2.1.5. Fully Connected Layer
Neurons are organized into groups in the fully-connected layer that are reminiscent of
those seen in traditional neural networks. As shown in Figure 10, any node in a layer that is
entirely linked is, therefore, directly connected to every node in the layer above and below
it. Figure 10 shows that every node in the pooling layer’s most recent frames is connected
as a vector from the fully-connected layer to the top layer. These are the most often utilized
CNN parameters within these layers; however, they need a lot of training time [22–24].
The biggest drawback of a fully connected layer is the large number of parameters that
necessitate laborious calculation in training samples. Consequently, we try to minimize the
number of connections and nodes. The eliminated nodes and connections can be satisﬁed
using the dropout approach. LeNet and AlexNet, for example, developed a vast and deep
network while preserving a constant computational complexity [22,23].