Computation 2023 ,11, 52 6 of 23
Computation 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  6 of 25 
 
 adding the res ults to get a single scalar value. Thereafter, the procedure is repeated until 
no more sliding is feasible [15 –17]. 
The main image (K), the filter (L) . 
The output matrix is based on the equation  
(K − L + 1),  (1) 
4 − 2 + 1 = 3, so the output then 3 × 3 
In fact, the values of the dot product indicate the feature map of the output. Figure 3 
visually represents the primary calculations performed at each stage. In this diagram, the 
smaller square (2 × 2) represents the kernel, while the larger square (4 × 4) represents the 
input picture. A product is then presented as a number after multiplying by both, and this 
sum provides an input value for the output feature map [15 –17]. 
 
Figure 3. A visual representation of the primary calculations . 
However, in the prec eding example, the kernel is given a stride of 1 (designating the 
desired step size total for vertical or horizontal locations), but the input image is not pad-
ded. Indeed , you are free to substitute a different stride value if you so choose. An 
Figure 3. A visual representation of the primary calculations.
However, in the preceding example, the kernel is given a stride of 1 (designating
the desired step size total for vertical or horizontal locations), but the input image is not
padded. Indeed, you are free to substitute a different stride value if you so choose. An
additional beneﬁt of increasing the stride value is a decrease in the dimensionality of the
resulting feature map [15–17].
The border size of the supplied picture, however, is greatly inﬂuenced by padding.
In contrast, the characteristics of the border side change dramatically over time.
Padding makes the input picture bigger, which also makes the size of the feature
map bigger.
Each ﬁlter could represent a feature. The ﬁlter does not activate when it moves over
an image and does not discover a match. CNN employs this method to discover the most
effective object–description ﬁlters.
Figure 4 demonstrates how the matrix may be conﬁgured to ﬁnd picture edges. Due
to the fact that they behave like the conventional ﬁlters used in image processing methods,
these matrices are also known as ﬁlters.