Computation 2023 ,11, 52 3 of 23
This success has encouraged researchers and developers to utilize more complex
models to tackle difﬁcult issues that conventional ANNs were unable to address. The most
important presupposition regarding the issues that CNN resolves is that there should be
no spatially dependent characteristics [19].
CNN is to blame for the current popularity of DL. The primary beneﬁt of CNN over
its forerunners is that it does everything automatically and without human supervision,
making it the most popular. Therefore, we have covered a lot of ground with CNN
by outlining its essential parts. The most prevalent CNN architectures, starting with
the AlexNet network and concluding with the high-resolution network, have also been
explored in length (HR.Net) [19,20].
This review’s main objective is to draw attention to the elements of CNN that are most
important, making it simple for researchers and students to comprehend CNN completely
after reading just one review paper. Additionally, in order to encourage CNN research, we
want to let people understand more about current developments in the industry. In view to
provide more precise options to the ﬁeld, researchers would be allowed to select the best
route of study to follow.
CNNs learn as they are trained on images; therefore, the features they extract from
images are not pre-learned.
Automatic feature extraction is largely responsible for the remarkable success of
deep learning models in computer vision. Complex models are required for deep CNN
architecture. More precision from them calls for larger image databases. For computer
vision tasks like object categorization, detection, tracking, and recognition, CNNs need
access to huge labeled datasets.
Object identiﬁcation, which has captivated researchers for much of this decade, has
signiﬁcantly beneﬁted from the application of deep learning techniques. Object identiﬁ-
cation and tracking play a crucial role in video surveillance, making it one of the most
difﬁcult but vital aspects of security systems. It keeps an eye on people in public places to
spot any signs of unusual or suspicious conduct.
The general contribution of this study is summarized as follows:
This review almost provides an in-depth analysis of CNN’s most important features.
This review almost provides an in-depth analysis of CNN’s networks and algorithms.
In this paper, I have compiled all of the current deep learning-based object detection
methods that can be found in the most recent academic literature.
To help pick the best object detection method for a given application or dataset, I
reviewed and compared several popular options.
This article focuses on CNN’s models and processes.
We put together a list of CNN to help developers and academics learn more about
how to use CNN.
We explain CNN in-depth, the most well-known deep learning algorithm, by outlining
the ideas, theories, and cutting-edge architectures.
Survey Methodology
I have analyzed the key research articles published in the ﬁeld between 2017 and 2022,
with a focus on those from 2017, 2018, and 2019, along with a few from 2021 and 2022. The
primary emphasis was on publications from the most prestigious publishers, including
IEEE, Elsevier, MDPI, ACM, and Springer. Several papers from ArXiv have been chosen.
I have examined over 60 papers on a variety of DL-related topics. There are 14 papers
from 2017, 12 papers from 2018, 19 papers from 2019, and 15 papers from all other years
(2020–2022). This shows that the focus of this review was on the most recent publications in
DL and CNN. The selected publications were analyzed and evaluated in order to perform
the following:
(1) List and describe the DL and CNN techniques and network types;
(2) Present the problems of CNN and provide alternative solutions;
(3) List and explain CNN architectures;