Computation 2023 ,11, 52 20 of 23
Table 2. A comparison between different Types of CNN.
Models Types of CNN Advantages Limitations
Fast R-CNN
[2015]Object detection
Two-stage frameworkThe properties of CNN are
calculated in a single loop,
making the detection of objects
25 times faster than the RCNN
approach (an average of 20 s is
required to study a picture).Using an external candidate region
generator slows down the
detection procedure.
Faster R-CNN
[2015]Object detection
Two-stage frameworkThe RPN approach enables
near-real-time object detection,
around 0.12 s per image.Despite the algorithm’s effectiveness,
it is too slow to be used in
applications requiring real-time, such
as driverless vehicles.
Mask R-CNN
[2017]Object detection
Two-stage frameworkWhen segmenting the objects in
an image, the location of the
objects becomes more exact.Its execution time is longer than that
of the Faster-RCNN approach; hence,
it cannot be implemented in
real-time applications.
YOLO
[2015]Object detection
One-stage frameworkThe efﬁciency of object
localization enables its usage in
real-time applications.The technique has trouble accurately
detecting little items.
SSD
[2016]Object detection
One-stage frameworkYOLO and Faster R-CNN
advantages are balanced with
high detection speed and high
object detection rate.Compared to the Fast-RCNN and
Faster-RCNN algorithms, the object
detection accuracy is less precise.
FCN
[2014]Semantic segmentationObtaining a complete
convolutional layer (without
connected layer).Poor precision of feature maps and
signiﬁcant GPU utilization.
UNet
[2015]Semantic segmentationThe structure has fewer
parameters and is basically like
the letter U. Appropriate for
object detection in limited
medical image samples.It is difﬁcult to acquire uniform
sub-sampling and
up-sampling standards.
5.4. Popular Applications
Biometric Detection: Verifying identity via unique biological characteristics. Individu-
als can be uniquely identiﬁed through their biometric features, which include things like
hand geometry, retina, iris patterns, and even DNA. The object detection method uses a
matching template to make its determinations [57,58].
CCTV cameras and other surveillance equipment are used to monitor the area and
record any suspicious activity. Keeping tabs on potential criminals is the job of object detection.
Research with autonomous robots is the central problem in the ﬁeld at the moment.
The most widely used system approach currently is the human–robotic system. Computa-
tional behavior forms the basis of the trusted system’s vision.
Medical imaging for object recognition includes such applications as tumor detection
in MRI scans and skin cancer screening.
6. Future Directions
Indeed, the performance of classiﬁcation in terms of accuracy, misclassiﬁcation rate,
precision, and recall is heavily inﬂuenced by the combination of convolutional layers,
the number of pooling layers, the number of ﬁlters, the ﬁlter size, the stride rate, and
the location of the pooling layer when designing a convolutional neural network. CNN
training necessitates the use of powerful and impressive hardware resources, such as GPUs.
Training and testing various combinations of parameters repeatedly requires a great deal of
time and high computing resources like GPUs in order to obtain a satisfactory result [ 59,60].