Computation 2023 ,11, 52 12 of 23
Computation 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  12 of 25 
 
 often utilized CNN parameters within these layers; however, they need a lot of training 
time [22–24]. 
 
Figure 10. Fully -connected layer . 
The biggest drawback of a fully co nnected layer is the large number of parameters 
that necessitate laborious calculation in training samples. Consequently, we try to mini-
mize the number of connections and nodes. The eliminated nodes and connections can be 
satisfied using the dropout approa ch. LeNet and AlexNet, for example, developed a vast 
and deep network while preserving a constant computational complexity [22,23].  
The convolution, which is the core element of the CNN network, is exposed when 
the non -linearity and pooling layer is added.  The three that are most commonly utilized 
in architecture are  as follows : 
− To rephrase, in a completely connected layer, all of the neurons communicate with 
their counterparts in the layer below. It is a classifier used by CNN.  
− Being a feed -forward ANN, it  performs similarly to a regular multi -layer perceptron 
network. Input to the FC layer comes from the last pooling or convolutional layer.  
− This is a vector input created by increasing the thickness of the feature maps [24].  
Figure 10 displays that the FC layer ’s output is consistent with the final CNN output.  
The preceding part discussed the various types of layers used in the CNN design; 
this section will focus on loss functions.  
Furthermore, the final classification is achieved b y employing the output layer, the 
very last layer of the CNN architecture. A few loss functions are used in the CNN model ’s 
output layer to compute the predicted error across the training data. As a result of this 
mistake, the disparity between actual and predicted output is highlighted. Then, it will be 
improved using the CNN learning approach.  
The loss function, however, takes advantage of two inputs to pinpoint the source of 
the mistake. For CNN, the first parameter is the forecast or estimate d output. The second 
input is the desired output or label. There are many different kinds of loss functions used 
for different sorts of problems [25].  
Below is a basic explanation of the many kinds of loss functions:  
Training : A training dataset made up of  a collection of images and labels (classes, 
bounding boxes, and masks) is used to train a CNN model.  
Figure 10. Fully-connected layer.
The convolution, which is the core element of the CNN network, is exposed when the
non-linearity and pooling layer is added. The three that are most commonly utilized in
architecture are as follows:
– To rephrase, in a completely connected layer, all of the neurons communicate with
their counterparts in the layer below. It is a classiﬁer used by CNN.
– Being a feed-forward ANN, it performs similarly to a regular multi-layer perceptron
network. Input to the FC layer comes from the last pooling or convolutional layer.
– This is a vector input created by increasing the thickness of the feature maps [24].
Figure 10 displays that the FC layer’s output is consistent with the ﬁnal CNN output.
The preceding part discussed the various types of layers used in the CNN design; this
section will focus on loss functions.
Furthermore, the ﬁnal classiﬁcation is achieved by employing the output layer, the
very last layer of the CNN architecture. A few loss functions are used in the CNN model’s
output layer to compute the predicted error across the training data. As a result of this
mistake, the disparity between actual and predicted output is highlighted. Then, it will be
improved using the CNN learning approach.
The loss function, however, takes advantage of two inputs to pinpoint the source of
the mistake. For CNN, the ﬁrst parameter is the forecast or estimated output. The second
input is the desired output or label. There are many different kinds of loss functions used
for different sorts of problems [25].
Below is a basic explanation of the many kinds of loss functions:
Training: A training dataset made up of a collection of images and labels (classes,
bounding boxes, and masks) is used to train a CNN model.
Backpropagation is a CNN training procedure that measures an error value using the
output value of the previous layer. Each neuron’s weight in that layer is updated using the
error value [26].
In order to measure an incorrect value and revise the old weights, fresh weights are
employed, as shown in Figure 11.