Computation 2023 ,11, 52 10 of 23
Computation 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  10 of 25 
 
 used pooling methods. The picture is divided into rectangular subregions, and only the 
greatest value discovered inside each subregion is returned. One of the most prevalent 
max -pooling sizes is 2  × 2. 
As shown in Figure 8, when pooling is used on the 2 -by-2 blocks in the top -left corner, 
attention is diverted to the top -right corner, and two steps are moved. As a result, stride 
2 is used for pooling. It is possible to use stride 1, which is unusual, to prevent downsam-
pling. Keep in mind that downsampling does not prese rve the position of the data.  
 
Figure 8. Pooling layer.  
At various pooling levels, various pooling techniques may be applied. Global aver-
age pooling (GAP), global max pooling, average pooling, min pooling, and gated pooling 
are some of these methods. Figu re 8 depicts each of these three pooling techniques [22,23]. 
The primary problem with the pooling layer is that it does  not aid CNN in determin-
ing whether or not a feature is present in an input image but rather just where that feature 
is located. Therefor e, there are times when CNN ’s total ratings take a dip. However, the 
CNN model leaves out the necessary information.  
2.1.4. Non -Linearity (Function of Activation)  
The layer of non -linearity follows convolution. Non -linearity allows the generated 
output to be changed or terminated. This layer is used to restrict or oversaturate the out-
put. 
Every type of activation function in every type of neural network serves the essential 
function of mapping input to output. The input value is calculated by calculating th e 
weighted sum of the neuron input and its bias (if present). This indicates that the activa-
tion function determines whether or not to fire a neuron in response to a certain input by 
generating the matching output.  
In the CNN architecture, non -linear activ ation layers are used after all layers with 
weights (also known as learnable layers, such as FC layers and convolutional layers).  
The mapping of input to output will be non -linear because of the activation layers ’ 
non-linear performance, and these layers a lso enable the CNN to learn extremely complex 
things [22–24]. 
Additionally, the capacity to differentiate is a crucial requirement for the activation 
function since it enables the use of error backpropagation to train the network.  
The most popular activati on functions in CNNs and other deep neural networks are 
the ones listed below:  
Sigmoid: This activation function only allows output values between 0 and 1 and 
accepts real numbers as input [25–28]. 
Figure 8. Pooling layer.
At various pooling levels, various pooling techniques may be applied. Global average
pooling (GAP), global max pooling, average pooling, min pooling, and gated pooling are
some of these methods. Figure 8 depicts each of these three pooling techniques [22,23].
The primary problem with the pooling layer is that it does not aid CNN in determining
whether or not a feature is present in an input image but rather just where that feature is
located. Therefore, there are times when CNN’s total ratings take a dip. However, the CNN
model leaves out the necessary information.
2.1.4. Non-Linearity (Function of Activation)
The layer of non-linearity follows convolution. Non-linearity allows the generated
output to be changed or terminated. This layer is used to restrict or oversaturate the output.
Every type of activation function in every type of neural network serves the essential
function of mapping input to output. The input value is calculated by calculating the
weighted sum of the neuron input and its bias (if present). This indicates that the activation
function determines whether or not to ﬁre a neuron in response to a certain input by
generating the matching output.
In the CNN architecture, non-linear activation layers are used after all layers with
weights (also known as learnable layers, such as FC layers and convolutional layers).
The mapping of input to output will be non-linear because of the activation layers’
non-linear performance, and these layers also enable the CNN to learn extremely complex
things [22–24].
Additionally, the capacity to differentiate is a crucial requirement for the activation
function since it enables the use of error backpropagation to train the network.
The most popular activation functions in CNNs and other deep neural networks are
the ones listed below:
Sigmoid: This activation function only allows output values between 0 and 1 and
accepts real numbers as input [25–28].
Tanh: It is comparable to the sigmoid function in that it accepts real numbers as input,
but its output range is only between one and one.
ReLU is the most popular function in the CNN context. All of the input values are
converted to the positive range. ReLU’s primary beneﬁt over other algorithms is the time
and resources it saves when used.
For a long time, the Tanh and sigmoid non-linearities were the most prevalent. Non-
linearities come in many forms, and they are shown in Figure 9. For these reasons, however,
the rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) has seen a surge in popularity in recent years.