Computation 2023 ,11, 52 18 of 23
Computation 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  19 of 25 
 
  
Figure 13. The process of object detection.  
One-step object detectors.  
The use of two -stage object detectors.  
Object detectors that are built on two -stage deep learning pipelines have two distinct 
phases: (1) proposing regions and then (2) classifying the objects within those regions 
[37,38,43,44,55]. The object detector’s region proposal stage entails proposing a  number of 
Regions of Interest (ROIs) in an input image that has a high possibility of having items of 
interest. The second phase involves selecting promising ROIs (while discarding less prom-
ising ones) and classifying items contained within them [53]. RCN N, Fast R -CNN, and 
Faster R -CNN are all well -liked examples of two -stage detectors. On the other hand, sin-
gle-stage object detectors build bounding boxes and classify objects all in the same stage 
using a single feed -forward neural network. Although these detectors are quicker than 
their two -stage counterparts, they are often less precise. YOLO, SSD, EfficientNet, and 
RetinaNet are just a few of the most well -known examples of single -stage detectors. The 
distinction between these two object detectors is see n in Figure 13.  
As one of the earliest deep learning -based object detectors, R -CNN implemented a 
two-stage detection process that included a highly effective selective search method for 
ROI proposals. A few issues with the R -CNN model were addressed with t he introduction 
of fast RCNN, including slow inference speed and inaccurate predictions. The Fast R -
CNN model uses a convolutional neural network (CNN) to process an image’s data and 
produce a feature map and ROI projection. Using ROI pooling, these region s of interest 
are mapped to the feature map for prediction. Rapid R -CNN is an alternative to R -CNN 
that bypasses the region of interest (ROI) as input to the CNN layers and instead processes 
the entire image to create feature maps for object detection [37, 38]. While both Fast and 
Faster R -CNN use a similar strategy, Faster R -CNN uses a separate network to feed the 
ROI to the ROI pooling layer and the feature map, which are subsequently reshaped and 
used for prediction [ 37]. 
Due to their ability to make pred ictions about an input with just one pass, single -
stage object detectors like YOLO (You only look once) are quicker than their two -stage 
Figure 13. The process of object detection.
One-step object detectors.
The use of two-stage object detectors.
Object detectors that are built on two-stage deep learning pipelines have two dis-
tinct phases: (1) proposing regions and then (2) classifying the objects within those
regions [37,38,43,44,55] . The object detector’s region proposal stage entails proposing a
number of Regions of Interest (ROIs) in an input image that has a high possibility of having
items of interest. The second phase involves selecting promising ROIs (while discarding
less promising ones) and classifying items contained within them [ 53]. RCNN, Fast R-CNN,
and Faster R-CNN are all well-liked examples of two-stage detectors. On the other hand,
single-stage object detectors build bounding boxes and classify objects all in the same stage
using a single feed-forward neural network. Although these detectors are quicker than
their two-stage counterparts, they are often less precise. YOLO, SSD, EfﬁcientNet, and
RetinaNet are just a few of the most well-known examples of single-stage detectors. The
distinction between these two object detectors is seen in Figure 13.
As one of the earliest deep learning-based object detectors, R-CNN implemented a
two-stage detection process that included a highly effective selective search method for
ROI proposals. A few issues with the R-CNN model were addressed with the introduction
of fast RCNN, including slow inference speed and inaccurate predictions. The Fast R-CNN
model uses a convolutional neural network (CNN) to process an image’s data and produce
a feature map and ROI projection. Using ROI pooling, these regions of interest are mapped
to the feature map for prediction. Rapid R-CNN is an alternative to R-CNN that bypasses
the region of interest (ROI) as input to the CNN layers and instead processes the entire
image to create feature maps for object detection [ 37,38]. While both Fast and Faster R-
CNN use a similar strategy, Faster R-CNN uses a separate network to feed the ROI to the
ROI pooling layer and the feature map, which are subsequently reshaped and used for
prediction [37].
Due to their ability to make predictions about an input with just one pass, single-
stage object detectors like YOLO (You only look once) are quicker than their two-stage
counterparts. The ﬁrst YOLO variation, YOLOv1, discovered how to quickly detect ob-