Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
CONCEPT LEARNERS FOR FEW-SHOT LEARNING
Kaidi Cao, Maria Brbi ´c, Jure Leskovec
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
fkaidicao, mbrbic, jure g@cs.stanford.edu
ABSTRACT
Developing algorithms that are able to generalize to a novel task given only a few
labeled examples represents a fundamental challenge in closing the gap between
machine- and human-level performance. The core of human cognition lies in
the structured, reusable concepts that help us to rapidly adapt to new tasks and
provide reasoning behind our decisions. However, existing meta-learning methods
learn complex representations across prior labeled tasks without imposing any
structure on the learned representations. Here we propose COMET, a meta-learning
method that improves generalization ability by learning to learn along human-
interpretable concept dimensions. Instead of learning a joint unstructured metric
space, COMET learns mappings of high-level concepts into semi-structured metric
spaces, and effectively combines the outputs of independent concept learners.
We evaluate our model on few-shot tasks from diverse domains, including ﬁne-
grained image classiﬁcation, document categorization and cell type annotation
on a novel dataset from a biological domain developed in our work. COMET
signiﬁcantly outperforms strong meta-learning baselines, achieving 6–15% relative
improvement on the most challenging 1-shot learning tasks, while unlike existing
methods providing interpretations behind the model’s predictions.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Deep learning has reached human-level performance on domains with the abundance of large-scale
labeled training data. However, learning on tasks with a small number of annotated examples is still
an open challenge. Due to the lack of training data, models often overﬁt or are too simplistic to
provide good generalization. On the contrary, humans can learn new tasks very quickly by drawing
upon prior knowledge and experience. This ability to rapidly learn and adapt to new environments is
a hallmark of human intelligence.
Few-shot learning (Miller et al., 2000; Fei-Fei et al., 2006; Koch et al., 2015) aims at addressing this
fundamental challenge by designing algorithms that are able to generalize to new tasks given only a
few labeled training examples. Meta-learning (Schmidhuber, 1987; Bengio et al., 1992) has recently
made major advances in the ﬁeld by explicitly optimizing the model’s ability to generalize, or learning
how to learn, from many related tasks (Snell et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2016; Ravi & Larochelle,
2017; Finn et al., 2017). Motivated by the way humans effectively use prior knowledge, meta-learning
algorithms acquire prior knowledge over previous tasks so that new tasks can be efﬁciently learned
from a small amount of data. However, recent works (Chen et al., 2019b; Raghu et al., 2020) show
that simple baseline methods perform comparably to existing meta-learning methods, opening the
question about which components are crucial for rapid adaptation and generalization.
Here, we argue that there is an important missing piece in this puzzle. Human knowledge is structured
in the form of reusable concepts. For instance, when we learn to recognize new bird species we
are already equipped with the critical concepts, such as wing, beak, and feather. We then focus on
these speciﬁc concepts and combine them to identify a new species. While learning to recognize new
species is challenging in the complex bird space, it becomes remarkably simpler once the reasoning
is structured into familiar concepts. Moreover, such a structured way of cognition gives us the ability
to provide reasoning behind our decisions, such as “ravens have thicker beaks than crows, with more
The two ﬁrst authors made equal contributions.
1arXiv:2007.07375v3  [cs.LG]  20 Mar 2021