Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
in this case, COMET signiﬁcantly outperforms all baselines, achieving only 2%lower accuracy on
the Tabula Muris dataset and 1%on the Reuters dataset on both 1-shot and 5-shot tasks compared
to human-deﬁned concepts. This additionally conﬁrms COMET’s effectiveness with automatically
extracted concepts. We provide more results in Appendix E .
Table 3: Results on 1-shot and 5-shot classiﬁcation with automatically extracted concepts. We report
average accuracy and standard deviation over 600randomly sampled episodes. We show the average
relative improvement of COMET over the best and ProtoNet baselines.
Accuracy CUB: 1-shot CUB: 5-shot Flowers: 1-shot Flowers: 5-shot
COMET 64:81:0 82 :00:5 70 :40:9 86 :70:6
Improvement of COMET...
over best baseline 1:3% 1 :1% 4 :8% 4 :6%
over ProtoNet 13:5% 7 :8% 6 :0% 8 :1%
3.3 I NTERPRETABILITY
We analyze the reasoning part of COMET by designing case studies aiming to answer the following
questions: (i) Which concepts are the most important for a given query point ( i.e., local explanation)?
Which concepts are the most important for a given class ( i.e., global explanation)?; (iii) Which
examples share locally similar patterns?; (iv) Which examples reﬂect well concept prototype? We
perform all analyses exclusively on classes from the novel task that are not seen during training.
Concept importance . Given a query point, COMET ranks concepts based on their importance
scores, therefore identifying concepts highly relevant for the prediction of a single query point.
We demonstrate examples of local explanations in Appendix G. To quantitatively evaluate global
explanations that assign concept importance scores to the entire class, we derive ground truth
explanations on the Tabula Muris dataset. Speciﬁcally, using the ground truth labels on the test set, we
obtain a set of genes that are differentially expressed for each class ( i.e., cell type). We then ﬁnd Gene
Ontology terms that are signiﬁcantly enriched (false discovery rate corrected p-value <0:1) in the set
of differentially expressed genes of a given class, and use those terms as ground-truth concepts. We
consider only cell types that have at least two assigned terms. To obtain COMET’s explanations, we
rank global concept importance scores for each class and report the number of relevant terms that are
successfully retrieved in top 20concepts with the highest scores in the 5-shot setting (Figure 3 left).
We ﬁnd that COMET’s importance scores agree extremely well with the ground truth annotations,
achieving 0:71average recall@ 20across all cell types. We further investigate global explanations
on the CUB dataset by computing the frequency of the most relevant concepts across the species
(Figure 3 right). Beak, belly and forehead turn out to be the most relevant features, supporting
Figure 3: (Left) Quantitatively, on the Tabula Muris dataset COMET’s global importance scores agree
well with the ground truth important Gene Ontology terms estimated using differentially expressed
genes. (Right) Qualitatively, on the CUB dataset importance scores correctly reﬂect the most relevant
bird features.
7