Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
...d(    ,    )d(    ,    )Concept embeddingsConcept learners
!""AggregateConcept importance scores!!(#)
!!(#)Concept prototypes
Figure 1: Along each concept dimension, COMET learns concept embeddings using independent
concept learners and compares them to concept prototypes. COMET then effectively aggregates
information across concept dimensions, assigning concept importance scores to each dimension.
of a curve to the end”. We argue that this lack of structure is limiting the generalization ability of the
current meta-learners. The importance of compositionality for few-shot learning was emphasized in
(Lake et al., 2011; 2015) where hand-designed features of strokes were combined using Bayesian
program learning.
Motivated by the structured form of human cognition, we propose COMET, a meta-learning method
that discovers generalizable representations along human-interpretable concept dimensions. COMET
learns a unique metric space for each concept dimension using concept-speciﬁc embedding functions,
named concept learners , that are parameterized by deep neural networks. Along each high-level
dimension, COMET deﬁnes concept prototypes that reﬂect class-level differences in the metric space
of the underlying concept. To obtain ﬁnal predictions, COMET effectively aggregates information
from diverse concept learners and concept prototypes. Three key aspects lead to a strong generaliza-
tion ability of our approach: (i) semi-structured representation learning, (ii) concept-speciﬁc metric
spaces described with concept prototypes, and (iii) ensembling of many models. The latter assures
that the combination of diverse and accurate concept learners improves the generalization ability
of the base learner (Hansen & Salamon, 1990; Dvornik et al., 2019). Remarkably, the high-level
universe of concepts that are used to guide our algorithm can be discovered in a fully unsupervised
way, or we can use external knowledge bases to deﬁne concepts. In particular, we can get a large
universe of noisy, incomplete and redundant concepts and COMET learns which subsets of those
are important by assigning local and global concept importance scores. Unlike existing methods
(Snell et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2016; Sung et al., 2018; Gidaris & Komodakis, 2018), COMET’s
predictions are interpretable—an advantage especially important in the few-shot learning setting,
where predictions are based only on a handful of labeled examples making it hard to trust the model.
As such, COMET is the ﬁrst domain-agnostic interpretable meta-learning approach.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on tasks from extremely diverse domains, including
ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation in computer vision, document classiﬁcation in natural language pro-
cessing, and cell type annotation in biology. In the biological domain, we conduct the ﬁrst systematic
comparison of meta-learning algorithms. We develop a new meta-learning dataset and deﬁne a novel
benchmark task to characterize single-cell transcriptome of all mouse organs (Consortium, 2018;
2020). Additionally, we consider the scenario in which concepts are not given in advance, and test
COMET’s performance with automatically extracted visual concepts. Our experimental results show
that on all domains COMET signiﬁcantly improves generalization ability, achieving 6–15% relative
improvement over state-of-the-art methods in the most challenging 1-shot task. Furthermore, we
demonstrate the ability of COMET to provide interpretations behind the model’s predictions, and
support our claim with quantitative and qualitative evaluations of the generated explanations.
2 P ROPOSED METHOD
Problem formulation . In few-shot classiﬁcation, we assume that we are given a labeled training
setDtr, an unlabeled query set Dqr, and a support set Sconsisting of a few labeled data points that
share the label space with the query set. Label space between training and query set is disjoint, i.e.,
fYtrg\fYqrg=;, wherefYtrgdenotes label space of training set and fYqrgdenotes label space of
2