Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
hereafter. To deﬁne concepts, CUB provides part-based annotations, such as beak, wing, and tail of
a bird. Parts were annotated by pixel location and visibility in each image. The total number of 15
parts/concepts is available; however concepts are incomplete and only a subset of them is present
in an image. In case concept is not present, we rely on the prototypical concept to substitute for a
missing concept. Based on the part coordinates, we create a surrounding bounding box with a ﬁxed
length to serve as the concept mask c(j). On both CUB and Flowers datasets, we test automatic
concept extraction. In NLP domain, we apply COMET to benchmark document classiﬁcation dataset
Reuters (Lewis et al., 2004) consisting of news articles. To deﬁne concepts, we use all hypernyms
of a given word based on the WordNet hiearchy (Lewis et al., 2004). On all datasets, we include a
concept that captures the whole input, corresponding to a binary mask of all ones.
In the biology domain, we introduce a new cross-organ cell type classiﬁcation task (Brbi ´c et al.,
2020) together with a new dataset. We develop a novel single-cell transcriptomic dataset based
on the Tabula Muris dataset (Consortium, 2018; 2020) that comprises 105;960cells of 124cell
types collected across 23organs of the mouse model organism. The features correspond to the gene
expression proﬁles of cells. Out of the 23;341genes, we select 2;866genes with high standardized
log dispersion given their mean. We deﬁne concepts using Gene Ontology (Ashburner et al., 2000;
Consortium, 2019), a resource which characterizes gene functional roles in a hierarchically structured
vocabulary. We select Gene Ontology terms at level 3that have at least 64assigned genes, resulting
in the total number of 190terms that deﬁne our concepts. We propose the evaluation protocol in
which different organs are used for training, validation, and test splits. Therefore, a meta-learner
needs to learn to generalize to unseen cell types across organs. This novel dataset along with the
cross-organ evaluation splits is publicly available at https://snap.stanford.edu/comet .
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst meta-learning dataset from the biology domain.
Baselines . We compare COMET’s performance to seven baselines, including FineTune/Baseline++
(Chen et al., 2019b), Matching Networks (MatchingNet) (Vinyals et al., 2016), Model Agnostic
Meta-Learning (MAML) (Finn et al., 2017), Relation Networks (Sung et al., 2018), MetaOptNet
(Lee et al., 2019), DeepEMD (Zhang et al., 2020) and Prototypical Networks (ProtoNet) (Snell et al.,
2017). DeepEMD is only applicable to image datasets.
We provide more details on evaluation and implementation in Appendix A. Code is publicly available
athttps://github.com/snap-stanford/comet .
3.2 R ESULTS
Performance comparison . We report results on CUB, Tabula Muris and Reuters datasets with
concepts given as a prior domain knowledge in Table 1. COMET outperforms all baselines by a
remarkably large margin on all datasets. Speciﬁcally, COMET achieves 9:5%and9:3%average
improvements over the best performing baseline in the 1-shot and 5-shot tasks across datasets. Notably,
COMET improves the result of the ProtoNet baseline by 19–23% in the 1-shot tasks across datasets.
COMET’s substiantial improvement are retained with the deeper Conv-6 backbone (Appendix C). To
conﬁrm that the improvements indeed come from concept learners and not from additional weights,
we compare COMET to ensemble of prototypical networks, and further evaluate performance of
COMET with shared weights across all concepts. Results shown in Table 2 demonstrate that COMET
achieves signiﬁcantly better performance than the ensemble of ProtoNets even when the weights
across concepts are shared. Of note, COMET’s performance is only slightly affected with shared
weights across concepts. More experimental details are provided in Appendix D.
Effect of number of concepts . We systematically evaluate the effect of the number of concepts on
COMET’s performance on CUB and Tabula Muris datasets (Figure 2). In particular, we start from
ProtoNet’s result that can be seen as using a single concept in COMET that covers all dimensions
of the input. We then gradually increase number of concepts and train and evaluate COMET with
the selected number of concepts. For the CUB dataset, we add concepts based on their visibility
frequency, whereas on the Tabula Muris we are not limited in the coverage of concepts so we
randomly select them. The results demonstrate that on both domains COMET consistently improves
performance when increasing the number of concepts. Strikingly, by adding just one most frequent
concept corresponding to a bird’s beak on top of the whole image concept, we improve ProtoNet’s
performance on CUB by 10% and5%in1-shot and 5-shot tasks, respectively. On the Tabula Muris,
with just 8concepts COMET signiﬁcantly outperforms all baselines and achieves 7%and17%
5