Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
common-sense intuition. For instance, ‘beak’ is selected as the most relevant concept for ‘parakeet
auklet’ known for its nearly circular beak; ‘belly’ for ‘cape may warbler’ known for its tiger stripes
on the belly; while ‘belted kingﬁsher’ indeed has characteristic ‘forehead’ with its shaggy crest on
the top of the head. This conﬁrms that COMET correctly identiﬁes important class-level concepts.
Locally similar patterns . Given a ﬁxed concept of interest, we apply COMET to sort images with
respect to the distance of their concept embedding to the concept prototype (Figure 4). COMET ﬁnds
images that locally resemble the prototypical image and well express concept prototype, correctly
reﬂecting the underlying concept of interest. On the contrary, images sorted using the whole image as
a concept often reﬂect background similarity and can not provide intuitive explanations. Furthermore,
by ﬁnding most distant examples COMET can aid in identifying misannotated or non-visible concepts
(Appendix H) which can be particularly useful when the concepts are automatically extracted. These
analyses suggest that COMET can be used to discover, sort and visualize locally similar patterns,
revealing insights on concept-based similarity across examples.
 1-shot task support setbeak concept global concept Images ranked according to their distance to the prototypical concept
Figure 4: Top row shows images with beak concept embeddings most similar to the prototypical beak.
Bottom row shows images ranked according the global concept that captures whole image. COMET
correctly reﬂects local similarity in the underlying concept of interest, while global concept often
reﬂects environmental similarity.
4 R ELATED WORK
Our work draws motivation from a rich line of research on meta-learning, compositional representa-
tions, and concept-based interpretability.
Meta-learning . Recent meta-learning methods fall broadly into two categories. Optimization-based
methods (Finn et al., 2017; Rusu et al., 2019; Nichol & Schulman, 2018; Grant et al., 2018; Antoniou
et al., 2019) aim to learn a good initialization such that network can be ﬁne-tuned to a target task
within a few gradient steps. On the other hand, metric-based methods (Snell et al., 2017; Vinyals
et al., 2016; Sung et al., 2018; Gidaris & Komodakis, 2018) learn a metric space shared across
tasks such that in the new space target task can be solved using nearest neighbour or simple linear
classiﬁer. DeepEMD (Zhang et al., 2020) learns optimal distance between local image representations.
Prototypical networks (Snell et al., 2017) learn a metric space such that data points cluster around a
prototypical representation computed for each category as the mean of embedded labeled examples.
It has remained one of the most competitive few-shot learning methods (Triantaﬁllou et al., 2019),
resulting in many follow-up works (Sung et al., 2018; Oreshkin et al., 2018; Ren et al., 2018; Liu
et al., 2019; Xing et al., 2019). Two recent works (Hou et al., 2019; Zhu et al.) proposed to learn
local discriminative features with attention mechanisms in image classiﬁcation tasks. Our work
builds upon prototypical networks and extends the approach by introducing concept-based prototypes.
Prototypical networks were extended by learning mixture prototypes in (Allen et al., 2019); however
prototypes in this work share the same metric space. In contrast, COMET deﬁnes human-interpretable
concept-speciﬁc metric spaces where each prototype reﬂects class-level differences in the metric
space of the corresponding concept.
Compositionality . The idea behind learning from a few examples using compositional represen-
tations originates from work on Bayesian probabilistic programs in which individual strokes were
combined for the handwritten character recognition task (Lake et al., 2011; 2015). This approach
was extended in (Wong & Yuille, 2015) by replacing hand designed features with symmetry axis as
object descriptors. Although these early works effectively demonstrated that compositionality is a
8