an acceptable proxy for pref.
Sajjadi et al. (2018) also examines diversity and
quality (which they call precision and recall) in
the context of generative image models. How-
ever, they rely on assuming that prefandpmodel
can be estimated accurately using the Fr ´echet
Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017).
HUSE avoids such assumptions and instead di-
rectly leverages human judgments, resulting in a
simple and reliable metric more suitable for use as
a gold-standard.
Estimating optimal classiﬁcation error. Eval-
uating a model by estimating its optimal classiﬁ-
cation error has been considered by several earlier
works (Olsson et al., 2018; Kannan and Vinyals,
2016; Li et al., 2017; Bruni and Fernandez, 2017;
Bowman et al., 2016). However, these meth-
ods have focused on classifying sentences directly,
which is quite challenging to do reliably. Exist-
ing adversarial evaluation methods do not yet re-
liably outperform human classiﬁcation (Kannan
and Vinyals, 2016; Bruni and Fernandez, 2017).
We propose the use of both human evaluation and
model probabilities as part of the adversarial eval-
uation framework, and demonstrate that the re-
sulting classiﬁer reliably outperforms humans and
captures both the sample quality and diversity of a
model.
Distributional divergence estimation. Our
proposed evaluation metric is closely related to
the total variation distance which has been studied
extensively in the distribution testing literature.
It is known that total variation distance estimates
have pessimistic minimax estimation rates in
high dimensions (Balakrishnan and Wasserman,
2017). Our work overcomes this by utilizing
pmodel and an estimate of pref. Other approaches to
distributional testing include the maximum mean
discrepancy (MMD) and Wasserstein distances,
but these approaches require knowledge of a
ground truth metric or kernel space (Tolstikhin
et al., 2016; Singh et al., 2018). Although such
divergences are easier to estimate than the total
variation distance from samples, the implied con-
vergence rates are still too slow to be practically
useful.
7 Discussion
In this paper, we demonstrate that the current gold
standard of human evaluation does not penalizeunder-diverse models. To remedy this, we pro-
pose HUSE, a general purpose evaluation strat-
egy which can be applied to any model for which
we can calculate a model’s sampling probabilities.
HUSE is an upper bound on the optimal classiﬁca-
tion error of distinguishing reference and model-
generated text, and never does worse than human
classiﬁcation. HUSE leverages both model proba-
bilities and human judgments, ensuring that mod-
els which do well on the metric are both high-
quality and diverse.
Our work can be viewed as a “superhuman ver-
sion” of the classic Turing Test (Turing, 1950).
Instead of relying on just a human classiﬁer, we
approximate the optimal classiﬁer, which can uti-
lize information about the model in addition to the
reference. We also modify the classiﬁcation prob-
lem and seek to identify whether a sample comes
from a (potentially superhuman) reference distri-
bution, rather than the human distribution. These
two changes lead to tractable, rigorous estimators
which can quantify tradeoffs between model qual-
ity and diversity on a wide range of generation
tasks.
Acknowledgements. We would like to thank
Arun Chaganty, Robin Jia, and Peng Qi for exten-
sive comments and feedback on the paper. This
work was funded by DARPA CwC program under
ARO prime contract no. W911NF-15-1-0462.
Reproducibility. All code, data, and ex-
periments are available on the CodaLab
platform at https://worksheets.
codalab.org/worksheets/
0x88644b5ee189402eb19d39d721d1005c .
References
S. Balakrishnan and L. Wasserman. 2017. Hypothesis
testing for high-dimensional multinomials: A selec-
tive review. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.06120 .
S. R. Bowman, L. Vilnis, O. Vinyals, A. M. Dai,
R. Jozefowicz, and S. Bengio. 2016. Generating
sentences from a continuous space. In Computa-
tional Natural Language Learning (CoNLL) , pages
10–21.
E. Bruni and R. Fernandez. 2017. Adversarial evalua-
tion for open-domain dialogue generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the SIGDIAL 2017 Conference .
M. Caccia, L. Caccia, W. Fedus, H. Larochelle,
J. Pineau, and L. Charlin. 2018. Language gans
falling short. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.02549 .