sampled from pmodel andpref. This is analogous to
learning the discriminator in a Generative Adver-
sarial Network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014)
or learning an evaluation metric from human judg-
ments (Lowe et al., 2017). However, as (x;y)are
high-dimensional objects, training a good classi-
ﬁer is extremely difﬁcult (and perhaps not signif-
icantly easier than solving the original generation
problem). Indeed, learned evaluation metrics do
not generalize very well (Lowe et al., 2017; Cha-
ganty et al., 2018). Unlike these approaches which
seek to replace human evaluation, our focus will
instead be on combining human and automatic sta-
tistical evaluation to estimate the optimal classiﬁer
error.
3 Human Uniﬁed with Statistical
Evaluation (HUSE)
Our key result is that the optimal discriminator de-
pends on (x;y)only through a two-dimensional
sufﬁcient statistic (Section 3.1), motivating an ap-
proximation which we call HUSE (Section 3.2).
For any feature map that maps (x;y)to
(x;y)2Rd, deﬁne the evaluation score L()to
be twice the error rate of the optimal discriminator
that depends on (x;y)only through:
L()def= 2 inf
fP[f((x;y))6=z]: (3)
Note that the evaluation score L()given by
a feature map optimizes over all functions that
depend on(3). Thus, the more information 
contains, the lower L()is. This has two impli-
cations: First, any feature map yields an (opti-
mistic) upper bound onL(2), meaning that L()
might be able detect when a model is poor but can-
not certify that it is good. Second, adding features
tocan only improve this bound.
3.1 Two features sufﬁce
Let us consider the following two-dimensional
feature map:
opt(x;y)def= [pref(yjx);pmodel(yjx)]:(4)
From the arguments above, it is clear that
L(opt)L, but perhaps more surprisingly, we
actually have equality:
Proposition 1. The two-dimensional feature map
optachieves the optimal discriminator score:
L(opt) =L.Proof We compute the true posterior over z
givenx;y. Sincep(z= 1) =p(z= 0) =1
2,
p(yjx;z= 1) =pref(yjx)andp(yjx;z=
0) =pmodel(yjx), by Bayes’ rule:
p(z= 1jx;y) =pref(yjx)
pref(yjx) +pmodel(yjx):
The optimal discriminator simply predicts z= 1
ifpref(yjx)>p model(yjx)andz= 0otherwise.
In other words, the decision boundary is given by
opt(x;y)1> opt(x;y)2.
More generally, we can obtain this equality with a
wider class of . It will hold exactly for any in-
vertible transformation of opt(Appendix Corol-
lary 1), and approximately for any which has
high mutual information with opt(Appendix The-
orem 1). This means that we can substitute pref
with noisy, possibly un-normalized estimates and
still obtain accurate estimates of L.
3.2 HUSE features
While we can directly compute pmodel(yjx)for
many probabilistic models, pref(yjx)is unattain-
able, soL(opt)is not computable. However, the
wisdom of the crowds (Surowiecki, 2004; Ungar
et al., 2012) suggests that pooling together the
judgments of many humans can often produce sur-
prisingly reliable estimates of real-world probabil-
ities such as pref(yjx), even if no individual hu-
man is particularly reliable. With this motivation,
we ask Amazon Mechanical Turk workers to rate a
sentence from 1–5 based on how “typical” it is as
a way to estimate pref(yjx). (see Appendix A.3
for more details). We deﬁne HJ (x;y)to be the av-
erage response over 20 crowdworkers. Figure 2
shows that for a language modeling task on the
Reddit corpus,3HJ(x;y)strongly correlates with
the actual log-frequency of yin the corpus. The
high correlation suggests that human judgments
HJ(x;y)are a good surrogate for logpref.
In addition, we found that rather than using
the model probability pmodel(yjx)directly as
a feature, normalizing by sentence length len (y)
yielded lower (tighter) scores. We therefore deﬁne
the HUSE features as follows:
huse(x;y)def=logpmodel(yjx)
len(y);HJ(x;y)
;
(5)
3We used the Reddit corpus due to crowdworker famil-
iarity, corpus size, and short average sentence length, which
results in a wide range of sentence frequencies.