T=1.0
T=0.9
T=0.7Figure 4. The two-dimensional classiﬁcation problem in Algorithm 1 on the summarization task with different
softmax temperatures (three panels). Each point represents a reference sentence huse(xi;yi)or model-generated
sentencehuse(xi;y0
i). The color denotes the source of the sentence ( z), shading is the classiﬁcation conﬁdence of the
nearest neighbor classiﬁer.
reliably generated even at t= 1:0. However,
the model frequently generates low quality sam-
ples that can easily be distinguished such as “two
new vaccines in the poor countries were effective
against go-it-alone study says” (Table 2).
At lower temperatures of t= 0:9andt= 0:7,
the boundary shifts towards becoming diagonal.
Although the distribution is no longer directly sep-
arable on human judgment, the two distributions
are clearly separable with the inclusion of pmodel.
Using Figure 4, we can identify individual ex-
amples which were correctly and incorrectly clas-
siﬁed based on pmodel and HJ. Table 2 shows ex-
amples of both quality failures and diversity fail-
ures identiﬁed by HUSE. For example, the “di-
versity failure” table shows that the summarization
model (t= 0:7) has an extremely low probability
of generating some reference sentences (“NFL’s
bills shake up front ofﬁce”) and is thus under-
diverse. Closer examination of the model shows
that the probability of generating “front ofﬁce”
is low, since it is an unusual way to refer to the
president and general manager. Improving these
models on the diversity failures will require that
the model understand more subtle paraphrases.
We can also identify model successes, where the
model outputs are indistinguishable from the ref-
erence in terms of quality (“Agassi bows out of
Australian Open after injury”), and the model as-
signs high probability to the reference (“Agassi
withdraws from Australian Open”).
5.4 HUSE stability
Since HUSE depends on human crowdworker an-
notations, one might ask if it is possible to reduce
either the number of annotated examples, or num-
ber of distinct crowdworkers for each example.
We show that for low-quality models, substantially
fewer annotations are needed.
Figure 5. Estimates of HUSE are robust to small
test set size, but generally require 20crowd-
worker measurements for each example.
Figure 5 shows the result of subsampling our
original data of 200 sentences and 20 crowdwork-
ers and estimating HUSE. First, we ﬁnd that us-
ing 50 test set examples (Figure 5, left) is of-
ten sufﬁcient to give accurate estimates of HUSE.
Next, we ﬁnd that the necessary number of crowd-
workers per example depends heavily on the task.
Easily distinguishable tasks (story generation), re-
quire only 10 crowdworkers, while less distin-
guishable tasks (summarization) require more than
20 crowdworkers to obtain accurate estimates.
6 Related work
The current state of NLG evaluation. Existing
approaches to NLG evaluation use a hodgepodge
mix of quality and diversity measures. Out of the
26 NLG papers at ACL 2018, six perform only hu-
man evaluation, fourteen measure human evalua-
tion and a diversity metric such as perplexity or
n-gram diversity, and six do not evaluate using hu-
man judgments.
While perplexity and n-gram counts can in
principle evaluate diversity, their practical imple-
mentations suffer from serious drawbacks. When
human evaluation and perplexity are both eval-
uated, they are almost always done on separate