Quality failure logpmodel HJ
Context: Two new vaccines have been shown effective against rotavirus, which is responsible for a
half-million infant deaths in poor countries each year, research studies published Wednes-
day said.
Model Two new vaccines in the poor countries were effective against go-it-alone study says -2.3 2.6
Reference New vaccines for key <UNK>virus shown effective -4.0 4.3
Diversity failure
Context: The Buffalo Bills sacked Tom Donahoe as president and general manager on Wednesday,
fulﬁlling expectations of a shake-up after another failure to make the National Football
League playoffs.
Model Bills sack<UNK>as president GM and general manager -0.9 4.3
Reference NFL’s Bills shake up front ofﬁce. -5.1 4.3
Model is indistinguishable
Context: US veteran and eight-time Grand Slam winner Andre Agassi has withdrawn from this
month’s Australian Open due to a nagging ankle injury, his management team announced
Thursday.
Model Agassi bows out of Australian Open after injury. -1.4 5.3
Reference Agassi withdraws from Australian Open. -0.3 4.9
Table 2. Example reference and model outputs (capitalization added for readability) corresponding to Figure 4
(summarization task) that were shown to crowdworkers (left column). Crowdworkers were shown samples from the
model (including the <UNK>token) and returned human judgments (right column). Using human judgments and the
model probability, we can identify several types of failures. Quality failures are examples that are classiﬁed by human
judgment. Diversity failures are examples that are classiﬁed by model probabilities. Finally some examples are not
easily classiﬁed, as they have similar human judgment and model probability scores.
models—human evaluations are done on beam-
searched output, while perplexity is computed on
the softmax outputs. This makes it appear as if the
models can simultaneously generate high quality
outputs while also being diverse, when in fact they
can only be one at a time based on whether they
sample or run beam search.
On the other hand, n-gram diversity was pro-
posed by Li et al. (2016) to identify models with
the generic utterance problem where models re-
peat phrases such as ‘I don’t know’. Unfortu-
nately,n-gram diversity is computed across con-
texts by counting the number of unique n-grams
generated, and so does not measure a model’s abil-
ity to generate multiple valid utterances at any sin-
gle context. In particular, a model which only
outputs a single memorized utterance per context
(e.g., via memorization or retrieval) can still have
highn-gram diversity as long as the memorized
sentences differ across contexts.
Finally, allexisting diversity measures are com-
puted separately from human evaluation. This
results in two incomparable evaluation metrics,
which prevent us from reasoning about tradeoffs
between diversity and quality. In contrast, HUSE
allows us to make precise statements about the
tradeoffs between model quality and diversity be-
cause it is a single metric which decomposes intodiversity and quality terms.
Related evaluations of diversity. The impor-
tance of diverse responses has previously been ac-
knowledged for summarization (Nenkova et al.,
2007) and information retrieval (Clarke et al.,
2008). Our work differs in considering a single
evaluation measure that captures quality and di-
versity applicable to anygeneration task.
Automated metrics based on n-gram overlap
such as BLEU, METEOR, ROUGE (Papineni
et al., 2002; Lavie and Denkowski, 2009; Lin and
Rey, 2004) work well for machine translation but
do not generalize well to domains with a diverse
spectrum of correct responses. While variants
(Sun and Zhou, 2012; Galley et al., 2015; Shima
and Mitamura, 2011) have adapted such metrics
to high entropy generative environments, they are
still signiﬁcantly inferior to the human judgments
they attempt to mimic.
Caccia et al. (2018) recently examined the di-
versity and quality tradeoffs for different language
model architectures on synthetic datasets. How-
ever, as their approach relies on measuring log-
likelihoods under both the model and reference
distributions, it cannot be applied to real data
whereprefis unavailable. Our main conceptual
contribution overcomes this by showing that HJ is