Unifying Human and Statistical Evaluation for
Natural Language Generation
Tatsunori B. Hashimoto*1;2Hugh Zhang*1Percy Liang1;2
(* equal contribution)
1Department of Computer Science2Department of Statistics
Stanford University
fthashim,hughz g@stanford.edu pliang@cs.stanford.edu
Abstract
How can we measure whether a natural lan-
guage generation system produces both high
quality and diverse outputs? Human evalu-
ation captures quality but not diversity, as it
does not catch models that simply plagiarize
from the training set. On the other hand, sta-
tistical evaluation (i.e., perplexity) captures di-
versity but not quality, as models that occa-
sionally emit low quality samples would be in-
sufﬁciently penalized. In this paper, we pro-
pose a uniﬁed framework which evaluates both
diversity and quality, based on the optimal er-
ror rate of predicting whether a sentence is
human- or machine-generated. We demon-
strate that this error rate can be efﬁciently es-
timated by combining human and statistical
evaluation, using an evaluation metric which
we call HUSE. On summarization and chit-
chat dialogue, we show that (i) HUSE detects
diversity defects which fool pure human evalu-
ation and that (ii) techniques such as annealing
for improving quality actually decrease HUSE
due to decreased diversity.
1 Introduction
Generating text is a core part of many NLP tasks
such as image captioning (Lin et al., 2014), open-
domain dialogue (Sordoni et al., 2015), story gen-
eration (Roemmele, 2016), and summarization
(Nallapati et al., 2016). However, proper evalu-
ation of natural language generation has proven
difﬁcult (Liu et al., 2016; Novikova et al., 2017;
Chaganty et al., 2018). A good evaluation metric
should not only capture the quality of generation,
but also the diversity of generation, which is es-
pecially crucial for creative, open-ended tasks like
dialogue or story generation.
Human evaluation , which is often viewed as the
gold standard evaluation, captures quality but fails
to capture diversity. As an example, for language
Reference
Model Probability (pmodel)Agassi bows out of Australian openAgassi withdraws from Australian open
Sharon has stroke for strokeCleared coach facing another 
grilling from British swim bosses
Model GenerationsReferenceHuman JudgmentFigure 1. HUSE is twice the classiﬁcation error
of distinguishing reference and generated text based
on human judgment scores and model probabili-
ties. HUSE identiﬁes samples with defects in qual-
ity (Sharon has stroke :::) and diversity (Cleared
coach facing :::).
modeling, a model that directly plagiarizes sen-
tences from the training set would pass the hu-
man quality bar but would have zero generaliza-
tion ability and thus have inadequate diversity. On
the other hand, statistical evaluation —i.e., per-
plexity on a reference test set—captures diversity,
as it ensures a model must assign reasonable prob-
ability to novel sentences, but perplexity provides
an inadequate measure of quality (Theis et al.,
2015). For example, modifying a perfect model by
removing its ability to generate even a single test
sentence results in inﬁnite perplexity even though
the model is still near-perfect. Automatic metrics
such as BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) and ROUGE
(Lin and Rey, 2004) capture quality better than
perplexity but still correlate poorly with human
evaluation and fail to capture diversity (Novikova
et al., 2017; Chaganty et al., 2018).
Existing approaches to combining statistical
and human evaluation have been ad-hoc, lead-
ing to misleading performance measures. A com-
mon approach is to measure diversity through the
perplexity of a probabilistic model and quality
through human evaluation on beam-searched out-
puts. This gives the illusion that a single model isarXiv:1904.02792v1  [cs.CL]  4 Apr 2019