12 of entities connected by arbitrary specified relationships, or interactions [72]. Examples of such 
data relevant to biology a re molecules (composed of atoms and bonds) [73–76] and protein –protein 
interaction networks (composed of proteins and interactions) [77]. A graph, in computational 
terms, is just a representation of data of this type, with each graph having a set of vertices or nodes, 
and a set of edges that represent various types of relationships or connections between the nodes. 
Using the e xamples given above, representations of atoms or proteins might be classed as node 
features, and bonds or interactions might be classed as edge features. GCNs use the structure of 
the resulting graph to determine the flow of information in the neural netwo rk model. As shown 
in Figure 4d, adjacent nodes are considered when updating the features of each node throughout 
the network, with the node features in the last layer being used as the output (e.g. interacting 
residues on a protein) or combined to form an  output for the whole graph (e.g. fold type of the 
protein). Graphs representing different associations can combine different sources of information 
when making predictions, such as combining drug –gene and food –gene relationship graphs  to 
predict foo ds for cancer prevention [78]. Software for training GCNs includes PyTorch Geometric 
(https://pytorch -geometric.readthedocs.io/en/ latest ) [79] and Graph Nets 
(https://github.com/deepmind/graph_nets ) [72]. 
 
Autoencode rs. As the name suggests, autoencoders are neural network architectures designed to 
self (auto) encode a collection of data points by representing them as points in a new space of pre -
determined dimensionality, usually far fewer than the number of input di mensions. One neural 
network (the encoder) is trained to convert the input into a compact internal representation, called 
a latent vector or latent representation, representing a single point in the new space. The second 
part of an autoencoder, called the decoder, takes the latent vector as input and is trained to produce 
as output the original data with its original dimensionality (Figure 4e). Another way of looking at 
it is that the encoder tries to compress the input, and the decoder tries to decompress it back again. 
The encoder, latent representation, and decoder are trained at the same time. Although this sounds 
like a pointless exercise, where the output just mimics the input, the idea is to learn a new 
representation of the input data that compactly encodes desirable features, such as similarity 
between the data points, while still retaining the ability to reconstruct the original data using the 
learned latent representation. Applications include predicting how closely related two data points 
are and enforcing some structure on the latent space that is useful for further prediction tasks. 
Another benefit of the encoder –decoder architecture is that, once trained, the decoder can be used 
in isolation to generate predictions of new, synthetic data samples  which can be tested in the lab 
and contribute to synthetic biology efforts [80]. Autoencoders have been applied to a range of 
biological problems including predicting DNA methylation state [81], the engineering of gene and 
protein sequences [82,83]  and single -cell RNA -sequencing analysis [84]. 
 
Training and improving neural networks.  The general procedure for training machine learning 
models has been outlined in B ox 1. However, as neural networks are structurally much more 
complex than the traditional machine learning algorithms, there are some concerns that are specific