18 the predictions of the model. It remains to be seen whether in the future automated machine 
learning will be reliable and flexible enough to allow experimentalists to routinely use complex 
machine learning algorithms independently, or whether machine learning expertise will remain a 
necessity.  
 
As has been discussed, rigorous v alidation of models and comparison of different models is 
challenging but remains necessary to identify the best performing models and inform future 
research directions. For the field to progress it will be necessary to develop benchmark datasets 
and valid ation tasks [115] , such as ProteinNet [116] , ATOM3D [117]  and TAPE [118] , and for 
these to become widely used. Of course, over -optimizing to a particular benchmark can occur and 
it is important that researchers resist the temptation to do this in order to make their results seem 
better. Blind assessments such as CASP [119]  and Critical Assessment of Functional Annotation 
(CAFA) [120]  will continue to play an important role in assessing which models perform best.  
 
Overall, the variety of biological data makes it hard to provide general guidelines for machine 
learning in biolog y. Hence, we have aimed here to give biologists an overview of the different 
methods available and to provide them with some ideas about how to carry out effective machine 
learning with their data. Of course, machine learning is not suited to every problem , and it is just 
as important to know when to avoid it: when there is not sufficient data, when understanding rather 
than prediction is required, or when it is unclear how to assess performance in a fair manner. The 
boundaries of when machine learning is u seful in biology are still being explored and will continue 
to change in accordance with the nature and volume of available experimental data. Undeniably, 
though, machine learning has had a huge impact on biology and will continue to do so.  
 
Acknowledgemen ts 
 
The authors thank members of the UCL Bioinformatics Group for valuable discussions and 
comments. This work was supported by the European Research Council Advanced Grant 
“ProCovar” (project ID 695558).  
 
Author contributions  
All authors researched data for the article, contributed substantially to discussion of the content, 
wrote the article and reviewed the manuscript before submission.  
Competing interests  
The authors declare no competing interests.