10 Layers of neurons in this simple arrangemen t are often called multilayer perceptrons and were the 
first networks useful for bioinformatics applications [52,53] . They are still widely used in a number 
of biological modelling applications today due to their ease and speed of training [13,54] . In many 
other applications, however, these simple architectures have been surpassed by newer model 
architectures discussed below, though so me of these newer architectures still often make use of 
fully connected layers as subcomponents.  
 
Convolutional neural networks.  CNNs are ideally suited for image -like data, where the data 
possesses some type of local structure, and where the recognition o f such structure is a key 
objective of the analysis. Using the example of images, this local structure could relate to specific 
types of objects in a field of view (e.g. cells in a microscopy image), represented by specific local 
patterns of colours and/or  edges in spatially close pixels in an input image.  
 
CNNs are composed of one or more convolutional layers (see Figure 4b), in which the output is 
the result of applying a small, one -layer fully connected neural network, called a filter or kernel, 
to local  groups of features in the input. In the case of image -like inputs, this local area would be a 
small patch of pixels in the image. The outputs of a convolutional layer are also image -like arrays, 
carrying the result of “sliding” the filter over the entire input and computing an output at each 
position. Crucially, the same filter is used across all pixels, allowing the filters to learn local 
structure in the input data. It is common in deeper CNNs to use skip connections that allow the 
input signal to bypass  one or more layers in addition to passing through the processing units in the 
layer. This type of network is called a residual network (ResNet) and allows training to converge 
more quickly on performant solutions.  
 
CNNs can be configured to operate effect ively on data of different spatial structure. For example, 
a 1D CNN would have filters that slide in just one direction (say left to right); this type of CNN 
would be suitable for data that have only one spatial dimension (such as text or biological 
sequen ces). 2D CNNs operate on data with 2 spatial dimensions, such as digital images. 3D CNNs 
operate on volumetric data, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans.  
 
CNNs have seen significant success in biology for a variety of data types. Recent advances  in 
protein structure prediction have used information on the co -evolution of residue pairs in related 
protein sequences to extract information on residue pair contacts and distances, allowing 
predictions of 3D protein structures to be built at unprecedent ed accuracy [23,55] . In this case, the 
network learns to pick out direct coupling interactions, and accurate predictions can be made even 
for sequences with few or no related sequences [56]. CNNs have also been applied successfully to 
identifying variants in genetic sequence data [57], 3D genome folding [58], DNA –protein 
interactions [22,59] , cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo -EM) image analysis [60,61]  and im age 
classification in medically -important contexts (such as detection of malignancy), where they often 
now rival expert human performance [24,62] .