17 Building s uch understanding takes time and effort, but is important to prevent the often 
unintentional dissemination of poor models and misleading results.  
 
Future directions  
 
The increasing use of machine learning in biological studies looks set to continue for the 
foreseeable future. This increased uptake has been enabled by important advances in methodology, 
software and hardware, all of which keep on developing. A number of large technology companies 
are using their technical expertise and considerable resources to assist academic researchers, or 
even carry out their own research in biology with innovative machine learning strategies. To date, 
however, most success has come f rom applying algorithms developed in other fields directly to 
biological data. For example, CNNs and RNNs were developed for applications such as image 
analysis (for face recognition or in self -driving cars) and natural language processing, respectively. 
One of the most exciting prospects for machine learning in biology is algorithms tailored 
specifically to biological data and biological questions [100,101] . If the known structure of a 
biologica l system can be exploited and neural networks used to learn the unknown parts, then 
increasingly heavily parameterised models can be replaced with simpler ones that are more 
amenable to interpretation and more robust on new data [102] . Applications include biological 
reaction systems and pharmacokinetics, where systems of known differential equations can be 
exploited. This will also assist in the move from predictive machine learning to generative mode ls 
that can create new entities, such as designing proteins with novel structures and functions 
[103,104] . 
 
As the variety of useful architectures and input data types increases, the paradigm of  differentiable 
programming is emerging from the field of deep learning [105] . Differentiable programming is the 
use of automatic differentiation, the central concept in training neural networks, to c alculate 
gradients and improve parameters in any desired algorithm. This shows promise for physical 
models of biological systems in protein structure prediction [63,106] , and for learning force field 
parameters for molecular dynamics simulations [107,108] . The development of differentiable 
software packages such as Jax [109]  and p ackages tailored to specific areas of biology such as 
Selene [110] , Janggu [111]  and Jax MD [112]  will assist the development of such methods.  
 
The progress in biological data analysis with machine learning has also been enabled owing to 
deposition of trained models in publically -available repositories. In this way, researchers working 
on sim ilar problems can use these models without the need for training, and a variety of different 
models can be used with only minimal effort required for switching between them [113] . The field 
has also s een an expansion of automated machine learning pipelines, which train and tune a variety 
of models without user input and return the best performing model. These may assist non -experts 
in training models [114] . However, these resources cannot replace a thorough understanding of the 
method being used, which is important for choosing the appropriate inductive bias and interpreting