8 approach to findin g the best model is generally the most prudent approach. With modern machine 
learning suites such as scikit -learn [18], changing between these model variants often requires 
changing just one line of c ode, so a good overall strategy for selecting the best method is to train 
and optimize a variety of the aforementioned methods and choose the one with the best 
performance on the validation set, before finally comparing their performance on a separate test  
set.  
 
Use of clustering models. The use of clustering algorithms (Figure 3e) is pervasive within biology 
[42,43] . k-means is a strong general -purpose approach to clustering that, like many oth er clustering 
algorithms, requires the number of clusters to be set as a hyperparameter [44]. DBSCAN is an 
alternative method that does not require the number of clusters to be predefined, but has the  trade -
off of other hyperparameters to set, [45]. Dimensionality reduction can also be performed prior to 
clustering to improve performance for datasets with a large number of features.  
 
Dimensionali ty reduction.  Dimensionality reduction techniques are used to transform data with a 
large number of attributes (or dimensions) into a lower -dimensional form while preserving the 
different relationships between the data points as much as possible. For examp le, data points that 
are similar (e.g. two homologous protein sequences) should also be similar in their lower -
dimensional form and vice versa, dissimilar data points (e.g. unrelated protein sequences) should 
remain dissimilar [46,47] . Two or three dimensions are often chosen to allow visualisation of the 
data on a set of axes, though larger numbers of dimensions have uses in machine learning too. 
These techniques comprise both linear and nonline ar transformations of the data. Examples 
common in biology include principal component analysis (PCA) as shown in Figure 3d, Uniform 
Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP)) and t -distributed stochastic neighbour 
embedding (t -SNE) [48]. The technique to use depends on the situation: PCA retains global 
relationships between data points and is interpretable because each component is a linear 
combination of input features, meaning it is easy to under stand which features give rise to variety 
in the data. t -SNE more strongly preserves local relationships between data points and is a flexible 
method that can reveal structure in complex datasets. Applications include single -cell 
transcriptomics for t -SNE [49] and molecular dynamics trajectory analysis for PCA.  
 
Artificial neural networks  
 
Artificial neural network models get their name from the fact that the form of the mathematical 
model that is bein g fit is inspired by the connectivity and behaviour of neurons in the brain and 
was originally designed to learn about brain function [50]. However, the neural networks in 
common use in data science a re obsolete as brain models, and are now just machine learning 
models that can offer state -of-the-art performance in certain applications. Interest in neural 
network models has grown in recent decades owing to rapid advances in the architectures and