33 computing minimises up -front IT infrastructure costs.  
 
Hidden Markov mo del. A statistical model that can be used to describe the evolution of 
observable events that depend on factors that are not directly observable. They have various uses 
in biology including representing protein sequence families.  
 
Saliency map . In the cont ext of machine learning, a saliency map is an image generated to show 
which pixels in an input image contribute to the prediction made by a model. They are useful in 
interpreting models.  
 
Automatic differentiation . A set of techniques to automatically calc ulate the gradient of a 
function in a computer program. Used to train neural networks where it is called 
backpropagation.  
 
Gradients . A gradient is the rate of change of one property as another property changes. In neural 
networks the set of gradient s of the loss function with respect to the neural network parameters, 
computed via a process known as backpropagation, is used to adjust the parameters and thus 
train the model.  
 
eTOC  
Machine learning is becoming a widely used tool for the analysis of biol ogical data. However, 
for experimentalists, proper use of machine learning methods can be challenging. This article 
overviews machine learning techniques and provides guidance on their applications in biology.  
 
 
References  
1.  Ching T, Himmelstein DS, Beaulieu -Jones BK, Kalinin AA, Do BT, Way GP, et al. Opportunities and 
obstacles for deep learning in biology and medicine. J R Soc Interface. 2018;15.  
A thorough review of appli cations of deep learning to biology and medicine including many references to the 
literature.  
2.  Mitchell TM. Machine Learning. McGraw Hill; 1997.  
3.  Goodfellow I, Bengio Y, Courville A. Deep Learning. MIT Press; 2016.  
4.  Libbrecht MW, Noble WS. Machine learning applications in genetics and genomics. Nat Rev Genet. 2015;16: 
321–332. 
5.  Zou J, Huss M, Abid A, Mohammadi P, Torkamani A, Telenti A. A primer on deep learning in genomics. Nat 
Genet. 2019;51: 12 –18. 
6.  Myszczynska MA, Ojami es PN, Lacoste AMB, Neil D, Saffari A, Mead R, et al. Applications of machine 
learning to diagnosis and treatment of neurodegenerative diseases. Nat Rev Neurol. 2020;16: 440 –456. 
7.  Yang KK, Wu Z, Arn old FH. Machine -learning -guided directed evolution for protein engineering. Nature