4 Sometimes the two approaches are combined in semi -supervised learning, where small amounts 
of labelled data are combined with large amounts of unlabelled data. This can improve 
performance in cases where labelled data is costly to obtain.  
 
Classification, regression and clustering problems.  When a problem involves assigning data 
points to a set of discrete categories (e.g. “cancerous” or “not cancerous”), the problem is called a 
classification problem, and any algorithm  that performs such classification can be said to be a 
classifier. By contrast, regression models output a continuous set of values, such as predicting the 
free energy change of folding after mutating a residue in a protein [17]. Continuous values can be 
thresholded or otherwise discretized, meaning that it is often possible to reformulate regression 
problems as classification problems. For example, the free energy change mentioned above can be 
binned into ranges of values that are favourable or unfavourable for protein stability. Clustering 
methods are used to predict groupings of similar data points in a dataset, and are usually based on 
some measure of similarity between  data points. They are unsupervised methods that do not require 
that the examples in a dataset have labels. For example, in a gene expression study, clustering 
could find subsets of patients with similar gene expression.  
 
Classes and labels.  The discrete set of values returned by a classifier can be made to be mutually 
exclusive, in which case they are called classes. Where these values need not be mutually 
exclusive, they are termed labels. For example, a residue in a protein structure can b e in only one 
of multiple secondary structure classes, but could simultaneously be assigned the non -exclusive 
labels of being ⍺-helical and transmembrane. Classes and labels are usually represented by an 
encoding, for example a one -hot encoding.  
 
Loss or c ost functions.  The output(s) of a machine learning model are never ideal, and will diverge 
from the ground truth. The mathematical functions that measure this deviation, or in more general 
terms, that measure the amount of “disagreement” between the obtain ed and ideal outputs are 
referred to as loss or cost functions. In supervised learning settings, the loss function would be a 
measure of deviation of the output relative to the ground truth output. Examples include mean 
squared error loss for regression pr oblems and binary cross entropy for classification problems.  
 
Parameters and hyperparameters.  Models are essentially mathematical functions that operate on 
some set of input features, and produce one or more output values or features. In order to be able 
to learn on training data, models contain adjustable parameters whose values can be changed over 
the training process to achieve the most optimal performance of the model (see below). In a simple 
regression model, for example, each feature has a param eter that is multiplied by the feature value 
and these are added together to make the prediction. Hyperparameters are adjustable values that 
are not considered part of the model itself in that they are not updated during training, but which 
still have an i mpact on the training of the model and its performance. A common example of a 
hyperparameter is the learning rate, which controls the rate or speed with which the model’s