13 to neural networks. Having picked a neural network as an appropriate model for the intended 
application (Figure 1) it is often a good idea to train it on just a single training example, e.g. a 
single image or gene sequence. This trained model is not useful for making predictions,  but the 
training is good at revealing programming errors. The training  loss function should very quickly 
go to zero as the network simply memorizes the input; if it doesn't, there is likely an error in the 
code, or the algorithm is not complex enough to model the input data. Once the network has passed 
this basic debugging t est, training on the whole training set can proceed where the training loss 
function is minimized. This may require tuning of hyperparameters such as the learning rate 
(Figure 2e). By monitoring loss on the training and validation set s, overfitting of the network can 
be detected where the training loss continues to drop lower and the loss on the validation set starts 
to increase. Training is usually stopped at that point, a process known as early stopping (Figure 
2f). Overfitting of a neural network (or any machine learning model), visualised in Figure 2d, 
means that the model is starting to simply memorize features of the training set and thus starting 
to lose its ability to generalize to new data. Early stopping is a good way of preve nting this, but 
other techniques can be used during training, such as regularisation of the model or dropout 
techniques, where nodes in the network are randomly ignored to force the network to learn a more 
robust prediction strategy involving multiple node s. 
 
Popular software packages used to train neural networks include PyTorch ( https://pytorch.org ) 
[85] and Tensorflow ( https://www.tensorflo w.org ) [85]. Training neural networks is 
computationally demanding, usually requiring a GPU (Graphics Processing Unit) or TPU (Tensor 
Processing Unit) with sufficient memory, as these devices can prov ide a 10 -100x speedup over 
using the standard, central processing unit (CPU). This speedup is required when training the larger 
models that have shown success in recent years, and when training on large datasets. However, 
running an already trained model i s usually considerably faster and is often feasible on just an 
ordinary CPU. Cloud computing solutions from common providers exist for those without access 
to a GPU for training, and it is worth noting that for small tasks, the Colaboratory (Colab) 
(https://research.google.com/colaboratory ) allows Python code to be tested on either GPUs or 
TPUs free of charge. Using Colab is an excellent way of getting started with Python -based deep 
learning.  
 
Chal lenges for biological applications  
 
Perhaps the single biggest challenge of modelling biological data is its sheer variety [1]. Biologists 
work with data such as gene and protein sequences, gene expr ession levels over time, evolutionary 
trees, microscopy images, 3D structures, and interaction networks, to name but a few. We have 
summarised some best practices and important considerations for specific biological data types in 
Table 2. Owing to the dive rsity of data types encountered, biological data often require somewhat 
bespoke solutions for handling them effectively, and this makes it difficult to recommend off -the-
shelf tools or even general guidelines for the use of machine learning in these proble m domains,