2 Introduction  
 
Humans make sense of the world around them by observing it, and  learning to predict what might 
happen next. Consider a child learning to catch a ball: the child (usually) knows nothing about the 
physical laws that govern the motion of a thrown ball, yet, by a process of observation, trial and 
error, the child adjusts their understanding of the ball’s motion, and how to move their body, until 
they are able to catch it reliably. In other words, the child has learned how to catch the ball by 
building a sufficiently accurate and useful ‘model’ of the process, by repeatedly  testing this model 
against the data, and making corrections to the model to make it better.  
 
Machine learning refers broadly to the process of fitting predictive models to data or of identifying 
informative groupings within data. The field of machine lear ning essentially attempts to 
approximate or imitate humans’ ability to recognise patterns, albeit in an objective manner, using 
computation. Machine learning is particularly useful when the dataset one wishes to analyse is too 
large (many individual data p oints), or too complex (contains a large number of features) for 
human analysis and/or when it is desired to automate the process of data analysis to establish a 
reproducible and time -efficient pipeline. Data from biological experiments frequently possess 
these properties; biological data sets have grown enormously in both size and complexity in the 
last few decades, and it is becoming increasingly important not only to have some practical means 
of making sense of this data abundance, but also to have a sou nd understanding of the techniques 
that are used. Machine learning has been used in biology for a number of decades, but it has 
steadily grown in importance to the point where it is used in nearly every field of biology. 
However, only in the last few years  has the field taken a more critical look on the available 
strategies and begun to assess which methods are most appropriate in different scenarios, or even 
if they are appropriate at all.  
 
This Review aims to inform biologists on how they can start to und erstand and use machine 
learning techniques. We do not intend to present a thorough literature review of papers using 
machine learning for biological problems [1], or to describe the detailed mathemat ics of various 
machine learning methods [2,3] . Instead, we focus on linking particular techniques to different 
types of biological data (similar reviews are available for specific biological dis ciplines e.g. [4–
11]). We also attempt to distil some best practices of how to practically go about the process of 
training and improving a model. The complex ity of biological data presents pitfalls as well as 
opportunities for their analysis using machine learning techniques. To address these, we discuss 
the widespread issues that affect the validity of studies, with guidance on how to avoid them. The 
bulk of the article is devoted to the description of a number of machine learning techniques, and 
in each case, we provide examples of the appropriate application of the method and how to 
interpret the results. These methods discussed include traditional machine l earning methods, as 
these are still the best choices in many cases, and deep learning  with artificial neural networks, 
which are emerging as the most effective methods for many tasks. We finish by describing what