27  
Figure 4 - Neural network methods. (a) A multilayer perceptron consists of nodes (shown as 
circles) that represent numbers: either an input value, an output value, or an in ternal (hidden) value. 
Nodes are arranged in layers with connections, indicating learned parameters, between every node 
of a layer and every node of the next layer. For example, molecular properties can be used to 
predict drug toxicity since the prediction  can be made from some complicated combination of 
independent input features. (b) A convolutional neural network (CNN) uses filters that move 
across the input layer and are used to calculate the values in the next layer. The filters operating 
across the wh ole layer mean that parameters are shared, allowing similar entities to be detected 
regardless of location. A 2D CNN is shown operating on a microscopy image but 1D and 3D CNNs 
also find applications in biology. The dimensionality, in this case, refers to how many spatial 
dimensions there are in the data, and the connectivity within the CNNs can be configured 
accordingly. For example, biological sequences can be considered 1D and Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging data can be considered 3D. (c) A recurrent neural n etwork (RNN) processes each part of 
a sequential input using the same learned parameters , giving an output and an updated hidden 
state for every input. The hidden state is used to carry information about the preceding parts of the 
sequence. In this case the probability of transcription factor binding is predicted for each base in a 
DNA sequen ce. The RNN is expanded to show how each output is generated using the same layers; 
this should not be confused with using different layers for each output. (d) A graph convolutional 
network (GCN) uses information from connected nodes in a graph, such as a  protein –protein 
interaction network, to update node properties the network by combining predictions from all 
neighbouring nodes. The updated node properties form the next layer in the network and predict 
the desired property in the output layer. (e) An au toencoder consists of an encoder neural network, 
which converts an input into a lower -dimensional latent representation, and a decoder neural 
network, which converts this latent representation back to the original input form. For example,