15 would mean that simply filtering by sequence identity would be insufficient to prevent data 
leakage. This is particularly important for models that operate on sequence alignments or sequence 
profiles as input, since, although two in dividual protein sequences may not share any obvious 
similarity, their profiles could be virtually identical. This means that for a machine learning model, 
these two profiles would essentially be the same data point —. both will be describing the same 
protein family. For protein sequences, one solution to avoid this problem is to search the test data 
with a sensitive hidden Markov model (HMM) profile comparison tool such as HH -suite, which 
can find sequences distantly related to the training data [91]. In the common case where protein 
structure is being used as input or output, structural classifications such as CATH [92] or ECOD 
[93] can be used to exclude similar folds or homologous proteins. Similar issues affect studies 
predicting protein –ligand binding affinity [94]. 
 
To be clear, dat a leakage is not an intrinsic issue with any particular type of data, but rather it is a 
problem with how the data are used when training and evaluating machine learning models. One 
would certainly expect a trained model to produce very good results on dat a that are similar to the 
training set. The issue of data leakage becomes a problem when a model that appears performant 
on some benchmark set performs poorly on new data that are actually different to the training set; 
in other words, the model does not g eneralise, likely because it has not modelled the true 
relationship between the variables, but rather remembered hidden associations present in the data.  
 
Thanks to frequent complaints from reviewers, some journals are now starting to require rigorous 
benchmarking to be carried out before a paper can be considered for publication. Without proper 
testing, the performance of a model will very likely not be representative of real -world 
performance on unseen data, which undermines user confidence in the model.  Worse, authors of 
future studies may be misled into thinking that inadequate testing is defensible simply because it 
has already appeared in (possibly several) peer -reviewed papers, even though it is not. As 
mentioned in Box 2, authors, peer reviewers and  journal editors all have a responsibility for making 
sure that data leakage has been avoided. Knowingly leaving these kinds of errors in place is really 
little better than fabricating data at the end of the day.  
 
Interpretability of models.  It is usually the case that biologists want to know why a particular model 
is making a particular prediction, i.e. what features of the input data is the model responding to 
and how, and why it works in some cases but not others. In other words, biologists are often 
interested in discovering mechanisms and the factors responsible for modelling output, rather than 
just accurate modelling, as mentioned previously. The ability to interpret a model depends on the 
machine learning method used and the input data. Interpretatio n is usually easier for non -neural 
network methods, since these have feature sets more amenable to direct meaningful interpretation 
and generally have fewer learnable parameters. In the case of, say, a simple linear regression 
model, the parameter assigned  to each input feature gives a direct indication of how that feature 
affects the prediction.