16  
The low cost of training non -neural network methods means that it is advisable to carry out ablation 
studies , where the effect on performance of removing defined  features of the input is measured. 
Ablation studies can reveal which features are most useful for the modelling task at hand, and are 
one way to possibly discover more robust, efficient and interpretable models.  
 
Interpreting a neural network (particularl y a deep neural network) is generally much harder due to 
the frequently large number of input features and parameters in the model. It is still possible to 
identify, for example, regions in an input image most responsible for a particular classification by  
building a saliency map [28]. Although saliency maps show which regions of an image are 
important, it can be more difficult to pinpoint which properties of the data in these locations were 
responsibl e for the prediction, particularly when the inputs are not easily human -interpretable like 
images and text. Nevertheless, saliency maps and similar representations can be useful as a ‘sanity 
check’ to ensure that the model is indeed looking at the relevant  parts of an image. This can help 
avoid situations where models make unintended connections, such as classifying medical images 
based on hospital or department labels in the corner of the image rather than the medical content 
of the image itself [95]. Generating adversarial examples, synthetic inputs that cause a neural 
network to produce confident incorrect predictions, can also be a good way of providing 
information on which features are being most u sed for prediction [96]. For example, CNNs often 
use textures (such as stripes in animal fur) to classify objects in images where humans would 
primarily make use of the shapes [51]. 
 
Privacy -preserving machine learning . Some biological data, most notably human genomics data 
and commercially sensitive  pharmaceutical data, has data privacy implications. There have been a 
number of efforts to allow s haring of data and distributed training of machine learning models in 
the context of data privacy. For example, modern cryptographic techniques allow training of a 
drug-target interaction model where the data and results are provably secure [97]. Simulated, 
synthetic participants that closely resemble real participants in a clinical trial can lead to results 
that are accurate for real participants without revealing identifying data [98]. Algorithms have been 
developed for efficient federated model training with data stored in different places [99]. 
 
The need for interdisciplinary collaborations . Unless publicly available  data is being used, it is 
rare that one research group will have the expertise and resources to both collect data for a machine 
learning study and also apply the most appropriate machine learning method effectively. It is 
common for experimental biologists to collaborate with computer scientists, with such 
collaborations often obtaining excellent results. It is, however, important in such collaborations 
that each side has some working knowledge of the other. In particular, computer scientists should 
make an effort to understand the data, such as the expected degree of noise and reproducibility, 
and biologists should understand the limitations of the machine learning algorithms being used.