5 parameters are altered during training.  
 
Training, validation and testing . Bef ore being used to make predictions, models require training, 
which involves automatically adjusting the parameters of a model to improve its performance. In 
a supervised learning setting, this involves modifying the parameters so the model performs well 
on a training dataset, by minimizing the average value of the loss or cost function (described 
above). Usually, a separate validation dataset is used to monitor but not influence the training 
process, in order to detect potential overfitting (see next sectio n). In unsupervised settings, a cost 
function is still minimized, though it does not operate on ground -truth outputs. Once a model is 
trained it can be tested on data not used for training. See Box 1 for a guide on the overall process 
of training and how t o split the data appropriately between training and testing sets. A flowchart 
to help the overall process is shown in Figure 1, and some of the concepts in model training are 
shown in Figure 2.  
 
Overfitting and underfitting. The purpose of fitting a  model to training data is to capture the “true” 
relationship between the variables in the data, such that the model has predictive power on unseen 
(non-training) data. Models that are either overfitted or underfitted will produce poor predictions 
on data not in the training set (Figure 2d). An overfitted model will produce excellent results on 
data in the training set (usually as a result of having too many parameters), but will produce poor 
results on unseen data. The overfitted model in Figure 2d passes exactly through every training 
point, and so its prediction error on the training set will be zero. However, it is evident that this 
model has “memorized” the training data and is unlikely to produce good results on unseen data. 
By contrast, an underfitted  model fails to adequately capture the relationships between the 
variables in the data. This could be due to an incorrect choice of model type, incomplete or 
incorrect assumptions about the data, too few parameters in the model, and/or an incomplete 
traini ng process. The underfitted model depicted in Figure 2d is inadequate for the data it is trying 
to fit; in this case it is evident that the variables have a nonlinear relationship, which cannot be 
adequately described with a simple linear model and so a no n-linear model would be more 
appropriate.  
 
Inductive bias and the bias -variance tradeoff.  The inductive bias of a model refers to the set of 
assumptions made in the learning algorithm that leads it to favour a particular solution to a learning 
problem ove r others. It can be thought of as the model’s preference for a particular type of solution 
to a learning problem over others. This preference is often programmed into the model using its 
specific mathematical form, and/or by using a particular loss functio n. For example, the inductive 
bias of recurrent neural networks (discussed below) is that there are sequential dependencies in the 
input data such as the concentration of a metabolite over time. This dependence is explicitly 
accounted for in the mathematic al form of a recurrent neural network. Different inductive biases 
in different model types make them more suitable and usually more performant for specific types 
of data. Another important concept is the tradeoff between bias and variance. A model with a h igh