32 Encoding.  Any scheme for numerically representing ( often categorical) data in a form suitable 
for use in a machine learning model. An encoding can be a fixed numerical representation, e.g. 
one-hot or continuous encoding, or can be defined using parameters that are trained along with 
the rest of a model.  
 
One-hot encoding.  An encoding scheme that represents a fixed set of n categorical inputs using n 
unique n-dimensional vectors, each with one element set to 1 and the rest to 0. For example, the 
set of three letters (A,B,C) could be represented by the three vectors [1,0,0], [0,1,0] and [0,0,1], 
respectively.  
 
Mean squared error . A loss function which calculates the average squared difference between 
the predicted values and the ground truth. This function heavily penalises outliers because it 
increases rapid ly as the difference between a predicted value and the ground truth grows.  
 
Binary cross entropy . The most common loss function for training a binary classifier — that is 
for tasks aimed to answer a question with only two choices (such as cancer versus non -cancer); 
sometimes called log loss.  
 
Linear regression . A model that assumes that the output can be calculated from a linear 
combination of inputs, i.e.  each input feature is multiplied by a single parameter and these values 
are added. It is easy to interpret how these models make their predictions.  
 
Kernel functions . Refers to transformations applied to each data point to map the original points 
into a space in which they become separable with respect to their class.  
 
Non-linear regression . A model where the output is calculated from a non -linear combination of 
inputs, i.e. the input features can be combined during prediction using operations such a s 
multiplication. These models can describe more complex phenomena than linear regression.  
 
k-nearest neighbours . A classification approach where a data point is classified based on the 
known (ground -truth) classes of the k most similar points in the train ing set, using a majority 
voting rule. k is a parameter that can be tuned. Can also be used for regression by averaging the 
property value over the k nearest neighbours.  
 
Regularisation . Restricting the values of parameters to prevent the model from overfitting to the 
training data. For example, penalising high parameter values in regression models reduces the 
flexibility of the model and can stop it fitting to noise in the training data . 
 
Cloud computing . On-demand computing services, including processing power and data storage, 
typically available via the internet. A pay -as-you-go model is usually used. Use of cloud