25  
 
Figure 2 - Training machine learning methods.  (a) Available data is often split into training, 
validation and test sets. The training set is directly used to train the model, the validation set is 
used to monitor training, and the test set is used to assess the performance of the model. k-fold 
cross -validation with a test set can also be used. (b) One -hot encoding is a common approach for 
representing categorical inputs where a single choice is permitted from a number of possibilities, 
in this case three possible protein secondary structure cl asses. The result of the encoding is a vector 
with three numbers, all equal to 0 except the occupied class which is set to 1. This vector is used 
by the machine learning model. (c) Continuous encoding represents numerical inputs, in this case 
the red, gree n and blue values of a pixel in an image. Again the result is a vector with three numbers 
corresponding to the amount of red, green and blue in the pixel. (d) Failing to learn the underlying 
relationship between the variables  is called underfitting, whereas learning the noise in the training 
data is called overfitting. Underfitting can be caused by using a model without sufficient 
complexity to describe the signal. Overfitting can be caused by using a model with too many 
param eters or by continuing training after it has learned an approximation of the true relationship 
between the variables. (e) The learning rate of the model determines how quickly learned 
parameters are adjusted when training a neural network or some tradit ional methods such as 
gradient boosting. A low learning rate can lead to slow training, which is time consuming and 
requires considerable computing power. By contrast, a high learning rate can lead to quick 
convergence on a non -optimal solution and poor pe rformance of the model. (f) Early stopping is 
the process of terminating training at the point where the loss function on the validation set starts 
to increase, even if the loss function on the training set is still decreasing. Use of early stopping 
can pr event overfitting.