30 Box 2 - Evaluating articles that use machine learning.  
 
Here are some questions to consider when reading or reviewing papers that use machine learning 
on biological data. It is useful to bear these considerations in mind, even if the answers are not 
appare nt, and these questions can be used as the basis for a discussion with collaborators with the 
required expertise. A surprising number of papers do not pass these criteria [147] . 
 
Is the dataset adequa tely described?  Complete steps to assemble the dataset should be provided, 
ideally with the dataset or summary data (e.g.  biological database IDs) available at a persistent 
URL. In our experience, a thorough description of the machine learning methodology but with 
only a cursory reference to the data is a red flag. If a standard dataset or dataset from another study 
is being  used, then this should be adequately justified in the paper.  
 
Is the test set valid?  Based on discussion in " Challenges for biological applications " section, 
check that the test set is sufficient to benchmark the property under investigation. There shou ld be 
no data leakage between the training and test sets, the test set should be of a large enough size to 
give reliable results, and the test set should mirror the range of examples a standard user of the 
tool would be likely to use it on. The composition  and size of the training and test sets should be 
discussed in detail. Authors have a responsibility to ensure that all steps have been taken to avoid 
data leakage, and these steps should be described in the article, along with the rationale behind 
them. J ournal editors and peer reviewers should also ensure that these tasks have been performed 
to a good standard, and certainly should never just assume that they have been.  
 
Is the model choice justified?  Reasons should be given for the choice of machine lear ning 
method. Neural networks should be used because they are appropriate to the data and question in 
hand, and not just because everyone else is using them. Discussion of models that were tried and 
didn’t work should be encouraged as it may help others; to o often a complex model is presented 
without any discussion of the inevitable trial and error that will have been required to end up with 
that model.  
 
Have they compared to other methods?  A novel method should be compared to existing 
methods that show good  performance and are used in the community. Ideally methods using a 
variety of model types should be compared, which can aid in interpreting results. It is surprising 
how many complex models can be matched in performance by simple regression methods.  
 
Are the results too good to be true?  Claims of 99%+ accuracy are not uncommon in machine 
learning papers for biology. Usually, this is a sign of a problem with the cross -validation rather 
than an amazing breakthrough. Both authors and reviewers should take not e of this point.