9 traini ng of deep neural networks [26]. In this section, we describe basic neural networks, as well 
as varieties that are widely used in biological studies. Some of these are shown in Figure 4.  
 
Basic principles of neural networks. A key property of neural networks is that they are universal 
function approximators, which means that, with very few assumptions, a correctly configured 
neural network can approximate any mathematical function to an arb itrary level of accuracy. In 
other words, if any process (biological or otherwise) can be thought of as some function of a set 
of variables, then that process can be modelled to any arbitrary degree of accuracy, governed by 
just the size or complexity of t he model. The above definition of universal approximation is not 
mathematically rigorous, but does highlight one reason why interest in neural networks has 
persisted for decades. However, this guarantee does not provide a way of finding the optimal 
paramet ers of a neural network model that will produce the best approximation for a given dataset. 
There is also no guarantee that the model will provide accurate predictions for new data [51].  
 
Artificial neurons are the building blocks of all neural network models. An artificial neuron is 
simply a mathematical function that maps (converts) inputs to outputs in a specific way. A single 
artificial neuron takes in any number of input values, applies a specifi c mathematical function to 
them, and returns an output value. The function used is usually represented as   
𝑦 =𝜎(∑(𝑤𝑖𝑥𝑖)𝑛
𝑖=1+𝑏), 
where xi represents a single input variable or feature (there are n such inputs), wi represents a 
learnable weight for that input, b represents a learnable bias term, and σ represents a non -linear 
activation function that takes a single input, and returns a single  output. To create a network, 
artificial neurons are arranged in layers, with the output of one layer being the input to the next. 
The nodes of the network can be thought of as holding the y values from the above equation, which 
become the x values for the  next layer. We describe various approaches to arranging artificial 
neurons in the subsections below, which are called neural network architectures. It is also common 
to combine the different architecture types, for example in a convolutional neural networ k (CNN) 
used for classification, fully connected layers are usually used to produce the final classification 
output.  
 
Multilayer perceptrons.  The most basic layout of a neural network model is that of layers of 
artificial neurons arranged in a fully conne cted fashion, as shown in Figure 4a. In this layout, a 
fixed number of “input neurons'' represent the input feature values calculated from the data that 
are fed to the network, and each connection between a pair of neurons represents one trainable 
weight p arameter. These weights are the main adjustable parameters in a neural network, and 
optimizing these weights is what is meant by neural network training. At the other end of the 
network, a number of output neurons represent the final output values from the  network. Such a 
network, when correctly configured, can be used to make complex, hierarchical decisions about 
the input, since each neuron in a given layer receives inputs from all neurons in the previous layer.