7 Traditional methods typically expect that each example in the dataset has the same  number of 
features, so this is not always possible. An obvious biological example of this is when 
protein/RNA/DNA sequences are being used and each example has a different length. In order to 
use traditional methods with this data, the data can be altered  so it is all the same size using simple 
techniques like padding and windowing. Padding means taking each example and adding 
additional values containing zero until it is the same size as the largest example in the data set. By 
contrast, windowing shortens  individual examples to a given size, e.g. only using the first 100 
residues of each protein in a dataset of protein sequences with lengths ranging from 100 upwards.  
 
Use of classification and regression models. For regression problems such as those shown  in 
Figure 3a, ridge regression (linear regression with a regularization term) is often a good starting 
point for developing a model, as it can provide a fast and well understood benchmark for a given 
task. Other variants of linear regression like LASSO re gression [31] and elastic net regression [32] 
are also worth considering when there is a desire for a model to rely on a minimal number of 
featu res within the available data. Unfortunately, the relationships between features in the data are 
often non -linear and so using a model like a SVM is often a more appropriate choice for these 
cases [33]. SVMs are a powerful type of regression and classification model that uses kernel 
functions to transform a non -separable problem into a separable problem that is easier to solve. 
SVMs can be used to perform both linear and non -linear regression depending  on the kernel 
function employed [34–37]. A good approach to developing a model is to train a linear SVM and 
a SVM with a radial basis function (RBF) kernel (a general -purpose non -linear type of SVM) in 
order to quantify what, if any, gain can be had from a non -linear model. Non -linear approaches 
can provide more powerful models but at the cost of easy interpretation of which features are 
influencing the model, a tradeoff mentioned in  the introduction.  
 
Many of the models that are commonly used in regression are also used for classification. Training 
a linear SVM and an SVM with a RBF kernel is also a good default starting point for a 
classification task. An additional method that can  be tried is k-nearest neighbours classification 
[38]. Being one of the simplest classification methods, k-nearest neighbours provides a useful 
baseline performance marker against which other more com plex models, like SVMs, can be 
compared. Another class of robust non -linear methods are ensemble -based models like random 
forests [39] and XGBoost [40,41] . Both methods are powerful non -linear models that have the 
added benefits of providing feature importance estimates and often require minimal 
hyperparameter tuning. Due to the assignment o f feature importance values and the decision tree 
structure, these models are a good choice if understanding which features contributed the most to 
a prediction is essential for biological understanding.  
 
For both classification and regression, the many a vailable models tend to have a bewildering 
variety of flavours and variants. Trying to predict how well -suited a particular method will be to a 
particular problem a priori  can be deceptive and instead taking an empirical, trial -and-error