14 as the choice of model, training and test data will depend heavily on the exact questions one wants 
to answer. Nevertheless, there are some common issues that need to be considered for the 
successful use of machine learning in biology, but also more generally.  
 
Data availability . Biology is somewhat unique in that there exist some problem domains that have 
very large quantities of data publicly available, whereas other problem domains have very little. 
An example is the relative abundance of biological sequence data in public dat abases such as NCBI 
GenBank and UniProt, whereas reliable data on protein interactions is much harder to come by. 
The quantity of data available for a given problem has a profound impact on the choice of 
techniques that can effectively be used. As a very r ough guideline, when only small amounts of 
data (hundreds or a few thousand examples) are available, one is essentially forced to use more 
traditional machine learning methods, as these are more likely to produce robust predictions. When 
larger quantities are available, one can start to consider more highly parameterized models such as 
deep neural networks. In supervised machine learning, the relative proportions of each ground 
truth label in the dataset should also be considered, with more data required fo r machine learning 
to work if some labels are rare [86]. 
 
Data leakage. Although the scale and complexity of biological data may make it seem ideal for 
machine learning, there are some important consi derations that need to be borne in mind 
[21,87,88] . One key concern is how to validate the performance of a model. The common setup of 
training, validation and test sets can lead to proble ms such as researchers repeatedly testing on the 
same test set with a variety of models to obtain the best accuracy, and hence risking overestimating 
performance on it without generalizing to other test sets or new data. However, biological data 
presents a  further non -trivial question: in a large dataset with related entries (e.g. as a result of 
familial relationships, or evolutionary relationships), how does one ensure that two closely related 
entries don't end up split between the training and test sets? If this occurs then the ability of the 
model to remember specific cases is tested, rather than its ability to predict the property in question. 
This is one type of issue often called data leakage and leads to results that appear better than they 
are, which  is perhaps one reason researchers are reluctant to be rigorous about the issue. Other 
types of data leakage are possible, for example, using any data or features during training that 
would not be available during testing. Here, we focus on the problem of having related samples in 
the training and testing sets.  
 
What we mean by “related” here depends on the nature of the study. It might be a case of sampling 
data from the same patient, or the same organism. However, the classic situation where data 
leakage occurs in biology is seen in studies on protein sequences and structures. Typically, but 
usually not correctly, researchers try to ensure that no protein in the training set has sequence 
identity above a certain threshold to any protein in the test set, us ually at a threshold of 30% or 
25%. This is enough to exclude many homologous pairs of proteins, but it has been known for 
decades that some homologous proteins can have virtually no sequence similarity [89,90] , which