3 the future holds for incorporating machine learning in data analysis pipelines in biology.  
 
There are two goals when using machine learning in biology. The first is to make accurate 
predictions where experimental data is lacking, and use these predictions to guide future research 
efforts. However,  as scientists we seek to understand the world, and so the second goal is to use 
machine learning to further our understanding of biology. Throughout this guide we will discuss 
how these two goals often come into conflict in machine learning, and how to ex tract 
understanding from models that are often treated as "black boxes" because their inner workings 
are difficult to understand [12]. 
 
Key concepts  
 
We first introduce a number of key concepts in mach ine learning. Where possible, we illustrate 
these concepts with examples taken from biological literature.  
 
General terms . A dataset comprises a number of data points or instances , each of which can be 
thought of as a single observation from an experiment.  Each data point is described by a (usually 
fixed) number of features. Examples of such features might be length, time, concentration, and 
gene expression level. A machine learning task  is an objective specification for what we want a 
machine learning mode l to accomplish. For example, for an experiment investigating the 
expression of genes over time, we might want to predict the rate of conversion of a specific 
metabolite into another species. In this case, the features “gene expression level” and “time” co uld 
be termed input features or simply inputs for the model, and “conversion rate” would be the desired 
output of the model, that is the quantity we are interested in predicting. A model can have any 
number of input and output features. Features can be eit her continuous (taking continuous 
numerical values), or categorical (taking only discrete values). Quite often, categorical features are 
simply binary and are either true (1) or false (0).  
 
Supervised and unsupervised learning.  Supervised machine learning refers to the fitting of a model 
to data (or a subset of data) that has been labelled — where there exists some ground truth  property, 
which is usually experimentally measured or human -assigned. Examples include protein 
secondary structure prediction [13] and prediction of genome accessibility to genome -regulatory 
factors [14]. In both cases, the ground truth is derived ultimately from laboratory observations, but 
often this raw data is preprocessed in some way. In the case of secondary structure, for example, 
the ground truth data are derived from analysing protein crystal structure data in the Protein Data 
Bank, and in the latter case, the ground  truth comes from data derived from DNA sequencing 
experiments. By contrast, unsupervised learning methods are able to identify patterns in unlabelled 
data, without the need for providing the system with the ground truth information in the form of 
pre-determined labels, such as finding subsets of patients with similar expression level in a gene 
expression study [15] or predicting mutation effects from gene sequence co -variation [16].