29 Box 1 - Doing machine learning.  
 
In this box we outline the steps that should be taken when training a machine learning model. 
There is surprisingly little guidance available on the model selection and training process 
[145,146] , with descriptions of the stepping stones and failed models rarely making it into 
published research papers. The first step, before touching any machine learning code, should be to 
fully understand the data (inputs) and predi ction task (outputs) at hand. This means a biological 
understanding of the question, such as knowing the origin of the data and the sources of noise, and 
having an idea of how the output could theoretically be predicted from the input using biological 
principles. For example, it can be reasoned that different amino acids might have preferences for 
particular secondary structures in proteins, so it makes sense to predict secondary structure from 
amino acid frequencies at each position in a protein sequence. It is also important to know how the 
inputs and outputs are stored computationally. Are they normalised to prevent one feature having 
an unduly large influence on prediction? Are they encoded as binary variables or continuously? 
Are there duplicate entries ? Are there missing data elements?  
 
Next, the data should be split to allow training, validation and testing. There are a number of ways 
to do this, two of which are shown in Figure 2a. The training set is used to directly update the 
parameters of the mode l being trained. The validation set, usually around 10% of the available 
data, is used to monitor training, select hyperparameters and prevent the model overfitting to the 
training data. Often k-fold cross -validation is used: the training set is split into  k evenly sized 
partitions (e.g. 5 or 10) to form k different training and validation sets, and the performance 
compared across each partition to select the best hyperparameters. The test set, sometimes called 
the hold -out set, typically also around 10% of  the available data, is used to assess the performance 
of the model on data not used for training or validation (i.e. estimate its expected real -world 
performance). The test set should be used only once at the very end of the study or as little as 
possible  [27,38]  to avoid tuning the model to fit the test set. See the "Data leakage" subsection of 
the article for issues to consider when making a fair test set.  
 
The next step is model selecti on, which depends on the nature of the data and prediction task and 
is summarised in Figure 1. The training set is used to train the model following best practices of 
the software framework being used. Most methods have a handful of hyperparameters that ne ed to 
be tuned in order to achieve the best performance. This can be done using random search or grid 
search, and be combined with k-fold cross -validation as outlined above [27]. Model ensembling 
shou ld be considered, where the outputs of a number of similar models are simply averaged to give 
a relatively reliable way to boost overall accuracy of the modelling task. Finally, the accuracy of 
the model on the test set (see above) should be assessed.