11  
Recurrent neural networks.  Recurrent neural ne tworks (RNNs) are most suited to data that is in 
the form of ordered sequences, such that there exists (at least notionally) some dependence or 
correlation between one point in the sequence and the next. Probably their main application outside 
biology is i n natural language processing, where text is treated as a sequence of words or 
characters. As shown in Figure 4c, recurrent networks can be thought of as a block of neural 
network layers that take as input the data corresponding to each entry (or time step ) in a sequence, 
and produce an output for each entry that is dependent on entries that have previously been 
processed. They can also be used to generate a representation of the whole sequence that is passed 
to later layers of the network to generate the o utput. This is useful as sequences of any length can 
be converted to a fixed size representation and input to a multilayer perceptron. Obvious examples 
for the use of RNNs in biology include analysis of gene or protein sequences, with tasks including 
ident ifying promoter regions from gene sequences, predicting protein secondary structure, or 
modelling gene expression levels over time; in the latter case, the value at a given time point would 
count as one entry in a sequence. The more advanced long short -term memory (LSTM) or gated 
recurrent unit (GRU) variants of RNNs, which have many uses in biology including protein 
structure prediction [63,64] , peptide design [65] and predicting clinical diagnosis from health 
records [66]. These more advanced methods are often used in combination with CNNs, which can 
increase accuracy [67]. RNNs can be very robust in analyzing sequence -based data. For example, 
RNNs trained on millions of protein sequences have shown an ability to capture evolutionary and 
structural information, and can be applied t o a variety of supervised tasks including tasks related 
to the design of novel protein sequences [68]. 
 
Role of attention mechanisms and the use of transformers . A problem identified with RNNs is the 
difficulty they have in examining specific parts of an input sequence, which is important in order 
to generate a highly accurate output. The addition of an attention mechanism to RNNs, which 
allows the model to acces s all parts of the input sequence when calculating each output, was 
introduced to alleviate this problem. Recently it has been shown that the RNN is not even required 
at all, and that attention alone can be used by itself; the resulting models, called tran sformers, have 
obtained state -of-the-art results on many natural language processing benchmarks [69]. 
Transformer models have recently shown better accuracy than RNNs for tasks on biological 
sequences , but it remains to be seen whether these methods, which are often trained on billions of 
sequences using thousands of GPUs, will be able to outperform existing alignment -based methods 
of sequence analysis in bioinformatics [70]. The outstanding success of AlphaFold2 at the Critical 
Assessment of protein Structure Prediction 14 (CASP14) experiment, a blind assessment of 
computational approaches to predict protein structure from sequence, suggests that models using 
attention also hold promise for tasks in structural biology [71]. 
 
Graph convolutional networks.  Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) are particularly suitable for 
data that, whilst not ha ving any obvious visible structure like an image, are nonetheless composed