............................................................................................................................................................................. both those whose partner has conceived without medical assistance
and with medical assistance, the fraction of which varied by time and lo-cation. Second, men with lower semen quality are underrepresented
among fertile men. Changes in the proportion of fertile men in the pop-
ulation over time could lead to a selection bias in the Fertile group. Incontrast, the Unselected group is not prone to such selection bias.
It is also possible that men providing a semen sample differ from those
who do not. We previously studied this important question by comparing
testosterone and Inhibin B levels in unselected men (potential militaryrecruits undergoing a compulsory routine physical exam to determine
their fitness for military service) who agreed to deliver a semen sample to
those in men who only agreed to give a blood sample. In both groups ofmen, the hormone levels were similar ( Andersen et al.,2 0 0 0 ). Therefore,
recruitment bias is unlikely in studies of unselected men.
As in our prior analysis, we included only English-language publica-
tions, which was unavoidable given the size of the task and the limitedsize of our study team. However, of the 2936 publications identifiedthrough our database searches in 2020, only 49 were excluded be-
cause of language.
In addition, it would be interesting to explore trends in sperm count
in a specific continent or even within countries and sub-populations.
However, we had inadequate statistical power to examine this ques-
tion at a finer geographic level. Repeated studies on semen quality inspecific populations would complement the current study by providinginformation about local trends.
Conclusion and wider implications
Our new data and analyses confirm our prior findings of an apprecia-ble decline in sperm count between 1973 and 2018 among men fromNorth America, Europe and Australia and support a decline amongunselected men from South/Central America, Africa and Asia. This
decline has continued, as predicted by our prior analysis, and has be-
come steeper since 2000. This substantial and persistent decline isnow recognized as a significant public health concern. In 2018, a groupof leading clinicians and scientists called for governments to acknowl-
edge decreased male fertility as a major public health problem and to
recognize the importance of male reproductive health for the survivalof the human (and other) species ( Levine et al. ,2 0 1 8 ). Research on
the causes of this continuing decline and an immediate focused re-
sponse to prevent further disruption of male reproductive health are
needed.
We hope that the new evidence provided here will receive atten-
tion not only from clinicians and scientists, but also from decision-
makers and the general public.
Supplementary data
Supplementary data are available at Human Reproduction Update
online.
Data availability
The data underlying this article will be shared on reasonable request
to the corresponding author.Acknowledgements
We thank Alexandria Albert for her assistance in the literature review.
Authors’ roles
H.L. had full access to all the data and takes responsibility for the integ-
rity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. Study concept
and design: H.L. and S.H.S. Search strategy design and execution: H.L.
and R.P. Acquisition, analysis or interpretation of data: H.L., N.J.,
A.M.-A., J.M., D.W.-D., M.J., R.P. and S.H.S. Drafting of the manu-
script: H.L., S.H.S. and M.J. Critical revision of the manuscript for im-
portant intellectual content: H.L., N.J., A.M.-A, J.M., D.W.-D., M.J.,
R.P. and S.H.S. Statistical analysis: H.L. and M.J. Administrative, techni-
cal or material support: H.L., R.P., S.H.S. and M.J. Study supervision:H.L. and S.H.S.
Funding
We gratefully acknowledge financial support from The GranthamFoundation for the Protection of the Environment. None of the funding
sources played a role in the design and conduct of the study; collection,
management, analysis and interpretation of the data; preparations, re-
view or approval of the manuscript; or decision to submit the manu-
script for publication. Anderson Martino-Andrade is a scholarship
recipient from the National Council for Scientific and Technological
Development (CNPq, Brazil).
Conflict of interest
All authors declare they have no conflict of interest.
References
Abyholm T. An andrological study of 51 fertile men. Int J Androl
1981; 4:646–656.
Ahmed FK, Memon AS, Khan AM, Burney I, Bano K. Effect of BMI
on semen parameters in male infertility in tertiary care hospital of
Karachi. Natl Editor Advis Board 2019; 30:104.
Aitken RJ, Best FS, Richardson DW, Djahanbakhch O, Lees MM.
The correlates of fertilizing capacity in normal fertile men. Fertil
Steril 1982; 38:68–76.
Aitken RJ. The changing tide of human fertility. Hum Reprod 2022; 37:
629–638.
Akutsu K, Takatori S, Nozawa S, Yoshiike M, Nakazawa H,
Hayakawa K, Makino T, Iwamoto T. Polybrominated diphenyl
ethers in human serum and sperm quality. Bull Environ Contam
Toxicol 2008; 80:345–350.
Al-Janabi AS, Al-Mehdawi FA, Al-Lami MQ. Relationship of seminal
biochemical parameters and serum reproductive hormones with
sperm function tests in asthenospermic patients. Jordan Med J
2012; 46:97–107.12 Levine et al.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humupd/advance-article/doi/10.1093/humupd/dmac035/6824414 by guest on 21 November 2022