Figure 2. Meta-regression models for mean sperm concentration (SC) and total sperm count (TSC) by collection year among
unselected men from all continents, adjusted for potential confounders, for the whole period and restricted to studies post2000. (a) Sperm concentration. ( b) Total sperm count. Meta-regression model weighted by sperm concentration (SC) SE, adjusted for continents,
age, abstinence time, semen collection method reported, counting method reported, having more than one sample per man, indicators for studyselection of population and exclusion criteria (some vasectomy candidates, some semen donor candidates, exclusion of men with chronic diseases,exclusion by other reasons not related to fertility, selection by occupation not related to fertility), whether collection year was estimated, whet her
arithmetic mean of SC was estimated, whether SE of SC was estimated and indicator variable to denote studies with more than one estimate. Total
sperm count (TSC) meta-regression models weighted by TSC SE, adjusted for similar covariates and method used to assess semen volume. SE,standard error.
Figure 3. Meta-regression models for mean sperm concentration (SC) and total sperm count (TSC) by collection year with in-
teraction for continents among unselected men, adjusted for potential confounders. (a) Sperm concentration (SC). ( b) Total sperm
count. NEA, North America–Europe–Australia; SAA, South/Central America–Asia–Africa. Meta-regression model weighted by sperm concentration(SC) SE, adjusted for continents, age, abstinence time, semen collection method reported, counting method reported, having more than one sampleper man, indicators for study selection of population and exclusion criteria (some vasectomy candidates, some semen donor candidates, exclusion ofmen with chronic diseases, exclusion by other reasons not related to fertility, selection by occupation not related to fertility), whether collecti on year
was estimated, whether arithmetic mean of SC was estimated, whether SE of SC was estimated and indicator variable to denote studies with morethan one estimate. Total sperm count (TSC) meta-regression models weighted by TSC SE, adjusted for similar covariates and method used to assesssemen volume. SE, standard error.8 Levine et al.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humupd/advance-article/doi/10.1093/humupd/dmac035/6824414 by guest on 21 November 2022