..............................................................................................................................................................Key words: human reproduction / male infertility / andrology / semen quality / sperm count / semen analysis / environmental effects /
epidemiology / systematic review / meta-analysis
Introduction
In 2017, ‘Temporal Trends in Sperm Count: A Systematic Review
and Meta-Regression Analysis’ was published by this journal ( Levine
et al. ,2 0 1 7 ). That article, which was widely discussed and highly
cited, includes all eligible English-language publications in 1981–2013 that contained data on sperm count. We reported a verystrong decline in sperm concentration (SC) and total sperm count(TSC) in North America, Europe, Australia/New Zealand (hereaf-ter NEA) but too few studies have been published in South/Central America, Asia and Africa (hereafter SAA) to draw a conclu-sion about trends in those continents. We examined mean SC andTSC as a function of collection year, as approximated by the mid-year of the sample collection period. Because sample collectionpreceded the year of publication by an average of 6 years, ourresults were already somewhat dated by the time we published ouranalysis in 2017. Therefore, we conducted a new literature searchin the spring of 2020 to identify eligible studies published between1 January 2014 and 31 December 2019. Here, we report on globaltrends in SC and TSC in publications 1981 through 2019, whichcombines results of both searches and analyses. This expandedanalysis addresses two important questions. With increased samplesize, was a trend seen in South America, Africa and Asia? Did thetrends we reported continue post-2011?
Recognition of the importance of male reproductive function,
and sperm count, has increased since 2017 ( Levine et al. , 2018 ;
United Nations Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner,2019 ). The economic and societal burden of male infertility is now
widely recognized, as is the unequal burden of male infertility whichfalls most heavily on low-income populations ( Winters and Walsh,
2014 ;Hauser et al. ,2 0 1 5 ;Dupree, 2016 ;Skakkebaek et al. , 2016 ).
Increasingly strong evidence links reduced sperm count and concen-tration to increases in all-cause mortality and morbidity ( Latif et al. ,
2017 ;Del Giudice et al. , 2021 ;Ferlin et al. , 2021 ). Links between
sperm count and infertility are well-recognized ( Bonde et al. , 1998 ;
Skakkebæk et al. ,2 0 2 2 ). Furthermore, the decline in sperm count is
paralleled by declines in testosterone and increases in testicularcancer and male genital anomalies ( Skakkebæk et al. , 2022 ). In fact,
the decline in semen quality and male reproductive health has re-cently been described as a crisis ( De Jonge and Barratt, 2019 ).
Relative to declines in sperm counts, these latter trends are farmore difficult to document. There is currently no systematic collec-tion of such data, making the examination of those trends difficult.Therefore, an international group of scientists, including several ofthe authors, has suggested the formation of a multidisciplinary mon-itoring system for reproductive health indicators that would provideongoing surveillance of reproductive health outcomes ( Le Moal
et al. ,2 0 1 6 ).
The broad implications of a global decline in sperm count, the data
gaps left unfilled by our prior analysis and the controversies surround-ing these issues warrant an up-to-date meta-analysis. This meta-analysis was conducted to address these aims.Methods
This systematic review and meta-regression analysis was conducted,
and the results reported, in accordance with Meta-analysis in
Observational Studies in Epidemiology ( Stroup et al. , 2000 )
(Supplementary Table SI ) and Preferred Reporting Items for
Systematic reviews and Meta-Analysis guidelines ( Liberati et al. , 2009 ;
Moher et al. , 2009 ). Our research team included epidemiologists,
andrologists and a medical librarian. Our predefined protocol was de-
veloped following best practices ( Borenstein et al. ,2 0 0 9 ;Higgins and
Green 2011 ;National Toxicology Program 2015 ) and informed by
our previous study. Throughout, unless otherwise noted, the methods
of the current study are those employed and published in the previ-
ous study ( Levine et al. ,2 0 1 7 ), including keywords and databases
searched, eligibility criteria and statistical methods.
Systematic review and study selection
A comprehensive search of the PubMed/MEDLINE and EMBASE was
conducted, to identify English-language publications that reported pri-
mary data on human sperm count, published in 2014–2019, i.e. from
the last date included in our prior search through 2019. On 15 May
2020, we searched MEDLINE/PubMed and Embase (Excerpta Medica
database) for peer-reviewed publications meeting our inclusion criteria.
Following the recommendation of the Cochrane Handbook for
Systematic Reviews, we searched in title and abstract for both index
(MeSH) terms and keywords and filtered out animal-only studies. We
used the MeSH term ‘sperm count’, which includes seven additional
terms, and to increase sensitivity, we added 13 related keywords (e.g.
‘sperm density’, ‘sperm concentration’).
All English-language studies that reported primary data on human
SC were considered eligible for abstract screening. We evaluated the
eligibility of all subgroups within a study. For example, in a case–con-
trol study, the control group might have been eligible for inclusion
even though, based on our exclusion criteria, the case group was not.
We divided eligible studies into two fertility-defined groups: (i) stud-
ies of men unselected by fertility status, hereafter ‘Unselected’ (e.g.
young men unlikely to be aware of their fertility, such as young men
being screened for military service or college students) and (ii) studies
of men whose partners had born a child or whose partners were
pregnant regardless of pregnancy outcome, hereafter ‘Fertile’. ‘Total’
refers to both groups.
A study was excluded if participants were selected based on: (i) in-
fertility or sub-fertility; (ii) their range of semen parameters (e.g. stud-
ies selecting normospermic men); and (iii) genital abnormalities,
diseases or medications. We also excluded studies limited to men
with exposures that may affect fertility, such as an occupational expo-
sure, post-clinical trial intervention or smoking. Studies of candidates
for vasectomy or semen donation were included only if semen quality
was not a criterion for men’s study participation. We excluded studies
that used non-standard methods for sperm collection (e.g. methodsReview and meta-regression of trends in sperm count 3Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humupd/advance-article/doi/10.1093/humupd/dmac035/6824414 by guest on 21 November 2022