............................................................................................................................................................................. other than masturbation) or counting methods other than hemocy-
tometer and studies with fewer than 10 men.
First, the publication was either excluded or advanced to full-text
screening based on the title and abstract. Any publication without anabstract was automatically referred for full-text screening. Second, wereviewed the full text and assigned it to exclusion (and categorized thereason for exclusion) or to data extraction. We then confirmed studyeligibility and identified multiple publications from the same study toensure that estimates from the same population were not used more
than once.
Data extraction
For each estimate, we extracted summary statistics on SC and TSC
(mean, standard deviation, minimum, maximum, median and percen-tiles), semen volume (mean and measured method), sample size, sam-ple collection years, data on covariates (fertility group, country, age,ejaculation abstinence time reported and per protocol, method of se-men collection, method of assessing of SC and semen volume, selec-tion of population, study exclusion criteria and number of samples perman). The range of permissible values, both for categorical and numer-ical variables and information on data completeness were recorded.Data were extracted on the total population as well as on all eligiblesubgroups.
Quality control
The current study followed the same protocol as used in the previous
study. For the new search, we used Covidence systematic review soft-
ware for the process of screening the articles that were not availablefor our prior search. In addition, one member of the research teamwas replaced. Screening of this extensive systematic review was con-ducted by a team of eight reviewers (H.L., N.J., A.M.-A., J.M.,D.W.-D., M.J., R.P., S.H.S.). As in our previous analysis, the screeningprotocol was piloted and reviewers were trained by screening of 50abstracts by all reviewers followed by a comparison of results, resolu-tion of any inconsistencies and clarification of the protocol as needed.The same quality control process was followed for full-text screeningand data extraction by all reviewers. All data were entered into digitalspreadsheets with explicit permissible values (no open-ended entries)to increase consistency. After data extraction, an additional round ofdata editing and quality control of all studies was conducted by H.L.and M.J. The process ensured that each study was evaluated by atleast two different trained reviewers.
Statistical analysis
We ran all models both on the data used in our 2017 study (for qual-
ity control) and for the dataset including all years. In all models, the
midpoint of the sample collection period was the independent variable(‘collection year’) and mean SC (or TSC) was the dependent varia-ble(s). Units were million/ml for SC and million for TSC (reported ordefined as SC /C2sample volume). All slopes denote unit change per
calendar year, reported with 95% confidence intervals (CI). We alsoreported values for the first and last years, and the % change/year.
We first used simple linear regression models to estimate SC and
TSC as functions of collection year, with each study weighted bysample size. Beside a model for all men (Unselected plus Fertile), we
also ran a model stratified by fertility status.
Then, we used random-effects meta-regression to model both SC
and TSC as linear functions of time, weighting estimates by the stan-
dard error (SE).
In the meta-regression models, we controlled for a predetermined
set of potential confounders: fertility group, age, abstinence time,
whether semen collection and counting methods were reported, num-
ber of samples per man and indicators for exclusion criteria
(Supplementary Table SII ). The method used to determine sample vol-
ume was included when modeling TSC. In all meta-regression analyses,
we included indicator variables to denote studies with more than one
SC/TSC estimate.
Several variables were imputed including mean SC (and TSC), as de-
scribed in our 2017 study. For example, for studies that reported me-
dian (not mean) SC or TSC, we estimated the mean by adding theaverage difference between the mean and median in studies for which
both were reported.
We included indicators in all models for imputed values. We in-
cluded continental group (NEA or SAA) and fertility group
(Unselected or Fertile), as variables in the model when applicable.
We ran several meta-regression models for both SC and TSC:
(i) basic, unadjusted model; (ii) adjusted model for all men; (iii) strati-
fied by fertility; (iv) unselected men only with time /C2continent interac-
tion; (v) all men with two interactions: time /C2fertility and time /C2
continent.
These analyses were repeated for subsets of data collection to ex-
amine recent trends ( >1972,>1985,>1995 and >2000).
We conducted several sensitivity analyses: (i) adding cubic and qua-
dratic terms for collection year in meta-regression analyses to assess
non-linearity; (ii) removing covariates one at a time from the model;(iii) excluding a specific group, i.e. the group with no information on
age, for each covariate; (iv) replacing age group by mean age, excluding
studies that did not report mean age; (v) adding a covariate for highsmoking prevalence ( >30%); (iv) removing each continent one at a
time; (vii) excluding studies with five or more data points to examine
the influence of large studies; and (viii) removing studies with SEs>20 million/ml.
All analyses were conducted using STATA version 14.1 (StataCorp).
Results
Systematic review and summary statistics
Using PubMed/MEDLINE and Embase searches, we identified 2936
new publications meeting our criteria for abstract screening ( Fig. 1 ). Of
these, 151 duplicate records were removed and 1917 were excluded
based on title or abstract screening. Full texts of the remaining 868
articles were reviewed for eligibility and 743 studies were excluded.Of the remaining 125 articles, 87 were excluded during data extraction
through the second round of full-text screening; 44 of them were
multiple publications. The remaining 38 studies of semen samples from14 233 men included 44 unique mean SC estimates that met the
protocol criteria. Combining these new data with data from our
previous meta-analysis, the current meta-analysis includes results from223 studies, yielding 288 estimates based on semen samples collected4 Levine et al.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humupd/advance-article/doi/10.1093/humupd/dmac035/6824414 by guest on 21 November 2022