5765
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
6.3  Review analysis
Sentiment analysis is extensively used in the domain of Entertainment. Reviews of 
movie, shows, and short films may be analyzed to determine the viewer’s response 
(Kumar et al. 2019). This not only helps viewers make a better choice but also helps 
good contents gain popularity. Sentence level (Lin and He 2009) Sentiment Analysis 
has commonly used in this domain to determine the overall sentiment of the reviews 
given accurately. The travel industry has sought to improve client experiences by devel-
oping machine learning and online consumer recommendation systems based on intel-
ligent, data-driven decision-making techniques (Jain et al. 2021f) also discussed catego-
rizing consumer decisions as positive or negative based on online reviews provided by 
the valuable consumer(Jain et al. 2021e).
6.3.1  Customer reviews
Sentimental analysis on reviews on hotels and restaurants can help customers choose 
better and also help the owners improve. Aspect-based sentiment analysis done on 
hotels and restaurants will help identify the aspect with the most positive reviews and 
negative reviews, on which Hotels can work and make it better. (Sann and Lai 2020; 
Al-Smadi et al. 2018) According to sentiment analysis, this is one of the most attractive 
industries. Sentimental analysis on reviews on hotels and restaurants can help customers 
choose better and also help the owners improve (Zhao et al. 2019). ABSA (Akhtar et al. 
2017) done on hotels and restaurants will help identify the aspect with the most positive 
reviews and negative reviews, on which hotels can work and make it better. The service 
providers profit the most since they may extract the aspect that receives the most nega-
tive feedback and improve on it.
6.3.2  Aspect analysis
Aspect-based sentiment analysis can help businesses make the most use of the massive 
amounts of data they create. The aspect-based method will enable companies to extract 
the most important aspects of client feedback and service.
6.4  Stock market
One of the applications of sentiment analysis is stock price prediction. It can be done 
by analyzing all the news about the stock market and predicting the stock price trends. 
Data can be collected from various sources like Twitter, news articles, blogs, etc. Sen-
tence level sentiment analysis can be done on these texts, after which the overall polar -
ity of texts will be decided of news of a particular company. In work of Xing et  al. 
(2018) used to determine whether the trend will be rising or decreasing. Positive news 
tended to lead to an upward trend, whereas negative news tended to lead to a downward 
trend. Bitcoin and other digital cryptocurrencies relate to a novel technology known as 
Blockchain. Participants inside the blockchain network verify the digital transactions 
using peer to peer consensus methods. However, investigations which apply Sentiment 
Analysis towards the area of blockchain technology are still infrequent, and those that 
do exist, such as work in Kraaijeveld and De Smedt (2020), have employed sentiment