5752 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
4.2.5  Maximum entropy (ME)
Conditional Exponential Classifiers: Conditional exponential classifiers encode labelled 
feature sets as vectors or arrays of integers. This vector is then used to compute feature 
weights, which can be used to select the most likely label for the feature set. Entropy is a 
measure of unpredictability. The Entropy is maximum for uniformly distributed data. The 
input data consists of texts and ratings from 1-5 polarity assigned to it. Most popularly 
used algorithms include SVM, NB, ME (Khairnar and Kinikar 2013; Kaufmann 2012) 
used ME Classifier to detect parallel sentences in any two-language pair, which have less 
training data. The other models used either required a massive amount of training data-
set or used a language-specific technique (Bergsma et al. 2012), but their model showed 
improved results could be produced using any pair of languages. This will enable the estab-
lishment of parallel corpora for various languages.
4.2.6  K‑nearest neighbours (KNN)
KNN algorithm is not extensively used in sentiment analysis but has shown to produce 
good results when trained carefully. It operates on the fact that the classification of a test 
sample will be similar to nearby neighbours. The K value may be selected on any hyper-
parameter tuning algorithms like Grid search or Randomized search cross validation. The 
polarity may be hard voted based on K nearest neighbors values, or soft addition may be 
done to find overall polarity.
4.2.7  Semi‑supervised learning
In this case, where the training dataset contains both labelled and unlabelled data, semi-
supervised learning appears to be a viable option (Zhu and Goldberg 2009). It is motivated 
that while gathering unlabelled data is relatively easy in many real-world applications, 
such as collecting articles from various blogs, labelling is expensive or labour-consuming 
because labelling the training dataset is typically performed by humans. Ortigosa-Hernán-
dez et al. (2012) introduced in the work of a real-world situation in which the user attitude 
is defined by three distinct (but related) target variables: subjectivity, sentiment solarity, 
and will to influence. In the work of Janjua et al. (2021) framework for semi-supervised 
machine learning that combines pre-processing and classification algorithms for unlabelled 
datasets.
Summary of different Sentiment Analysis Techniques its Advantage and Disadvantage 
shown in Table 5.
4.3  Hybrid approach
Hybrid approach combines machine learning and lexicon-based approaches. Hybrid is a 
term that refers to the combination of machine learning and lexicon-based techniques to 
sentiment analysis. The hybrid technique combines the two and is extremely popular, with 
sentiment lexicons playing a significant role in the majority of systems. Sentiment analysis 
is a hybrid approach, including both statistical and knowledge-based methods for polarity 
recognition. In the work of Hassonah et al. (2020a) proposed a hybrid machine learning 
approach using SVM and two feature selection techniques using the multi-verse optimizer