5740 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
from a corpus word-to-word co-occurrence matrix. GloVe is a popularly used method as 
it is straightforward and quick to train GloVe model because of its parallel implementation 
capacity (Al Amrani et al. 2018).
Fast Text It is an open-source and free library developed by FAIR (Facebook AI 
Research) mainly used for word classifications, vectorization, and creation of word embed-
dings. It uses a linear classifier to train the model, which is very fast in training the model 
(Bojanowski et al. 2017). It supports a CBOW and SG model. Semantic similarities may be 
found using this model.
ELMo ELMo is a deep contextualized text representation. ELMo contributes to over -
coming the limitations of conventional word embedding approaches such as LSA, TF-IDF 
and n-grams models (Peng et al. 2019). ELMo generates embeddings to words based on 
the contexts in which they are used to record the word meaning and retrieve additional 
contextual information. Through pretraining, ELMo can more accurately represent polyse-
mous words in a variety of contexts and is more informative about the text’s higher-level 
semantics (Ling et al. 2020).
3.4  Feature selection approach
Feature Selection Approach is evaluated to identify a data characteristic. A characteris-
tic can be insignificant, significant, or redundant. Various feature selection approaches are 
used to eliminate irrelevant and superfluous characteristics (Ahmad et al. 2019b; Lata et al. 
2020). Feature Selection is a procedure that identifies and eliminates superfluous and irrel-
evant characteristics from the feature list and thus increases sentiment classification accu-
racy. In  the work of  (Hailong et  al. 2014; Duric and Song 2012) sentiment analysis  for 
feature selection include lexicon-based and statistical methods. Humans produce features 
in lexicon-based techniques. Typically, the procedure begins with the collection of phrases 
with a strong feeling to develop a limited feature set (Kolchyna et  al. 2015). The set is 
augmented with additional terms via synonym detection or web resources (Ghazi et  al. 
2015; Rizos et al. 2019). The benefit of these approaches is their efficacy, as they carefully 
address aspects. Choosing handcrafted features is a lengthy and complicated process.
SentiWordNet is a sentiment lexicon built from the WordNet database, with each term 
accompanied by numerical values indicating positive and negative sentiment. A well-
known example is a SentiWordNet lexicon. contrarily, statistical processes are entirely 
automated and are widely used for feature selection, although they typically fail to distin-
guish between sentimental and non-sentimental features (Poria et al. 2014; Varelas et al. 
2005). The authors (Cambria et al. 2020) proposed SenticNet as a way to include logical 
reasoning into deep learning models for sentiment analysis.
Statistical techniques for feature selection are typically categorized into four categories: 
filter, embedding, wrapper, and hybrid.
Filter approach This is the most often used technique of selecting features. It selects 
features without utilizing any machine learning technique based on the general properties 
of the training data. The feature is ranked using several statistical metrics, and then the 
features with the highest rankings are chosen (Adomavicius and Kwon 2011).  They are 
computationally inexpensive and well-suited for datasets with a high number of attributes. 
The words “Information Gain”, “Chi-square”, “Document Frequency”, and “Mutual infor -
mation” are all used to refer to fundamental filter algorithms.
Wrapper approach This approach is based on machine learning algorithms since it 
relies on the output of the machine learning algorithm. Approaches are often iterative and