5745
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
4.1.1  Corpus based approach
The approach employs semantic and syntactic patterns to ascertain the sentence’s emo-
tion. This approach begins with a predefined set of sentiment terms and their orientation 
and then investigates syntactic or similar patterns to discover sentiment tokens and their 
orientation in a huge corpus. This is a situation-specific method that requires a signifi-
cant amount of labeled data to train. However, it aids in resolving the issue of opinion 
words with context-dependent orientations.
In the work of Park and Kim (2016) used a corpus based method for sentiment anal-
ysis. They used linguistic constraints and connectives to find the sentiment of a new 
token. For instance, tokens on either side of correlative conjunctions like "AND" tend 
to have the same orientation while words like "OR", but point out opinion change or the 
tokens on opposite orientations. Although this idea is popularly known as Sentiment 
Consistency, in practice, this is not that consistent. So, they constructed a graph that 
contained tokens in vertices and their corresponding word in edges, after which a linear 
log model was used to identify if two conjoined adjectives were or same or opposite ori-
entation and later clustered into a set of positive or negative words.
The corpus-based approach has the following types of approaches: Statistical 
Approach and Semantic Approach as explained below.
Statistical Approach The seed opinion words or co-occurrence patterns can be found 
using statistical approach. The rough idea behind this approach is that if it appears 
in positive texts more than negative texts, then it is more likely to be positive or vice 
versa. The key premise of this approach is that if comparable sentiment tokens are fre-
quently observed in the same environment, they will likely have the same orientation. 
As a result, the orientation of the new token is determined by the frequency with which 
it appears alongside other tokens detected in a similar context. In Turney and Littman 
(2003) approach for calculating mutual information can be used to calculate the fre-
quency of co-occurrences of tokens.
A statistical approach is mostly used in several sentiment analysis applications. One 
such application is detecting manipulated reviews by running a statistical test of ran-
domness popularly known as training test. In work of Hu et  al. (2012) expected that 
reviews written by customers would have random writing styles due to the random back -
grounds of customers. They used a book review dataset from amazon.com to confirm 
their results but, it was found that close to 10.3 percent of products were subjected to 
online review manipulations.
LSA is another statistical technique for analyzing links between papers and tokens 
referenced in the documents in order to generate essential patterns connecting to the 
documents and phrases. In work of Cao et al. (2011) in used LSA to find semantic quali-
ties from reviews to investigate the effect of various features. They engaged program 
user feedback dataset from the CNETdownload.com website. Their main objective was 
to find out why few reviews received helpful votes while few reviews helpful votes. 
They determined various factors which may affect the helpful voting pattern for reviews.
Semantic Approach In this approach, the similarity score is calculated between 
tokens that are used for Sentiment Analysis. Wordnet is commonly used for this task. 
Antonyms and synonyms can be easily found using this approach as similar words have 
a positive score or higher value. In Maks and Vossen (2012) proposed that semantic 
approach can be used in various applications to build a lexicon model that can be used 
to describe adjectives, verbs, and nouns to use in Sentiment Analysis. They described,