5751
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
(2020) used Linear SVM and VADER to predict customer reviews sentiment. The review 
belonged to Huge Swedish Telecom Corporation. The dataset was huge and consisted of 
168,  010 emails for training. They used Swedish sentiment Lexicon and VADER senti-
ment for initial labeling. Their (Li et al. 2019a) linear SVM model performed marvelously 
with an F1 score of 83.4 percent and a mean AUC of 0.896. Furthermore, their model 
highlighted a pattern that was predicted in Email conversations, using which sentiment of 
unseen Email was being predicted. In work of Xia et al. (2020) urged that subjectivity of 
opinion and credibility of expresser should be considered, unlike regular Binary Classifi-
cation Problem. A framework (Wu et al. 2020) was proposed to summarize opinions on 
microblogs. They found and retrieved the topics mentioned in the opinions related to users 
inquiries and then categorized the opinions using SVM. Ali et al. (2020) also worked on 
Twitter tweet data for the experiment. They found it to be beneficial to aggregate the opin-
ions for microblogs.
4.2.3  Logistic regression (LR)
A machine learning technique known as logistic regression works by multiplying an input 
value by a weight value. It is a classifier that learns which input properties are most helpful 
in identifying positive and negative classes. Logistic regression is a probabilistic regression 
analysis used for classification tasks. For binary classification applications, logistic regres-
sion is commonly deployed. When there are multiple explanatory variables, logistic regres-
sion calculates the ratio of odds. Logistic regression uses Maximum-likelihood to calculate 
best parameters. The independent variables may belong to any category i.e., Continuous, 
Discrete (ordinal and nominal). LR model (Hamdan et al. 2015) that the dependent vari-
able is binary, and there is little or no multicollinearity between the predicting variables.
4.2.4  Decision tree (DT)
DT Classifier is a supervised learning technique where a tree is built using the training 
example to classify the polarity of the text. DT uses a condition to divide data into parts 
recursively. RF are used frequently than DT which combines multiple DT to avoid over -
fitting and improve accuracy. DT may be built using several algorithms like CART, ID3, 
C5.0, C4.5 (Revathy and Lawrance 2017; Hssina et al. 2014; Singh and Gupta 2014; Patel 
and Prajapati 2018). These are used the identify the best fitting attribute which needs to 
be placed in the root (Gower 1966; Revathy and Lawrance 2017; Patil et al. 2012). Yan-
Yan et al. (2010)using a graph-based strategy, They proposed a propagation strategy for 
integrating sentence-level and sentence-level features. These two phrase characteristics are 
referred to as inter and intra document verification. They tried to argue that determining 
the sentiment classification of a review sentence entails more than simply examining the 
statement’s components. They investigated the camera domain and compared their results 
to those obtained using SVM and NB Classifiers. In the work of Jain et al. (2021a) tagged 
data that can be used to distinguish between genuine and fraudulent reviews. Additionally, 
we used two distinct datasets to test various machine learning techniques for categorization 
(Yelp hotel review dataset, Yelp restaurant review dataset).