5748 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
• Opinion Identification Opinion Finder recognizes subjective statements automatically 
and highlights several characteristics of their subjectivity, such as the source (holder) of 
the subjectivity and terms included in phrases indicating positive or negative views.7
• National Taiwan University Sentiment Dictionary contain 2812 Positive and 8276 neg-
atives words.8
• WordNet-Affect WordNet-Affect is a WordNet Domains extension that includes a subset 
of synsets that are appropriate for representing affective notions associated with emo-
tional words.9
• Affective Norms for English Words Affective Norms for English Words is a collection 
of normative emotional ratings for a large number of English words. This collection of 
linguistic materials has been graded for enjoyment, arousal, and dominance in order to 
establish a baseline for future research on sentiment and attentiveness.10Table 3  Summary analysis of Lexicon based classification method and its advantage and disadvantage
Technique Advantage Disadvantage
Dictionary based Trained data are not required
Give good outcomes for domains with fewer bands
Quick access to the vocabulary of word meaningsOpinion terms with a specific 
content orientation
Incapable of finding opinion terms 
with a specified content oriented 
domain that are not included in 
the lexicon
Corpus based The capacity to identify expressions of opinion 
with a particular content orientation. When 
domains are distinct, provides superior resultsDue to the lexicon’s broad scope, 
performance varies
The difficulties of providing 
substantial texts while also being 
able to cover all of the text terms 
means that they cannot be used 
individually
Raw
DataTraining
Algorith m
ModelManual
Review
Manual
ReviewManual
Review
Production Trained
Algorithm
Fig. 5  General procedure for sentiment analysis in supervised machine learning category
9 http:// csea. phhp. ufl. edu/ media/ anewm essage. html.
10 http:// csea. phhp. ufl. edu/ media/ anewm essage. html.7 http:// mpqa. cs. pitt. edu/ opini onfin der .
8 http:// acade miasi nican lplab. github. io.