5769
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
research subject due to its usefulness in enhancing social media sentiment analysis (Eke 
et al. 2020).
Informal style of writing Informal style of writing is the biggest challenge to all NLP 
tasks, including sentiment analysis. People are very casual about writing reviews or texts; 
they tend to use acronyms, emojis, shortcuts in their text which is very hard to pick up. 
Acronyms can be handled if they are universal. There are a lot of regional acronyms14 
which change and grow day by day.
Grammatical errors Grammatical errors are very common in informal texts and can be 
handled, but only to some extent; spelling errors can also be corrected limited. It is very 
difficult to burgeoning the spelling mistake of users uniquely every time. The accuracy of 
sentiment analysis and NLP tasks may be improved if these errors can be handled and 
corrected.
Computational cost To get better accuracy, we need to increase the training data size 
and complicate the model, which will exponentially increase the computational cost of the 
model for training; high-end GPU may be required to train a model with a huge corpus. 
Models like SVM, NB are not computationally costly, but neural networks and attention 
models have shown that they are computationally costly.
Availability of data As NLP and sentiment analysis is a recently boomed technology, 
the Availability of data may also be a challenge in some cases. Although data is available 
in Twitter for sentiment analysis, high-quality training data is challenging for supervised 
learning algorithms. Training data for ABSA is challenging to find online therefore needs 
to be prepared manually. The training data of one domain may not be applicable and valu-
able to other domains. For instance, a model trained on a hotel review dataset is not helpful 
in predicting sentiments of a stock or mutual fund dataset and vice versa.
Adaptations of language Languages change as they move to different regions and 
places; although the base language remains the same, many factors influence language, 
such as language prominence, pronunciation, literacy rate, etc. For instance, consider Eng-
lish language, which is widely spoken worldwide, but it is seen that many English varieties 
are spoken worldwide based on the regions like Indian, American, British, etc. Lots of 
words are used differently depending upon the region there are used. For instance, consider 
the word “thong” which means flip-flops or slippers in Australia but means undergarments 
in the UK. Similarly, different spellings for the same word, such as “color” and “colour,” 
mean the same but are spelled differently in different regions. This will create duplicates 
and may affect the accuracy and computational cost of the model. Language barrier is the 
hardest of the challenges to NLP. There are thousands of languages spoken worldwide, 
although NLP techniques are hardly available to 5-10 languages, and resources are widely 
available for English.
Phrases containing degree adverbs and intensifiers Adverbs such as slightly, barely, and 
moderately are used to quantify the sentiments. For instance, consider review r1= “The 
food is barely good” and r2= “the food is really good”. r1 is considered neutral or slightly 
positive, whereas r2 is considered to be highly positive. The adverbs ’barely’ and ’really’ 
decide the extent of positiveness and the word ’good’. Similarly, intensifiers also quantify 
the sentiment of the sentences. Intensifiers like very, too are used to increase the positive-
ness or negativeness of the token. For instance, “too good” is considered to be more posi-
tive than “good.” Intensifiers and degree adverbs impose a challenge on aggregating the 
14 https:// www. dicti onary. com/e/ acron  yms.