5735
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
as working with conditional sentences or ambiguous statements (Ferrari and Esuli 2019). In 
these circumstances, sentence-level sentiment analysis is critical.
2.3  Phrase level sentiment analysis
Phrase level: Sentiment analysis also be performed where opinion words are mined at phrase 
level, and classification will be done. Each phrase may contain multiple aspects or single 
aspects. This may be useful product reviews of multiple lines; here, it is observed that a sin-
gle aspect is expressed in a phrase (Thet et al. 2010). It has been a hot topic of researchers 
in recent times. While document-level analysis concentrated on categorizing the entire docu-
ment as subjective, either positively or negatively, sentence-level analysis is more beneficial, 
as a document contains both positive and negative statements. Word is the most basic unit of 
language; its polarity is intimately related to the subjectivity of the sentence or document in 
which it appears. A sentence containing an adjective has a high probability of being a subjec-
tive sentence. (Fredriksen-Goldsen and Kim 2017) Additionally, the term chosen for expres-
sion represents the demographic characteristics of individuals, such as gender and age, and its 
desire, social standing, and personality, other psychological and social characteristics (Flek 
2020). As a result, term serves as the foundation for text sentiment analysis.
2.4  Aspect level sentiment analysis
Aspect level:  sentiment analysis is performed at the aspect level. Each sentence may con-
tain multiple aspects; therefore, Aspect level sentiment analysis. Primary attention to all the 
aspects used in the sentence and assigns polarity to all the aspects after which an aggregate 
sentiment has calculated for the whole sentence (Schouten and Frasincar 2015; Lu et al. 2011).Hotel Reviews
Restaurant
Reviews
Airline
Reviews
Stock News
Product
Reviewswww. amazon.co m
twitter API
www .tripadvisor .com
www. yelp.com
www .facebook.co m
Kaggle
Online Survey
www .airlinequalit y.com
Data Selection Data ScrapingData Pre-
Processing
Data
Visualization
Data AnalysisCorpus Based
Approaches
Machine
Learning Based
ApproachesDictionary Based
Approaches
ApproachSentiment Analysis
Subjectivity Classification
Opinion Spam Detectio n
Aspect Detectio n
Polarity Classification
Task
Fig. 2  General procedure of sentiment analysis