5762 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
proportional to each other. Therefore it is impossible to increase both Precision and Recall 
at the same time. A recall is used in cases where the capture of a class is dominant.
F1 score F1 score is the harmonic mean of Recall and Precision. It is the most used met-
ric after Accuracy. It is used when we are unable to choose between Precision or Recall. F1 
score manages the trade-off between recall and precision.
Accuracy This is the most commonly used metric in all the classification tasks. Accu-
racy defines how accurate the model is. It is the ratio of correct classification to total pre-
dictions done by the model. Accuracy is a good metric to use for sentiment classification 
for a balanced dataset.
Specificity Specificity Is the opposite of sensitivity. It is not popularly used by research-
ers but is helpful in few domains. It Is the ratio of the total number of correctly classified 
negative samples to negative classes actually present in the confusion matrix as shown in 
Fig. 7.
Confusion matrix A confusion matrix is a table that is frequently used to evaluate a cat-
egorization model’s (or “classifier’s”) effectiveness on a set of training test data values are 
known. While the confusion matrix Fig.  7. itself is rather straightforward to comprehend, 
the associated language might be perplexing.
TF-IDF Term Frequency refer to as number of times term present in a document. TF 
which counts the number of times a term word appears in the document Because each doc-
ument is varied in length, it is likely that a term will appear far more frequently in longer 
documents than in shorter ones. As a result, the phrase frequency is frequently divided by 
the document length.(2) Recall =TP
TP+FN
(3) Term Frequency =(Number of times term t present in a document )
(Total number of terms in the document )
SA APPLICA TIONS Review Analysis
Stock MarketSentiments of
Customer Review s
Aspect Analysis
Trend PredictionStock Price
PredictionHealth Care
Experince AnalysisReputation
ManagmentBusiness
IntelligenceProduct AnalysisMarket Research an d
Competitor Analysis
Fig. 8  Applications of sentiment analysis