5732 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
aid decision-making, we must employ user-generated data to analyze it automatically. 
As a result, sentiment analysis has increased its popularity across research communities 
in recent years. Sentiment analysis is also called as Opinion analysis or Opinion mining. 
We have seen a recent growth in the sentiment analysis task. The variuos research works 
in sentiment analysis (Ligthart et al. 2021) published an overview on Opinion mining 
in the earlier stage. In (Piryani et al. 2017) discusses the study topic from 2000 to 2015 
and provides a framework for computationally processing unstructured data with the 
primary goal of extracting views and identifying their moods. Several recent surveys 
(Yousif et al. 2019; Birjali et al. 2021) authors has described the problem of sentiment 
analysis and suggested potential directions. Soleymani et  al. (2017) and Yadav and 
Vishwakarma (2020) on sentiment classification have been published. Also the topic 
of detecting opinion spam and fraudulent reviews was investigated. Additionally, In the 
work of Yue et al. (2019) and Liu et al. (2012) conducted research on the effectiveness 
of internet reviews. The Authors (Jain et al. 2021b) discuss machine learning applica-
tions that incorporate online reviews in sentiment categorization, predictive decision-
making, and the detection of false reviews. In the work of Balaji et al. (2021) conducted 
a thorough examination of the several applications of social media analysis utilizing 
sophisticated machine learning algorithms. Authors present a brief overview of machine 
learning algorithms used in social media analysis (Hangya and Farkas 2017).
The growth of social network sites has generated a slew of fields devoted to analyz-
ing these networks and their contents in order to extract necessary information. Sen-
timent analysis is concerned with deriving the sentiments communicated by a piece 
of text from its content. Sentiment analysis is a subfield of NLP and that, given long 
and illustrious public opinion for decision making, there must be multiple early works 
addressing it. However, it still works going on sentiment analysis develop till the new 
millennium.
Several real-world applications require sentiment analysis for detailed investigation. 
for example, product analysis, discover which components or qualities of a product 
appeal to customers in terms of product quality. In work of Subhashini et  al. (2021) 
presents the results of a comprehensive review of contemporary opinion mining litera-
ture. It also covers how to extract text features from opinions with noise or uncertainty, 
represent knowledge in opinions, and categorize them. Mowlaei et al. (2020) suggest a 
technique for adaptive aspect-based lexicons for sentiment classification. The authors 
described two strategies for constructing two dynamic lexicons to aid in the classifica-
tion of sentiments depending on their aspects: a strategy based on statistics and genetic 
algorithms. A dynamic lexicon can be automatically updated and provides more precise 
grading for context-related concepts (Kumar and Uma 2021). To organize all the aspects 
of the reviews they selected a number of lexicons from several dictionaries. Sentiment 
analysis is previously being applied in various domains ranging from hotels to airlines 
and healthcare to the stock market (Zvarevashe and Olugbara 2018). Sentiment analy -
sis has applied to hotel reviews to get a better understanding of customer’s likes and 
dislikes. In comparison (Valencia et al. 2019), it is used to determine the trends of the 
stock market and cryptocurrencies based on the market sentiment. The Authors (Ahmad 
et al. 2019a) analyze tweets relating to various domains and analyze the sentiments of 
the tweets. The health care domain is seeing a surge in sentiment analysis applications 
in recent times, customer opinion analyses (Ruffer et al. 2020; Park et al. 2020; Cor -
tis and Davis 2021; Arora et al. 2021), customer satisfaction analyses are few applica-
tions in the healthcare sector (Baashar et  al. 2020; Miotto et  al. 2018). The business 
sector has always utilized sentiment analysis for its improvement. Sentiment analysis