5738 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
such as love, happiness, and joy, while negative emoticons are composed of negative emo-
tions such as sadness, depression, and wrath.
Punctuation marks, or exclamation marks, serve to highlight the force of a positive or 
negative remark. Similarly, the apostrophe and the question mark are other punctuation 
marks.
Words in slang, such as lol and rofl. These are frequently used to introduce a sense of 
humor into a remark. Given the nature of opinion tweets, it is plausible to assume that a 
slang expression in the text suggests sentiment analysis. Substitute their meaning for the 
slang term.
Punctuation marks, like exclamation marks, serve to highlight the force of a positive 
or negative remark. Similarly, the apostrophe and the question mark are other punctuation 
marks.
3.3  Feature extraction
Feature extraction is a key task in sentiment classification as it involves the extraction of 
valuable information from the text data, and it will directly impact the performance of the 
model. The approach tries to extract valuable information that encapsulates the text’s most 
essential features. In the work of Venugopalan and Gupta (2015) incorporated other fea-
tures as it is challenging to extract features from the text. In most cases, punctuations are 
removed from the text after lowering it in the pre-processing stage, but they used them to 
extract features and hashtags and emoticons commonly used techniques for feature extrac-
tions listed below.
Terms frequency It is one of the simplest ways to express features that are more fre-
quently used in various NLP applications, including Sentiment Analysis, for information 
retrieval. It considers a single word, i.e., uni-gram or group of two-three words, which can 
be in bi-gram and tri-gram, with their terms count representing features (Sharma et  al. 
2013). Term’s presence gives the word a value of either 0 or 1. Term frequency is the 
integer value, which is its count in the given document. TF-IDF can be used as a weighted 
scheme for better results that will measure the importance of any token in the given 
document.
Parts of Speech tagging The process of tagging a word in a text (corpus) based on its 
definition and context is also known as grammatical tagging. Tokens are categorized as 
nouns, verbs, pronouns, adverbs, adjectives, and prepositions. For instance, “This mobile 
is amazing” may be tagged as follows: (Straka et al. 2016) This :determiner, mobile:noun, 
is:verb, amazing:adjective. For sentiment mining, an adjective is used more often as it rep-
resents the sentiment of the opinion. PoS taggers may be used for this task which is availa-
ble in NLTK or Spacy. Researches most commonly use Stanford PoS-tagger (Weerasooriya 
et al. 2016).
Negations These are the words that can change or reverse the polarity of the opinion and 
shift the meaning of a sentence. Commonly used negation words include not, cannot, nei-
ther, never, nowhere, none, etc. Every word appearing in the sentence will not reverse the 
polarity; therefore, removing all negation words from stop-words may increase the compu-
tational cost and decrease the model’s accuracy. Negation words must be handled with at 
most care (George et al. 2013). Negation words such as not, neither, nor, and so on are crit-
ical for sentiment analysis since they can revert the polarity of a given phrase. For instance, 
the line “This movie is good.” is a positive sentence, but “The movie is not good.” is a 
negative sentence. Regrettably, some systems eliminate negation words because they are