5756 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
relationships in the sequence. In the case of Bi-LSTM (Plank et  al. 2016) uses the 
previous time step information along with next time step information to predict the 
current time step, as pass the sequence in both the ways forward as well as backward. 
Deep learning has identified new avenues for emulating the peculiarly human poten-
tial, for example-based learning. While this method of bottom-up learning is success-
ful for picture classification and object recognition, it is ineffective for NLP (Cambria 
et al. 2020). They blend top-down and bottom-up learning in their work using an array 
of symbolic and subsymbolic AI tools and apply them to the intriguing challenge of 
text polarity detection.
RNN (Donkers et al. 2017) have proven to improve results when trained on suffi-
cient data and computations. Variants of RNN (Pham and Le-Hong 2017) like LSTM 
(Bandara et  al. 2020), GRU (Cheng et  al. 2020), Bi-LSTM (Abid et  al. 2019; Cho 
and Lee 2019) have been used extensively in Sentiment analysis and related NLP task 
(Abid et al. 2019; Khan et al. 2016). Attention models are being introduced recently, 
which gives models an edge over another model. Recent transfer learning techniques 
using BERT (Devlin et  al. 2018) and GPT (Ethayarajh 2019) are gaining the atten-
tion of researchers as the model is already trained on a massive corpus for days on 
high-end GPU and Super computers. Weights can be fine-tuned using the training 
dataset to get accurate results. Deep learning-based techniques are becoming highly 
popular due to their outstanding performance in recent times. In the work of Yadav and 
Vishwakarma (2020) and Wadawadagi and Pagi (2020) gives a detailed assessment of 
common deep learning techniques that are widely employed in sentiment analysis. To 
detect the intensity of sentiments and emotions, a stacked-ensemble model based on 
deep learning was developed (Akhtar et  al. 2020). To better capture both long-term 
dependencies and local features, they employ GloVe word embedding, bidirectional 
GRU, bidirectional LSTM, attention mechanism, and CNN. The authors (Basiri et al. 
2021) suggested a model for sentiment analysis based on attention (CNN-RNN). In the 
work of Alhumoud and Al Wazrah (2021) conduct a systematic review of the literature 
to identify, categorize, and evaluate state-of-the-art works utilizing RNNs for Arabic 
sentiment analysis.
In 2017, researchers at the Google Brain team, Google Research and University of 
Toronto came up with the concept of Transformers in their paper (Vaswani et al. 2017) 
“Attention is all you need,” which revolutionized the NLP applications. This model is 
a stack of encoder-decoder models consisting of self-attention, multi-headed attention 
layers, and normalizing and feed-forward layers. The input is word embeddings along 
with the position vector, which specifies the position of the vector and the inputs can 
be given parallelly, unlike other models which take serial or sequential inputs. In the 
encoder part, Self attention is calculated for each token with the help of key-value and 
query vector. This is done multiple times and stacked over each other, forming a multi-
headed attention layer passed to the feed-forward layer (Kitaev and Klein 2018). There 
are six encoder and six decoder layers present in the model. The input to the decoder 
from an encoder is the two vectors K  and V . The decoder layer has three layers: the self 
attention layer, then a normalization layer which is the same as the encoder layer sec-
ond one is the encoder-decoder attention. The output self-attention and the input from 
encoder are used to produce an output vector followed a feed forward network along 
with a linear and a SoftMax layer (Juraska and Walker 2021). There are few skip con-
nections or residuals present in both encoders and decoders for better results.
There are various methods for sentiment analysis using machine learning and deep 
learning used by the author are shown in Table  6. we are using several terms in Table  6