5764 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
6.1.2  Market research and competitor analysis
Market research is perhaps the most common sentiment analysis application, besides brand 
image monitoring and consumer opinion investigation. The purpose of sentiment analysis 
is to determine who is emerging among competitors and how marketing campaigns com-
pare. It can be utilized to acquire a complete picture of a brand’s and its competitors con-
sumer base from the ground up. Sentiment analysis may collect data from several platforms 
Twitter, Facebook, blogs, deliver tangible results, and overcome difficulties in business 
intelligence.
6.2  Healthcare and medical domain
This is one of the industries where sentiment analysis is being utilized in recent times. 
Data can be collected from various sources like surveys, Twitter (Carvalho and Plastino 
2021), blogs, news articles, reviews, etc. This data can then be analyzed for various 
use cases, one of them being an evaluation of standards and analysis of new updates in 
the medical field. Domain experts are researching actively to find more uses of senti-
ment analysis and other NLP applications (Ebadi et  al. 2021). This application helps 
healthcare service providers collect and evaluate patient moods, epidemics, adverse 
drug reactions, and diseases to improve healthcare services. In work of Jiménez-Zafra 
et  al. (2019) pointed out the difficulties in applying sentiment analysis in health care 
because of the specific and unique terminologies used in the domain. In work of Clark 
et al. (2018) used Twitter tweets concerning patient’s experiences as an add-on to ana-
lyze public health. Over a year, they generated roughly five million breast cancer-related 
tweets using Twitter’s Streaming API. After pre-processing, the tweets were classified 
with a standard LR classifier and a CNN model. Positive treatment experiences, rally -
ing support, and expanding public awareness were all linked. In conclusion, applying 
sentiment analysis to analyze patient-generated data on social media can help determine 
patients’ needs and views.
6.2.1  Reputation management
The application of sentiment analysis in diverse markets is brand monitoring and repu-
tation management. Evaluating how customers view their brand, product, or service is 
beneficial to fashion companies, marketing agencies, IT companies, hotel chains, media 
channels, and other businesses. Sentiment analysis tool adds more variety and intelli-
gence to the brand’s and their products portrayal. It enables businesses to track how 
their customers perceive their brands and highlight the precise data about their attitudes. 
Look for trends and changes, and pay attention to influencers presentations. Altogether, 
sentiment analysis can be utilized in automating the media surveillance system as well 
as the alarm system that goes with it. Keep track of the brand’s discussions and ratings 
on various social media platforms.