5759
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
as SA indicates Sentiment Analysis, SC indicates Sentiment Classification. Categori-
zation of an individual method as Supervised Learning Method, Unsupervised Learn-
ing Method, Semi-supervised Learning Method, Domain-oriented Sentiment Analysis 
Lexicon-based and Dictionary-based with its advantage and disadvantage are shown in 
Table 5 .
4.5  Other approaches
4.5.1  Aspect based sentiment analysis (ABSA)
ASBA is valuable and rapidly growing part of sentiment analysis that has gained promi-
nence in recent years. Three critical phases compose aspect-level sentiment analysis: 
aspect detection, polarity or sentiment categorization, and aggregation. Aspect detection 
is a critical stage in Aspect-based Sentiment analysis, as it is followed by sentiment cal-
culation. Aspects are mined either by using pre-defined implicit aspects or can be mined 
explicitly (Rana and Cheah 2016). Machine learning techniques, along with NLP tech-
niques, are used to mine aspects out of a sentence. Aspect level sentiment analysis is most 
popular among product reviews or hotel reviews, as this approach will help them identify 
various aspects focused by the review writers and help them rectify aspects that have a 
negative sentiment (Tran et al. 2019). This is useful to both consumers as well as produc-
ers. For instance, for a hotel review dataset, implicit aspects may be defined as A= taste, 
service, value, miscellaneous. For instance, consider a review R= “the food was awesome, 
but service was slow”, this review consists of two aspects which are food and service, i.e., 
A = taste, service and the corresponding sentiment words are awesome and slow i.e. S = 
awesome, slow which be classified as P = positive, negative which when aggregated is 
neutral. If we consider the sentiment scores based on their positiveness or negativeness, the 
aggregated polarity may vary.
Aspect level sentiment analysis has many challenges as it to identify the individ-
ual aspect(implicit or explicit) and classify as per sense is challenging to mine aspects 
(Tubishat et al. 2018), Therefore, complex algorithms like LSTM, Bi-LSTM or pre-trained 
models like BERT, GPT-2 may be used to accomplish the task. The researchers avoid 
vanilla RNN as it faces many problems like vanishing and exploding gradient descent. It 
is seen that recently attention-based models are being used in aspect detection. The next 
step after aspect detection is polarity assignment to those mined aspects. There are multiple 
approaches to perform the task, Machine learning algorithms may be used to complete the 
task, or a dictionary-based approach may be used. Assigning the polarity to the aspect an 
aggregation score may be calculated to find the overall polarity of the sentence. Hard or 
soft voting is used to determine the sentence’s overall sentiment. Consumer sentiment is 
assessed concerning qualitative content, quantitative ratings, and cultural factors in order to 
forecast consumer recommendation decisions (Jain et al. 2021c, d).
4.5.2  Transfer learning
Transfer learning is one of the advances techniques in AI, where a pre-trained model can 
use its acquired knowledge to transfer to a new model. Transfer learning uses the simi-
larity of data, distribution, and task. The new model directly uses the previously learned 
features without needing any explicit training data. Training data may be used to fine-tune