5761
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
a video portraying a person discussing a product or a movie. Typically, spoken transcripts 
are examined separately from face and voice expressions, and the results of unimodal, 
text-based sentiment analysis are combined in post to create a “MSA” system. It may be 
bimodal, consisting of various combinations of two modalities, or trimodal, consisting of 
three modalities (Stappen et al. 2020). The majority of MSA techniques focus on develop-
ing complex fusion processes, ranging from attention-based models to tensor-based fusion.
MSA is a rapidly expanding area of study. A key area of opportunity in this subject is 
to enhance the mechanism of multimodal fusion. In the work of Majumder et al. (2018) 
and Poria et al. (2018b) feature fusion technique that is hierarchical in nature, merging the 
two modalities first and subsequently all three modalities. MSA of human spoken language 
has developed into a significant subject of research (Liu 2012; Poria et al. 2017). Unlike 
traditional emotional learning tasks that require the use of single modalities (text, speech), 
multimodal learning makes use of many sources of information, including language (text/
transcripts/ASR), audio/acoustic, and visual modalities.
5  Performance evaluation parameter
The majority of state-of-the-art sentiment analysis makes use of accuracy, F1 score, and 
precision. Sentiment analysis using deep learning architectures: a review utilizes recall and 
accuracy as performance metrics. These metrics are as follows:
True Positive(TP): The number of positive reviews that have been correctly classified.
True Negative(TN):The number of negative reviews correctly classified as negative.
False Positive(FP): Number of incorrectly classified positive review.
False Negative(FN): Number of incorrectly classified negative review.
Precision Precision is defined as the ratio of correctly classified positive samples to 
the total number of samples predicted as positive. This metric can be used to indicate the 
strength of the prediction. i.e., if a model has 100 percent precision, all the samples evalu-
ated as positive are confidently positive.
Recall Recall is also known as sensitivity. It is defined as the ratio of actual posi-
tive instances out of a total number of positive instances present in the classification. It 
measures the misclassifications done by the model. Precision and recall are inversely (1) Precision =TP
TP+FPFig. 7  Confusion matrix
True Positive False Negative
False Postive True NegativeACTUA L
Negative Positive
PREDICTEDPositive Negative