5737
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
of findings, text data can be combined with other types of data like video, audio, loca-
tion, etc. A few essential sources of data collection are:
Social media: Social data refers to information gathered via social media networks. It 
demonstrates how consumers interact with the product by accessing, posting, and exchang-
ing over. Academic study on individual, group and behavior uses social media as a dynamic 
data source. It refers to Internet apps that are web or mobile-based that enable users to cre-
ate, access, and trade user-generated content.
Forums: Users can use message boards to discuss various topics, exchange opinions 
and ideas, and solicit assistance via text messages. Forums are an intriguing source for 
sentiment analysis due to the dynamic nature of user-generated information. Additionally, 
researchers can undertake sentiment analysis on a specific domain by leveraging forums as 
a source (Korkontzelos et al. 2016).
Weblog: A short weblog consists of paragraphs conveying a viewpoint, facts, personal 
diary entries, or links. Together referred to as posts, that are chronologically sorted with 
the most recent entry appearing first, in the style of a research article (Kumar and Teeja 
2012). Blogs an valuable resource for performing sentiment analysis on a variety of entities 
(Annett and Kondrak 2008).
Electronic Commerce website: Electronic Commerce websites where users can give 
evaluations and express their opinions about a particular business or organization. In this 
instance, websites that do not specifically review sites have millions of reviews, such as 
e-commerce sites that feature product reviews1 or professional review sites such as.2 In 
the work of Jain et al. (2019) conducted a descriptive study of the various airline service 
classifications. 
3.2  Feature selection
It is important to remember that developing a classification model requires first identifying 
relevant features in dataset (Ritter et al. 2012). Thus, a review can be decoded into words 
during model training and appended to the feature vector. For single word is considered, 
the technique is called a “Uni-gram”; when two words are considered, the technique is 
called a “Bi-gram”; and if three words are considered, the technique is referred to as a 
“Tri-gram.” combination of unigram and bigram helpful for analysis (Razon and Barnden 
2015); the context feature which helpful for getting results most accurate.
Pragmatic features are those that emphasize the application of words rather than a 
methodological foundation. Pragmatics is the study of how context relates to perception in 
linguistics and related sciences. Pragmatics is the study of phenomena such as implicature, 
speech acts, relevance, and conversations.
Emoji are facial expressions used in sentiment analysis to convey emotions. Various 
emoticons are used to depict a wide variety of human emotions (Tian et al. 2017). Emoti-
cons aid in conveying a person’s tone when composing a sentence and so aid in sentiment 
analysis. Substitute their meaning for the emoticons: Review contain a range of emotions, 
including happiness, sadness, and rage. Emoticons are classified into two categories: posi-
tive and negative sentiment emotions. Positive emotions are formed of positive emotions 
1 www. amazon. com.
2 www. yello  wpages. com.