5741
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
computationally demanding due to this dependency, but they can determine the optimal 
feature set for that particular modeling algorithm. Wrapper techniques include creating fea-
ture subsets (forward or backward selection) plus various learning algorithms(such as NB 
or SVM).
Embedded approach This method combines the feature selection procedure into the exe-
cution of the modeling algorithm. It employs classification methods that have a built-in fea-
ture selection capability (Imani et al. 2013). As a result, it is more computationally efficient 
than the wrapper approach. However, this technique is algorithm-specific (Das et al. 2020). 
Embedded techniques are frequently based on a variety of decision tree algorithms, includ-
ing CART (Kosamkar and Chaudhari 2013), C4.5, and ID3 (Quinlan 2014; Mezquita et al. 
2020), and additional algorithms like LASSO (Hssina et al. 2014).
Hybrid approach This strategy combines filter and wrapper approaches; hybrid meth-
ods generally utilize multiple approaches to produce the optimum feature subset. Hybrid 
techniques typically achieve excellent performance and accuracy through the use of many 
approaches. Numerous hybrid feature selection algorithms for sentiment analysis have been 
developed (Chiew et al. 2019).
3.5  Task of sentiment analysis
Overview of the various task of sentiment analysis as shown in Fig.  3 and explain as 
follows.
Subjectivity classification This is frequently assumed to be the first stage in senti-
ment analysis. Subjectivity classification recognizes subjective hints, emotional phrases, 
and subjective ideas. Tokens like ’hard’, ’amazing’ and ’cheap’ are identified (Kasmuri 
and Basiron 2017). These indications are used to distinguish objective or subjective text 
objects. In work of Kasmuri and Basiron (2017) involves determining whether or not there 
is a particular subject in the given text. Subjectivity classification aims to keep undesirable 
objective data items out of subsequent processing (Kamal 2013).
Sentiment classification Sentiment categorization is a well-known researched task in 
sentiment analysis. Polarity determination is one of the subtasks of sentiment classification, 
Fig. 3  Task of sentiment analysis