5744 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
• Identify and act in real-time problems: Through social media, a customer can immedi-
ately voice his discontent to the entire world.
4  Methodology
Three mainly used approaches for Sentiment Analysis include Lexicon Based Approach, 
Machine Learning Approach, and Hybrid Approach. In addition, researchers are continu-
ously trying to figure out better ways to accomplish the task with better accuracy and lower 
computational cost. Overview various methods used in Sentiment Analysis as shown in 
Fig. 4. General Method about the Data collection, Feature selection and Sentiment analysis 
task are shown in Fig.  2 which understand the overall scenario of sentiment analysis task 
and overall method workflow.
4.1  Lexicon based approach
Lexicons are the collection of tokens where each token is assigned with a predefined score 
which indicates the neutral, positive and negative nature of the text (Kiritchenko et  al. 
2014). A score is assigned to tokens based on polarity such as + 1, 0, − 1  for positive, 
neutral, negative or the score may be assigned based on the intensity of polarity and its val-
ues range from [+ 1, − 1] where + 1 represents highly positive, and − 1 represents highly 
negative. In Lexicon Based Approach, for a given review or text, the aggregation of scores 
of each token is performed, i.e., positive, negative, neutral scores are summed separately. 
In the final stage, overall polarity is assigned to the text based on the highest value of indi-
vidual scores. Thus, the document is first divided into tokens of single words, where-after 
the polarity of each token is calculated and aggregated in the end.
The lexicon-based technique is extremely feasible for sentiment analysis at the sentence 
and feature level. Because no training data is required, it might be termed an unsupervised 
technique. On the other side, the primary disadvantage of this technique is domain depend-
ence, as words can have several meanings and senses, and therefore a positive word in one 
domain may be negative in another. For instance, given the word “small” and the sentences 
“The TV screen is too small” and “This camera is extremely small”, the word “small” in 
the first sentence is negative, as people generally prefer large screens, whereas in the sec-
ond sentence it is positive, as if the camera is small, it will be easy to carry. This issue can 
be overcome by developing a domain-specific sentiment lexicon or by adapting an existing 
vocabulary.
The advantage of the lexicon-based approach is that not require any training data and 
is considered an unsupervised approach by some experts (Yan-Yan et al. 2010). The main 
disadvantage with lexicon-based approach is that it is highly domain orientated and words 
pertaining to one domain cannot be used in another domain (Moreo et  al. 2012). For 
instance, consider the word huge it may be positive or negative based on the domain in 
which it is being used. In “the queue for the movie was huge” the word may be considered 
positive whereas, in “there was a huge lag in network” the word can be considered nega-
tive. Therefore, the polarity should be assigned to words carefully, considering the domain. 
There are mainly two approaches used in Lexicon Based Approaches: Corpus Based and 
Statistical Approach explain below, Comparative Analysis of Lexicon Based Classification 
Method and its individual Advantage and Disadvantage are shown in Table 3.