5733
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
for various applications like reputation management, market research, and competitor 
analysis, product analysis, customer voice, etc.
Various issues are associated with sentiment analysis and natural language processing, 
such as individuals informal writing style, sarcasm, irony, and language-specific challenges. 
There are many words in different languages whose meaning and orientation change depend-
ing on the context and domain in which they are employed. Therefore, there are not many 
tools and resources available for all the languages. Sarcasm and irony are two of the most criti-
cal challenges that have recently attracted the attention of researchers. There has been much 
development in detecting sarcasm and irony in text. There are many challenges in sentiment 
analysis. In this work  we will analyze the variuos challenges, methodologies, applications, 
and algorithms that are employed in sentiment analysis. We present the task with comparative 
data analysis shown in tables, flow charts, and graphs that are simple to comprehend. Various 
description of abbreviation which use in our work shown in Table 1 .
To our understanding, existing surveys frequently skip some of the sentiment analysis 
techniques in favor of machine learning, transformer learning, and lexicon-based approaches. 
Although this paper covered all the task as well, it varies from earlier research in that it cov -
ers the most frequently used techniques. Additionally, other surveys study sentiment analysis 
from a particular task, various challenges, or concentrate on a specific issue, such as product 
reviews. This study provides a comprehensive investigation of sentiment analysis by discuss-
ing this area from various perspectives since it encompasses numerous research components 
connected to sentiment analysis, such as problems, applications, tools, and approaches. This 
work is highly beneficial to scholars and beginners, as it allows them to access a wealth of 
knowledge about this area in a single paper. The survey important contributions can be sum-
marized as follows
• Several literature have been analyzed in order to thoroughly define the sentiment analysis 
process and to identify well-known technologies for performing this work.
• Analyses of available methodologies in order to determine which one is most appropriate 
for a certain application.
• We classify and summarize frequently used sentiment analysis approaches to understand 
better accessible techniques such as machine learning, lexicon-based analysis, and hybrid 
analysis.
• Summarizing the benefits and challenges of sentiment analysis in order to keep up of cur -
rent trending research.
• Each method comparison with their advantage and disadvantage, suggesting selecting the 
proper method sentiment analysis task.
  The literature survey paper is organized as Sect.  2, Level of Sentiment Analysis, Sect.  3, 
contain the Data Collection, Feature Extraction, and Feature Selection Method, explaining 
all the steps from data extraction to various task of Sentiment Analysis, Sect.  4 contain 
General Methodology for Sentiment Analysis and its Summary, Sect. 5 , Contain the Senti-
ment Analysis Application in Various Domain, Sect.  6, Contain the Challenges in Senti-
ment Analysis, In the final Sect. 7 , We Conclude our research work.