5767
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
being asked, social media posts frequently present some of the most honest points of 
view regarding products, services, and enterprises. They are obliged to express their 
feelings to the rest of the world.
7  Challenges in sentiment analysis
Sentiment analysis comes with various challenges ranging from computational cost to 
informal writing and the presence of variations in languages. We look at the sentiment 
analysis challenges that occur more frequently with certain types of sentiment structure, 
as shown in Table 7 . Few significant challenges faced in sentiment analysis are:
7.1  Structured sentiments
Structured sentiments are found in formal sentiment reviews, they are more focused 
on formal problems such as books or research. Because the authors are professionals, 
they are capable of writing thoughts or observations concerning scientific or factual 
concerns.
7.2  Semi‑structured sentiments
Semi-Structured Sentiments fall between structured and unstructured sentiments. These 
require an awareness of numerous review-related concerns. This style, which is depend-
ent on benefits and drawbacks, is listed separately by the authors, and the pros and cons 
sections are typically comprised of brief sentences (Birjali et al. 2021; Hussein 2018; 
Ebrahimi et al. 2017; Mohammad 2017).
7.3  Unstructured sentiment
Unstructured Sentiment is an informal and free-flowing writing type in which the writer 
is not constrained by any rules (Mukherjee et al. 2013). The text may comprise multi-
ple sentences, each of which could potentially include both pros and cons. For exam-
ple, unstructured reviews offer more opinion information than their formal counterparts 
(Levashina et al. 2014). A feature explicitly stated: If a feature occurs in a review sen-
tence’s segment/chunk, the feature is referred to as an explicit feature of the product. 
For instance, in the segment, the image is marvelous. The image is an explicit feature. If 
a feature f is not explicitly mentioned in the review section but is implied, it is referred 
to as an implicit feature of the product (Liu et al. 2010; Elith et al. 2011). For instance, 
in the section, it is extremely pricey, and expensive is a feature sign. In light of the criti-
cal nature of sentiment analysis, this study examines the relationship between respond-
ents perspective structures and sentiment analysis issues.