5755
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
and Relief algorithms (Chang et al. 2020). Sentiment analysis task (Al Amrani et al. 2018) 
proposed using machine learning-based hybrid approach including RF and SVM. They 
have shown that the individual models of SVM and RF had an accuracy of 81.01 and 
82.03 percent, respectively, whereas the hybrid model combining both the algorithms had 
an accuracy of close to 84% in the product review dataset provided by amazon.com. Few 
researchers have proposed a hybrid architecture involving both lexicon-based and auto-
mated learning techniques to enhance the results. This is still a hot topic for researchers, 
and lots of research needs to be done.
In work of Hassonah et  al. (2020b) used Twitter data for training. As many as 6900 
tweets were extracted for training using the Twitter API. The results showed that their 
model outperforms most of the models while reducing the total number of features up to 
96%. They also pointed out the capacities of Hybrid models and concluded that Hybrid 
models could outperform all the models with proper architecture and precise selection of 
hyperparameters (Chang et al. 2020). The Hybrid model outperformed both the model in 
all other metrics and comparisons. They concluded that although their Hybrid model per -
forms better than individual models, there are still many research opportunities available to 
improve the performance of the hybrid model by tweaking and training the model. There 
are various Method Summary Analysis of Supervised Machine learning Classification 
Algorithm and its Advantage and Disadvantage shown in Table 4.
4.4  Neural network
Neural Network- In work of Van de Camp and Van den Bosch (2012) presented the use 
of Neural networks and SVM in supportive relationships. They used biographical texts to 
confirm their results. They were successful in marking relations between two individuals 
as neutral, positive, or negative. They concluded that a SVM and a single layer Neural 
Network had shown improved results. In work of Moraes et al. (2013a) presented a com-
parative empirical analysis between SVM and ANN in document-level sentiment analysis. 
The motive of this comparison is that SVM was widely being used as an algorithm for 
opinion mining as it had shown its capacity of getting accuracy. ANN, even though with 
good potential, did not have much attention. In Moraes et al. (2013b) they discussed all 
the aspects related to both ANN and SVM, including their requirements, their accuracies, 
and other contexts in which each model can perform the best. They have also implemented 
a consistent evaluation framework using well-known participants in supervised methods 
for selecting features and weights in orthodox BoW models. According to Medhat et al. 
(2014), Ravi and Ravi (2015) ANN had the edge over SVM in most of the cases, except 
very few cases where there was a data imbalance. They used product reviews of Books, 
GPS, and camera from amazon.com and Movie reviews to come to this conclusion. They 
also pointed out potential problems and drawbacks of each model. An important disadvan-
tage of each model is the computational cost taken in training by ANN and the computa-
tional cost of SVM model in run time.
The traditional RNN (Liu et al. 2016) were used for various NLP tasks as they used 
the previous time step information to predict the current time step, which ensures the 
usage of previous information and acts as memory as it remembers some information 
about a sequence. The most significant achievement or advantage of RNN was that it 
used previous information, thus remembering the previous information, which acted 
as memory. The main disadvantage of a traditional RNN is that it suffers from van-
ishing and exploding gradient descent, which means it cannot remember long-term