5750 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
prepared specifically for sentiment analysis. Supervised learning methods are more com-
monly used due to their accurate results. These algorithms need to be trained on a training 
set before it is applied to the actual data. Features may be extracted from text data.
The machine learning technique utilizes syntactic and/or linguistic factors to address 
sentiment classification as a standard text classification issue utilizing syntactic and/or lin-
guistic factors. The categorization model associates the underlying record’s features with 
one of the class labels. The model is then used to predict a class label for a given instance 
of an unknown class. When an instance is assigned only one label, we have a difficult cat-
egorization challenge. When a probabilistic value of labels assigned to an instance, this is 
referred to as the soft classification issue. Machine learning enables systems to acquire new 
abilities without being explicitly programmed to do so. Sentiment analysis algorithms can 
be trained to read beyond simple definitions to comprehend contextual information, sar -
casm, and misapplied words. Commonly used algorithms include:
4.2.1  Naive Bayes (NB)
NB technique is utilized for both categorization and training. NB is a Bayesian classifi-
cation approach based on the theorem of bayes. NB is a probabilistic classifier that uses 
Bayes theorem to predict the probability of a given set of features as part of any particular 
label. The conditional probability that event A occurs given the individual probabilities of 
A and B and conditional probability of occurrence of event B. Here it is assumed that fea-
tures are not dependent. BoW model may be used for feature extraction. Generally, NB is 
applied when the training data size is small. NB classified as positive 10% more accurately 
than negative classification. This led to a decrease in average accuracy when it was taken. 
In the work of Kang et al. (2012) solved this problem using an improved version of the NB 
classifier. They tested this model on to restaurant review dataset. In work of Tripathy et al. 
(2015) used machine learning for the classification of reviews. They proposed a NB model 
along with a SVM model (Hajek et al. 2020; Bordes et al. 2014). They used a movie review 
dataset for training and testing the models. Two thousand reviews were trained after pre-
processing and vectorization of the training dataset. Count Vectorizer and TF-IDF were 
used before training the machine learning model. NB model proposed in Tripathy et al. 
(2015) gave an accuracy of 89.05 percent in a K-fold Cross-validation. The performance 
was better when compared to other models using the probabilistic NB algorithm (Calders 
and Verwer 2010).
4.2.2  Support vector machine (SVM)
SVM approach, which uses hyper-planes, is used to analyze data and define decision lim-
its in this technique. SVM are a type of non-probabilistic supervised learning technique 
that is frequently used for classification tasks. SVM primary objective is to determine the 
hyperplane that best separates the data into distinct classes. As a result, SVM seeks out 
the hyperplane with the highest feasible margin. In work of Li and Li (2013) used Sup-
port Vector Machines for sentiment polarity Classifier. Classifying reviews based on their 
quality is one of the many purposes for which SVM are utilized. Chen and Tseng (2011) 
used two multiple class SVM based approaches. First being One-vs- all SVM and Multi-
class SVM to classify reviews. Second, a method was proposed to evaluate the quality of 
the product review dataset quality by considering it as a classification problem. In work 
of Dave et al. (2003) worked on MP3 reviews and digital camera reviews. Borg and Boldt