5770 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
sentiment values and comparing two sentences of the same sentiment rather than differenti-
ating between two sentences of opposite polarity.
The theoretical challenges employ a variety of approaches to enhance performance 
when answering the particular sentiment challenges (Hunter et al. 2012). The theoretical 
kind makes extensive PoS tagging and lexicon-based approaches (Taboada et  al. 2011). 
The second approach is the BoW technique (El-Din 2016). Finally, there is the ME 
approach. However, the most frequently used technique is the N-gram technique, which is 
based on phrases and expressions when it comes to technical sentiment challenges (Wilson 
et al. 2009). As well as the method that is used the least is the lexicon-based approach.
Mixed Code Data Code-mixing is the employment of vocabulary and grammar from 
different languages in same sentence (Pravalika et al. 2017; Poria et al. 2020). Code Mix-
ing is a linguistic phenomenon that can occur in a multilingual situation where speakers 
speak multiple languages. This phenomenon is becoming increasingly common as com-
munication between groups of people who speak different languages grows. Code-Mixing: 
A review of Facebook posts created by Hindi-English users revealed a high code-mixing 
level in the posts. The problems in the Hindi-English code-mixed text were reported using 
a PoS tag annotated corpus. (Vijay et al. 2018) a system that can detect the language of 
the words, normalize them to their standard forms, assign their PoS tag, and split them 
into chunks to handle the problem of shallow parsing of Hindi-English code-mixed social 
media content. It’s frequent in multilingual societies and presents considerable difficulty to 
NLP tasks like sentiment analysis. The lack of a formal grammar for code-mixed phrases 
makes it challenging to identify compositional semantics, which is critical for conducting 
sentiment analysis using rule-based and machine learning-based techniques. Furthermore, 
because mixing is up to the individual, there are no predetermined mixing guidelines, 
which is one of the significant drawbacks (Chatterjere et al. 2020). As a result, in order to 
conduct sentiment analysis on code-mixed data, new language models must be developed. 
In work of Chatterjere et al. (2020) and Singh et al. (2018) language modeling challenge 
for code-mixed Hinglish text was investigated. However, despite the fact that Code Mix-
ing is a significant concern, few research has addressed it as thoroughly as the study of Lal 
et al. (2019) (English-Hindi) code-mixed data for sentiment analysis, the authors presented 
a hybrid architecture.
8  Conclusion
This article discussed sentiment analysis and associated techniques. The primary objective 
of this work is to investigate and complete classification methods with their advantage and 
disadvantages in sentiment analysis. To begin, several levels of sentiment analysis were 
discussed, followed by a quick overview of necessary procedures such as data collection 
and feature selection. Next, methods of sentiment categorization systems were classified 
and compared in terms of their advantages and disadvantages. Due to their simplicity and 
excellent accuracy, supervised machine learning methods are often the widely utilized 
technique in this discipline. Classification using NB and SVM algorithms are commonly 
used as benchmarks against which newly proposed approaches can be compared. Several of 
the most common application areas are discussed then the survey examines the significance 
and consequences of sentiment analysis challenges in sentiment evaluation. The compari-
son investigates the relationship between the structure of sentiment reviews and the dif-
ficulties associated with sentiment analysis. This comparison reveals domain dependence,