5746 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
the in-depth description of subjectivity relations among the characters in a statement 
conveying distinct attitudes for each character. subjectivity tagged with the knowledge 
relating to both identity and orientation of attitude holder. In work of Bordes et  al. 
(2014), Bhaskar et al. (2015), Rao and Ravichandran (2009) worked on the WordNet 
dataset in their work. They determined that the viewer’s subjectivity and the actor’s sub-
jectivity might be distinguished in some instances (Hershcovich and Donatelli 2021).
4.1.2  Dictionary based method
Dictionary based approach consists of a list of predefined set opinion words collected 
manually (Chetviorkin and Loukachevitch 2012; Kaity and Balakrishnan 2020). The pri-
mary assumption behind this approach is that synonyms have the same polarity as the base 
word, while antonyms have opposite polarity. Large corpora like thesaurus or wordnet are 
looked upon for antonyms and synonyms, after which it is appended to a group or seed 
list prepared earlier. In the first stage, initial set of words are collected manually with their 
orientation. Later the list is expanded by looking at the antonyms and synonyms in the 
available lexical resources (Singh et al. 2017; Ho et al. 2014). Then the words are itera-
tively added to the list, and list is expanded. Manual evaluation or correction may be done 
in the last stage to ensure the quality of it. Stefano and Andrea created SentiWordNet three-
way in Baccianella et  al. (2010) with the help of automatic annotations of WordNet 3/uni2032.vars 
synsets. Another famous resource thesaurus was created based on online dictionaries. In 
the work of Park and Kim (2016) suggested a rule-based strategy for labelling sentiment 
sentences and words in contextual advertising using a dictionary-based approach. This 
approach is feasible only for small dictionary size. Another disadvantage of all lexicon-
based approaches (Hajek et al. 2020), including the dictionary-based approach, is finding 
opinion words specific for each domain as the polarity may vary. General Procedure step 
in Lexicon Unsupervised learning category shown in Fig.  6. Summary Analysis of Lexicon 
Based Classification Method and its Advantage and Disadvantage shown in Table  3 and 
Summary Analysis of Clustering Method and its Advantage and Disadvantage shown in 
Table 2.
• Lexicon Method Based tools Summary Analysis of Lexicon Based method tools and 
available Dictionary as explain below
• Pre-define Dictionary Utilize a pre-defined list of positive and negative words to deter -
mine the polarity of texts based on the frequency with which each category is repre-
sented.3.
• SentiWordNet SentiWordNet assigns numerical sentiment scores to WordNet synsets 
that are either positive or negative.4
• Bing Liu’s Sentiment Lexicon A dictionary has 4783 helpful positive and negative 
words.5
• SentiStrength Unless modified by any additional classification rules, texts are catego-
rized according to the highest positive or negative score for any constituent word.6
3 http:// www. wjh. harva rd. edu/ ~inqui rer/
4 http:// senti wordn et. isti. cnr. it.
5 https:// www. cs. uic. edu/ ~liub/ FBS/ senti ment- analy  sis. html.
6 http:// senti stren gth. wlv. ac. uk .