5739
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
included in stop word lists or are implicitly omitted since they have a neutral sentiment 
value in a lexicon and do not affect the absolute polarity. However, reversing the polarity 
is not straight forward because negation words might occur in a sentence without affecting 
the text’s emotion.
In some cases, neutral sentiment is also included, and neutral evaluations are frequently 
ignored in many sentiment analysis tasks due to their vagueness and lack of information, In 
the work of Valdivia et al. (2018) considered to empower neutrality by defining the bound-
ary between positive and negative evaluations to improve the model performance. They use 
several sentiment analysis approaches to various corpora, extracting their sentiment and fil-
tering out neutral evaluations by consensus, i.e., taking various models based on weighted 
aggregation. Finally, then they compared the performance of single and aggregated models 
in categorization. Other contribution introduced in the work of Wang et al. (2020) opinion 
analysis, namely multi-level fine-scaled sentiment detection with ambivalence handling. 
The ambivalence handler is detailed, as are the strength-level tuning settings for analyz-
ing the strength and fine-scale of both positive and negative attitudes (Buder et al. 2021). 
It is capable of delving deeper into the text to uncover multi-level fine-scaled sentiments 
and distinct emotional types. In the work of Valdivia et  al. (2017) suggest the usage of 
induced ordered weighted averaging operators based on the fuzzy majority for the aggre-
gating polarity from many sentiment analysis methods. Their contribution is to establish 
neutrality for opinions guided by a fuzzy majority.
Bag of Words (BoW) BoW is one of the simplest approach for extracting text features. 
BoW will describe the occurrence of words in a document. Bag represents the vocabulary 
of words using which a vector is formed for each sentence. The main problem with this 
model is that it does not consider the syntactic meaning of the text. For instance, consider 
two sentences s1= “the food was good”, s2= “the service was bad”. The vocabulary is 
created for two sentences where v= {’the’, ‘food’, ‘was’, ‘service’, ‘bad’, ‘good’} and the 
length of the vector is 6 and is represented as v1= [ 1 1 1 0 0 1] and v2= [1 0 1 1 1 0]. BoW 
approach performance evaluated using (TF-IDF) which performs better in most cases.
3.3.1  Word embedding
Word embeddings represent words in a vector space by clustering words with similar 
meanings together. Each word is assigned to a vector, which is then learned in a manner 
similar to neural networks. It learns and chooses a vector from a predetermined vocabulary. 
The dimension of the words may be chosen by passing it as a hyperparameter. SG model 
and the continuous CBOW model are two of the most well-known algorithms for word 
embeddings. Both of these are shallow window approaches methods in which a short win-
dow of some size, such as four or six, is specified, and the current word is anticipated using 
context words in CBOW, while context words are forecasted using the current word in the 
SG model. Word embeddings are concerned with learning about words in the context of 
their local usage, which is specified by a window of nearby terms.
Word2vec word2vec is a 2-layer neural network that is used for vectorizing the tokens. 
It is one of the famous and widely used vectorizing techniques developed by Mikolov et al. 
(2013). Word2vec mainly has two models CBOW and SG. The CBOW model predicts the 
target word using context words, whereas the SG model predicts the target word using con-
text words. With a larger dataset, the SG model performs better.
Global Vectors (GloVe) Global Vectors for word representation have developed (Pen-
nington et al. 2014) by an unsupervised learning approach to generate word embeddings