5743
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
not refer to aspects, terms like ’bucks,’ ’dollars,’ ’rupees,’ etc. Also, aspects that are not 
mentioned frequently can be missed by this method. A set of rules can be supplemented 
with a frequency-based approach to overcome these problems, but these manually crafted 
rules tend to come from parameters that need to be tuned manually, which is a hectic and 
time-consuming task. Instead of focusing on the Frequency-based approach. Syntax-based 
approach can be used as this approach covers the flaws of the frequency-based approach of 
not detecting less frequent aspects (Bai et al. 2020). In this approach, For example, here, 
’ Awesome’ refers to an adjective referring to the aspect “food” in ’ Awesome food.’ For this 
approach, many annotated data covering all syntactical relations should be collected for 
training the algorithm.
3.5.1  Need of sentiment analysis
Sentiment analysis is incredibly significant since it helps businesses understand their con-
sumers sentiment towards their brand. By automatically classifying the emotions behind 
social media interactions, reviews, and more, organizations can make informed decisions. 
Sentiment Analysis refers to the methods and strategies that enable firms to examine data 
about how their customer base feels about a given service or product. To identify the Polar -
ity:? Indicates whether an emotion is good or negative.? Subject: What is the subject of dis-
cussion? Who is the holder of the opinion:? A thing or person that conveys the sentiment.
Sentiment Analysis is a process that analyzes natural language utterances automatically, 
discovers essential claims or opinions, and classifies them according to their emotional 
attitude.
• In the business needs with sentiment analysis has increased consumer happiness 
through enhanced products, real-time problem detection, and market distinctiveness.
• Customer satisfaction analysis through sentiment analysis: The customer shares his 
experience with a product and communicates his opinion and attitude about it using 
natural language comments. This provides us with crucial insight into whether the con-
sumer is satisfied and, if necessary, how we can improve the product.
Fig. 4  Approach of sentiment analysis