5768 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
7.4  Methodological challenges
The majority of sentiment analysis in the modern day is data-driven machine learning 
models adapting a sentiment analysis algorithm developed for product evaluations to 
evaluate microblog postings is an unanswered question. Additionally, how to deal with 
ambiguous situations and irony are key difficulties in sentiment analysis. For instance, 
a sarcastic remark about an object is intended to communicate a negative sentiment; 
yet, conventional sentiment analysis algorithms frequently miss this meaning. Numer -
ous methods have been proposed (Castro et  al. 2019; Medhat et  al. 2014) for detect-
ing sarcasm in language. However, the problem is far from resolved, as comedy is very 
culturally particular, and it is challenging for a machine to understand unique(and fre-
quently fairly detailed) cultural allusions. In the work of Poria et al. (2018a) suggest by 
incorporating vocal and facial expressions into multimodal sentiment analysis; This can 
improve its success rate in identifying sarcastic comments. Furthermore, individuals 
express sentiment for social reasons unrelated to their fundamental dispositions. For 
instance, a person may transmit positive or negative thoughts to adhere to a specific 
topic A norm or express and define one’s identity. Finally, machine-based sentiment 
analysis is confined to outward expressions of sentiment, and conclusive information 
about an individual expressed ideas is lacking.
Sentiment analysis is applicable to different types of data, each of which presents par -
ticular challenges. Sentiment analysis of human to machine and human to human interac-
tions requires very similar datasets to those used for emotion recognition. As a result, it has 
the same limitations in terms of size and unreliable ground truth. In the work of McDuff  
et al. (2014) have illustrated how webcams may be used to collect a large number of emo-
tional reactions, including sentiment. While this degrades the audiovisual capture qual-
ity, it achieves a scale that is not conceivable in the laboratory. Additionally, there is the 
issue of labeling confidential laboratory data, which prohibits those permitted to examine 
the data from performing the time-consuming operation of labeling. As a result, they are 
restricted in terms of the amount of data they can collect in the laboratory and our ability 
to label huge volumes of data. There are several methods for assessing feelings, but word 
embedding algorithms such as word2vec and GloVe turn words into meaningful vectors. 
These methods, on the other hand, ignore the word’s sentiment information (Wankhade 
et al. 2021).
Multimedia information on websites is the second source of multi-modal sentiment 
data. Social media provides us with a wealth of data that helps us to scale. The issue is that 
the data acquired vary in terms of quality and context, and the data is limited to specific 
populations that are more prevalent on the internet. However, because the data is publicly 
available, crowd sourcing may be utilized to categorize it easily. According to the available 
data on MSA, people are more prone to communicate positive or negative ideas online, 
resulting in a scarcity of neutral opinions represented in all MSA studies evaluated.
Sarcasm People tend to use sarcasm when they do not meet their expectations. It is very 
tough for machines to pick up sarcasm as many factors affect sarcasm, such as tone, situ-
ation, background information, etc. Sarcasm is a satirical remark that may look like prais-
ing but in reality. Sarcasm is used by people to criticize. Sarcasm is a type of sentiment in 
which people express implicit information, usually the polar opposite of the message con-
tent, in order to emotionally hurt someone or mock something. Sarcasm detection in text 
mining is one of the most challenging tasks in NLP, but it has lately become an interesting