5763
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
6  Applications of sentiment analysis
Sentiment analysis has many applications, ranging from analyzing customer opinion, ana-
lyzing patient mental health status based on posts done on social media. Furthermore, 
technological advances such as Blockchain, IoT, Cloud Computing, and Big Data have 
broadened the range of applications for Sentiment Analysis, allowing it to be used in prac-
tically any discipline. Few most frequently used application in sentiment analysis shown in 
Fig.  8. A few significant domains and industries where Sentiment Analysis is applied are 
described below:
6.1  Business analysis
Sentiment analysis in the field of business intelligence offers several benefits. Additionally, 
firms can utilize sentiment analysis data to improve products, investigate client feedback 
and develop an innovative marketing strategy. The most typical use of sentiment analy -
sis in the field of business intelligence is analyzing customers impressions of services or 
products. These studies, however, are not limited to product producers; consumers may 
use them to review items and make more informed decisions. Sentiment analysis in busi-
ness intelligence has various benefits. For example, Businesses can use the results of Senti-
ment Analysis to make product enhancements, examine consumer feedback, or develop a 
new marketing plan (Han et al. 2019). Sentiment analysis is most frequently used in busi-
ness intelligence to examine customers perceptions of products or services. However, these 
analyses are not limited to product producers; consumers may also use them to compare 
items and make a more informed choice. For eight years, (Bose et al. 2020) service food 
reviews on amazon.com. Emotion lexicon, which classifies them into eight different emo-
tions and two moods (positive and negative). They found that sentiment analysis may be 
used to identify customer behaviours and hazards and increase customer satisfaction.
6.1.1  Product reviews
As the e-commerce business is burgeoning, so is the number of products sold and reviews 
given from the customers. Sentiment analysis one them will help customers choose better 
products (Paré 2003). Phrase level or aspect level (Schouten and Frasincar 2015) sentiment 
analysis performed on product reviews. Sentiment analysis can determine what the cus-
tomer thinks about its latest product after launching or examining comments and reviews. 
Keywords for a specific product feature (food, service, cleanliness) can be chosen, and a 
sentiment analysis framework (Mackey et al. 2015) can be trained to identify and analyze 
only the necessary information.(4) Inverse Document Frequency (IDF )=(Total Number of document )
(number of terms t in the document )
(5) TF−IDF =(TF )∗(IDF)