5734 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
2  Sentiment analysis levels
Sentiment analysis has been investigated on several levels: Document Level, Sentence 
Level, Phrase Level, and Aspect Level. Sentiment analysis in each level such as document, 
sentence and phrase, aspect level shown in Fig. 1.
2.1  Document level sentiment analysis
Document-level: Document level sentiment analysis is performed on a whole document, 
and single polarity is given to the whole document. This type of sentiment analysis is not 
used a lot. It can be used to classify chapters or pages of a book as positive, negative, or 
neutral. At this level, both supervised and unsupervised learning approaches can be utilized 
to classify the document (Bhatia et al. 2015). Cross-domain and cross-language sentiment 
analysis are the two most significant issues in document-level sentiment analysis. (Saun-
ders 2021) Domain-specific sentiment analysis has been shown to achieve remarkable 
accuracy while staying highly domain-sensitive. In these tasks, the feature vector is a set of 
words that must be domain-specific and limited.
2.2  Sentence level sentiment analysis
Sentence level: In this level of analysis, each sentence is analyzed and finding with a corre-
sponding polarity. This is highly useful when a document has a wide range and mix of senti-
ments associated with it (Yang and Cardie 2014). This classification level is associated with 
subjective classification (Rao et  al. 2018). Each sentence polarity will be determined inde-
pendently using the same methodologies as the document level but with greater training data 
and processing resources. The polarity of each sentence may be aggregated to find the senti-
ment of the document or used individually. Occasionally, document-level sentiment analysis 
is insufficient for specific uses (Behdenna et  al. 2018). In previous work  on sentence-level 
analysis has been devoted to finding subjective sentences. However, more difficult tasks, such Fig. 1  Level of sentiment 
analysis