5760 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
the model to a new task. This technique can be used to transfer knowledge of one domain 
to another domain. This methodology has grown as a transfer learning technique because it 
can produce great accuracy and results while requiring significantly less training time than 
training a new model from scratch (Celik et al. 2020). Transfer learning is frequently used 
in sentiment analysis to classify sentiments from one field to another field. In Meng et al. 
(2019) developed a multiple-layer CNN based transfer learning approach. They used the 
weights and biases of a convolutional and pooling layer from a pre-trained model to model. 
They used the features from pre-trained model and fine-tuned weights of Fully connected 
layers. This approach can produce good results when large labeled data sets are absent and 
similarities in the tasks accomplished by the models. In the work of Bartusiak et al. (2015), 
applied Transfer Learning to propose the sentiment analysis challenge. They used this tech-
nique to evaluate the sentiment at the document level in the polish language. They used 
N-gram and Bi-gram to encode complex words and phrases. They used two different data-
sets from two different domains to provide evidence that knowledge gained from the train-
ing model suing dataset of one domain can be used for a dataset of another domain. Senti-
ment Analysis by using Deep learning and Machine Learning Method as shown in Table 6.
In 2018, Google AI Language Researchers open-sourced a new model for NLP called 
BERT. It has a breakthrough and has taken the industry of deep learning by storm due 
to its performance. In the work of Han et al. (2021) Transformer network revolutionized 
the area of NLP and replaced the usage of LSTM and Bi-LSTM. The main advantage is 
that Transformers do not suffer from vanishing or exploding gradient problems as they do 
not use recurrence at all, and also, they are faster and less expensive to train. BERT is 
an extension of the Transformers model proposed (Vaswani et al. 2017) in the “Attention 
is all you need” paper. BERT uses transformers, an attention mechanism that learns con-
textual relationships between words or sub-words in a given text. The input in this model 
contains the word embeddings and position embeddings, unlike transformers, but also has 
an extra vector representing the sentence it belongs to handle two or more sentences at 
a time. BERT consists of encoders based transformers; the encoder part is similar to the 
transformer encoder. BERT has two models BERT base with 12 encoders stacked with 
110 million parameters and BERT large model with 24 encoders stacked with 330 mil-
lion parameters. BERT model trained in two stages pre-training and fine-tuning. This is the 
model main advantage as the fine-tuning with the dataset can be done as per the task. Such 
as sentiment analysis (Singh et al. 2021a), aspect detection (Li et al. 2019b), spam detec-
tion (Yaseen et al. 2021), Transformer models for text-based emotion detection (Acheam-
pong et al. 2021), impact of coronavirus(singh2021sentiment). A single sentence or a pair 
of sentences can be represented as a successive array of tokens using the task-specific 
BERT architecture (Gao et al. 2019). In the work of Sun et al. (2019) transform ABSA to 
a sentence-pair classification problem, such as question answering and natural language 
inference, by constructing an auxiliary sentence from the aspect. BERT pre-trained model 
has been fine-tuned.
4.6  Multimodal sentiment analysis (MSA)
MSA adds a new level to standard text-based sentiment analysis by incorporating addi-
tional modalities such as audio and visual data. Several studies have attempted to discern 
sentiment analysis in social multimedia using a variety of multimodal inputs, including vis-
ual, audio, and textual data (Soleymani et al. 2017). Social multimedia sites such as You-
Tube, video blogs (vlogs), or spoken evaluations contain expressions of sentiment, such as