Graph classification  Node classification A B
COClHNFBrSPINaKLiCa
Not applicable Not applicableMolecular
graph with nodefeaturesComputationgraph of red node with nodefeatures
Input to
GNN
Node ’s structural role Molecule’s mutagenicityGNN’s
Prediction
Ground T ruth
Feature Importance
GNNExplainer
Grad
AttFigure 5: Visualization of features that are important
for a GNN’s prediction. A.Shown is a representative
molecular graph from MUTAG dataset (top). Impor-
tance of the associated graph features is visualized
with a heatmap (bottom). In contrast with baselines,
GNNEXPLAINER correctly identiﬁes features that are
important for predicting the molecule’s mutagenicity,
i.e.C, O, H, and N atoms. B.Shown is a computation
graph of a red node from BA-C OMMUNITY dataset
(top). Again, GNNEXPLAINER successfully identiﬁes
the node feature that is important for predicting the
structural role of the node but baseline methods fail.
high scores for edges that are in the ground-truth explanation, and thus achieves higher explanation
accuracy. Results show that GNNEXPLAINER outperforms alternative approaches by 17.1% on
average. Further, GNNEXPLAINER achieves up to 43.0% higher accuracy on the hardest TREE-GRID
dataset.
2) Qualitative analyses. Results are shown in Figures 3–5. In a topology-based prediction task with
no node features, e.g.BA-S HAPES andTREE-CYCLES ,GNNEXPLAINER correctly identiﬁes network
motifs that explain node labels, i.e.structural labels (Figure 3). As illustrated in the ﬁgures, house,
cycle and tree motifs are identiﬁed by GNNEXPLAINER but not by baseline methods. In Figure 4,
we investigate explanations for graph classiﬁcation task. In MUTAG example, colors indicate node
features, which represent atoms (hydrogen H, carbon C, etc).GNNEXPLAINER correctly identiﬁes
carbon ring as well as chemical groups NH 2andNO2, which are known to be mutagenic [10].
Further, in R EDDIT -BINARY example, we see that Question-Answer graphs (2nd row in Figure 4B)
have 2-3 high degree nodes that simultaneously connect to many low degree nodes, which makes
sense because in QA threads on Reddit we typically have 2-3 experts who all answer many different
questions [ 24]. Conversely, we observe that discussion patterns commonly exhibit tree-like patterns
(2nd row in Figure 4A), since a thread on Reddit is usually a reaction to a single topic [ 24]. On the
other hand, GRAD andATTmethods give incorrect or incomplete explanations. For example, both
baseline methods miss cycle motifs in MUTAG dataset and more complex grid motifs in TREE-GRID
dataset. Furthermore, although edge attention weights in ATTcan be interpreted as importance scores
for message passing, the weights are shared across all nodes in input the graph, and as such ATTfails
to provide high quality single-instance explanations.
An essential criterion for explanations is that they must be interpretable, i.e., provide a qualitative
understanding of the relationship between the input nodes and the prediction. Such a requirement
implies that explanations should be easy to understand while remaining exhaustive. This means
that a GNN explainer should take into account both the structure of the underlying graph as well as
the associated features when they are available. Figure 5 shows results of an experiment in which
GNNEXPLAINER jointly considers structural information as well as information from a small number
of feature dimensions3. While GNNEXPLAINER indeed highlights a compact feature representation
in Figure 5, gradient-based approaches struggle to cope with the added noise, giving high importance
scores to irrelevant feature dimensions.
6 Conclusion
We present GNNEXPLAINER , a novel method for explaining predictions of any GNN on any graph-
based machine learning task without requiring modiﬁcation of the underlying GNN architecture or
re-training. We show how GNNEXPLAINER can leverage recursive neighborhood-aggregation scheme
of graph neural networks to identify important graph pathways as well as highlight relevant node
feature information that is passed along edges of the pathways. While the problem of explainability of
machine-learning predictions has received substantial attention in recent literature, our work is unique
in the sense that it presents an approach that operates on relational structures—graphs with rich
node features—and provides a straightforward interface for making sense out of GNN predictions,
debugging GNN models, and identifying systematic patterns of mistakes.
3Feature explanations are shown for the two datasets with node features, i.e.,MUTAG andBA-C OMMUNITY .
9