GNN model training and predictions Explaning GNN’s predictions
GNNExplainer
Figure 1: GNNEXPLAINER provides interpretable explanations for predictions made by any GNN model on any
graph-based machine learning task. Shown is a hypothetical node classiﬁcation task where a GNN model is
trained on a social interaction graph to predict future sport activities. Given a trained GNN and a prediction ^yi
= “Basketball” for person vi,GNNEXPLAINER generates an explanation by identifying a small subgraph of the
input graph together with a small subset of node features (shown on the right) that are most inﬂuential for ^yi.
Examining explanation for ^yi, we see that many friends in one part of vi’s social circle enjoy ball games, and so
the GNN predicts that viwill like basketball. Similarly, examining explanation for ^yj, we see that vj’s friends
and friends of his friends enjoy water and beach sports, and so the GNN predicts ^yj= “Sailing.”
models with simpler surrogate models, which are then probed for explanations [ 25,29,30]. Other
methods carefully examine models for relevant features and ﬁnd good qualitative interpretations of
high level features [ 6,13,27,32] or identify inﬂuential input instances [ 23,38]. However, these
approaches fall short in their ability to incorporate relational information, the essence of graphs.
Since this aspect is crucial for the success of machine learning on graphs, any explanation of GNN’s
predictions should leverage rich relational information provided by the graph as well as node features.
Here we propose GNNEXPLAINER , an approach for explaining predictions made by GNNs. GNNEX-
PLAINER takes a trained GNN and its prediction(s), and it returns an explanation in the form of a small
subgraph of the input graph together with a small subset of node features that are most inﬂuential for
the prediction(s) (Figure 1). The approach is model-agnostic and can explain predictions of any GNN
on any machine learning task for graphs, including node classiﬁcation, link prediction, and graph
classiﬁcation. It handles single- as well as multi-instance explanations. In the case of single-instance
explanations, GNNEXPLAINER explains a GNN’s prediction for one particular instance ( i.e., a node
label, a new link, a graph-level label). In the case of multi-instance explanations, GNNEXPLAINER
provides an explanation that consistently explains a set of instances ( e.g., nodes of a given class).
GNNEXPLAINER speciﬁes an explanation as a rich subgraph of the entire graph the GNN was
trained on, such that the subgraph maximizes the mutual information with GNN’s prediction(s).
This is achieved by formulating a mean ﬁeld variational approximation and learning a real-valued
graph mask which selects the important subgraph of the GNN’s computation graph. Simultaneously,
GNNEXPLAINER also learns a feature mask that masks out unimportant node features (Figure 1).
We evaluate GNNEXPLAINER on synthetic as well as real-world graphs. Experiments show that
GNNEXPLAINER provides consistent and concise explanations of GNN’s predictions. On synthetic
graphs with planted network motifs, which play a role in determining node labels, we show that
GNNEXPLAINER accurately identiﬁes the subgraphs/motifs as well as node features that determine
node labels outperforming alternative baseline approaches by up to 43.0% in explanation accuracy.
Further, using two real-world datasets we show how GNNEXPLAINER can provide important domain
insights by robustly identifying important graph structures and node features that inﬂuence a GNN’s
predictions. Speciﬁcally, using molecular graphs and social interaction networks, we show that
GNNEXPLAINER can identify important domain-speciﬁc graph structures, such as NO2chemical
groups or ring structures in molecules, and star structures in Reddit threads. Overall, experiments
demonstrate that GNNEXPLAINER provides consistent and concise explanations for GNN-based
models for different machine learning tasks on graphs.
2 Related work
Although the problem of explaining GNNs is not well-studied, the related problems of interpretability
and neural debugging received substantial attention in machine learning. At a high level, we can
group those interpretability methods for non-graph neural networks into two main families.
2