4.4 G NNEXPLAINER model extensions
Any machine learning task on graphs. In addition to explaining node classiﬁcation, GNNEX-
PLAINER provides explanations for link prediction and graph classiﬁcation with no change to its
optimization algorithm. When predicting a link (vj;vk),GNNEXPLAINER learns two masks XS(vj)
andXS(vk)for both endpoints of the link. When classifying a graph, the adjacency matrix in Eq. (5)
is the union of adjacency matrices for all nodes in the graph whose label we want to explain. However,
note that in graph classiﬁcation, unlike node classiﬁcation, due to the aggregation of node embed-
dings, it is no longer true that the explanation GSis necessarily a connected subgraph. Depending on
application, in some scenarios such as chemistry where explanation is a functional group and should
be connected, one can extract the largest connected component as the explanation.
Any GNN model. Modern GNNs are based on message passing architectures on the input graph. The
message passing computation graphs can be composed in many different ways and GNNEXPLAINER
can account for all of them. Thus, GNNEXPLAINER can be applied to: Graph Convolutional
Networks [ 21], Gated Graph Sequence Neural Networks [ 26], Jumping Knowledge Networks [ 36],
Attention Networks [ 33], Graph Networks [ 4], GNNs with various node aggregation schemes [ 7,5,18,
16, 40, 39, 35], Line-Graph NNs [8], position-aware GNN [42], and many other GNN architectures.
Computational complexity. The number of parameters in GNNEXPLAINER ’s optimization depends
on the size of computation graph Gcfor nodevwhose prediction we aim to explain. In particular,
Gc(v)’s adjacency matrix Ac(v)is equal to the size of the mask M, which needs to be learned
byGNNEXPLAINER . However, since computation graphs are typically relatively small, compared
to the size of exhaustive L-hop neighborhoods ( e.g., 2-3 hop neighborhoods [ 21], sampling-based
neighborhoods [ 39], neighborhoods with attention [ 33]),GNNEXPLAINER can effectively generate
explanations even when input graphs are large.
5 Experiments
We begin by describing the graphs, alternative baseline approaches, and experimental setup. We then
present experiments on explaining GNNs for node classiﬁcation and graph classiﬁcation tasks. Our
qualitative and quantitative analysis demonstrates that G NNEXPLAINER is accurate and effective in
identifying explanations, both in terms of graph structure and node features.
Synthetic datasets. We construct four kinds of node classiﬁcation datasets (Table 1). (1) In BA-
SHAPES , we start with a base Barab ´asi-Albert (BA) graph on 300 nodes and a set of 80 ﬁve-node
“house”-structured network motifs, which are attached to randomly selected nodes of the base graph.
The resulting graph is further perturbed by adding 0:1Nrandom edges. Nodes are assigned to 4
classes based on their structural roles. In a house-structured motif, there are 3 types of roles: the top,
middle and bottom node of the house. Therefore there are 4 different classes, corresponding to nodes
at the top, middle, bottom of houses, and nodes that do not belong to a house. (2) BA-C OMMUNITY
dataset is a union of two BA-S HAPES graphs. Nodes have normally distributed feature vectors and
are assigned to one of 8 classes based on their structural roles and community memberships. (3)
InTREE-CYCLES , we start with a base 8-level balanced binary tree and 80 six-node cycle motifs,
which are attached to random nodes of the base graph. (4) TREE-GRIDis the same as TREE-CYCLES
except that 3-by-3 grid motifs are attached to the base tree graph in place of cycle motifs.
Real-world datasets. We consider two graph classiﬁcation datasets: (1) MUTAG is a dataset of
4;337molecule graphs labeled according to their mutagenic effect on the Gram-negative bacterium S.
typhimurium [10]. (2) REDDIT -BINARY is a dataset of 2;000graphs, each representing an online
discussion thread on Reddit. In each graph, nodes are users participating in a thread, and edges
indicate that one user replied to another user’s comment. Graphs are labeled according to the type of
user interactions in the thread: r/IAmA andr/AskReddit contain Question-Answer interactions, while
r/TrollXChromosomes andr/atheism contain Online-Discussion interactions [37].
Alternative baseline approaches. Many explainability methods cannot be directly applied to graphs
(Section 2). Nevertheless, we here consider the following alternative approaches that can provide
insights into predictions made by GNNs: (1) GRAD is a gradient-based method. We compute gradient
of the GNN’s loss function with respect to the adjacency matrix and the associated node features,
similar to a saliency map approach. (2) ATTis a graph attention GNN (GAT) [ 33] that learns attention
weights for edges in the computation graph, which we use as a proxy measure of edge importance.
While ATTdoes consider graph structure, it does not explain using node features and can only explain
GAT models. Furthermore, in ATTit is not obvious which attention weights need to be used for edge
7