GNNExplainer: Generating Explanations
for Graph Neural Networks
Rex YingyDylan Bourgeoisy,zJiaxuan YouyMarinka ZitnikyJure Leskovecy
yDepartment of Computer Science, Stanford University
zRobust.AI
frexying, dtsbourg, jiaxuan, marinka, jure g@cs.stanford.edu
Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are a powerful tool for machine learning on
graphs. GNNs combine node feature information with the graph structure by
recursively passing neural messages along edges of the input graph. However, in-
corporating both graph structure and feature information leads to complex models
and explaining predictions made by GNNs remains unsolved. Here we propose
GNNEXPLAINER , the ﬁrst general, model-agnostic approach for providing inter-
pretable explanations for predictions of any GNN-based model on any graph-based
machine learning task. Given an instance, GNNEXPLAINER identiﬁes a compact
subgraph structure and a small subset of node features that have a crucial role in
GNN’s prediction. Further, GNNEXPLAINER can generate consistent and concise
explanations for an entire class of instances. We formulate GNNEXPLAINER as an
optimization task that maximizes the mutual information between a GNN’s predic-
tion and distribution of possible subgraph structures. Experiments on synthetic and
real-world graphs show that our approach can identify important graph structures
as well as node features, and outperforms alternative baseline approaches by up to
43.0% in explanation accuracy. GNNEXPLAINER provides a variety of beneﬁts,
from the ability to visualize semantically relevant structures to interpretability, to
giving insights into errors of faulty GNNs.
1 Introduction
In many real-world applications, including social, information, chemical, and biological domains,
data can be naturally modeled as graphs [ 9,41,49]. Graphs are powerful data representations but
are challenging to work with because they require modeling of rich relational information as well
as node feature information [ 45,46]. To address this challenge, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
have emerged as state-of-the-art for machine learning on graphs, due to their ability to recursively
incorporate information from neighboring nodes in the graph, naturally capturing both graph structure
and node features [16, 21, 40, 44].
Despite their strengths, GNNs lack transparency as they do not easily allow for a human-intelligible
explanation of their predictions. Yet, the ability to understand GNN’s predictions is important and
useful for several reasons: (i) it can increase trust in the GNN model, (ii) it improves model’s
transparency in a growing number of decision-critical applications pertaining to fairness, privacy and
other safety challenges [ 11], and (iii) it allows practitioners to get an understanding of the network
characteristics, identify and correct systematic patterns of mistakes made by models before deploying
them in the real world.
While currently there are no methods for explaining GNNs, recent approaches for explaining other
types of neural networks have taken one of two main routes. One line of work locally approximates
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.