deﬁned as follows,
L=/summationtext
(x,y)∈T/bracketleftbig
−σcos(wi,x)+
log(/summationtextN
j=1exp(σcos(wj,x)))/bracketrightbig
+λ/bardblφ/bardbl2,(3)
whereλis a hyper-parameter weighting the l2-norm regu-
larization of the learnable parameters of neural network fφ.
Algorithm 1 outlines our training procedures.
3.2. Generalized Zero­Shot Learning
With the learned classiﬁer generator f, given attributes
of unseen classes Auin the test stage, we generate the cor-
responding classiﬁer weights Wu=f(Au)and use it to
classify visual features of unseen classes Xuaccording to
Eq. ( 2).
When both seen and unseen classes are involved for eval-
uations, i.e., the generalized ZSL setting, we combine the
classiﬁers for both seen and unseen classes to classify im-
ages from all classes. Speciﬁcally, with AuandAs, we can
get classiﬁers Wu=f(Au)andWs=f(As)for unseen
and seen classes, respectively. We use their concatenation
Wb= [Wu,Ws]as the classiﬁer for all classes.
It is worth noting that since fhas already been trained
with labeled samples, the resulting Wsshould be very dis-
criminative to discern whether an incoming image belongs
to the seen classes or not. As will be shown later in the ex-
periments, this desirable property prevents our method from
signiﬁcant recognition accuracy drops when much more
classes are involved for evaluations.
3.3. Transductive Zero­Shot Learning
Thanks to the conditional visual classiﬁcation formula-
tion of ZSL, the above inductive approach can be readily
adapted to the transductive ZSL setting. We can utilize
test data during training to calibrate our classiﬁer genera-
tor and output classiﬁers of better decision boundaries for
both seen and unseen classes. We achieve this in virtue
of self-training. Speciﬁcally, we alternate between gen-
erating pseudo labels for images of unseen classes using
the classiﬁer generator and updating it using the generated
pseudo labels. With this idea, two key problems need to be
solved. The ﬁrst is how to prevent the generator from over-
adapting to unseen classes such that the knowledge previ-
ously learned from seen classes is lost, resulting in unsatis-
factory performance for seen classes. The second is how to
avoid the generator being impaired by the incorrect pseudo
labels. We propose a novel self-training based transductive
ZSL algorithm to avoid both problems. Figure 1illustrates
our algorithm.
To generate pseudo labels for test images Xu, we ﬁrst
generate classiﬁer weights Wufor unseen classes as
Wu=f(Au). (4)T"=	(𝑋",	𝑌",𝐴"}𝑓
T,=(𝑋,,	𝑌,,	𝐴,}𝐿"
𝐿,UnseenClasses
SeenClasses
Matrix
concatenation	𝑊"
	𝑊,
Figure 1. Illustration of the transductive ZSL algorithm. We sam-
ple ZSL tasksTsfrom seen classes and Tufrom unseen classes
(with pseudo labels). The classiﬁer Wugenerated from Auare
concatenated with classiﬁer Wsto classify visual features from
bothTuandTs, which results in loss LuandLs, respectively. The
pseudo labels for unseen classes are updated in a self-training way.
WithWu, we calculate classiﬁcation score SofXuaccord-
ing to Eq. ( 2). Pseudo labels ˜YuofXucan be obtained
from S. There inevitably exist noises among ˜Yu. We pro-
pose to mitigate their impact by a novel classiﬁcation score
peakiness based ﬁltering strategy.
Letsi∈RNube the classiﬁcation score of ui∈ Xuac-
cording to all the Nuclasses. Let si
ymandsi
ynbe the high-
est and second highest score among si. The pseudo label
assigned to uishould be ym. However, we regard this as-
signment as a “conﬁdent” one unless si
ymis peaky enough:
si
ym
siyn> γ, (5)
whereγis a threshold controlling the peakiness. This con-
straint prevents ambiguous label assignment from being ex-
ploited for classiﬁer generator calibration.
After obtaining the conﬁdent set ˆDu={ˆXu,ˆYu}, as
well as the the corresponding attributes ˆAu, we can use
them to adjust f. However, ﬁnetuning fwith only ˆDu
shall cause strong bias towards unseen classes such that the
knowledge previously acquired about seen classes will be
forgotten after a few iterations. What is worse, the incor-
rect pseudo labels among ˆYsmay damage fwhen they are
of a high portion. We propose a novel learning-without-
forgetting training scheme to avoid this.
Along with sampling a ZSL task Tufrom (ˆDu,ˆAu) to
calibratefto unseen classes, we sample another ZSL task
Tsfrom (Ds,As) to keep the memory of fto seen classes
and dilute the impact of noisy labels from Tu. Further, while
updating f, we update as well classiﬁer Wsto adjust the
decision boundaries of seen classes towards unseen ones.
Moreover, we introduce the very recently proposed gen-
eralized cross-entropy loss [ 46] to handle task Tuand limit
the impact of incorrect pseudo labels to the classiﬁer weight
generator:
Lu=/summationdisplay
(xu,yu)∈Tu1−(wyu)q
q, (6)
3586