Rethinking Zero-Shot Learning: A Conditional Visual Classiﬁcation Perspective
Kai Li1, Martin Renqiang Min2, Yun Fu1,3
1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
2NEC Laboratories America
3Khoury College of Computer Science, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
kaili@ece.neu.edu, renqiang@nec-labs.com, yunfu@ece.neu.edu
Abstract
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) aims to recognize instances of
unseen classes solely based on the semantic descriptions of
the classes. Existing algorithms usually formulate it as a
semantic-visual correspondence problem, by learning map-
pings from one feature space to the other. Despite being rea-
sonable, previous approaches essentially discard the highly
precious discriminative power of visual features in an im-
plicit way, and thus produce undesirable results. We in-
stead reformulate ZSL as a conditioned visual classiﬁca-
tion problem, i.e., classifying visual features based on the
classiﬁers learned from the semantic descriptions. With
this reformulation, we develop algorithms targeting vari-
ous ZSL settings: For the conventional setting, we propose
to train a deep neural network that directly generates vi-
sual feature classiﬁers from the semantic attributes with an
episode-based training scheme; For the generalized setting,
we concatenate the learned highly discriminative classiﬁers
for seen classes and the generated classiﬁers for unseen
classes to classify visual features of all classes; For the
transductive setting, we exploit unlabeled data to effectively
calibrate the classiﬁer generator using a novel learning-
without-forgetting self-training mechanism and guide the
process by a robust generalized cross-entropy loss. Exten-
sive experiments show that our proposed algorithms signif-
icantly outperform state-of-the-art methods by large mar-
gins on most benchmark datasets in all the ZSL settings.
1. Introduction
Deep learning methods have achieved revolutionary suc-
cesses on many tasks in computer vision owing to the
availability of abundant labeled training data [ 45,44,17,
20,19,21]. However, labeling large-scale training data
for each task is both labor-intensive and unscalable. In-
spired by human’s remarkable abilities to recognize in-
stances of unseen classes solely based on class descrip-
tions without seeing any visual example of such classes, re-searchers have extensively studied an image classiﬁcation
setting similar to the human learning called zero-shot learn-
ing (ZSL) [ 41,31,22,33], in which labeled training im-
ages of seen classes and semantic descriptions of both seen
classes and unseen classes are given and the task is to clas-
sify test images into seen and unseen classes.
Existing approaches usually formulate ZSL as a visual-
semantic correspondence problem and learn the visual-
semantic relationship from seen classes and apply it to un-
seen classes, considering that the seen and unseen classes
are related in the semantic space [ 1,43,13]. These methods
usually project either visual features or semantic features
from one space to the other, or alternatively project both
types of features to an intermediate embedding space. In
the shared embedding space, the associations between the
two types of features are utilized to guide the learning of
the projection functions.
However, these methods fail to recognize the tremendous
efforts in obtaining these discriminative visual features over
a large number of classes through training powerful deep
neural network classiﬁers with a huge amount of computa-
tional and data resources, and thus essentially discard the
highly precious discriminative power of visual features in
an implicit way. In details, on one hand, the visual features
used in most ZSL methods are extracted by some powerful
deep neural networks (e.g., ResNet101) trained on large-
scale datasets (e.g., ImageNet) [ 40]. These visual features
are already highly discriminative; reprojecting them to any
space shall impair the discriminability, especially to a lower
dimensional space, because the dimension reduction usu-
ally signiﬁcantly shrinks data variance. It is surprising that
the majority of existing ZSL approaches try to transform the
visual feature vectors in various ways [ 22,33,13]. On the
other hand, by nature of classiﬁcation problems, the com-
petition information among different classes are crucial for
classiﬁcation performance. But many ZSL approaches ig-
nore the class separation information during training due to
focusing on learning the associations between visual and se-
mantic features, and fail to realize that ZSL is essentially a
3583