V→A /enc-34 /enc-34
V→I←A /enc-34 /enc-34
A→V /enc-34 /enc-34 /enc-34
Dot product /enc-34 /enc-34 /enc-34
Cosine similarity /enc-34 /enc-34 /enc-34 /enc-34
Episode based training /enc-34
ZSL 36.3 45.1 34.2 42.8 27.0 67.7 70.9
GZSL-U 24.5 10.1 25.9 11.2 22.7 59.8 62.7
GZSL-S 62.5 86.8 68.9 81.8 53.2 75.2 77.0
GZSL-H 35.2 18.0 37.6 19.6 31.9 66.6 69.1
Table 2. Ablation study on the AwA1 dataset. “V →A”, “A→V”,
and “V→I←A” refer to projecting visual features to attribute
space, projecting attributes to visual space, and projecting both vi-
sual and attribute features into an intermediate space, respectively.
or intermediate space, no matter using dot product or Co-
sine similarity based classiﬁcation score functions. As ana-
lyzed before, image feature embeddings for ZSL are usually
generated ofﬂine by some powerful feature extraction net-
works such that high discriminatibility has already been se-
cured. Reprojecting them to either attribute or intermediate
space shall inevitably impair the discriminability. What is
worse, the attribute space or the intermediate space are often
of lower dimension than the visual embedding space. The
visual variance, which is crucial to ensure discriminability,
shall be shrunk once the feature embeddings are reprojected
to the lower-dimensional spaces. Due to the damage of the
discriminability of visual features, the hubness problem be-
comes even more intense, leading to much worse results.
Cosine similarity based classiﬁcation score function . We
compare dot product and cosine similarity based loss func-
tions under all the three classiﬁcation spaces. Table 2shows
that the classiﬁcation space seems a more dominant factor:
neither of the two score functions works well if the classiﬁ-
cation space is not appropriate. When the visual embedding
space is selected for classiﬁcation, the proposed cosine sim-
ilarity based score function results in much better perfor-
mance than that based on dot product. We speculate the rea-
son is that values of class attribute are not continuous such
that there are large variance among the attribute vectors of
different classes. Consequently, classiﬁer weights derived
from them also possess large variance, which might cause
high variances of inputs to the Softmax activation func-
tion [ 23]. Unlike dot product, our cosine similarity based
score function normalizes the classiﬁer weights before cal-
culating its dot product with visual embeddings. This nor-
malization procedure can bound and reduce the variance of
the classiﬁer weights, contributing to better performance.
Episode-based training mechanism The proposed
episode-based training mechanism is to train our classiﬁer
weight generator in the way it works during test. From Ta-
ble2, we can observe that there are about 3 %performance
gains for both the ZSL setting and GZSL setting when this
unique training mechanism is adopted. This is within ourexpectation because after exposing our weight generator
with numerous (faked) new ZSL tasks during the training,
it acquires the knowledge how to deal with real new ZSL
tasks during the test. So, better performance is more likely
to be guaranteed.
4.4. Comparative Results
Zero-shot learning . Table 3shows the comparative results
of the proposed method and the state-of-the-art ones for the
inductive ZSL problem. For conventional ZSL, our method
reaches the best for three out of the ﬁve datasets. Remark-
ably, for the AwA2 dataset, our method beats the second
best by about 4 %.
Generalized zero-shot learning . More interesting obser-
vations can be made for the GZSL setting where classiﬁca-
tion is performed over both seen and unseen classes. With
more classes involved, the classiﬁcation accuracy of unseen
classes drops for all methods. However, our method ex-
hibits much more robustness than the other ones and drops
moderately on these datasets. Remarkably, our method
sometimes secures accuracy that is even by about 100 %
(aPY) higher than the second best. We analyze this strik-
ing improvements owning to our consideration of inter-class
separation during training so that the resultant classiﬁers for
seen classes possess good separation property after training.
When they are combined with classiﬁers generated from se-
mantic descriptions of unseen classes in test, they shall be
highly discriminative to discern the incoming images do not
belong to the classes they were trained for.
Contrary to the striking advantages for recognizing un-
seen classes, our method seems kind of “forgetful” and
is overcome by many methods for the accuracy of seen
classes. This is because during training, we constantly sam-
ple new ZSL tasks to train the weight generator to acquire
the knowledge of handling new ZSL tasks. Unlike existing
methods, which process the whole dataset altogether or are
specially designed to keep the training memory, our method
does not memorize the global class structure of the whole
training set. Therefore, with the increase of the capabil-
ity of handle new ZSL tasks, it is inevitably sacriﬁce some
competence of classifying seen classes. Despite of this, our
method surpasses the other ones by large margins for three
our of the ﬁve datasets for the harmonic mean (H), while
being very close to the feature synthesized based method.
Transductive zero-shot learning . When test data are avail-
able during training, better performance is often expected as
we can utilize them to mitigate the bias of models towards
seen classes. Table 4veriﬁes this and our transductive al-
gorithm signiﬁcantly outperform the inductive counterpart.
This substantiates the effectiveness of our novel learning-
without-forgetting self-training technique. Further, with
generalized cross-entropy loss for unseen classes, Ours-
trans (GXE) consistently performs better than that with con-
3588