classiﬁcation problem [ 43].
Inspired by the above observations, we propose to solve
ZSL in a novel conditional visual feature classiﬁcation
framework. In the proposed framework, we effectively gen-
erate visual feature classiﬁers from the semantic attributes,
and thus intrinsically preserve the visual feature discrim-
inability while exploiting the competing information among
different classes. Within the novel framework, we propose
various novel strategies to address different ZSL problems.
For the conventional ZSL problem where only unseen
classes are involved for evaluations, we propose to train
a deep neural network that generates visual feature clas-
siﬁers directly from the semantic attributes. We train the
network with a Cosine similarity based cross-entropy loss,
which mitigates the impact of variances of features from
two different domains when calculating their correlations.
Borrowing ideas from meta-learning, we train our model
in an episode-based way by composing numerous “fake”
new ZSL tasks, so that its generalizability to “real” new
ZSL tasks during test is enhanced. For the generalized set-
ting in which seen classes are included for ZSL evaluations,
we concatenate the classiﬁers for seen classes and unseen
classes to classify visual features for all classes. Since the
classiﬁers for seen classes are trained with labeled samples,
they are highly discriminative to discern whether an incom-
ing image belongs to the seen classes or not. This desir-
able property prevents our method from signiﬁcant perfor-
mance drops when much more classes are involved for eval-
uations. For the transductive setting in which images of un-
seen classes are available [ 34], we take advantage of these
unlabeled data to calibrate our classiﬁer generator using the
pseudo labels generated by itself. To limit the harm of incor-
rect pseudo labels and avoid the model being over-adapted
to new classes, we propose to use the generalized cross-
entropy loss to guide the model calibration process under
an effective learning-without-forgetting training scheme.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:
•We reformulate of ZSL as a conditional visual classi-
ﬁcation problem, by which we can essentially beneﬁt
from high discriminability of visual features and inter-
class competing information among training classes to
solve ZSL problem in various settings.
•We propose various effective techniques to address dif-
ferent ZSL problems uniformly within the proposed
framework.
•Experiments show that our algorithms signiﬁcantly
outperform state-of-the-art methods by large margins
on most benchmark datasets in all the ZSL settings.
2. Related Work
Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) aims to recognize unseen
classes based on their semantic associations with seenclasses. The semantic associations could be within the
human-annotated attributes [ 34,26,2], word vectors [ 10,
43,4], text descriptions [ 16,6], etc. In practice, ZSL is
performed by ﬁrstly learning an embedding space where
semantic vectors and visual features are interacted. Then,
within the learned embedding space, the best match among
semantic vectors of unseen classes is selected for the visual
features of any given image of the unseen classes.
According to the embedding space used, existing meth-
ods can be generally categorized into the following three
groups. Some approaches select semantic space as embed-
ding space and project visual features to semantic space
[15,10]. Projecting visual features into a often much lower-
dimensional semantic space shall shrink the variance of the
projected data points and thus aggravate the hubness prob-
lem, i.e., some candidates will be biased to be the best
matches to many of the queries. Alternatively, some meth-
ods project both visual and semantic features into a com-
mon intermediate space [ 1,35,47]. However, due to the
lack of training samples from unseen classes, these meth-
ods are prone to classifying test samples into seen classes
[30]. The third category of methods choose the visual space
as the embedding space and learned a mapping from the
semantic space to visual space [ 43]. Beneﬁting from the
abundant data diversity in visual space, these methods can
mitigate the hubness problem to some extent.
Recently, a new branch of methods come out and ap-
proach ZSL in virtue of data augmentation, either by vari-
ational auto-encoder (V AE) [ 25] or Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN) [ 5,42,8,48,50]. These methods learn
from visual and semantic features of seen classes generators
that can generate synthesized visual features based on class
semantic descriptions. Then, synthesized visual features are
used to train a standard classiﬁer for object recognition.
ZSL may turn easier when unlabelled test samples from
unseen classes are available during training, i.e., the so-
called transductive ZSL. This is because unlabelled test
samples can be utilized to help reach clearer decision
boundaries for both seen and unseen classes. In fact, it is
more like a semi-supervised learning problem. Propagated
Semantic Transfer (PST) [ 29] conducts label propagation
from seen classes to unseen classes through exploiting the
class manifold structure. Unsupervised Domain Adaption
(UDA) [ 13] formulates the problem as a cross-domain data
association problem and solves it by regularized sparse cod-
ing. Quasi-Fully Supervised Learning (QFSL) [ 34] aims to
strength the mapping from visual space to semantic space
by explicitly requiring the visual features being mapped to
the categories (seen and unseen) they belong.
Unlike the above methods, we approach ZSL from the
perspective of conditioned visual feature classiﬁcation. Per-
haps most similar to our algorithms are [ 16,38], which ap-
proach ZSL also by generating classiﬁers. However, [ 16]
3584