Page 3 of 34
 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
 
task-specific versus task-agnostic augmentations and form versus meaning augmenta -
tions. We describe these distinctions further throughout our survey.
Generalization is the core challenge of Deep Learning. How far can we extrapolate 
from the instances available? The same interface used to control the training data is also 
useful for simulating potential test sets and distribution shifts. We can simulate distribu -
tion shift by applying augmentations to a dataset, such as adding random tokens to an 
email spam detector or increasing the prevalence of tokens that lie on the long-tail of the 
frequency distributions. These simulated shifts can also describe higher-level linguis -
tic phenomenon. This involves deeper fact chaining than what was seen in the training 
set, or the ability to change predictions given counterfactual evidence. As our tools for 
Generative Data Augmentation continue to improve, we will be able to simulate more 
semantic distribution shifts. This looks like a very promising direction to advance gener -
alization testing.
Our survey on Text Data Augmentation for Deep Learning builds on our work sur -
veying Image Data Augmentation for Deep Learning [6]. In Computer Vision, this 
describes applying transformations such as rotating images, horizontally flipping them, 
or increasing the brightness to form augmented examples. We found that it is currently 
much easier to apply label-preserving transformations in Computer Vision than NLP . It 
is additionally easier to stack these augmentations in Computer Vision, enabling even 
more diversity in the augmented set, which has been shown to be a key contributor to 
success. Data Augmentation research has been more thoroughly explored in Computer 
Vision than NLP . We present some ideas that have found interesting results with images, 
but remain to be tested in the text data domain. Finally, we discuss the intersection of 
visual supervision for language understanding and how vision-language models may 
help overcome the grounding problem. We discuss the grounding problem in greater 
detail under our Motifs Of Data Augmentation section.
Our next section presents practical implementation decisions for text data augmen -
tation. We begin by describing the use of a consistency regularization loss to further 
influence the impact of augmented data. Differently from consistency regularization, 
contrastive learning additionally uses negative examples to structure the loss function. 
The next key question is how to control the strength and sampling of each augmenta -
tion. Augmentation controllers apply a meta-level abstraction to the hyperparameters 
of augmentation selection and the magnitude of the transformation. This is commonly 
explored with an adversarial controller that aims to produce mistakes in the model. We 
also describe controllers that search for performance improvements such as AutoAug -
ment [7], Population-Based Augmentation [8], and RandAugment [9]. Although similar 
in concept, we discuss the key distinction between augmentation controllers and cur -
riculum learning. Another important consideration for implementing Data Augmenta -
tion is the CPU to GPU transfer in the preprocessing pipeline, as well as the conceptual 
understanding of offline versus online augmentation. Finally, we describe the application 
of augmentation to alleviate issues caused by class imbalance.
Our Discussion section presents opportunities to explore text data augmentation. 
We begin with task-specific augmentations describing how key NLP tasks such as 
question answering differ from natural language inference, particularly with respect 
to input length or the categorization as a knowledge-intensive task. We quickly