Page 28 of 34 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
Self‑supervised learning and data augmentation
In both the case of self-supervised learning and Data Augmentation, we are looking to 
inject prior knowledge about a data domain. When a model is deployed, what is more 
likely: the data distribution changes or the task the model is supposed to perform with 
the data changes? In self-supervised learning, we look for ways to set up tasks and loss 
functions for representation learning. In Data Augmentation, we look for priors to 
manipulate the data distribution. A key advantage of Data Augmentation is that it is 
much easier to stack priors than self-supervised learning. In order to utilize multiple 
priors, self-supervised learning relies on highly unstable multi-task learning or costly 
multi-stage learning. In contrast, Data Augmentation only requires random sampling 
operations to integrate multiple priors.
We note that many of the key successes in self-supervised Learning rely on Data Aug -
mentation, or have at least been dramatically improved by Data Augmentation. For exam -
ple, the success of contrastive learning relies on Data Augmentation to form two views 
of the original instance. The most data-efficient GAN frameworks achieve data-efficiency 
through the use of Data Augmentation [137]. Further, DistAug [138] even tests Data Aug -
mentation with large scale pixel autoregressive modeling in the ImageGPT model [139].
Transfer and multi‑task learning
Transfer learning has been one of the most successful approaches to training deep neu -
ral networks. This looks especially promising as more annotated datasets are collected 
and unified in dataset hubs. A notable example of which is HuggingFace datasets [140], 
containing 884 datasets at the time of this publication. In addition to transfer learning, 
researchers have additionally explored multi-task learning in which a model simulta -
neously optimizes multiple tasks. This has been well explored in T5 [141], which con -
verts all tasks into language modeling. We believe there is room for Data Augmentation 
experiments in this space, such as the use of MixUp to combine data from multiple tasks 
or Back-Translation between curated datasets.
Wei et al. [130] propose an interesting extension, named as Multi-Task View (MTV), 
to the common practice of transfer learning to better utilize augmented subsets and 
share information across distributions. Multi-Task View (MTV) trains separate heads 
on augmented subsets and ensembles predictions for the final output. Geva et al. [142] 
have also shown utility in sharing a feature extractor base and training separate heads. 
In this case, Geva et al. train each head with a different task and reformulate inputs into 
unifying prompts for inference. Similar to the discussion of prompting under Generative 
Data Augmentation, there remains a significant opportunity to explore transfer learning, 
multi-task learning, and Data Augmentation.
AI‑GAs
One of the most interesting ideas in artificial intelligence research is AI-GAs (AI-
generating algorithms) [10]. An AI-generating algorithm is composed of three pillars, 
meta-learning architectures, meta-learning the learning algorithms themselves, and 
generating effective learning environments. We believe that Data Augmentation and 
this interface to control data distributions will play a large role in the third pillar of