Page 11 of 34
 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
 
Graphs are made up of nodes and edges. In WordNet, each node represents a word 
such as “tiger” . The genius of WordNet is the simplification of which edges to connect. 
In WordNet, the nodes are connected with the same edge type, a “synset” relation -
ship. Synsets are loosely defined as words belonging to a similar semantic category. 
The word “tiger” would have a synset relation with nodes such as “lion” or “jaguar” . 
The word “tiger” may also have finer-grained synset relations with nodes that describe 
more particular types of tigers. WordNet is an example of a Graph-Structured Aug -
mentation that builds on synonym replacement. WordNet describes a graph where 
each node is related to another graph by being a “synset” .
We additionally consider graphs that contain finer grained edge classifications, this 
kind of graph is frequently referred to as a Knowledge Graph [39]. As an example, 
CoV-KGE [42] contains 39 different types of edges relating biomedical concept nodes 
such as drugs or potential binding targets. Huang et al. [43] provide another interest -
ing example of constructing a knowledge graph from the long context provided as 
input to abstractive summarization. This graph enables semantic swaps that preserve 
global consistency.
Another heavily studied area of adding structure to text data is known as syntactic 
parsing. Syntactic parsing describes different tasks that require structural analysis of text 
such as the construction of syntax or dependency trees. Recently, Glavas and Vulic [44] 
demonstrated that supervised syntactic parsing offered little to no benefit in the modern 
pre-train, then fine-tune pipeline with large language models.
The final use of structure for Text Data Augmentation we consider is to integrate meta -
data via structural information. For example, scientific literature mining has become a 
very popular application of NLP . These applications could benefit from the underlying 
citation network characterizing these papers, in addition to the text content of the papers 
themselves. Particularly, network structure has played an enormous role in biology and 
medicine. Li et al. [45] present many of these graphs in high-level application domains 
such as molecules, genomics, therapeutics, and healthcare. The integration of this struc -
ture with text data could be a key component to grounding text representations.
In the theme of our survey, we note that these auxiliary graphs may benefit from aug -
mentation as well. Data Augmentation for explicitly graph-structured data is still in its 
early stages. Zhao et  al. [46] propose an edge augmentation technique that “exposes 
GNNs to likely (but nonexistent) edges and limiting exposure to unlikely (but exist -
ent) ones” [46]. This graph augmentation leads to an average accuracy improvement 
of 5% across 6 popular node classification datasets. Kong et  al. [47] further demon -
strate the effectiveness of adversarially controlled node feature augmentation on graph 
classification.
In the section, Practical Considerations for Implementation, we will present the use 
of consistency regularization and contrastive learning to further enforce the use of aug -
mented data in training. Building on these ideas, we can use graph-structures to assign 
nearest neighbor assignments and regularize embeddings. Neural Structured Learning 
[48] describes constructing a graph connecting instances that share fine-grained class 
labels. This is used to penalize a misclassification of “golden retriever” less so than “ele -
phant” if the ground truth label is “labrador retriever” . Li et al. [49] similarly construct