Page 5 of 34
 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
 
could be game changing for the way we store datasets and build Deep Learning mod -
els. More particularly, it could become common to use labeled datasets solely for the 
sake of evaluation, rather than representation learning.
Our survey has some similarities to Feng et al. [16] which has been published roughly 
around the same time as ours. Both surveys seek a clear definition of Data Augmenta -
tion and aim to highlight key motifs. Additionally, both surveys narrate the development 
of NLP augmentation around the successes of augmentation in Computer Vision and 
how these may transfer. Feng et al. [16] provide a deeper enumeration of task-specific 
augmentation than is covered in our survey. Our survey adds important concepts such 
as the debate between Meaning versus Form, Counterfactual Examples, and the use of 
prompts in Generative Data Augmentation.
Many of the successes of Deep Learning stem from access to large labeled datasets 
such as ImageNet [17]. However, constructing these datasets is very challenging and 
time-consuming. Therefore, researchers are looking for alternative ways to leverage data 
without manual annotation. This is a large motivation behind the success of self-super -
vised language modeling with papers such as GPT-3 [14] or BERT [18]. Data Augmenta -
tion follows this same motivation as overcoming the challenge of learning with limited 
labeled data and avoiding manually labeling data. For example, many of the surveyed 
studies highlight the success of their algorithms when sub-setting the labeled data.
Transfer Learning has been one of the most effective solutions to this challenge of 
learning from limited labeled datasets [19]. Transfer Learning references initialization 
of the model for learning with the weights learned from a previous task. This previous 
task usually has the benefit of big data, whether that data is labeled such as ImageNet or 
unlabeled, as is used in self-supervised language models. There are many research ques -
tions around the procedure of Transfer Learning. In our Discussion section we discuss 
opportunities with Data Augmentation such as freezing the base feature extractor and 
training separate heads on the original and augmented datasets.
Self-supervised learning describes a general set of algorithms that learn from unla -
beled data with supervised learning. This is done by algorithmically labeling the data. 
Some of the most popular self-supervised learning tasks include generation, contrastive 
learning, and pretext tasks. Generation describes how language models are trained. A 
token is algorithmically selected to be masked out and the masked out token is used 
as the label for supervised learning. Contrastive learning aligns representations of data 
algorithmically determined to be similar (usually through the use of augmentations), 
and distances these representations from negatives (usually other samples in the mini-
batch). Pretext tasks describe ideas such as applying an augmentation to data and task -
ing the model to predict the transformation. The augmentation interface powers many 
task constructions in self-supervised learning.
Motifs of text data augmentation
This section will introduce a unifying view of objective the augmentations presented in 
the rest of the survey address. We introduce the key motifs of Text Data Augmentation 
as Strengthening Decision Boundaries, Brute Force Training, Causality and Counterfac -
tual Examples, and the distinction between Meaning versus Form. These concepts dig