Page 7 of 34
 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
 
Many of the Text Data Augmentations described throughout the survey utilize the 
terminology of Counterfactual Examples [24]. These Counterfactual Examples describe 
augmentations such as the introduction of negations or numeric alterations to flip the 
label of the example. The construction of counterfactuals in language generally relies on 
human expertise, rather than algorithmic construction. Although the model does not 
deliberately sample these interventions akin to a randomized control trial, the hope is 
that it can still establish causal links between semantic concepts and labels by observing 
the result of interventions.
Liu et al. [25] lay the groundwork for formal causal language in Data Augmentation. 
This entails the use of structured causal models and the procedure of abduction, action, 
and prediction to generate counterfactual examples. These experiments rely on phrasal 
alignment between sequences in neural machine translation to sample counterfactual 
replacements. Their counterfactual augmentation improves on a baseline English to 
French translation system from 26.0 to 28.92 according to the BLEU metric. It seems 
possible that this phrasal alignment could be extended to other sequence-to-sequence 
problems such as abstractive question answering, summarization, or dialogue systems. 
This explicit counterfactual structure is different from most reviewed works that rather 
use natural language prompts to automate counterfactual sampling. For example, DINO 
[26] generates natural language inference data by either seeding the generation with 
“mean the same thing” or “are on completely different topics” . We think it is an interest -
ing research direction to see if rigorous causal modeling such as computing the condi -
tional probabilities of the context removing the variable [27] will provide benefits over 
prompts and large language models.
Meaning versus form
One of the most interesting ideas in language processing is the distinction between 
meaning and form. Bender and Koller [28] introduced the argument, providing several 
ideas and thought experiments. A particularly salient anecdote to illustrate this is known 
as the octopus example. In this example, two people are stranded on separate islands, 
communicating through an underwater cable. This underwater cable is intercepted by 
an intelligent octopus who learns to mimic the speaking patterns of each person. The 
octopus does this well enough that it can substitute for either person, as in the Turing 
test. However, when one of the stranded islanders encounters a bear and seeks advice, 
the octopus is unable to help. This is because the octopus has learned the form of their 
communication, but it has not learned the underlying meaning of the world in which 
their language describes.
We will present many augmentations in this paper that aid in learning form. Similar to 
the concept of strengthening decision boundaries, ideas like synonym swap or rotating 
syntactic trees will help the octopus further strengthen its understanding of how lan -
guage is generally organized. With respect to achieving an understanding of meaning in 
these models and defining this esoteric concept, many have turned to ideas in grounding 
and embodiment. Grounding typically refers to pairing language with other modalities 
such as vision-language or audio-language models. However, grounding can also refer to 
abstract concepts and worlds constructed solely from language. Embodiment references 
learning agents that act in their environment. Although Bender and Koller propose that