Page 22 of 34 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
255x8x8x3 values. Therefore, image models need to rely on energy-based models that 
learn joint embedding spaces and assign similarity scores, rather than exactly modeling 
the probability of each missing patch. Perhaps the GAN framework, or something simi -
lar, will take over in NLP once generative modeling expands its scope to sentence-level 
or paragraph-level generation, such as the pre-training task used for abstractive summa -
rization in PEGASUS [64].
Another interesting success of Data Augmentation has been its application in Rein -
forcement Learning. This has been heavily studied with Robotic Control from Visual 
Inputs and the Atari benchmark. One of the biggest bottlenecks with robotic learning, 
and most deep reinforcement learning problems, is a lack of data. It is challenging to 
restart a robot laundry folder back to the beginning of the unfolded shirt and collect 
millions of trajectories. To solve this problem, researchers have turned to forming aug -
mented trajectories from collections in a replay buffer. Amongst many applications of 
reinforcement learning with Text data that have been proposed, patient care control is 
particularly exciting. Ji et al. [101] explore the use of model-based reinforcement learn -
ing for patient care of septic patients using the MIMIC-III dataset [102]. The authors 
use clinical notes to sanity check the model-based rollouts of physiological patient state 
markers. A promising area of research will be to apply Text Data Augmentation to col -
lected clinical note trajectories to improve patient care and trajectory simulation.
Practical considerations for implementation
This section presents many details of implementing Text Data Augmentation that make 
a large performance difference in terms of evaluation metrics and training efficiency.
Consistency regularization
Consistency regularization is a strong compliment to the priors introduced via Data 
Augmentation. A consistency loss requires a model to minimize the distance in repre -
sentations of an instance and the augmented example derived from it. In line with the 
motif of strengthening decision boundaries, consistency regularization enforces a con -
nection between original and augmented samples. This is usually implemented in a 
multi-task learning framework where a model simultaneously optimizes the down -
stream task and a secondary consistency term.
Consistency regularization has been successfully applied to translate between pro -
gramming languages by enforcing consistency on back-translations [103]. Alberti et al. 
[104] use a slightly different form of consistency regularization to generate synthetic 
question-answer pairs. Rather than minimizing the distance between representations 
of original and augmented examples, the framework requires that the model outputs 
the exact same answer when predicting from context, question inputs as when a sepa -
rate model generates the question from context, answer inputs. The original BERT-
Large model achieves an F1 score of 83.1 when fine-tuned on the SQuAD2. Fine-tuning 
BERT with an additional 7 million questions generated with the consistency condition 
improves performance to 84.8.
Consistency regularization is a common technique for self-supervised represen -
tation learning because unlabeled data should still have this property of consistent