Page 21 of 34
 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
 
transformations in Computer Vision are used in image classification, object detection, 
semantic segmentation, and image generation.
As described in the beginning of our survey, Data Augmentation biases the model 
towards certain semantic invariances. Image Data Augmentation has largely been suc -
cessful because it is easy to think semantic invariances relevant to vision. These include 
semantic invariance to horizontal flips, rotations, and increased brightness, to name 
a few. Comparatively, it is much harder to define transformations to text data that are 
guaranteed to be semantically invariant. All of the augmentations described in Easy Data 
Augmentation have the potential to perturb the original data such that it changes the 
ground truth label, y.
Another interesting trend is the integration of vision and language in recent mod -
els such as CLIP and DALL-E. For the sake of Data Augmentation, a notable example 
is Vokenization from Tan and Bansal [96]. The authors align tokens such as “humans” 
with images of “humans” and so on, even for verbs such as “speaking” . The masked lan -
guage modeling task then uses the visual tokens as additional supervision for predicting 
masked out tokens. There is some noise in this alignment such as finding a visual token 
for words such as “by” or “the” . Tan and Basil report visual grounding ratios for tokens of 
54.8%, 57.6%, and 41.7% on curated vision-language datasets compared to 26.6%, 27.7%, 
and 28.3% for solely language corpora. Across the SST-2, QNLI, QQP , MNLI, SQuAD 
v1.1 and v2.0, and SWAG benchmark tasks, Vokenization improves BERT-Large from 
79.4 to 82.1 and RoBERTa-Large from 77.6 to 80.6. There are many interesting vision-
language datasets labeled for tasks such as visual question answering, image captioning, 
and text-image retrieval, to name a few. Vision-language Data Augmentation schemes 
such as Vokenization look to be a very promising area of research.
A recent trend in Image Data Augmentation has been its integration in the training 
of generative models, namely generative adversarial networks (GANs) [97]. The GAN 
framework, similar to the ELECTRA model [98], consists of a generator and a discrimi -
nator. The generator transforms random noise into images and the discriminator clas -
sifies these images as either coming from the generator or the provided training set. 
Following, we will describe why this does not work as well as autoregressive modeling 
for text. Returning to how Data Augmentation has been used for GANs, this investi -
gation began with Zhang et  al. ’s work on consistency regularization [99]. Consistency 
regularization requires the discriminator to make the same classification on a real image 
and an augmented view of that same image. Unfortunately, this led to the augmenta -
tions being “leaked” into the generated distribution such that the generator produces 
augmented data as well.
We will end this discussion by presenting some ideas from LeCun and Misra [100] 
on the key distinction between generative modeling between Images and Text. The key 
issue stated in the article is handling uncertainty. As an example, take the masked token 
completion task: “The mask chases the mask in the savana” . LeCun and Misra point out 
that the language model can easily “associate a score or a probability to all words in the 
vocabulary: high score for lion’ , ‘cheetah’ , and a few other predators, and low scores for 
all other words in the vocabulary” [100]. In comparison, applying this kind of density 
on candidate images in highly intractable. The missing token can only be 1 of a typi -
cal 30,000 tokens, whereas a missing 8x8 RGB patch can take on a ridiculously large,