Page 29 of 34
 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
 
generating learning environments. For example, embedding learning agents in teacher-
student loops in which the teacher controls augmentation parameters to render the 
learning environment.
Learning the learning environment itself has been successfully applied to bipedal walk -
ing control with neural networks in POET [11]. POET is a co-evolutionary framework 
of control parameters and parameters that render walking terrains. Data Augmentation 
may be the most natural way of extending this framework to understanding language 
in which the environment searches for magnitude parameters of augmentation or sub -
sets of data, as in curriculum learning. AI-GAs have been applied to vision problems 
in examples such as Generative Teaching Networks [12] and Synthetic Petri Dish [13]. 
In GTNs, a teacher network generates training data for a student network. Notably, the 
training data has high-frequency noise patterns that do not resemble natural image data. 
It could be interesting to see how well GTNs could generate text embeddings similar to 
the continuous optimization of prompt tuning.
Conclusion
In conclusion, this survey has presented several strategies for applying Data Augmenta -
tion in Text data. These augmentations provide an interface to allow developers to inject 
priors about their task and data domain into the model. We have additionally presented 
how Data Augmentation can help simulate distribution shift and test generalization. 
As Data Augmentation for NLP is relatively immature compared to Computer Vision, 
we highlight some of the key similarities and differences. We have also presented many 
ideas surrounding Data Augmentation, from practical engineering considerations to 
broader discussions of the potential of data augmentation in building artificial intelli -
gence. Data Augmentation is a very promising strategy and we hope our discussion sec -
tion helps motivate further research interest.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the reviewers in the Data Mining and Machine Learning Laboratory at Florida Atlantic University. 
Additionally, we acknowledge partial support by the NSF (IIS-2027890). Opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommenda-
tions in this paper are the authors’ and do not reflect the views of the NSF.
Authors’ contributions
CS performed the literature review and drafted the manuscript. TMK worked with CS to develop the article’s framework 
and focus. TMK introduced this topic to CS. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Funding
NSF RAPID (IIS-2027890).
Availability of data and materials
Not applicable.
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 22 June 2021   Accepted: 28 June 2021