Page 14 of 34 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
resulted in the curation of large labeled datasets of parallel sentences. We can also imag -
ine the use of other text datasets such as translations between programming languages 
or writing styles as we describe in more detail under Style Augmentation.
Back-translation leverages the semantic invariances encoded in supervised translation 
datasets to produce semantic invariances for the sake of augmentation. Also interest -
ingly, back-translation is used to train unsupervised translation models by enforcing 
consistency on the back-translations. This form of back-translation is also heavily used 
to train machine translation models with a large set of monolingual data and a limited 
set of paired translation data. Outside of translation we could imagine structuring these 
domain pairings such as scientific papers and news articles or college-level and high-
level reading and so on.
An interesting design question with this may be to weigh the importance of using a 
high performance machine translation model for the back-translation. However, as 
stated by Pham et al., the lesson has been “better translation quality of the pseudo-paral -
lel data does not necessarily lead to a better final translation model, while lower-quality 
but diverse data often yields stronger results instead” [55]. The curation of paired lan -
guages and domains could also impact the final performance. Exploring back-translation 
augmentation for question answering Longpre et al. discuss “curating our input data and 
learning regime to encourage representations that are not biased by any one domain or 
distribution” [56].
Style augmentation
Finally, we present another augmentation strategy utilizing Deep Networks to augment 
data for the training of other Deep Nets. In our previous survey of Image Data Augmen -
tation, we explored works that use Neural Style Transfer for augmentation. Artistic style 
transfers such as a picasso-themed dog image, may be useful as an OOD augmentation 
in a Negative Data Augmentation framework, which we will present later. However, we 
are more interested in styles within the dataset. This is an interesting strategy to prevent 
overfitting to high-frequency features or blurring out the form of language such as to 
focus on meaning. In the text data domain, this could describe transferring the writing-
style of one author to another for applications such as abstractive summarization or con -
text for extractive question answering.
Data Augmentation is often deployed to focus models on semantics, rather than par -
ticular forms of language. These particular forms could emerge from one author’s writing 
style or general tonality in the language such as an optimistic versus a pessimistic writer. 
Style transfer offers an interesting window to extract semantic similarities between writ -
ing styles. This could help with modeling contexts in question answering systems or doc -
uments for information retrieval.
Generative data augmentation
Generative Data Augmentation is one of the most exciting emerging ideas in Deep 
Learning. This includes generating photorealistic facial images [57] or indistinguishable 
text passages [14]. These models have been very useful for Transfer Learning, but the 
question remains: What is the killer application of the generative task? These generations