Page 24 of 34 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
Contrastive learning, similarly to consistency regularization, describes making the 
representation of an instance and a transformation-derived pair similar. However, con -
trastive learning adds a negative normalization that additionally pushes these represen -
tations away from other instances in the samples mini-batch. Contrastive learning has 
achieved large advances in representation Computer Vision such as SimCLR [106] and 
MoCo [107]. Using Data Augmentation for contrastive learning is a very promising area 
of research with recent extensions to the information-retrieval language model REALM 
[73]. We refer interested readers to a report from Rethmeier and Augenstein [112] for 
more details on early efforts to apply contrastive learning to NLP .
Consistency regularization and contrastive learning are candidate solutions to a com -
mon problem found by inspecting model performance. For example, Thorne et al. [113] 
find that fact verification models achieve better accuracy when classifying if claims are 
supported or refuted by the evidence when ignoring the evidence. Contrastive learning 
would require the model to correctly associated supporting evidence by contrasting it 
with refuting evidence. Consistency Regularization would more so describe having a 
similar prediction when the evidence has been slightly perturbed, such as inserting a 
random word or replacing it with a paraphrase that shares the same semantics.
Negative data augmentation
Negative Data Augmentation is a similar concept to the negative examples used in con -
trastive learning. However, a key difference is that contrastive learning generally uses 
other data points as the negatives, whereas Negative Data Augmentation entails apply -
ing aggressive augmentations. These augmentations are not just limited to label cor -
ruptions, but may push the example out of the natural language distribution entirely. 
Returning to the motif of Meaning versus Form [28] these augmentations may not be 
useful for learning meaning, but they can help reinforce the form of natural language. 
Sinha et al. [114] demonstrate how this can be used to improve contrastive learning and 
generative adversarial networks.
Augmentation controllers
A large contributor to the success of Data Augmentation in Computer Vision is the 
development of controllers. Controllers reference algorithms that optimize the strength 
of augmentations throughout training. The strength of augmentations describe the mag -
nitude of operation such as inserting 3 additional words compared to 15. Augmentation 
strength also describes how many augmentations are stacked together such as random 
insertion followed by deletion followed by back-translation and so on, described more 
next. Successful controllers such as AutoAugment [7], Population-Based Augmentation 
[8], or RandAugment [9] have not yet seen large-scale adoption in NLP .
When applying Easy Data Augmentation, several hyperparameters arise. Hyperparam -
eter optimization is one of the active areas of Deep Learning research [115–117]. This 
presents a perfect problem to find optimal values for random augmentation samplings, 
as well as magnitudes such as: how many tokens to delete? SpanBERT [118], for exam -
ple, shows that instead of masking out single tokens for language modeling, masking out 
multiple tokens at a time, known as spans, results in better downstream performance.