Page 10 of 34 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
where the hypothesis in premise-hypothesis NLI (Natural-Language Inference) pairs are 
translated to the passive version of the sentence. An example of Inversion is the change 
from “The lawyer saw the actor” to “The actor saw the lawyer” . An example of Passiviza -
tion is changing from “This small collection contains 16 El Grecos” to “This small col -
lection is contained by 16 El Grecos” . The authors show improvement applying these 
augmentations on the HANS challenge set for NLI [38].
Graph‑structured augmentation
An interesting opportunity for text data augmentation is to construct graph-struc -
tured representations of text data. This includes relation and entity encodings in 
knowledge graphs, grammatical structures in syntax trees, or metadata grounding 
language data, such as citation networks. These augmentations add explicit structural 
information, a relatively new integration with Deep Learning architectures. The addi -
tion of structure can aid in finding label-preserving transformations, representation 
analysis, and adding prior knowledge to the dataset or application. We will begin our 
analysis of Graph-Structured Augmentation by unpacking the difference between 
structured versus unstructured representations.
Deep Learning operates by converting high-dimensional, and sometimes sparse, 
data into lower-dimensional, continuous vector embedding spaces. The learned vec -
tor space has corresponding metrics such as L2 or cosine similarity distance func -
tions. This is a core distinction from topological spaces, in which distance between 
points is not defined. A topological space is a more general mathematical space with 
less constraints than Euclidean or metric spaces. Topological spaces encode informa -
tion that is challenging to integrate in modern Deep Learning architectures. Rather 
than designing entirely new architectures, we can leverage the power of structured 
data through the Data Augmentation interface.
One of the most utilized structures in language processing is the Knowledge Graph 
[39]. A Knowledge Graph is composed of (entity, relation, entity) tuple relations. The 
motivation of the augmentation scheme is that paths along the graph provide infor -
mation about entities and relations which are challenging to represent without struc -
ture. Under the scope of Rule-based Augmentation, we presented the idea of synonym 
swap. One strategy to implement synonym swap would be to use a Knowledge Graph 
with “is equivalent” relationships to find synonyms. This can be more practical than 
manually defining dictionaries with synonym entries. This is especially the case 
thanks to rapid acceleration in automated knowledge graph construction from unla -
beled data. Knowledge Graphs often contain more fine-grained relations as well.
Previously, we mentioned how random synonym replacement would benefit enor -
mously from the perspective of preserving the class label with better swaps. Improved 
swaps describe transitions such as “I am jogging” to “I am running” compared to “I 
am yelling” , or even “I am market” . Structured language in graph-form is a very useful 
tool to achieve this augmentation capability. These kinds of graphs have been heavily 
developed with notable examples such as WordNet [40], Penn Treebank [41], and the 
ImageNet class label structure [17]. Graphs such as WordNet describe words in rela -
tionship to one another through “synsets” .