Page 16 of 34 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
with the development of transformer models that can in sequences longer than 512 
tokens as inputs. Similar to excitement about retrieval-augmented modeling, this will 
allow in-context learning models to process more demonstrations of the task. However, 
due to limitations of scale, methods that continue with gradient updates are more practi -
cally useful.
The next implementation of prompting we will present is prompt tuning. Prompt 
tuning describes first embedding the prompt into a continuous space, and then opti -
mizing the embedding with gradient descent while keeping the rest of the network fro -
zen. Similarly to GPT-3, Lester et al. [62] show that scale improves performance with 
prompt tuning and that prompt tuning significantly outperforms the in-context learning 
results reported from Brown et al. [14]. Performance can be further improved by ensem -
bling optimized prompts and running inference as a single batch of the input and the 
appended prompts. Tuned prompt ensembling improves the average performance of the 
prompts on SuperGLUE from 88.5, and the best performing individual prompt at 89.8, to 
90.5. The authors further highlight that analysis of the optimized prompt embedding can 
aid in task complexity and similarity metrics, as well as Meta-Learning. Prompt tuning 
shares the same underlying concept of prepending context to the input of downstream 
tasks to facilitate fine-tuning, however this technique is more in line with research on 
Transfer Learning with minimal modifications. For example, adapter layers [63] aim to 
introduce a small number of parameters to fine-tune a pre-trained Transformer.
An emerging theme in the pre-train then fine-tune paradigm has been that domain 
and task alignment tends to improve fine-tuned performance. Gururangan et  al. [59] 
demonstrate the effectiveness of data domain alignment and Zhang et  al. [64] dem -
onstrate effectiveness of task alignment in the proposed PEGASUS algorithm. In cor -
respondence with the lesson of alignment, Zhong et  al. [65] tune language models to 
be better fitted to answer prompts. This is done by manually annotating 441 questions 
across 43 existing datasets that map every task to a “Yes” or “No” answer. Measured by 
AUC-ROC plots, the authors show that further fine-tuning on prompt specialization 
improves these models and that this also benefits from scale. The authors call for the 
organization of NLP datasets into unified formats that better aids in fine-tuning models 
for answering prompts.
Pattern exploiting training (PET) [66] uses the pre-trained language model to label 
task-specific unlabeled data. This is done with manually-defined templates that convert 
the supervised learning task into a language modeling task. The outputs of the language 
model are then mapped to supervised learning labels with a verbalizer. Gradient-descent 
optimization is applied to verbalized outputs to fine-tune it with the same cross-entropy 
loss function used to train classifiers. Schick and Shutze [67] demonstrated that the PET 
technique enables much smaller models to surpass GPT-3 with 32 labeled examples 
from SuperGLUE. Tam et al. [68] further developed the algorithm to ADAPET. ADA -
PET utilizes dense supervision in the labeling task, applying the loss to the entire vocab -
ulary distribution without a verbalizer and additional requiring the model to predict the 
masked tokens in the context given the label, similarly to conditional-BERT. ADAPET 
outperforms PET without the use of task-specific unlabeled data.
A limitation to pattern-exploiting training, in-context learning, and prompt tun -
ing, is that they require retaining a large language model for downstream tasks. Most