Page 8 of 34 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
meaning cannot be learned from form alone, many other works highlight different areas 
of the language modeling task such as assertions [29] or multiple embedded tasks [30] 
that could lead to learning meaning. Another useful way of thinking about meaning ver -
sus form could be to look at recently developed benchmarks in language processing such 
as the distinction between GLUE [31] and SuperGLUE [32] tasks that predominantly 
test an understanding of form to knowledge-intensive tasks such as KILT [33] that bet -
ter probe for meaning. In our survey, we generally use the terms “understanding” and 
“meaning” to describe passing black-box tests designed by humans. We believe that 
drilling into the definition of these terms is one of the most promising pursuits in lan -
guage processing research.
Text data augmentations
We described Data Augmentation as a strategy to prevent overfitting via regularization. 
This regularization is enabled through an intuitive interface. As we study a task or data -
set, we learn more about what kind of priors or what kind of additional data we need to 
collect to improve the system. For example, we might discover characteristics about our 
question answering dataset such as that it fails with symmetric consistency on compari -
son questions. The following list of augmentations describes the mechanisms we cur -
rently have available to inject these priors into our datasets.
Symbolic augmentation
We categorize these augmentations as “Symbolic Augmentations” in contrast to “Neural 
Augmentations” . As stated earlier, the key difference is the use of auxiliary neural net -
works, or other types of statistical models, to generate data compared to using symbolic 
rules to augment data. A key benefit of symbolic augmentation is the interpretability 
for the human designer. Symbolic augmentations also work better with short transfor -
mations, such as replacing words or phrases to form augmented examples. However, 
some information-heavy applications rely on longer inputs such as question answering 
or summarization. Symbolic rules are limited in applying global transformations such as 
augmenting entire sentences or paragraphs.
Fig. 1 Success of EDA applied to 5 text classification datasets. A key takeaway from these results is the 
performance difference with less data. The gain is much more pronounced with 500 labeled examples, 
compared to 5,000 or the full training set