Page 9 of 34
 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
 
Rule‑based augmentation
Rule-based Augmentations construct rules to form augmented examples. This entails if-
else programs for augmentation and symbolic templates to insert and re-arrange exist -
ing data. Easy Data Augmentation from Wei et  al. [34] presents four augmentations. 
Figure  1 highlights the performance improvement with EDA, note the smallest subset 
of 500 labeled examples benefits the most. One of the main reasons to be excited about 
Easy Data Augmentation is that it is relatively easy to use off-the-shelf. Many of the 
Augmentations mentioned later in this survey, are still in the research phase, waiting 
for large-scale testing and adoption. Easy Data Augmentation includes random swap -
ping, random deletion, random insertion, and random synonym replacement. Examples 
of this are shown in Fig. 2.
There are many opportunities to build on these augmentations. Firstly, we note that 
with random swapping, the classification of the word is incredibly useful. From the Data 
Augmentation perspective of introducing semantic invariances, “I am jogging” , is much 
more similar to “I am swimming” than “I am yelling” . Further designing token vocabular -
ies with this kind of structure should lead to an improvement.
Programs for Rule-based augmentation further encompass many of the adversarial 
attacks that have been developed for NLP . Adversarial attacks are equivalent to aug -
mentations, differing solely in the intention of their construction. As an example of 
a rule-based attack, Jin et  al. [35] present TextFooler. TextFooler first computes word 
importance scores by looking at the change in output when deleting each word. Text -
Fooler then selects the words which most significantly changed the outputs for synonym 
replacement. This is an example of a rule-based symbolic program that can be used to 
organize the construction of augmented examples.
Another rule-based strategy available is Regular Expression Augmentation. Regular 
Expression filtering is one of the most common ways to clean data that has been scraped 
from the internet, as well as several other data sources such as Clinical Notes [36]. Regu -
lar Expressions describe matching patterns in text. This is usually used to clean data, but 
it can also be used to find common forms of language and generate extensions that align 
with a graph-structured grammar. For example, matching patterns like “This object is 
adjective” and extending it with patterns such as, “and adjective” . Another strategy is to 
re-order the syntactics based on the grammar such as “This object is adjective” to “ An 
adjective object” .
Min et  al. [37] propose rules for augmentation based on syntactic heuristics. This 
includes Inversion, swapping the subject and object in sentences, and Passivization 
Fig. 2 Examples of easy data augmentation transformations