Page 25 of 34
 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
 
Adversarial augmentation
Adversarial attacks and the use of adversarially optimized inputs for augmentation is 
very similar to the previous discussion on controllers. The key differentiation is that 
adversarially controllers target misclassifications whereas controllers generally try to 
avoid misclassifications. Particularly, adversarial optimization aims to improve robust -
ness to high-frequency pattern shifts. Adversarial attacks on text data generally range 
from introducing typos to swiping out individual or chunks of words. There is a great 
deal of ambiguity with this since many of these perturbations would be cleaned and fil -
tered by the text data preprocessing techniques such as spell checkers, case normaliza -
tions, or regular expression filtering.
TextAttack [119] is an open-source library implementing adversarial text attacks and 
providing APIs for Data Augmentation. There are four main components of an attack in 
the TextAttack framework, a goal function, constraints, transformations, and a search 
method. This pipeline is illustrated in Fig.  7. The goal function defines the target out -
put, for example instead of solely flipping the predicted output we may want to target a 
50-50 density. The constraints define how far the input can be changed. The transforma -
tion describes the tools available to change the input such as synonym swaps, deletions, 
applying back-translation, and all the other techniques discussed previously. Finally, the 
search method describes the algorithm for searching for the attack. Similar to our dis -
cussion of controllers there are many different ways to perform black-box searches such 
as grid or random searches, bayesian optimization, and evolutionary search, to name a 
few [ 115].
A key consideration with adversarial augmentation is how quickly we can construct 
adversarial examples. Many adversarial example construction techniques such as Sze -
gedy et  al. [120] rely on iterative optimization such as L-BFGS to find the adversarial 
example. This would be a significant bottleneck in Deep Learning training to wait for the 
adversarial search at each training batch. Towards solving this issue, Wang et al. [121] 
reduce time consumption up to 60% with their DEAT algorithm. The high-level idea of 
DEAT is to use batch replay to avoid repeatedly computing adversarial batches.
Stacking augmentations
Stacking augmentations is a strategy that has improved vision models but is less straight -
forward to apply to text data. One strategy for this is CoDA [122]. CoDA introduces a 
local consistency loss to make sure stacking augmentations has not overly corrupted the 
sample, and a global loss to preserve local neighborhoods around the original instance.
Fig. 7 Developing attacks in TextAttack [119]