Page 26 of 34 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
Tokenization
The preprocessing pipeline of tokenization presents a formidable challenge for imple -
menting Data Augmentations. It is common to tokenize, or convert word tokens to their 
respect numeric index in a vocabulary-embedding lookup table offline before it reaches 
the Data Loader itself. Applying Data Augmentations on these index lists could require 
significantly more engineering effort. Even for simple synonym replacement, additional 
code will have to be written to construct dictionaries of the synonyms index value for 
swaps. Notably, researchers are exploring tokenizer-free models such as byT5 [123] and 
CANINE [ 124]. These models process byte-level sequences such as ASCII codes [125, 
126] and will require special processing to integrate these augmentations.
Position embeddings
Another more subtle detail of Transformer implementations are the use of position 
embeddings. The original Transformer [92] uses sine and cosine functions to integrate 
positional information into text sequences. Another subtle Data Augmentation could be 
to explore perturbing the parameters that render these encodings.
Augmentation on CPUs or GPUs?
Another important aspect of Data Augmentation is to understand the typical data pre -
processing pipeline from CPUs to GPUs. It has been standard practice to apply Data 
Augmentation to data on the CPU before it is passed to the GPU for model training. 
However, recent practice has looked at applying Data Augmentation directly on the 
GPU. This is done in Keras, for example, by adding Data Augmentation as a layer in the 
model immediately after the input layer. It is also worth noting clever schemes such as 
Data Echoing from Choi et al. [127] that apply additional techniques to avoid idle time 
between CPU data loading and GPU model training.
Offline and online augmentation
Similarly to the discussion of augmenting data on the CPU or on the GPU, another 
important consideration is to make sure the Data Augmentation is happening online, 
compared to offline. This refers to when the original instance is augmented in the data 
pipeline. Offline augmentation refers to augmenting the data and storing the augmented 
examples to the disk. Online augmentation describes augmenting the data as a new 
batch of the original data is loaded for a training step. We note that Online augmenta -
tion is much more powerful than Offline augmentation. Offline augmentation offers the 
slight benefit of faster loading times, but it does not really take advantage of the stochas -
ticity and diversity enabled with most of the described augmentations.
Another important detail of this pipeline is augmentation multiplicity [128]. Augmen -
tation multiplicity refers to the number of augmented samples derived from one original 
example. Fort et  al. [128] and Hoffer et  al. [129] illustrate how increasing augmenta -
tion multiplicity can improve performance. This approach could introduce significant 
memory overhead without an online augmentation pipeline. Additionally Wei et  al. 
[130] point out that examples are often augmented online such that the model never 
actually trains with the original instances. Wei et al. propose separating the model into