Page 18 of 34 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
to a local database such as to avoid a centralized database. Which models should we 
send to local databases? Classifiers or generative models? If we send a generative model, 
we have the potential to cover more of the data distribution and learn more about gen -
eral data manifolds such as the use of language more broadly, however, we risk exposing 
more critical information [76].
Label augmentation
Supervised Learning, describes fitting an input, x, to a label, y. Throughout this survey, 
we have presented strategies for regularizing the x values. In this section, we explore 
research looking to entertain the y class labels. The most successful example of this is 
Knowledge Distillation [77]. Knowledge Distillation describes transforming the tradi -
tional one-hot encoded y labels into a soft distribution by re-labeling xs with the logits of 
another neural network’s prediction. This has been very influential in compression such 
as DistilBERT [78], information retrieval [79], and achieving state-of-the-art classifica -
tion results in Computer Vision [80].
In addition to Knowledge Distillation, several other strategies have been developed to 
augment the label space. Label smoothing uses a heuristic adjustment to the density on 
negative classes and has been highly influential for training classifiers [81] and genera -
tive adversarial networks [82]. Another exciting approach is the use of a meta-controller, 
similar to knowledge distillation, but massively different in that the Teacher is learning 
from the gradients of the Student’s loss to update the label augmentation. Notable exam -
ples exploring this include Meta Pseudo Labels [83] and Teaching with Commentaries 
[84]. This ambitious idea of learning to augment data through outer-inner loop gradients 
have also been explored in the data space, x, with Generative Teaching Networks [12]. 
As of the time of this writing, Generative Teaching Networks have only been applied 
to image data. A similar idea is “Meta Back-Translation” [55], in this work, the authors 
“propose a meta-learning framework where the back-translation model learns to match 
the forward translation model’s gradients on the development data with those on the 
pseudo-parallel data. ”
Thakur et al. [85] present the Augmented SBERT to augment data labels for distilla -
tion. The authors note that the cross-encoder, although much slower and less efficient 
than bi-encoders, tends to reach higher accuracy on pairwise classification tasks such 
as ranking or duplicate question detection. The paper proposes to label data with the 
cross-encoder and fit these augmented labels with the bi-encoder. Also worth mention -
ing is that the cross-encoder heavily outperforms the bi-encoder with less training data. 
Thakur et al. find a significant benefit strategically selecting data to soft label with the 
cross encoder. We have found this idea throughout experiments in Data Augmentation, 
discussing it further in our Discussion section under Curriculum Learning.
Testing generalization with data augmentation
The holy grail of Machine Learning is to achieve out-of-distribution (OOD) generaliza -
tion. This is distinct from in-distribution generalization where the training and test sets 
are sampled from the same data distribution. In order to measure OOD generalization, 
we need to make assumptions about how the distribution will shift. As Arjvosky writes, 
“if the test data is arbitrary or unrelated to the training data, then generalization is