Page 20 of 34 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
inference, the authors group the workers’ revisions into categories such as modifying/
removing actions, substituting entities, adding details to entities, inserting relation -
ships, numerical modifications, using/removing negation, and unrelated hypothesis. 
These examples are constructed for testing generalization to these counterfactual 
examples.
Returning to our description of Generative Data Augmentation, are generative models 
capable of making these edits? If GPT-3 was given an IMDB review with the task prompt 
of “change this movie review from positive to negative” , it could probably manage it. 
We leave it to future work to investigate the generalization shifts induced by human-
designed counterfactuals and generative models. To further motivate this study, the 
authors note that their dataset construction came with a hefty price tag of $10,778.14. 
Inference costs of generative models are unlikely to approach this cost, unless working 
with extremely large models. Highlighting that a similar categorization of the changes 
as Kaushik et al. use [24] could help us understand the linguistic phenomena underlying 
this kind of generalization test.
Generative Data Augmentation provides another lens to study generalization. Nak -
kiran et  al. propose a novel way of studying generalization in “The Deep Bootstrap 
Framework” [93]. The idea is to compare the Online test error to the Bootstrap test 
error. The Online error describes the performance of a model trained on an infinite data 
stream, i.e. without repeating samples. The Bootstrap test error describes the common 
training setup in Deep Learning, repeating batches of the same data. The authors simu -
late the Online learning scenario by fitting a generative model, in this particular case 
a Denoising diffusion probabilistic model [94]. The generative model is used to sample 
6 million examples, compared to the standard 50,000 samples used to train CIFAR-10. 
Garg et  al. [95] additionally propose RATT, a technique that analyzes learning curves 
and generalization when randomly labeled unlabeled data is added to the training batch. 
The augmentations described in this survey may be able to simulate this unlabeled data 
and provide similar insights.
To conclude, when is overfitting problematic? How much of a data distribution are 
modern neural networks capable of covering? Deep Neural Networks have a remarkable 
ability to interpolate within the training data distribution. A potential solution could be 
to leverage Data Augmentation to expand the training distribution such that there are 
no reasonable out-of-distribution shifts in the test sets. Even if all the potential distribu -
tions cannot be compressed into a single neural network, this interface can illuminate 
where the model will fail.
Image versus text augmentation
Our survey on Text Data Augmentation for Deep Learning is intended to follow a simi -
lar format as our prior work on Image Data Augmentation for Deep Learning [6]. We 
note there are many similarities between the Easy Data Augmentations and basic geo -
metric and color space transformations used in Computer Vision. Most similarly, both 
are easy to implement and complement nearly any problem working with text or image 
data respectively. We have described how Easy Data Augmentation can easily interface 
with text classification, pairwise classification, extractive question answering, abstrac -
tive summarization, and chatbots, to name a few. Similarly, geometric and color space