Page 19 of 34
 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
 
obviously futile” [86]. Chollet further describes the relationship between system-centric 
and developer-aware generalization, as well as levels of generalization such as absent, 
local, broad, and extreme [87]. We argue that Data Augmentation is the natural inter -
face to quantify the relationship between test and train data distributions and levels of 
generalization.
A classic tool to test for generalization is to simply report the difference in accuracy 
between the training and test sets. However, as shown in papers such as Deep Double 
Descent [88], the phenomenon of overfitting is generally poorly understood with large-
scale Deep Neural Networks. We believe it is more practical to study overfitting and 
generalization in the data space. For example, the success of adversarial examples shows 
that Deep Neural Networks cannot generalize to distributions added with adversarially 
optimized noise maps. Jia and Liang [89] show that models trained on SQuAD cannot 
generalize when adversarially optimized sentences are added to the context, an example 
of this is shown in Fig.  5. In addition to adversarial attacks, many other datasets show 
intuitive examples of distribution shifts where Deep Neural Networks fail to generalize.
We present Data Augmentation as a black-box test for generalization. Check -
List [90] proposes a foundational idea for these kinds of tests in NLP . CheckList is 
designed to test the linguistic capabilities of models such as robustness to negation, 
vocabulary perturbations, or temporal consistency. We view this as introducing a dis -
tribution shift of linguistic phenomena in the test set. Clark et  al. [91] construct a 
toy example for transformers to see how far they can generalize fact chaining. In this 
test, the training data requires the model to chain together more or less facts than are 
tested in the test set. Again, the distribution shift is controlled with an intuitive inter -
face again to Data Augmentation. Finally, WILDS [92] is a collection of real-world dis -
tribution shifts. These real-world shifts can also be mapped to Data Augmentations.
Kaushiik et al. [24] describes employing human-labelers to construct a set of coun -
terfactual movie reviews and natural language inference examples. The authors 
construct an elegant annotation interface and task Mechanical Turk workers to 
minimally edit examples such as to switch the label. For example, converting “The 
world of Atlantis, hidden beneath the earth’s core, is fantastic” to “The world of Atlan -
tis, hidden beneath the earth’s core is supposed to be fantastic” . For movie reviews, 
the authors group the workers’ revisions into categories such as recasting fact as 
hoped for, suggesting sarcasm, inserting modifiers, inserting phrases, diminishing 
value qualifiers, differing perspectives, and changing ratings. For natural language 
Fig. 5 Fooled by injected text. Image taken from Jia and Liang [89]