Page 12 of 34 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
an embedding graph to enforce consistency between predictions of strong and weakly 
augmented data.
MixUp augmentation
MixUp Augmentation describes forming new examples by meshing existing examples 
together, sometimes blending the labels as well. As an example, MixUp may take half 
of one text sequence and concatenate it with half of another sequence in the dataset to 
form a new example. MixUp may be one of the best interfaces available to connect dis -
tant points and illuminate a path of interpolation.
Most implementations of MixUp vary with respect to the layer in which samples are 
interpolated. Guo et al. [50] test MixUp at word and sentence levels. This difference is 
shown in Fig.  3. Their wordMixup technique combines existing samples by averaging 
embedding vectors at the input layer. The sentMixup approach combines existing sam -
ples by averaging sentence embeddings as each original sequence is passed through sia -
mese encoders. Their experiments find a significant improvement in reducing overfitting 
compared to no regularization or using dropout.
Feature space augmentation
Feature Space Augmentation describes augmenting data in the intermediate representa -
tion space of Deep Neural Networks. Nearly all Deep Neural Networks follow a sequen -
tial processing structure where input data is progressively transformed into distributed 
representations and eventually, task-specific predictions. Feature Space Augmentations 
isolate intermediate features and apply noise to form new data instances. This noise 
could be sampled from standard uniform or gaussian distributions, or they could be 
designed with adversarial controllers.
MODALS [51] presents a few strategies for feature space augmentations. Shown 
in Fig.  4, these strategies describe how to move along class boundaries to form new 
Fig. 3 Left, word-level mixup. Right, sentence-level mixup. The red outline highlights where augmentation 
occurs in the processing pipeline