Page 27 of 34
 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
 
two fine-tuning heads, one which trains solely on the unaugmented data and the other 
trained on high magnitude augmentations. These works highlight the opportunity to 
explore fine-grained details in augmentation pipelines.
Curriculum learning
Curriculum Learning describes having a human or meta-controller structured organi -
zation to the data batches. This includes varying the strength of Data Augmentation 
throughout training. Kucnik and Smith [131] find that it is much more efficient to sub -
sample a portion of the dataset to be augmented, rather than augmenting the entire 
dataset. Wei et  al. [132] demonstrate the efficacy of gradually introducing augmented 
examples to original examples in the training of triplet networks for text classifica -
tion. We note this is very similar to our discussion of controllers for augmentation and 
searching for optimal magnitude and chaining parameters. Thakur et  al. [85] describe 
that “selecting the sentence pairs is non-trivial and crucial for the success of the method” .
Class imbalance
A prevalent issue explored in classification models is Class Imbalance [133]. In addition 
to customized loss functions, sampling techniques are a promising solution to overcome 
biases stemming from Class Imbalance. These solutions generally describe strategies 
such as random oversampling or undersampling [134, 135], in addition to interpolation 
strategies such as synthetic minority oversampling technique (SMOTE) [136]. SMOTE 
is a general framework to oversample minority instances by averaging between them. 
From the list of augmentations we have covered, we note that MixUp is very similar to 
this technique and has been explored for text data. It may be useful to use other tech -
niques for oversampling to avoid potential pitfalls of duplicating instances.
Discussion
Task‑specific augmentation for NLP
NLP encompasses many different task formulations. This ranges from text classification 
to paraphrase identification, question answering, and abstractive summarization, to name 
a few. The off-the-shelf Data Augmentation prescribed in the previous section will need 
slight adaptations for each of these tasks. For example, when augmenting the context in a 
question answering dataset, it is important to be mindful of removing the answer. The larg -
est difference we have found between tasks from the perspective of Data Augmentation 
is that they vary massively with respect to input length. Short sequences will have to be 
more mindful of how augmentations change the original example. Longer sequences have 
more design decisions such as how to sample nested sentences for back-translation and 
so on. We refer interested readers to Feng et al. [16] who enumerate how Data Augmenta -
tion applies to summarization, question answering, sequence tagging, parsing, grammati -
cal error correction, neural machine translation, data-to-text natural language generation 
(NLG), open-ended and conditional generation, dialogue, and multimodal tasks.