Page 6 of 34 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
into the understanding of Data Augmentation and their particular application to lan -
guage processing.
Strengthening decision boundaries
Data Augmentation is commonly applied to classification problems where class bounda -
ries are learned from label assignments. Augmented examples are typically only slightly 
different from existing samples. Training on these examples results in added space 
between the original example and its respective class boundary. Well defined class 
boundaries result in more robust classifiers and uncertainty estimates. For example, 
these boundaries are often reported with lower dimensional visualizations derived from 
t-SNE [ 20] or UMAP [21].
A key motif of Data Augmentation is to perturb data so that the model is more familiar 
with the local space around these examples. Expanding the radius from each example in 
the dataset will overall help the model get a better sense of the decision boundary and 
result in smother interpolation paths. This is in reference to small changes to the origi -
nal data points. In NLP this could be deleting or adding words, synonym swaps, or well 
controlled paraphrases. The model becomes more robust to the local space and decision 
boundary based on available labels simply by increased exposure.
Brute force training
Deep Neural Networks are highly parametric models with very high variance that can 
easily model their training data. Fitting the training data is surprisingly robust to inter -
polation, or moving within the data points provided. What Deep Learning struggles 
with, as we will unpack in Generalization Testing with Data Augmentation, is extrapo -
lating outside of data points provided during training. A potential solution to this is to 
brute force the data space with the training data.
The upper bound solution to many problems in Computer Science is to simply enu -
merate all candidate solutions. Brute force solutions rely on computing speed to over -
power the complexity of a given problem. In Deep Learning, this entails training on an 
exhaustive set of natural language sequences such that all potential distributions the 
test set could be sampled from are covered in the training data. This way, even the most 
extreme edge cases will have been covered in the training set. The design of brute force 
training requires exhaustive coverage of the natural language manifold. A key question 
is whether this idea is reasonable or not? It may be better to identify key regions that are 
missing, although that it is challenging to probe for and define.
Causality and counterfactual examples
Vital to achieving the goals of Deep Learning, is to learn causal representations [22], as 
opposed to solely representing correlations. The field of Causal Inference demonstrates 
how to use interventions to establish causality. Reinforcement Learning is the most 
similar branch of Deep Learning research in which an agent deliberately samples inter -
ventions to learn about its environment. In this survey, we consider how the results of 
interventions can be integrated into observational language data. This is also similar to 
the subset of Reinforcement Learning known as the offline setting [23].