Page 15 of 34
 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
 
are certainly interesting for artistic applications, but more importantly is their use for 
representation learning and Data Augmentation.
We note a core distinction in the use of generative models for Data Augmentation. A 
popular use is to take a pre-trained language model of the shelf and optionally fine-tune 
it further with the language modeling task. This is the standard operating procedure of 
Transfer Learning. However, the fine-tuning is usually done with the Supervised Learn -
ing task, rather than additional language modeling. The pre-trained language models 
have learned many interesting properties of language because they are trained on mas -
sive datasets. An interesting example that is publicly available is The Pile [58]. The Pile is 
800GB of text data spanning Wikipedia, comment forums, entire books, and many more 
examples of data like this. Even though these models and datasets are very impressive, 
additional benefits will likely be achieved by domain-tuning with additional language 
modeling on the limited dataset.
Language modeling is a very useful pre-training stage and we often have more data 
for language modeling than a downstream task like question-answering. Whereas we 
may only have 100 question-answer pairs, the question, answer, and surrounding context 
could easily contain 300 words each, accounting for a total of 3,000 words for construct -
ing language modeling examples. A dataset size of 3,000 compared to 100 can make a 
large difference in success with Deep Learning and is the prime reason for our interest 
in Data Augmentation to begin with. Gururangan et al. [59] present an argument for this 
use of language models since downstream performance is dramatically improved when 
pre-training on a relevant dataset. This distinction of “relevant dataset” is in contrasting 
reference to what is used to train models like GPT-3 [14].
One of the most popular strategies for training a language model for Generative Data 
Augmentation is Conditional BERT (C-BERT) [60]. C-BERT augments data by replacing 
masked out tokens of the original instance. The key novelty is that it takes an embed -
ding of the class label as input, such as to preserve the semantic label when replacing 
masked out tokens. This targets the label-preserving property of Data Augmentation. 
The C-BERT training strategy can be used when fine-tuning a model pre-trained on 
another dataset or starting from a random initialization.
An emerging strategy to adapt pre-trained generative models to downstream tasks 
is to re-purpose the interface of masking out tokens. This is known as prompting. The 
output of language models can be guided with text templates for the sake of generating 
or labeling new data. Testing the efficacy of prompting with respect to the objective of 
learning from limited data, Scao and Rush [61] show that prompting is often worth 100s 
of data points on SuperGLUE classification tasks [32]. This is in direct comparison with 
the more heavily studied paradigm of Transfer Learning, head-based fine-tuning. We 
will present a few variants on implementing prompts, this includes in-context learning, 
pattern-exploiting training, and prompt tuning.
The first implementation of prompting we consider is in-context learning. In-context 
learning became well known when demonstrated with GPT-3. The idea is to prepend 
each input with a fixed task description and a collection of examples of the task. This 
does not require any further gradient updates of the model. Brown et al. [14] show that 
scale is crucial to making this work reporting significant performance drops from 175B 
parameters to 13B and less. This technique has likely not yet hit its ceiling, especially