Page 4 of 34 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
previewed that self-supervised and transfer learning are also emerging solutions to 
learning with limited labeled data. We discuss the use of Data Augmentation in self-
supervised learning and then recent works with transfer and multi-task learning. 
Finally, we discuss AI-GAs, short for AI-generating Algorithms [10]. This is a very 
interesting idea encompassing papers such as POET [11], Generative Teaching Net -
works [12], and the Synthetic Petri Dish [13] which describe algorithms that learn 
the environment to learn from. We present how this differs from augmentation con -
trollers or curriculum learning, the idea of skill acquisition from artificial data, and 
opportunities to test these ideas in NLP .
Data Augmentation for NLP prevents overfitting, provides the easiest way to inject 
prior knowledge into a Deep Learning system, and offers a view into the generaliza -
tion ability of these models. Our survey is organized as follows:
• We begin with the key Motifs Of Data Augmentation that augmentations strive to 
achieve.
• We provide a list of Text Data Augmentations. This list can be summarized into 
symbolic augmentations, using rules and graph-structured decomposition to form 
new examples, and neural augmentations, that use auxiliary neural networks to 
sample new data.
• Following our list of available augmentations, we dive deeper into Testing Gener -
alization with Data Augmentation.
• We continue with a comparison of Image versus Text Augmentation.
• Returning to Text Data Augmentation, we describe Practical Considerations for 
Implementation.
• Finally, we present interesting ideas and research questions in our Discussion sec -
tion.
• Our Conclusion briefly summarizes the motivation and findings of our survey.
Background
Data Augmentation has been a heavily studied area of Machine Learning. The 
advancement of the prior knowledge encoded in augmentations is one of the key dis -
tinctions between previous works and now. As we will discuss in depth later in the 
survey, the success of Data Augmentation in Computer Vision has been fueled by the 
ease of designing label-preserving transformations. For example, a cat image is still a 
cat after rotating it, translating it on the x or y axis, increasing the intensity of the red 
channel, and so on. It is easy to brainstorm these semantically-preserving augmenta -
tions for images, whereas it is much harder to do this in the text domain.
We believe our survey on text data augmentation is well-timed with respect to ques -
tions such as why now? What has changed recently? Recent advances in generative 
modeling such as StyleGAN for images, GPT-3 for text [14], and DALL-E unifying 
both text and images [15], have been astounding. We summarize many exciting works 
on the use of prompting for adapting language models for downstream tasks. As dis -
cussed in further detail later on, we believe these advances in generative modeling