Page 13 of 34
 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
 
examples in the feature space. Hard example interpolation (a) forms a new example by 
moving it in the direction of existing embeddings that lie on the decision boundary for 
classification. Hard example extrapolation (b) describes moving existing examples along 
the same angle they currently lie from the mean vector of the class boundary. Gauss -
ian noise (c) entails adding Gaussian noise in the feature space. Difference transform 
(d) moves an existing sample in the directional distance calculated from two separate 
points in the same class. As described as one of the general Motifs Of Data Augmenta -
tion, MODALS aims to strengthen decision boundaries. Research in Supervised Con -
trastive Learning [52], replacing the commonly used KL-divergence of logits and class 
labels with contrastive losses such as NCE with positives and negatives formed based on 
class labels, has been shown to improve these boundaries. It could be useful to explore 
how this benefits the MODALS algorithm.
We also consider Differentiable Data Augmentation [53] techniques to fall under the 
umbrella of Feature Space Augmentation. Data Augmentation is a function f(x) that pro -
duces augmented examples x’ . Similar to any other layers in the network, we can treat 
the beginning of the network as an augmentation module and backpropagate gradients 
through it. We can also separate the augmentation function and add it to the inputs such 
that the transformation is not too dramatic, akin to adding an optimized noise map to 
the input. Minderer et  al. [54] use this technique to facilitate self-supervised pretext 
tasks.
Neural augmentation
The following augmentations rely on auxiliary neural networks to generate new train -
ing data. This entails using a model trained on supervised Neural Machine Translation 
datasets to translate from one language to another and back to sample new instances, 
or a model trained on generative language modeling to replace masked out tokens or 
sentences to produce new data. We additionally discuss the use of neural style transfer in 
NLP to translate from one writing style to another or one semantic characteristic such as 
formal to casual writing.
Back‑translation augmentation
Back-translation describes translating text from one language to another and then back 
from the translation to the original language. An example could be taking 1,000 IMDB 
movie reviews in English and translating them to French and back, Chinese and back, or 
Arabian and back. There has been an enormous interest in machine translation. This has 
Fig. 4 Directions for feature space augmentation explored in MODALS