Page 23 of 34
 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
 
representations before and after augmentation. Xie et al. [105] deploy consistency reg -
ularization as shown in Fig.  6. This technique surpasses the previous state-of-the-arts 
trained solely with supervised learning using significantly less data. These improvements 
continue even in the extreme case of only 20 labeled examples. As an example of the per -
formance gain, the fine-tuned BERT model achieves a 6.5% error rate on IMDB review 
classification, which is reduced to 4.2% with UDA. The multi-task loss formulation is 
also fairly common in consistency regularization implementations.
Contrastive learning
Contrastive learning differs from consistency regularization by utilizing negative sam -
ples to normalize the loss function. This is a critical distinction because the negative 
samples can provide a significant learning signal. We believe that the development of 
Text Data Augmentation can benefit from adapting successful examples in Computer 
Vision. The use of Data Augmentation to power contrastive self-supervised learning 
has been one of the most interesting stories in Computer Vision. This involves frame -
works such as SimCLR [106], MoCo [107], SwAV [108], and BYOL [109], to name a 
few. This training strategy should be well suited for information retrieval in NLP .
Krishna et al. [110] propose contrastive REALM (c-REALM). The contrastive loss is used 
to align the embedding of the question and supervised answer, and contrast the question 
with other supervised answers from the mini-batch. However, this technique of contras -
tive learning is more akin to supervised contrastive learning [52], than frameworks such as 
SimCLR. In SimCLR, Data Augmentation is used to form the positive pairs. This strategy 
has not been heavily explored in information retrieval, likely due to the lack of augmenta -
tions. Hopefully, the list we have provided will help those interested pursue this idea.
Gunel et al. [111] demonstrate significant improvements on GLUE benchmark tasks by 
training with a supervised contrastive loss in addition to cross-entropy loss on one-hot 
encoded label vectors. The gain is especially pronounced when learning from 20 labeled 
examples, while they do not report much of a difference at 1,000 labeled examples. In 
addition to quantitative metrics, the authors highlight that the embeddings of classes are 
much more spread out through the lens of a t-SNE visualization.
Fig. 6 Unsupervised data augmentation schema. Image taken from Xie et al. [105]