Page 2 of 34 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
which a model outputs a novel summary from a collection of input documents. Cachola 
et al. [3] were able to collect a dataset of 5.4K Too Long; Didn’t Read (TLDR) summaries 
of 3.2K machine learning papers. This required employing 28 undergraduate students to 
refine data bootstrapped from the OpenReview platform. These anecdotes are provided 
to highlight the difficulty of curating annotated big data for knowledge-intensive NLP 
tasks with millions of examples.
The Deep Learning research community is currently exploring many solutions to the 
problem of learning without labeled big data. In addition to Data Augmentation, self-
supervised learning and transfer learning have performed very well. Few and zero-shot 
learning are categories of research gaining interest as well. In this survey, we explore 
getting more performance out of the supervised data available with Data Augmentation. 
Our survey additionally explores how Data Augmentation is driving key advances in 
learning strategies outside of supervised learning. This includes self-supervised learning 
from unlabeled datasets, and transfer learning from other domains, whether that data is 
labeled or unlabeled.
Data Augmentation describes a set of algorithms that construct synthetic data from an 
available dataset. This synthetic data typically contains small changes in the data that the 
model’s predictions should be invariant to. Synthetic data can also represent combina -
tions between distant examples that would be very difficult to infer otherwise. Data Aug -
mentation is one of the most useful interfaces to influence the training of Deep Neural 
Networks. This is largely due to the interpretable nature of the transformations and the 
window to observe how the model is failing.
Preventing overfitting is the most common use case of Data Augmentation. Without 
augmentation, or regularization more generally, Deep Neural Networks are prone to 
learning spurious correlations and memorizing high-frequency patterns that are difficult 
for humans to detect. In NLP , this could describe high frequency numeric patterns in 
token embeddings, or memorizations of particular forms of language that do not gen -
eralize. Data Augmentation can aid in these types of overfitting by shuffling the particu -
lar forms of language. To overcome the noisy data, the model must resort to learning 
abstractions of information which are more likely to generalize.
Data Augmentation is a regularization strategy. Other regularization techniques have 
been developed such as dropout [4] or weight penalties [5]. These techniques apply 
functional regularization by either adding noise to intermediate activations of the net -
work or adding constraints to the functional form. These techniques have found suc -
cesses, but they lack the power to express the esoteric concept of semantic invariance. 
Data Augmentation enables an intuitive interface for demonstrating label-preserving 
transformations.
Our survey presents several strategies for applying Data Augmentation to text data. 
We cluster these augmentations into symbolic or neural methods. Symbolic methods 
use rules or discrete data structures to form synthetic examples. This includes Rule-
Based Augmentations, Graph-Structured Augmentations, Feature-Space Augmenta -
tion, and MixUp. Neural augmentations use a deep neural network trained on a different 
task to augment data. Neural augmentations surveyed include Back-Translation, Gen -
erative Data Augmentation, and Style Augmentation. In addition to symbolic vs. neural-
based augmentations, we highlight other distinctions between augmentations such as