Page 17 of 34
 Shorten et al. J Big Data           (2021) 8:101 
 
applications are interested in compressing these models for the sake of efficiency. Under 
the scope of Label Augmentation, we will present the use of knowledge distillation. For 
now, we consider compression by generating data to train a smaller model with. This 
approach is most similar to pattern-exploiting training, except that rather than use 
the pre-trained language model to label data, we will instead use it to generate entire 
examples.
Drawing inspiration from the success of MixUp, which was presented in further detail 
in MixUp Augmentation, Yoo et al. developed GPT3Mix [69]. The input to GPT3Mix 
begins with a Task Specification that defines the task such as, “Text Type T = movie 
review, Label Type L = sentiment” . Akin to MixUp, the next inputs are examples of 
the task formulated as “text type: example text k (label type: example label k)” , such as 
“Example 1: The cat is running my mat. (negative)” . The final piece of the input is the 
template to generate new examples. Further, the generated example is “soft-labeled” by 
the generating probabilities of each token in the process of generating the new exam -
ple. GPT3Mix achieves massive performance improvements over no augmentation, Easy 
Data Augmentation, and BackTranslation when subsetting available data to extreme lev -
els such as 0.1% and 0.3%.
Schick and Shutze [26] also explore the strategy of generating data from language 
models, presenting Datsets from Instructions (DINO). DINO uses a task description and 
one example from the dataset to generate pairwise classification datasets. Interestingly, 
they contrast task descriptions which entail the resulting label to decode language model 
generation. For example, the task description could begin with “Write two sentences 
that” and continue with either “mean the same thing” or “are on completely different 
topics” . The generation accounts for the token another label description would gener -
ate. Evaluated on the STS text similarity dataset, representations learned from DINO 
show improvements over state-of-the-art sentence embedding techniques trained with 
supervised learning, such as Universal Sentence Encoders [70] and Siamese BERT and 
RoBERTa models [71].
While built on the same underlying concept, discrete versus continuous prompt 
search diverge heavily from one another. Discrete prompt search has the benefit of inter -
pretability. For example, comparing different task descriptions and examples provided 
by a human annotator offers insights into what the model has learned. However, prompt 
optimization in the continuous embedding space fully automates the search. Continuous 
prompt optimization is likely more susceptible to overfitting due to the freedom of the 
optimization space.
Another somewhat similar theme to prompting in NLP has been to augment knowl -
edge-enhanced text generation with retrieval. Popular models include Retrieval-Aug -
mented Generation (RAG) [72], and Retrieval-Augmented Language Model Pre-training 
(REALM) [73]. Shuster et  al. [74] show how retrieving information to prepend to the 
input reduces the problem of hallucination in text generation. Once this retrieved infor -
mation is embedded into the continuous representation space of language models, it is a 
similar optimization problem as prompt tuning.
Another interesting idea is the intersection of Data Privacy and Generative Data Aug -
mentation. Can we store data in the parameters of models instead of centralized data -
bases? The idea of Federated Learning [75] is to send copies of the global model weights