integer linear problem, where cutting planes are introduced for breaking cycles
until the optimal solution is found. Identifying good cutting planes is the key
to the success of this approach. Experimentally it has been shown to handle
datasets with up to 200 variables.
Malone et al. (2018) propose a supervised solver selection. They evaluate a
collection of features computed on the input data in order to predict the best
state-of-the-art solver for the particular instance. Their work is a promising
initial step also in the understanding of each solver weaknesses and strengths.
An interesting idea was introduced by Teyssier and Koller (2005) (which
we call ordering-based search or OBS ), where a simple yet eective heuristic
approach is proposed. It is based on a Monte Carlo search over the space of
variable orderings, trying to select for each ordering the best network consistent
with it. As an approximate method it is competitive when the problem is too
complex for the exact approaches, potentially scaling to datasets with thousands
of variables.
OBS employs a na ve operator, called swap , for escaping local maxima in the
local greedy search. A more powerful operator, called insertion , was proposed
by Alonso-Barba et al. (2011). With this operator the authors were able to
signicantly increase the score of the learned structures.
Recently, Lee and van Beek (2017) suggest enhancing the performance of the
greedy local search by applying a meta-heuristic. They propose two approaches:
(a) an iterated local search coupled with a perturbation factor, and (b) a genetic
algorithm in which each candidate solution is an individual, subject to a series
of crossover and mutation stages.
Scanagatta et al. (2017) propose a novel operator for improving the score of
the structure by applying local changes to its underlying ordering. They denote
it as the window operator for local search, already known as block insertion
(Ben-Daya and Al-Fawzan; 1998) in the local search literature. They report
that the resulting algorithm consistently yields higher-scoring networks than
state-of-the-art competitors, and is able to learn Bayesian networks from dataset
containing thousands of variables.
The idea to manipulate the underlying ordering was also explored by Scana-
gatta, Corani, de Campos and Zaalon (2018). The authors investigate which
parent sets are especially important for the score of a DAG, with the aim of
improving the sampling strategy and thus to cover better regions of the space
of orders. Their approach is to sample the variables of the ordering in a fashion
that is proportional to their entropy. This leads to an increase of performance,
that can be applied to any algorithm based on local search over the space of
orderings.
Local search has also been carried out over the space of equivalence classes
of network structures (Alonso-Barba et al.; 2013; Chickering; 1995) resulting in
the so-called GES algorithm. It has recently been improved by introducing new
local search heuristics, scaling up to networks of 100 nodes (Alonso et al.; 2018).
Zheng et al. (2018) have recently proposed a novel and interesting approach
to structure learning. They have been able to formulate the learning task as
a continuous optimization problem that can be solved by standard numerical
algorithms.
7