Bounded treewidth structure optimization Being a global property of
the graph, bounding the treewidth considerably increases the diculty of the
learning process. The treewidth of a DAG is measured as the treewidth of its
moral graph , that is the undirected graph obtained by adding an undirected
edge between all the common parents of a node, and discarding the direction of
all the other arcs.
The rst approaches were based on heuristic edge additions. An approximate
method has been proposed by Elidan and Gould (2008), polynomial in both the
number of variables and the treewidth bound. It is able to provide an upper-
bound on the treewidth of the learned structure, thus able to check at each arc
addition if the bound is violated. The experiments show that their approach
is able to learn better models than competing heuristic methods, on data sets
with up to 200 variables.
An exact method has been proposed by Korhonen and Parviainen (2013).
It is a dynamic programming algorithm able to nd the optimal graph maxi-
mizing a given score function in time O(3nnk+O(1)), wherekis the treewidth
bound. Experiments show its applicability to networks with up to 15 nodes and
treewidth bound of 3. Its complexity growth may render it unfeasible for larger
domains.
Parviainen et al. (2014) adopted an integer programming approach. Cutting
planes are formulated in order to enforce the treewidth bound. Their experi-
ments showed an improvement over the competitors on data sets with up to 60
nodes.
Nie et al. (2014) proposed an approximation technique that consists of sam-
plingk-trees (maximal graphs of treewidth k), and subsequently selecting the
best structure which is a subgraph of that k-tree. Their experiments showed
promising results for data sets with up to 100 variables. Unfortunately the
sampling space for k-trees is huge and can barely be eectively explored by the
sampling technique in a reasonable amount of time. As the number of variables
grows each sampled k-tree has a low probability of providing a good t for the
given domain, and the time required to nd good solution increases.
Nie et al. (2015) improved on the above idea by searching for promising
k-trees using an A* guided exploration. The goodness of the k-tree is ap-
proximated by using a heuristic evaluation, called Informative Score . When a
promisingk-tree has been selected, the algorithm searches for the optimal DAG
that is subgraph of the k-tree. The idea has been shown to improve on competi-
tors, but does not solve completely the issue about the diculties of sampling
in the space of k-trees.
Scanagatta et al. (2016) exploit the fact that any k-tree can be constructed
by an iterative procedure that adds one variable at a time. They then propose
an iterative procedure that, given an order on the variables, builds a DAG G
adding one variable at a time. The moral graph of Gis thus ensured to be
subgraph of a k-tree. The algorithm is designed as to maximize the score of the
resulting DAG, while guaranteeing the bound on the treewidth. They report
that their approach scales eectively with both the number of variables and
the treewidth, outperforming the competitors, and is able to learn bounded
treewidth Bayesian networks from dataset containing thousands of variables.
8