Java based, oers an intuitive ed eective Graphical User Interface and it is
available on Windows, Linux and macOS. Structural learning is performed by
the score-based approach which allows to choose whether to optimize BIC or
AIC, and by the constraint-based approach, where the PC (Spirtes et al.; 2000)
and Necessary Path Condition (Steck and Tresp; 1996) learning algorithms are
made available.
4.18 LibB
LibB ( http://www.cs.huji.ac.il/labs/compbio/LibB/programs.html ) has
been developed by Nir Friedman and Gal Elidan, and it consiists of a set of
executables freely available for academic use only. It made availabel for the
following software platforms: Windows 2000, NT, XP, and Linux. The program
LearnBayes learns the stucture of a Bayesian network by the score-based ap-
proach. In particular, the available scores are the following: BIC, likelihood,
BDe and BDe with equivalent sample size, while the following search options
are available: greedy hill climbing, greedy hill climbing with restarts, Tabu
search, best-rst search, beam search, MCMC search, simulated annealing, and
stochastic rst-ascent search. It is worthwhile to mention that structure learn-
ing is made possible also in the case of missing data, in such a case Structural
Expectation Maximization is used.
4.19 Libpgm
Libpgm ( https://pythonhosted.org/libpgm/ ) is an endeavor to make Bayesian
probability graphs easy to use. It was developed at CyberPoint Labs during the
Summer of 2012 by Charles Cabot working under the direction of James Ulrich
and Mark Raugas. It is provided free of use in accordance with the New BSD
License. Structure learning can be performed according to both the score-based
and the constraint-based approaches.
4.20 OpenMarkov
OpenMarkov ( http://www.openmarkov.org/index.php?lang=en ) has been de-
veloped in Java by the Research Centre for Intelligent Decision-Support Systems
of the UNED in Madrid. The latest stable release is 0.2.0. Structure learning
is performed according to the score-based approach by the hill climbing search
procedure applied to the K2 metric, and according to the constraint-based ap-
proach applying the PC (Spirtes et al.; 2000) algorithm. OpenMarkov makes
available a rudimentary treatment of dataset with missing values, i.e. record
removal of missing replacement with the string missing . Furthermore, Open-
Markov can be used as an API.
4.21 PNL and PyPNL
The Open Source Probabilistic Networks Library (PNL) is a tool, written in
C++, for working with graphical models made available under the Intel Open
Source License. It supports directed and undirected models, discrete and con-
tinuous variables, and various inference and learning algorithms. The last
update of PNL ( https://sourceforge.net/projects/openpnl/ ) dates back
17