Bayesian networks are a structured knowledge representation where domain
variables are regarded as nodes in a graph whose structure encodes the depen-
dencies between them. A crucial aspect is learning the dependency graph of
a Bayesian network from data. This task, which we call structure learning , is
NP-hard (Chickering et al.; 2014), and is the subject of intense, cutting-edge
research.
In short, it can be thought of as choosing one graph over the many candi-
dates, grounding our reasoning over a collection of samples of the distribution
generating the data. The number of possible graphs dramatically increases with
the number of variables. Hence, searching in this space, and selecting a graph
over the others, becomes quickly burdensome. In this survey we present a review
of the many sophisticated algorithms that have been proposed in the literature.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 formally intro-
duces Bayesian networks and gives an illustrative example. Section 3 presents a
review of the most relevant literature about structure learning. Section 4 reviews
the main software tools implementing Bayesian networks structure learning and
Section 5 gives some hints about what method to use depending on the target
application. The paper ends with some concluding remarks in Section 6.
2 Bayesian networks
We start with the earthquake example given by Pearl (1988). It is a Bayesian
network of 5 variables, modeling the following domain: Mr. K is at work when he
receives a call from a neighbor telling him that his house alarm went o. When
he is about to call the police he remembers reading in the instruction manual
that the alarm is sensitive to earthquakes and can be accidentally triggered
by one. He reckons that if an earthquake occurred, it would be on the news.
So he turns on the radio and nds out that an earthquake has just occurred.
Should Mr. K call the police? A variable is assigned to each event: the alarm
ringing (variable A), a burglar intrusion (variable B), the earthquake occurrence
(variable E), the radio announcement (variable R), and the neighbor's call
(variable C). To each variable is then assigned a conditional probability table
(CPT). These tables encode the distribution of the variable given the values
of its parents. Each variable is binary, with the value tmeaning the event has
happened, and the value fmeaning it has not. The Bayesian network is depicted
in Figure 1.
2.1 Denition
We can now properly dene a Bayesian network as a pair ( G;O) that encodes
a joint probability distribution over a nite set X=fX1;:::;X ngof categorical
variables. It is composed of: (i) a directed acyclic graph (DAG) G=fV;Eg
whose nodesVcorrespond to the variables in Xand arcsErepresent direct de-
pendencies between variables, and (ii) a collection of conditional mass functions
Othat dene the behavior of each variable Xigiven its parents  iin the graph.
In the earthquake example, we have X=fA;B;C;R;Eg;Gis the graph
showed in Figure 1, and Ois the set of conditional probability tables showed in
the same gure.
2