A B C E R
y n n y y
n n n n y
y y y n n
...
Figure 2: Example data Dsampled from the modeled network.
radio announcement of an earthquake. In a formula:
P(B=tjR=t;C=t) =?: (2)
Several researchers have studied this application, which has been proven to
be NP-Hard (Cooper; 1990). An important result is that this complexity can be
managed by bounding the treewidth, a measure of the tree-likeness of the graph.
The treewidth is dened as the size of the largest clique in a chordal completion of
the graph. Modern exact inference algorithms have worst-case time complexity
exponential in the treewidth of the underlying graph (Kwisthout et al.; 2010).
3 Structure learning
Suppose now that we are unaware of the original structure of the earthquake
model. We can only observe its behavior, sampling data from the distribution
associated to the model as in Figure 2. Grounding our reasoning on these
observations, we can then make an assessment of their originating structure.
This is the fundamental idea of structure learning.
The problem of learning the structure of a Bayesian network from a complete
data set ofddatapointsD=fD1;:::;D dgcorresponds to determining the set of
directed arcsEfor the DAGG= (X;E), using some criterion that species the
quality of a structure. This can also be stated as choosing for each variable Xi
its parent set  i.
The usual assumption is for the data to be complete. The case of missing
data currently represents a bottleneck for structure learning, as few methods
can properly manage it. We discuss them in Section 3.3.
The task is computationally non-trivial due to the enormous size of the
space of possible graphs G, growing super-exponentially in the number of nodes
n(Robinson; 1973). In Figure 3 we show only a few examples. How can we
choose one over the others?
3.1 Score-based structure learning
The most used approach to structure learning is called score-based . Loosely
speaking, the task is to nd the best DAG according to some score function
that measures its tness to the data (Heckerman et al.; 1995). The goal is now
to solve:
argmax
G2Gscore (G;D): (3)
4