rules have been proposed to help with this matter (de Campos and Ji; 2011), but
they do not considerably reduce the dimension of this space. An exception is
the greedy search of the K2 algorithm (Cooper and Herskovits; 1992), which has
however been superseded in terms of accuracy by the more modern approaches
mentioned above.
A high in-degree implies a larger search space and allows achieving a higher
score; however it also requires higher computational time. When choosing the
in-degree the user makes a trade-o between these two objectives. When the
number of variables is large, the in-degree is generally set to a small value,
in order to allow the optimization to be feasible. The problem of parent set
identication is unlikely to admit a polynomial-time algorithm with a quality
guarantee (Koivisto; 2016). This motivates the development of eective search
heuristics.
Scanagatta et al. (2015) devise a novel approach for parent set identication
that eliminates the limitation posed by the structure constraint k. The idea is
to guide the exploration towards the most promising parent sets on the basis of
an approximated score function, denoted as BIC, that is computed in constant
time. The approach is based on the BIC score, and is currently the only score
function supported. The authors report that BICscales up to thousands of
nodes without constraints on the maximum in-degree.
General structure optimization Several exact algorithms for structure op-
timization have been proposed. The rst approaches were based on the obser-
vation that for any xed ordering of the nvariables, the decomposability of the
score enables ecient optimization over all DAGs compatible with the ordering
(Cooper and Herskovits; 1992).
Koivisto and Sood (2004) and Silander and Myllymaki (2006) explored dy-
namic programming approaches. The main idea is to solve small subproblems
rst and use the results to nd solutions to larger problems until the global
learning problem is solved. They spend memory and time proportional to n2n.
Such complexity limits the realistic application of these approaches only to small
domains.
Malone (2012), Yuan and Malone (2012) and Yuan et al. (2011) propose
a new approach that formulates the learning goal as a shortest path problem.
With the guidance of a consistent heuristic, the algorithm is able to focus on
searching for the most promising parts of a solution space. The main benet
consists in pruning part of the graph space. Empirically the approach was shown
to outperform the competitors on data sets with up to 26 variables.
An approach based on branch and bound was proposed by de Campos et al.
(2009) and de Campos and Ji (2011). It rst nds optimal parent sets for the
individual variables by ignoring the acyclicity constraint and then detects and
breaks all the cycles to nd a valid Bayesian network. It continues to improve
on it either by nding a better solution or by reducing the upper bound, until
the optimal solution is found. This anytime behavior is the main appeal of the
approach, as it allows the user to trade-o between the score of the learned
graph and required computational time. It is able to handle datasets with up
to 100 variables.
Yet the current state-of-the-art approach is based on integer linear program-
ming (Cussens; 2011; Jaakkola et al.; 2010). The learning is posed as a relaxed
6