3.2 Constraint-based structure learning
There are also methods based on statistical tests, called constraint-based struc-
ture learning. These algorithms use a series of conditional hypothesis tests to
learn independences among the variables in the model (Pearl; 2003; Pearl and
Verma; 1995). Following these constraints the DAG is in turn built. Their
performance is critically determined by the adopted hypothesis test.
The state-of-the-art approach is the PC algorithm (named after its authors,
Peter and Clark) introduced by Spirtes et al. (2000). It starts from a complete,
undirected graph and deletes edges recursively based on conditional indepen-
dence decisions. This yields an undirected graph that can then be partially
directed and further extended to represent the underlying DAG. The PC algo-
rithm runs in the worst case in exponential time (as a function of the number
of nodes), but if the true underlying DAG is sparse, which is often a reason-
able assumption, this reduces to a polynomial runtime. Kalisch and B uhlmann
(2007) showed the applicability of the PC algorithm even in high-dimensional
settings, up to 1000 nodes.
The standard PC algorithm relies on an ordering over the variables, and
may thus suer from unstable results. Colombo and Maathuis (2014) proposed
a modication of the algorithm that signicantly increases the robustness of the
method, rendering it order-independent.
The PC algorithm by itself does not require a specic conditional indepen-
dence test. Most applications adopt Chi-square test or mutual information tests.
An interesting approach, based on Bayesian score tests, has been proposed by
Abell an et al. (2006).
Recent innovations introduced parallel computing techniques for local causal
discovery methods in constraint based approaches (Scutari; 2014). Remarkably,
the solution proposed by Madsen et al. (2017), which is based on allocating
the conditional independence tests in the available computing units following
a balanced incomplete block design, has been tested on datasets of over 2000
variables and 500k records.
3.3 Incomplete data
The standard approach to structure learning requires the data to be complete.
At the moment very few methods can handle the case of incomplete data. The
most commonly used is the structural Expectation-Maximization (SEM) (Fried-
man; 1998). This approach performs a two-step iterative procedure: (i) E-step :
complete the data with expected values or modes from the currently induced
Bayesian network (in other word, compute the expected sucient statistics);
(ii)M-step : perform structure learning as if the data were complete. This pro-
cedure continues until convergence. Unfortunately, the complexity cost of this
computation can be very high and restrict its application only to small domains.
A competing approach has been proposed by Adel and de Campos (2017).
Given the task of learning a Bayesian network from missing data, it translates
it into the problem of structure learning from complete data. This is done by
augmenting the network with variables that take into account all the possible
completions of the data. The approach showed convincing potential in datasets
with up to 23 variables, but only on small datasets, since it has an exponential
cost in the size of the missing data.
9