A survey on Bayesian network structure learning
from data
Mauro Scanagatta, Antonio Salmer ony, Fabio Stellaz
May 14, 2019
Abstract
A necessary step in the development of articial intelligence is to enable
a machine to represent how the world works, building an internal structure
from data. This structure should hold a good trade-o between expressive
power and querying eciency. Bayesian networks have proven to be an
eective and versatile tool for the task at hand. They have been applied
to modeling knowledge in a variety of elds, ranging from bioinformatics
to law, from image processing to economic risk analysis. A crucial aspect
is learning the dependency graph of a Bayesian network from data. This
task, called structure learning , is NP-hard and is the subject of intense,
cutting-edge research. In short, it can be thought of as choosing one graph
over the many candidates, grounding our reasoning over a collection of
samples of the distribution generating the data. The number of possible
graphs increases very quickly at the increase of the number of variables.
Searching in this space, and selecting a graph over the others, becomes
quickly burdensome. In this survey we review the most relevant structure
learning algorithms that have been proposed in the literature. We classify
them according to the approach they follow for solving the problem and we
also show alternatives for handling missing data and continuous variable.
An extensive review of existing software tools is also given.
1 Introduction
A key issue in articial intelligence is the development of models able to provide
a structured representation of the domain knowledge, and taking into account
that most likely those models will be learnt from data. These models should hold
a good trade-o between expressive power and querying eciency. Bayesian
networks (Pearl; 1988) have proven to be an eective and versatile tool for the
task at hand. They have been applied to modeling knowledge in a variety of
elds, ranging from bioinformatics to law, from image processing to economic
risk analysis (Pourret et al.; 2008).
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy - mscanagatta@fbk.eu
yDepartment of Mathematics and Center for the Development and Transfer of Mathemat-
ical Research to Industry (CDTIME), University of Almer a, Spain - antonio.salmeron@ual.es
zDepartment of Informatics, Systems and Communication, University of Milan-Bicocca,
Milano, Italy - stella@disco.unimib.it
1