C
A1 A2 A3 A4
Figure 4: Na ve Bayes. In this gure and the following ones, class variable is
shown in gray.
C
A1A2A3A4
Figure 5: TAN: the tree is A1 A2 A3!A4.
3.5 Statistical classication
Statistical classication is a common problem in machine learning, where it
is required to identify to which category a new observation belongs, based on
previous observations. The category to be predicted is known as the class,
and the explanatory variables on which the choice is made are called features .
An example would be to predict if tomorrow is going to rain ( class ) given
information on today's atmospheric conditions such as pressure, humidity, wind
speed ( features ). This has been a widely used application of Bayesian networks.
Thanks to structural constraints the approaches are usually highly scalable, able
to learn optimal structures even with thousand of variables.
Na ve Bayes (NB) has been one of the rst proposed tools. An example is
shown in Figure 4. It assumes the stochastic independence of the features given
the class. This strong assumption makes the classier highly scalable, with a
complexity of O(n). However, the posterior probabilities are biased and may
lead to incorrect estimation (Hand and Yu; 2001).
The tree-augmented na ve classier (TAN) (Friedman et al.; 1997) relaxes
this assumption, augmenting the NB with a tree which connects the features.
An example is shown in Figure 5. As a result one feature has only the class as
a parent, while the remaining features have two parents: the class and another
feature. This design consistently helps reducing the bias of na ve Bayes, at the
cost of time complexity of only O(n2) for exact learning.
C
A1 A2 A3 A4
Figure 6: FAN: the forest is constituted by the sub-trees A1!A2andA3 A4.
TAN is further improved by the forest-augmented na ve classier (FAN). An
example is shown in Figure 6. A FAN augments the na ve Bayes with a forest.
A forest is a set of disjoint trees; it is more general than a tree, as it includes
11