veloped in Java by researchers from the University of Bras lia and the George
Mason University. The web site mentions that structural learning of Bayesian
networks is implemented trough the score-based approach, i.e. K2 metric. How-
ever, the latest update of UnBBayes dates back to 2010 March 24th.
4.26 WinMine/MSBN
The WinMine/MSBN toolkit is free for non commercial purposes. It has been
developed by Max Chickering at Microsoft Research, and works on Windows
2000/NT/XP and can be downloaded at https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/
research/project/winmine-toolkit/ . It has been established 2002 October
5th, and consists of a set of executables which allow to build statistical models
from data. Learning the structure of a Bayesian networks can be performed
by running Dnet.exe . In particular, when WinMine/MSBN is used to learn
the strcucture of a discrete Bayesian network, it uses a score-based approach
together with a greedy DAG-based search algorithm. The search for the optimal
structure of the Bayesian networks starts with the model containing no edges;
then edges are greedily added, deleted, and reversed until a local maximum is
reached.
Table 1 summarizes the the analyzed softwares according to the following
characteristics:
Constraint is associated with constraint-based learning algorithms.
Score is associated with score-based learning algorithms, more precisely
with score available for optimization.
Missing is associted with missing treatment with specic reference to struc-
ture learning.
GUI tells about graphical user interface availability.
License is about whether the software is free (F) or commercial (C).
Op. System is about which operating system/s is/are supported.
Language is associated with the programming language used to develop
the software.
API tells about the API availability.
Updated tells the date of the last known update.
5 Guidelines
From a practitioner's point of view, it can be dicult to choose a method to
use in a particular problem given the wide variety of available algorithms for
inducing the structure of a Bayesian network. First of all, the nature of the
problem to solve must be taken into account. If we are facing a classication
19