June 19th, and no informations are provided about the implemented structure
learning approach.
4.14 Free BN
Free BN is a open source, Java written, Bayesian network structure learning
API licensed under the Apache 2.0 license which has been made available by Jee
Vang as a major accomplishement of his PhD dissertation. Structural learning
of Bayesian network is performed according to the score-based approach, using
a search-and-score algorithm which optimizes the K2 metric, and according
to the constraint-based approach mainly through the PC algorithm. The last
interactions on the ocial web site date back to 2010.
4.15 GeNie and Smile
GeNie and Smile are commercial softwares from BayesFusion ( https://www.
bayesfusion.com/ ). GeNie Modeler is a graphical user interface (GUI) to
SMILE Engine and allows for interactive model building and learning. It is
written for the Windows environment but can be also used on macOS and
Linux under Wine. The SMILE Engine, oers easy integration of BayesFusion
in customers' applications, which can be written in a variety of programming lan-
guages (e.g., C++, Python, Java, R, .NET). SMILE.COM allows for easy inte-
gration with MS Excel. Structure learning can be performed by the score-based
approach algorithms as: Bayesian search algorithm (Heckerman et al.; 1995),
Greedy Thick Thinning (Cheng et al.; 1997) and by using the PC constraint-
based algorithm (Spirtes et al.; 2000). Furthermore, GeNie makes available the
Essential Graph Search algorithm, based on a combination of the constraint-
based search (with its prominent representative being the PC algorithm) and
the Bayesian Search approach.
4.16 GOBNILP
Globally Optimal Bayesian Network learning using Integer Linear Program-
ming (GOBNILP) is a C program which learns Bayesian networks from com-
plete discrete data or from local scores. GOBNILP ( https://www.cs.york.
ac.uk/aig/sw/gobnilp/ ) uses the SCIP ( https://scip.zib.de/ ) framework
for constraint integer programming. A development version of GOBNILP is
freely available as well as a Python version. Structural learning in GOBNILP
is score-based (BDeu), while the cutting plane algorithm is used to solve an
integer linear programming problem for score optimization. The latest version,
GOBNILP 1.6.3 has been released 2018 January the 5th, and it is available for
both Windows and Mac.
4.17 Hugin Expert
Hugin Expert ( https://www.hugin.com/ ) is a commercial software based on
Bayesian networks and in
uence diagram technology. The following products
are made available: Hugin Explorer, Hugin Developer, Hugin Educational,
which is free but limited in the maximum number of nodes, and Hugin Re-
searcher which makes available API to develop industrial applications. It is
16