is 2004 July 21st. Structure learning is made available through score-based
approach while search strategy include sparse candidate, Markov chain Monte
Carlo (perturbation-based). BNJ works for both Windows and Linux.
4.10 bnstruct
Bnstruct is an R package which learns Bayesian networks from data with missing
values ( https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/bnstruct/index.html )
implements the Silander-Myllymaki complete search, the max-min parents-and-
children, the hill-climbing, the max-min hill-climbing heuristic searches, and
the structural expectation-maximization algorithm. Structure learning is score-
based on the following scoring functions: BDeu, AIC, BIC. The current release
is bnstruct 1.0.4, which has been released 2018 August the 31st.
4.11 BNT
The Bayes Net Toolbox (BNT) has been developed by Kevin Murphy from
1997 to 2002 using the Matlab programming language. It oers no graphical
user interface, and its' last update dates back to 19 October 2007. Starting from
January 2014, it is maintained on Github at https://github.com/bayesnet/
bnt. BNT supports structure learning of Bayesian networks by making available
the following score-based algorithms: Bayesian learning, using MCMC or local
search, only in the case where nodes are discrete and fully observed, and the
following constraint-based algorithms: Inductive Causation (IC), Fast Causal
Inference (FCI) (Pearl and Verma; 1995), and PC (Spirtes et al.; 2000).
4.12 DEAL
DEAL is a software package for use with R ( https://www.jstatsoft.org/
article/view/v008i20 ) which has been developed by Susanne G. Bttcher
and Claus Dethlefsen. DEAL includes several methods for analysing data using
Bayesian networks with variables of discrete and/or continuous types but re-
stricted to conditionally Gaussian networks. Structure learning is implemented
through a score-based approach which uses the Bayes factor comparing two
dierent DAGs. The seach strategy compares models that dier only by a
single arrow, either added, removed or reversed. Indeed, in these cases, the
Bayes factor is especially simple, because of decomposability of the network
score. DEAL also oers the possibility to combine the search algorithm random
restarts (Heckerman et al.; 1995), and to exploit equivalence relations to speed
up model search. It is worthwhile to mention that DEAL has an interface to
Hugin.
4.13 ELVIRA
The ELVIRA system ( http://leo.ugr.es/elvira/ ) is a tool to construct
model based decision support systems (Elvira Consortium; 2002). It oers an
easy to use Graphic Interface User (GUI) which allows the user to dene models
by clicking his/her mouse. It has been developed using the Java language and
thus it can be used on any operating system. Furthermore, the source code is
made freely available to download. However, its last update dates back to 2001
15