A dierent approach was proposed by Fern andez et al. (2010). It is de-
signed for learning Bayesian networks representing regression problems, and is
based on using mixtures of truncated exponentials in order to represent the
joint distribution of the induced network (Moral et al.; 2001). It relies on a
data augmentation algorithm that iteratively re-estimates a Bayesian network
model, and imputes the missing values using it. It showed promising results on
datasets with up to 16 variables, with both discrete and continuous values.
Nielsen et al. (2010) proposed an algorithm for learning, in the presence of
missing data, a Probabilistic Decision Graph: this is a representation language
for probability distributions based on binary decision diagrams. It can encode
independence relations that cannot be captured in a Bayesian network struc-
ture, and can sometimes provide computationally more ecient representations
than Bayesian networks (Jaeger; 2004). Their experiments showed a reasonable
performance, but on networks with only up to 40 variables.
Scanagatta, Corani, Zaalon, Yoo and Kang (2018) propose a method for
performing structure learning on incomplete data sets, using structural Expectation-
Maximization (SEM). They tackle the issue of the complexity cost by employing
a bounded treewidth Bayesian network structure learning algorithm. In this way
they obtain a fast implementation of SEM, since the bounded-treewidth struc-
tures learned in the dierent iterations guarantee ecient inferences. They re-
port that it is the rst implementation of SEM that is able to scale to thousands
of variables.
3.4 Handling continuous variables
The methods for structure learning described so far are basically designed for
discrete variables, though in general they can be adapted to handle continuous
variables as well. The most straightforward approach is to discretize the con-
tinuous variables, so that statistical tests of independence can be carried out,
and therefore algorithms like the PC can be applied. This approach has been
explored by Fern andez et al. (2013).
Score-based structure learning can also be used with continuous variables as
long as the score used to guide the search process is compatible with the model
adopted for representing the probability density of the continuous variables.
The method proposed by Romero et al. (2006) represent such densities using
mixtures of truncated exponentials.
However, some statistical models are incompatible with this approach, as
they impose some structure restrictions. This is the case of the conditional
Gaussian (CG) model (Lauritzen and Wermuth; 1989), where discrete variables
are not allowed to have continuous parents. This model corresponds to scenarios
where the marginal over the discrete variables is a Multinomial and the condi-
tional density of the continuous variables for each conguration of the discrete
ones is a multivariate Normal. A solution for learning CG networks following
a score based approach was proposed by Bttcher (2001), later improved by
considering equivalence classes resulting in a more ecient search procedure
(Bttcher and Dethlefsen; 2003).
10