the tree as a special case. Thus the BIC score of FAN is higher than or equal
to the BIC score of TAN. The structural learning algorithm of FAN (Koller and
Friedman; 2009) is obtained as a slight modication of the TAN algorithm. It
maintains the same quadratic time complexity.
C
A1A2A3A4
Figure 7: ETAN which recognizes A4as an irrelevant feature. Note also that
A2is not connected to the class.
A limit of both TAN and FAN is that they do not perform feature selection;
each feature is forcedly connected to the class without checking if it is relevant.
The extended tree-augmented naive (ETAN) (de Campos et al.; 2015) overcomes
this problem. ETAN allows each feature to have as parent either (i) the class;
(ii) the class and a feature; (iii) a feature without the class; (iv) no parent,
in which case the feature is recognized as irrelevant. The structural learning
algorithm of ETAN exactly identies the highest-scoring graph that satises
the previous constraints. An example is shown in Figure 7. This algorithm is
more complex than that of TAN and FAN. The ETAN includes naive Bayes,
TAN and FAN as special cases; thus it achieves a higher BIC score (equal score
in the worst case) than all of them.
Bayesian network classiers have also been extended to regression problems,
in which the variable to predict is continuous. Adaptations for learning dif-
ferent structures in regression problems have been proposed by Fern andez and
Salmer on (2008), where feature selection is carried out following a lter ap-
proach.
4 Software Tools
This section provides the current state-of-the-art on software tools for learning
Bayesian networks from data. A summary table, containing main characteristics
of analyzed softwares is made available.
4.1 BANJO
Bayesian network inference with Java objects (BANJO) https://users.cs.
duke.edu/ ~amink/software/banjo/ is a software application and framework
for structure learning of static and dynamic Bayesian networks, developed under
the direction of Alexander J. Hartemink in the Department of Computer Sci-
ence at Duke University. BANJO focuses on score-based structure learning by
making available the following heuristic search strategies: simulated annealing
and greedy hill-climbing. These heuristics are paired with evaluation of a single
random local move or all local moves at each step. BANJO runs on comput-
ers running Macintosh OS X, Microsoft Windows, Linux, and Solaris, and its'
code is modiable within any Java development environment, from simple text
12