or regression problem, then one should stick to the alternatives described in
Section 3.5, because those structures are specially optimized for the prediction
tasks.
If instead we are interested in knowing the independence relations between
the variables in the model, score-based and constraint-based methods are more
appropriate, since they are more expressive in terms of representing indepen-
dences. It is important to point out that the methods explored in this paper
do not take causality into account. It means that links between the variables in
the learned structures should not be interpreted as causal relationships. Learn-
ing causal models is a research line that is receiving important attention in the
last years. The work by He et al. (2017) constitutes a good review of existing
methods for these scenarios.
From a technical point of view, the features of the available data also deter-
mine the kind of methods that can be used. More precisely, depending on the
existence of missing data or the presence of continuous variables, the procedures
reviewed in Sections 3.3 and 3.4 become relevant, as they are able to handle such
situations directly. Otherwise, a pre-processing step aimed to impute the miss-
ing data or discretize the continuous variables would be necessary.
The size of the dataset is also relevant because it can determine the accuracy
of the constraint-based methods. It is known that the power of the statistical
tests grows with the sample size (i.e. the probability of accepting the null
hypothesis when it is false decreases as the sample size increases). Therefore,
test-based algorithms like the PC have a tendency to include too many false
edges when the sample size is large. A solution to this problem was developed
by Bacciu et al. (2013).
Finally, the software availability issue is crucial when attempting to apply
any of the reviewed methods to practical problems. In that sense, the analysis
of software solutions in Section 4 can be of help.
6 Concluding remarks
In this paper we have presented a review of the most relevant literature on
Bayesian network structure learning. We have classied the analyzed methods
according to the approach they follow for solving the problem and discussed
relevant issues about how they handle missing values or continuous variables.
Methods oriented to specic tasks as classication and regression have also been
accounted for. A thorough revision of available software tools has also been
carried out.
Regarding future lines of research, there is an increasing interest of devel-
oping scalable methods able to handle large volumes of data and to run in
distributed computational environments. Causality is also receiving consider-
able attention. This fact is connected to the need of developing models that are
interpretable by humans.
Acknowledgments
This work has been partly supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science, Inno-
vation and Universities, grant TIN2016-77902-C3-3-P and by ERDF (FEDER)
21