ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2020 ,9, 256 2 of 19
band images. Yuan et al. [ 5] proposed a new spatial constraint model driven clustering method, which
clusters candidate objects through sparsity, but this method is limited by the image’s spatial resolution.
Lu et al. [ 6] used threshold segmentation to analyze multispectral satellite images, but the spectra
deference in different regions has great inﬂuence on the segmentation accuracy. Zhang et al. [ 7]
proposed a support vector machine method to perform the coastline extraction by minimizing
errors and maximizing geometric edge features, but it has difﬁculties in large scale data training.
Feyisaet et al. [ 8] proposed the automatic water area segmentation index (AWEI), which signiﬁcantly
improves the segmentation accuracy of shadow area and dark surface, but its extraction ability on
small targets is not good. Michael et al. [ 9] proposed the tandem-x coastline extraction based on
non-local ﬁltering. This method has a good effect on coastline extraction, but it misses small targets
within the coastline. Du et al. [ 10] designed a new method for surface water detection based on
a digital elevation model (DEM), which achieves a high accuracy. However, the problem is that
different infrared images have a great inﬂuence on the results. Park et al. [ 11] proposed a density based
spatial clustering (DBSCAN) algorithm, but there are obvious differences in the extraction between
the bright and shadow parts of the image. In the same year, Wang et al. [ 12] proposed a new method
by combining the NDWI with the image segmentation method. Cheng et al. [ 13] used an adaptive
neighborhood selection method to extract water body and buildings from remote sensing images.
To summarize, the above methods for water area segmentation all have high requirements for data
processing and exhibit poor generalization performance, that is, they cannot extract arbitrary lakes
and rivers accurately.
Since the rise of artiﬁcial intelligence, deep learning has been widely used in speech recognition,
image recognition, information retrieval, and other ﬁelds [ 14]. Compared with traditional segmentation
methods, the deep learning method does not require any prior conditions to perform automatic water
area segmentation from remote sensing images. With the increase of computing power and the
emergence of GPUs, more and more convolutional neural network (CNN) models have been proposed,
such as the visual geometry group network (VGGNet) [ 15], the googLe network (GoogLeNet) [ 16],
the densely connected convolutional network (DenseNet) [17], and so on. The classiﬁcation accuracy
of these neural network models has reached the human level. The neural network method can
extract deep features of remote sensing images to achieve better classiﬁcation [ 18], e.g., in water area
segmentation. However, CNN models can only classify a speciﬁc object, but lack the ability to extract
its accurate location and boundary information. Therefore, for remote sensing images, such as of lakes
and rivers, which have high requirements for location and boundary extraction, the traditional CNN
models are not accurate enough. To solve this problem, a semantic segmentation model which can
achieve pixel-level classiﬁcation has been proposed in recent years.
The Semantic segmentation algorithm can classify images at the pixel level and extract more
detailed features. The algorithm’s high precision and fast speed make a hot research topic in image
segmentation. In 2014, Long et al. [ 19] proposed a fully convolutional network (FCN) for semantic
segmentation, in which, the last two fully connected layers of the VGGNet are changed to fully
convolutional layers and skipping connection is used to realize an end-to-end and pixel-to-pixel deep
neural networks (DNN). In the same year, the decovolution network (DeconvNet) was proposed by
Noh et al. [ 20], who used a new method for upsampling: deconvolution. However, an image’s ﬁne
granularity cannot be fully displayed by DeconvNet, and the network’s understanding of features is
not sufﬁcient. In addition, because there are too many convolution kernels, the model’s parameter
number is large and its calculation burden is high. In 2015, Badrinarayanan et al. [ 21] also proposed a
semantic pixel-wise segmentation network (SegNet) based on the VGGNet. SegNet makes full use of
the location index information during convolution process, greatly reducing the memory consumption,
but this technique also increases the training time and reduces the efﬁciency. In 2017, a pyramid scene
parsing network (PSPNet) was designed by Zhao et al. [ 22] which applies dilated convolution [ 23]
to convolution layers, increasing the receptive ﬁeld without increasing the number of parameters.
Nowadays, more and more semantic segmentation algorithms based on deep learning are proposed.