ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2020 ,9, 256 3 of 19
These algorithms have great prospects in processing remote sensing satellite images and segmenting
pathological cells in medical images and other ﬁelds. Although existing semantic segmentation
algorithms perform well in remote sensing image extraction, there is a problem of gradient vanishing
due to the deepening of convolution layers during training process, and thus the network performance
degrades and its image segmentation accuracy is affected. In addition, a DNN normally has many
convolution kernels, which increases the parameter numbers of the training network, and thus makes
the training time-consuming and difﬁcult [ 24]. To solve these problems, a separable residual SegNet
(SR-SegNet) is proposed in this paper. A modiﬁed residual block is added to the encoder of SegNet to
solve the problem of performance degradation. Furthermore, depthwise separable convolutions [ 25]
are introduced to reduce the parameter number, shorten the training time, and cut down the calculation
cost without compromising the network performance. In the proposed network, the characteristics
of high-level (the higher layer of deep neural network layer) and low-level (the lower layer of deep
neural network layer) are obtained by cascading. In addition, dilated convolutions are used to expand
the receptive ﬁeld in convolution layers to improve the ability of feature extraction without increasing
the number of parameters. Compared with FCN, SegNet, and DeconvNet, the SR-SegNet proposed in
this paper improves the F1-score, mean intersection over union (Miou), and recall, while also reducing
the testing time.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the structure of SR-SegNet is
discussed in detail. Section 3 presents experimental details of the proposed model using Lake and
River dataset. In Section 4, conclusions are given and the future research direction is discussed.
2. Proposed Method
In this section, the proposed SR-SegNet’s architecture is presented in detail. The classical SegNet
uses a large number of convolution kernels and a deep network structure to extract image features,
thus its training is slow, and vanishing gradient (vanishing gradient: as the number of neural network
layers increases, the accuracy of classiﬁcation decreases) always happens. The segmentation of lakes
and rivers in remote sensing images is limited by the images’s spectrum, resolution, shadow, and
other factors. In addition, there are some problems in the application of traditional methods, such as
poor generalization performance, poor effect of water area segmentation, and so on. In this paper, we
propose a SR-SegNet to solve these problems; the method can retrieve rich and multi-scale contexts
for a more accurate segmentation, and signiﬁcantly decrease the number of training parameters and
reduce the image prediction time.
2.1. Model Overview
The classical SegNet has a large number of parameters. Therefore, vanishing gradient always
happens and its ability of feature extraction deteriorates during training process. Its parameter number
is large because there are too many convolution kernels. Moreover, ﬁve times of 2 upsampling
are performed during encoding stage, resulting in a long training and a slow testing. In addition,
because the classical SegNet simply performs upsampling during encoding stage, it lacks the fusion of
high-level and low-level semantic information; as a result, detailed location information could be lost
during the segmentation of water area remote sensing image. To solve these problems, we propose a
separable residual SegNet. In SR-SegNet, a modiﬁed residual block [ 26] is introduced in the encoding
stage, and the detailed information is presented in Section 2.2.1. To limit the parameter numbers
associated with a large number of convolutional kernels, we use depthwise separable convolutions for
efﬁciency. Finally, dilated convolutions are applied in our encoder to capture more water area spatial
information. More details of the depthwise separable convolution can be found in Section 2.2.2.
Figure 1 shows the detailed architecture of the proposed SR-SegNet. The entire network is
divided into two parts: the encoder and the decoder. (1) In the encoding stage, a modiﬁed residual
block is added to each convolution block to alleviate the degradation problem that often occurs in
training process [ 27]. (2) Considering that the training process is complicated by a large number of