ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2020 ,9, 256 8 of 19
convolutions are used to aggregate outputs, and thus NC parameters are generated. Therefore, the
whole depth separable convolutions generates CK2+ NC parameters, many fewer than that of standard
convolutions.
BN 
Relu 
3x3x1 Depth Conv 
BN 
Relu 
1x1xc Point Conv 
BN 
Relu 
nxnxc 
(a) (b)
nxnxc 
3x3xc Conv 
Figure 5. The details of standard convolution and depthwise separable convolution: ( a) standard
convolution; and ( b) depthwise separable convolution. BN, batch normalization; Relu function,
rectiﬁed linear unit.
The application of depthwise separable convolutions in water area segmentation not only shortens
training time and reduces computation, but also effectively avoids overﬁtting. Using depthwise
separable convolutions makes the model easier to train. Moreover, training and prediction time will
also be reduced.
2.3. Decoder Design
Although the end-to-end model can directly use a whole picture as the input and generate a
whole picture as the output [ 33]. Image spatial information could be lost during decoding stage. The
U-Net proposed by Ronneberger O et al. [ 34] uses concatenation in both encoder and decoder to fuse
high-level and low-level image features to obtain more feature information.
Previous work shows that the layer by layer upsampling does not improve prediction results, but
instead it increases the complexity of model and generates a large number of parameters. Information
in encoding layers will be lost if the upsampling is as of the same size as the input image directly. In
view of the above situations, our proposed SR-SegNet in this paper combines an end-to-end cascading
mode, and adopts 4 unpooling for the ﬁrst upsampling, instead of traditional 2 unpooling. Next,
2unpooling is conducted layer by layer. As a result, there are only four times of unpooling. In the
residual block of encoder, the ﬁrst four residual blocks are cascaded with the upsampling in decoding
stage. The cascading uses the fusion method to effectively obtain more spatial location information.
This method combines high-level and low-level features, and can extract detailed features of water
body remote sensing images, especially the edges in them [35].
3. Experiment and Result Analysis
To verify the effectiveness of SR-SegNet proposed in this paper, experiments were carried out on
Lake and River dataset. Furthermore, semantic segmentation models were used as the control groups.
All experiments were evaluated based on four major metrics, including Accuracy (Ac), Dice, F1-Score
(F1), and Mean intersection over union (Miou). Experimental results show that the network proposed
in this paper exceeded all comparing networks on the evaluation metrics.