ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2020 ,9, 256 16 of 19
v1 achieves an improvement of 2.39% over the classical SegNet (0.9304 vs. 0.9065). The superiority of
proposed networks in this paper for river extraction is thereby veriﬁed.
3.5. Veriﬁcation Experiment
To further verify the generalization abilities of the models proposed in this paper, Cityscapes, a
public dataset, was selected for further experiment. Due to the limitation of computer memory, this
experiment did not use all categories of the Cityscapes dataset. Only four categories, namely human,
car, road, and background, were selected. Then 2975 pictures were used as the training dataset and
2975 pictures as the validation dataset. With the Adam optimizer, the initial learning rate was 0.0001,
the weight attenuation rate was 0.0005, the training batch batch-size was 3, and the iteration was
160 times.
The research topic of this paper is water area segmentation. To verify the generalization
performance and effectiveness of the algorithms proposed in this paper, we selected a different
dataset for veriﬁcation. The biggest difference between the Cityscapes dataset and the water area
segmentation dataset is that their objects are different, but using different objects for veriﬁcation
can better demonstrate the generalization performance of the networks proposed in this paper. The
experimental results are shown in Table 7. We can see that the training speed of V2 is increased by
about 8.3%, and its Miou is also increased by 1.01%. Therefore, the generalization performance and
effectiveness of the proposed network is veriﬁed.
Table 7. The results of validation dataset on the Cityscapes dataset. The highest value for the different
metrics are highlighted in bold.
Training Time/h Miou/%
SegNet 23.25 81.24
SR-SegNet v2 21.32 82.25
4. Conclusions
In this paper, lake and river segmentation is improved by using SR-SegNet. Traditional decoding
methods use 2 upsampling step by step, but this paper proposes to run 4 upsampling for the
ﬁrst time, and then removes three convolution layers with 512 channels each in decoding stage, thus
reducing a large number of parameters and improving the training speed. At the same time, to extract
more deep features and ensure the model’s segmentation accuracy, improved residual blocks are
introduced into encoding stage to solve the problem of network degradation. Furthermore, to obtain
a larger receptive ﬁeld and obtain more spatial information, dilated convolutions are also added to
convolution layers, and the cascading method is used to fuse the low-level and high-level features of
the image.
The quantitative comparison results with SegNet, FCN, and DeconvNet demonstrates that
SR-SegNet outperforms the other models. Compared with the standard SegNet, SR-SegNet gains a
2.37% improvements in Miou and saves 10–27% in model-testing time on the Lake and River dataset.
However, due to the complexity of the model, this paper also needs to make improvements in the
following aspects: (1) make the training process converge more quickly and improve the model’s
training and prediction speed; (2) search more data and further improve the generalization performance
of the model; and (3) solve the problem of small identiﬁcation.