15
Fig. 15: Illustration of typical ”recovering with partial in-
put” methods: colorization, inpainting and super-resolution.
Given the original input on the left, models are asked to
recover it with different partial inputs given on the right.
as colorization [75], [76], [157], [158], inpainting [61], [96]
and super-resolution [78] apply the adversarial learning via
in a different way. Instead of asking models to reconstruct
the whole input, they provide models with partial input
and ask them to recover the rest parts. This is similar to
denoising autoencoder (DAE) such as BERT’s family in
natural language processing but conducted in an adversarial
manner.
Colorization is ﬁrst proposed by [157]. The problem
can be described as given one color channel Lin an image
and predicting the value of two other channels A,B. The
encoder and decoder networks can be set to any form of
convolutional neural network. Interestingly, to avoid the
uncertainty brought by traditional generative methods such
as VAE, the author transforms the generation task into a
classiﬁcation one. The ﬁrst ﬁgure out the common locating
area of (A;B)and then split it into 313 categories. The
classiﬁcation is performed through a softmax layer with
hyper-parameter Tas an adjustment. Based on [157], a
range of colorization-based representation methods [75], [76],
[158] are proposed to beneﬁt downstream tasks.
Inpainting [61], [96] is more straight forward. We will ask
the model to predict an arbitrary part of an image given the
rest of it. Then a discriminator is employed to distinguish
the inpainted image from the original one. Super-resolution
method SRGAN [78] follows the same idea to recover high-
resolution images from blurred low-resolution ones in the
adversarial setting.
5.3 Pre-trained Language Model
For a long time, the pre-trained language model (PTM)
focuses on maximum likelihood estimation based pretext task
because discriminative objectives are thought to be helpless
due to languages’ vibrant patterns. However, recently some
work shows excellent performance and sheds light on
contrastive objectives’ potential in PTM.
Fig. 16: The architecture of ELECTRA [26]. It follows GAN’s
framework but uses a two-stage training paradigm to avoid
using policy gradient. The MLM is Masked Language Model.
The pioneering work is ELECTRA [26], surpassing BERT
given at the same computation budget. ELECTRA proposesReplaced Token Detection (RTD) and leverages GAN’s
structure to pre-train a language model. In this setting, the
generatorGis a small Masked Language Model (MLM),
which replaces masked tokens in a sentence to words.
The discriminator Dis asked to predict which words are
replaced. Notice that replaced means not the same with
original unmasked inputs. The training is conducted in two
stages:
1)Warm-up the generator: train the Gwith MLM pretext
taskLMLM(x;G)for some steps to warm up the
parameters.
2)Trained with the discriminator: D’s parameters is initial-
ized withG’s and then trained with the discriminative
objectiveLDisc(x;D)(a cross-entropy loss). During this
period,G’s parameter is frozen.
The ﬁnal objective could be written as
min
G;DX
x2XLMLM(x;G) +LDisc(x;D) (19)
Though ELECTRA is structured as GAN, it is not trained
in the GAN setting. Compared to image data, which is con-
tinuous, word tokens are discrete, which stops the gradient
backpropagation. A possible substitution is to leverage policy
gradient, but ELECTRA experiments show that performance
is slightly lower. Theoretically speaking, LDisc(x;D)is actu-
ally turning the conventional k-class softmax classiﬁcation
into a binary classiﬁcation. This substantially saves the com-
putation effort but may somehow harm the representation
quality due to the early degeneration of embedding space.
In summary, ELECTRA is still an inspiring pioneer work in
leveraging discriminative objectives.
At the same time, WKLM [144] proposes to perform
RTD at the entity-level. For entities in Wikipedia paragraphs,
WKLM replaced them with similar entities and trained the
language model to distinguish them in a similar discrimina-
tive objective as ELECTRA, performing exceptionally well
in downstream tasks like question answering. Similar work
is REALM [50], which conducts higher article-level retrieval
augmentation to the language model. However, REALM is
not using the discriminative objective.
5.4 Graph Learning
There are also attempts to utilize adversarial learning ( [28],
[33], [137]). Interestingly, their ideas are quite different from
each other.
The most natural idea is to follow BiGAN [38] and
ALI [41]’s a practice that asks discriminator to distinguish
representation from generated and prior distribution. Adver-
sarial Network Embedding (ANE) [28] designs a generator
Gthat is updated in two stages: 1) Gencodes sampled graph
into target embedding and computes traditional NCE with
a context encoder Flike Skip-gram, 2) discriminator Dis
asked to distinguish embedding from Gand a sampled one
from a prior distribution. The optimized objective is a sum
of the above two objectives, and the generator Gcould yield
better node representation for the classiﬁcation task.
GraphGAN [137] considers to model the link prediction
task and follow the original GAN style discriminative
objective to distinguish directly at node-level rather than
representation-level. The model ﬁrst selects nodes from the