13
embeddings from the same node (in different subgraphs)
are viewed as similar. Results show that GCC learns bet-
ter transferable structural knowledge than previous work
such as struc2vec [110], GraphWave [40] and ProNE [155].
GraphCL [152] studies the data augmentation strategies in
graph learning. They propose four different augmentation
methods based on edge perturbation and node dropping. It
further demonstrates that the appropriate combination of
these strategies can yield even better performance.
4.3 Self-supervised Contrastive Pre-training for Semi-
supervised Self-training
While contrastive learning-based self-supervised learning
continues to push the boundaries on various benchmarks,
labels are still important because there is a gap between
training objectives of self-supervised learning and supervised
learning. In other words, no matter how self-supervised
learning models improve, they are still the only powerful
feature extractor, and to transfer to the downstream task, we
still need labels more or less. As a result, to bridge the gap
between self-supervised pre-training and downstream tasks,
semi-supervised learning is what we are looking for.
Recall the MoCo [52] that have topped the ImageNet
leader-board. Although it is proved beneﬁcial for many other
downstream vision tasks, it fails to improve the COCO object
detection task. Some following work [90], [163] investigates
this problem and attributes it to the gap between the instance
discrimination and object detection. In such a situation,
while pure self-supervised pre-training fails to help, semi-
supervised-based self-training can contribute a lot to it.
First, we will clarify the deﬁnitions of semi-supervised
learning and self-training. Semi-supervised learning is an
approach to machine learning that combines a small amount
of labeled data with many unlabeled data during training.
Various methods derive from several different assumptions
made on the data distribution, with self-training (or self-
labeling) being the oldest. In self-training, a model is trained
on the small amount of labeled data and then yield labels
on unlabeled data. Only those data with highly conﬁdent
labels are combined with original labeled data to train a new
model. We iterate this procedure to ﬁnd the best model.
The current state-of-the-art supervised model [143] on
ImageNet follows the self-training paradigm, where we ﬁrst
train an EfﬁcientNet model on labeled ImageNet images
and use it as a teacher to generate pseudo labels on 300M
unlabeled images. We then train a larger EfﬁcientNet as a
student model based on labeled and pseudo labeled images.
We iterate this process by putting back the student as the
teacher. During the pseudo labels generation, the teacher
is not noised so that the pseudo labels are as accurate
as possible. However, during the student’s learning, we
inject noise such as dropout, stochastic depth, and data
augmentation via RandAugment to the student to generalize
better than the teacher.
In light of semi-supervised self-training’s success, it is
natural to rethink its relationship with the self-supervised
methods, especially with the successful contrastive pre-
trained methods. In Section 4.2.1, we have introduced
M3S [120] that attempts to combine cluster-based contrastive
pre-training and downstream semi-supervised learning. Forcomputer vision tasks, Zoph et al. [163] study the MoCo
pre-training and a self-training method in which a teacher
is ﬁrst trained on a downstream dataset (e.g., COCO) and
then yield pseudo labels on unlabeled data (e.g., ImageNet),
and ﬁnally a student learns jointly over real labels on
the downstream dataset and pseudo labels on unlabeled
data. They surprisingly ﬁnd that pre-training’s performance
hurts while self-training still beneﬁts from strong data
augmentation. Besides, more labeled data diminishes the
value of pre-training, while semi-supervised self-training
always improves. They also discover that the improvements
from pre-training and self-training are orthogonal to each
other, i.e., contributing to the performance from different
perspectives. The model with joint pre-training and self-
training is the best.
Chen et al. [20]’s SimCLR v2 supports the conclusion
mentioned above by showing that with only 10% of the
original ImageNet labels, the ResNet-50 can surpass the
supervised one with joint pre-training and self-training. They
propose a 3-step framework:
1)Do self-supervised pre-training as SimCLR v1, with
some minor architecture modiﬁcation and a deeper
ResNet.
2)Fine-tune the last few layers with only 1% or 10% of
original ImageNet labels.
3)Use the ﬁne-tuned network as teacher to yield labels on
unlabeled data to train a smaller student ResNet-50.
The success in combining self-supervised contrastive pre-
training and semi-supervised self-training opens up our eyes
for a future data-efﬁcient deep learning paradigm. More
work is expected for investigating their latent mechanisms.
4.4 Pros and Cons
Because contrastive learning has assumed the downstream
applications to be classiﬁcations, it only employs the encoder
and discards the decoder in the architecture compared
to generative models. Therefore, contrastive models are
usually light-weighted and perform better in discriminative
downstream applications.
Contrastive learning is closely related to metric learning,
a discipline that has been long studied. However, self-
supervised contrastive learning is still an emerging ﬁeld,
and many problems remain to be solved, including:
1)Scale to natural language pre-training. Despite its
success in computer vision, contrastive pre-training
does not present a convincing result in the NLP bench-
marks. Most contrastive learning in NLP now lies
in BERT’s supervised ﬁne-tuning, such as improving
BERT’s sentence-level representation [109], information
retrieval [65]. Few algorithms have been proposed to
apply contrastive learning in the pre-training stage. As
most language understanding tasks are classiﬁcations,
a contrastive language pre-training approach should be
better than the current generative language models.
2)Sampling efﬁciency. Negative sampling is a must for
most contrastive learning, but this process is often
tricky, biased, and time-consuming. BYOL [47] and
SimSiam [24] are the pioneers to get contrastive learning
rid of negative samples, but it can be improved. It is also