10
Fig. 10: Deep Graph InfoMax [136] uses a readout function to
generate summary vector s1, and puts it into a discriminator
with node 1’s embedding x1and corrupted embedding
ex1respectively to identify which embedding is the real
embedding. The corruption is to shufﬂe the positions of
nodes.
tocorrupt the original context by keeping the sub-graph
structure and permuting the node features. DGI is followed
by many works, such as InfoGraph [118], which targets
learning graph-level representation rather than node level,
maximizing the mutual information between graph-level
representation and substructures at different levels. As what
CMC has done to improve Deep InfoMax, in [51] authors
propose a contrastive multi-view representation learning
method for the graph. They also discover that graph diffusion
is the most effective way to yield augmented positive sample
pairs in graph learning.
As an attempt to unify graph pre-training, in [57],
the authors systematically analysis the pre-training strate-
gies for graph neural networks from two dimensions: at-
tribute/structural and node-level/graph-level. For structural
prediction at node-level, they propose Context Prediction
to maximize the MI between the k-hop neighborhood’s
representations and its context graph. For attributes in the
chemical domain, they propose Attribute Mask to predict a
node’s attribute according to its neighborhood, which is a
generative objective similar to token masks in BERT.
S2GRL [98] further separates nodes in the context graph
into k-hop context subgraphs and maximizes their MI with
target node, respectively. However, a fundamental problem
of graph pre-training is about learning inductive biases
across graphs, and existing graph pre-training work is only
applicable for a speciﬁc domain.
4.2 Instance-Instance Contrast
Though MI-based contrastive learning achieves great success,
some recent studies [19], [23], [52], [129] cast doubt on the
actual improvement brought by MI.
The [129] provides empirical evidence that the success
of the models mentioned above is only loosely connected
to MI by showing that an upper bound MI estimator leads
to ill-conditioned and lower performance representations.
Instead, more should be attributed to encoder architecture
and a negative sampling strategy related to metric learning.
A signiﬁcant focus in metric learning is to perform hard
positive sampling while increasing the negative sampling
efﬁciency. They probably play a more critical role in MI-based
models’ success.
As an alternative, instance-instance contrastive learning
discards MI and directly studies the relationships between
different samples’ instance-level local representations as what
Fig. 11: Cluster-based instance-instance contrastive emthods:
DeepCluster [17] and Local Aggregation [162]. In the embed-
ding space, DeepCluster uses clustering to yield pseudo
labels for discrimination to draw near similar samples.
However, Local Aggregation shows that a egocentric soft-
clustering objective would be more effective.
metric learning does. Instance-level representation, rather
than context-level, is more crucial for a wide range of classi-
ﬁcation tasks. For example, in an image classiﬁed as “dog”,
while there must be dog instances, some other irrelevant
context objects such as grass might appear. But what matters
for the image classiﬁcation is the dog rather than the context.
Another example would be sentence emotional classiﬁcation,
which primarily relies on few but important keywords.
In the early stage of instance-instance contrastive learn-
ing’s development, researchers borrow ideas from semi-
supervised learning to produce pseudo labels via cluster-
based discrimination and achieve rather good performance
on representations. More recently, CMC [126], MoCo [52],
SimCLR [19], and BYOL [47] further support the above
conclusion by outperforming the context-instance contrastive
methods and achieve a competitive result to supervised
methods under the linear classiﬁcation protocol. We will
start with cluster-based discrimination proposed earlier and
then turn to instance-based discrimination.
4.2.1 Cluster Discrimination
Instance-instance contrast is ﬁrst studied in clustering-based
methods [17], [79], [93], [147], especially the DeepCluster [17]
which ﬁrst achieves competitive performance to the super-
vised model AlexNet [73].
Image classiﬁcation asks the model to categorize images
correctly, and the representation of images in the same cate-
gory should be similar. Therefore, the motivation is to pull
similar images near in the embedding space. In supervised
learning, this pulling-near process is accomplished via label
supervision; in self-supervised learning, however, we do
not have such labels. To solve the label problem, Deep
Cluster [17] proposes to leverage clustering to yield pseudo
labels and asks a discriminator to predict images’ labels. The
training could be formulated in two steps. In the ﬁrst step,
DeepCluster uses K-means to cluster encoded representation
and produces pseudo labels for each sample. Then in the
second step, the discriminator predicts whether two samples
are from the same cluster and back-propagates to the encoder.
These two steps are performed iteratively.
Recently, Local Aggregation (LA) [162] has pushed for-
ward the cluster-based method’s boundary. It points out