7
Fig. 5: Architecture of VQ-VAE [132]. Compared to VAE, the
orginal hidden distribution is replaced with a quantized vec-
tor dictionary. In addition, the prior distribution is replaced
with a pre-trained PixelCNN that models the hierarchical
features of images. Taken from [132]
into its argument, and is a hyperparameter which controls
the reluctance to change the code corresponding to the
encoder output.
More recently, researchers propose VQ-VAE-2 [108],
which can generate versatile high-ﬁdelity images that rival
BigGAN [15] on ImageNet [31], the state-of-the-art GAN
model. First, the authors enlarge the scale and enhance the
autoregressive priors by a powerful PixelCNN [131] prior.
Additionally, they adopt a multi-scale hierarchical organiza-
tion of VQ-VAE, which enables learning local information
and global information of images separately. Nowadays,
VAE and its variants have been widely used in the computer
vision area, such as image representation learning, image
generation, video generation.
Variational auto-encoding models have also been em-
ployed in node representation learning on graphs. For
example, Variational graph auto-encoder (VGAE) [71] uses
the same variational inference technique as VAE with graph
convolutional networks (GCN) [70] as the encoder. Due to
the uniqueness of graph-structured data, the objective of
VGAE is to reconstruct the adjacency matrix of the graph by
measuring node proximity. Zhu et al. [160] propose DVNE, a
deep variational network embedding model in Wasserstein
space. It learns Gaussian node embedding to model the
uncertainty of nodes. 2-Wasserstein distance is used to
measure the similarity between the distributions for its
effectiveness in preserving network transitivity. vGraph [119]
can perform node representation learning and community
detection collaboratively through a generative variational
inference framework. It assumes that each node can be gen-
erated from a mixture of communities, and each community
is deﬁned as a multinomial distribution over nodes.
3.4 Hybrid Generative Models
3.4.1 Combining AR and AE Model.
Some researchers propose to combine the advantages of
both AR and AE. MADE [84] makes a simple modiﬁcation
to autoencoder. It masks the autoencoder’s parameters
to respect auto-regressive constraints. Speciﬁcally, for the
original autoencoder, neurons between two adjacent layers
are fully-connected through MLPs. However, in MADE, some
connections between adjacent layers are masked to ensure
that each input dimension is reconstructed solely from its
dimensions. MADE can be easily parallelized on conditional
computations, and it can get direct and cheap estimates of
Fig. 6: Illustration for permutation language modeling [148]
objective for predicting x3given the same input sequence x
but with different factorization orders. Adapted from [148]
high-dimensional joint probabilities by combining AE and
AR models.
In NLP , Permutation Language Model (PLM) [148] is a
representative model that combines the advantage of auto-
regressive model and auto-encoding model. XLNet [148],
which introduces PLM, is a generalized auto-regressive
pretraining method. XLNet enables learning bidirectional
contexts by maximizing the expected likelihood over all
permutations of the factorization order. To formalize the idea,
letZTdenotes the set of all possible permutations of the
length-Tindex sequence [1;2;:::;T ], the objective of PLM
can be expressed as follows:
max
EzZT[TX
t=1logp(xztjxz<t)] (7)
Actually, for each text sequence, different factorization or-
ders are sampled. Therefore, each token can see its contextual
information from both sides. Based on the permuted order,
XLNet also conducts reparameterization with positions to
let the model know which position is needed to predict.
Then a special two-stream self-attention is introduced for
target-aware prediction.
Furthermore, different from BERT, inspired by the latest
advancements in the AR model, XLNet integrates the seg-
ment recurrence mechanism and relative encoding scheme
of Transformer-XL [29] into pre-training, which can model
long-range dependency better than Transformer [134].
3.4.2 Combining AE and Flow-based Models
In the graph domain, GraphAF [115] is a ﬂow-based auto-
regressive model for molecule graph generation. It can
generate molecules in an iterative process and also calculate
the exact likelihood in parallel. GraphAF formalizes molecule
generation as a sequential decision process. It incorporates
detailed domain knowledge into the reward design, such
as valency check. Inspired by the recent progress of ﬂow-
based models, it deﬁnes an invertible transformation from a
base distribution (e.g., multivariate Gaussian) to a molecular
graph structure. Additionally, Dequantization technique [56]
is utilized to convert discrete data (including node types and
edge types) into continuous data.
3.5 Pros and Cons
A reason for the generative self-supervised learning’s success
in self-supervised learning is its ability to recover the original
data distribution without assumptions for downstream tasks,
which enables generative models’ wide applications in