3
Fig. 3: Categorization of Self-supervised learning (SSL):
Generative, Contrastive and Generative-Contrastive (Adver-
sarial).
contrastive objectives. In Section 6, we introduce some recent
theoretical attempts to understand the hidden mechanism of
self-supervised learning’s success. Finally, in Section 7 and
8, we discuss the open problems, future directions and our
conclusions.
2 M OTIVATION OF SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING
It is universally acknowledged that deep learning algorithms
are data-hungry. Compared to traditional feature-based
methods, deep learning usually follows the so-called “end-
to-end” fashion (raw-data in, prediction out). It makes very
few prior assumptions, which leads to over-ﬁtting and
biases in scenarios with little supervised data. Literature has
shown that simple multi-layer perceptrons have a very poor
generalization ability (always assume a linear relationship
for out-of-distribution (OOD) samples) [145], which results
in over-conﬁdent (and wrong) predictions.
To conquer the fundamental OOD and generalization
problem, while numerous works focus on designing new
architectures for neural networks, another simple yet effec-
tive solution is to enlarge the training dataset to make as
many samples “in-distribution”. However, the fact is, despite
massive available unlabeled web data in this big data era,
high-quality data with human labeling could be costly. For
example, Scale.ai3, a data labeling company, charges $6.4
per image for the image segmentation labeling. An image
segmentation dataset containing 10k+ high-quality samples
could cost up to a million-dollar.
The most crucial point for self-supervised learning’s
success is that it ﬁgures out a way to leverage the tremendous
amounts of unlabeled data that becomes available in the
big data era. It a time for deep learning algorithms to
get rid of human supervision and turn back to data’s self-
supervision . The intuition of self-supervised learning is to
leverage the data’s inherent co-occurrence relationships as
the self-supervision, which could be versatile. For example,
in the incomplete sentence “I like apples”, a well-trained
language model would predict “eating” for the blank (i.e., the
famous Cloze Test [125]) because it frequently co-occurs with
the context in the corpora. We can summarize the mainstream
3. https://scale.com/pricing
Fig. 4: Conceptual comparison between Generative, Con-
trastive, and Generative-Contrastive methods.
self-supervision into three general categories (see Fig. 3) and
detailed subsidiaries:
Generative: train an encoder to encode input xinto an
explicit vector zand a decoder to reconstruct xfromz
(e.g., the cloze test, graph generation)
Contrastive: train an encoder to encode input xinto
an explicit vector zto measure similarity (e.g., mutual
information maximization, instance discrimination)
Generative-Contrastive (Adversarial): train an encoder-
decoder to generate fake samples and a discriminator to
distinguish them from real samples (e.g., GAN)
Their main difference lies in model architectures and
objectives. A detailed conceptual comparison is shown in
Fig. 4. Their architectures can be uniﬁed into two general
components: the generator and the discriminator, and the
generator can be further decomposed into an encoder and a
decoder. Different things are:
1)For latent distribution z: in generative and contrastive
methods,zis explicit and is often leveraged by down-
stream tasks; while in GAN, zis implicitly modeled.
2)For discriminator: the generative method does not
have a discriminator while GAN and contrastive have.
Contrastive discriminator has comparatively fewer pa-
rameters (e.g., a multi-layer perceptron with 2-3 layers)
than GAN (e.g., a standard ResNet [53]).
3)For objectives: the generative methods use a reconstruc-
tion loss, the contrastive ones use a contrastive similarity
metric (e.g., InfoNCE), and the generative-contrastive
ones leverage distributional divergence as the loss (e.g.,
JS-divergence, Wasserstein Distance).
A properly designed training objective related to down-
stream tasks could turn our randomly initialized models
into excellent pre-trained feature extractors. For example,
contrastive learning is found to be useful for almost all
visual classiﬁcation tasks. This is probably because the
contrastive object is modeling the class-invariance between
different image instances. The contrastive loss makes images
containing the same object class more similar. It makes
those containing different classes less similar, essentially
accords with the downstream image classiﬁcation, object
detection, and other classiﬁcation-based tasks. The art of
self-supervised learning primarily lies in deﬁning proper
objectives for unlabeled data.