have in mind problems where the state space is enormous (effectively inﬁnite) but it is tractable to
store and loop over vectors of length m. Tractable algorithms can then be derived by searching over
approximate transition kernels, value functions, or policies, that don’t distinguish between states
belonging to a common segment. Our hope is that states in a common segment are sufﬁciently
similar, for example due to smoothness in the transition dynamics and rewards, so that these
approximations still allow for effective decision-making.
To make this idea formal, let us deﬁne the set of approximate value functions and policies
induced by a state aggregation f,
Qf=fQ2RjSjjAj:Q(s,a) =Q(s0,a)for all a2A, and all s,s02S such that f(s) =f(s0)g
Pf=fp2P:p(s) =p(s0)for all s,s02S such that f(s) =f(s0)g.
It should be emphasized that practical algorithms do not require, for example, actually storing
njAj numbers in order to represent an element Q2Q fRjSjjAj. Instead, one stores just mjAj
numbers, one per segment.
Should we approximate the value function or the policy? In this setting, there is a broad
equivalence. This is important to the interpretation of the paper’s results, since it implies that any
beneﬁt of policy gradient methods is not due to its approximation architecture but instead due to
how it searches over the parameters of an approximation. A complete proof of these statements is
omitted but some details are given Appendix B.
Remark 1 (Equivalence of aggregated-state approximations) .The set of randomized state-aggregated
policies Pfis equal to the set of policies formed by softmax optimization with respect to state-aggregated
value functions:
Pf=closurefp2P:Q2Q f,p(s,a) =eQ(s,a)/å
a02AeQ(s,a0)8s2S,a2Ag . (3)
Moreover, the set of deterministic policies contained in Pfis isomorphic to
ff2AjSj:Q2Q f,f(s) =minfargmax
a2AQ(s,a)gg, (4)
the set of greedy policies3with respect to some state-aggregated value function.
4 Approximation via policy gradient with state-aggregated policy classes
Convergence to stationary points. Policy gradient methods are ﬁrst-order optimization methods
applied to maximize J(p)over the constrained policy class Pf. Of course, just as there is an ever
growing list of ﬁrst-order optimization procedures, there are many policy gradient variants. How
do we provide insights relevant to this whole family of algorithms? Were J(p)concave, we would
expect that sensible optimization method converge to the solution of max p2PfJ(p), allowing us to
abstract away the details of the optimization procedure and study instead the quality of decisions
that can be made using a certain constrained policy class. Unfortunately, J(p)is non-concave
3Here we have broken ties deterministically in favor of the actions with a smaller index. If there are multiple optimal
actions and ties are broken differently at states sharing common segment, the induced policy would not be constant
across segments.
6