of the state space. Singh et al. [1995] propose a soft state aggregation method, which avoids
discontinuities in the approximate value function at the boundaries of partitions. The theory of
Tsitsiklis and Van Roy [1996] holds for a related class of approximations they call interpolators. A
popular approximation method called tile coding, which is closely related to state-aggregation, is
discussed in the textbook of Sutton and Barto [2018]. This paper does not pursue such extensions,
focusing on the simplest variant of state-aggregation. The current proof signiﬁcantly relies on the
structure of hard state-aggregation.
The current paper assumes a state-aggregation rule is ﬁxed and given, then studying the
quality of the policies various algorithms produce with this approximation. A long series of works
have focused on how a state aggregation can be learned or adaptively constructed [Bertsekas and
Castanon, 1989, Singh et al., 1995, Dean and Givan, 1997, Jiang et al., 2015, Duan et al., 2019, Misra
et al., 2020].
The bounds for policy gradient provided in this work depend on a notion of maximal error due
to state aggregation (See Deﬁnition 2). Contemporaneously, Agarwal et al. [2020] looked at policy
gradient with state aggregated representations. Dependence on the time horizon is not a focus of
their work. Instead, they focus on providing an upper bound that depends on a softer notion of
approximation error which averages across partitions. It seems that the two measures coincide in
Example 1 below, but the measure of Agarwal et al. [2020] can offer an important improvement in
other examples. Their upper bounds are not matched by those previously established for alternative
algorithms and are suggestive of another provable beneﬁt of using policy gradient methods in this
setting.
2 Problem Formulation
We consider a Markov decision process M= (S,A,r,P,g,r), which consists of a ﬁnite state space
S=f1,,jSjg, ﬁnite action space A=f1,,jAjg , reward function r, transition kernel P,
discount factor g2(0, 1)and initial distribution r. For any ﬁnite set X=f1,,jXjg , we let
D(X) =fd2RjXj
+:åx2Xdx=1gdenote the set of probability distributions over X. A stationary
randomized policy is a mapping p:S!D(A). We use p(s,a)to denote the athcomponent of
p(s). LetPdenote the set of all stationary randomized policies. Conditioned on the history up to
that point, an agent who selects action ain state s2S earns a reward in that period with expected
value r(s,a)and transitions randomly to a next state, where P(s0js,a)denotes the probability of
transitioning to state s02S. To treat randomized policies, we overload notation, deﬁning for
d2D(A),r(s,d) =åjAj
a=1r(s,a)daand P(s0js,d) =åjAj
a=1P(s0js,a)da. Notice that if ea2D(A)is the
athstandard basis vector, then r(s,ea) =r(s,a).
Value functions and Bellman operators. We deﬁne, respectively, the value function associated
with a policy pand the optimal value function by
Vp(s) =Ep
s"
¥
å
t=0gtr(st,at)#
, V(s) =max
p2PVp(s).
The notation Ep
s[]denotes expectations taken over the sequence of states when s0=sand policy
pis applied. A policy pis said to be optimal if Vp(s) = V(s)for every s2S. It is known
that an optimal deterministic policy exists. Throughout this paper, I will use pto denote some
4