The large performance gap between API and policy gradient is surprising since they are known
to be closely related [Konda and Tsitsiklis, 2000, Sutton et al., 2000]. There is a particularly precise
and simple connection in the case of state-aggregation: Theorem 8 shows that a Frank-Wolfe
[Frank and Wolfe, 1956] policy gradient method is equivalent to a version of a API which (1)
estimates an approximate value function by minimizing a loss function which weighs errors at
states in proportion to how often those states are visited under the current policy and (2) makes
soft or local updates to the policy in each iteration. With these modiﬁcations, each iteration of API
locally optimizes a ﬁrst-order approximation to the true decision objective, leading to much greater
robustness to approximation errors. See Section 6. Section 5 also studies a version of API that
makes only the ﬁrst change — using an on-policy state weighting — but not the second. A different
counterexample (Ex. 2) is constructed to show that this variant can be as brittle as a standard
version of API which makes neither change.
The limited scope of this work should be highlighted. I have in mind settings where policy gra-
dient is applied in simulation, which is how they are currently employed in nearly all applications.
In this case, it is feasible to employ an exploratory initial distribution as is assumed in this work.
This choice can have a critical impact on the optimization landscape [see e.g. Agarwal et al., 2019b].
By focusing on the quality of stationary points, the paper sidesteps issues of (i) optimization error
(i.e. error due to executing only a ﬁnite number of gradient steps), (ii) statistical error (i.e. error due
to estimating gradients with limited simulated rollouts) and (iii) precisely which policy gradient
variant and stepsizes are employed. The treatment of API is similarly stylized. This choice allows
for a crisp presentation focused on one insight that is missing in the current literature.
Further discussion of related literature. Dong et al. [2019] prove that a state-aggregated and
optimistic variant of Q-learning efﬁciently approaches limiting per-period regret smaller a measure
of inherent aggregation error similar to ef. Van Roy [2006] had previously shown that approximate
value iteration with ﬁxed state-relevance weights could suffer per-period regret that scales with
the effective time horizon. Van Roy [2006] also observed that the robustness of policies derived
from solutions of state-aggregated Bellman equations can depend critically on the choice of state-
relevance weights. While this paper studies different algorithms and gives proofs which bear little
resemblance to Van Roy [2006] and Dong et al. [2019], their study of the robustness difference
between to closely related algorithms inspired my own.
A number of recent works study the convergence rates of policy gradient methods in Markov
decision processes with ﬁnite state and action spaces under the assumption that the policy class
can represent all stochastic policies. Examples include [Agarwal et al., 2019b, Mei et al., 2020,
Zhang et al., 2021, Cen et al., 2021, Bhandari and Russo, 2021, Khodadadian et al., 2021]. The
fastest convergence rates seem to be attained by policy gradient variants that behave just like
policy iteration [Bhandari and Russo, 2021]. Such theory therefore does not offer insight into the
advantages of policy gradient methods over classical algorithms. This paper helps closes that.
intellectual gap in the literature.
A fascinating paper by Scherrer and Lesner [2012] observed that the horizon dependence of
approximate value and policy iteration can be improved by modifying them to use non-stationary
policies. It is unclear if there is a connection between their work and this paper’s ﬁnding about
policy gradient methods for optimizing over the class of stationary policies.
What is called state-aggregation in this paper is sometimes called ‘hard’ state aggregation.
Generalizations allow a state to have an afﬁnity or partial association with several different regions
3