point, two-point, k-point, uniform, partia lly matched, order, precedence preserving
crossover, shuffle, reduced surrogate and cycle.
In a single point crossover, a random crossover point is selected. The genetic information of
two parents which is beyond that point will be swapped with each other [ 190]. Figure 3shows
the genetic information after swapping. It replaced the tail array bits of both the parents to get
the new offspring.
In a two point and k-point crossover, two or more random crossover points are selected and
the genetic information of parents will be swapped as per the segments that have been created
[190]. Figure 4shows the swapping of genetic information between crossover points. The
middle segment of the parents is replaced to generate the new offspring.
In a uniform crossover, parent cannot be decomposed into segments. The parent can be
treated as each gene separately. We randomly decide whether we need to swap the gene with
the same location of another chromosome [ 190]. Figure 5depicts the swapping of individuals
under uniform crossover operation.
Partially matched crossover (PMX) is the most frequently used crossover operator. It is an
operator that performs better than most of the other crossover operators. The partially matched
(mapped) crossover was proposed by D. Goldberg and R. Lingle [ 66]. Two parents are choose
for mating. One parent donates some part of genetic material and the corresponding part of
other parent participates in the child. Once this process is completed, the left out alleles are
copied from the second parent [ 83]. Figure 6depicts the example of PMX.Table 3 Comparison of different selection techniques
Selection Techniques Pros Cons
Roulette wheel Easy to implement
Simple
Free from BiasRisk of Premature convergence
Depends upon variance present in the fitness function
Rank Preserve diversity
Free from BiasSlow convergence
Sorting required
Computationally Expensive
Tournament Preserve diversity
Parallel Implementation
No sorting requiredLoss of diversity when the tournament size is large
Boltzmann Global optimum achieved Computationally Expensive
Stochastic Universal
SamplingFast Method
Free from BiasPremature convergence
Elitism Preserve best Individual in
populationBest individual can be lost due to crossover and
mutation operators
Fig. 3 Swapping genetic information after a crossover pointMultimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:8091 –8126 8098