4.5.4 Optimize control parameters
The control parameters of GA play a crucial role in maintaining the balance between
intensification and diversification. Fuzzy logic has an ability to estimate the appropriate control
parameters of GA [ 167]. Beside this, GA can be used to optimize the control parameters of
other techniques. GAs have been used to optimize the learning rate, weights, and topology of
neutral networks [ 21]. GAs can be used to estimate the optimal value of fuzzy membership in
controller. It was also used to optimize the control parameters of ACO, PSO, and other
metaheuristic techniques [ 156]. The comparative analysis of well-known GAs are mentioned
in Table 9.
5 Applications
Genetic Algorithms have been applied in various NP-hard problems with high accuracy rates.
There are a few application areas in which GAs have been successfully applied.
5.1 Operation management
GA is an efficient metaheuristic for solving operation management (OM) problems such as
facility layout problem (FLP), supply network design, scheduling, forecasting, and inventory
control.
5.1.1 Facility layout
Datta et al. [ 32] utilized GA for solving single row facility layout problem (SRFLP). For
SRFLP, the modified crossover and mutation operators of GA produce valid solutions. They
applied GA to large sized problems that consists of 60 –80 instances. However, it suffers from
parameter dependency problem. Sadrzadeh [ 173] proposed GA for multi-line FLP have multi
products. The facilities were clustered using mutation and heuristic operators. The total cost
obtained from the proposed GA was decreased by 7.2% as compared to the other algorithms.
Wu et al. [ 211] implemented hierarchical GA to find out the layout of cellular manufacturing
system. However, the performance of GA is greatly affected from the genetic operators. Aiello
et al. [ 7] proposed MOGA for FLP. They used MOGA on the layout of twenty different
departments. Palomo-Romero et al. [ 148] proposed an island model GA to solve the FLP. The
proposed technique maintains the population diversity and generates better solutions than the
existing techniques. However, this technique suffers from improper migration strategy that can
be utilized for improving the population. GA and its variants has been successfully applied on
FLP [ 103,119,133,201].
5.1.2 Scheduling
GA shows the superior performance for solving the scheduling problems such as job-shop
scheduling (JSS), integrated process planning and scheduling (IPPS), etc. [ 119]. To improve
the performance in the above-mentioned areas of scheduling, researchers developed various
genetic representation [ 12,159,215], genetic operators, and hybridized GA with other
methods [ 2,67,147,219].Multimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:8091 –8126 8108