better convergence speed and quality of solution. Wang et al. [ 208] proposed multi-
offspring RCGA with direction based crossover for solving constrained problems.
Table 7shows the mathematical formulation of genetic operators in RGAs.
4.2 Multiobjective GAs
Multiobjective GA (MOGA) is the modified vers ion of simple GA. MOGA differ from GA in terms
of fitness function assignment. The remainin g steps are similar to GA. The main motive of
multiobjective GA is to generate the optimal Pareto Front in the objective space in such a way that
no further enhancement in any fitness function wit hout disturbing the other fitness functions [ 123].
Convergence, diversity, and coverage are main goal of multiobjective GAs. The multiobjective GAs
are broadly categorized into two categories nam ely, Pareto-based, and decomposition-based
multiobjective GAs [ 52]. These techniques are discussed in the preceding subsections.
4.2.1 Pareto-based multi-objective GA
The concept of Pareto dominance was introduce d in multiobjective GAs. Fonseca and Fleming [ 56]
developed first multiobjective GA (MOGA). The ni che and decision maker concepts were proposed
to tackle the multimodal proble ms. However, MOGA suffers from parameter tuning problem and
degree of selection pressure. Horn et al. [ 80] proposed a niched Pareto genetic algorithm (NPGA)
that utilized the concept of tournament selection and Pareto dominance. Srinivas and Deb [ 191]
developed a non-dominated sorting genetic algor ithm (NSGA). However, it suffers from lack of
elitism, need of sharing parameter, and high com putation complexity. To alleviate these problems,
Deb et al. [ 36] developed a fast elitist non-dominated so rting genetic algorithm (NSGA-II). The
performance of NSGA-II may be deteriorated for many objective problems. NSGA-II was unable to
maintain the diversity in Pareto-front. To alleviate this problem, Luo et al. [ 130] introduced a
dynamic crowding distance in NSGA-II. Coello and Pulido [ 28] developed a multiobjective micro
GA. They used an archive for storing the non-dom inated solutions. The performance of Pareto-
based approaches may be deteriorated in many objective problems [ 52].
4.2.2 Decomposition-based multiobjective GA
Decomposition-based MOGAs decompose the gi ven problem into multiple subproblems. These
subproblems are solved simultaneously and e xchange the solutions among neighboring subprob-
lems [ 52]. Ishibuchi and Murata [ 84] developed a multiobjective genetic local search (MOGLS). In
MOGLS, the random weights were used to select the p arents and local search for their offspring.
They used generation replacement and roul ette wheel selection method. Jaszkiewicz [ 86] modified
the MOGLS by utilizing different selection mechanisms for parents. Murata and Gen [ 141]
proposed a cellular genetic algorithm for mult iobjective optimization (C-MOGA) that was an
extension of MOGA. They added cellular structu re in MOGA. In C-MOGA, the selection operator
was performed on the neighboring of each cell. C- MOGA was further extended by introducing an
immigration procedure and known as CI-MOGA. Alves and Almeida [ 11] developed a
multiobjective Tchebycheffs-based genetic algor ithm (MOTGA) that ensures convergence and
diversity. Tchebycheff scalar function was used to generate non-dominated solution set. Patel
et al. [ 151] proposed a decomposition based MOGA (D-M OGA). They integrated opposition basedMultimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:8091 –8126 8104