pressure (SP2), then population using SP1 should be larger than the population using SP2. The
higher selection pressure can decrease the population diversity that may lead to premature
convergence [ 71].
Convergence property has to be handled prope rly so that the algorithm finds global optimal
solution instead of local optimal solution (see Fig. 8). If the optimal solution lies in the vicinity of an
infeasible solution, then the global nature o f GA can be combined with local nature of other
algorithms such as Tabu search and local search. The global nature of genetic algorithms and local
nature of Tabu search provide the proper balance between intensification and diversification.
6.1.3 Selection of efficient fitness functions
Fitness function is the driving force, which plays an important role in selecting the fittest
individual in every iteration of an algorithm. If the number of iterations are small, then a costly
fitness function can be adjusted. The number of iterations increases may increase the compu-
tational cost. The selection of fitness function depends upon the computational cost as well as
their suitability. In [ 46], the authors used Davies-Boul din index for classification of
documents.
6.1.4 Degree of mutation and crossover
Crossover and mutation operators are the integral part of GAs. If the mutation is not considered
during evolution, then there will be no new information available for evolution. If crossover is
not considered during evolution, then the algorithm can result in local optima. The degree of
these operators greatly affect the performance of GAs [ 72]. The proper balance between these
operators are required to ensure the global optima. The probabilistic nature cannot determine
the exact degree for an effective and optimal solution.
6.1.5 Selection of encoding schemes
GAs require a particular encoding scheme for a specific problem. There is no general
methodology for deciding whether the particular encoding scheme is suitable for any type of
Fig. 8 Local and global optima [ 149]Multimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:8091 –8126 8116