4.3.2 Fine grained parallel GA
In last few decades, researchers are working on mig ration policies of fine grained parallel GA (FG-
PGA). Porta et al. [ 161] utilized clock-time for migration frequency, which is independent of
generations. They used non-unifo rm structure and static confi guration. The best solution was
selected for migration and worst solution was replaced with migrant solution. Kurdi [ 115]u s e d
adaptive migration frequency. The migration proce dure starts until there is no change in the obtained
solutions after ten successive generations. The non-uniform and dynamic structure was used. In
[209], local best solutions were synchronized and formed a global best solutions. The global best
solutions were transferred to all processors for f ather execution. The migration frequency depends
upon the number of generation. They used uniform st ructure with fixed configuration. Zhang et al.
[220] used parallel GA to solve the set cover problem of wireless networks. They used divide-and-
conquer strategy to decompose the population into sub- populations. Thereafter, the genetic operators
were applied on local solutions and Kuhn-Munkr es was used to merge the local solutions.
4.3.3 Coarse grained parallel GA
P i n e le ta l .[ 158] proposed a GraphCell. The population w as initialized with random values and one
solution was initialized with Min-min heuristic te chnique. 448 processors were used to implement
the proposed approach. However, coarse grained parallel GAs are less used due to complex in
nature. The hybrid parallel GAs are widely use d in various applications. Shayeghi et al. [ 182]
proposed a pool-based Birmingham cluster GA. Master node was responsible for managing global
population. Slave node selected the solutions from global population and executed it. 240 processors
are used for computation. Roberge et al. [ 170] used hybrid approach to op timize switching angle of
inverters. They used four different strategies fo r fitness function computation. Nowadays, GPU,
cloud, and grid are most popular hardware for parallel GAs [ 198].
4.4 Chaotic GAs
The main drawback of GAs is premature convergen ce. The chaotic systems are incorporated into
GAs to alleviate this problem. The diversity of chaos genetic algorithm removes premature
convergence. Crossover and mutation operators can be replaced with chaotic maps. Tiong et al.
[197] integrated the chaotic maps into GA for fur ther improvement in accuracy. They used six
different chaotic maps. The perf ormance of Logistic, Henon and Ikeda chaotic GA performed better
than the classical GA. However, these techniques suffer from high computational complexity.
Ebrahimzadeh and Jampour [ 48] used Lorenz chaotic for genetic operators of GA to eliminate the
local optima problem. However, the proposed appr oach was unable to find relationship between
entropy and chaotic map. Javidi and Hosseinpourfard [ 87] utilized two chaotic maps namely logistic
map and tent map for generating chaotic values in stead of random selection of initial population. The
proposed chaotic GA performs better than the GA. However, this method suffers from high
computational complexity. Fuertes et al. [ 60] integrated the entropy into chaotic GA. The control
parameters are modified through chaotic maps. They i nvestigated the relationship between entropy
and performance optimization.
Chaotic systems have also used in multiobjective and hybrid GAs. Abo-Elnaga and Nasr [ 5]
integrated chaotic system into modified GA for s olving Bi-level programming problems. Chaotic
helps the proposed algorithm to alleviate local op tima and enhance the convergence. Tahir et al.
[193] presented a binary chaotic GA for feature sele ction in healthcare. The chaotic maps were usedMultimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:8091 –8126 8106