real-life problem. If there are two different problems, then two different encoding schemes are
required. Ronald [ 171] suggested that the encoding schemes should be designed to overwhelm
the redundant forms. The genetic operators should be implemented in a manner that they are
not biased towards the redundant forms.
6.2 Future research directions
GAs have been applied in different fields by modifying the basic structure of GA. The
optimality of a solution obtained from GA can be made better by overcoming the current
challenges. Some future possibilities for GA are as follows:
1) There should be some way to choose the appropriate degree of crossover and mutation
operators. For example Self-Organizing GA adapt the crossover and mutation operators
according to the given problem. It can save computation time that make it faster.
2) Future work can also be consid ered for reducing premature convergence problem. Some
researchers are working in this direction. Ho wever, it is suggested that new methods of
crossover and mutation techniques are required t o tackle the premature convergence problem.
3) Genetic algorithms mimic the natural evolution process. There can be a possible scope for
simulating the natural evolution process such as the responses of human immune system
and the mutations in viruses.
4) In real-life problems, the mapping from genotype to phenotype is complex. In this
situation, the problem has no obvious building blocks or building blocks are not adjacent
groups of genes. Hence, there is a possibility to develop novel encoding schemes to
different problems that does not exhibit same degree of difficulty.
7C o n c l u s i o n s
This paper presents the structured and explained view of genetic algorithms. GA and its
variants have been discussed with application. Application specific genetic operators are
discussed. Some genetic operators are designed for representation. However, they are not
applicable to research domains. The role of genetic operators such as crossover, mutation, and
selection in alleviating the premature convergence is studied extensively. The applicability of
GA and its variants in various research domain has been discussed. Multimedia and wireless
network applications were the main attention of this paper. The challenges and issues
mentioned in this paper will help the practitioners to carry out their research. There are many
advantages of using GAs in other research domains and metaheuristic algorithms.
The intention of this paper is not only provide the source of recent research in GAs, but also
provide the information about each component of GA. It will encourage the researchers to
understand the fundamentals of GA and use the knowledge in their research problems.
References
1. Abbasi M, Rafiee M, Khosravi MR, Jolfaei A, Menon VG, Koushyar JM (2020) An efficient parallel
genetic algorithm solution for vehicle routing problem in cloud implementation of the intelligent trans-
portation systems. Journal of cloud Computing 9(6)Multimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:8091 –8126 8117