Multimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:8091 –8126
A review on genetic algorithm: past,
present, and future
Sourabh Katoch1&Sumit Singh Chauhan1&Vijay Kumar1
Received:27July2020/Revised:12October2020/Accepted:23October2020
#Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2020
Abstract
In this paper, the analysis of recent advances in genetic algorithms is discussed. The genetic
algorithms of great interest in re search community are selected f or analysis. This review will
help the new and demanding researchers to provi de the wider vision of genetic algorithms. The
well-known algorithms and their implementat ion are presented with their pros and cons. The
genetic operators and their usages are discuss ed with the aim of facili tating new researchers.
The different research domains involved in genetic algorithms are covered. The future research
directions in the area of genetic operators, fitne ss function and hybrid algorithms are discussed.
This structured review will be helpful for research and graduate teaching.
Keywords Optimization .Metaheuristic .Genetic algorithm .Crossover .Mutation .Selection .
Evolution
1 Introduction
In the recent years, metaheuristic algorith ms are used to solve real-life complex
problems arising from different fields such as economics, engineering, politics, man-
agement, and engineering [ 113]. Intensification and diversification are the key elements
of metaheuristic algorithm. The proper balance between these elements are required to
solve the real-life problem in an effective manner. Most of metaheuristic algorithms are
inspired from biological evolution p rocess, swarm behavior, and physics ’law [ 17].
These algorithms are broadly classified into two categories namely single solution and
population based metaheuristic algorithm (Fig. 1). Single-solution based metaheuristic
algorithms utilize single candidate solutio n and improve this solution by using local
search. However, the solution obtained fro m single-solution based metaheuristics may
s t u c ki nl o c a lo p t i m a[ 112]. The well-known single-solution based metaheuristics arehttps://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-020-10139-6
*Vijay Kumar
vijaykumarchahar@gmail.com
1Computer Science and Engineering Department, National Institute of Technology, Hamirpur, IndiaPublished online: 31 October 2020/