5.3.3 Bandwidth and channel allocation
The appropriate bandwidth allocation is a complex task. GAs and its variants have been
developed to solve the bandwidth allocation problem [ 92,94,107]. GAs were used to
investigate the allocation of bandwidth with QoS constraints. The fitness function of GAs
may consists of resource utilization, bandwidth distribution, and computation time [ 168]. The
channel allocation is an important issue in wireless networks. The main objective of channel
allocation is to simultaneously optimize the number of channels and reuse of allocated
frequency. Friend et al. [ 59] used distributed island GA to resolve the channel allocation
problem in cognitive radio networks. Zhenhua et al. [ 221] implemented a modified immune
GA for channel assignment. They used different encoding scheme and immune operators.
Pinagapany and Kulkarni [ 157] developed a parallel GA to solve both static and dynamic
channel allocation problem. They used decimal encoding scheme. Table 10summarizes the
applications of GA and its variants.
6 Challenges and future possibilities
In this section, the main challenges faced during the implementation of GAs are discussed
followed by the possible research directions.
6.1 Challenges
Despite the several advantages, there are some challenges that need to be resolved for future
advancements and further evolution of genetic algorithms. Some major challenges are given
below:
6.1.1 Selection of initial population
Initial population is always considered as an important factor for the performance of genetic
algorithms. The size of population also affects the quality of solution [ 160]. The researchers
argue that if a large population is considered, then the algorithm takes more computation time.
However, the small population may lead to poor solution [ 155]. Therefore, finding the
appropriate population size is always a challenging issue. Harik and Lobo [ 71] investigated
the population using self-adaption method. They used two approaches such as (1) use of self-
adaption prior to execution of algorithm, in which the size of population remains the same and
(2) in which the self-adaption used during the algorithm execution where the population size is
affected by fitness function.
6.1.2 Premature convergence
Premature convergence is a common issue for GA. It can lead to the loss of alleles that makes
it difficult to identify a gene [ 15]. Premature convergence states that the result will be
suboptimal if the optimization problem coincides too early. To avoid this issue, some
researchers suggested that the diversity should be used. The selection pressure should be used
to increase the diversity. Selection pressure is a degree which favors the better individuals in
the initial population of GA ’s. If selection pressure (SP1) is greater than some selectionMultimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:8091 –8126 8114