simulated annealing, tabu search (TS), microcanonical annealing (MA), and guided
local search (GLS). Population-based metaheuristics utilizes multiple candidate solu-
tions during the search process. These metaheuristics maintain the diversity in popula-
tion and avoid the solutions are being stuck in local optima. Some of well-known
population-based metaheuristic algorithms are genetic algorithm (GA) [ 135], particle
swarm optimization (PSO) [ 101], ant colony optimization (ACO) [ 47], spotted hyena
optimizer (SHO) [ 41], emperor penguin optimizer (EPO) [ 42], and seagull optimization
(SOA) [ 43].
Among the metaheuristic algorithms, G enetic algorithm (GA) is a well-known
algorithm, which is inspired from biological evolution process [ 136]. GA mimics
the Darwinian theory of survival of fittest in nature. GA was proposed by J.H.
Holland in 1992. The basic elements of GA ar e chromosome representation, fitness
selection, and biological-inspired operat ors. Holland also introduced a novel element
namely, Inversion that is generally used in implementations of GA [ 77]. Typically, the
chromosomes take the binary string format. In chromosomes, each locus (specific
position on chromosome) has two possible alleles (variant forms of genes) - 0 and 1.
Chromosomes are considered as points in the solution space. These are processed
using genetic operators by iteratively replac ing its population. The fitness function is
used to assign a value for all the chromosomes in the population [ 136]. The
biological-inspired operators are selection, mutation, and crossover. In selection, the
chromosomes are selected on the basis of its fitness value for further processing. In
crossover operator, a random locus is chosen and it changes the subsequences
between chromosomes to create off-springs. In mutation, some bits of the chromo-
somes will be randomly flipped on the basis of probability [ 77,135,136]. The further
development of GA based on operators, representation, and fitness has diminished.
Therefore, these elements of GA are focused in this paper.
The main contribution of this paper are as follows:
1. The general framework of GA and hybrid GA are elaborated with mathematical
formulation.
2. The various types of genetic operators are discussed with their pros and cons.
3. The variants of GA with their pros and cons are discussed.
4. The applicability of GA in multimedia fields is discussed.Metaheuristics
Evolutionary 
AlgorithmsPopulation based 
MetaheuristicsSingle-solution based 
Metaheuristics
Swarm-Intelligence 
Algorithms
Fig. 1 Classification of metaheuristic AlgorithmsMultimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:8091 –8126 8092