requirements in water irrigation systems can be optimized by viewing it as a multi-objective
optimization problem. The amount of irrigation required and thus power requirements change
continuously in a SMART farm. Therefore, GA can be applied in irrigation systems to reduce
the power requirements [ 33].
5.2.6 Gaming
GAs have been successfully used in games such as gomoku. In [ 202], the authors shown that
the GA based approach finds the solution having the highest fitness than the normal tree based
methods. However, in real-time strategy based games, GA based solutions become less
practical to implement [ 82]. GAs have been implemented for path planning problems consid-
ering the environment constraints as well as avoiding the obstacles to reach the given
destination. Burchardt and Salomon [ 18] described an implementation for path planning for
soccer games. GA can encode the path planning problems via the coordinate points of a two-
dimensional playing field, hence resulting in a variable length solution. The fitness function in
path planning considers length of path as well as the collision avoiding terms for soccer
players.
5.3 Wireless networking
Due to adaptive, scalable, and easy implementation of GA, it has been used to solve the
various issues of wireless networking. The main issues of wireless networking are routing,
quality of service, load balancing, localization, bandwidth allocation and channel assignment
[128,134]. GA has been hybridized with other metaheuristics for solving the routing prob-
lems. Hybrid GA not only producing the efficient routes among pair of nodes, but also used for
load balancing [ 24,212].
5.3.1 Load balancing
Nowadays, multimedia applications require Quality-of-Service (QoS) demand for delay and
bandwidth. Various researchers are working on GAs for QoS based solutions.GA produces
optimal solutions for complex networks [ 49]. Roy et al. [ 172] proposed a multi-objective GA
for multicast QoS routing problem. GA was used with ACO and other search algorithms for
finding optimal routes with desired QoS metrics. Load balancing is another issue in wireless
networks. Scully and Brown [ 177] used MicroGAs and MacroGAs to distribute the load
among various components of networks. He et al. [ 73] implemented GA to determine the
balance load in wireless sensor networks. Cheng et al. [ 25] utilized distributed GA with multi-
population scheme for load balancing. They used load balancing metric as a fitness function in
GA.
5.3.2 Localization
The process of determining the location of wireless nodes is called as localization. It plays an
important role in disaster management and military services. Yun et al. [ 216]u s e dG Aw i t h
fuzzy logic to find out the weights, which are assigned according to the signal strength. Zhang
et al. [ 218] hybridized GA with simulated annealing (SA) to determine the position of wireless
nodes. SA is used as local search to eliminate the premature convergence.Multimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:8091 –8126 8113