it suffers from many problems such as errors introduced by its stochastic nature. De Jong and
Brindle modified the roulette wheel selection method to remove errors by introducing the
concept of determinism in selection procedure. Rank selection is the modified form of Roulette
wheel selection. It utilizes the ranks instead of fitness value. Ranks are given to them according
to their fitness value so that each individual gets a chance of getting selected according to their
ranks. Rank selection method reduces the chances of prematurely converging the solution to a
local minima [ 88].
Tournament selection technique was first proposed by Brindle in 1983. The individuals are
selected according to their fitness values from a stochastic roulette wheel in pairs. After
selection, the individuals with higher fitness value are added to the pool of next generation
[88]. In this method of selection, each individual is compared with all n-1 other individuals if it
reaches the final population of solutions [ 88]. Stochastic universal sampling (SUS) is an
extension to the existing roulette wheel selection method. It uses a random starting point in
the list of individuals from a generation and selects the new individual at evenly spaced
intervals [ 3]. It gives equal chance to all the individuals in getting selected for participating in
crossover for the next generation. Although in case of Travelling Salesman Problem, SUS
performs well but as the problem size increases, the traditional Roulette wheel selection
performs relatively well [ 180].
Boltzmann selection is based on entropy and sampling methods, which are used in Monte
Carlo Simulation. It helps in solving the problem of premature convergence [ 118]. The
probability is very high for selecting the best string, while it executes in very less time.
However, there is a possibility of information loss. It can be managed through elitism [ 175].
Elitism selection was proposed by K. D. Jong (1975) for improving the performance of
Roulette wheel selection. It ensures the elitist individual in a generation is always propagated
to the next generation. If the individual having the highest fitness value is not present in the
next generation after normal selection procedure, then the elitist one is also included in the next
generation automatically [ 88]. The comparison of above-mentioned selection techniques are
depicted in Table 3.
3.2.3 Crossover operators
Crossover operators are used to generat e the offspring by combining the genetic
information of two or more parents. The we ll-known crossover operators are single-Table 2 Comparison of different encoding schemes
Encoding
SchemePros Cons Application
Binary Easy to implement
Faster ExecutionNo support for inversion operator Problems that support binary
encoding
Octal Easy to implement No support for inversion operator Limited use
Hexadecimal Easy to implement No support for inversion operator Limited use
Permutation Support inversion
operatorNo support for binary operators Task ordering Problem
Value No need of value
conversionRequires specific crossover and
mutationNeural Network Problems
Tree Operator can easily
appliedDifficult to design tree for some
problemsEvolving ProgramsMultimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:8091 –8126 8097