Order crossover (OX) was proposed by Davis in 1985. OX copies one (or more) parts of
parent to the offspring from the selected cut-points and fills the remaining space with values
other than the ones included in the copied section. The variants of OX are proposed by
different researchers for different type of problems. OX is useful for ordering problems [ 166].
However, it is found that OX is less efficient in case of Travelling Salesman Problem [ 140].
Precedence preserving crossover (PPX) preserves the ordering of individual solutions as
present in the parent of offspring before the application of crossover. The offspring is
initialized to a string of random 1 ’sa n d0 ’s that decides whether the individuals from both
parents are to be selected or not. In [ 169], authors proposed a modified version of PPX for
multi-objective scheduling problems.
Shuffle crossover was proposed by Eshelman et al. [ 20] to reduce the bias introduced by
other crossover techniques. It shuffles the values of an individual solution before the crossover
and unshuffles them after crossover operation is performed so that the crossover point does not
introduce any bias in crossover. However, the utilization of this crossover is very limited in the
recent years. Reduced surrogate crossover (RCX) reduces the unnecessary crossovers if the
parents have the same gene sequence for solution representations [ 20,139]. RCX is based on
the assumption that GA produces better individuals if the parents are sufficiently diverse in
their genetic composition. However, RCX cannot produce better individuals for those parents
that have same composition. Cycle crossover was proposed by Oliver [ 140]. It attempts to
generate an offspring using parents where each element occupies the position by referring to
the position of their parents [ 140]. In the first cycle, it takes some elements from the first
parent. In the second cycle, it takes the remaining elements from the second parent as shown in
Fig.7.
Table 4shows the comparison of crossover techniques. It is observed from Table 4that
single and k-point crossover techniques are easy to implement. Uniform crossover is suitable
for large subsets. Order and cycle crossovers provide better exploration than the other
crossover techniques. Partially matched crossover provides better exploration. The perfor-
mance of partially matched crossover is better than the other crossover techniques. Reduced
surrogate and cycle crossovers suffer from premature convergence.
Fig. 4 Swapping genetic information between crossover points
Fig. 5 Swapping individual genesMultimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:8091 –8126 8099