The main aim of this paper is two folds. First, it presents the variants of GA and their
applicability in various fields. Second, it broadens the area of possible users in various fields.
The various types of crossover, mutation, selection, and encoding techniques are discussed.
The single-objective, multi-objective, parallel, and hybrid GAs are deliberated with their
advantages and disadvantages. The multimedia applications of GAs are elaborated.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2presents the methodology
used to carry out the research. The classical genetic algorithm and genetic operators are
discussed in Section 3. The variants of genetic algorithm with pros and cons are presented
in Section 4.S e c t i o n 5describes the applications of genetic algorithm. Section 6presents the
challenges and future research directions. The concluding remarks are drawn in Section 7.
2R e s e a r c hm e t h o d o l o g y
PRISMA ’s guidelines were used to conduct the review of GA [ 138]. A detailed search has
been done on Google scholar and PubMed for identification of research papers related to GA.
The important research works found during the manual search were also added in this paper.
During search, some keywords such as “Genetic Algorithm ”or“Application of GA ”or
“operators of GA ”or“representation of GA ”or“variants of GA ”were used. The selection
and rejection of explored research papers are based on the principles, which is mentioned in
Table 1.
Total 27,64,792 research papers were explored on Google Scholar, PubMed and manual
search. The research work related to genetic algorithm for multimedia applications were also
included. During the screening of research papers, all the duplicate papers and papers
published before 2007 were discarded. 4340 research papers were selected based on 2007
and duplicate entries. Thereafter, 4050 research papers were eliminated based on titles. 220
research papers were eliminated after reading of abstract. 70 research papers were left after
third round of screening. 40 more research papers were discarded after full paper reading and
facts found in the papers. After the fourth round of screening, final 30 research papers are
selected for review.
Based on the relevance and quality of research, 30 papers were selected for evaluation. The
relevance of research is decided through some criteria, which is mentioned in Table 1.T h e
Table 1 Selection criterion for shortlisted research papers
Sr.
No.Parameters Selection criteria Elimination criteria
1 Duration Research papers published from 2007
to 2020Research papers published before 2007
2 Analysis Research includes various operators
and modification in GAResearch includes operators of other metaheuristics
3 Comparison Research focuses on variants of GA Research focuses on variants of other
metaheuristics. GA included in some part of
research
4 Applications Research involves on multimedia,
operation management and wireless
networksResearch involves on engineering design, data
mining, software applications, and astronomy
applications
5 Study Research includes mathematical
foundation and experimental resultsResearch includes patent, case study, papers having
language other than EnglishMultimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:8091 –8126 8093