using binary GA (BGA). Their method produced better fitness value and farm efficiency.
Shukla et al. [ 185] utilized BGA for feature subset selection. They used mutual information
maximization concept for selecting the significant features. BGAs suffer from Hamming cliffs,
uneven schema, and difficulty in achieving precision [ 116,199].
4.1.2 Real-coded GAs
Real-coded GAs (RGAs) have been widely used in various real-life applications. The repre-
sentation of chromosomes is closely associated with real-life problems. The main advantages
of RGAs are robust, efficient, and accurate. However, RGAs suffer from premature conver-
gence. Researchers are working on RGAs to improve their performance. Most of RGAs are
developed by modifying the crossover, mutation and selection operators.
Crossover operators The searching capability of crossove r operators are not satisfactory for
continuous search space. The developments in cro ssover operators have been done to enhance their
performance in real environment. Wright [ 210] presented a heuristics crossover that was applied on
parents to produce off- spring. Michalewicz [ 135] proposed arithmetical crossover operators for
RGAs. Deb and Agrawal [ 34] developed a real-coded crossover operator, which is based on
characteristics of single-point crossover in B GA. The developed crossover operator named as
simulated binary crossover (SBX). SBX is able to overcome the Hamming cliff, precision, and
fixed mapping problem. The performance of SB X is not satisfactory in two-variable blocked
function. Eshelman et al. [ 53] utilized the schemata concept to design the blend crossover for
RGAs. The unimodal normal distribution crossove r operator (UNDX) was developed by Ono et al.
[144]. They used ellipsoidal probability distribu tion to generate the offspring. Kita et al. [ 106]
presented a multi-parent UNDX (MP- UNDX), which is the extension of [ 144]. However, the
performance of RGA with MP-UNDX is much similar to UNDX. Deep and Thakur [ 39]p r e s e n t e d
a Laplace crossover for RGAs, which is base d on Laplacian distribution. Chuang et al. [ 27]
developed a direction based crossover to further e xplore the all possible search directions. However,
the search directions are limited. The heuristic norma l distribution crossover operator was developed
by Wang et al. [ 207]. It generates the cross-generated offspring for better search operation. However,
the better individuals are not consider ed in this approach. Subbaraj et al. [ 192] proposed Taguchi
self-adaptive RCGA. They used Taguchi metho d and simulated binary crossover to exploit the
capable offspring.
Mutation operators Mutation operators generate diversity in the population. The two
main challenges have to tackle during the application of mutation. First, the proba-
bility of mutation operator that was appl ied on population. Second, the outlier
produced in chromosome after mutation process. Michalewicz [ 135] presented uniform
and non-uniform mutation operators for RGAs. Michalewicz and Schoenauer [ 136]Table 6 Best combination of various operators under optimal Environment
Encoding Scheme Mutation Crossover
Binary Encoding Inversion Uniform, Arithmetic, 1-Point, N-Point
Permutation Inversion Partially Matched Crossover,
Cycle Crossover, Order Crossover
Value Displacement Uniform, Arithmetic, 1-Point, N-Point
Tree Scramble Uniform, 1-PointMultimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:8091 –8126 8102