selected research papers comprise of genetic algorithm for multimedia applications, advance-
ment of their genetic operators, and hybridization of genetic algorithm with other well-
established metaheuristic algorithms. The pros and cons of genetic operators are shown in
preceding section.
3 Background
In this section, the basic structure of GA and its genetic operators are discussed with pros and
cons.
3.1 Classical GA
Genetic algorithm (GA) is an optimization algorithm that is inspired from the natural
selection. It is a population based search a lgorithm, which utilizes the concept of
survival of fittest [ 135]. The new populations are produced by iterative use of genetic
operators on individuals present in the population. The chromosome representation,
selection, crossover, mutation, and fitnes s function computation are the key elements of
GA. The procedure of GA is as follows. A population ( Y)o f nchromosomes are
initialized randomly. The fitness of each chromosome in Yis computed. Two chromo-
somes say C1andC2are selected from the population Yaccording to the fitness value.
The single-point crossover operator with crossover probability (C p) is applied on C1
andC2to produce an offspring say O. Thereafter, uniform mutation operator is applied
on produced offspring ( O) with mutation probability (M p) to generate O′. The new
offspring O′is placed in new population. The sel ection, crossover, and mutation
operations will be repeated on current population until the new population is complete.
The mathematical analysis of GA is as follows [ 126]:
GA dynamically change the search process through the probabilities of crossover and
mutation and reached to optimal solution. GA can modify the encoded genes. GA can evaluate
multiple individuals and produce multiple optimal solutions. Hence, GA has better global
search capability. The offspring produced from crossover of parent chromosomes is probable
to abolish the admirable genetic schemas parent chromosomes and crossover formula is
defined as [ 126]:
R¼Gþ2ﬃﬃﬃgp /C0/C1
=3G ð1Þ
where gis the number of generations, and Gis the total number of evolutionary generation set
by population. It is observed from Eq.( 1) that Ris dynamically changed and increase with
increase in number of evolutionary generation. In initial stage of GA, the similarity between
individuals is very low. The value of Rshould be low to ensure that the new population will
not destroy the excellent genetic schema of individuals. At the end of evolution, the similarity
between individuals is very high as well as the value of Rshould be high.
According to Schema theorem, the original schema has to be replaced with modified
schema. To maintain the diversity in population, the new schema keep the initial population
during the early stage of evolution. At the end of evolution, the appropriate schema will be
produced to prevent any distortion of excellent genetic schema [ 65,75]. Algorithm 1shows
the pseudocode of classical genetic algorithm.Multimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:8091 –8126 8094