to initialize the population and modi fied reproduction operators were applied on population. Xu et al.
[115] proposed a chaotic hybrid immune GA for spectrum allocation. The proposed approach
utilizes the advantages of both chaotic and immune operator. However, this method suffers from
parameter initialization problem.
4.5 Hybrid GAs
Genetic Algorithms can be easily hybridized with other optimization methods for improving their
performance such as image denoising methods, ch emical reaction optimization, and many more.
The main advantages of hybridized GA with othe r methods are better solution quality, better
efficiency, guarantee of feasible soluti ons, and optimized control parameters [ 51]. It is observed
from literature that the sampling capability of GA s is greatly affected from population size. To
resolve this problem, local search algorithms su ch as memetic algorithm, Baldwinian, Lamarckian,
and local search have been integrated with GAs. T his integration provides proper balance between
intensification and diversification. Another pro blem in GA is parameter setting. Finding appropriate
control parameters is a tedious task. The other m etaheuristic techniques can be used with GA to
resolve this problem. Hybrid GAs have been used to solve the issues mentioned in the preceding
subsections [ 29,137,186].
4.5.1 Enhance search capability
GAs have been integrated with local search algor ithms to reduce the genetic drift. The explicit
refinement operator was introduced in local search for producing better solutions. El-Mihoub et al.
[54] established the effect of probability of local sear ch on the population size of GA. Espinoza et al.
[50] investigated the effect of local search for red ucing the population size of GA. Different search
algorithms have been integrated with GA s for solving real-life applications.
4.5.2 Generate feasible solutions
In complex and high-dimensional problems, th e genetic operators of GA generate infeasible
solutions. PMX crossover generat es the infeasible solutions for ord er-based problems. The distance
preserving crossover operator was developed to g enerate feasible solutions for travelling salesman
problem [ 58]. The gene pooling operator instead of crossover was used to generate feasible solution
for data clustering [ 19]. Konak and Smith [ 108] integrated a cut-saturation algorithm with GA for
designing the communication networks. They used uni form crossover to produce feasible solutions.
4.5.3 Replacement of genetic operators
There is a possibility to re place the genetic operato rs which are mentioned in
Section 3.2with other search techniques. Leng [ 122] developed a guided GA that
utilizes the penalties from guided local search. These penalties were used in fitness
function to improve the perform ance of GA. Headar and Fukushima [ 74]u s e ds i m p l e x
crossover instead of standard crossover. The standard mutation operator was replaced
with simulated annealing in [ 195]. The basic concepts of quantum computing are used
to improve the performance of GAs. The heur istic crossover and hill-climbing oper-
ators can be integrated into GA for solving three-matching problem.Multimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:8091 –8126 8107