5.1.3 Inventory control
Besides the scheduling, inventory control plays an important role in OM. Backordering and
lost sales are two main approaches for inventory control [ 119]. Hiassat et al. [ 76] utilized the
location-inventory model to find out the number and location of warehouses. Various design
constraints have been added in the objective functions of GA and its variants for solving
inventory control problem [].
5.1.4 Forecasting and network design
Forecasting is an important component for OM. Researchers are working on forecasting of
financial trading, logistics demand, and tourist arrivals. GA has been hybridized with support
vector regression, fuzzy set, and neural network (NN) to improve their forecasting capability
[22,78,89,178,214]. Supply network design greatly affect the operations planning and
scheduling. Most of the research articles are focused on capacity constraints of facilities [ 45,
184]. Multi-product multi-period problems increases the complexity of supply networks. To
resolve the above-mentioned problem, GA has been hybridized with other techniques [ 6,45,
55,188,189]. Multi-objective GAs are also used to optimize the cost, profit, carbon emissions,
etc. [ 184,189].
5.2 Multimedia
GAs have been applied in various fields of multimedia. Some of well-known multimedia fields
are encryption, image processing, video processing, medical imaging, and gaming.
5.2.1 Information security
Due to development in multimedia applications, images, videos and audios are transferred
from one place to another over Internet. It has been found in literature that the images are more
error prone during the transmission. Therefore, image protection techniques such as encryp-
tion, watermarking and cryptography are required. The classical image encryption techniques
require the input parameters for encryption. The wrong selection of input parameters will
generate inadequate encryption results. GA and its variants have been used to select the
appropriate control parameters. Kaur and Kumar [ 96] developed a multi-objective genetic
algorithm to optimize the control parameters of chaotic map. The secret key was generated
using beta chaotic map. The generated key was use to encrypt the image. Parallel GAs were
also used to encrypt the image [ 97].
5.2.2 Image processing
The main image processing tasks are preprocessing, segmentation, object detection, denoising,
and recognition. Image segmentation is an important step to solve the image processing
problems. Decomposing/partitioning an image requires high computational time. To resolve
this problem, GA is used due to their better search capability [ 26,102]. Enhancement is a
technique to improve the quality and contrast of an image. The better image quality is required
to analyze the given image. GAs have been used to enhance natural contrast and magnify
image [ 40,64,99]. Some researchers are working on hybridization of rough set with adaptiveMultimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:8091 –8126 8111