4 Variants of GA
Various variants of GA ’s have been proposed by researchers. The variants of GA are broadly
classified into five main categories namely, real and binary coded, multiobjective, parallel,
chaotic, and hybrid GAs. The pros and cons of these algorithms with their application has been
discussed in the preceding subsections.
4.1 Real and binary coded GAs
Based on the representation of chromosomes, GAs are categorized in two classes, namely
binary and real coded GAs.
4.1.1 Binary coded GAs
The binary representation was used to encode GA and known as binary GA. The genetic
operators were also modified to carry out the search process. Payne and Glen [ 153] developed
a binary GA to identify the similarity among molecules. They used binary representation for
position of molecule and their conformations. However, this method has high computational
complexity. Longyan et al. [ 203] investigated three different method for wind farm designTable 4 Comparison of different crossover techniques
Technique Pros Cons
Single point Easy to implement
SimpleLess diverse solutions
Two and K-point Easy to implement Less diverse solutions
Applicable on small subsets
Reduced Surrogate Better performance over small optimization
problemsPremature convergence
Uniform Unbiased Exploration
Applicable on large subsets
Better recombination potentialLess diverse solutions
Precedence Preservative
(PPX)Better offspring generation Redundancy Problem
Order Crossover (OX) Better Exploration Loss of information from previous
individual
Cycle Crossover Unbiased Exploration Premature convergence
Partially Mapped (PMX) Better Convergence rate
Superior than the other crossoversNA
Table 5 Comparison of different mutation operators
Operator Pros Cons
Displacement Mutation Easy to implement
Applicable on small problem
instancesRisk of Premature convergence
Simple-Inversion
MutationEasy to implement Premature convergence
Scramble Mutation Affects large number of genes
Applicable on large problem
instancesDisturbance in the population
Deterioration of solution quality in some
problemsMultimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:8091 –8126 8101