ANOMALY DETECTION FOR TIME SERIES USING VAE-LSTM HYBRID MODEL
Shuyu Lin1, Ronald Clark2, Robert Birke3, Sandro Sch ¨onborn3, Niki Trigoni1, Stephen Roberts1
1University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 2JD, UK
2Imperial College London, South Kensington, London SW7 2AZ, UK
3ABB Future Labs, Segelhofstrasse 1K, 5404 Baden-D ¨attwil, Switzerland
ABSTRACT
In this work, we propose a V AE-LSTM hybrid model as an
unsupervised approach for anomaly detection in time series.
Our model utilizes both a V AE module for forming robust
local features over short windows and a LSTM module for
estimating the long term correlation in the series on top of
the features inferred from the V AE module. As a result, our
detection algorithm is capable of identifying anomalies that
span over multiple time scales. We demonstrate the effective-
ness of our detection algorithm on ﬁve real world problems
and ﬁnd our method outperforms three other commonly used
detection methods.
Index Terms —Anomaly Detection, Time Series, Deep
Learning, Unsupervised Learning
1. INTRODUCTION
Anomaly detection for time series is concerned with detect-
ing unexpected system behaviours across time to provide in-
formative insights. In many industrial applications, anomaly
detection is used for monitoring sensor failures, alerting users
of external attacks and detecting potential catastrophic events
at an early stage [1]. Despite all the beneﬁts, designing a
good anomaly detection algorithm is extremely challenging.
This is because the training data are often unbalanced with
very few labelled anomalies. Furthermore, most anomalous
behaviours are not known a priori and a good anomaly algo-
rithm is expected to be able to detect even unseen anomalies.
Due to these constraints, anomaly detection algorithms often
have to be trained in an unsupervised fashion.
Broadly, we may characterize three types of anomalies
that commonly occur in time series: namely point, context
and collective anomalies [2]. Of the three types, point anoma-
liesare the easiest to detect as data points can be treated in-
dependently during detection and no temporal relationships
need to be considered. For this reason, simple threshold ap-
proaches or multi-layer perceptron (MLP) based methods [3]
work relatively well for point anomalies. Context and collec-
tive anomalies , on the contrary, are more challenging. Con-
text anomalies depend on the value of surrounding data points
and thus local information is required for their detection andconvolutional neural networks (CNNs) with larger receptive
ﬁelds have been shown to work well in this case [4]. Collec-
tive anomalies occur when a series of data points together ex-
hibits abnormal behaviours. As collective anomalies always
occur in sequence over a reasonably long period, recurrent
neural networks (RNNs), have been shown to be effective [5].
However, although a number of successful approaches have
been proposed, none of the existing methods work well for
all anomaly types.
In this paper, we propose a hybrid anomaly detection
method that combines the representation learning power of a
deep generative model - in the form of a variational autoen-
coder (V AE) - with the temporal modelling ability of a long
short-term memory RNN (LSTM), as shown in Figure 1. Via
the V AE module our model aims to capture the structural
regularities of the time series over local windows, while the
LSTM module attempts to model the longer term trend. Both
the V AE and LSTM units do not require labelled anomalies
for training. The code of our algorithm and experiments
included in this paper is available at https://github.com/lin-
shuyu/VAE-LSTM-for-anomaly-detection . In summary, our
contributions are:
We utilize a V AE model to summarize the local infor-
mation of a short window into a low-dimensional em-
bedding .
We utilize a LSTM model, which acts on the low-
dimensional embeddings produced by the V AE model,
to manage the sequential patterns over longer term.
The hierarchical structure allows us to detect anoma-
lies occurring over both short and long periods .
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. We
ﬁrst brieﬂy outline V AE and LSTM models and ways in
which they have been used for anomaly detection. We then
present our hybrid V AE-LSTM model, followed by detection
results given by our and other methods on real world time
series. Finally we conclude with avenues for future research.
2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
In this section, we provide an overview of two machine learn-
ing models, namely V AEs and LSTMs, which serve as major4322 978-1-5090-6631-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE ICASSP 2020
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Oxford Libraries. Downloaded on June 16,2020 at 14:15:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.