Training Failures of GANs under Limited Data. [15,1] observe that GANs’ performance has
severely deteriorated when only limited training data is available. The discriminator tends to memorize
and heavily overﬁt the small training samples, leaving a gap between the real sample’s and the
generated sample’s distribution. As shown in Figure 2, with only 10% CIFAR-10 data available for
training SNGAN [ 23], the training and validation accuracies of the discriminator Dquickly saturate
to nearly 100% (ideally close to 50%), which indicatesDto become over-conﬁdent in distinguishing
real and generated samples. It demonstrates that Dsimply memorizes the training data, and such
overﬁtting leads to training collapses and deteriorated quality of generated images.
To address this dilemma, we suggest a new data-efﬁcient GAN training workﬂow, decomposed into
two stages: ( i)ﬁnding winning tickets in GANs via Algorithm 1; then ( ii)training the found GAN
tickets , potentially with both data- and feature-level augmentations, via Algorithm 2. Blessed by
LTH, the located GAN ticket shows improved generalization ability, and is further enhanced by
augmentations that prevent Dfrom becoming too conﬁdent.
3.2 Data-Efﬁcient Lottery Ticket Finding from GANs
In this section, we provide the preliminaries and setups to identifying data-efﬁcient GAN tickets.
Subnetworks and winning tickets. A subnetwork of GAN is deﬁned as fG(;mg);D(;
md)g, wheremg2 f0;1gkk0andmd2 f0;1gkk0are binary masks for the generator and
discriminator respectively, and is the element-wise product. Let 0and0be the initializa-
tion weights of GANs. Following [ 18,16], we deﬁne winning tickets of GAN as subnetworks
fG(;0mg);D(;0md)g, that reach a matched or better performance compared to unpruned
GANs when trained in isolation with similar training iterations.
Finding data-efﬁcient winning tickets in GANs. To our best knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to extend
LTH to the limited data regimes. In this challenging scenario, only a small amount of training data
are accessible for the ﬁnding and training of GAN tickets . We use unstructured magnitude pruning
[87], e.g., Iterative Magnitude Pruning (IMP), to establish the sparse masks mgandmd.
As shown in Algorithm 1, we ﬁrst train the full GAN model for tepochs with limited training samples
(e.g., 100-shot), and then perform IMP to globally prune the weights with the lowest magnitude. Zero
elements in the obtained masks mgandmdindex the pruned weights. Before repeating the process
again, the weights of the sparse generator G(;mg)and discriminatorD(;md)are rewound
to the same initialization 0and0, following the convention [ 18]. The pruning ratio controls the
portion of weights removed per round, and we ﬁx = 20% in all experiments.
Intuitively, identifying a special sparse mask (without requiring to train its weights well) should be an
easier and hence more data-efﬁcient task compared to training the full network weights. That was
veriﬁed by our observations in experiments too: when the training data volume reduces from 100% to
10% of the full training set, the quality of sparse mask remains to be stable, since it achieves matched
performance compared to its dense counterpart in both full and limited data re-training regimes.
3.3 Data-Level and Feature-level Augmentations for Training GAN Tickets
After locating the GAN ticket at certain sparsity, training it using the vanilla recipe could already
attain signiﬁcantly improved IS and FID compared to the full dense model trained in the same
data-limited regime: see Figure 1 outer circle for example.
Next, we discuss how our proposal can be applied together with augmentation-based approaches,
for enhanced training of our found GAN tickets. Our natural choices include to plug-in the two
recent state-of-the-art data augmentations, i.e., DiffAug [ 1] and ADA [ 15]. We further present a new
adversarial feature-level augmentation (AdvAug), that can be jointly applied together with data-level
augmentations to gain an additional performance boost.
Revisiting adversarial training. Let(x;y)denote the input image and its label. f(#;x;y)is the
loss function parameterized by #. Adversarial training [69] can be formulated as follows:
min
#E(x;y)
max
kkpf(#;x+;y)
; (1)
whereis crafted adversarial perturbation constrained within the `pnorm ball that is centered at
xwith a radius .can be reliably generated by multi-step projected gradient descent (PGD) [ 69].
4