This paper addresses the above issue from a brand new perspective by decomposing the challenging
GAN training in limited data regimes into two sequential sub-problems: ( i) ﬁnding independent train-
able subnetworks (i.e., lottery tickets in GANs) [ 16,17]; then (ii) training the located subnetworks,
which we show is more data-efﬁcient by itself, and can further beneﬁt from aggressive augmentations
(both the input data and feature levels). Either sub-problem becomes much less data-hungry to
train, and the two sub-problems re-use the same small training set of real images. Although this
paper focuses on tackling the data-efﬁcient training of GANs, such a coordinated framework might
potentially be generalized to training other deep models with higher data efﬁciency too.
Our key enabling technique is to leverage the lottery ticket hypothesis ( LTH ) [18]. LTH shows the
feasibility to locate highly sparse subnetworks (called “ winning tickets ”) that are capable of training
in isolation to match or even outperform the performance of original unpruned models. Recently,
[17,16] revealed the existence of winning ticket in GANs (called “ GAN tickets ”). However, none of
the existing works discuss the inﬂuence of training data size on locating and training those tickets.
Our work takes one step further, and shows that one can identify the same high-quality GAN tickets
even in the data-scarce regime. The found GAN tickets also serve as a sparse structural prior to solve
the second sub-problem with less data, while maintaining an unimpaired trainability blessed by the
LTH assumption [ 18]. Figure 1 (the outer circle’s blue dots) evidences that we can identify sparse
GAN tickets that achieve superior performance than full GANs in the data-scarce scenarios.
The new lottery ticket angle complements the existing augmentation techniques [ 19–21], and we
further show that they can be organically combined to boost performance further1. When we train
the identiﬁed lottery ticket, we demonstrate its training can beneﬁt as well from the latest data-level
augmentation strategies, ADA [ 15] and DiffAug [ 1]. Furthermore, we introduce a novel feature-level
augmentation that can be applied in parallel to data-level. It injects adversarial perturbations into
GANs’ intermediate features to implicitly regularize both discriminator and generator. Combining
the new feature-level and existing data-level augmentations in training GAN tickets leads to more
stabilized training dynamics, and establishes new state-of-the-arts for data-efﬁcient GAN training.
Extensive experiments are conducted on a variety of the latest GAN architectures and datasets, which
consistently validate the effectiveness of our proposal. For example, our BigGAN tickets at 36:00%
and67:24% sparsity levels reach an (FID, IS) of (23:14;52:98)and(70:91;7:03), on Tiny-ImageNet
6464and ImageNet 128128, with 10% and25% training data, respectively. On CIFAR-10 and
CIFAR-100, for SNGAN and BigGAN tickets at 67:24%86:58% sparsity, our results with only
10% training data can even surpass their dense counterparts. Impressively, our method can generate
high-quality images on par with other GAN transfer learning approaches, by training on as few as
100real samples and without using any pre-training.
2 Related Work
GANs and Data-Efﬁcient GAN Training. GANs [ 22] have gained popularity in diverse computer
vision scenarios. To stabilize GAN training and improve the visual ﬁdelity and diversity of generated
images, extensive studies have been conducted, such as sophisticated network architectures [ 23,8,24–
26], improved training recipes [ 27,4,28,29], and more stable objectives [ 30–35]. [36,37] utilize
semi- and self-supervised learning to pursue label efﬁciency in GAN training.
Recently, how to train GANs without sufﬁcient real images in the target domain sparkles new interests.
There have been efforts on adapting a pre-trained GAN generator, including BSA [ 38], AdaFM [ 39],
Elastic Weight Consolidation [ 40], and Few-Shot GAN [ 41–43]. However, those methods assume
a large, related source domain as pre-training , based on which they further alleviate target domain
data limitation by only tuning small subsets of weights. They are hence in a completely different
track from our “stand-alone” data-efﬁcient training goal where no pre-training is leveraged. [ 44,45]
select core-sets of training data to speed up GAN training. A few recent attempts [ 1,15] leverage
differentiable or adaptive data augmentations to signiﬁcantly improve GAN training in limited data
regimes. Lately, [ 46] investigates a regularization approach, on constraining the distance between
the current prediction of the real image and a moving average variable that tracks the historical
predictions of the generated image, that complements the data augmentation methods.
Lottery Ticket Hypothesis and GAN Tickets. [18] claims the existence of independently trainable
sparse subnetworks that can match or even surpass the performance of dense networks. [ 47,48] scale
1We also tried to add augmentations in the lottery ticket ﬁnding stage, but did not observe visible impact.
2