Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 11202 4 of 21
The innovations and main contributions of this paper are described as follows.
 A novel noise K-means clustering algorithm based on a noise algorithm is developed
to capture urban hotspots.
 The noise algorithm is employed to randomly enhance the attribution of data points
and output results of clustering by adding noise judgment to automatically obtain the
number of clusters and initialize the center cluster.
 Four unsupervised evaluation indexes of DB, PBM, SC, and SSE are directly used to
evaluate and analyze the clustering result.
 A non-parametric Wilcoxon statistical analysis method is employed to verify the
distribution state and difference of clustering results.
 Comprehensive experiments are designed and executed to prove the effectiveness of
the proposed noise K-means clustering algorithm with ﬁve sets of taxi GPS data.
2. Noise K-Means Clustering Algorithm
2.1. The Idea of the Noise K-Means Clustering Algorithm
A K-means clustering algorithm is an iterative clustering analysis algorithm that has
been regarded as an effective means to solve urban road planning problems by scholars for
the past several decades. The algorithm has been widely used in the ﬁelds of document
classiﬁcation, customer classiﬁcation, ride data analysis, criminal network analysis, the
detailed analysis of call records, and so on. It is very difﬁcult to determine the number of
clusters and sensitively initialize the cluster center. Noise can be used to simulate noise
phenomena in nature. Because of its continuity, if an axis in two-dimensional noise is taken
as the time axis, the result is a continuously changing one-dimensional function. As such,
in order to solve the existing problems of the K-means clustering algorithm and make use
of the merits of the noise algorithm, a novel noise-based K-means clustering algorithm
is proposed to obtain a better clustering center and capture urban hotspots in this paper.
The proposed noise-based K-means clustering algorithm consists of three parts. Firstly, the
noise algorithm is employed to randomly enhance the attribution of data points and the
output result of clustering by adding noise judgment in order to automatically obtain the
number of clusters of the given data and initialize the cluster center. Secondly, the K-means
clustering algorithm is employed to optimize the clustering center generated. It is fused
with noise algorithm to form a novel noise-based K-means clustering algorithm. Finally, the
proposed noise-based K-means clustering algorithm is used to obtain the clustering results
for the given data and capture an excellent clustering center, i.e., and urban hotspot. Four
unsupervised evaluation indexes of DB, PBM, SC, and SSE are directly used to evaluate and
analyze the clustering results, and nonparametric Wilcoxon statistical analysis is employed
to verify the distribution states and differences between clustering results.
2.2. The Flow of the Noise K-Means Clustering Algorithm
The ﬂow of the proposed noise K-means clustering algorithm is shown in Figure 2.