Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 11202 8 of 21
4. Experiment Results and Analysis
4.1. Urban Taxi GPS Data
In order to verify the effectiveness of the proposed noise K-means clustering algo-
rithm, ﬁve taxi GPS datasets at home and abroad are used as shown in Table 1. Taxi GPS
data mainly refer to the vehicle position, direction, and speed information that is regu-
larly recorded by the vehicle via the on-board global positioning system during travel.
At present, many taxi GPS datasets exist for many cities across the world. The cities in
this study, i.e., Aracaju (Brazil), San Francisco (USA), Rome (Italy), Chongqing (China),
and Beijing (China), are representative cities for different continents and countries and
are large-scale cities. The DB index [ 47], PBM index [ 48], SC (silhouette coefﬁcient) [ 49]
and SSE (sum of squares for error) are directly used to evaluate and analyze the clustering
results. These evaluation methods are directly related to the number of clusters. Among
them, DB index is mainly used to evaluate the performance of the noise K-means clustering
algorithm. If the value of DB index is smaller, the similarity between clusters is lower
and the clustering result is better. The PBM index is still used to evaluate the quality of
clustering structure, where it describes clustering results and object attribution by deﬁning
quality. If the value of the PBM index is higher, the clustering effect is better. SC evaluates
the clustering results by clustering the cohesion and separation. If the value of SC is greater,
the clustering effect is better. SSE is used to evaluate the error probability distribution state
and object attribution clustering. If the value of SSE is smaller, the clustering effect is better.
The evaluation results and excellent procedures directly affect the effectiveness of urban
hotspot discovery.
In Table 1, the GPS points are distributed in city areas and some are hotspots; however,
it is very difﬁcult to capture the hotspots from GPS datasets.
Table 1. Taxi GPS datasets.
Taxi GPS Dataset Latitude and Longitude Region Number of GPS Data Points
Aracaju (Brazil) 0.14 0.16 16,513
San Francisco (USA) [39] 0.10 0.10 21,826
Rome (Italy) [39] 0.35 0.50 20,254
Chongqing (China) [1] 0.60 0.36 19,149
Beijing (China) [40] 0.90 0.90 17,387
4.2. Experimental Environment and Parameter Setting
The experimental environment based on VMware featured the following: Intel Xeon
E5-2658, dominant frequency 2 2.10 GHz with 8G RAM, Windows 2008 server, and the
algorithm was coded in MATLAB 2016b. MATLAB is a commercial mathematical software
produced by American MathWorks company(USA) which includes row matrix operation,
drawing functions and data, implementing algorithms, creating user interfaces, connecting
programs of other programming languages, and so on. It is used in data analysis, wireless
communication, deep learning, image processing and computer vision, signal processing,
robotics, control systems, and other ﬁelds. In our experiment, the alternative values were
tested and modiﬁed for some functions to obtain the most reasonable initial values of
these parameters. These selected values of the parameters take on the optimal solution
and the most reasonable running time to efﬁciently complete the solving problem. The
parameter settings of the FCM, K-means, K-means plus, and noise K-means are shown
in Table 2. The number of clustering iterations was 200, and each algorithm ran 20 times
independently. Generally, the evaluation results will be directly affected when the smaller
clustering number of the comparison algorithm is set. FCM selected the clustering center
according to the fuzzy parameters. K-means and K-means plus selected clustering center
randomly. Noise-based K-means could obtain the clustering number and the initialization
of the clustering center automatically. At the same time, the clustering numbers of noise-
based K-means and FCM, K-means, and K-means plus were the same, and the clustering
evaluation results of the corresponding clustering algorithm were also similar.