Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 11202 2 of 21
technology has made urban operation more intelligent and has gradually become a reality,
making rail transit and urban transportation more predictable and widely applied; however,
a city is a densely populated area with a high concentration of both living and vehicle
operation. The growth of the world’s civil vehicle sales from 2010 to 2020 is shown in
Figure 1.
Appl. Sci. 2021 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 20 
 
from the strategic level and have formulated  construction schemes to meet the develop-
ment needs of different cities, hoping to solv e the challenges faced in the process of urban 
development and alleviating urban congestion. In particular, the application of the new generation of cloud computing, big data, the Internet of Things, and artificial intelligence 
technology has made urban operation more intelligent and has gradually become a real-
ity, making rail transit and urban transporta tion more predictable and widely applied; 
however, a city is a densely populated area with a high concentration of both living and 
vehicle operation. The growth of the world’s ci vil vehicle sales from 2010 to 2020 is shown 
in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. The growth of the world’s civil vehicle Sales from 2010 to 2020. 
Moreover, population flow is directly related to time, and urban congestion is still an 
important challenge for every city. The application of big data has served as a basic stra-
tegic digital resource in smart cities. Many researchers have analyzed the trajectory GPS 
data of transportation vehicles in order to  mine the hidden information behind the data 
to reflect the urban operation status and define temporal and spatial change rules [1], in addition to use in traffic congestion status  analysis [2–7], crowd movement distribution 
[8–10], traffic travel recommendation [11,12], and road planning [13,14], urban hotspot 
discovery [15–18], and so on. Such research resu lts are directly applied to the construction 
of a smart city to elucidate more reasonable urban road planning and a more reasonable 
dispersion of vehicle flow and human flow. Such research methods usually use machine 
learning algorithms (such as cluster analysis and feature learning) to capture the vehicle 
trajectory patterns, including the origins and destinations (OD) [19–21], stops and moves 
(SM) [22,23], and moving objects (MO) [24,25] from the GPS data. Pongracic et al. [26] proposed a midlatitude Klobuchar correction model to correct the Klobuchar model for 
midlatitude users. Gu et al. [27] proposed a data-based methodology to estimate the traffic 
congestion of road segments between bus stop s in order to improve the travel time relia-
bility and quality of public transport services. Gao et al. [28] proposed a specific and ac-
curate definition of traffic congestion to qu antify the level of traffic congestion and con-
structed an image-based traffic congestion estimation framework based on a convolu-
tional neural network. Afrin and Yodo [29] proposed a Bayesian network based on speed- 
and volume-related measures and a probabilis tic congestion estimation approach. These 
models have been used to explain and disc over urban operation states, crowd migration 
hotspots, and other urban operations. 
In order to learn the valuable information hidden behind the location data, a cluster-
ing learning algorithm is a common and simple method that is used in many studies. 
Figure 1. The growth of the world’s civil vehicle Sales from 2010 to 2020.
Moreover, population ﬂow is directly related to time, and urban congestion is still
an important challenge for every city. The application of big data has served as a basic
strategic digital resource in smart cities. Many researchers have analyzed the trajectory
GPS data of transportation vehicles in order to mine the hidden information behind the
data to reﬂect the urban operation status and deﬁne temporal and spatial change rules [ 1],
in addition to use in trafﬁc congestion status analysis [ 2–7], crowd movement distribu-
tion [ 8–10], trafﬁc travel recommendation [ 11,12], and road planning [ 13,14], urban hotspot
discovery [15–18] , and so on. Such research results are directly applied to the construction
of a smart city to elucidate more reasonable urban road planning and a more reasonable
dispersion of vehicle ﬂow and human ﬂow. Such research methods usually use machine
learning algorithms (such as cluster analysis and feature learning) to capture the vehicle
trajectory patterns, including the origins and destinations (OD) [19–21] , stops and moves
(SM) [ 22,23], and moving objects (MO) [ 24,25] from the GPS data. Pongracic et al. [26]
proposed a midlatitude Klobuchar correction model to correct the Klobuchar model for
midlatitude users. Gu et al. [27] proposed a data-based methodology to estimate the trafﬁc
congestion of road segments between bus stops in order to improve the travel time reliabil-
ity and quality of public transport services. Gao et al. [ 28] proposed a speciﬁc and accurate
deﬁnition of trafﬁc congestion to quantify the level of trafﬁc congestion and constructed
an image-based trafﬁc congestion estimation framework based on a convolutional neural
network. Afrin and Yodo [ 29] proposed a Bayesian network based on speed- and volume-
related measures and a probabilistic congestion estimation approach. These models have
been used to explain and discover urban operation states, crowd migration hotspots, and
other urban operations.