Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 11202 3 of 21
In order to learn the valuable information hidden behind the location data, a clustering
learning algorithm is a common and simple method that is used in many studies. Cluster
analysis, also known as group analysis, is not only a statistical analysis method to study
a classiﬁcation problem (sample or index), but is also an important algorithm for data
mining. Cluster analysis is composed of several patterns. Usually, a pattern is a vector of
measurement or a point in multi-dimensional space. Cluster analysis is based on similarity.
Patterns in a cluster have more similarity than patterns that are not in the same cluster.
Clustering analysis algorithms can be divided into partition methods, hierarchical methods,
density-based methods, grid-based methods, and model-based methods. Among them,
K-means clustering is the simplest, most used, and computationally efﬁcient clustering
algorithm, but it faces three major problems for any given dataset. As such, it is very
difﬁcult to ﬁnd the appropriate number of clusters, optimize clustering centers, and capture
global clustering results.
For the past several decades, many researchers have proposed some new ideas and
methods. An improved K-means algorithm based on density (canopy K-means) has been
proposed to solve the problem of determining the most suitable number of clusters and
the best initial seeds [ 30]. An evolutionary K-means (EKM) method, based on combining
K-means and a genetic algorithm, has been proposed to select parameters automatically
through the evolution of partitions for solving the initiation problem of K-means [ 31]. The
K-means++ algorithm has been proposed to quickly capture a better clustering center to
ﬁnd the sensitivity of the clustering process for the clustering center [ 32]. Fuzzy C-means
(FCM) has been proposed to solve the problem of clustering edge data attribution [ 33–36].
An intelligent optimization algorithm with a K-means algorithm has been proposed to
effectively solve the global optimization of clustering and the sensitivity of clustering
center effectively [ 37,38]. In addition, some researchers have also proposed some improved
methods for K-means algorithms and new application scenarios. For example, the depth
representation extracted by depth learning technology has been proposed to improve the
clustering performance of K-means clustering [ 39]. A competing cluster center approach
has been proposed to maximize the beneﬁts of cluster centers [ 40]. Ma and Zhou [ 41]
proposed a novel sharing-based niche genetic algorithm with an initial population based
on hybrid K-means clustering in order to obtain the best chromosome and perform K-
means clustering. Sun et al. [ 42] proposed a framework to differentiate between these two
types of methods with the following procedure.
These K-means clustering algorithms have adequately realized clustering and have
obtained clustering results in actual engineering applications; however, some shortcomings
still exist, such as a low processing efﬁciency, difﬁculty in determining the number of clus-
ters, sensitively initializing the cluster center, and so on. In order to solve these problems, a
novel K-means clustering algorithm based on a noise algorithm, namely, a noise K-means
clustering algorithm, is developed here in order to improve the processing efﬁciency of
automatic clustering and avoid both excessive manual conﬁguration of parameter uncer-
tainty and clustering results falling into local optimums in this paper. The noise algorithm
is employed to randomly enhance the attribution of data points and output the results of
clustering by adding noise judgment in order to automatically obtain the number of clusters
for the given data and initialize the center cluster. Four unsupervised evaluation indexes
of DB, PBM, SC, and SSE, and the nonparametric Wilcoxon statistical analysis method are
employed to evaluate and analyze the clustering results and verify the distribution states
and differences. Finally, ﬁve taxi GPS datasets, including Beijing, Chongqing, San Francisco,
Rome and Aracaju, are selected to test and verify the effectiveness of the proposed noise
K-means clustering algorithm in comparison with fuzzy C-means, K-means, and K-means
plus approaches.