Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 11202 16 of 21
As can be seen from Figures 9–12, the spatial distributions of urban hotspots have been
captured by the FCM, K-means and K-means plus clustering algorithms for the given taxi
GPS data of Aracaju (Brazil), San Francisco (USA), Rome (Italy), Chongqing (China) and
Beijing (China) is different. The aggregation degree of taxi operation varies signiﬁcantly
between different cities. From the city hotspot marking results of the taxis GPS data in
the ﬁve cities obtained by FCM in Figure 9, it can be seen that the clustering effect is not
ideal and that there are serious dispersion and local optimum phenomena. For example,
the clustering results of San Francisco (USA) demonstrate local optimum phenomena and
multiple hotspots are close together, which results in an uneven distribution of urban
hotspots and deviation from urban hotspots. Thus, a potentially planned road cannot
beneﬁt many people with this approach. From the city hotspot marking results of the
taxis GPS data in ﬁve cities obtained by K-means clustering in Figure 10, it can be seen
that the clustering centers and numbers of clusters are not very reasonable and do not
show optimal results. There are multiple local optimum phenomena, such as the serious
phenomenon that multiple hotspots are close together in Rome (Italy) and Beijing (China).
The phenomenon occurs such that some marker points are not clustered, so that a planned
road cannot beneﬁt a large number of people. As can be seen from the city hotspot marking
results of the taxis GPS data in ﬁve cities obtained by K-means plus clustering in Figure 11,
the obtained clustering effect is better than that obtained with FCM and K-means clustering.
The clustering centers and number of clusters in most cities are optimal, but there is a local
optimal phenomenon in Rome (Italy), which shows multiple hotspots together. A road
planned with this approach could beneﬁt many people. As can be seen from the city hotspot
marking results of the taxis GPS data in ﬁve cities obtained by the noise-based K-means
clustering in Figure 12, the obtained clustering effect is better than that obtained with FCM,
K-means, and K-means plus clustering. The clustering centers and numbers of clusters for
all ﬁve cities are the best here, and there are no groups of hotspots that are close together.
The information reﬂected by these urban hotspots denotes shopping points, parks, stations,
amusement areas, and other public places, which means that consequently planned roads
beneﬁt all people. In summary, the compared experiment results show that the noise-based
K-means algorithm can reasonably obtain the number of clusters and initialize the cluster
center, and the proposed algorithm shows better clustering performance and accurately
obtains clustering results, in addition to effectively capturing urban hotspots.
5. Statistical Analysis of Wilcoxon
A Wilcoxon rank sum test is a non-parametric null hypothesis statistical testing
method [ 50] that is often used to test the signiﬁcant difference and distribution state of a
clustering training process. When statistical validation is performed, it is usually composed
ofp,handstats, in which prepresents the results uandvof a clustering evaluation. pis the
continuous distribution of data samples, which is used to test uandvunder the non-null
hypothesis (noise-based K-means vs. FCM, noise-based K-means vs. K-means, noise-based
K-means vs. K-means plus). As p!0, the difference between uand vbecomes more
obvious. his the logical value for testing 0 or 1, h= 1 means reject the null hypothesis, and
h= 0 means reject the null hypothesis at a(for example, a= 0.05, ais the signiﬁcance level
parameter, value range: 0 < a< 1). That is, h= 1 means that the difference between uandv
is signiﬁcant, while h= 0 means that the difference between uandvis not signiﬁcant. Stats
consists of two statistics, zval andranksum .zval represents a normal distribution estimate of
p, while ranksum represents a statistic [ 51]. The statistical analysis results of the Wilcoxon
rank sum testing are shown in Tables 8–10.