by three convolutional layers, which contain 512 ﬁlters with
shape 51, followed by a bidirectional long short-term mem-
ory (LSTM) layer of 256 units for each direction. The result-
ing text encodings are accessed by the decoder through a loca-
tion sensitive attention mechanism, which takes attention his-
tory into account when computing a normalized weight vector
for aggregation.
The autoregressive decoder network takes as input the ag-
gregated text encoding, and conditioned on 256-dimensional
d-vector from a separately trained speaker encoder as in
Tacotron 2D [12]. Similar to Tacotron 2, we separately train
a WaveRNN [4] to invert mel spectrograms to a time-domain
waveform.
Training TTS on non-studio data like Isolated-Sentences
is challenging. To improve TTS ﬁdelity when training on this
material we make two changes to the model. First, we use
a GMM based attention mechanism [13] rather than content-
based attention. Second, we augment the model with a vari-
ational auto encoder (V AE) as in [14]. In order to make the
model robust to noise and highly biased data, we further mod-
ify the global V AE to a hierarchical version as Figure 1. The
new V AE includes a local encoder which encodes ﬁxed two-
second chunks with a one-second overlap and a global en-
coder which encodes the whole utterance. Both V AEs have
convolutional layers followed by LSTM layers. The global
style vector is summed with the local style vector and fed
into each decoder RNN step. These two modiﬁcations add
stability and ﬁdelity to the TTS output. The use of a hierar-
chical structure in the V AE results in synthesized speech that
is recognized by Google’s production voice search recognizer
with a WER that is 1% absolute less than the non-hierarchical
V AE.
4. SPEECH RECOGNITION MODEL
The ASR experiments in this paper use listen-attend-spell
(LAS), an end-to-end encoder-decoder model with additive
attention mechanism [15, 16].
Input speech is represented by 80-mel input features with
deltas and double deltas. These are encoded by two con-
volutional layers, which contain 32 ﬁlters with shape 3
1and a 22stride, followed by four bidirectional LSTM
layers of 1024 units for each direction. The decoder is a
two unidirectional LSTM layers with 1024 units. Targets
are drawn from a vocabulary of 16k graphemic word pieces
[17]. The word piece model inventory is learned from the
LIBRISPEECH training data. These targets are used for both
the L IBRISPEECH and I SOLATED -SENTENCES experiments.
This model does not include a language model during train-
ing, and we do not perform any second-pass language model
based rescoring. Training is performed using Adam [18] for
200k steps. We use a warmup and exponential decay learning
rate schedule with a maximum of 1e-3 and minimum of 1e-5
[19]. We introduce variational weight noise with a standarddeviation of 0.075 after 10k steps.
This architecture, training strategy, and associated hyper-
parameters were tuned for L IBRISPEECH ASR performance
without any data augmentation. While these settings may not
always be optimal, we keep these ﬁxed for all experiments.
There are instances when end-to-end speech synthesis
fails to faithfully synthesize the input utterance. This typi-
cally comes from end-of-sequence issues, where the synthe-
sizer either prematurely stops, or fails to end, and generates
some “babbling” like noise. This typically occurs on long
utterances, and is a more signiﬁcant issue when synthesizing
LIBRISPEECH material than I SOLATED -SENTENCES . There-
fore, prior to training, we attempt to identify these poorly
synthesized L IBRISPEECH utterances. To do this, we decode
them using a recognizer trained on L IBRISPEECH . Using
the intended utterance, we eliminate synthesized utterances
that are recognized with a WER of more than 20%. This
eliminates between 10 and 20% of utterances from training
depending on the speaker representation used. Because we
have fewer end-pointing issues on short sequences, we do not
do this ﬁltering on I SOLATED -SENTENCES .
For all experiments, we use the standard partitions of the
LIBRISPEECH material. The training set comprises 460 hours
of “clean” data, and 500 hours of “other” data. Similarly dev
and test sets are partitioned into “clean” and “other” subsets.
ISOLATED -SENTENCES contains 76 hours of material, par-
titioned into train, dev and test sets with a 90/5/5 ratio. For
both corpora, the train, dev and test partitions remain constant
across both TTS and ASR experiments.
5. ACOUSTIC DIVERSITY
We describe data augmentation experiments on L IBRISPEECH .
In these, training utterances are augmented with duplicate
synthesized copies of training text produced by TTS.
5.1. Speaker Representation
The multi-speaker TTS model described in Section 3 uses
d-vectors as speaker-conditioning information. To control the
speaker diversity in the synthesized data we use three differ-
ent approaches to generate d-vectors for inference.
Original Use a d-vector derived from the training utterance
itself. In the case of perfect synthesis, this would result in a
synthesized utterance that is identical to the source.
Sampled Randomly select a d-vector from some other utter-
ance that was used during training for inference. This ensures
that the speaker representation has been seen by the synthe-
sizer, but the source utterance and synthesized utterance will
differ in terms of the speaker characteristics.
Random Generate a random 256 dimensional vector, and
then project it to the unit-hypersphere via L2-normalization.
This is then used as the d-vector for the synthesized utter-
ance. If the d-vectors are evenly distributed this will result in