nizer (cf. Section 6).
Speech recognition (like any other machine learning ap-
plication or statistical model) is most effective when the train-
ing data and testing data are drawn from the same population.
In the context of data augmentation, we ask if we can use a
speech synthesis model trained on one domain, to synthesize
material in a new domain and use this synthetic material to
improve recognition performance. If this is the case, a gen-
eral purpose synthesizer can be used for data augmentation
across a number of domains. If it is not, speech-synthesis
driven domain adaptation would require a domain speciﬁc
synthesizer for each domain. This is limiting, as speech syn-
thesis on “found” data is a challenging problem [6]. To ad-
dress this, we repeat the data augmentation and lexical diver-
sity experiments performed on L IBRISPEECH material on the
ISOLATED -SENTENCES domain, and investigate the relative
value of a L IBRISPEECH -trained synthesizer to one trained
on I SOLATED -SENTENCES (cf. Section 7).
Overall, we ﬁnd that expanded acoustic diversity and
lexical diversity in training data as provided by synthesized
speech can improve ASR performance. However, there are
limits to these improvements. Despite closing much of the
gap between synthesized and real speech with respect to syn-
thesis quality, more work is needed for synthesized speech to
deliver the value of real speech for ASR training.
To summarize, the contributions of this work are as fol-
lows:
1. We demonstrate that data augmentation with TTS utter-
ances yields improvements to ASR.
2. We show, for the ﬁrst time, the importance of effective
and diverse speaker representations in TTS for ASR
data augmentation.
3. We show, for the ﬁrst time, the impact of using lexically
diverse TTS utterances for ASR data augmentation.
4. We describe a novel TTS technique, hierarchical V AE,
which signiﬁcantly aids TTS training with a small
amount of multi-speaker training data.
2. RELATED WORK
The prior work most similar to the research described in this
paper was written by Li et al. [3]. They also investigated the
use of speech synthesis as a source for data augmentation. We
ﬁnd similar gains via expanding acoustic diversity. Li et al.
accomplished this via a Global Style Token (GST) to expand
prosodic variation as described in [7]. They were also able to
achieve additional performance improvements through hyper
parameter tuning, speciﬁcally increased depth of the recog-
nition network. We conﬁrm these ﬁndings through a distinct
but related approach to expanding acoustic diversity of the
training data, and expand on these via investigations of lex-
ical diversity. In terms of speciﬁc results on L IBRISPEECH ,
Local Variational EncoderReference Spectrogrum SlicesGlobal Variational EncoderReference Spectrogrum SlicesGlobal Embedding+DecoderRNNDecoderRNNDecoderRNNDecoderRNN……Local EmbeddingHierarchicalVAEFig. 1 . Local V AE encodes local style information with ﬁxed
window size. Global V AE encodes global style information.
The summed style vector is broadcast to each decoder RNN
step.
our work yields better performance on the more challenging
test-other partition, while Li et al. report better results on the
test-clean partition.
A different approach that jointly trains ASR and TTS
systems has been explored. The term, speech chain , was
ﬁrst introduced in 1963 (and reissued in 1993) by Denes
et al. [8, 9], where speech communication was described
as a spoken message between the minds of the speakers
and the listeners, based on speech production and speech
perception processes. Using this as a basis, Tjandra et al.,
developed DeepChain [10], an approach to simultaneously
train both recognition and synthesis systems. They proposed
a sequence-to-sequence model in a closed-loop architecture
that allows training with both, labeled and unlabeled data.
The ASR component transcribes the unlabeled speech fea-
tures, that TTS synthesizes from, while the ASR component
also attempts to learn from the labeled text using the syn-
thesized speech. Multi-speaker, Tacotron TTS with speaker
embeddings was used in this work. Using the BTEC corpus,
the authors demonstrated an improvement in ASR perfor-
mance when allowing TTS to learn from ASR and viceversa.
This work was extended further in [11] with the introduction
of a speaker veriﬁcation module inside the closed-loop ar-
chitecture. This module generates a speaker embedding with
one utterance of the target speaker and allows the DeepChain
model to handle unseen speakers. Improvements to ASR
performance were demonstrated on the WSJ corpus when
measuring character error rate (CER).
3. SPEECH SYNTHESIS MODEL
We base our TTS model on Tacotron 2 [1], which takes a text
sequence as input, and outputs a sequence of mel spectro-
gram frames. The input text sequence embedding is encoded