SPEECH RECOGNITION WITH AUGMENTED SYNTHESIZED SPEECH
Andrew Rosenberg, Yu Zhang, Bhuvana Ramabhadran, Ye Jia, Pedro Moreno, Yonghui Wu, Zelin Wu
Google
frosenberg, ngyuzh, bhuv, jiaye, pedro, yonghui, zelinwu g@google.com
ABSTRACT
Recent success of the Tacotron speech synthesis architecture
and its variants in producing natural sounding multi-speaker
synthesized speech has raised the exciting possibility of re-
placing expensive, manually transcribed, domain-speciﬁc,
human speech that is used to train speech recognizers. The
multi-speaker speech synthesis architecture can learn latent
embedding spaces of prosody, speaker and style variations
derived from input acoustic representations thereby allowing
for manipulation of the synthesized speech. In this paper,
we evaluate the feasibility of enhancing speech recognition
performance using speech synthesis using two corpora from
different domains. We explore algorithms to provide the
necessary acoustic and lexical diversity needed for robust
speech recognition. Finally, we demonstrate the feasibility
of this approach as a data augmentation strategy for domain-
transfer. We ﬁnd that improvements to speech recognition
performance is achievable by augmenting training data with
synthesized material. However, there remains a substantial
gap in performance between recognizers trained on human
speech those trained on synthesized speech.
Index Terms : speech synthesis, speech recognition, Tacotron,
LAS, sequence models
1. INTRODUCTION
Speech synthesis (text-to-speech or TTS) performance has
improved in recent years. These improvements have been
so dramatic that, in some cases, synthesized speech is in-
distinguishable from human speech [1]. One reliable way,
perhaps even the most reliable way, to improve automatic
speech recognition (ASR) performance is to add more tran-
scribed training data. If speech synthesis is equivalent to hu-
man speech, adding more transcribed training data generated
by speech synthesis should improve speech recognition per-
formance. In this paper, we test this hypothesis. We explore
this using data augmentation, where the human speech train-
ing data is combined with various amounts and types of syn-
thesized material.
Our experiments use two corpora. L IBRISPEECH is a
960 hour corpus of books read by non-professional speak-
ers [2] divided into a 460 hour “clean” portion and a 500hour “other” partition. These partitions are created by speaker
splits with those speakers whose speech is easy to recognize
being put in the “clean” partition, and more difﬁcult speakers
in “other”. We also use I SOLATED -SENTENCES , an internal
corpus of shorter utterances read in diverse recording condi-
tions. I SOLATED -SENTENCES contains 76 hours of material
across 201k utterances collected from 1,988 speakers. The
number of speakers in this corpus is similar to L IBRISPEECH ,
but the total material is signiﬁcantly less.
The connection with speech synthesis and speech recog-
nition has been explored previously (cf. Section 2). We draw
particular comparison with [3], prior work exploring speech
synthesis based data augmentation on L IBRISPEECH .
For speech synthesis, we use a Tacotron 2 [1] based multi-
speaker speech synthesis model with a WaveRNN vocoder
[4]. Speciﬁcs of the model are described in Section 3. We
train slightly different version of the synthesizer whether
training on L IBRISPEECH or I SOLATED -SENTENCES . For
speech recognition we use an end-to-end, encoder-decoder
with attention recognizer (cf. Section 4). We use the
same recognition model for L IBRISPEECH recognition and
ISOLATED -SENTENCES recognition.
We describe L IBRISPEECH data augmentation experi-
ments in Section 5. The synthesizer is capable of producing
speech from multiple speakers based on a ﬁxed sized speaker
embedding. We describe different approaches to controlling
the speaker representation and report their impact on data
augmentation performance in Section 5.2. We also inves-
tigate how ASR performance is impacted as we reduce the
amount of human speech (cf. Section 5.3). This seeks to ad-
dress the question of whether training data can be replaced by
synthesized material and with what impact on performance.
Data augmentation is a well-established method to ap-
proximate noise and variability in training data to improve
robustness and generalizability at evaluation or inference time
[5]. Resynthesis of training utterances addresses speaker vari-
ability by generating multiple readings of the training utter-
ances from different (synthesized) speakers. However, this
speaker variability is only part of the variability that speech
recognition needs to be robust to; we expect a recognizer
to recognize lexically diverse utterances. To that end, we
demonstrate the use of speech synthesis to include unseen ut-
terances in the training data, resulting in a more robust recog-arXiv:1909.11699v1  [cs.CL]  25 Sep 2019