an effective random sampling of speaker characteristics.
5.2. ASR augmentation
Based on the three speaker representation approaches, we
generate synthesized utterances for data augmentation. Each
of these experiments include a complete synthesized copy
of the human speech training data. ASR performance is
reported in Table 1. The L IBRISPEECH corpus contains
two test (and development) partitions, one that is relatively
clean (test-clean and dev-clean) and one that is not (test-other
and dev-other). This reveals that acoustic diversity as con-
Augmentation test-clean test-other
None 4.77 13.89
Original 4.84 14.75
Random 4.92 14.91
Sampled 4.58 13.78
Table 1 . L IBRISPEECH Word Error Rate (WER) by aug-
mentation with TTS utterances using different d-vector ap-
proaches.
trolled by the speaker representation used during synthesis
has an impact on the value of synthesized speech for data
augmentation. Random d-vectors are less effective in gen-
erating effective speaker diversity. This likely is because
of a mismatch between the d-vectors used during inference
and those seen during training. The training d-vectors are
not uniformly distributed on the unit hypersphere. Synthe-
sis quality suffers when the supplied d-vector is inconsistent
with observed speaker conditioning information. Using the
original d-vectors does not provide reliable gains, and in fact,
degrades performance somewhat. Sampling from observed
speaker representations provides speaker diversity. This re-
sults in a relative gain of approximately 4% to WER on both
the test-clean and test-other sets.
While this improvement is modest, the fact that perfor-
mance is improved at all speaks to the coherence between the
multi-speaker TTS utterances and human speech, as well as
the ability for d-vector speaker representation to reasonably
capture some of the acoustic diversity expressed by differ-
ent speakers. For comparison, we repeated this experiment
with augmentation material from high-quality single-speaker
TTS using a traditional TTS frontend and WaveNet vocoder.
Even though single-speaker TTS quality is superior to the
multi-speaker system used in Table 1, the resultant ASR per-
formance is dramatically worse, speciﬁcally, WERs of 13.55
and 24.84 on test-clean and test-other sets, respectively. Thus,
TTS quality is a necessary but not sufﬁcient criteria for effec-
tive data augmentation. Multi-speaker TTS is necessary for
effective data augmentation for ASR.5.3. Reduced Source Material
We next investigate the performance of data augmentation as
a function of the amount of source training data. All experi-
ments use the sampled approach to speaker conditioning. Ta-
ble 2 describes ASR performance using all 960 hours of syn-
thesized material, with reduced amounts of source speech, as
compared to performance using only the reduced source ma-
terial. While this approach is still effective with less source
data aug source only
hrs clean other clean other
0 32.44 66.10 - -
10-clean 16.91 43.10 NA NA
100-clean 9.25 30.58 12.46 34.00
460-clean 6.28 22.52 6.30 22.41
960-all 4.58 13.78 4.77 13.89
Table 2 . Data Augmentation ASR performance (WER) with
reduced source material.
data, we are not able to maintain performance as we reduce
the amount of source training data. We ﬁnd similar gains
to the clean performance when training on 460 hours of hu-
man speech, but reduced performance on the noisy test data.
When we reduce the source data to 100 hours, we see a much
larger improvement from data augmentation. Note that in
these experiments, we made no model changes to adjust for
the amount of training data. This model failed to converge
when trained on 10 hours of speech.
6. LEXICAL DIVERSITY
One potential advantage of speech synthesis is the ability to
synthesize unseen utterances thereby expanding lexical as
well as acoustic diversity of training material.
6.1. Topline experiments
To verify that this approach has merit, we run an optimistic
“topline” experiment. Here we assume knowledge of the test
utterances, but not the audio. We then augment the train-
ing data with synthesized versions of these utterances using
speaker d-vectors sampled from the training utterances or ex-
tracted from the test audio. In the sampled condition, there is
no test audio used, while in the original condition the test au-
dio is used to condition the synthesizer to sound like the test
speaker via d-vector extraction. Results can be found in Table
3. We ﬁnd, unsurprisingly, that knowledge of the test utter-
ances yields signiﬁcant ASR gains. However, it is sufﬁcient
to know the lexical content of the utterances, having access
to the audio is not necessary. While this is unreasonable for
general purpose ASR, in domain speciﬁc applications, there
can be a good deal of a priori information about utterances
that users will generate.