Page 4 of 38 Salem et al. Journal of Big Data          (2024) 11:105 
• A conclusion that addresses the challenges encountered with these AI methods in 
cybersecurity and proposes future solutions.
Paper structure
The paper is organized into six clearly defined sections to provide a systematic explora -
tion of AI methods in cyber-attack detection. In the ’Introduction ’ section, we introduce 
the research contributions and motivations. In the ’Background ’ section, we discuss the 
research background and describe the main topics of the research. In the ’Literature 
Review’ section, we review related literature. In the ’Experiments and Setup’ section, we 
briefly describe the research methodology used. In the ’Results and Discussion’ section, 
we analyze the results and discuss the reasons behind them. Finally, in the ’ Conclusion ’ 
section, we summarize the entire text.
Background
The growth of computer networks has transformed how societies function, leading 
to an increase in cyberattacks’ frequency and complexity. Cyberattacks are disruptive 
activities that target computer systems, networks, or data. They are usually organized 
and well-planned and involve synchronized steps to achieve their goals [3]. Intending to 
cause damage, unauthorized access, or service interruptions that cause severe data loss 
or financial damage and often lead to long-lasting consequences [7], these are the insider 
threats that represent a significant and growing segment of these attacks, usually com -
mitted by disgruntled or rogue employees who exploit their authorized access to steal 
data or cause harm. These threats can also emerge from intrusive applications that users 
accidentally install on their devices, allowing these apps to access and misuse sensitive 
information. Advanced behavioral anomaly detection and auto-resiliency mechanisms 
are being developed to combat these threats by proactively identifying and mitigating 
malicious actions at both the employee and application levels [8].
There is a broad spectrum of cyber-attacks that represent a variety of threats in the 
digital world. Insights into several critical types of these attacks are provided, as high -
lighted in the literature and summarized in Table  1. This information emphasizes the 
complexity and wide range of cyber threats, illustrating the many attacks organiza -
tions and individuals may encounter in today’s interconnected environment [3]. Bot -
nets, another critical cyber threat, are networks of infected computers controlled by an 
attacker to perform coordinated malicious activities, such as DDoS attacks, data theft, 
and spamming. These networks can be vast, comprising thousands or even millions of 
compromised devices, which makes them incredibly difficult to dismantle. Botnet oper -
ators use sophisticated methods to infect devices and maintain control, continuously 
evolving their techniques to avoid detection [9].
The range of cyber-attack types of points to the vital need for effective cybersecu -
rity strategies. It’s crucial to guard sensitive data and keep digital services running 
smoothly. Figure  1 categorizes these cyber-attack types. As cyber threats are ever-
changing, it’s essential to remain alert and continuously invest in advanced secu -
rity solutions. Staying ahead of cyber threats means actively adapting to new risks,