Page 3 of 38
 Salem et al. Journal of Big Data          (2024) 11:105 
 
high false-positive rates, slower response times, and a significant demand for human 
intervention.
The motivation for this paper stems from the urgent need to bridge the gap left by 
these traditional methods. By exploring AI-driven techniques, specifically DL and ML, 
we aim to harness the power of AI to process vast amounts of data in real time, identify 
intricate patterns, and adapt to new threats quickly. AI’s ability to learn from data and 
continuously evolve makes it an invaluable tool in developing more resilient and scal -
able cybersecurity solutions by addressing challenges such as insider threats that pose 
significant risks from within the organization, making them difficult to detect using con -
ventional methods, and botnets, which are networks of compromised devices controlled 
by malicious actors capable of executing coordinated attacks that overwhelm traditional 
defenses.
Many surveys must comprehensively cover recent studies on the three main topics of 
ML, DL, and metaheuristic technologies. Additionally, they often fail to address the full 
spectrum of cyber-attacks or include dedicated sections for future work and limitations. 
In contrast, our survey provides thorough coverage of these areas, including specific sec -
tions for future works and limitations. Moreover, we have listed all recent datasets along -
side their corresponding studies, ensuring our survey is grounded in the latest research. 
This research seeks to demonstrate how AI can transform cybersecurity by providing 
more accurate, efficient, and adaptive defenses. By addressing the limitations of tradi -
tional methods, such as manual feature extraction and static controls, and leveraging 
AI’s strengths, we aim to enhance the detection and mitigation of sophisticated cyber 
threats, including insider threats and botnets, ultimately contributing to a more secure 
digital environment.
Main contribution
The primary contribution of this paper is a carefully compiled collection of recent stud -
ies on different types of cyber-attacks and their corresponding detection technologies. 
It outlines current challenges and research gaps, providing scholars with a clear over -
view and a solid foundation for further research into the use of AI to detect and mitigate 
cyber threats. The contributions of the research are organized into the following points:
• An evaluation of ML, DL, and metaheuristic techniques in detecting cyber-attacks, 
including a focused analysis on anomaly detection, classification, and analysis meth -
odologies.
• A review and critical examination of more than sixty scholarly articles from the last 
four years focused on cybersecurity and the implementation of foundational AI tech -
niques.
• The article were assessed based on several criteria: cybersecurity focus, AI tech -
niques used, data sets, methods for reducing data complexity, ways of sorting data, 
comparing methods, and measuring performance.
• Evaluation of open access cyber-security datasets and primary classification of cyber-
attack types found within these datasets.
• The studies’ key elements are organized into comparative tables, which serve as a 
streamlined reference for understanding the varied approaches and outcomes.