Page 34 of 38 Salem et al. Journal of Big Data          (2024) 11:105 
• Automating the selection process: Developing automated frameworks for feature 
selection that minimize human intervention, including creating user-friendly tools 
that can automatically select and tune metaheuristic algorithms based on dataset 
characteristics and problem requirements [65].
Conclusion
The exploration undertaken in this research provides a comprehensive review of AI 
methodologies utilized in the area of cyber-attack detection. Our analysis underscores 
the pivotal role of ML, DL, and metaheuristic algorithms in refining the responsiveness 
and precision of cybersecurity systems. Key findings indicate that while AI technologies 
significantly enhance detection rates, they are also challenged by high computational 
demands and the necessity for vast, accurate new datasets.
In this comprehensive study, we have accurately analyzed various methods employed 
for the detection of cyber-attacks. Our evaluation has been gathered from an initial 
collection of 9084 papers, a methodical review based on title, abstract, and keywords, 
followed by a stringent application of inclusion and exclusion criteria and generated 
68 high-quality studies. Key details such as publication details, citation counts, fields 
of study, methodologies, and datasets were extracted primarily from the introductory 
sections of each paper, ensuring a concentrated source of research for further analysis. 
These papers focus primarily on advanced techniques such as DL, ML, and metaheuris -
tic approaches. A detailed comparison of these techniques against traditional meth -
ods, which has been systematically documented in comparative tables within the study. 
These tables serve as a valuable resource, showing the effectiveness of new and tradi -
tional approaches for various types and datasets of cyber-attacks.
A significant insight derived from this research is the key role of dimension reduc -
tion and feature selection in enhancing the efficacy of intrusion detection systems. We 
explored how various techniques affect performance metrics, underscoring the necessity 
of optimizing AI algorithm hyperparameters through heuristic methods to significantly 
improve effectiveness.
Author contributions
Aya Hesham Salem wrote the manuscript and designed all figures and tables. Prof. Amr A. Abohanya reviewed and 
supervised the manuscript content. Dr. Safaa Azzam supervised the manuscript content. Prof. Osama Emam supervised 
the manuscript content.
Funding
Open access funding provided by The Science, Technology & Innovation Funding Authority (STDF) in cooperation with 
The Egyptian Knowledge Bank (EKB).
Data availability
No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.
Declarations
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: 4 May 2024   Accepted: 13 July 2024