Page 20 of 38 Salem et al. Journal of Big Data          (2024) 11:105 
Select relevant studies
After selecting the digital repositories, it was necessary to address a search string to 
perform an exhaustive search to select the main studies. The process of defining the 
search string involved four steps:
1- Using the predefined research questions to identify the relevant outcomes.
2- Identifying synonyms and alternative spellings for each key term.
3- Verifying the presence of search terms in titles, abstracts, and keywords of the arti -
cles.
4- Applying Boolean operators such as "AND" and "OR" to formulate the search string 
effectively.
The resultant search string, addressed using the above steps, was: ("Software Cyber-
attacks" OR "SW Cyber-attacks") AND ("Detection") AND ("Methods”) AND ("Cyber-
attack" OR "Cyber attack" OR "Cybersecurity" OR "Cyber threats") AND ("Machine 
Learning" OR “ML” OR "Deep Learning" OR “DL” OR "Metaheuristic Algorithms" 
OR "Optimization Algorithms") OR ("Artificial Intelligence" OR "AI"). This string was 
employed to aggregate all published papers, aiming to maximize the scope of relevant 
literature within a set timeframe from 2020 up to now.
To refine the selection of primary studies, we established inclusion and exclusion 
criteria as shown in Table 6 .
Initially, 9084 studies were identified through the search string. After screen -
ing these studies based on titles, abstracts, and keywords, we narrowed them down 
to 409 primary studies. Further application of the inclusion and exclusion criteria 
reduced the selection to 68 relevant studies. These studies were thoroughly reviewed 
to confirm their quality and relevance to our research goals, focusing on their scien -
tific rigor and contributions to the field of cyber-attack detection.Table 6 Inclusion and exclusion criteria
Inclusion criteria Papers related to software attack detection
Studies utilizing ML, DL, or Metaheuristic (MH) algorithms
Exclusion criteria Works published in journals or conferences, and peer reviewed
Studies focusing on attack detection methods outside of ML, DL, and MH
Research lacking empirical analysis, surveys, or results
Studies where the full text is unavailable
Fig. 8 Paper selection criteria