Page 6 of 38 Salem et al. Journal of Big Data          (2024) 11:105 
Artificial intelligence overview
AI delineated by pioneers such as John McCarthy in 1956 [13], refers to the science 
and engineering of making intelligent machines. Over the years, AI has evolved into a 
foundation of computer science, focusing on simulating human cognitive processes 
through complex mathematical algorithms. This interdisciplinary field combines ele -
ments from various domains to adopt machines that can learn, reason, and make deci -
sions based on the data they process. Besides, it encompasses both the replication of 
human thought and behavior in machines, categorized respectively into thinking and 
acting both humanly and rationally [14]. AI applications range from simple tasks to 
complex problem-solving domains such as cybersecurity, where it addresses sophisti -
cated cyber threats. This transformative technology continues to push the boundaries of 
what machines are capable of, aiming to enhance human capabilities and automate tasks 
through assisted, augmented, and autonomous intelligence [15].
The use of AI in cybersecurity is increasingly critical due to its capacity to analyze 
vast amounts of data rapidly, detect patterns, and identify potential threats with high 
efficiency. In a digital era characterized by ever-evolving cyber threats, traditional secu -
rity measures often fall short in both the speed and sophistication needed to counter -
act modern cyberattacks, including zero-day threats [16]. AI’s ability to learn from data 
enables the development of systems that can adapt to new, previously unknown attacks, 
enhancing the ability to secure information infrastructure from a broad spectrum of 
threats [ 15]. The benefits of integrating AI into cybersecurity include improved decision-
making capabilities, enhanced detection of network intrusions, and the management of 
cyber-attack impacts. This progression in technology not only allows for real-time threat 
detection and response but also significantly reduces the rate of false positives, which 
are common in more traditional methods of cyber defense. Furthermore, AI’s predictive 
Fig. 1 Cyber-attack types