ExplainableAI(XAI):Core Ideas, Techniques andSolutions • 13
5.5 Sotware Libraries for Model Explainability
In the following, we present some of the software libraries, which can be used for Model Explainability.
Table 5 describes frameworks, which can be used to implement data explainability techniques. It explains
if the particular explainable ML algorithm on the left can be carried out with the help of the framework
speciﬁed at the top. ✓denotes the afﬁrmative case. Similarly, ✗signiﬁes that the stated framework cannot
be used to implement the technique.
The mentioned algorithms for generation of models such as linear models, decision trees, GAMs,
neural networks and tree ensembles belong to a family of models that are accounted as explainable.
However, some techniques viz. linear model coefﬁcients do no ensure explainability in practice due to
the reason that implementing them on a high dimensional input may not be explainable. It could only be
possible if the number of input features are limited using regularization. Furthermore, the linear model
coefﬁcients could be unstable in case of multi-collinearlity (multiple correlated features). Decision tree,
unline Linear Model coefﬁcients, can also be applied to non - linear models. Decision Tree visualizations
are intuituve and reveal all decisions during model training, thus supporting interpretability and
explainability. A generalized additive model (GAM) is much more ﬂexible than Regression. Although
GAMs are interpretable, it comes at an cost of not ﬁtting every type of data. GAMs are explainable in
the sense that the distributions of values for any given feature function can be plotted in 2D, which a
domain expert can easily interpret.The most reliable of all, neural networks are the most ﬂexible for
model explainability. Tee ensembles can be understood as a bunch of decision trees whose results are
combined thus providing the support for explainability same as decision trees but with the beneﬁt of
stringer learning during training.
XAI TechniquesBasic Li-
braries*Tensorflow Keras Pytorch PyGAM
Linear model coefﬁcients (Section 5.1) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
Decision Tree (Section 5.1) ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗
Generalized Additive Models (GAMs) (Section 5.1) ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓
Neural networks (Section 5.2) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
Tree ensembles (Section 5.2) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
Model Performance Evaluation Metrics (Section 5.4) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
Table 5. Programmingframeworks for Model Explainability.
*Basiclibraries: numpy,pandas,matplotlib ,seaborn,sklearn
Ktrain is an interface to Keras to build and train an explainable model. It works for text and image
classiﬁcation. Considering an example image, it focuses on the area of the image over which the classiﬁer
can be used for prediction. The visualizations are supported by the eli5 library and based on Grad-CAM
technique. The text dataset classiﬁcation is carried out with LIME where the prediction is made using
the relative importance of the words.
PyTorch uses Captum for model interpretability, using smoothGrad, integrated gradients, Deeplift,
GradientShap and other PyTorch models. It is used for understanding the important neurons and layers
of the PyTorch model. It also provides a Web Interface ‘Insights’ for data visualization.
Arize AI. Arize is an ML observability framework for model monitoring and assessment, used to
diagnose the root cause of a model output and to detect pre- and post-validation checks. In addition, it
unveils and explains how models arrive at speciﬁc outcomes for any set of predictions.
ACM Comput. Surv.