18 • R. Dwivedi et al.
ICE explains what happens to model predictions when a speciﬁc feature varies. Figure 8 presents an
ICE plot for feature “worst concave points" of a cancer dataset. The “worst concave points" plot is
decreasing in nature (i.e., Lower value( <0.10)) of concave points. It is a factor for higher value of target
variable (malignant cases). Between 0.10 and 0.20 the graph decreases and after 0.21 it is constant (has
lower yvalue – benign cases).
Beneﬁts. They are far more intuitive to understand when compared to PDP [ 44]. A single line plots the
predictions for one instance if we change the feature of interest. Distinct from PDP , ICE curves can unveil
heterogeneous relationships.
Limitations. First, too many ICE curves could lead to an overcrowded plot without the ability to assess
anything. Second, ICE curves and PDPs share the same concern: If the interest feature correlates with
the other features, then a few points in lines could be invalid data points. Third, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd the
average in ICE plots. One solution is to group together the individual conditional expectation curves
with the partial dependence plot.
PDP vs ICE vs Feature Importance. Table 7 presents a comparative analysis among PDP , ICE, and
Feature Importance. PDP demonstrates global effects, concealing the heterogeneous effects. ICE unravels
the heterogeneous effects but makes it difﬁcult to ﬁnd the average. In addition, all three methods consider
the features as independent entity. Hence, if features are correlated, it will result in the creation of unlikely
data points.
Approaches Advantages Disadvantages
PDP • Intuitive
• Easy to implement
• Shows global effects• Assumption of independence
• Heterogeneous effects maybe hidden
ICE • Intuitive
• Easy to implement
• Can uncover heterogeneous relationships• Can only display one feature meaningfully
• Assumption of independence
• Not easy to see the average
Feature Im-
portance• Provide a highly compressed global insight
• Comparable across problems
• Automatically takes into account all interactions• Not additive
• Shufﬂing the feature added randomness
• Need access to true data
• Assumption of independence
Table 7. PDPvs ICEvs Feature Importance [53].
6.4 AccumulatedLocalEfects(ALE) Plot
ALE Plot [ 2,44] handles the inherent limitations of PDP . In few cases, PD Plots produce erroneous
results when the features of the dataset are highly correlated. This is where ALE Plots come into picture.
ALE Plot works on a model agnostic algorithm that provides global explanations for classiﬁcation and
regression models on tabular data. They are preferred over PD Plots, as they produce optimal results in
spite of correlation between features and are less computationally expensive. ALE Plots visualise the
effect on the predictions of the model for each features isolated from all other features.
Example. Figure 9 shows implemented ALE on the Iris classiﬁcation dataset from sklearn that has 4
features ( sepal length ,sepal width ,petal length ,petal width ) and 3 target values ( setosa ,versicolor ,
virginica ). The ALE Plots visualise feature effects linearly in Logit Space. Looking at the plot for Petal
Length (bottom right plot), it can be observed that the three lines overlap at the 3.8 cm mark. From that,
it can be concluded that the effects of the Petal Length on each class will be one and the same at 3.8 cm.
It can also be observed that the more the petal length is, the more is the chance of the ﬂower being from
ACM Comput. Surv.