ExplainableAI(XAI):Core Ideas, Techniques andSolutions • 27
Fig.19. An example ofglobal explanationusing heartdisease dataset.
An example. Let us understand it more using an example using MNIST dataset, as presented in positive
attributions and negative attributions. Consider an example of Fashion MNIST dataset, which consists of
70,000 grayscale 28x28 images of different clothing items. The label consists of 10 classes, which denotes
different kinds of clothing items such as shirt, hoodies, shoes and jeans.
The ﬁrst example (top part of Figure 20) is is an image of a shoe. The attributions section shows a
melange of positive and negative attributions together. It can be observed from the bar on the right side
that green signiﬁes positive attributions and purple signiﬁes negative attributions. The shoe is unique
compared to other clothing items, and hence, it has a lot more positive attributes than negatives. The
lining, collar and back part of the shoe are the main pixels that inﬂuence the decision of the model.
On the other hand, the negative attributions are negligible for this particular instance. The second
example (bottom part of Figure 20) is an image of a shirt where there is an equal number of positive and
negative attributions. The pixels around the collar and the sleeves are the biggest positive attributions.
However, the middle portion of the shirt can be mistaken to be a part of a pair of jeans or trousers.
Therefore, due to this ambiguity, they are the negative attributions for the prediction. All in all, we
can afﬁrm that when the positive attributions outweigh the negative attributions, the model makes the
correct prediction.
7.6 Sotware Libraries for Example-basedXAITechniques
In the following, we present some of the software libraries, which can be used to implement example-
based XAI techniques. Table 9 describes frameworks, which can be used to implement these techniques.
Diverse Counterfactual Explanations (DiCE) for ML9.DiCE [ 45] is a package that gives the “what-if"
explanations for the model prediction. The ML models perform prediction based on the values/features
present in the data. However, in practical situations, this might not be enough. It is important to know
the answer to the question “What should be the modiﬁcations in features so that the prediction ﬂips?".
DiCE not only provides the most inﬂuential feature for the prediction but also recommends the feature
modiﬁcations needed for the result. It implements counterfactual explanations that include perturbed
features which in turn will lead to the required result.Additionally, if some features are difﬁcult to modify
9DiCE for ML: https://github.com/interpretml/DiCE
ACM Comput. Surv.