Explainable AI(XAI):Core Ideas,TechniquesandSolutions
RUDRESH DWIVEDI, Netaji Subhas University of Technology (formerly NSIT), India, India
DEVAM DAVE, HET NAIK, SMITI SINGHAL, Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University, India, India
OMER RANA, School of Computer Science and Informatics, Cardiff University, UK, UK
PANKESH PATEL, AI Institute, University of South Carolina, USA, USA
BIN QIAN, ZHENYU WEN, TEJAL SHAH, GRAHAM MORGAN, RAJIV RANJAN, School of
Computing, Newcastle University, UK, UK
As our dependence on intelligent machines continues to grow, so does the demand for more transparent and inter-
pretable models. In addition, the ability to explain the model generally is now the gold standard for building trust
and deployment of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) systems in critical domains. Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI)
aims to provide a suite of machine learning (ML) techniques that enable human users to understand, appropriately
trust, and produce more explainable models. Selecting an appropriate approach for building an XAI-enabled appli-
cation requires a clear understanding of the core ideas within XAI and the associated programming frameworks. We
survey state-of-the-art programming techniques for XAI and present the different phases of XAI in a typical ML
development process. We classify the various XAI approaches and using this taxonomy, discuss the key differences
among the existing XAI techniques. Furthermore, concrete examples are used to describe these techniques that are
mapped to programming frameworks and software toolkits. It is the intention that this survey will help stakeholders
in selecting the appropriate approaches, programming frameworks, and software toolkits by comparing them
through the lens of the presented taxonomy.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies →Knowledge representation and reasoning .
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Interpretable AI, Programming framework,
Software toolkits
1 INTRODUCTION
As a society, our dependence on intelligent machines is on a continuous upswing. From driverless cars,
ﬂexible email-ﬁlters to forward-looking and preemptive law maintenance models, machine learning (ML)
based systems are increasingly being deployed across several domains. With the frequent utilization of
complex Deep Learning (DL) architectures, it requires urgent attention to understand the inner workings
and to get insights into the outcomes. This is a core motivation of Explainable AI (XAI) [ 15]. The
prime reason for rapid growth in XAI is the increased robustness of AI systems in business, enterprise
computing and critical industries [ 14,15]. For companies such as Google, a false prediction can led
Authors’ addresses: Rudresh Dwivedi, Netaji Subhas University of Technology (formerly NSIT), India, Dwarka, Delhi, India,
rudresh.dwivedi@nsut.ac.in; Devam Dave, Het Naik, Smiti Singhal, Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University, India, Raysan,
Gandhinagar, India, devam.dce18@sot.pdpu.ac.in,het.nce18@sot.pdpu.ac.in,smiti.sce18@sot.pdpu.ac.in; Omer Rana, School of
Computer Science and Informatics, Cardiff University, UK, Cardiff, UK, RanaOF@cardiff.ac.uk; Pankesh Patel, AI Institute,
University of South Carolina, USA, South Carolina, USA, PPANKESH@mailbox.sc.edu; Bin Qian, Zhenyu Wen, Tejal Shah, Graham
Morgan, Rajiv Ranjan, School of Computing, Newcastle University, UK, UK, B.Qian3@newcastle.ac.uk.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided
that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on
the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is
permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
0360-0300/2022/9-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3561048
ACM Comput. Surv.