ExplainableAI(XAI):Core Ideas, Techniques andSolutions • 5
Use cases of Explainable AI Stages
Explaining Phase 
(After Model Deployment)Understanding Phase (Before
Model Deployment)
Detecting
BiasScientific
UnderstandingBuilding a
robust modelHypothesizing
about New
KnowledgeAutoMLBetter
Decision
MakingDescrimination JustifiabilityDebugging and
Enhancing AI
Models
Fig.2. Use casesofXAIat diferentphases
no solution is presented. XAI can shed more light on this decision-making process and answer the “why".
Armed with this knowledge, businesses can formulate an appropriate goal-directed plan.
Discrimination:. Datasets often contain inherent discrimination. For example, in 2015, searching for
“CEO" on Google Images returned women personalities only 11% of the time. This did not match with
the real-world representation of 27%. Unlike black box models, XAI models can present the reasoning
behind the result, which can help identify the source for the discrimination and address it accordingly.
Justiﬁability:. As legal questions may not addressable with black-box models, modern AI systems will
have no choice except to add explainability. For example, In the area of individual rights, regulators will
demand more explainability from AI models. People who are adversely impacted by an AI system’s
decision (e.g. those rejected for a loan) would be interested to know why the system chose not to approve
the loan.
3 TAXONOMYOFXAITECHNIQUES
This section explores different approaches for interpreting machine learning models and lays the foun-
dations of interpretability techniques. Table 3 presents our comparative analysis and a taxonomy of
different XAI techniques covered in subsequent sections (Section 4, Section 5, Section 6, Section 7).
Figure 3 provides an overview of different XAI techniques.
3.1 White-Box vsBlack-Box Model Techniques
Black-box models are non-transparent in nature while white-box models are transparent and compara-
tively easy to understand.The black-box model is also termed as intrinsic as it is achieved by limiting the
complexity of an AI model, while a white-box model is also termed as post-hoc as it is applied on the model
after training.
White-Box Model Techniques. Some AI models are simple and self-explanatory. For example, the
predicted outcome ycan be mathematically expressed as a weighted sum of all of its features x. It is
visualized as a a straight line graph, with aas the slope of the line and bas the intercept on the y-axis.
A linear model is a white-box model because its mechanism is transparent and simple (as opposed
to a black-box whose mechanism is not readily understood). Though simple, these are less capable of
representing a larger dataset featuring complex interactions. Therefore, for higher accuracy, we require
more complex and expressive models.
Black-Box model Techniques. Black box models such as neural networks or complex ensembles of much
lower complexity (like a gradient boosting model based on decision-trees). The architecture of these
ACM Comput. Surv.