ExplainableAI(XAI):Core Ideas, Techniques andSolutions • 31
the knowledge of the decision-making process is vital for purposes of general acceptance and overall
accountability.
The quality of data is part of the XAI. Modern AI methods rely on huge volumes of data for making
predictions and decisions [ 55]. Being aware of data quantity and its provenance in AI systems ensures
system explainability. For instance, image data might be biased against minorities, social media data
might be restricted to a particular demographic, or city sensor data might only represent a particular
neighborhood.
Explainability may not always be the priority while designing an AI system. Explainability needs must
be looked at within the overall objectives of the system. Figure 21 shows various AI applications based
on human participation and cost of poor decisions. The extent of requisite explainability differs from one
experiment to another. In the example of shopping recommendations, the customer may not want an
explanation for the items recommended. On the other hand, in situations where ML model is utilized for
making crucial decisions, explainability is paramount. The bottom left quadrant represents the most
successful AI use cases, where both potential cost and human participation are low. Decisions listed in the
top right quadrant, e.g. for credit risk proﬁling, medical diagnosis etc, represent exponentially increasing
cost. The top left quadrant features decisions where any errors can result in disastrous consequences.
If AI cannot explain itself in these domains, then its risk of making a wrong decision may override its
accuracy and decision-making efﬁcacy.
Fig.21. XAI:Costofpoordecisions vs Humanparticipation[36].
10 CONCLUSION
In this survey, we have covered a variety of XAI techniques currently in use, ranging from white box
models, such as linear models, decision trees and generalized additive models which are ML-based
models. The techniques that are intrinsically more explainable and interpretable as compared to their
black box counterparts to feature-based techniques such as LIME, SHAP and global surrogate models in
addition to plots such as PDP , ICE and ALE have been presented along with their role in the progress
and development of AI. In essence, this survey seeks to facilitate structured and acute information for
the coupled researchers. We have explored our discussions beyond what has been gone so far in the XAI
domain toward the idea of distributed AI, a paradigm that imposes storage of data on multiple nodes
when implementing AI models in practice, including privacy, transparency, and fairness. We have also
investigated the implications of espousing XAI techniques in the context of different applications such
as livestock mart and healthcare, unveiling the potential of XAI to compromise the privacy of a user.
ACM Comput. Surv.