ExplainableAI(XAI):Core Ideas, Techniques andSolutions • 15
SageMaker, called Amazon SageMaker Clarify is used to interpret the ML model by explaining the
predictions made by the model. The approach can also be used to detect bias at various stages of the
model i.e. during data cleaning, model training and deployment.
Fairlearn. an open-source project to make ML models more transparent. Various kinds of biases and
other factors pertaining to unfairness exist in a ML model. Fairlearn believes that fairness cannot be
introduced by technical toolkits alone. The objective of Fairlearn is to detect and reduce this unfairness,
often in the form of biases.
5.6 Distributedlearning
Small ML models lack the representation capability for expressing complex data patterns. To train for
large models and data volumes, the limitation of the computing power and storage of a single machine
calls for distributing the machine learning workload across multiple machines and aggregating the
results for a coherent model. We describe various technical issues to consider during implementation of
distributed models, and report their impact on QoS metrics – e.g. scalability, latency and convergence
speed.
Data Parallel, Model Parallel and Pipeline Parallel:. Data parallel partitions and places data onto
worker nodes, with each one applying the same model for the training process. The worker nodes and
central server communicate periodically to ensure the model is synchronized across all nodes. In the
model parallel approach [ 42,43] the same model is split and placed on different worker nodes, while
processing the same copy of data set. The result is then aggregated from all sub-models. Model parallel
depends heavily on the model structure as not all can be split up easily. For example during training of
the sequential models, only one GPU is utilized at a time as it has to wait for results from the previous/
subsequent GPU. To alleviate this problem, pipeline parallel [ 31] splits the data into smaller batches and
pipelines them for better utilization of the available resources.
Topology:. One important design consideration of distributed learning is the organization and synchro-
nization of worker nodes within a system. There are several considerations before actual implementation:
1) The system has to be scaleable for large number of worker nodes so that the dispatching and ag-
gregating of worker information are efﬁcient and constant. 2) The system communication should be
efﬁcient and easy to setup. Parameter sever (PS) [ 37] is most prominent for centralized aggregation of
data parallel training. In PS, worker nodes periodically upload their model parameter updates to the
central server. In a decentralized setting where there is no central server, the worker nodes communicate
via an AllReduce approach for exchanging model updates. Overall, the communication topology has
a very signiﬁcant impact on the training performance. The ring-allreduce [ 10] usually achieves better
scaleability due to efﬁcient use of network bandwidth. PS can suffer from network congestion at the
server side due to the model aggregation approach.
Synchronization and asynchronization SGD:. In single machine training, SGD is used for updating the
parameters of a single model. In distributed learning, a global model is updated with the aggregate of all
worker gradients computed with SGD. This updated model is then sent to all worker nodes. Parameter
aggregation between worker nodes impacts several system metrics: loss in model training quality,
convergence speed. Overall, there are three key approaches: Synchronous SGD [ 51], Stale asynchronous
SGD [ 61], and Asynchronous SGD [ 11]. In Asynchronous SGD, the delayed gradients create noise in
the global model and delay the convergence speed. However, it provides better model generalization
capability and is fast in training. Synchronous training usually takes more time as it requires waiting for
idle nodes. But compared to an asynchronous approach, it often generates models that produces better
performance.
ACM Comput. Surv.