ExplainableAI(XAI):Core Ideas, Techniques andSolutions • 11
possible. However, their black-box nature is a major hindrance to explainability. On the other hand,
symbolic AI has long known to be explainable natively [ 3] since it represents knowledge using meaning-
ful symbols such as language that is understandable by humans as well as interpretable by machines.
However, the lack of scaleability of symbolic systems and their inability to handle noisy data has limited
their use. More recently, a combination of symbolic and subsymbolic approaches based on artiﬁcial
neural networks, variously known as neuro-symbolic or neural-symbolic (henceforth NS) systems, has
shown signiﬁcant promise in exploiting the complementary strengths of individual approaches [20, 28] .
Consequently, such systems often perform better; for example, Mao et al. [ 41] present a Neuro-Symbolic
Concept Learner, which incorporates symbolic reasoning for better interpretation of visual concepts, and
can be trained on less data (10% of the original dataset) while being explainable.
The symbolic element of NS systems commonly consists of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning
techniques, such as ontologies and knowledge graphs [28, 47] . These represent domain/expert knowl-
edge as concepts and relationships between them, which together provide semantically rich background
context for the domain. Knowledge graphs represent facts, usually in the W3C standard, Resource
Description Framework [ 5] or using graph databases and can be linked to ontologies that represent
background or contextual knowledge commonly in the Web Ontology Language [ 29]. Ontologies can
thus perform deductive reasoning to derive new, deeper knowledge from existing knowledge in a
traceable manner.
Doran et al. [ 14] postulate that for a system to be comprehensible, i.e. not only be interpretable by
experts but also understandable by non-experts, it must “emit symbols" to enable the user to understand
how a conclusion is reached. Symbols are closer to how humans understand, compared to vectors or
numerical encodings as seen in neural networks. However, to achieve this explainability, the authors
argue the critical need for reasoning to understand the why and how behind a particular outcome [ 14].
Ontologies enable reasoning not only to deduce new knowledge and facts but also for causal inference
to understand the cause and effect behind the outcomes, such as through transitivity [ 23]. For example,
in the ontology, SNOMED CT [32], the following concepts are represented in a transitive relationship:
Acute Rheumatic Arthritisdue to− −− → Streptococcus pyogenes In f ectioncausative agent− −−−−−−− → Streptcoccus pyogenes
Based on transitivity, ∀x,y,z(R(x,y)∧R(y,z) =⇒R(x,z)), it can be inferred that Acute Rheumatic
Arthritis (effect) is associated with Streptococcus pyogenes (cause). Using further knowledge from the
ontology, such as type relationships (classiﬁcation), a natural language explanation can be generated such
as, “Acute Rheumatic Arthritis , anAutoimmune Disorder , is caused due to anInfectious Disease ,
Streptococcus pyogenes Infection . ThisDisease hascausative agent aBacterium ,Streptococcus
pyogenes . Hence, Streptococcus pyogenes is acausative agent forAcute Rheumatic Arthritis as
well". Causal inference has other practical applications such as in personalised recommendations, for
instance, drug contraindications [38].
It therefore follows that outputs from subsymbolic approaches when linked to background and
contextual knowledge can generate user-speciﬁc and understandable explanations [ 30]. Sarker et al. [ 47]
provide a useful pipeline to demonstrate how background knowledge made available through ontologies
can be used to explain the classiﬁcation behaviours of artiﬁcial neural networks. They use DL-Learner
[8], a system for supervised machine learning based on inductive learning, to automatically create class
expressions from a knowledge base, which can be used towards explaining the classiﬁcation behaviour.
Furthermore, researchers have exploited advances in Natural Language Processing, speciﬁcally Natural
Language Generation approaches, for further linguistic reﬁnement of explanations [16, 49].
ACM Comput. Surv.