24 • R. Dwivedi et al.
Example. Consider an example of Heart Disease dataset, with a feature instance suggesting heart disease
for an individual. The value of thalach of this person is 131 and cais 3, therefore AnchorTabular method
reaches the following conclusions (See Figure 14). Further, We apply the AnchorTabular method to assess
which features contribute signiﬁcantly for such type of prediction.
Fig.14. Example: An Output ofAnchor.
The person’s maximum heart rate is 131 (which is less than 138). The blood vessels coloured by
fluoroscopy are 3 (greater than 1). As the maximum heart rate of a person should be high and the blood
vessels coloured by fluoroscopy should be low, the above features act as Anchors for the patient, and
deduce that the person has a heart disease.
7.2 Counterfactual Explanations
Determining “ what should be the change in features in order to switch prediction " when an ML-based model is
applied to real world data (along with the rationale behind its outcome) is important. Counterfactual
explanations is a model-agnostic XAI technique that provides changes that can be made tofeature values
to change the current output to a predeﬁned output. Counterfactual explainer method work on black
box models and best suited for binary datasets. They can also be applied on classiﬁcation with more
than 3 target values, but the performance degrades as compared to binary classiﬁcation.
Heart Disease dataset example:. a value of condition ﬁeld 0 or 1 signiﬁes the presence or absence of
heart disease. From this dataset, we have considered a speciﬁc instance where the patient has a heart
disease. Figure 15 shows this instance. Using input in Figure 15, we generate 4 different counterfactuals
as shown in Figure 16. All of these exhibit the minimum changes to the feature values in order to change
the condition of a patient.
Fig.15. An inputto aCounterfactual ś A specific instancewhere the patienthas aheartdisease.
Fig.16. Diferentcounterfactuals outputsofCounterfactual Explainer.
The following are the observations regarding the output: (i) The sex,ageor the type of chest-pain (ﬁeld
cp) of a person suffering from a heart disease cannot be changed. Therefore, these features have to be
ﬁxed in each of the counterfactuals. (ii) the 4 different counterfactuals are all different schemes to change
ACM Comput. Surv.