12 • R. Dwivedi et al.
Figure 4 shows an overview of the interaction between neural and symbolic approaches within an NS
system [ 3]. We explain the process with the help of our previous example. Consider a neural network
model trained for clinical prediction of Streptococcus pyogenes infection in patients. The symbolic
knowledge consisting of a knowledge base (KB), represented for example, as a formal ontology, is
used to determine the subtypes of the infection to include those in the prediction. The neural model is
trained on patient data from several sources such as clinical notes, electronic records, laboratory results,
etc. The output from the model is used to reﬁne the KB by incorporating new associations for causal
analysis to encode the rationale behind the neural network’s decisions. This and the other encoded
knowledge in the KB is now used to construct human-understandable explanations as exempliﬁed
earlier. Moreover, the system can be questioned for further analysis such as, “ What other conditions do
these patients risk developing? ” or “ What other conditions are caused by S. pyogenes? ". In practice, however,
only partial elements of such NS integration are utilised [ 3] and many NS systems are still based on
non-logical or “ﬂat" approaches prompting Sarker et al. [ 48] to argue for the need to focus more on the
logical aspects of NS systems in order to realise improved explainability.
What we can infer from contemporary works is that the combination of neural and symbolic ap-
proaches brings together “...two most fundamental aspects of intelligent cognitive behaviour: the ability
to learn from experience and the ability to reason from what was learned” [ 59]. Thus, where neural
systems excel at learning, symbolic approaches can be employed to explain what has been learnt. In fact,
deep understanding of cognitive science will most certainly beneﬁt the ﬁeld of NS-AI particularly for
the integration of neuro-symbolic approaches [ 6] to develop a mature and robust integrated model and
consequently, for the design of explainable systems that are closer to how humans understand, think,
and communicate.
5.4 ModelPerformanceEvaluation Metrics
In any data science life-cycle, model performance evaluation is an important phase before the optimal
model is chosen. Evaluation can lead to adjusting model hyper-parameters. Evaluation metrics can be
both problem speciﬁc and agnostic. We present model performance metrics that are incorporated to
interpret a model.
Fig.4. High-levelviewofaneural-symbolicsystem[3]
ACM Comput. Surv.