ExplainableAI(XAI):Core Ideas, Techniques andSolutions • 25
the target value from 1 to 0. For example, the second counterfactual on the list indicates that reduction of
cholesterol leads to a decrease in the intensity of heart disease. It also shows that there should be normal
results and no defects upon performing the Thallium test on the heart. (iii) a recurring theme in all
counterfactuals is the reduction of cafrom2to0.casigniﬁes the number of blocked vessels of the heart –
cais the most important feature contributing to having a heart disease. Hence, the most important factor
in changing the condition is to reduce the number of blocked vessels by using methods like angioplasty.
Counterfactual guided by Prototypes. Refers to explanations described on the basis of a prototype i.e.
using a representive sample of instances belonging to a class. Counterfactuals guided by prototypes is
more advanced and accurate, and works on black-box models. This method is a model agnostic approach
to interpret results using the prototypes of classes of target variable. It is much faster than counterfactual,
as prototype speed up the search process signiﬁcantly by directing counterfactual to the prototype of a
particular class.
7.3 Contrastive ExplanationsMethod(CEM)
CEM is a XAI Method for generating local explanations on a black box model. CEM deﬁnes explanations
for classiﬁcation models by providing insight on preferable features along with unwanted features i.e.
Pertinent Positives (PP) and Pertinent Negatives (PN). It is the ﬁrst method that provides the explanations
of both what should be minimally present and what should be necessarily absent from the instance to be
explained in order to maintain the original prediction class. Further, it also identiﬁes a minimal set of
features that is adequate to differentiate it from the nearest different class. Using CEM, the accuracy of
the ML model can be enhanced by looking at cases of mis-classiﬁed instances and using the explanations
provided by CEM.
The two categories of explanations includes Pertinent Positives and Pertinent Negatives [ 12]. The
Pertinent Positives explanation ﬁnds the features that are necessary for the model to predict the same
output class as the predicted class. For example, this includes the important pixels of an image, the
features having a high feature weight, etc. PP works similarly to Anchors. The Pertinent Negatives
explanation ﬁnds the features that should be minimally and sufﬁciently be removed from an instance
whilst maintaining the original output class. PN works similarly to Counterfactuals.
An example using heart disease dataset. Figure 17 generates counter explanations in terms of Pertinent
Negative. The original prediction was 0 which is altered to 1 after applying CEM with pertinent negative.
Pertinent Negative explanations work similarly to the counterfactual explanations, as describe above.
The CEM values in the array which are different from the original one change the prediction class. Some
of them are cp,ca,thal . Hence, changes in these features should necessarily be eliminated to retain the
original prediction as 0 as they are responsible for ﬂipping the prediction class.
Fig.17. An output by CEM using heartdisease dataset.
ACM Comput. Surv.