8 • R. Dwivedi et al.
Global Interpretation. Global interpretation methods involve an overall analysis of a model and its
general behavior. The process of deﬁning variables, their dependency, and interactions goes alongside
with the process of assigning importance to these components. Two global interpretation techniques:
feature importance and partial dependence plots, are described in Section 6.
Local Interpretation. Involves an analysis of individual predictions and decisions made by the model, to
clarify why the model suggested a particular course of action. When a data point prediction/ decision is
analyzed, the focus is on the sub-region around that data point. It enables us to understand the contextual
importance of the data point output in that space. LIME and Shapley value are two such techniques
used to understand individual predictions Section 6.
4 DATAEXPLAINABILITY
The ﬁrst step of explainability is data Visualization which provides an idea and insight to the dataset. This
is where all the model validation and explanation kick off. This section presents commonly used data
explainability techniques – a ﬁrst step for validating, explaining and trusting a model. Section 4.3 presents
programming frameworks, which can be used to implement these data explainability techniques.
4.1 ExploratoryAnalysisandVisualization
Visual analysis is crucial for interpretable ML as knowing its contents is vital for setting a baseline
expectation for how models behave and what they create. For long, exploratory data analysis and
visualization has been a major tool for gleaning meaningful information from data.
4.2 Dimensionality Reduction Techniques
Visualizing is crucial for interpretable ML, however data sets are sometimes hard to visualise due to
too many variables and sizes. Although multiple dimensions can be plotted, their interpretation can be
complex and error prone. Dimensionality reduction techniques such as PCA, ICA, Isometric Mapping
(Isomap), t-sne, LDA, UMAP , LDS, LLE, and Autoencoders can be used to improve visualisation and
interpretation. PCA converts observations of correlated features into a set of linearly uncorrelated features
through various orthogonal transformations while ICA extracts independent components equivalent
to the number of dimensions or features present in the original data set. Isomap is used to preserve
the geodesic distance in the lower dimension whereas t-SNE produces slightly different results each
time on the same data set, preserving the structure of neighbouring points. LDA provides the highest
possible discrimination between multiple classes. On the other hand, Uniform Manifold Approximation
and Projection for Dimension Reduction (UMAP) and Locally Linear Embedding (LLE) are manifold
learning methods based on Riemannian geometry and algebraic topology. Multidimensional Scaling
(MDS) represents measures of similarity/ dissimilarity among pair of objects by computing distances
between points in a low-dimensional space. Autoencoders contain an abstract representation of data,
unlike other non-linear dimension reduction algorithms such as LLE or MDS.
4.3 Sotware Libraries for Data Explainability
Table 4 describes frameworks to implement data explainability techniques. ✓denotes afﬁrmative and ✗
unrealisability of the technique. The methodologies provide exploration as well as explanation of the
observation data. It gives insights into a data set by expressing the features visually – enabling trends
and anomalies to be identiﬁed. Although Data Visualization Plots give a good data explainability, plots
such as Histogram are much less ﬂexible than KDEs. The latter give estimates of an unknown density
function wherein we can not only differ the bandwidth, but also implement kernels with various shapes
ACM Comput. Surv.