20 • R. Dwivedi et al.
6.6 LocalInterpretableModel-agnosticExplanations(LIME)
LIME [ 46] is different from global surrogate in the sense that LIME does not try to explain the whole
model. By perturbing the input of data samples and comprehending how the predictions change, LIME
tries to understand the model. LIME enables local model interpretability. A single data sample is modiﬁed
adjusting some feature values and the resultant output impact is observed. This is often linked to what
human interests are when the output of a model is observed.
A computer vision example. Figure 11 illustrates how LIME is used for image classiﬁcation. For example,
a classiﬁer has to be explained which predicts the likelihood of the image containing an Egyptian cat.
The image (part (b)of Figure 11) is acquired and split into easily interpretable components. As seen in
the part(c)of Figure 11, a dataset of perturbed instances is generated by turning “off" (turning them
grey here) some of the interpretable components. For every instance of perturbation, we compute the
probability of an Egyptian cat being in the image as per the model. We then try to understand a locally
weighted simple (linear) model on the dataset. The emphasis is more on erring in perturbed instances
which best match the original image. Ultimately, we provide the super-pixels showing the highest
positive weights as our explanation (part (d)of Figure 11). We distinguish it by turning everything else
grey.
Fig.11. ExplainingapredictionwithLIME:(a)OriginalimageofEgyptiancattobereadbyLIME,(b)Generatedsuper-pixels
intheimageusingmarkboundaries,(c)Perturbedimage,(d)AreaoftheimagethatproducedthepredictionofEgyptiancat.
An example: explanations by LIME. Figure 12 illustrates the explanations generated by the LIME
technique, using the ML-based price prediction model. It generates price recommendations with explana-
tions, describing how the recommended price is derived at with explanations, instead of just predicting
the price. The output of Figure 12 is a list of explanations, considering the contribution of each feature to
a predicted price. The left part shows the range of a maximum (1487.18) and minimum (240.07) value,
which is predicted by the ML-based price prediction module. The middle part shows the features (i.e.,
WT and PPK ), which contribute the most in the predicted price of an animal. It can be observed that
when the weight is in a range between 308.00 <WT<=327.00 it is contributing in a negative direction
of the prediction. It can also be assessed that when PPK is in a range 210.50 <PPK<=214.10 it is
contributing to the positive side of the total price. The right part shows the actual value of a particular
feature (i.e., Weight=327.00, PPK=214.10).
Potential pitfalls. Trust is important for the efﬁcient interaction between humans and ML systems. The
explanation of individual predictions is the ideal way to assess trust. Even though LIME seems superior
in terms of ease in implementation and computation cost, there are a couple of potential limitations
such as: First and foremost, only linear models are used to approximate local behaviour in the current
implementation. This assumption is correct to some extent when only a small region around the data
sample is considered. However, when this region is expanded, there is a possibility that the linear model
ACM Comput. Surv.