4 • R. Dwivedi et al.
Stakeholders Description
UsersPeople who use AI systems.
Members of this group need explanations to help them decide whether/ how to act given the
outputs of the system, and/ or to help justify those actions.
An example is an insurance company that uses an AI tool to help decide whether and at what
cost to sell policies to clients. The end-users of the tool, the director of the company, and the
clients are all members of the user community.
ConsumersConsumers are recipients of products and services.
Explanations need to be simple and clear, enabling users with limited understanding to make
use of the information without assistance.
This provides trustworthiness as well as increases the transparency of AI Systems.
BusinessesA business stakeholder is someone who wants to deploy an AI system within their product.
A business stakeholder can include: policemen, judges, bank associates, government ofﬁcials,
doctors etc.
Business stakeholders should understand how the model makes a decision. This ensures
fairness and also protects users from false decisions taken by the model.
RegulatorsAn expert or a regulator consistently monitors and audits the AI System.
In case of a false output/ decision made by the model, this group follows the decision trail.
Another job of regulators is to ensure that the model is up to date, by training it with new
data as and when required.
Table 2. Stakeholders at explainingphase.
Detecting bias. A decision-making process can be fully or partially automated with AI models [ 33].
However, if these models are trained on biased historical data, then such bias can permeate the entire
system negatively impacting the decision outcomes. XAI is a valuable tool that can help to identify biases
in AI models. For example, feature importance (discussed in Section 6.1), a common type of explanation,
shows the comparative signiﬁcance of input features for any speciﬁc model prediction(s).
Scientiﬁc understanding. The Automated Statistician project [ 56] explains its predictions by breaking
down complex datasets into manageable interpretable sections and communicating its results to a user.
This enables researchers to enhance their understanding of data features [33].
Building a robust model. Models less likely to be impacted by small changes in inputs are referred to as
“robust" and models that are explainable also tend to be more robust [ 33,35]. In a way, this is somewhat
intuitive: having a coherent explanation for predictions implies that the reasoning is logical, and logical
reasoning is less likely to be affected by noise.
AutoML. AutoML has made explainability more important, as the entire data pipeline is convered into a
black box (as opposed to just the machine learning model) [ 27]. When using AutoML, a user does not
have the ability to engineer or select features, or has visibility into a model’s decision-making process.
2.2 Explaining phase
This is the phase where an ML model is deployed and used in real-life applications. The purpose
of this phase is to interpret how predictions on real-world data are made by the model. This would
expose human-readable explanations to end-users, describing how the prediction results are derived –
especially important in mission critical applications. Table 2 describes stakeholders in this phase and
why explainability is important for them. Below we present use cases of XAI at the Explaining phase of
ML process.
Better decision making. The ability to understand why AI systems make certain predictions or generate
outcomes can help organisations make appropriate decisions. To illustrate, in churn prediction an AI
model can accurately predict customers likely to leave in the future, and the business is alerted – however
ACM Comput. Surv.