22 • R. Dwivedi et al.
importance algorithms provide results for the entire population ignoring individual scenarios. The local
interpretability facilitates to locate and compare the effect of these factors.
Shapley Value vs. LIME. Shapley Value provides local and global interpretation including explanation
with theoretical inferences. However, it is computationally expensive to calculate the Shapley Value in
comparison to LIME. This problem may be resolved with the recently developed kernel SHAP method
which applies a fast kernel approximation. However, crunching large background data still incurs high
computational costs.
LIME is an optimal alternative for few models such as knn model in terms of computation cost.
However, it fails to work out-of-the-box on all models. For example, LIME cannot handle the requirement
of XGBoost to use xgb.DMatrix() on the input data. Contrary, SHAP provides fast, reliable evaluations
and incorporates TreeExplainer, which optimally estimates Shapley Values through XGBoost.
6.8 Sotware Libraries for Feature-basedXAITechniques
In the following, we present few software libraries, which can be used to implement feature-based XAI
techniques. Table 8 describes frameworks, which can be used to implement the following techniques.
Feature-Based XAI TechniquesBasic Li-
braries*Keras ,
Tensorflow ,
PyTorchLime Shap Skater eli5 pdpbox XAI
Feature Importance (Section 6.1) ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓
Partial Dependence Plots (Section 6.2) ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗
Individual Conditional Expecta-
tion (Section 6.3)✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗
Global Surrogate (Section 6.5) ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
LIME (Section 6.6) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
Shapely Value (Section 6.7) ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
Accumulated Local Effects
Plot (Section 6.4)✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
Table 8. Programmingframeworks for AdvancedXAITechniques.
ELI53.an abbreviated form of Explain Like I’m 5 – a popular Python package which provides explanation
and a visualisation of the predictions of ML model, and aids in debugging an ML classiﬁer. There are
two primary ways to assess how an ML model works using ELI5: (1) Global ELI5 provides the method
show_weights() to explain how parameters are acting with respect to the entire model; (2) Local ELI5
provides show_prediction() to look at a speciﬁc instance of a prediction, and an explanation for the
model prediction for that instance.
SHAP4.a popular libraries used for model explainability, based on Shapley values which measure
the inﬂuence of various features, i.e. the contribution of every feature of the dataset towards the
prediction. It is capable of visualizing both local and global interpretations . Local explanation consists of
why prediction on an individual instance was made and Global explanation provides a summary of
feature importance over the entire dataset. SHAP offers a method to visualise the overall data patterns
and understand the model in a global context. SHAP has a number of explainers : deep (based on
the DeepLIFT algorithm [ 40,52]), gradient, kernel (to estimate SHAP for regression and classiﬁcation
models), linear (to compute the SHAP values for a linear model with independent features), tree (to
3ELI5 documentation: https://eli5.readthedocs.io/
4Shap Documentation: https://github.com/slundberg/shap
ACM Comput. Surv.