ExplainableAI(XAI):Core Ideas, Techniques andSolutions • 29
8.1 What-If Tool
What-If Tool (WIT)10is an attribute of Google’s open-source Tensorboard web application. It is a user-
friendly tool that has the ability to debug and evaluate ML models effectively. This tool aid to understand
a model in a simple and intuitive way through a visual interface. It works on both classiﬁcation and
regression models. The prominent feature of WIT is that it allows everyone from ML researchers and
developers to non-technical stakeholders for extensive use as it is free of complex coding. It also provides
answers to different what-if scenarios and aid to visualize and explore the counterfactual examples. For
example, in a classiﬁcation model, it returns the instance with the most similar features but different
prediction. Thus it enables and simpliﬁes the task to assess the modiﬁcations in model in real time. One
of the other features is its visualization of the dataset, which inculcates how diverse is the data, impact
on model’s results on altering different feature values, how the hyperparameters should be tuned and
other observations. Also, it can be beneﬁcial in comparing the results of two different models on the
same input data. It is also capable of post training evaluation.
The what-if tool has 3 tabs with different features: Data-point Editor ,Performance & Fairness and Feature :
The datapoint editor shows the prediction for every datapoint passed. Using Data-point editor, we are
also able to inspect individual input points and create custom visualisations by changing the feature
values. The Performance and Fairness provides the overall performance using evaluation metrics such
as confusion matrix, ROC curve etc. It provides a way to slice data of different features and then applies
different strategies for accuracy and fairness enhancement. The Features tab shows the balance in the
dataset for every feature by assigning the range of every feature prior to the training.
8.2 TensorBoard
TensorBoard is a visualization tool that helps in inspecting the inner workings of the model as training a
deep neural network can be complex and difﬁcult to comprehend. It is used for measuring the evaluation
metrics like loss and accuracy needed during the machine learning workﬂow and projecting embeddings
to a lower dimensional space, etc. TensorBoard is also capable of debugging and optimizing TensorFlow
programs.
All TensorFlow programs have two basic components: Operations and Tensors . Tensors are values of
a multidimensional array i.e. data is stored in tensors and operations manipulate the stored data. The
data is fed into the model which consists of a set of operations, and tensors ﬂow between the operations
to get the output tensor. The current implementation of TensorBoard allows ﬁve visualizations: scalars ,
images ,audio ,histograms and graphs : TensorBoard’s Scalar Dashboard visualizes scalar valued tensors
that vary with time similar to loss or learning rate. The Image Dashboard can display saved images. It
can also be used to build an image classiﬁer on arbitrary image data as it is able to display input images
of a network, generated output images of an autoencoder or a GAN. Audio enables saving audio which
can be embedded and played in the Audio Dashboard using audio widgets. The Histogram Dashboard
visualizes the distribution of a non-scalar Tensor over different periods of time. It can be used to visualize
weight or bias matrices of a neural network. The Graph Explorer can visualize a TensorBoard graph,
allowing understanding of the TensorFlow model and its operations.
Tensorboard also provides an Embedding Projector , which aids in visualizing high-dimensional data
and examining embedding layers. For example, in sentiment analysis it allows searching for speciﬁc
terms, and highlights words that are nearby in the embedding space. It requires a checkpoint through
which it reads the input data as well as metadata such as vocabulary ﬁles or additional information
about the layer to visualize. Another component of Tensorboard is summary , a special operation that is
10https://pair-code.github.io/what-if-tool/
ACM Comput. Surv.