16 • R. Dwivedi et al.
Distributed Learning System. Apart from the commonly used computation frameworks that are used for
distributed computation, e.g. MapReduce, Apache Spark, there are many frameworks that are dedicated
for deep learning. These frameworks include generic deep learning frameworks such as TensorFlow,
Pytorch, MXNet that incorporate different distributed learning approaches. On the other hand, some
frameworks are dedicated for distributed learning, as summarized in Table 6. For example, frameworks
such as PaddlePaddle includes support for both sync and async training, PS and AllReduce topology.
Theano is an optimizing compiler instead of a development framework. We aim to list the trending
frameworks that the users/ developers could choose from, thus Theano is not included in the table.
Synchronizaiton Architecture
Sync Async Stale Parameter Server RingAllReduce
Tensorﬂow •• •
Pytorch •• •
Mxnet •• •
Paddle Paddle •• • •
Caffe2 • •
Baidu AllReduce • •
Horovod • •
CNTK • •
Distbelief • •
petuum • •
DMTK •• •
Table 6. DistributedLearning frameworks
6 FEATURE-BASED TECHNIQUES
This section presents feature-based model explainability techniques, which describes howinput fea-
tures contribute to model output. There are many feature-based methods available: permutation Fea-
ture Importance, Partial Dependence Plots (PDPs), Individual Conditional Expectation (ICE) plots,
Accumulated Local Effects (ALE) Plot, Global surrogate models, Local Interpretable Model-agnostic
Explanations (LIME) and Shapley Additive Explanations (SHAP).
6.1 Feature Importance
Feature importance [ 17,19] refers to a class of techniques that are used to assign scores to input features.
It shows each feature’s relative importance when a prediction is made. They also deﬁne the basis for
dimensionality reduction and feature selection to improve the efﬁciency of a predictive model.
Permutation Importance is a widely used feature importance technique that measures importance by
looking at how reshufﬂing of each predictor randomly impacts the performance of the model. It is
considered as a computationally expensive technique.
Table 6 presents a feature importance example of a cancer dataset. The output of the feature importance
is a matrix, listing weights and features of the data sets. The topmost values indicate the features which are
most important and the numbers in the bottom represent the least important features. The randomness
in our permutation importance evaluation is measured by repetition with several shufﬂes.
ACM Comput. Surv.