30 • R. Dwivedi et al.
required to visualize the model parameters such as weights and biases of a neural network, evaluation
metrics, and images such as input images to a network. It feeds in a regular tensor and outputs the
summarized data to the disk.
8.3 InterpretML
InterpretML is an open-source Python toolkit by Microsoft for training intelligible models and explaining
black-box systems. It is based on human interpretation of the global and local explanations of the
model. It also simpliﬁes debugging the model to be able to understand the predictions. InterpretML
has the ability of comparing different XAI methods using the same feature as well as it optimizes
real-life datasets. The different XAI methods include Decision Tree, Decision Rule List, Linear Regression,
Logistic Regression, SHAP Kernel Explainer, SHAP Tree Explainer, LIME, Morris Sensitivity Analysis,
and Partial Dependence. It includes Explainable Boosting Machine (EBM), which is an algorithm for
explaining glass-box models with higher accuracy.There are currently 3 features available: (i) tabular data
interpretability : what-if based interactive visualization is available in the toolkit, where a user can assess
the modiﬁcations for features of a particular data point in the model’s predictions; (ii) Interpretability for
text data A text-speciﬁc visualization dashboard is also available for a text classiﬁcation and sentimental
analysis; (iii) Counterfactual example analysis using DiCE The demo analysis is also available where it
recommends the required modiﬁcations to the input features so that the model yield the desired output.
Other features of the dashboard include ﬁltering the data and creating cohorts. A Model performance
tab visualizes model performance metrics, as well as the distribution of rejection probability. Overall
model explanations show techniques like feature importance and individual feature importance factors.
9 DESIGN CONSIDERATIONSFOR IMPLEMENTING XAI
Enhancing explainability into AI systems can bring in many positives. However, the implementation of
XAI is not the easiest of tasks. In the following, we discuss the considerations while implementing XAI
models:
Trade-off: XAI vs Model Performance. While applying XAI concepts to models, we may have to choose
between model interpretability and model performance [26]. For example, few simple linear or tree-based
models can easily explain the model decisions that lead to a speciﬁc insight or prediction. Conversely,
complex ensemble and deep learning models often produce superlative performance, but they are
considered as black-box models as it is very difﬁcult to assess model’s decisions.
Different users need different forms of explanation in different situations. A decision or recommenda-
tion may have to be explained in many ways, depending on audience requirements and the factors in
different scenarios [ 55]. For understanding the system functioning, users may have questions such as,
what kind of data was used by the system, the origin of such data and the reason why that data was
chosen; how does the model work and what factors impact the decision-making process; why a speciﬁc
result was achieved. To ﬁgure out what kind of explanations are required, it is necessary to engage with
all stakeholders and build a robust system design.
System design often needs to balance competing requirements. XAI technologies utilize various
schemes and approaches, each with its own pros and cons. These methods when used in different
applications, the interpretability, accuracy, and privacy varies. For instance, in healthcare and ﬁnance
applications, AI systems are privy to conﬁdential data for making decisions and offering recommenda-
tions. Explainability in such cases differs as businesses must keep in mind to which extent they need
to be transparent. This puts a question mark on the suitability of such systems for applications where
ACM Comput. Surv.