10 • R. Dwivedi et al.
with a logic similar to Boolean. Scikit-learn library includes methods that can be used for interpretation
of trees, e.g. sklearn.tree.export_text ,sklearn.tree.plot_tree ,sklearn.tree.export_graphviz , and dtreeviz
and graphviz package . Sklearn also provides a way to evaluate feature importance – the total decrease
entropy due to splits over a given feature.
5.1.3 Generalized Additive Models (GAMs). Generalized Additive Models (GAMs) are an extension of
Generalized Linear Models (GLMs) with a smoothing function. GAMs offer a trade-off between simple,
interpretable models such as logistic regression and more complex, sophisticated models such as neural
networks, which (usually) offer better accuracy and predictive power as compared to simple models.
Over ﬁtting is unlikely in GAMs due to the regularization of prediction functions.
5.2 Black Box Models
Black Box models cannot be understood or interpreted by themselves. Black Box models include Tree
Ensembles, Support Vector Machines (SVM) as well as a variety of neural networks. Inclusion of several
layers in a neural network makes it difﬁcult for designers to explain how the algorithm has reached a
particular prediction outcome [1].
5.2.1 Tree Ensembles. Tree ensembles method is a learning technique that focuses on integrating several
decision trees to create an output. It determines which features to chose at each split. Since a single
decision tree may not be enough to yield optimal performance, several decision trees can be combined
together to get an optimal performance model. However, the model’s complexity increases due to
multiple decision trees. As a result, it becomes a lot more difﬁcult to understand model behaviour. The
following methods are developed for interpreting complex tree ensembles:
•Simpliﬁed Tree Ensemble Learner (STEL). The ‘InTrees’ (Interpretable Trees) package coverts a
complex tree ensemble into a rule based learner known as STEL. The ensemble method averages
over the variance of multiple models, which in turn deprive the interpretations of individual
models.
•Tree interpreter. Tree interpreter provides interpretations of decision trees and random forests.
It decomposes every prediction result to a sum of feature contributions and bias. This enables a
better interpretation of how a feature led to a particular prediction.
5.2.2 Support Vector Machines. SVM is a supervised ML algorithm used for classiﬁcation and regression.
A Hyperplane is calculated based on the data points which are plotted in an N-dimensional space. This
Hyperplane is oriented in such a way that it differentiates between classes by maximizing the distance
between the data points of different classes. It works well in high dimensional spaces and scenarios
where number of dimensions are greater than the number of samples.
5.2.3 Explainable Neural Networks: Inclusion of several layers in a large and complex neural nets makes it
difﬁcult to explain how a speciﬁc prediction or conclusion [ 1] was reached. This black box explainability
refers to assessing predictions made by a model for any given input without having the knowledge of
its inherent working. The design of an explainable Neural Network provides insights into the model.
These post-hoc explanation schemes are being used for both single/ multilayer Neural Networks,
Convolutional Neural Networks and Recurrent Neural Networks.
5.3 Neural-SymbolicApproaches
Subsymbolic approaches, such as those based on artiﬁcial neural networks, are growing in popularity
due to their robustness against noisy data and ability to perform complex tasks not otherwise manually
ACM Comput. Surv.