ExplainableAI(XAI):Core Ideas, Techniques andSolutions • 23
calculate SHAP values for Decision Tree models), sampling (computes SHAP values by using random
permutation of features). SHAP is a robust method that provides the integration of several methods such
as feature importance, feature dependence, interactions, clustering and summary plots, all included in a
single library. SHAP is computationally expensive on certain models such as KNN but runs fast on trees,
such as gradient boosted trees from XGBoost.
XAI5.It is an explainability toolbox for ML which is speciﬁcally designed for data analysis and model
evaluation as follows: (1) Data Analysis : It facilitates the user to balance the class by up-sampling or
down-sampling and thereby splitting a testing and training dataset. It has the ability of visualizing the
correlation matrix thereby explaining the model’s behavior. (2) Model Evaluation : The interaction between
the predictions and the input features can be analyzed by building a deep learning model.
Pdpbox6.Partial Dependence Plot toolbox, abbreviated as PDPbox is similar to ICEbox. It is used
to compute and visualize the impact or effect of features on the prediction of target variable for any
scikit-learn algorithm, thereby explaining the prediction of the model. This library is one step ahead of
random forest, as Pdpbox provides the direction in which the feature is inﬂuencing the prediction.
Skater7.It is a Python library used for interpreting and identifying relationships between data or
features that act as input to the model and the ﬁnal prediction the model makes. It is used to reveal
the interpretations of black box models globally as well as locally. With Skater, one can perform global
interpretations using partial dependence plots and feature importance techniques. For example, how
a loan prediction model uses the customer’s credit history, account status, income to approve or deny
his loan. Skater can also measure how a model’s performance alters over time after its deployment in a
production environment. Skater has the ability to interpret allowing the practitioner to measure how
feature interactions varies across different versions of models.
Tf-explain8.a library used for Keras API (TensorFlow v2.0 workﬂow), primary features include tensor-
board integration and callbacks. Supports visualization of heatmaps and gradients for hyper-parameter
tuning or confusion matrix generation, for explanation and visualization of the prediction. The methods
include GradCAM [50] and SmoothGrad [54].
7 EXAMPLE-BASED TECHNIQUES
Section 7.1-7.5 describe commonly used example-based XAI techniques. Section 7.6 presents program-
ming frameworks to implement these techniques and their comparative analysis.
7.1 Anchors
Anchors capture limit/ sufﬁcient conditions of features at which the model gives a high precision
prediction. Anchors support model-agnostic approaches for classiﬁcation models of text, image or
tabular data. Anchor takes into account the global dataset and then give the anchor feature-values, using
If-Then rules for ﬁnding features associated with input instances responsible for prediction. Anchors
are similar to LIME as they both provide local explanations linearly. However, LIME only covers a local
region and may not be generalisable. If the same perturbation space is allotted to both LIME and Anchors,
the latter will build a more valid region of instances which better describe the model’s behaviour.
5An eXplainability Toolbox for Machine Learning: https://github.com/EthicalML/xai
6Python partial dependence plot toolbox: https://pdpbox.readthedocs.io/
7Python Library for Model Interpretation/Explanations: https://oracle.github.io/Skater/
8Interpretability methods for Tensorﬂow 2.0: https://tf-explain.readthedocs.io/
ACM Comput. Surv.