ExplainableAI(XAI):Core Ideas, Techniques andSolutions • 9
and sizes. On the other hand PCA and t-SNE are purely dimensionality reduction techniques, e.g. to 2D
or 3D representations.
Software ibraries such as Sklearn, NetworkX can be used for building ML models, network models
and provide algorithms for classiﬁcation and regression. Sklearn provide ease in interpretation for deep
learning models. Along with many supervised and unsupervised learning algorithms, Sklearn also
consists of cross validation methods to assess model performance/ prediction on unseen data. Using
NetworkX, different kinds of networks such as random, weighted, symmetric and asymmetric networks
can be created. WordCloud supports visualisation of frequent words in a given text – identifying the
most important words in the text.
5 MODELEXPLAINABILITY
In this section, we outline commonly used model explainability techniques to understand AI models.
laying the foundation for techniques discussed in Section 6 and Section 7. In Section 5.1, we ﬁrst describe
techniques used for white box model , whose internal mechanisms lend themselves to be interpreted in
a direct manner. Section 5.2 outlines techniques used in black-box models while Section 5.3 discusses
the application of knowledge representation techniques for explainability. Section 5.4 describes model
performance evaluation metrics . Section 5.5 presents programming frameworks, which can be used to
implement the presented model explainability techniques.
5.1 White-Box Models
In this section we present white-box models and programming methods used for interpretation.
5.1.1 Linear models. Explainability of linear models involves a linear combination of feature values,
adjusted by the coefﬁcients of the model. For example, in y=mx+c,mis coefﬁcient of feature x1and c
is coefﬁcient of x0so polynomial of degree 1 is a linear polynomial. Similarly, Logistic Regression is one
of the most interpretable linear ML models for certain class of events. seaborn ,matplotlib ,sklearn and
ALE libraries can be used to unfold and visualise a Logistic Regression Model.
5.1.2 DecisionTree. A decision tree predicts the value of a target variable against multiple input variables.
The terminal node, also called the leaf node, depicts the value of the target variable based on the input
variable. A key beneﬁt of decision trees lies in establishing the input and target variable relationship
XAI Techniques numpy,
pandasmatplotlib seaborn sklearn wordcloud networkX
Data Visualization Plots ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
Kernel Density Estimation
(KDE)✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
Box and Whisker Plot ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
Correlation Matrix ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
Word Cloud ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗
Network Diagram ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓
Principal Component Analysis
(PCA)✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
HeatMaps ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Em-
bedding (t-SNE)✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
Table 4. ProgrammingFrameworks for Data Explainability.
ACM Comput. Surv.