26 • R. Dwivedi et al.
7.4 Kernel andTree Shapley Additive Explanations
The goal of SHAP is to calculate the impact of every feature on the prediction [ 22,40]. Compared to
Shapley values, Kernel SHAP provides computational efﬁciency and accurate approximation in higher
dimensions. In Kernel SHAP , the full model has been utilized that is already trained instead of retraining
models with different feature permutations. Here, the “missing features" are replaced with “samples
from the data". This means that the "absent feature values" are equated with "feature value replaced by
random feature values selected from data". Now, this modiﬁed feature space is ﬁtted to the linear model
and the coefﬁcients of this model act as Shapley values.
Local explanation. An example of local explanation using heart disease dataset is illustrated in Figure 18.
The base value is the average of all output values of the model on the training data(here : -0.3148). Pink
values drag/push the prediction towards 1 (pushes the prediction higher i.e. towards having heart
disease) and the blue towards 0 (pushes the prediction lower i.e. towards no disease). The magnitude of
inﬂuence is determined by the length of the features on the horizontal line. The value shown correspond-
ing to the feature are the values of feature at the particular index (eg. 2.583 for ca). Here, the highest
inﬂuence is of cafor increasing the prediction value and of sex for decreasing the value.
Fig.18. An example oflocal explanationusing heartdisease dataset.
Global explanation. Figure 19 plots visualizes the impact of features on the prediction class 1. The
features are arranged such that the highest inﬂuence is of topmost feature. Thus, cais the feature that
inﬂuences prediction the most; followed by thal and so on. The colour shades depicts the direction in
which the feature impacts the prediction. For example, higher shap values of caare shown in red colour
which means high feature value. The higher the value of ca, the higher is the SHAP value i.e. more
towards 1. High value of caindicates more chances of Heart Disease. However, it is the opposite for
some features: High thalach will indicate no heart disease.
Tree Shapley Additive Explanations. It is an algorithm to compute exact SHAP values for decision
trees based models. The algorithm provides interpretable explanations suitable for regression and
classiﬁcation of models with tree structure applied to tabular data [ 22,39]. It attributes the change of a
model output with respect to a baseline (e.g., average over a reference set or inferred from node data) to
each of the input features. Similar to Kernel SHAP , the Shapley value of each feature is computed by
averaging the difference of the model output observed when the feature is part of a group of “present"
features.
7.5 IntegratedGradients
Integrated Gradients, also known as Path-Integrated Gradients is an XAI technique that assign an
importance value to each feature of the input using the gradients of the model output [ 57]. It is a local
method that helps explain each individual prediction. This method provides the speciﬁc attributions
of the feature inputs that are positive attributions and negative attributions. Positive attributions are
attributions that contribute or inﬂuence a model to make the decision whereas negative attributions are
attributions that contribute or inﬂuence a model against a decision made.
ACM Comput. Surv.