ExplainableAI(XAI):Core Ideas, Techniques andSolutions • 21
Fig.12. Model explanationsgeneratedby LIME.
might be impotent to explain the original model’s behaviour. There would be non-linearity at local
regions for datasets requiring complicated, non-interpretable models. The inability to deploy LIME in
such settings is a major pitfall.
6.7 ShapleyValue
SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) is a game theoretic approach to explain the output of any
machine learning model. The SHAP value [ 40] is a great tool similar to LIME where interpretations
measures the impact of having a certain value for a given feature in comparison to the prediction. This
section discusses Shapley value and how the SHAP ( SHapley Additive ex Planations) value arises from
the concept of Shapley. It also demonstrates how SHAP values increase the transparency of the model.
An example. Figure 13 shows an output SHAP plot of an instance of cancer dataset2. The output value is
the prediction for that observation. The base value is the value that would be predicted if the features are
unknown for the current output i.e. mean prediction. Features (red/blue) that push the prediction higher
(to the right) are shown in red, and those pushing the prediction lower are in blue.
Fig.13. Example: output ofSHAPplot.
The explanation in Figure 13 displays features that contribute to push the model output from the
base value to the model output. The basevalue is the model output average over the passed training
dataset. Features that push the prediction higher are color-coded in red. Their size shows the extent of
the effect of the feature visually. Features that push the prediction lower are depicted in blue color. We
predicted −3.89, whereas the basevalue is 1.837. The biggest impact comes from worst area i.e. 989.5.
Though the mean concave points value has high effect (0.04079) increasing the prediction. If we subtract
the length of the blue bars from the length of the pink bars, it equals the distance from the base value to
the output (Here, 3.89 +3.837−5.89=1.837).
Beneﬁts. An important advantage of SHAP value lies in its transparency and interpretability locally,
which implies that each observation can have its own SHAP value set. It is possible to explain why
a instance gets its prediction and the contributions of its predictors. Example scenarios are: When
a model denies a loan to an individual and the bank is legally bound to explain why the loan was
rejected. A physician wants to determine the factors responsible for each patient’s disease risk so that
he can directly look at those risk factors with directed health interventions. The traditional variable
2Breast Cancer Dataset: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Breast+Cancer+Wisconsin+(Diagnostic)
ACM Comput. Surv.