2 • R. Dwivedi et al.
to the application user being shown a wrong recommendation [ 62]. However, in critical sectors such
as healthcare, ﬁnance, and military, inaccurate predictions can have serious consequences on human
life. Hence it is crucial to understand how these systems make their decisions. As AI permeates into
these critical areas, the human limitation to understand complex AI models is a major roadblock. The
main reason for this is that the data insights and the tasks solved by machines remain out of sight in
increasingly complex models. The user would need access to tons of numbers to explain a Deep Neural
Network (DNN), and moreover there is no concrete way to understand the model completely. In addition
to the black box nature of a model, biascan creep in when dealing with data [ 60]. Model performance
metrics (e.g., model accuracy) do not always exhibit true prediction decisions [ 9]. Just having a highly
accurate model is not sufﬁcient to trust and deploy the model in real-world applications.
XAI has been receiving much attention across multiple application domains [ 21]. Consequently, an
increasing number of XAI tools and techniques are being proposed both in industry and academia.
The current XAI systems exhibit a diverse set of dimensions and functionalities for simple exploratory
data analysis to understanding complex AI models. Therefore, selecting the correct method(s) for given
requirements necessitates a clear understanding of the methods and basic differences among the different
XAI approaches. However, the state-of-the-art analysis with respect to existing approaches for building
XAI-enabled applications has been investigated to a limited extent. In Došilovi´ c et al. [ 13], general
interpretability and explainability have been discussed but limited to supervised ML models. On the
other hand, Bhatt el al. [ 7] discuss how explanation schemes are adapted for ML engineers, end users or
other stakeholders. They provide recommendations for organizations to achieve real time explanation
and to improve performance. Arrieta et al. [ 4] present concepts, taxonomies, opportunities and challenges
towards responsible AI. The focus of their survey is on schemes for fairness and discrimination in ML
models. Our survey focuses on model and data explainability and on model performance metrics.
Additionally, case studies are used to explain the signiﬁcance of feature importance. Furthermore, design
considerations for XAI frameworks along with software systems have been discussed to support fairness
and accountability.
We believe that a comparative analysis is needed to counsel various stakeholders involved in XAI-
enabled application development. The focus of this survey is on approaches to develop XAI applications,
covering tools and technologies for XAI and related concepts to aid implementation in AI-based systems.
Outline. The rest of this paper1is structured as follows: the different stages of building a typical ML
model and an XAI-based model are compared in Section 2. The need for XAI in AI-based applications and
in the explanation phases of the ML process is then discussed in Section 3 followed by the taxonomy of
XAI techniques in Section 4 – discussed in the subsequent sections. Sections 5 and 6 cover the major pillars
of XAI system, i.e., Data Explainability and Model Explainability respectively. The focus in Section 5 is
on basic data visualization and dimensionality techniques along with the associated software libraries,
and Section 6 on model explainability techniques and the associated software libraries. Using examples,
Feature-based and Example-based XAI techniques are discussed in Sections 7 and 8 respectively. Open
source and commercially available toolkits for building XAI models are covered in Section 9 with an
analysis on requirements during implementation of XAI presented in Section 10. The paper is concluded
in Section 11.
2 DEVELOPINGXAI-BASEDAPPLICATIONS
While an ML pipeline can provide accurate predictions, it lacks two important phases: understanding
and explaining. The Understanding phase involves the training and quality assurance of an AI model
1Some of the content is derived from our unpublished technical report: https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.03195
ACM Comput. Surv.