ExplainableAI(XAI):Core Ideas, Techniques andSolutions • 17
Fig.6. An example output ofFeature Importance
 Fig.7. An example of Partial DependencePlots.
Fig.8. An Example ofICEPlot.
6.2 PartialDependence Plots (PDP)
Partial Dependence Plots (PDP) depict scenarios in which a feature affects predictions. For example, the
following questions can be answered with PDP [ 18,25]:What would be the impact of longitude and latitude
on prices of houses? ,how would houses of similar size be priced in different geographic areas? . Figure 7 illustrates
a simple PDP example. The x-axis plots the value of feature f0 (i.e. worst concave points), and the y-axis
plots the predicted value. The solid line drawn in the shaded area represents the variation of average
prediction when the value of f0 changes. The yaxis is represented as a change in the prediction from
what it would be predicted as a baseline point (or the leftmost value). The blue shaded area denotes the
level of conﬁdence. In our example, “Worst Concave points" feature has initially a increasing negative
inﬂuence, and thereafter it remains neutral. Hence we can say that for less values, we can initially predict
that there are less chances of malignant condition.
Beneﬁts. First, there is an ease in implementation [ 44]. Second, The computation part is quite intuitive
when it comes to partial dependence plots. The partial dependence function at the point of a speciﬁc
feature value would represent the average prediction. It is easy for a laymen to understand the logic of
PDPs.
Limitations. The concern associated with PDP is the assumption of their independence [ 44]. The feature(s)
for which the partial dependence is computed are assumed to be not correlated with other features.
Second, the maximum number of features in a partial dependence function is realistically just two. The
underlying reason lies with their 2-dimensional representation (paper or screen), or lack of ability to
visualize more than 3 dimensions. Third, Heterogeneous effects can be uncovered by analysing the
individual conditional expectation (outlined in Section 6.3) curves, ignoring the aggregated line.
6.3 IndividualConditionalExpectation (ICE)
Instead of average plotting in PDP , ICE [ 24] shows one line per instance. ICE scores outperforms PDP
on intuitiveness as each line stands for the predictions for one instance. As with partial dependence,
ACM Comput. Surv.