Proceedings of Machine Learning Research vol 120:1–4, 2020 2nd Annual Conference on Learning for Dynamics and Control
A Theoretical Analysis of Deep Q-Learning
Jianqing Fan JQFAN @PRINCETON .EDU
Princeton University
Zhaoran Wang ZHAORAN .WANG @NORTHWESTERN .EDU
Northwestern University
Yuchen Xie YCXIE @U.NORTHWESTERN .EDU
Northwestern University
Zhuoran Yang ZY6@ PRINCETON .EDU
Princeton University
Editors: A. Bayen, A. Jadbabaie, G. J. Pappas, P. Parrilo, B. Recht, C. Tomlin, M.Zeilinger
1Abstract
Despite the great empirical success of deep reinforcement learning, its theoretical foundation is less
well understood. In this work, we make the ﬁrst attempt to theoretically understand the deep Q-
network (DQN) algorithm (Mnih et al., 2015) from both algorithmic and statistical perspectives. In
speciﬁc, we focus on a slight simpliﬁcation of DQN that fully captures its key features. Under mild
assumptions, we establish the algorithmic and statistical rates of convergence for the action-value
functions of the iterative policy sequence obtained by DQN. In particular, the statistical error char-
acterizes the bias and variance that arise from approximating the action-value function using deep
neural network, while the algorithmic error converges to zero at a geometric rate. As a byprod-
uct, our analysis provides justiﬁcations for the techniques of experience replay and target network,
which are crucial to the empirical success of DQN. Furthermore, as a simple extension of DQN, we
propose the Minimax-DQN algorithm for zero-sum Markov game with two players. Borrowing the
analysis of DQN, we also quantify the difference between the policies obtained by Minimax-DQN
and the Nash equilibrium of the Markov game in terms of both the algorithmic and statistical rates
of convergence.
Keywords: Deep Q-Learning, Markov Decision Process, Zero-Sum Markov Game
Introduction. In this work, we aim to provide theoretical guarantees for DQN (Mnih et al., 2015),
which can be cast as an extension of the classical Q-learning algorithm (Watkins and Dayan, 1992)
that uses deep neural network to approximate the action-value function. Although the algorithmic
and statistical properties of the classical Q-learning algorithm are well-studied, theoretical analysis
of DQN is highly challenging due to its differences in the following two aspects.
First, in online gradient-based temporal-difference reinforcement learning algorithms, approx-
imating the action-value function often leads to instability. Baird (1995) proves that this is the
case even with linear function approximation. The key technique to achieve stability in DQN is
experience replay (Lin, 1992; Mnih et al., 2015). In speciﬁc, a replay memory is used to store the
1. Extended abstract. Full version appears as arXiv reference, arXiv:1901.00137.
c
2020 J. Fan, Z. Wang, Y . Xie & Z. Yang.