A T HEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF DEEPQ-L EARNING
trajectory of the Markov decision process (MDP). At each iteration of DQN, a mini-batch of states,
actions, rewards, and next states are sampled from the replay memory as observations to train the
Q-network, which approximates the action-value function. The intuition behind experience replay
is to achieve stability by breaking the temporal dependency among the observations used in training
the deep neural network.
Second, in addition to the aforementioned Q-network, DQN uses another neural network named
the target network to obtain an unbiased estimator of the mean-squared Bellman error used in train-
ing the Q-network. The target network is synchronized with the Q-network after each period of
iterations, which leads to a coupling between the two networks. Moreover, even if we ﬁx the target
network and focus on updating the Q-network, the subproblem of training a neural network still
remains less well-understood in theory.
In this paper, we focus on a slight simpliﬁcation of DQN, which is amenable to theoretical
analysis while fully capturing the above two aspects. In speciﬁc, we simplify the technique of ex-
perience replay with an independence assumption, and focus on deep neural networks with rectiﬁed
linear units (ReLU) (Nair and Hinton, 2010) and large batch size. Under this setting, DQN is re-
duced to the neural ﬁtted Q-iteration (FQI) algorithm (Riedmiller, 2005) and the technique of target
network can be cast as the value iteration. More importantly, by adapting the approximation results
for ReLU networks to the analysis of Bellman operator, we establish the algorithmic and statistical
rates of convergence for the iterative policy sequence obtained by DQN. As we will show in the
main results, the statistical error characterizes the bias and variance that arise from approximating
the action-value function using neural network, while the algorithmic error geometrically decays to
zero as the number of iteration goes to inﬁnity.
Furthermore, we extend DQN to two-player zero-sum Markov games (Shapley, 1953). The
proposed algorithm, named Minimax-DQN, can be viewed as a combination of the Minimax-Q
learning algorithm for tabular zero-sum Markov games (Littman, 1994) and deep neural networks
for function approximation. Compared with DQN, the main difference lies in the approaches to
compute the target values. In DQN, the target is computed via maximization over the action space.
In contrast, the target obtained computed by solving the Nash equilibrium of a zero-sum matrix
game in Minimax-DQN, which can be efﬁciently attained via linear programming. Despite such a
difference, both these two methods can be viewed as approximately applying the Bellman opera-
tor to the Q-network. Thus, borrowing the analysis of DQN, we also establish theoretical results
for Minimax-DQN. Speciﬁcally, we quantify the suboptimality of policy returned by the algorithm
by the difference between the action-value functions associated with this policy and with the Nash
equilibrium policy of the Markov game. For this notion of suboptimality, we establish the both algo-
rithmic and statistical rates of convergence, which implies that the action-value function converges
to the optimal counterpart up to an unimprovable statistical error in geometric rate.
Our contribution is three-fold. First, we establish the algorithmic and statistical errors of the neu-
ral FQI algorithm, which can be viewed as a slight simpliﬁcation of DQN. Under mild assumptions,
our results show that the proposed algorithm obtains a sequence of Q-networks that geometrically
converges to the optimal action-value function up to an intrinsic statistical error induced by the ap-
proximation bias of ReLU network and ﬁnite sample size. Second, as a byproduct, our analysis
2