a brittle, time consuming process, which we have
replaced with a domain speciﬁc version of an ex-
isting pipeline component.
Both scispaCy models are released with the cus-
tom tokeniser, but without a custom sentence seg-
menter by default.
Model Sent Abstract Citation
web-small 88.2% 67.5% 74.4%
web-small + ct 86.6% 62.1% 88.6%
web-small + cs 91.9% 77.0% 87.5%
web-small + cs + ct 92.1% 78.3% 94.7%
sci-small + ct 97.2% 81.7% 97.9%
sci-small + cs + ct 97.2% 81.7% 98.0%
sci-med + ct 97.3% 81.7% 98.0%
sci-med + cs + ct 97.4% 81.7% 98.0%
Table 8: Sentence segmentation performance for the
core spaCy and scispaCy models. cs=custom rule
based sentence segmenter and ct=custom rule based
tokenizer, both designed explicitly to handle citations
and common patterns in biomedical text.
7 Related Work
Apache cTakes (Savova et al., 2010) was de-
signed speciﬁcally for clinical notes rather than
the broader biomedical domain. MetaMap and
MetaMapLite (Aronson, 2001; Demner-Fushman
et al., 2017) from the National Library of
Medicine focus speciﬁcally on entity linking using
the Uniﬁed Medical Language System (UMLS)
(Bodenreider, 2004) as a knowledge base. Buyko
et al. (2006) adapt Apache OpenNLP using the
GENIA corpus, but their system is not openly
available and is less suitable for modern, Python-
based workﬂows. The GENIA Tagger (Tsuruoka
et al., 2005) provides the closest comparison to
scispaCy due to it’s multi-stage pipeline, inte-
grated research contributions and production qual-
ity runtime. We improve on the GENIA Tagger
by adding a full dependency parser rather than
just noun chunking, as well as improved results
for NER without compromising signiﬁcantly on
speed.
In more fundamental NLP research, the GENIA
corpus (Kim et al., 2003) has been widely used
to evaluate transfer learning and domain adapta-
tion. McClosky et al. (2006) demonstrate the ef-
fectiveness of self-training and parse re-ranking
for domain adaptation. Rimell and Clark (2008)
adapt a CCG parser using only POS and lexicalcategories, while Joshi et al. (2018) extend a neu-
ral phrase structure parser trained on web text to
the biomedical domain with a small number of
partially annotated examples. These papers focus
mainly of the problem of domain adaptation it-
self, rather than the objective of obtaining a robust,
high-performance parser using existing resources.
NLP techniques, and in particular, distant su-
pervision have been employed to assist the cu-
ration of large, structured biomedical resources.
Poon et al. (2015) extract 1.5 million cancer path-
way interactions from PubMed abstracts, lead-
ing to the development of Literome (Poon et al.,
2014), a search engine for genic pathway inter-
actions and genotype-phenotype interactions. A
fundamental aspect of Valenzuela-Escarcega et al.
(2018) and Poon et al. (2014) is the use of hand-
written rules and triggers for events based on de-
pendency tree paths; the connection to the appli-
cation of scispaCy is quite apparent.
8 Conclusion
In this paper we presented several robust model
pipelines for a variety of natural language process-
ing tasks focused on biomedical text. The scis-
paCy models are fast, easy to use, scalable, and
achieve close to state of the art performance. We
hope that the release of these models enables new
applications in biomedical information extraction
whilst making it easy to leverage high quality syn-
tactic annotation for downstream tasks. Addition-
ally, we released a reformatted GENIA 1.0 cor-
pus augmented with automatically produced Uni-
versal Dependency annotations and recovered and
aligned original abstract metadata. Future work on
scispaCy will include a more fully featured entity
linker built from the current candidate generation
work, as well as other pipeline components such as
negation detection commonly used in the clinical
and biomedical natural language processing com-
munities.
References
Waleed Ammar, Dirk Groeneveld, Chandra Bhagavat-
ula, Iz Beltagy, Miles Crawford, Doug Downey, Ja-
son Dunkelberger, Ahmed Elgohary, Sergey Feld-
man, Vu Ha, Rodney Kinney, Sebastian Kohlmeier,
Kyle Lo, Tyler Murray, Hsu-Han Ooi, Matthew E.
Peters, Joanna Power, Sam Skjonsberg, Lucy Lu
Wang, Chris Wilhelm, Zheng Yuan, Madeleine van
Zuylen, and Oren Etzioni. 2018. Construction of