equivalent practical value. In the case of depen-
dency parsing, we ﬁnd that the Biafﬁne parser of
Dozat and Manning (2016) outperforms the scis-
paCy models by a margin of 2-3%. However, as
demonstrated in Table 2, the scispaCy models are
approximately 9x faster due to the speed optimiza-
tions in spaCy.8
Robustness to Web Data. A core principle of
the scispaCy models is that they are useful on a
wide variety of types of text with a biomedical fo-
cus, such as clinical notes, academic papers, clin-
ical trials reports and medical records. In order
to make our models robust across a wider range
of domains more generally, we experiment with
incorporating training data from the OntoNotes
5.0 corpus when training the dependency parser
and POS tagger. Figure 2 demonstrates the effec-
tiveness of adding increasing percentages of web
data, showing substantially improved performance
on OntoNotes, at no reduction in performance on
biomedical text. Note that mixing in web text dur-
ing training has been applied to previous systems
- the GENIA Tagger (Tsuruoka et al., 2005) also
employs this technique.
Figure 2: Unlabeled attachment score (UAS) perfor-
mance for an encore scimdmodel trained with in-
creasing amounts of web data incorporated. Table
shows mean of 3 random seeds.
4 Named Entity Recognition
The NER model in spaCy is a transition-based
system based on the chunking model from Lam-
ple et al. (2016). Tokens are represented as
hashed, embedded representations of the preﬁx,
sufﬁx, shape and lemmatized features of individ-
8We refer the interested reader to Nguyen and Verspoor
(2018) for a comprehensive description of model architec-
tures considered in this evaluation.ual words. Next, we describe the data we used to
train NER models in scispaCy.
4.1 Datasets
The main NER model in both released packages
in scispaCy is trained on the mention spans in
the MedMentions dataset (Murty et al., 2018).
Since the MedMentions dataset was originally
designed for entity linking, this model recog-
nizes a wide variety of entity types, as well as
non-standard syntactic phrases such as verbs
and modiﬁers, but the model does not predict
the entity type. In order to provide for users
with more speciﬁc requirements around entity
types, we release four additional packages
ennerfbc5cdrjcraftjjnlpbajbionlp13cggmd
with ﬁner-grained NER models trained on
BC5CDR (for chemicals and diseases; Li et al.,
2016), CRAFT (for cell types, chemicals, pro-
teins, genes; Bada et al., 2011), JNLPBA (for cell
lines, cell types, DNAs, RNAs, proteins; Collier
and Kim, 2004) and BioNLP13CG (for cancer
genetics; Pyysalo et al., 2015), respectively.
4.2 Experiments
As NER is a key task for other biomedical text pro-
cessing tasks, we conduct a through evaluation of
the suitability of scispaCy to provide baseline per-
formance across a wide variety of datasets. In par-
ticular, we retrain the spaCy NER model on each
of the four datasets mentioned earlier (BC5CDR,
CRAFT, JNLPBA, BioNLP13CG) as well as ﬁve
more datasets in Crichton et al. (2017): AnatEM,
BC2GM, BC4CHEMD, Linnaeus, NCBI-Disease.
These datasets cover a wide variety of entity types
required by different biomedical domains, in-
cluding cancer genetics, disease-drug interactions,
pathway analysis and trial population extraction.
Additionally, they vary considerably in size and
number of entities. For example, BC4CHEMD
(Krallinger et al., 2015) has 84,310 annotations
while Linnaeus (Gerner et al., 2009) only has
4,263. BioNLP13CG (Pyysalo et al., 2015) anno-
tates 16 entity types while ﬁve of the datasets only
annotate a single entity type.9
Table 5 provides a thorough comparison of the
scispaCy NER models compared to a variety of
models. In particular, we compare the models to
9For a detailed discussion of the datasets and their
creation, we refer the reader to https://github.com/
cambridgeltl/MTL-Bioinformatics-2016/
blob/master/Additional%20file%201.pdf