ScispaCy: Fast and Robust Models
for Biomedical Natural Language Processing
Mark Neumann, Daniel King, Iz Beltagy, Waleed Ammar
Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Seattle, WA, USA
fmarkn,daniel,beltagy,waleeda g@allenai.org
Abstract
Despite recent advances in natural language
processing, many statistical models for pro-
cessing text perform extremely poorly un-
der domain shift. Processing biomedical and
clinical text is a critically important applica-
tion area of natural language processing, for
which there are few robust, practical, publicly
available models. This paper describes scis-
paCy, a new Python library and models for
practical biomedical/scientiﬁc text processing,
which heavily leverages the spaCy library. We
detail the performance of two packages of
models released in scispaCy and demonstrate
their robustness on several tasks and datasets.
Models and code are available at https://
allenai.github.io/scispacy/ .
1 Introduction
The publication rate in the medical and biomedical
sciences is growing at an exponential rate (Born-
mann and Mutz, 2014). The information over-
load problem is widespread across academia, but
is particularly apparent in the biomedical sciences,
where individual papers may contain speciﬁc dis-
coveries relating to a dizzying variety of genes,
drugs, and proteins. In order to cope with the sheer
volume of new scientiﬁc knowledge, there have
been many attempts to automate the process of ex-
tracting entities, relations, protein interactions and
other structured knowledge from scientiﬁc papers
(Wei et al., 2016; Ammar et al., 2018; Poon et al.,
2014).
Although there exists a wealth of tools for
processing biomedical text, many focus primar-
ily on named entity recognition and disambigua-
tion. MetaMap and MetaMapLite (Aronson, 2001;
Demner-Fushman et al., 2017), the two most
widely used and supported tools for biomedical
text processing, support entity linking with nega-
tion detection and acronym resolution. However,
Figure 1: Growth of the annual number of cited ref-
erences from 1650 to 2012 in the medical and health
sciences (citing publications from 1980 to 2012). Fig-
ure from (Bornmann and Mutz, 2014).
tools which cover more classical natural language
processing (NLP) tasks such as the GENIA tag-
ger (Tsuruoka et al., 2005; Tsuruoka and Tsujii,
2005), or phrase structure parsers such as those
presented in McClosky and Charniak (2008) typi-
cally do not make use of new research innovations
such as word representations or neural networks.
In this paper, we introduce scispaCy, a spe-
cialized NLP library for processing biomedical
texts which builds on the robust spaCy library,1
and document its performance relative to state
of the art models for part of speech (POS) tag-
ging, dependency parsing, named entity recogni-
tion (NER) and sentence segmentation. Speciﬁ-
cally, we:
Release a reformatted version of the GENIA
1.0 (Kim et al., 2003) corpus converted into
Universal Dependencies v1.0 and aligned
with the original text from the PubMed ab-
stracts.
1spacy.ioarXiv:1902.07669v3  [cs.CL]  9 Oct 2019