11:6 • J.Gan et al.
Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed HiGAN+. During training, the model simultaneously (a) learns to synthesize handwritten texts based on disentangled
styles, (b) is regularized based on reconstruction, and (c) lastly refines the local details of synthetic images for improving visual qualities. At t he test time,
the model can either (d) generate diverse handwritten texts by randomly sampling styles from a prior normal distribution or (e) imitate the calligraph ic
styles thatdisentangled from reference samples.Notably, eachmoduleshares its parameters at different training stages.
3.3 Objective Functions
To train HiGAN+ for HI, it requires a multi-writer handwriting
dataset which consists of the sets of handwriting images X, their
labeledtextsY,andthecorrespondingwriteridentities W.Since
the handwritten text generation is not limited to the training cor-
pus or OOV words, a large open corpus Cis utilized to yield arbi-
trary textual contents during training, where Y⊂C.A ss h o w n
inFigure 2,weillustratetheoverviewofthetrainingprocess,and
the details of different lossesareformulatedbelow.
3.3.1 HI withDisentangled Representations.
Adversarial Loss. Following the paradigm of GANs, the genera-
tivemodelistrainedviaamin-maxadversarialgame.Duringtrain-
ing, the generator Gtakes arbitrary textual content ˜y∈Cand a
stylefeature sasinputsandthenlearnstosynthesizeafakeimage
G(˜y,s)that is indistinguishable (by the discriminator D)f r o mt h e
real onex∈Xviatheadversarial loss,i.e.,
Ladv=Ex[logD(x)]+E˜y,s[log(1−D(G(˜y,s)))],(1)
where the style feature sis either (1) randomly sampled from a
prior normal distribution N(0,1)or (2) disentangled from the ref-
erenceimage x,i.e.,s=E(x).Notably,theadversariallossonlypro-
motesthegeneralvisualappearanceofgeneratedimagestomake
them look realistic, while it does not consider preserving either
textual contents or calligraphic styles.Text Recognition Loss. Despite visual appearances, the genera-
torGis supposed to synthesize realistic readable handwriting im-
ageswithpreservingdesiredtextualcontents.Tothisend,ahand-
writing recognizer Ris introduced to guide Gtoward producing
handwritingimageswithspecifictextualcontents.Specifically,the
recognizer Risfirstoptimizedbytheoreticallymaximizingthelike-
lihoodsforeachpair {x∈X,y∈Y}fromthetrainingdata(where
the connectionist temporal classification loss [Graves et al. 2006]
is empirically adopted in HiGAN+) as
LD
ctc=Ex,y[−ylogR(x)], (2)
when maximizing the adversarial loss. This ensures that Rcan
correctly predict the text labels of given handwriting images. Al-
though the recognizer Ris only trained with real, labeled, hand-
writing images, it is supposed to guide the generator Gto synthe-
sizereadablehandwritingconditioningtoarbitrarytextualcontent
˜y∈Cas
LG
ctc=E˜y,s[−˜ylogR(G(˜y,s))], (3)
wheretheparametersof Rkeepfixedwhenminimizingtheadver-
sarialloss.
Writer Identification Loss. The primary objective of HiGAN+ is
toexactly disentanglethecalligraphicstylesfromreferencehand-
writing images and further imitate generating different images of
similarstylesbutwithothertextualcontents.However,onemajor
ACMTransactionson Graphics,Vol.42, No.1,Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.