11:14 • J. Gan et al.
Fig. 14. Qualitative results ofdifferent GANs for handwritten paragraphs.
Fig. 15. Qualitative results ofdifferent GANs for longhandwritten texts.
texturedetailsofsyntheticimagesbyintroducingapatchdiscrimi-
natortoverifythepatchfidelity.Thosestrategieseventuallymake
HiGAN+ attain a good global & local consistency. As shown in
Figures14and15, HiGAN+ produces clearer handwriting images
and achieves amoreprecise HI.4.7.2 QuantitativeEvaluation. Togiveahigher-levelindication
of visual quality on the whole test set, we further conduct a quan-
titative evaluation between different GANs for handwriting syn-
thesis as shown in Table 5. Moreover, we also have evaluated the
metrics between the generated and real samples in different set-
tings (in Table 6) including (1) in vocabulary and seen style (I-
S), (2) in vocabulary and unseen style (I-U), (3) OOV and seen
style (O-S), and (4) OOV and unseen style (O-U). We can ob-
serve that both ScrabbleGAN and ST-GAN obtain high FID and
WIER, which indicates that they suffer from the poor visual qual-
ity andalso failtoimitate the calligraphic styles of reference sam-
ples. Moreover, although HiGAN slightly outperforms GANwrit-
ing in terms of visual quality, it achieves more precise HI (i.e.,
lower WIER) and its synthetic images are much more readable
(i.e., lower WER). Furthermore, the quantitative results in Table 5
clearly demonstrate that HiGAN+ largely outperforms the other
state-of-the-art GANs for HI in terms of visual quality and it also
achievesamorepreciseone-shothandwritingstyletransfer.Lastly,
we list the model storages of different GANs in Table 7,a n dw e
can observe that the proposed HiGAN+ attains the most com-
pact model for handwritten text synthesis compared with other
state-of-the-art GANs. This is because HiGAN+ employs a com-
pact style encoder (that is specifically designed for extracting
handwriting styles) rather than using a huge pre-trained VGG
backbone.
4.8 Failure Case Analysis
To investigate the weakness and limitation of the proposed Hi-
GAN+,weconductthefailurecaseanalysisasshowninFigure 16.
ACMTransactionson Graphics,Vol.42, No.1,Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.