11:4 • J.Gan et al.
imitate styles of reference samples most of the time. In our prior
work[GanandWang 2021],weproposedHiGANthatcansynthe-
size variable-sized handwriting images conditioned on arbitrary-
length texts and disentangled styles, while it sometimes produces
blurred textures and distorted characters. Nevertheless, the state-
of-the-art GANs have not entirely solved the text- and style-
conditioned handwrittentext synthesisyet.
2.2 GAN-Based Style Transfer
Computers nowadays can solve many image translation tasks by
combining the conceptions of GANs and VAEs, and those tasks
aim at transferring the style characteristics of a style image to a
content image. Specifically, Isola et al. [ 2017] proposed a cGAN
(i.e.,pix2pix)forimage-to-imagetranslation,andZhuetal.[ 2017]
proposed BicycleGAN to enable more diversified outputs. Never-
theless,those methods all requirepaired trainingdata. To address
thisproblem,manyworksrelaxthedependencyonpaireddataby
leveragingthecycleconsistency,e.g.,CycleGAN[Kimetal. 2017],
DIRT [Lee et al. 2018], MUNIT [Huang et al. 2018], and StarGAN
[Choi et al. 2018]. Moreover, Mao et al. [ 2019] proposed the mode
seeking regularization to ensure the output diversity, and Iizuka
et al. [2017] proposed to refine local details of images. Essentially,
this kind of style transfer is achieved by minimizing differences
between the generated and target images, where pixel-to-pixel
reconstruction is utilized for spatial alignments and Gram matri-
ces for texture statistics. Similar techniques have been extended
to related applications such as font synthesis [Gao et al. 2019],
scene texts [Wu et al. 2019], caricature [Cao et al. 2018], and face
editing [Portenieret al. 2018].
2.3 GlyphFont Synthesis
Glyphfontsynthesisaimsatdesigningandgeneratingglyphfont
images automatically, and it has witnessed great achievements in
recent years [Azadi et al. 2018; Gao et al. 2019; Jiang et al. 2019;
Cha et al. 2020;W a n ge ta l . 2020;P a r ke ta l . 2021]. However, we
demonstratethattheglyphfontsynthesisislargelydifferentfrom
HI in thefollowingaspects:
(1)Annotation Difficulty: The font style transfer requires
laboriousannotationsforsupervision,suchaspairedtraining
samples (i.e., the input images and corresponding pixel-level
aligned ground-truth images) or even attribute annotations
for attribute editing [Wang et al. 2020]. Instead, HI only
imposes writers’ identities to specify the calligraphic styles,
whichavoidslaboriousannotations.Thistasklearnsthestyle
transfer moreimplicitlythan font generation.
(2)Characters vs. Strings: Previous font generation can only
generate single isolated characters; however, HI aims at syn-
thesizing long handwritten text strings with variable-sized
outputsandarbitrarytextualcontentsthatareunconstrained
toany predefined corpusand OOV words.
(3)Style Variations: Font generation aims at designing fonts
for the industry, and the glyph fonts have very small intra-
categoryvariations(i.e.,thefontofthespecificcharacterclass
and style always has a standard template); instead, humans’
handwriting is very arbitrary and their writing styles vary
significantly (e.g., a person even is hard to write the exactlysame sentences twice with pixel-to-pixel correspondence).
Different from glyph fonts with limited styles, a thousand
people have a thousanddifferent handwritingstyles.
Indeed, the research on glyph font generation may bring some in-
spiration forHI.
2.4 Differences between thePrior andPresented Works
HI is a new research topic, and the state-of-the-art GANs have
not entirely solved this challenging problem yet. In our previous
work [Gan and Wang 2021], we have proposed a novel HiGAN
for HI, which can generate handwriting images conditioned on
arbitrary-lengthtextsandanycalligraphicstylesofreferencesam-
ples. However, the prior work is very preliminary, still leaving a
big room forimprovement. Specifically,
(1)GenerationQuality: ThepriorHiGANsometimesmaypro-
duce blurred and distorted characters, exhibiting low visual
qualities of synthetic images. In HiGAN+, we introduce a lo-
cal patch loss (LPL) to refine the local details of synthetic
images,whichsignificantlyimprovesthelocalconsistencyof
synthetic images. This strategy effectively prevents HiGAN+
from producing blurred patches or distorted characters, thus
leadingtomuchhighervisualqualitiesofsynthetichandwrit-
ten texts. Moreover, considering the characteristics of hand-
writingimages,weintroducethecontextuallossdedicatedto
HiGAN+toeffectivelymodelcalligraphicstyles,whichsignif-
icantly improves the style consistency and achieves a better
handwriting styletransfer.
(2)Model Compactness: The prior HiGAN requires training
twoindividualmodules(i.e.,thewriteridentifierandstyleen-
coder).Instead,HiGAN+derivesamorecompactandmoreef-
fectivearchitecturebyrethinkingtherolesofindividualmod-
ulesinthecurrentframework,i.e.,reusingtheearlylayersof
thewriteridentifierforstyleencoding.Incontrasttoexisting
works, this strategy can avoid using a huge pre-trained VGG
backbone or trainingan additional styleencoder.
(3)ComprehensiveEvaluation: Theevaluationsofpriorwork
areweakandinsufficientinsomeaspects,sinceitonlyevalu-
atestheFréchetInceptionDistance (FID)andworderror
rate(WER)scoresofHiGAN,GANwritingandScrabbleGAN.
Instead,thepresentedworkproposescomprehensivemetrics
for HI, including (a) Inception Score (IS), FID,Kernel
Inception Distance (KID),Peak Signal to Noise Ratio
(PSNR), andMean Structural Similarity (MSSIM)f o r
visual quality, (b) WER for readability, and (c) the newly pro-
posed WIER for style transferability. Especially, none of the
previous works have ever attempted to quantitatively evalu-
atethehandwritingstyletransferabilitybefore.Furthermore,
more extensive experiments are conducted on benchmark
datasets to demonstrate the superiority of HiGAN+ over
many other state-of-the-art GANs (including ScrabbleGAN,
GANwriting, TS-GAN, HWT, and HiGAN). Moreover, the
presented workeven conducts Turingtestsfor HI.
(4)State-of-The-ArtPerformance: Experimentalresultsshow
that the presented framework significantly outperforms
the prior work, and the proposed HiGAN+ achieves the
ACMTransactionson Graphics,Vol.42, No.1,Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.