HiGAN+: Handwriting ImitationGANwith Disentangled Representations • 11:7
concern is that we actually do not have the exact labels for writ-
ingstyles(includingthestrokethickness,charactershape,andtext
slant)toformthestyleconsistencyregularization.Toavoidexpen-
sive manual annotations, we impose the writer identity to specify
the calligraphic style. The reason for doing this is based on a sim-
ple assumption that the writing style of each individual is unique
and almost consistent. Therefore, the writer identifier Iis intro-
duced to guide the encoder Ein disentangling calligraphic styles
fromreferencesamples.
Specifically,theidentifier Iisoptimizedbyminimizingthecross-
entropy lossfor each pair {x∈X,w∈W}fromtrainingdata as
LD
id=Ex,w[−wlogI(x)], (4)
when maximizing the adversarial loss. This ensures that Ican
identify which writer the reference image xbelongs to. To guide
the encoder Eto exactly disentangle calligraphic styles from
reference samples, we enforce the style-conditioned synthetic
imagesG(˜y,E(x))to retain a remarkably similar style with the
reference image x, i.e.,
LG
id=Ex,w,˜y[−wlogI(G(˜y,E(x)))], (5)
whereIkeepsitsparametersfixedwhenminimizingtheadversar-
ialloss,andthetextualcontent ˜y∈Cisnotlimitedtothetraining
corpus. It is worth noting that the identifier Iis only trained on
the training set and thus it is unable to identify the writers that
have never been seen during training (i.e., the writers in the test
set).
3.3.2 Regularization withReconstruction.
Style Reconstruction Loss. To encourage an invertible mapping
between synthetic images and style features, we apply a style re-
construction losssimilartoChen et al.[ 2016]a s
Lstyle=E˜y,s[||s−E(G(˜y,s))||1], (6)
where the style feature sis sampled from the prior normal distri-
butionN(0,1). This regularization loss essentially exhibits two
advantages: (1) It guarantees that the style feature scan explic-
itly affect calligraphic styles of synthetic handwriting images; (2)
It encourages the diversified outputs and thus helps avoid model
collapses of thegenerative network.
Content Reconstruction Loss. To improve the content and style
consistency of synthetic images, we adopt a self-reconstruction
losstofacilitate thetraining,i.e.,
Lrecn=Ey,x[||x−G(y,E(x))||1], (7)
wherey∈Yis the labeled text of image x. Following this auto-
encodingtrainingscheme,itmayregularizethegenerativemodel
toachieve a morerobusthandwritingstyletransfer.
KL-Divergence Loss. To ensure a meaningful stochastic style
samplingininference,wefurtherexplicitlyregularizetheencoded
latent space tomatchthe priornormaldistributionas
Lkl=Ex[DKL(E(x)||N(0,1))], (8)
whereDKLdenotes the KL-divergence [Zhu et al. 2017]. This is a
crucialregularizationtechniqueinmanystyletransfertasks[Zhu
et al.2017; Lee et al. 2018].3.3.3 Local Detail Refinement.
Contextual Loss. Conventional style transfer is achieved by syn-
thesizing an image to match both the contents and styles of tar-
get images, which commonly compares images in two aspects:
(1) the pixel-to-pixel loss that compares pixel values at the same
spatialcoordinates;(2)theGramlossthatcompareshighlayerfea-
turesandtextureinformationovertheentireimage.Thismethodis
very effective for nature images or oil paintings, since their styles
are modeled as texture features. In contrast, handwriting images
contain little textures and their styles are modeled as the charac-
ter shape, thickness, and slant. Moreover, humans’ handwriting
can be very arbitrary and the synthetic handwriting may not be
exactly spatially aligned with the ground-truth images, and thus
handwriting images with similar styles may produce a large re-
construction loss. What is worse, the synthetic handwriting and
reference samples may have completely different textual contexts
and spatial sizes. Therefore, the conventional style transfer strat-
egyis unsuitablefor HI.
To address this problem, we introduce the contextual
loss [Mechrez et al. 2018] to measure the similarity of two
handwriting images, requiring no spatial alignment. The key
idea of contextual loss is to treat an image as a collection of
features, and the similarity between images is measured based
on the similarity between their high-level features, ignoring
the spatial positions of the features. This loss focuses more on
high-level style features and allows the generated images to be
slightly spatially deformed with respect to ground-truth images.
Moreover,thecontextuallossisnotoverlyglobalanditcompares
featuresinlocalregionsbasedonsemantics.Let A={a1,...,aN}
andB={b1,...,bN}be two sets of features, the contextual
similaritybetween them isdefined as
CX(A,B)=1
N/summationdisplay
jmax
iCXij, (9)
whereCX ijdenotesthesimilaritybetweenfeatures aiandbj,and
CXijis calculated by normalizing all the cosine distances dijbe-
tweenany aiandbjasMechrezetal.[ 2018].Inourtask,weapply
thecontextual losstoachieve better HI,i.e.,
Lctx=/summationdisplay
l−loдCX/parenleftBig
Φl(x),Φl(G(˜y,E(x)))/parenrightBig
,(10)
whereΦl(·)denotesthehigh-levelfeaturesextractedfromthe lth
layer of the writer identifier I,a n dC X(·,·)denotes the aforemen-
tionedcontextual similaritybetween twofeaturesets.
Local Patch Loss. Handwritten text images can be arbitrarily
long,andthustheycanberegardedashigh-resolutionimages.Al-
thoughitcanachieveagoodglobalconsistency(i.e.,asyntheticim-
ageisgloballyvisuallyplausible)bygradingthewholeimagefrom
a global perspective, such a strategy may lead to poor local con-
sistency (i.e., the synthetic handwriting image may contain many
blurred patches and distorted characters). Therefore, it is crucial
torefine thelocal texturedetails of synthetic handwritingimages.
Despiteclassifyingthewholeimageasfakeorreal,wefurthersplit
each image into patches and then justify the patch fidelity by in-
troducing an extra patch discriminator. The introduced patch dis-
criminatorcanpenalizethelocalstructuresandthushelpachieve
ACMTransactionsonGraphics,Vol.42, No.1, Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.