HiGAN+: Handwriting ImitationGANwith Disentangled Representations • 11:9
Therefore, the weight of Lctcis adjusted as λctc=δ(∇adv)
δ(∇ctc)and
other hyper-parameterscan be calculated in the sameway.
3.5 Evaluation of GANs forHI
HI is different from CIG due to its variable-sized outputs, arbi-
trary textual contents, and different style transfer. Hence, it is
essentialtoquantitativelymeasurethequalitiesofsynthetichand-
writingimagesfromdifferentaspects.Therefore,weproposecom-
prehensivemetricstofullyevaluate theperformanceof GANs for
variable-length handwritten text synthesis.Specifically,
—Visual Quality: Synthetic handwriting images should first
deceive the human eyes visually and be realistic as far as
possible. Therefore, we adopt several commonly used met-
rics to evaluate the visual quality of handwriting images, in-
cludingIS[Salimans et al. 2016],FID[Heusel et al. 2017],
KID[Binkowski et al. 2018],PSNR,a n dMSSIM. Particularly,
IS is used to measure the realism and diversity of generated
images,FIDandKIDaimtomeasurethedistancebetweendis-
tributions of the generated images and real samples, MSSIM
measures the structural similarity between them, and PSNR
measures thereconstruction error.
—Readability: Differentfromnaturalimages,handwritingim-
ages convey specific semantic information that can be read
and understood by humans. Therefore, we use the WERto
evaluate the readability of synthetic texts, which is the num-
ber of word recognition errors divided by that of total words.
Particularly, the word recognition can be done by humans or
apre-trainedhandwritingrecognizer.
—Style Transferability: Besides the realism and readabil-
ity, the calligraphic styles of synthetic images should be
consistent with the reference samples as much as possible.
Therefore, we propose to use the WIERto measure the style
transferabilityofGANsforHI,whichisthenumberofwriter
identification errors divided by that of the total words. It is
worthnotingthatnoneofthepreviousworkshaveeverquan-
titativelyevaluated thestyletransferabilityof GANs for HI.
Since the handwritten texts are variable-length instead of fixed-
sized,wereplacetheaveragingpoolingofIncepetionV3with Tem-
poralPyramidPooling (TPP)whencalculatingIS,FID,andKID
(similar to Kang et al. [ 2021]), and we also use the global averag-
ing pooling in the CNN backbone of the writer identifier when
calculating WIER. In our settings, all GANs are trained using the
trainingsetimagesandallevaluationsareconductedontestsetim-
ages. However, since the writers in test set have never been seen
in training set, we need to train an additional writer identifier us-
ing the test images to evaluate the WIER. Such a writer identifier
is entirely independent of the presented framework and thus can
fairlyevaluate thestyletransferabilityof different GANs for HI.
4 EXPERIMENTS
4.1 Experimental Settings
4.1.1 Datasets. To evaluate the performance of handwriting
generation, we use the IAMdataset [Marti and Bunke 2002]a s
thebenchmarkdataset.TheIAMdatasetconsistsof63Khandwrit-
tenEnglishwords,writtenby500differentwriters.Itprovidesonetraining set, one test set, and two validation sets. It is worth not-
ingthathandwrittenwordsofallsetsaremutuallyexclusive,thus
each writer only contributes to one set. In our experiments, only
thetrainingsetandvalidationsetsareusedfortrainingGANs,and
thetest setis onlyusedfor qualityevaluation.
4.1.2 Implementation Details. Our experiments are conducted
onaDellworkstationwithanIntel(R)Xeon(R)Bronze3204CPU@
1.90GHz,48GBRAM,andGeForceRTX3090GPU24GB.Forfast
training, the batch size is set to 8 and the model is trained for 70
epochs.Furthermore,weutilizetheAdam[DiederikandBa 2015]
algorithm to optimize the GAN model, where the initial learning
rate is 0.0001 and ( β1,β2) = (0.5, 0.999). Moreover, we begin to lin-
earlydecaythelearningrateatthe25thepoch.WhentrainingHi-
GAN+,weempiricallyset λkl=0.0001,λctx=5.0,andtherest λs
aredynamicallyadjustedduringtrainingwiththegradientbalanc-
ing strategy. The training time is less than three days on a single
GeForce RTX 3090 with our implementation in PyTorch [Paszke
et al.2019].
4.1.3 Competitors. Previous works mainly focus on handwrit-
ten character/digit generation, while handwritten text generation
has not been fully explored. In our experiments, we can only
compare our method with several recently proposed handwrit-
ten text generation approaches, i.e., ScrabbleGAN [Fogel et al.
2020],GANwriting [Kangetal. 2020],TS-GAN [Davisetal. 2020],
HTW[Bhunia et al. 2021], andHiGAN[Gan and Wang 2021]
(where Table 1gives a detailed feature-by-feature comparison ).
Weusetheofficialimplementationofthosemodelsprovidedbythe
authors,wherewedirectlyusethedefaultsettingsandpre-trained
modelsifavailable.Notably,wealsoretrainHiGANwithournew
network configurations, which can generate handwriting images
with a fixed height of 64 pixels rather than 32 pixels. In our ex-
periments,allsynthetichandwritingimagesareresizedtohave64
pixel height while preserving the original aspect ratios. For a fair
comparison,allevaluationsareconductedontestsetimages.More
specifically, we optimize all GANs with training set images and
then usethosegenerative models toreconstruct testset images.
4.2 Qualitative Analysis
In this subsection, we first conduct the qualitative analysis of Hi-
GAN+ for arbitraryhandwritten text generation.
4.2.1 Latent-GuidedSynthesis. TheproposedHiGAN+cangen-
erate arbitrary handwritten English words of diverse calligraphic
styles with high visual quality. For latent-guided synthesis, differ-
ent styles of synthetic images are simply randomly sampled from
thepriornormaldistribution.Specifically,weshowsomeselected
synthetic images in Figure 4, where each row presents images of
thesamestylesandeachcolumnofthesametexts.Itisworthnot-
ingthatallgeneratedhandwrittenwordsarehuman-readable,and
they are unconstrained to the predefined corpus or OOV words.
Moreover, we observe that HiGAN+ can successfully render cur-
sive ligatures among adjacent characters of handwritten words if
necessary.
4.2.2 Reference-Guided Synthesis. For reference-guided syn-
thesis, our HiGAN+ can precisely disentangle calligraphic styles
ACMTransactionsonGraphics,Vol.42, No.1, Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.