HiGAN+: Handwriting ImitationGANwith Disentangled Representations • 11:3
To address the above challenges, in our previous conference
work[GanandWang 2021],wehaveproposedanovel handwrit-
ingimitationGAN (HiGAN)forHI,whichcangeneratediverse
and realistic handwriting images conditioned on arbitrary textual
contents(thatareunconstrainedtoanypredefinedcorpusorOOV
words) and calligraphic styles (that are disentangled from refer-
ence samples). However, HiGAN may produce blurred and dis-
torted characters, exhibiting low visual qualities of synthetic im-
ages. The presented HiGAN+ not only significantly improves the
visual qualities of synthetic images but also achieves a more ac-
curate handwriting style transfer with desired properties. Table 1
shows a feature-by-feature comparison between different GANs
forhandwritten text generation.
Overall, the presented work supposes a significantly extended
version of our previousconference paper. Specifically,
(1) WeenhanceourpriorHiGANwithseveralnewtechnicalcon-
tributions,including:
— The contextual loss is introduced to improve the style con-
sistencyandachieves a better calligraphic styletransfer.
— The local patch refinement is proposed to improve the
local consistency of synthetic images with higher visual
qualities.
— We derive a more compact and effective architecture by
reusingthewriteridentifier forstyleencoding.
(2) We propose comprehensive metrics to fully measure the
performance of GANs for variable-length handwritten text
synthesis. Particularly, the newly proposed writer identifi-
cation error rate (WIER) can quantitatively measure the
handwriting style transferability of GANs, which has never
been investigatedbefore.
(3) We conduct more extensive experiments (including Turning
tests)onbenchmarkstofullycomparetheproposedHiGAN+
with other state-of-the-art GANs for HI, where HiGAN+
achieves the best performance in terms of visualquality,
scalability,compactness,andstyletransferability.
2 RELATED WORK
2.1 HandwritingSynthesis
Traditional approaches for handwritten text generation not only
involveexpensivemanualinterventionforclippingglyphsandtag-
ging individual characters, but they also require a strong domain-
specific knowledge for modeling glyph layouts and rendering lig-
atures and background textures. For example, Haines et al. [ 2016]
proposed such an algorithm that can render desired English texts
in a specific writer’s handwriting. Similarly, Lin and Wan [ 2007]
proposed to compute features from individual glyphs and words
based on geometric statistics and further learn to synthesize com-
plete words/sentences with hand-crafted hierarchical rules. Of
course, such manual interventions are extremely expensive, and
their generalization and scalability are also limited due to the
domain-specific knowledge andhierarchical rules.
With the great successes of deep learning techniques in com-
puter vision and machine learning, artificial neural networks
have been gradually used for handwriting synthesis. Specifically,
Graves [ 2013] first proposed to synthesize online handwrit-
ing trajectories of English texts based on recurrent neuralnetworks (RNNs),whichcanpredictthefuturestrokepointswith
Gaussian mixture models. Moreover, Ha and Eck [ 2018]p r o p o s e d
SketchRNN for synthesizing hand-drawn sketches. Furthermore,
Zhang et al. [ 2018] successfully adopted this architecture to draw
realistic online handwritten Chinese characters of thousands of
categories.Morerecently,Kotanietal.[ 2020]proposedthedecou-
pled style descriptor model for handwriting, which factors both
character-andwriter-levelstylesandthussynthesizesmorerealis-
tic handwriting trajectories. However, such an RNN-based model
is hard to learn long-range dependencies of long sequences, and
also their generation is time-consuming since RNNs remain less
amenable to parallelization. More lethally, it is challenging to col-
lectmassivetrajectoriesinanaturalsetting,sincetheirrecordings
require unique equipment like stylus pens and touch screens. In-
stead,itismucheasiertocollecthandwritingimageswithubiqui-
touscamerasandscannersinourreallives.Hence,itismoreprac-
ticaltosynthesizehandwriting images rather thantrajectories.
GANs have achieved much progress in many image synthe-
sistasks,includinghandwrittencharactergeneration.Specifically,
Goodfellow et al. [ 2014] proposed to generate realistic handwrit-
ten digits by introducing the adversarial loss, and Kingma and
Welling [ 2013] proposed a VAE instead. Furthermore, Mirza and
Osindero [ 2014]p r o p o s e d conditional GANs (cGANs)t oc o n -
strain the handwriting generation conditioned on desired class la-
bels. Moreover, Chen et al. [ 2016] proposed InfoGANs to address
the model collapse and Radford et al. [ 2013]p r o p o s e d deep con-
volutional GANs (DCGANs ) to improve the generation capa-
bility, thus producing more diverse and realistic images. Particu-
larly, Chang et al. [ 2018] successfully adopted CycleGANs [Kim
et al.2017] for synthesizing handwritten Chinese characters of
thousands of categories. Moreover, many researches also adopted
GANs for the glyph font generation [Azadi et al. 2018; Jiang et al.
2019; Cha et al. 2020;P a r ke ta l . 2021], which aims at generating
fixed-sizedandisolatedglyphfontcharacters(insteadoflongtext
strings) with desired styles. Overall, existing works mainly focus
on synthesizing fixed-sized handwritten digits/characters, while
handwrittentext synthesisis rarelyexplored.
As an emerging research topic, only a few efforts have been
made for synthesizing handwritten text images. Specifically,
Alonso et al. [ 2019] first proposed a GAN-based model to syn-
thesize handwritten words conditioned on the whole embeddings
of input texts, while their model is limited to generating fixed-
sized images and also produces low visual qualities for OOV
words.Moreover,Fogeletal.[ 2020]proposedScrabbleGANwhich
can generate arbitrary-length handwritten texts by concatenat-
ing letter-tokens together but fails to imitate calligraphic styles
of reference samples. Furthermore, Kang et al. [ 2020]p r o p o s e d
GANwritingthatcangeneratehandwrittenwordsconditionedon
extracted calligraphic features in a few-shot setting and tex-
tual contents of a pre-defined text length. In their follow-up
work [Kang et al. 2021], they further demonstrated that the use
of realistic synthetic texts at training is useful for improving the
handwrittentextrecognitionperformance.Moreover,Bhuniaetal.
[2021] proposed to synthesize handwritten texts with Transform-
ers.Recently,Davisetal.[ 2020]proposedaTS-GANforhandwrit-
ten text synthesis, which learns to extract styles based on pixel-
to-pixel reconstruction loss. However, TS-GAN fails to correctly
ACMTransactionsonGraphics,Vol.42, No.1, Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.