11:10 • J. Gan et al.
Fig. 4. Latent-guided synthesis.
Fig. 5. Reference-guided synthesis.
from reference samples, and it further imitates generating other
handwriting images of similar calligraphic styles. As shown
in Figure 5, we show some selected handwritten words under
reference-guided synthesis. We can observe that HiGAN+ can
successfully imitate the calligraphic styles of reference samples
(such as the writing slant, thickness, and character shape), while
strictly preserving the desired textual contents. Overall, Our
HiGAN+ can achieve preciseone-shot handwritingstyletransfer.
4.2.3 Arbitrary-Length Text Synthesis. The proposed HiGAN+
can generate variable-sized images conditioned on arbitrary-
length texts, which are unconstrained to any predefined corpus
or OOV words. As shown in Figure 6,w es h o ws o m es e l e c t e d
long synthetic handwritten texts. Particularly, since handwritten
English sentence generation can be easily accomplished by word
generation, we omit all spaces of the provided textual content to
form an extremely long text string for handwriting synthesis in
Figure6. Rather than generating handwriting images conditioned
on a single embedding of the entire word/text, HiGAN+ will con-
vertthetextintocharacterembeddingsindividuallyandthencon-
catenate them together. Moreover, the generator with a fully con-
volutionalnetworkstructurewillautomaticallylearnoverlapsand
ligatures among adjacent characters. Notably, HiGAN+ can even
Fig.6. Arbitrary-lengthtextsynthesis.Notably,allspacesoftheprovided
textualcontent areomitted to form along textstring.
Fig. 7. Handwritten paragraph synthesis.
disentangle styles from short words to generate arbitrary-length
text images of similar styles.
4.2.4 Handwritten Paragraph Synthesis. Despite words and
texts, HiGAN+ can even generate complete handwritten para-
graphs with its ability of one-shot style transfer for handwriting
images.Figure 7illustratestheoriginalhandwrittenparagraphand
the one reconstructed with HiGAN+, where each reconstructed
word is synthesized based on the disentangled representations of
the corresponding real word. We observe that HiGAN+ can suc-
cessfully imitate calligraphic styles and preserve the original tex-
tual contents of most handwritten words. This eventually results
inthatthegeneratedhandwrittenparagraphslookextremelyreal-
istic and mostly indistinguishable from the real ones. Overall, our
ACMTransactionson Graphics,Vol.42, No.1,Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.