HiGAN+: Handwriting ImitationGANwith Disentangled Representations • 11:5
state-of-the-art performance for HI in terms of visual
quality,scalability,compactness,andstyletransferability
compared with the state-of-the-art GANs for handwritten
text generation.
Overall, the presented HiGAN+ not only significantly improves
the visual qualities of prior HiGAN but also achieves the more ac-
curate handwriting style transfer with desired properties, suppos-
ingasignificantlyextended versionof ourprior work.
3 METHODOLOGY
3.1 Problem Formulation
We aim at teaching machines to synthesize diverse and realis-
tic handwriting images conditioned on arbitrary textual content
y=[y1,...,yL]( w i t hal e n g t ho f L) and any calligraphic style s,
i.e.,ˆx=G(y,s),whereGisthegenerator.Notably,thetextualcon-
tentyfor handwriting generation can be very arbitrary, which is
unconstrainedtoanypredefinedcorpusorOOVwords.Moreover,
theconditionedcalligraphicstyle scanbeeither(1)randomlysam-
pled from a prior normal distribution N(0,1)or (2) disentangled
fromthereferenceimage x,i.e.,s=E(x),whereEdenotesthestyle
encoder. As a result, our generative model can not only generate
arbitrary handwritten texts with randomized styles, but it also is
abletoimitatethecalligraphicstylesofreferencesamples.Figure 2
illustratestheoverview of theproposedHiGAN+.
3.2 Network Architecture
3.2.1 Style-Controlled Handwritten Text Generator. Different
fromconventionalimagesynthesistasks,handwrittentextsynthe-
sis needs to generate variable-length images (instead of fix-sized
ones) conditioned on arbitrary textual contents (even for unseen
texts and OOV words). By revisiting humans’ handwriting pro-
cess, one major observation is that handwriting essentially is a
local process (which is firstly introduced by ScrabbleGAN [Fogel
etal.2020]).Morespecifically,humanstypicallyfinishahandwrit-
ing text by writing its letters sequentially and individually, under
which the character shapes and cursive ligatures are mostly influ-
encedbytheirneighborcharactersinalocalrange.Inspiredbythis,
ourgeneratorisdesignedtomimicsuchawritingprocess.Briefly,
rather than generating handwriting based on a single embedding
oftheentiretext,thegeneratorconvertsthetextintocharacterem-
beddingsindividuallyandthenconcatenatesthoselocalcharacter
patchestogetherintoacompletehandwrittentext,wherethecon-
volutions are utilized to learn the overlaps and transitions among
characters. Overall, the style-controlled handwritten text genera-
toris designed withthefollowingtwo strategies:
Textual Content Embedding. Instead of encoding the entire tex-
tualcontent yintoafixed-sizedrepresentation,weprefertolearn
thecharacter-levelembeddingsof yandconcatenateletter-tokens
into a complete text. The reason for doing this is to improve the
generalization ability of the generative model, under which the
generation can be conditioned on arbitrary texts that are uncon-
strained to the training corpus or any OOV words (e.g., words
that have never been seen during training). Specifically, let A
be the alphabet and F={fc|c∈A }be the set of character
filter maps (where fcis the embedding of the character c). Toachieve the character-level embedding, the given textual content
y=[y1,...,yL]( w i t hal e n g t h L) will be individually embedded
intomultiplefiltermapsas F(y)=[fy1,...,fyL].Moreover,each
filtermapcanbefurthermodulatedwithaconsistentrandomized
noise vector ϵto introduce subtle distortions for characters, i.e,
F(y,ϵ)=[fy1⊗ϵ,...,fyL⊗ϵ]. Lastly, those filter maps are con-
catenated horizontally into a variable-sized text map M, which
can beregarded as astyle-invariant embedding of y.
CalligraphicStyleRendering. Giventhestyle-invarianttextmap
M,thegenerator Gwillup-sampleitsspatialresolutionandsimul-
taneously render the calligraphic styles. Particularly, the condi-
tional batch normalization (CBN) [Vries et al. 2017] is utilized
to inject the style feature sinto the generator, thus explicitly af-
fectingthecalligraphicstylesofsyntheticimages(suchasthetext
slant,charactershape,andstrokethickness).Moreover,thegener-
atorfollowsafullyconvolutionalstructuretoensurethevariable-
length outputs. Due to the merits of convolutions, the generator
can automatically learn the overlaps between adjacent characters
and create smooth transitions (i.e., natural ligatures) if necessary.
This eventually leads to the generator being able to synthesize ar-
bitrarily long handwritten texts conditioned on arbitrary textual
contents withcontrollable calligraphic styles.
3.2.2 Other Components. To achieve precise HI, we further in-
troducethefollowingkeycomponentstoassistinthetrainingpro-
cess of HiGAN+:
GlobalDiscriminator. Theglobaldiscriminator Dlearnsabinary
classification to determine whether an input image xis the real
image from the training data or the fake image produced by the
generator G.Bygradingthewholeimage,thediscriminator Dcan
verifythefidelityof syntheticimages fromaglobal perspective.
Patch Discriminator. The patch discriminator Pcan justify
whether a given patch ψxis the one cropped from real images or
fakeimages.Insteadofgradingthewholeimage,itwillhelprefine
thelocaltexturedetailsofsyntheticimagesbyverifyingthepatch
fidelity.
StyleEncoder. Thestyleencoder Eissupposedtodisentanglethe
calligraphicstylesfromarbitraryhandwritingimagesbutwithout
explicitly accessing extra clues including the writer identities and
text labels. Additionally, the encoder Ecan map arbitrary-length
handwriting images into fixed-sized latent vectors (i.e., the calli-
graphicstylefeatures) for HI.
Writer Identifier. The writer identifier Ican distinguish which
writer the input handwriting image xbelongs to, and it aims to
guidethegeneratortosynthesizehandwritingimagesconditioned
on specific calligraphic styles. Notably, the identifier Ican only
identifyhandwritingimagesofseenwritersintrainingdata,while
it cannot classifythat of unseen writersat testtime.
Text Recognizer. The text recognizer Rshould correctly predict
thetextlabel yofanyhandwritingimage x.Particularly,although
the recognizer Ris only trained on real, labeled, handwriting im-
ages, it is supposed to guide the generator Gto produce arbitrary
readable handwriting images conditioned on arbitrary textual
contents.
ACMTransactionsonGraphics,Vol.42, No.1, Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.