HiGAN+: Handwriting ImitationGAN with DisentangledRepresentations • 11:11
Fig. 8. Handwriting styleinterpolation.
Fig.9. Handwriting text editing.
resultsdemonstratethatHiGAN+canperformpreciseone-shotHI
withhighvisualqualities.
4.3 Generalization Analysis
We further investigate whether the generative model can imi-
tate handwriting as humans, rather than simply memorizing the
ground-truthimages.
4.3.1 Style Interpolation. To better analyze the learned latent
style space, we perform the linear interpolation between two ran-
domcalligraphicstylesandgeneratethecorrespondinghandwrit-
ingimagesasshowninFigure 8.Wecanobservethatthesynthetic
handwriting images continuously change their calligraphic styles
(such as the thickness, character shape, and writing slant), while
strictlypreservingtheoriginaltextualcontents.Thoseresultsval-
idate the continuity of the latent style space, thus demonstrating
that HiGAN+ generalizes in the distribution rather than simply
memorizing trivialvisual appearances of trainingdata.
4.3.2 Text Editing. Despite the latent style space, we also per-
form the interpolation in the text space to further validate the
generalization of HiGAN+. In contrast to the continuous nature
of the style distribution, the textual content space essentially
is discrete. Therefore, we simply perform the handwriting text
editing by following a “word ladder” puzzle game as shown in
Figure9, where we change the source word into the target one
byreplacingonlyonecharacteratatime.Wecanobservethatthe
synthetic handwriting images continuously change their textual
contents, while strictly preserving the original calligraphic styles.
Moreover, HiGAN+ not only draws the natural ligatures when re-
placingthespecificletterbutalsosuccessfullygeneratestheOOV
words (e.g., “kitty”, “dicer”, and “dicey”). The interpolation results
validatethatHiGAN+cangeneratenovelhandwritingimagesthat
Fig.10. TheUMAPvisualizationofthelatentvectorsextractedbytheen-
coder, where the shape and coloridentify the author.
unconstrainedtoanyOOVwords(ratherthansimplycopyingthe
trainingsamples).
4.3.3 Style Embeddings. To further verify the generalization
abilityofHiGAN+,weshowtheUMAPvisualizationofthelatent
vectors extracted from both (a) test images and (b) reconstructed
images of HiGAN+. As shown in Figure 10(a), the latent distri-
butions (i.e., style features) of images from the same writer are
clustered, while that of different writers are separated from each
other.ThisdemonstratesthatHiGAN+canclusterembeddingsfor
handwritingimagesofsimilarstylesanddiversifyembeddingsfor
that of different styles, thus disentangling meaningful styles from
handwriting images. Furthermore, we can also observe a similar
phenomenon on the reconstruction images in Figure 10(b), which
indicates that HiGAN+ can achieve aprecise HI.
4.4 Ablation Studies
Inthissubsection,weconductanablationstudytojustifythecon-
tributionofeachkeycomponentinHiGAN+.AsshowninTable 2,
wegivethequantitativecomparisonofdifferentconfigurationsfor
handwrittentextsynthesis,whereeachcomponentiscumulatively
added on top of thebaseline model.
Specifically,thebaselineconfiguration(A)(withonlytheadver-
sarial loss and CTC loss) corresponds to the basic setup of Scrab-
bleGAN[Fogeletal. 2020],whichcanonlygeneratereadablehand-
writtentextswithrandomizedstyles.Asshowninthefirstrowof
Figures11and12, the baseline model (A) fails to imitate the cal-
ligraphic styles of reference images, since it lacks a style encoder
to disentangle handwriting styles. Moreover, the visual quality of
syntheticimagesispoor,wheresomecharactersareevendistorted
andblurredas shownin Figure 11.
Wefirstimprovethebaselinemodel(A)byregularizingthegen-
eratorwithreconstructingoriginalimagecontents,i.e.,theconfig-
uration (B) which is equivalent to the TS-GAN [Davis et al. 2020].
Additionally, we introduce the KL-Divergence loss to regularize
the encoded latent space to match the prior normal distribution.
With the explicit spatial alignment between synthetic images and
ground-truthimages,wewishthestyleencodercanextractmean-
ingfulstyleembeddingsfromreferenceimagesandthusisableto
generate novel handwritten texts of similar styles. However, the
WIERofconfiguration(B)isveryhighasshowninTable 2,which
indicatesthatsuchanauto-encodingschemecannothelpthegen-
erative model to achieve precise HI. As shown in the second row
ACMTransactionsonGraphics,Vol.42, No.1, Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.