Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
performs better than its counterpart trained with uniform masking in audio spectrogram reconstruc-
tion, particularly for the time masking and frequency masking settings, showing it is stronger in
leveraging global information. This indicates different training masking strategies do impact the
properties of the model. While the training masking strategy only minorly impacts the downstream
classiﬁcation task, it has a relatively large impact on reconstruction.
I CAV-MAE V ISUAL SOUND SOURCE LOCALIZATION RESULTS
We evaluate the capability of CA V-MAE (uniform masking, masking ratio = 75%, c=0.01) on the
visual sound source localization task with a basic similarity-based method. Speciﬁcally, for each
audio-image pair, we mean pool the representations of all audio tokens as the clip-level audio rep-
resentation, and then calculate the cosine similarity between the clip-level audio representation with
all patch-level image representations as the visual sound source localization heat map. In general,
we ﬁnd the CA V-MAE model is not a strong visual sound source localization model though its
audio-visual retrieval performance is good. In Figure 6, we show a successful sample (left) and a
failed sample (right). In some cases, CA V-MAE localizes the sound to the background instead of
the main sound source object. We hypothesize that it is due to the masked contrastive learning ob-
jective. During the training process, the model needs to match positive audio-visual pairs even when
both modalities are heavily masked, in some situations, the main sound source could be completely
masked, the model thus learns to leverage the context information for the matching, which may hurt
its performance on the visual sound source localization task.
Input           
Heatmap     
Input           
Heatmap     
Figure 6: A successful sample (left) and a failed sample (right) of CA V-MAE on the visual sound
source localization task. In some cases, CA V-MAE localizes the sound to the background instead of
the main sound source object.
J I MPACT OF THE AUDIO -VISUAL PAIRING INFORMATION IN TRAINING
DATASET
Even without a contrastive objective, A V-MAE allows the model to reconstruct one modality based
on the information of another modality, which theoretically allows the model to learn audio-visual
correlation. However, without an explicit objective of encouraging paired audio-visual correspon-
dence, to which extent the A V-MAE leverages the audio-visual pairing information is unknown. In
this section, we evaluate this by the following experiment: we break the original audio-visual pairs
of the training set and conduct a random shufﬂe (i.e., randomly match audio and visual samples in
the dataset), which removes most of the audio-visual pairing information in the training data. We
train the CA V , A V-MAE, and CA V-MAE models with the shufﬂed training dataset, and then ﬁnetune
these models on the audio-visual joint event classiﬁcation task with original unshufﬂed downstream
datasets. As shown in Table 16, we ﬁnd 1) the CA V model that solely relies on the audio-visual
pairing information has a signiﬁcant performance drop when the training dataset is shufﬂed; 2) the
A V-MAE model is almost not impacted by the training set shufﬂe, indicating it is weak at leveraging
audio-visual pairing information in the training set and mostly relies on single-modality information;
3) CA V-MAE performs almost the same with A V-MAE with the shufﬂed training set, but noticeably
better with the original training set. These ﬁndings again justify the main point of this paper that
contrastive and reconstruction objectives are most effective when they are combined together. When
only the contrastive objective is used, the model performs worse and is less robust to the noise in the
22