Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
stream tasks; The reconstruction task of A V-MAE forces its representation to encode the majority of
the input information in the fusion, but it lacks an explicit audio-visual correspondence objective.
This motivates us to design the Contrastive Audio-Visual Masked Autoencoder (CAV-MAE) that in-
tegrates contrastive learning and masked data modeling which learns a joint andcoordinated audio-
visual representation with a single model.
Our experiments support our design: on audio-visual event classiﬁcation, CA V-MAE signiﬁcantly
outperforms baseline models trained with only contrastive or masked data modeling objectives,
demonstrating that the two objectives are complementary in learning a strong joint audio-visual
representation. As a result, CA V-MAE achieves a new SOTA accuracy of 65.9% on VGGSound,
and is comparable with the previous best supervised pretrained model on AudioSet. Moreover,
when it comes to audio-visual retrieval, CA V-MAE also performs equally well or even better than
models trained with only the contrastive objective, which demonstrates that CA V-MAE can learn
both a joint andcoordinated representation well.
Finally, CA V-MAE multi-modal pretraining improves single-modal performance, consequently,
CA V-MAE achieves a new SOTA for audio-based event classiﬁcation on AudioSet-20K and VG-
GSound.
In summary, our contributions are: (1) We extend the single-modal MAE to multi-modal A V-MAE,
which fuses audio-visual inputs for self-supervised learning through cross-modal masked data mod-
eling; (2) More importantly, we investigate how to best combine contrastive audio-visual learn-
ing with masked data modeling and propose CA V-MAE; (3) We demonstrate that contrastive and
masked data modeling objectives are complementary. As a result, CA V-MAE matches or outper-
forms SOTA models on audio-visual classiﬁcation.
2 C ONSTRASTIVE AUDIO -VISUAL MASKED AUTOENCODER
2.1 P RELIMINARIES
2.1.1 A UDIO AND IMAGE PRE-PROCESSING AND TOKENIZATION
As depicted in Figure 1 (A), we follow pre-processing and tokenization in AST (Gong et al., 2021a)
and ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) for audio and image inputs, respectively. Speciﬁcally, we use
10-second videos (with parallel audios) in AudioSet (Gemmeke et al., 2017) and VGGSound (Chen
et al., 2020) to pretrain and ﬁne-tune the model. For audio, each 10-second audio waveform is ﬁrst
converted to a sequence of 128-dimensional log Mel ﬁlterbank (fbank) features computed with a
25ms Hanning window every 10ms. This results in a 1024( time)128( frequency )spectrogram.
We then split the spectrogram into 512 1616square patches a= [a1;:::;a512]as the input of the
model. Processing video with Transformer models is expensive and typically requires industrial-
level computation resources. To lower the computational overhead and ﬁt our resources, we use a
frame aggregation strategy. Speciﬁcally, we uniformly sample 10 RGB frames from each 10-second
video (i.e., 1 FPS). During training, we randomly select one RGB frame as the input; during infer-
ence, we average the model prediction of each RGB frame as the video prediction. Compare with
concatenating multiple RGB frames as the input of the Transformer that has a quadratic complexity
(e.g., in Nagrani et al. (2021)), frame aggregation is much more efﬁcient with a linear complexity in
time at a cost of not considering inter-frame correlation. For each RGB frame, we resize and center
crop it to 224224, and then split it into 196 1616square patches v= [v1;:::;v196].
2.1.2 T HETRANSFORMER ARCHITECTURE
Throughout this paper, we use the standard Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) as our main model
component. Each Transformer layer consists of multi-headed self-attention (MSA), layer normal-
ization (LN), and multilayer perceptron (MLP) blocks with residual connections. Speciﬁcally, we
denote a Transformer layer y= Transformer( x; MSA;LN1;LN2;MLP) as:
x0= MSA(LN 1(x)) +x;y= MLP(LN 2(x0)) +x0(1)
where MSA computes dot-product attention of each element of xand thus has a quadratic complex-
ity w.r.t. to the size of x. Please refer to Vaswani et al. (2017) for further details on Transformers.
2