Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
works that should be used together for audio-visual self-supervised learning. Effectively combin-
ing the two frameworks and avoiding representation collapse requires some careful design such as
the multi-stream forward pass strategy, joint-speciﬁc encoder architecture, and masked contrastive
learning. From the perspective of representation learning, CA V-MAE learns a joint andcoordinated
representation and can be used for both audio-visual joint event classiﬁcation task as well as the
audio-visual retrieval task. As a result, on the audio-visual event classiﬁcation task, CA V-MAE
matches or outperforms SOTA models with fully self-supervised pretraining and noticeably fewer
computational resources; on the retrieval task, CA V-MAE is comparable to models trained with
only the contrastive objective. Finally, CA V-MAE multi-modal pretraining also learns strong single-
modal representations, which leads to a new SOTA performance on audio-based event classiﬁcation.
Acknowledgments : This research is supported by the MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab.
ETHICS STATEMENT
The data used in this paper are publicly available YouTube videos, we do not use videos that have
been removed by the user. The proposed audio-visual model can be applied in a wide range of areas
including security-related applications. However, it can also be used for malicious purposes such as
surveillance. We are committed to distributing our code and model carefully.
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
We document all implementation details in Section 2.3.1 and Appendix B. Code and pretrained
models are available at https://github.com/yuangongnd/cav-mae .
REFERENCES
Hassan Akbari, Liangzhe Yuan, Rui Qian, Wei-Hong Chuang, Shih-Fu Chang, Yin Cui, and Boqing
Gong. Vatt: Transformers for multimodal self-supervised learning from raw video, audio and
text. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 24206–24221, 2021.
Relja Arandjelovic and Andrew Zisserman. Look, listen and learn. In IEEE International Confer-
ence on Computer Vision , pp. 609–617, 2017.
Relja Arandjelovic and Andrew Zisserman. Objects that sound. In European Conference on Com-
puter Vision , pp. 435–451, 2018.
Yusuf Aytar, Carl V ondrick, and Antonio Torralba. Soundnet: Learning sound representations from
unlabeled video. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 29, 2016.
Alan Baade, Puyuan Peng, and David Harwath. Mae-ast: Masked autoencoding audio spectrogram
transformer. In Interspeech , 2022.
Roman Bachmann, David Mizrahi, Andrei Atanov, and Amir Zamir. MultiMAE: Multi-modal multi-
task masked autoencoders. The European Conference on Computer Vision , 2022.
Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. wav2vec 2.0: A frame-
work for self-supervised learning of speech representations. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , 33:12449–12460, 2020.
Tadas Baltru ˇsaitis, Chaitanya Ahuja, and Louis-Philippe Morency. Multimodal machine learning:
A survey and taxonomy. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 41(2):
423–443, 2018.
Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, Songhao Piao, and Furu Wei. Beit: Bert pre-training of image transformers.
InInternational Conference on Learning Representations , 2021.
Angie Boggust, Kartik Audhkhasi, Dhiraj Joshi, David Harwath, Samuel Thomas, Rogerio Feris,
Dan Gutfreund, Yang Zhang, Antonio Torralba, Michael Picheny, and James Glass. Grounding
spoken words in unlabeled video. In CVPR Sight and Sound Workshop , 2019.
10