Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Following the common practice of audio-visual learning, we initialize the weights of all models with
ImageNet pretrained weights. Speciﬁcally, we use the weights of the original vision MAE He et al.
(2022). Nevertheless, unlike previous work that uses supervised pretrained weights (e.g., Fayek
& Kumar (2021) and Nagrani et al. (2021)), we only use the self-supervised pretrained weights
(i.e., without ﬁnetuning), which does not lead to the best performance but makes our whole training
pipeline self-supervised. The impact of initialization strategy is discussed in detail in Appendix E.
3 S ELF-SUPERVISED MODEL PRETRAINING
We pretrain and compare the performance of the following models:
1.Audio-MAE/Visual-MAE: Single-modal masked auto-encoder models. The model architec-
ture is the same with Vanilla AV-MAE but they are only pretrained with data of a single modality.
2.CAV: The contrastive audio-visual learning model that has no reconstruction objective. For a fair
comparison, we implement CAV using the same encoder architecture (modal-speciﬁc encoders +
joint encoder) with CAV-MAE but remove the reconstruction objective Lr.
3.Vanilla AV-MAE: The vanilla audio-visual masked auto-encoder with a joint encoder and no
contrastive objective as described in Section 2.2.
4.AV-MAE: The audio-visual masked auto-encoder with two modal-speciﬁc encoders and a joint
encoder. It has the same architecture with CAV-MAE , butcis set to 0 (no contrastive loss). We use
this model to disentangle the impact of modal-speciﬁc encoders (when compared with Vanilla
AV-MAE ) and contrastive objective (when compared with CAV-MAE ).
5.CAV-MAE: Our proposed contrastive masked auto-encoder as described in Section 2.3.
6.CAV-MAEscale+:The same model with CAV-MAE , but trained with a larger batch size=108
(effective contrastive batch size=27) and more epochs=25. We train this model on our best GPUs.
For a fair comparison, all models (except CAV-MAEscale+) are pretrained with the same pipeline
with a batch size of 48 for 12 epochs on the full AudioSet-2M. During pretraining, we intentionally
do not use class balanced sampling as that implicitly leverages the label information. Our pretraining
process (including the ImageNet pretrained weight initialization) is fully self-supervised. Please
refer to Appendix B for all pretraining details.
4 A UDIO -VISUAL EVENT CLASSIFICATION
We evaluate the representation quality on the audio-visual event classiﬁcation task, a major audio-
visual learning benchmark. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁne-tune the pretrained models on three datasets: 1)
AudioSet-20K (20K samples, same domain as the pretraining data); 2) AudioSet-2M (2 million
samples, same with pretraining data); and 3) VGGSound (200K samples, different domain than the
pretraining data), covering various downstream data volume and domain situations.
In the ﬁne-tuning stage, we only keep the encoder of the pretrained models and connect it to a
randomly initialized linear classiﬁcation head. To avoid overriding too much of the knowledge
learned in pretraining, we use a smaller learning rate for the pretrained weights and a 10 -100
larger learning rate for the new classiﬁcation head. We use the standard training pipeline used in
prior audio-based and audio-visual event classiﬁcation work Gong et al. (2021a;b); Nagrani et al.
(2021) with mixup Zhang et al. (2018), balanced sampling, label smoothing, label enhancement
(only for AudioSet-20K) and random time shifts. We ﬁne-tune the model using audio-only data
(A), video-only data (V), and audio-visual data (A V) to evaluate the single-modal and multi-modal
representation quality. We show the results in Table 1. Key ﬁndings are as follows:
1. Contrastive learning and masked data modeling are complementary. While both AV-MAE
(only with masked data modeling objective) and CAV (only with contrastive objective) perform
better than ensembling two single-modal MAEs, the proposed CAV-MAE that combines the two
objectives signiﬁcantly boosts the performance (e.g., 2.0 and 3.1 mAP boost from CAV andAV-MAE
on AudioSet-20K, respectively). Note CAV-MAE ,AV-MAE , and CAV have the same architecture
during ﬁne-tuning, the only difference is the objective in the pretraining stage. This demonstrates
that the two major self-supervised learning frameworks are complementary in the context of audio-
visual learning and CA V-MAE is an effective way to combine their advantages.
6