Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
CONTRASTIVE AUDIO -VISUAL MASKED
AUTOENCODER
Yuan Gong1(yuangong@mit.edu) , Andrew Rouditchenko1
Alexander H. Liu1, David Harwath2, Leonid Karlinsky3;4, Hilde Kuehne4;5, James Glass1
1MIT CSAIL;2UT Austin;3IBM Research AI;4MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab;5Goethe University Frankfurt
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we ﬁrst extend the recent Masked Auto-Encoder (MAE) model from
a single modality to audio-visual multi-modalities. Subsequently, we propose the
Contrastive A udio-V isual M asked A uto-E ncoder (CA V-MAE) by combining con-
trastive learning and masked data modeling, two major self-supervised learning
frameworks, to learn a joint andcoordinated audio-visual representation.
Our experiments show that the contrastive audio-visual correspondence learning
objective not only enables the model to perform audio-visual retrieval tasks, but
also helps the model learn a better joint representation. As a result, our fully
self-supervised pretrained CA V-MAE achieves a new SOTA accuracy of 65.9% on
VGGSound, and is comparable with the previous best supervised pretrained model
on AudioSet in the audio-visual event classiﬁcation task. Code and pretrained
models are at https://github.com/yuangongnd/cav-mae .
1 I NTRODUCTION
Acoustic and visual modalities have different properties, yet humans are able to seamlessly connect
and integrate them to perceive the world. Developing learning algorithms to replicate these abilities,
especially for multi-modal audio-visual fusion and retrieval is of great interest. Since manually
annotating audio and video is expensive and difﬁcult to scale, how to utilize web-scale unlabeled
video data in a self-supervised manner has become a core research question.
One major line of audio-visual self-supervised learning research is leveraging the natural audio-
visual correspondences found in videos. Among numerous ways to use such correspondences, Con-
trastive Audio-Visual Learning has shown to be a simple yet effective approach (Arandjelovic &
Zisserman, 2018; Morgado et al., 2021b; Rouditchenko et al., 2021). It learns coordinated1repre-
sentations that are closer for paired audio and visual samples than for mismatched samples. Such
coordinated representations are particularly useful for tasks such as cross-modal retrieval.
Another vetted commonly used self-supervised learning framework is Masked Data Modeling
(MDM) , which learns a meaningful representation with the pretext task of recovering the original
inputs or features from the corrupted ones (Devlin et al., 2019).
Particularly, based on the Audio Spectrogram Transformer (Gong et al., 2021a) and Vision Trans-
former (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) backbones, the single-modal Masked Auto-Encoder (MAE) (He
et al., 2022) achieved state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on images and audio tasks (Huang et al.,
2022a) individually. Inspired by these advances, we propose to extend the single-modal MAE to
Audio-Visual Masked Auto-Encoder (A V-MAE), aiming to learn a joint representation that fuses the
unimodal signals.
Although these two major self-supervised frameworks have been widely used individually, to the
best of our knowledge, they have never been combined in audio-visual learning. In fact, we ﬁnd they
are complementary: Contrastive audio-visual learning explicitly leverages the very useful audio-
visual pair information, but it could discard modality-unique information that is useful in down-
1Multi-modal representations can be divided into two categories: joint representations that combine the
unimodal signals into the same representation space, and coordinated representations that process unimodal
signals separately, but enforce certain similarity constraints on them. (Baltru ˇsaitis et al., 2018)
1arXiv:2210.07839v4  [cs.MM]  11 Apr 2023