BioGPT 1
BioGPT: Generative Pre-trained Transformer for
Biomedical Text Generation and Mining
Renqian Luo1;, Liai Sun2, Yingce Xia1;, Tao Qin1;, Sheng Zhang3,
Hoifung Poon3and Tie-Yan Liu1
1Microsoft Research AI4Science, Beijing, China,2Peking University, Beijing, China and3Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA
Corresponding authors: Renqian Luo, Microsoft Research AI4Science, E-mail: renqianluo@microsoft.com; Yingce Xia, Microsoft Research
AI4Science, E-mail: yinxia@microsoft.com; Tao Qin, Microsoft Research AI4Science, E-mail: taoqin@microsoft.com
Abstract
Pre-trained language models have attracted increasing attention in the biomedical domain, inspired by their great success
in the general natural language domain. Among the two main branches of pre-trained language models in the general
language domain, i.e., BERT (and its variants) and GPT (and its variants), the rst one has been extensively studied in
the biomedical domain, such as BioBERT and PubMedBERT. While they have achieved great success on a variety
of discriminative downstream biomedical tasks, the lack of generation ability constrains their application scope. In
this paper, we propose BioGPT, a domain-specic generative Transformer language model pre-trained on large scale
biomedical literature. We evaluate BioGPT on six biomedical NLP tasks and demonstrate that our model outperforms
previous models on most tasks. Especially, we get 44 :98%, 38 :42% and 40 :76% F1 score on BC5CDR, KD-DTI and
DDI end-to-end relation extraction tasks respectively, and 78 :2% accuracy on PubMedQA, creating a new record. Our
case study on text generation further demonstrates the advantage of BioGPT on biomedical literature to generate 
uent
descriptions for biomedical terms. Code is available at https://github.com/microsoft/BioGPT .
Key words: biomedical literature, generative pre-trained language model, text generation, text mining
Introduction
Text mining and knowledge discovery from biomedical
literature play important roles in drug discovery, clinical
therapy, pathology research, etc. Typical tasks include
recognizing named entities in the articles, mining the
interaction between drugs and proteins/diseases/other drugs,
answering questions given reference text, generating abstracts
for given phrases/words, etc. People have accumulated large
amounts of literature in the previous studies. For example,
PubMed1, one of the most popular biomedical search engines,
covers more than 30 Marticles and the number still rapidly
increases every day as new discoveries are continuously coming
out. Therefore, automatically mining the knowledge from
literature becomes an urgent demand.
Pre-training models have demonstrated their powerful
capability in natural language processing (NLP). On the GLUE
benchmark, a widely used benchmark for natural language
understanding, pre-training based methods outperform non-
pre-training methods by a large margin [1]2. There are two main
kinds of pre-training models: (1) the BERT-like models [2, 3, 4],
mainly for language understanding tasks; (2) the GPT-like
models [5, 6, 7], mainly for language generation tasks.
These models are rst pre-trained on large scale corpora
collected from the Web via self-supervised learning task (e.g.,
masked language modeling for BERT, auto-regressive language
modeling for GPT), and then ne-tuned on specic donwstream
tasks. The BERT-like models are widely used in sequence
classication and sequence labeling, where we need to encode
1https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
2https://gluebenchmark.com/leaderboardthe complete document. In comparison, the GPT-like models
are often used in generation tasks (e.g., abstract generation,
knowledge triplet generation).
By witnessing the success of pre-training in general NLP,
people explore adapting these techniques into biomedical
domain. However, directly applying these models to the
biomedical domain leads to unsatisfactory performance due to
domain shift [8, 9]. A natural solution is to develop pre-training
models on biomedical texts (e.g., PubMed). BioBERT [10]
and PubMedBERT [9]) are two representative BERT-like
models pre-trained on biomedical domain, and they obtain
superior performances than general pre-trained models on
biomedical benchmarks. However, previous works mainly focus
on BERT models which are more appropriate for understanding
tasks, not generation tasks. In comparison, GPT models
have demonstrated their abilities on generation tasks but
demonstrate inferior performance when directly applying to the
biomedical domain [11, 12].
In this work, we propose BioGPT, a domain-specic
generative pre-trained Transformer language model for
biomedical text generation and mining. BioGPT follows the
Transformer language model backbone, and is pre-trained on
15MPubMed abstracts from scratch. We apply BioGPT to
six biomedical NLP tasks: end-to-end relation extraction on
BC5CDR [13], KD-DTI [14] and DDI [15], question answering
on PubMedQA [16], document classication on HoC [17], and
text generation. To adapt to the downstream tasks, we carefully
design and analyze the target sequence format and the prompt
for better modeling the tasks. Experiments demonstrate that
BioGPT achieves better performance compared to baseline
methods and other well-performing methods across all the
tasks.arXiv:2210.10341v3  [cs.CL]  3 Apr 2023