2 Renqian Luo et al.
Related Work
Pre-trained Language Models
It has proven to be a very successful pattern in deep
learning to pre-train models on large scale unlabeled data
via careful designed self-supervision tasks and then transfer
to downstream tasks by ne-tuning on them. Downstream
tasks can benet from the learned representations from the
pre-trained models. BERT [2] is a bidirectional transformer
based contextualized language model pre-trained on large scale
text corpus English Wikipedia and BooksCorpus. It is pre-
trained via carefully designed self-supervision tasks: masked
language modeling (MLM) task where random word tokens
of the input text are replaced by a special token [MASK]
which is to be predicted by the model from the context, and
thenext sentence prediction (NSP) task where two sentences
are to be predicted whether the second one is probable given
the rst one. The pre-trained BERT provides contextualized
word representations that can be used by downstream tasks by
just ne-tuning on the tasks and has achieved great success
on various natural language understanding tasks. Subsequent
works mainly focus on pre-training on larger-scale data and
models [3] and advanced pre-training task [4]. Though BERT
and various biomedical BERT models have been successful
in language understanding tasks and classication tasks, few
eorts have been devoted to generative models. As BERT learns
powerful word representations through the Transformer encoder
model architecture in a bi-directional way, it limits its ability
of generation.
Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT) [5] is proposed
for language generation tasks via pre-training Transformer
decoder model on large scale text corpus in a classical casual
language modeling task where model learns to predict the
next word token only dependent on the previous word tokens.
Further, GPT-2 [6] and GPT-3 [7] with larger model size
pre-trained on larger scale text corpus are proposed with
remarkable performance in various downstream tasks (e.g.,
translation, summarization) including classication tasks (e.g.,
reading comprehension) even without ne-tuning (zero-shot)
via appropriate prompts design.
Pre-trained Language Models in Biomedical Domain
When applying to specic domain (e.g., biomedicine), BERT
models pre-trained on general domain can be further improved
if pre-trained on in-domain text data [8, 18, 10]. Specically,
[10] and [8] start from the original pre-trained BERT
model [2] that are pre-trained on general domain (Wikipedia
and BooksCorpus) and continue pre-training on biomedical
literature. Specically, [10] continue pre-training using PubMed
abstracts and PubMed Central full text articles and [8] continue
pre-training on both PubMed text and clinical notes from
MIMIC-III [19]. As they are initialized from the original BERT
that are pre-trained on general domain, they use the same
vocabulary as the original BERT, which is quite dierent from
the target biomedical domain. Instead of continue pre-training
from the pre-trained BERT model, [18] pre-train the BERT
model from scratch on large corpus of scientic literature
(mainly biomedical and computer science literature) where the
vocabulary is more suitable for science domain but still contains
out-domain information for biomedicine. [9] propose that it
is a better strategy to pre-train on domain-specic data from
scratch where the vocabulary is more suitable for the biomedical
domain. Consequently, they propose PubMedBERT which ispre-trained on 14 MPubMed abstracts from scratch. Similarly,
[20] pre-train on 28 Mdata as in [8] also from scratch, using
the more advanced ELECTRA model. All these works have
shown improved performance on plenty of biomedical literature
language processing tasks compared to the original BERT pre-
trained on general domain, while none of them is for biomedical
generation tasks.
Noticing the powerful generation ability of GPT models,
it is quite curious how GPT models perform on biomedical
domain which is very dierent from general domain. However,
recent works show that GPT models, even much more powerful
GPT-3 model, perform poorly on biomedical tasks [11, 12]. A
previous work on pre-training GPT on biomedical literature
is DARE [21]. However, they pre-train GPT on very limited
amount of data (only 0 :5MPubMed abstracts) and use it only
for data-augmentation for relation extraction task. A recent
work on using GPT model is [22], where they design converters
for GPT-3 [7] for several unconventional downstream clinical
tasks.
Downstream Tasks
In this subsection, we introduce the downstream tasks we will
work on. A summary of those tasks is in Table 1. All these tasks
can be formulated as text generation / mining tasks.
Relation Extraction
Relation extraction is a key task for biomedicine and life
science research. Classical pipeline-based methods [33, 34, 23]
resolve the task into several separate sub-tasks that require
additional intermediate annotations and information which
may suer from the lack of intermediate annotated data and
error accumulation. Joint extraction aims to jointly extract the
entities and the relations between them from the text. Sequence
labeling methods tackle the task by labeling the word tokens in
the text with dierent tags to mark out all the entity mentions
and then perform the relation classication between them via
classiers [35, 36, 37, 38]. Table lling methods formulate the
task as a table constituted by the Cartesian product of itself and
predicts the relations between the token pairs [39, 40, 41]. These
methods may suer from error accumulation caused by previous
tagging process and laborious intermediate annotations (i.e.,
named entity recognition). Text generation methods reframe
the task as a sequence-to-sequence learning task, by taking
the text as the input sequence and the triplet as the target
sequence and employing an encoder-decoder network to learn to
generate the triplet from the text [42, 43, 14, 24, 25]. However,
many joint extraction methods still require additional entity
information [38, 44]. In this work, we focus on the end-to-
end relation extraction, which formulates the task as an text
generation task that takes only the text as the input and
generates the relational triplets in an end-to-end way without
additional intermediate annotations [24, 14, 25].
Question Answering
Question answering (QA) is the task of answering questions
given a context (reading comprehension). Typical methods
predict a span in the source context as the answer text,
or predicts a label (e.g., yes or no) for simpler tasks with
predened categorical answers [26, 45, 27]. [9, 28, 29] mainly
focus on the biomedical domain question answering task via
pre-trained language models. Generative models [6, 7] directly
generate the answer sequence or the label words.