BioGPT 7
Table 7. Example of generated text
Input Model Text
Bicalutamide GPT-2Bicalutamide, a synthetic bicalutamide derivative, was found to increase the cellular proliferation of C.
elegans cells. This eect was not observed with the other synthetic bicalutamide derivatives. This is in
line with our previous work which showed that bicalutamide increases the proliferation of C. elegans cells
but not in the presence of synthetic bicalutamide.
BioGPTBicalutamide (Casodex) is an androgen receptor (AR) antagonist approved for the treatment of metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) in patients who have progressed on or are ineligible for
docetaxel chemotherapy, as well as for the treatment of early-stage prostate cancer in men who have not
progressed on or are ineligible for docetaxel chemotherapy, as well as for the treatment of metastatic
castration-sensitive prostate cancer (mCSPC) in men who have not progressed on or are ineligible for
docetaxel chemotherapy.
Janus kinase
3 (JAK-3)GPT-2Janus kinase 3 (JAK-3) mediates the conversion of glucose to glycogen in skeletal muscle. The increase in
glucose uptake by skeletal muscle is believed to be associated with a reduction in muscle protein breakdown
and with the release of ketone bodies, which contribute to the metabolism of glucose.
BioGPTJanus kinase 3 (JAK-3) is a member of the Janus kinase (JAK) family of non-receptor tyrosine kinases
and plays an important role in the regulation of cell proliferation, dierentiation, survival, migration, and
angiogenesis.
Apricitabine GPT-2Apricitabine, duloxetine, and citalopram) were investigated in patients with a history of treatment-
resistant depression (n = 10). We found that treatment with the three drugs signicantly decreased
depressive symptoms, but not depressive symptoms over the next 12 weeks. We conclude that
antidepressant drugs that reduce depressive symptoms and reduce depressive symptoms over time may be
benecial in patients with recurrent depression.
BioGPTApricitabine is an oral prodrug of 5-aza-2 '-deoxycytidine (5-aza-CdR), a DNA methyltransferase (DNMT)
inhibitor, which has been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment
of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in combination with low-dose
cytarabine (Ara-C) and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) for patients with intermediate-2
or high-risk MDS or AML.
Xylazine GPT-2Xylazine, the "active ingredient" in "bath salts" (see above) has been linked to numerous deaths, including
those of former University of California, Berkeley, professor Andrew Anglin, who posted a video of himself
having a bath lled with it.
BioGPTXylazine is an alpha 2-adrenoceptor agonist that has been used as a sedative and analgesic in veterinary
medicine for many years, but its eects on the cardiovascular system have not been extensively studied in
the dog, and its eects on the central nervous system (CNS) have not been well characterized in the dog,
despite the fact that xylazine has been widely used as a sedative and analgesic in veterinary medicine for
more than 30 years.
Psoralen GPT-2Psoralen, the city of the spiritualist, and had been given to him by God, who wished to show him the
way of salvation, and to draw him back to the true life of Christ, and to bring him into communion with
his fellow-man.
BioGPTPsoralen photochemotherapy (PUVA) is a well-established treatment for psoriasis, but its use is limited
by the risk of skin cancer, particularly squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the head and neck (H & N),
which is the most common site of skin cancer in the United States (US)
CP-673451 GPT-2CP-673451) and 4-5-6-3-1-2-3-4-6-7-8-9-10-11-12-13-14-15-16-17-18-19-20-21-22-23-24-25-26-27-28-29-30-
31-32-33-34-35-36-37-38-39-40-41-42-43-44-45-46-47-48-49-50...
BioGPTCP-673451 is a potent, selective, and orally active inhibitor of human neutrophil elastase (HNE) and
human cathepsin G (CatG) with in vitro and in vivo anti-in
ammatory activity in a variety of animal
models of in
ammation and in a model of acute lung injury (ALI) in the rat induced by intratracheal
instillation of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), a model of acute
lung injury (ALI) in which neutrophils play an important role.
BIIB-021 GPT-2BIIB-021A-2-1.pdf. Wright, C. (2002). "The War on Terror: A Legal Theory of Terrorist Attacks," in
L.E.R. Wright, S.R. Warrick, and J.H. Rothman (Eds.), The War on Terror: Essays in Honor of Michael
T. Klare (New York: Oxford University Press), 143-57.
BioGPTBIIB-021 is a novel, orally active, non-peptide bradykinin B2 receptor antagonist with potent and long-
lasting anti-in
ammatory activity in animal models of acute and chronic in
ammation and in a rat model
of adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA), an animal model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and in a rat model of
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), an animal model of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), in which arthritis
is induced by immunization with bovine type II collagen (CII).