Naik et al. Legal and Ethical Consideration in Artiﬁcial Intelligence
FIGURE 1 | Various ethical and legal conundrums involved with the usag e of artiﬁcial intelligence in healthcare.
unknown, and the use of machines will severely limit our abili ty
toassignblameandtakeownershipofthedecision-making( 30).
Modern computing approaches can hide the thinking
behind the output of an Artiﬁcial Intelligent System (AIS),
makingmeaningfulscrutinyimpossible.Therefore,thetech nique
through which an AIS generates its outputs is “opaque.” A
procedureusedbyanAISmaybesosophisticatedthatforanon-
technically trained clinical user, it is eﬀectively conceale d while
remaining straightforward to understand for a techie skill ed in
thatareaofcomputerscience( 5).
AISs, like IBM’s Watson for oncology, are meant to support
clinical users and hence directly inﬂuence clinical decisi on-
making. The AIS would then evaluate the information and
recommend the patient’s care. The use of AI to assist clinicia ns
in the future could change clinical decision-making and, if
adopted, create new stakeholder dynamics. The future scenar io
of employing AIS to help clinicians could revolutionize clin ical
decision-making and, if embraced, create a new healthcare
paradigm.Clinicians(includingdoctors,nurses,andother health
professionals)haveastakeinthesaferoll-outofnewtechno logies
intheclinicalsetting( 5).
The scope of emerging ML-HCAs in terms of what they
intend to achieve, how they might be built, and where they
might be used is very broad. ML-HCAs range from entirely self-
suﬃcientsyntheticintelligencediabeticretinopathyprogn osisin
primary care settings, to non-self-suﬃcient death forecast s, to
manualcoverageandresourceallocation( 25).Researchersought
to describe how those outputs can be included in the research,
alongwithpredictions.Thisinformationisessentialtoset tingup
thecostofthescientiﬁctrialandguidingscientiﬁcresear ch(31).
AI applied in healthcare needs to adjust to a continuously
changing environment with frequent disruptions, whilemaintaining ethical principles to ensure the well-being of
patients ( 24). However, an easy, key component of ﬁguring out
theprotectionofanyhealthcaresoftwarereliesuponthecapac ity
to check out the software and recognize how the software would
fail. For example, the additives and physiologic mechanisms
of medications or mechanical devices are comparable to the
technique for software programmes. On the other hand, ML-
HCAs can present a “black box” issue, with workings that aren’ t
visible to evaluators, doctors, or patients. Researchers ought to
describe how those outputs can be included in the research,
along with predictions. This information helps assess the cost of
thescientiﬁctrialandguidesscientiﬁcresearch( 25).
GLOBAL LEGISLATIONS
The Resolution of the European Parliament was based on
research commissioned, supervised, and published by the polic y
department for “Citizens’ Rights and Constitutional Aﬀairs” in
responsetoarequestfromtheEuropeanParliament’sCommitte e
on Legal Aﬀairs. The report emphasizes the critical nature of
a resolution calling for the immediate creation of a legislat ive
instrument governing robots and AI, capable of anticipating
and adapting to any scientiﬁc breakthroughs anticipated in
the medium term ( 29). The various ethical and legal concerns
associated with the use of AI in healthcare settings have bee n
highlightedin Figure1.
WHY IS RESPONSIBILITY NECESSARY?
When the setting or context changes, AI systems can fail
unexpectedly and drastically. AI can go from being extremely
intelligent to extremely naive in an instant. All AI systems
Frontiers in Surgery | www.frontiersin.org 3 March 2022 | Volume 9 | Article 862322