Naik et al. Legal and Ethical Consideration in Artiﬁcial Intelligence
TABLE 1 | Considerations for ethical review for healthcare-based Ma chine learning research: procedural and conceptual change s (31).
Stage 1: Data access
Group-based approval Providing access to speciﬁc, qualiﬁed i ndividuals who are grouped around a common governance struc ture, subject to
certain conditions, and with a speciﬁc aim in mind.
PHI (Protected health information) protection PHI that isn ’t required is deleted, leaving the option of examining raw o r masked data.
Broad goal without pre-determined
methodologyAllows comparison of alternative methodologies to help imp lementation and avoids biasing study outputs.
Data-access frameworks A greater emphasis on data governan ce, with accountability gained by access and rationale reco rds.
Pre-speciﬁed, frequent data retrieval without
repeated amendmentsAscertains if the model is learning from the most recent patt erns in health data.
Stage 2: Silent period
Prospective non-interventional trial application
as a templatePatients do not receive treatments, and machine learning re sults do not reach the treating team in time to inﬂuence
decision-making or the trial’s evaluation.
Goal of the trial To see if the model is feasible and if it can be used in clinical settings.
Model validation Technical performance and calibration we re evaluated using ML best practices.
Clinical evaluation By comparing quiet predictions to real -time patient labeling, evidence for the model’s clinical u sefulness is obtained.
Stage 3: Clinical trial
Goal of the trial To see if the model is more effective than the existing standard of treatment.
Generalizability Rather than demonstrating the model’s ge neralizability, the goal is to demonstrate the approach’s g eneralizability.
Disaggregated performance metrics Patient safety and just ice depend on disaggregated performance indicators, which will guide clinical acceptance.
Clinically relevant evaluation Disaggregated performanc e measures will guide clinician acceptance, ensuring patie nt safety and justice.
• The model was investigated in the context of its planned app lication in decision-making.
• The outputs of the model were recorded.
• Clinical decisions are kept track of.
• Determining the cause of a disparity in output and decision s.
will have limits, even if AI bias is managed. The human
decision-maker must be aware of the system’s limitations, a nd
the system must be designed so that it ﬁts the demands of
the human decision-maker. When a medical diagnostic and
treatment system is mostly accurate, medical practitioners who
useitmaygrowcomplacent,failingtomaintaintheirskillso rtake
pleasureintheirwork.Furthermore,peoplemayacceptdecision -
support system results without questioning their limits. Thi s
sort of failure will be repeated in other areas, such as crimin al
justice,wherejudgeshavemodiﬁedtheirdecisionsbasedon risk
assessmentslaterrevealedtobeinaccurate( 32).
The use of AI without human mediation raises concerns
about vulnerabilities in cyber security. According to a RAN D
perspectivesreport,applyingAIforsurveillanceorcybersecuri ty
in national security creates a new attack vector based on
“data diet” vulnerabilities. The study also discusses dome stic
security issues, such as governments’ (growing) employment
of artiﬁcial agents for citizen surveillance (e.g., predict ive
policing algorithms). These have been highlighted as potenti ally
jeopardizing citizens’ fundamental rights. These are serio us
concernsbecausetheyputkeyinfrastructuresatrisk,puttin glives
and human security and resource access at risk. Cyber securi ty
weaknesses can be a severe threat because they are typically
hidden and only discovered after the event (after the damage is
caused)(28).
In recent years, there has been an uptick in the feasibility,
design, and ethics of lethal autonomous weapon systems
(LAWS). These machines would have AI autonomy’s vast
discretion combined with the power to murder and inﬂict
damage on humans. While these advancements may oﬀerconsiderable advantages, various questions have been raise d
concerning the morality of developing and implementing
LAWS(33).
TheproblemofselectionbiasindatasetsusedtoconstructAI
algorithmsisatypicaloccurrence.AsestablishedbyBuolam wini
and Gebru, there is bias in automated facial recognition and the
associated datasets, resulting in lower accuracy in recogn izing
darker-skinnedindividuals,particularlywomen.Ahugenumb er
ofdatapointsarerequiredforML,andthemajorityoffrequent ly
utilized clinical trial research databases come from selec ted
populations. As a result, when applied to underserved and
consequently probably underrepresented patient groups, the
resultingalgorithmsmaybemorelikelytofail( 34).
WHO BEARS THE RESPONSIBILITY?
Unlike doctors, technologists are not obligated by law to
be accountable for their actions; instead, ethical principles
of practice are applied in this sector. This comparison
summarizes the dispute over whether technologists should be
held accountable if AIS is used in a healthcare context and
directly aﬀects patients. If a clinician can’t account for the
output of the AIS they’re employing, they won’t be able to
appropriately justify their actions if they choose to use that data .
This lack of accountability raises concerns about the possibl e
safety consequences of using unveriﬁed or unvalidated AISs
in clinical settings. Some scenarios show how opacity aﬀects
each stakeholder. Table1shows the necessary considerations
for procedural and conceptual changes to be taken for ethical
review for healthcare-based Machine learning research. It is
Frontiers in Surgery | www.frontiersin.org 4 March 2022 | Volume 9 | Article 862322