Naik et al. Legal and Ethical Consideration in Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Artiﬁcialintelligence(AI)isatermusedincomputingtodes cribe
a computer program’s capacity to execute tasks associated with
human intelligence, such as reasoning and learning. It also
includes processes such as adaptation, sensory understandin g,
and interaction. Traditional computational algorithms, si mply
expressed,aresoftwareprogrammesthatfollowasetofrulesan d
consistentlydothesametask,suchasanelectroniccalcula tor:“if
thisistheinput,thenthisistheoutput.”Ontheotherhand,an AI
system learns the rules (function) through training data (i nput)
exposure.AIhasthepotentialtochangehealthcarebyproducin g
new and essential insights from the vast amount of digital da ta
createdduringhealthcaredelivery( 2).
AI is typically implemented as a system comprised of both
softwareandhardware.Fromasoftwarestandpoint,AIismain ly
concerned with algorithms. An artiﬁcial neural network (AN N)
is a conceptual framework for developing AI algorithms. It’s a
human brain model made up of an interconnected network of
neurons connected by weighted communication channels. AI
uses various algorithms to ﬁnd complex non-linear correlatio ns
in massive datasets (analytics). Machines learn by correct ing
minor algorithmic errors (training), thereby boosting pred iction
modelaccuracy(conﬁdence)( 3,4).
The use of new technology raises concerns about the
possibility that it will become a new source of inaccuracy and
data breach. In the high-risk area of healthcare, mistakes c an
have severe consequences for the patient who is the victim of
this error. This is critical to remember since patients come i nto
contact with clinicians at times in their lives when they are
most vulnerable ( 5). If harnessed eﬀectively, such AI-clinician
cooperationcanbeeﬀective,whereinAIisusedtooﬀerevidence -
based management and provides medical decision-guide to the
clinician (AI-Health). It can provide healthcare oﬀerings in
diagnosis, drug discovery, epidemiology, personalized care , and
operational eﬃciency. However, as Ngiam and Khor point out if
AI solutions are to be integrated into medical practice, a sou nd
governanceframeworkisrequiredtoprotecthumansfromharm ,
includingharmresultingfromunethicalbehavior( 6–17).Ethical
standards in remedy may be traced lower back to the ones of
the health practitioner Hippocrates, on which the idea of the
HippocraticOathisrooted( 18–24).
Machine Learning-healthcare applications (ML-HCAs) that
wereseenasatantalizingfuturepossibilityhasbecomeapres ent
clinical reality after the Food and Drug Administration (FD A)
approvalforautonomousartiﬁcialintelligencediagnostics ystem
basedonMachineLearning(ML).Thesesystemsuse algorithms
to learn from large data sets and make predictions without
explicitlyprogramming( 25).
APPLICATIONS OF AI FOR HEALTH
RESEARCH
Theuseofdatacreatedforelectronichealthrecords(EHR)is an
important ﬁeld of AI-based health research. Such data may be
diﬃcult to use if the underlying information technology sys tem
anddatabasedonotpreventthespreadofheterogeneousorlow-
quality data. Nonetheless, AI in electronic health records can beused for scientiﬁc study, quality improvement, and clinical c are
optimization. Before going down the typical path of scientiﬁc
publishing, guideline formation, and clinical support tools, AI
that is correctly created and trained with enough data can he lp
uncoverclinicalbestpracticesfromelectronichealthreco rds.By
analyzingclinicalpracticetrendsacquiredfromelectronic health
data,AIcanalsoassistindevelopingnewclinicalpracticemod els
ofhealthcaredelivery( 26).
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN DRUG
DEVELOPMENT
In the future, AI is expected to simplify and accelerate
pharmaceutical development. AI can convert drug discovery
from a labor-intensive to capital- and the data-intensive proc ess
byutilizingroboticsandmodelsofgenetictargets,drugs, organs,
diseases and their progression, pharmacokinetics, safety an d
eﬃcacy. Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) can be used in the drug
discoveryanddevelopmentprocesstospeedupandmakeitmore
cost-eﬀective and eﬃcient. Although like with any drug study ,
identifying a lead molecule does not guarantee the developme nt
ofasafeandsuccessfultherapy,AIwasusedtoidentifypotenti al
Ebolavirusmedicinespreviously( 26).
ETHICAL CHALLENGES
There is a continuous debate regarding whether AI “ﬁts withi n
existinglegalcategoriesorwhetheranewcategorywithits special
features and implications should be developed.” The application
of AI in clinical practice has enormous promise to improve
healthcare, but it also poses ethical issues that we must now
address. To fully achieve the potential of AI in healthcare, fo ur
major ethical issues must be addressed: (1) informed consent to
usedata,(2)safetyandtransparency,(3)algorithmicfairn essand
biases, and (4) data privacy are all important factors to consid er
(27). Whether AI systems may be considered legal is not only a
legalonebutalsoapoliticallycontentiousone(Resolutiono fthe
EuropeanParliament,16February2017)( 28).
The aim is to help policymakers ensure that the moral
demanding situations raised by enforcing AI in healthcare
settingsaretackledproactively( 17).Thelimitationofalgorithmic
transparency is a concern that has dominated most legal
discussions on artiﬁcial intelligence. The rise of AI in hig h-
risk situations has increased the requirement for accounta ble,
equitable, and transparent AI design and governance. The
accessibility and comprehensibility of information are the t wo
most important aspects of transparency. Information about
the functionality of algorithms is frequently deliberatel y made
diﬃculttoobtain( 29).
Ourcapacitytotraceculpabilitybacktothemakeroroperator
is allegedly threatened by machines that can operate by unﬁxe d
rules and learn new patterns of behavior. The supposed “ever-
widening” divide is a cause for alarm, as it threatens “both t he
moral framework of society and the foundation of the liabili ty
idea in law.” The use of AI may leave us without anyone to hold
accountableforanysortofdamagedone.Theextentofdanger is
Frontiers in Surgery | www.frontiersin.org 2 March 2022 | Volume 9 | Article 862322