Naik et al. Legal and Ethical Consideration in Artiﬁcial Intelligence
indeed a challenging aspect of technology. We think that new
frameworkandapproachisneededforapprovalofAIsystemsbut
practitioners and hospitals using it need to be trained and hen ce
have the ultimate responsibility of its use. Medical devices b ased
AI will facilitate the decision making too carry out treatme nt
and procedures by the individuals, and not to replace them
in entirety. There is dearth of literature in this regard and a
detailedframe-workneedstobedevelopedbythehighestbodi es
ofpolicymakers.
AISs should be evaluated and validated, according to the
Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
It is critical to establish, test, measure, and assess the
dependability, performance, safety, and ethical compliance of
such robots and artiﬁcial intelligence systems logically a nd
statistically/probabilistically before they are implement ed. If a
clinician chooses to employ an AIS, veriﬁcation and validati on
may help them account for their activities reasonably. As
previously mentioned, clinical rules of professional conduc t do
not allow for unaccountable behavior. It has been suggested ,
however, that AIS is not the only thing that may be opaque,
and doctors can also be opaque. If AIS cannot be punished, it
will be unable to take on jobs involving human care. Managers
of AIS users should make it clear that physicians cannot evade
accountabilitybyblamingtheAIS( 5).
AssistiveML-HCAsprovideresourcestohealthcareproviders
by providing “ideas” for treatment, prognosis, or control whi le
relying on individual interpretation of any suggestions to m ake
judgments. Autonomous ML-HCAs provide direct prognostic
andcontrolstatementswithouttheinterventionofaclinic ianor
anyotherhuman.Becausethedeveloper’spreferenceforanML-
autonomyHCA’sstagehasclearimplicationsfortheassumptio n
ofresponsibilityandliability,thisautonomystagemustbe visible
(25).Insteadofaskingiftheywereawareofthehazardsandpoor
decision-making,thequestionshouldbeaskediftheycould grasp
andrecognizethoserisks( 35).
BIAS IN THE USE OF AI
Evidence suggests that AI models can embed and deploy human
and social biases at scale. However, it is the underlying dat a
than the algorithm itself that is to be held responsible. Model s
can be trained on data which contains human decisions or on
data that reﬂects the second-order eﬀects of social or histor ical
inequities. Additionally, the way data is collected and use d can
also contribute to bias and user-generated data can act as a
feedback loop, causing bias. To our knowledge there are noguidelines or set standards to report and compare these models,
but future work should involve this to guide researchers and
clinicians( 36,37).
AI is moving beyond “nice-to-have” to becoming an essential
part of modern digital systems. As we rely more and more
on AI for decision making, it becomes absolutely essential to
ensure that they are made ethically and free from unjust bias es.
We see a need for Responsible AI systems that are transparent,
explainable, and accountable. AI systems increase in use for
improving patient pathways and surgical outcomes, thereby
outperforming humans in some ﬁelds. It is likely to meager, co-
exist or replace current systems, starting the healthcare age o f
artiﬁcialintelligenceandnotusingAIispossiblyunscienti ﬁcand
unethical( 38).
CONCLUSION
AI is going to be increasingly used in healthcare and hence
needs to be morally accountable. Data bias needs to be avoided
by using appropriate algorithms based on un-biased real time
data. Diverse and inclusive programming groups and frequent
auditsofthealgorithm,includingitsimplementationinasy stem,
need to be carried out. While AI may not be able to completely
replace clinical judgment, it can help clinicians make better
decisions. If there is a lack of medical competence in a contex t
withlimitedresources,AIcouldbeutilizedtoconductscree ning
and evaluation. In contrast to human decision making, all AI
judgments, even the quickest, are systematic since algorit hms
are involved. As a result, even if activities don’t have lega l
repercussions (because eﬃcient legal frameworks haven’t be en
developed yet), they always lead to accountability, not by th e
machine, but by the people who built it and the people who
utilize it. While there are moral dielemmas in the use of AI, it is
likely to meager, co-exist or replace current systems, starti ng the
healthcare age of artiﬁcial intelligence, and not using AI is also
possiblyunscientiﬁcandunethical.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
NN, DSh, BH, and BS contributed to the conception and design
of the study. MS, SI, DSw, SS, and KA organized the database.
DSw, KA, VP, KS, SS, and SI wrote the ﬁrst draft of the
manuscript. NN, DSh, KS, BR, VP, and BH wrote sections of the
manuscript. PC, BR, and BS critically reviewed and edited the
manuscript.Allauthorscontributedtomanuscriptrevision, read,
andapprovedthesubmittedversion.
REFERENCES
1. MorleyJ,FloridiL.AnethicallymindfulapproachtoAIforHealthCare. SSRN
ElectronJ. (2020)395:254–5.doi:10.2139/ssrn.3830536
2. Drukker L, Noble JA, Papageorghiou AT. Introduction to artiﬁci al
intelligence in ultrasound imaging in Obstetrics and Gynecology.
Ultrasound Obstetr Gynecol. (2020) 56:498–505. doi: 10.1002/uog.
221223. Rong G, Mendez A, Bou Assi E, Zhao B, Sawan M. Artiﬁcial intelli gence
in healthcare: review and prediction case studies. Engineering. (2020) 6:291–
301.doi:10.1016/j.eng.2019.08.015
4. Miller DD, Brown EW. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in medical practice:
the question to the answer? Am J Med. (2018) 131:129–
33.doi:10.1016/j.amjmed.2017.10.035
5. Smith H. Clinical AI: opacity, accountability, responsibility an d liability. AI
Soc.(2020)36:535–45.doi:10.1007/s00146-020-01019-6
Frontiers in Surgery | www.frontiersin.org 5 March 2022 | Volume 9 | Article 862322