Dataset Task Split Metric
COCOCap Scene Description test CIDEr (↑)
VQAv2 Scene Understanding QA test-dev VQA acc. (↑)
GQA Scene Understanding QA test-dev VQA acc. (↑)
OKVQA External Knowledge QA val VQA acc. (↑)
VizWiz Scene Understanding QA test-dev VQA acc. (↑)
VisDial Image Dialogue val NDCG (↑)
COCO Text-to-Image Generation val test FID (↓)
Table 5. Summary of the evaluation benchmarks.
6. Training Details
6.1. Training of image tokenizer and detokenizer
Datasets. The image-text pairs from CC3M, Laion-
Aestheics, and LAION-COCO are utilized for the train-
ing of our image tokenizer-detokenizer framework. Specif-
ically, CC3M dataset comprises 3.3 million image-text
pairs crawled from the Web. Both Laion-Aesthetics and
LAION-COCO are subsets of the larger LAION-5B dataset.
LAION-Aesthetics is characterized by its high aesthetic
quality, while LAION-COCO is composed of images sam-
pled from LAION-5B and their corresponding captions
generated by existing vision-language models, e.g., BLIP.
Due to the efficient design of the framework, a relatively
small subset of 10 million samples from these two datasets
was found to be sufficient for model convergence in our ex-
periments. Further exploration of experiments with larger
datasets remains a prospect for future research. During
the training process, data were randomly sampled from the
mixture of these three datasets in a ratio proportional to their
respective sizes.
Optimization. The visual encoder in the image tokenizer is
initialized with CLIP-L, while the diffusion decoder in the
image detokenizer incorporates the U-Net and V AE mod-
ules from IP-adapter Plus. These components remain frozen
during the training process. The causal transformer in the
image tokenizer and the transformer decoder in the image
decoder are constructed using the standard transformer de-
coder, which consisting of 12 transformer blocks with ran-
dom initialization. Each block comprises a causal self-
attention layer, a cross attention layer, and a multilayer per-
ception (MLP) layer. The causal attention layer plays a vi-
tal role in capturing causal dependencies among 1D visual
continual embeddings, which is proved to be effective for
further modeling in large vision-language models like Emu
and SEED. In all experiments, the number of visual embed-
dingNis set to 32 in our all experiments, and its dimension
dis set to 4096. Image augmentation techniques employed
in CLIP models are applied, which involve resizing the in-
put image with its shorter side to 224 pixels and cropping
the image to a fixed size of 224 ×224 pixels.6.2. Pre-training of VL-GPT
Datasets. In addition to the datasets utilized for training the
image tokenizer-detokenizer framework, publicly available
interleaved image-text data, i.e., MMC4 and OBELICS,
are employed for the pre-training of our vision-language
transformer. During pre-training, multimodal sequences
with interleaved image-text data are obtained from these
two datasets. For MMC4, the core split is used, and low-
quality samples with a CLIP similarity between the image
and its caption below 0.24 are filtered out. For OBELICS,
a sequence comprising 512 tokens is randomly sampled
based on the arrangement of image and text data within the
original document. To augment the probability of procur-
ing sequences containing multiple images, single-image se-
quences are discarded with a likelihood of 0.8. Throughout
the training process, these two datasets maintain equivalent
sampling probabilities, as do the sampling probabilities for
datasets comprising image-text pairs and datasets contain-
ing interleaved image and text data.
Optimization. The large vision-language model, VL-GPT,
is constructed by integrating the pre-trained language model
LLaMA 7B with our image tokenizer-detokenizer frame-
work. LoRA modules are attached to all linear layers in the
vision-language transformer, with a LoRA rank of 32. An
additional linear head is employed as a separate regression
head to predict the subsequent visual continuous embedding
for the current embedding. During multimodal pre-training,
only the parameters in LoRA modules and the regression
head are tuned, while all parameters of pre-trained LLaMA,
image tokenizer, and image detokenizer remain frozen to re-
duce training costs. The data augmentation techniques used
in the previous stage are also utilized in this phase.
6.3. Instruction tuning of VL-GPT
Datasets. To align the VL-GPT model with human instruc-
tions, multimodal instruction tuning is applied to the model
using a combination of publicly available datasets, such
as LLA V A, SVIT, MSCOCO Caption, InstructPix2Pix, and
Magicbrush. All dataset are restructured into a conversa-
tional formulation, consisting of a system message followed
by a single-turn or multi-turn conversation dialogue be-
tween a user and an assistant. The system message and con-
versational template employed in our method are presented
in Tab. 6. Furthermore, the MSCOCO caption dataset is
employed for both image captioning task and image gen-
eration task by altering the order of the image and its cor-
responding caption. The InstructPix2Pix and Magicbrush
datasets are utilized for prompt-based image editing task.
During instruction tuning, data in these datasets are sam-
pled to construct a batch of data for model optimization in
a ratio proportional to the dataset size.
Optimization. Instruction tuning is carried out on the pre-
12