former model for vision and language (VL) understand-
ing and generation tasks. The model can be pre-trained
on large-scale multimodal corpora in a unified auto-
regressive manner, i.e., predicting the next token in a mul-
timodal sequence containing continuous visual embed-
dings and discrete text tokens without any discrimination.
• VL-GPT exhibits competitive performance on various VL
understanding and generation benchmarks under zero-
shot and few-shot settings, including image captioning,
visual question answering, and text-to-image generation.
It also demonstrates an appealing multimodal in-context
learning ability when provided with multimodal prompts.
Furthermore, it shows promising potential to serve as a
general multimodal assistant through instruction tuning.
2. Related Work
Multimodal Pre-training in the Pre-LLM Era. Prior re-
search efforts primarily concentrated on model architec-
ture to facilitate the fusion and interaction of cross-model
data [6, 50, 52]. The success of transformers in language
models [42] and ViT [10] inspired the development of uni-
fied multi-modal modeling [27, 44]. Although images and
language can be processed by a unified model with shared
parameters, they often have distinct training objectives. It
is worth mentioning that the BEiT series [2, 45] success-
fully adapted the masked language modeling objective from
BERT [8] to vision and multimodal pre-training.
Multimodal Pre-training in the LLM Era. Building upon
pre-trained large language models (LLMs) [33, 40, 41, 54],
recent studies have effectively developed multimodal lan-
guage models capable of processing image and text inputs
to generate text outputs [1, 22, 24, 25, 56]. Another chal-
lenge for large multimodal models is generating multimodal
content beyond language. Several efforts, such as Visual
ChatGPT [47] and HuggingGPT [38], have achieved this
by connecting LLMs with other generation tools within an
LLM integration framework, e.g., LangChain. However,
these systems exhibit instability and limited room for fur-
ther optimization. To enable LLMs to generate images with
optimization, M-V ADER [46] aligns the semantic consis-
tence between an LLM and a diffusion decoder by train-
ing them on image-text pair data. GILL [18] achieves more
complex interleaved image-text generation by mapping the
embedding spaces of the LLM to text-to-image generation
models. NExT-GPT [48] extends this concept to additional
modalities, such as audio and video. DreamLLM [9] fa-
cilitates passing the differential gradient from image diffu-
sion models to language models, enabling the generation of
free-form interleaved content. Following similar methods,
Kosmos-G [30] enhances the fidelity of generated images in
context through a compositional instruction tuning task.
In contrast to our VL-GPT, these studies mainly focus on
Image EncoderText Encodera brown dog is sleeping on a bed
Rec LossRec LossInput imageImage caption
Visual continuous embedding xvImage embedding evText embedding	et
Estimated image embedding zvEstimated text embedding ztImage Tokenizer
Reconstruction Image !xUnused DuringTrainingImage Detokenizer
Causal TransformerTransformerDecoder
Visual Encoder
Diffusion DecoderFigure 2. The training scheme of our image tokenizer-detokenizer
framework, which is supervised by the frozen image and text en-
coders of our adopted pre-trained image diffusion model. Only
the causal transformer in tokenizer and the transformer decoder
in detokenizer necessitate training, while the diffusion decoder in
detokenizer remains unused during training.
leveraging existing LLMs and exploring the integration of
current image encoders and image generation models into
LLMs. However, these methods do not achieve unified
modeling for images and language, nor unified modeling
for image understanding and generation. For instance, spe-
cial queries are typically needed to encapsulate the context
information for image generation, but they are deemed un-
necessary when images serve as input for LLMs. Moreover,
applying an auto-regressive training objective on visual em-
beddings is challenging due to the inconsistency of image
embedding space. Consequently, these approaches are lim-
ited in expanding the scalable pre-training paradigm for
the GPT family, i.e., next-token prediction, to large vision-
language models on web-scale multimodal corpora.
Recently, Emu [39] proposes a multimodal pre-trained
model that enables the auto-regressive training for both vi-
sual and text embeddings. However, it requires an costly
second-stage fine-tuning of the Stable Diffusion [35] to con-
vert the visual embeddings into pixel space. In contrast, our
method utilizes a novel image tokenizer-detokenizer frame-
work that can fully leverage a pre-trained image diffusion
model (see Fig. 2). This approach not only simplifies the
process but also enhances training efficiency. Similar to our
approach, SEED [11] initially trains an image tokenizer, fol-
lowed by a multi-modal training. Nevertheless, its tokenizer
encodes images into discrete tokens via quantization opera-
tions, potentially losing partial image information. In con-
trast, our tokenizer converts images into continuous visual
embeddings, preserving both semantic information and ap-
pearance details, resulting in improved performance across
3