VL-GPT: A Generative Pre-trained Transformer
for Vision and Language Understanding and Generation
Jinguo Zhu1*Xiaohan Ding2*Yixiao Ge2,3Yuying Ge2
Sijie Zhao2Hengshuang Zhao4Xiaohua Wang1Ying Shan2,3B
1Xi’an Jiaotong University2Tencent AI Lab
3ARC Lab, Tencent PCG4The University of Hong Kong
Abstract
In this work, we introduce Vision-Language Generative
Pre-trained Transformer (VL-GPT), a transformer model
proficient at concurrently perceiving and generating visual
and linguistic data. VL-GPT achieves a unified pre-training
approach for both image and text modalities by employing a
straightforward auto-regressive objective, thereby enabling
the model to process image and text as seamlessly as a lan-
guage model processes text. To accomplish this, we initially
propose a novel image tokenizer-detokenizer framework for
visual data, specifically designed to transform raw images
into a sequence of continuous embeddings and reconstruct
them accordingly. In combination with the existing text tok-
enizer and detokenizer, this framework allows for the en-
coding of interleaved image-text data into a multimodal
sequence, which can subsequently be fed into the trans-
former model. Consequently, VL-GPT can perform large-
scale pre-training on multimodal corpora utilizing a uni-
fied auto-regressive objective ( i.e., next-token prediction).
Upon completion of pre-training, VL-GPT exhibits remark-
able zero-shot and few-shot performance across a diverse
range of vision and language understanding and genera-
tion tasks, including image captioning, visual question an-
swering, text-to-image generation, and more. Additionally,
the pre-trained model retrains in-context learning capabil-
ities when provided with multimodal prompts. We further
conduct instruction tuning on our VL-GPT, highlighting its
exceptional potential for multimodal assistance.
1. Introduction
Driven by the remarkable success of large language mod-
els (LLMs) in the field of natural language processing
*Equal contribution. This work is done when Jinguo Zhu is an intern
at Tencent AI Lab. The source code and model weights shall be released
athttps://github.com/AILab-CVC/VL-GPT .BCorresponding
author.(NLP) [40, 41, 54], there has been a surge of interest within
multimodal community to develop large vision-language
(VL) models. One of the promising approaches, exempli-
fied by Flamingo [1], BLIP2 [24], LLA V A [25], have ex-
plored how to build large VL models based on powerful
pre-trained LLMs. These studies typically adopted a similar
architecture: a pre-trained image encoder and an LLM are
connected via a trainable connection module, which aligns
the image feature and text embeddings, thereby enabling
language models to accept images and text as inputs and
generate a text sequence.
To expand the capabilities of generating image in a mul-
timodal context, certain efforts, e.g., Visual ChatGPT [47],
attempt to connect LLMs with image generation tools in a
cascaded pipeline by transferring text messages, which in-
evitably introduce instability and noise. Alternatively, an-
other line of research achieves it by optimizing models in
an end-to-end manner [9, 18, 23, 30, 48]. By aligning the
output space with the image diffusion models, VL models
can not only perceive but also generate images and text.
A crucial characteristic of large language models is auto-
regressive modeling [31], i.e., predicting next token, which
facilitates language understanding and generation in a uni-
fied manner. However, in the aforementioned studies, the
inconsistency of image embeddings between LLM’s input
and output sides compels the model to treat input images
and generated images differently, resulting in separate mod-
eling for image understanding and generation. Meanwhile,
this discrepancy also obstructs the implementation of auto-
regressive training loss on image embeddings.
In this study, we introduce VL-GPT, a large vision-
language generative pre-trained transformer that enables the
unified training of both visual and linguistic data using an
auto-regressive objective, as depicted in Fig. 1. To achieve
this, we propose an image tokenizer-detokenizer framework
for the conversion between raw image pixels and contin-
uous visual embeddings, analogous to the role of the text
tokenization [19, 43] in language models. The framework
1arXiv:2312.09251v1  [cs.CV]  14 Dec 2023