Models VQAv2 VizWiz
k 2 4 8 2 4 8
Kosmos-1 [16] 51.4 51.8 51.4 31.4 35.3 39.0
Flamingo-9B [1] - 56.3 58.0 - 34.9 39.4
Emu [39] 56.4 58.4 59.0 37.8 41.3 43.9
VL-GPT 57.2 58.6 58.9 38.9 41.8 44.2
Table 3. Few-shot performance on visual question answering.
Estimation target Reconstruction VL-GPT
CLIP
Similarity ( ↑)Captioning
CIDEr ( ↑)Generation
FID (↓)
et 73.59 131.1 12.79
ev 80.05 123.6 13.61
et+ev 80.22 133.7 12.25
Table 4. Ablation of condition embedding types. Text embedding
(et), image embedding ( ev), or their combination ( et+ev) are
employed to guide the training of the tokenizer-detokenizer frame-
work. We evaluate the effectiveness of reconstructing images and
the performance of VL-GPT when adopting different image tok-
enizer and detokenizer.
both image-text understanding and text-to-image generation
tasks, thereby validating the effectiveness of unified multi-
modal pre-training. Notably, VL-GPT attains an impres-
sive CIDEr score of 116.4 or 119.2 on MSCOCO caption-
ing without or with text-only prompts, surpassing other uni-
fied VL pre-trained models. With further instruction tuning,
VL-GPT-I, the instruction-tuned VL-GPT, significantly en-
hances model performance, achieving the best or near-best
results in all tasks.
Multimodal In-context Learning Similar to the behav-
ior of LLMs, our VL-GPT can be prompted to address
new vision-language tasks when provided with a few mul-
timodal examples from training data composed in the mul-
timodal prompt. To quantitatively evaluate its multimodal
in-context learning capability, we examine the few-shot per-
formance of VL-GPT when varying the number of exam-
ples in the given prompt, as shown in Tab. 3. Our VL-GPT
outperforms other works under almost all few-shot setting
(k=2,4,8) on two datasets for the visual question answer-
ing task. Moreover, a positive correlation is observed be-
tween the number of the examples in the given prompt and
the performance on these two datasets.
Qualitative Results Fig. 4 showcases a series of gener-
ated visualizations using our VL-GPT model, encompass-
ing various tasks such as image captioning, visual ques-
tion answering, text-to-image generation, multimodal gen-
eration with in-context learning, and multimodal multi-turn
dialogue. Intriguingly, VL-GPT demonstrates remarkable
capabilities that are not readily assessed through existing
academic benchmarks. For instance, in Fig. 4 (7-8), VL-GPT generates highly realistic images in response to long-
text prompts containing complex concepts. In Fig. 4 (10),
VL-GPT exhibits the ability to generate images and texts in
a flexible manner, conditioned on the provided multimodal
context. Fig. 4 (11-12) illustrates the multi-turn dialogue
capabilities of the instruction-tuned VL-GPT, wherein the
model generates multimodal contents consistent with the
existing context based on user instructions. This suggests
the promising potential of the VL-GPT as a versatile and
effective multimodal general assistant.
4.5. Ablation Studies
Previous studies typically generate images by converting
their output into text condition embedding for image dif-
fusion models. In contrast, our detokenizer estimates both
text condition embedding and image condition embedding
from visual continuous embeddings, as depicted in Sec. 3.1.
The advantage of this design will be discussed next.
Fig. 3 displays the images reconstructed by our
tokenizer-detokenizer using different estimated condition
embedding, i.e., only using image condition embedding,
only using text condition embedding, or using both. These
examples reveal that these two type of embedding comple-
ment each other: image embedding effectively preserve im-
age appearance details while text embedding assists in im-
age reconstruction, e.g., determining the number of people.
As evidenced in Tab. 4, although it is feasible to train im-
age tokenizer-detokenizer framework by estimating solely
one type of condition embedding (when λ1=0orλ2=0in
Eq. 1), the simultaneous estimation of both types of con-
dition embedding leads to optimal performance for both
the tokenizer-detokenizer framework and VL-GPT. We hy-
pothesize that estimating image condition embedding en-
ables our tokenizer to retain more pixel information from
the input image, which is beneficial for image reconstruc-
tion. Meanwhile, estimating text condition embedding al-
lows the visual embeddings to contain more high-level se-
mantics, leading to improved performance in subsequent vi-
sion and language tasks.
5. Conclusion
We propose VL-GPT, a generative pre-trained transformer
model for vision and language understanding and gen-
eration. The model incorporates an innovative image
tokenizer-detokenizer framework, enabling it to be pre-
trained on large-scale multimodal corpora with a unified
auto-regressive objective. Upon completion of the pre-
training, VL-GPT exhibits competitive performance across
various academic benchmarks and manifests several appeal-
ing emergent capabilities. As for limitations, the effective-
ness of our method has not been verified through the scaling
up of model parameters. We hope that our work will stimu-
late further exploration in the pursuit of general intelligence
within the multimodal research community.
8