diverse benchmarks.
3. Method
As illustrated in Fig. 1, the implementation of our VL-GPT
can be separated into two consecutive stages. In the first
stage, we learn an image tokenizer-detokenizer framework,
capable of encoding images into continuous visual embed-
dings and decoding them back. The second stage is the pre-
training and instruction tuning of our VL-GPT, which facil-
itates a unified modeling approach for vision and language
understanding and generation. In the following sections, we
will provide a detailed description of these two stages.
3.1. Image Tokenizer-Detokenizer Framework
To implement an auto-regressive training objective on vi-
sual embeddings and text tokens concurrently, we de-
velop an image tokenizer-detokenizer framework for vision-
language models. The framework, inspired by text tok-
enizers utilized in language models [43], can realize bi-
directional conversion between original images and contin-
uous visual embeddings, thereby enabling the transformer
model to process vision data akin to processing text data.
Architecture The overall architecture of our image
tokenizer-detokenizer framework is depicted in Fig. 1. It
comprises two primary components: a tokenizer Erespon-
sible for encoding the image into continuous visual embed-
dings, and a detokenizer Ddedicated to decoding the visual
embeddings back to raw images.
Formally, the image tokenizer Eemploys an image en-
coder ( e.g., ViT [10]) to extract spatial patched features xp
from the given image x. Subsequently, a standard decoder-
only causal transformer is utilized to convert the patched
features xpto 1D (one-dimensional) visual embeddings
xv∈RN×d, where Nrepresents the number of visual em-
beddings, and ddenotes the embedding dimension. The
1D continuous visual embeddings xvserve as input embed-
dings to our vision-language model, analogous to word to-
kens in language models.
Inspired by current image diffusion models with excel-
lent performance and accessibility [34, 35, 49], our image
detokenizer Dlearns a latent diffusion model to decode
visual embeddings xvinto images. Specifically, a trans-
former decoder is employed to estimate condition embed-
dingzfromxv. Then a diffusion decoder, initialized from
a pre-trained image diffusion models, can generate images
ˆxbased on estimated condition embedding z.
Training Despite the initialization with pre-trained models,
conducting a full-scale end-to-end optimization of the im-
age tokenizer and detokenizer demands large-scale data and
considerable training costs. To pursue efficient training, we
opt to train the transformer decoder in image detokenizer
to estimate the condition embedding utilized for the diffu-sion decoders, as illustrated in Fig. 2. Notably, the diffusion
decoder, including its U-Net and V AE modules, is not em-
ployed during framework training, substantially enhancing
the efficiency of training procedure.
As Fig. 2 shows, the training objective of our framework
aims to concurrently reconstruct the image condition em-
bedding evand text condition embedding et. This design
distinguishes our framework from previous works [11, 18,
48], which only align their intermediate outputs with text
embedding produced by the text encoder of the diffusion
model. Specifically, we optimize the framework by mini-
mizing the following loss function (with weight λ1andλ2):
L(z) =λ1∗MSE( zv, ev) +λ2∗MSE( zt, et) (1)
where MSE (·)denotes the mean squared error loss, and
zvandztrepresent the estimated image condition em-
bedding and estimated text condition embedding, respec-
tively. During inference, both types of condition embed-
ding contribute collectively to generate images. Our image
tokenizer-detokenizer framework can also work when re-
constructing only image condition embedding (if λ2=0) or
only text condition embedding (if λ1=0). Moreover, the
training for estimating image embedding only requires vi-
sual data, which is more training-friendly than estimating
text embedding. However, our experiments in Sec. 4.5 re-
veal that these two types of embedding complement each
other: text embedding contain rich semantic information
while image embedding effectively persevere image details.
3.2. VL-GPT
VL-GPT aims to process the vision and language under-
standing and generation within a single transformer model
in a unified way, similar to GPT handles language tasks.
It is capable of perceiving the interleaved multi-modal data
and generating content across various modalities. By em-
ploying unified modeling, our VL-GPT can conduct auto-
regressive pre-training on web-scale multimodal corpora,
thereby holding the potential to serve as a powerful foun-
dation model in the multimodal research community.
Architecture As depicted at the bottom of Fig. 1, our VL-
GPT comprises five components: a large vision-language
transformer model M, an image tokenizer Ev, a text tok-
enizerEt, an image detokenizer Dvand a text detokenizer
Dt. In comparison to a language model, VL-GPT incor-
porates additional image tokenizer and image detokenizer
elements.
Given any interleaved image-text data, the image tok-
enizer and the text tokenizer initially encode them into a
multimodal sequence. More specifically, the image tok-
enizerEvconverts each image into Ncontinuous visual em-
beddings xv. Additionally, two special tokens [IMG]and
[/IMG]are appended at the beginning and end of the vi-
sual embeddings, respectively. The visual embeddings are
4