then combined with the discrete text tokens encoded by the
text tokenizer Etto form a interleaved multimodal sequence
v= (v1, v2, . . . , v n), where vican be either a discrete text
token or a continuous visual embedding. The multimodal
sequence vis then fed into the large VL model Mfor uni-
fied auto-regressive modeling.
The output embedding M(vi)can be flexibly trans-
formed into a text embedding through a language model-
ing head for the predefined vocabulary or into a visual em-
bedding with a separate regression head. During training,
the selection of the transformed head depends on whether
the target for the current embedding is a text token or a vi-
sual embedding. During inference, if [IMG]is predicted, the
visual regression head will be utilized to transform output
embeddings in the subsequent Nprediction; otherwise, the
language modeling head will be used. The prediction em-
beddings are subsequently decoded to raw images or text
via the image detokenizer Dvor the text detokenizer Dt.
Multimodal Pre-training. Benefiting from the unified
modeling of both visual and text embeddings, we can apply
the unsupervised pre-training paradigm of GPT [31] to our
VL-GPT on a large corpus of multimodal data with minimal
modifications.
Given an interleaved multimodal sequence v=
(v1, v2, . . . , v n)in a large-scale corpora, we employ the
standard auto-regressive modeling objective in language
models to maximize the following likelihood:
L(v) =nX
ilogP(vi|v1, v2, . . . , v i−1; Θ) (2)
where Θrepresents the parameters of our VL-GPT. We ap-
ply cross-entropy loss with a language modeling head on the
discrete text tokens and utilize MSE loss with a regression
head for continuous visual embeddings.
Instruction Tuning To enhance the ability of the pre-
trained VL-GPT to follow human instructions faithfully and
generate multimodal contents creatively, we perform fur-
ther instruction tuning of VL-GPT using publicly available
instruction-tuning datasets. Briefly, the data from these
datasets will be restructured into a conversational format,
i.e., pairs of multimodal human instructions and their re-
sponses for single or multiple rounds, and subsequently em-
ployed for model tuning in a manner similar to the pre-
training corpora. A minor deviation from pre-training pro-
cess is that the training objective will be applied exclusively
to the embeddings tokenized from answer responses.
4. Experiments
The training of our VL-GPT consists of three phases: train-
ing for the tokenizer-detokenizer framework, unified mul-
timodal pre-training for the vision-language transformer
model, and instruction tuning for the pre-trained VL-GPT.
Input ImagesReconstruction (zv+zt)Reconstruction (zv)Reconstruction (zt)
Figure 3. Reconstruction images of our image tokenizer-
detokenizer framework by utilizing image condition embedding
(zv), or text condition embedding ( zt), or both types of condition
embedding ( zv+zt). More examples are included in the appendix.
Model COCO Flickr30k
GILL [18] 67.45 65.16
SD v1.5 [35] 68.43 65.40
SEED [11] 68.23 65.22
unCLIP [34] 79.30 79.55
Our tokenizer-detokenizer 80.22 79.14
Table 1. Evaluation of image reconstruction with CLIP similarity.
4.1. Datasets
Publicly available datasets are utilized for different phrase
of the VL-GPT training. The image tokenizer-detokenizer
framework is trained on image-text pairs from CC3M [37],
LAION-Aestheics [20], and LAION-COCO [36]. Dur-
ing the unified multimodal pre-training of VL-GPT, a
combination of paired and interleaved image-text data is
employed. The image-text pairs remain consistent with
the preview phase, while the interleaved image-text se-
quences are acquired from Multimodal-C4 (MMC4) [57]
and OBELICS [21]. We adopt similar preprocessing tech-
niques for interleaved data implemented in Flamingo [1].
For each document, a maximum of 5 images and their as-
sociated captions are randomly sampled to construct a sub-
sequence with a token length of up to 512. Additionally,
for paired and interleaved image-text data, each image is
randomly placed before or after its corresponding caption.
For the instruction tuning of VL-GPT, a compositional in-
struction tuning dataset is constructed from various sources,
encompassing conversational data from LLA V A [25] and
SVIT [55], image-text pair data from COCO Caption [5],
and image editing data from InstructPix2Pix [3] and Mag-
icbrush [53]. These datasets are restructured into a conver-
5