3.3. CompCos: from Closed to Open World
Although CompCos is an effective CZSL algorithm in
the standard closed world scenario, performing well on the
OW-CZSL requires tackling different challenges, such as
avoiding distractors. We consider distractors as less-likely
concepts, e.g. pureed dog ,hairy tomato , and argue that the
similarity among objects and states can be used as a proxy
to estimate the feasibility of each composition. The least
feasible compositions can then be successfully isolated, im-
proving the representations of the feasible ones.
Estimating Compositional Feasibility. Let us consider
two objects, namely catanddog. We know, from our train-
ing set, that cats can be small anddogs can be wetsince
we have at least one image for each of these compositions.
However, the training set may not contain images for wet
cats andsmall dogs , which we know are feasible in real-
ity. We conjecture, that similar objects share similar states
while dissimilar ones do not. Hence, it is safe to assume that
the states of catscan be transferred to dogs and vice-versa.
With this idea in mind, given a composition c= (s,o)
we deﬁne its feasibility score with respect to the object oas:
ρobj(s,o) = max
ˆo∈Oscos(ϕ(o),ϕ(ˆo)) (3)
withOsbeing the set of objects associated with state sin
the training set Cs,i.e.Os={o|(s,o)∈ Cs}. Note, that
the score is computed as the cosine similarity between the
object embedding and the most similar other object with the
target state, thus the score is bounded in [−1,1]. Training
compositions get assigned the score of 1. Similarly, we de-
ﬁne the score with respect to the state sas:
ρstate(s,o) = max
ˆs∈Socos(ϕ(s),ϕ(ˆs)) (4)
withSobeing the set of states associated with the object o
in the training set Cs,i.e.So={s|(s,o)∈ Cs}.
The feasibility score for a composition c= (s,o)is then:
ρ(c) =ρ(s,o) =g(ρstate(s,o),ρobj(s,o)) (5)
wheregis a mixing function, e.g. max operation ( g(x,y) =
max(x,y)) or the average ( g(x,y) = (x+y)/2), keeping
the feasibility score bounded in [−1,1]. Note that, while we
focus on extracting feasibility from the visual information,
external knowledge ( e.g. knowledge bases [ 18], language
models [ 31]) can be complementary resources.
Exploiting Compositional Feasibility. A ﬁrst simple strat-
egy is applying a threshold on the feasibility scores, con-
sidering all compositions above the threshold as valid and
others as distractors (e.g. ripe dog , as shown in the black
pie slice of Figure 2):
fHARD(x) = argmax
c∈Ct,ρ(c)>τcos(ω(x),φ(c)) (6)whereτis the threshold, tuned on a validation set. While
this strategy is effective, it might be too restrictive in prac-
tice. For instance, tomatoes anddogs being far in the em-
bedding space does not mean that a state for dog, e.g. wet,
cannot be applied to a tomato . Therefore, considering the
feasibility scores as the golden standard may lead to exclud-
ing valid compositions. To sidestep this issue, we propose
to inject the feasibility scores directly into the training pro-
cedure. We argue that doing so can enforce separation be-
tween most and least feasible unseen compositions in the
shared embedding space.
To inject the feasibility scores ρ(c)directly within our
objective function, we can deﬁne:
Lf=−1
|T |/summationdisplay
(x,c)∈Tloge1
T·pf(x,c)
/summationtext
y∈Ce1
T·pf(x,y)(7)
with:
pf(x,c) =/braceleftBigg
cos(ω(x),φ(c)) ifc∈ Cs
cos(ω(x),φ(c))−αρ(c)otherwise(8)
whereρ(c)are used as margins for the cosine similarities,
andα >0is a scalar factor. With Eq. ( 7) we include the full
compositional space while training with the seen composi-
tions data to raise awareness of the margins between seen
and unseen compositions directly during training.
Note that, since ρ(ci)/ne}ationslash=ρ(cj)ifci/ne}ationslash=cjandci,cj/∈ Cs,
we have a different margin, i.e. −αρ(c), for each unseen
composition c. This is because most feasible compositions
should be closer to the seen ones (to which the visual em-
bedding network is biased) than less feasible ones. By do-
ing that, we force the network to push the representation of
less feasible compositions away from the representation of
compositions in CsinZ. On the other hand, the less pe-
nalized feasible compositions beneﬁt from the updates pro-
duced for seen training compositions containing the same
primitives. More feasible compositions will then be more
likely to be predicted by the model, even without being
present in the training set. As an example (Figure 2, top
part), the unfeasible composition ripe dog is more penal-
ized than the feasible wet tomato during training, with the
outcome that the optimization procedure does not force the
model to reduce the region of wet tomato , while reducing
the one of ripe dog (top-right pie).
We highlight that in this stage we do not explicitly bound
the revised score pf(c)to[−1,1]. Instead, we let the net-
work implicitly adjust the cosine similarity scores during
training. We also found it beneﬁcial to linearly increase α
till a maximum value as the training progresses, rather than
keeping it ﬁxed. This permits us to gradually introduce the
feasibility margins within our objective while exploiting im-
proved primitive embeddings to compute them.
5225