projection of learned primitive embeddings with an inte-
grated feasibility estimation mechanism; (3) A signiﬁcantly
improved state-of-the-art performance on MIT states [ 13]
and UT Zappos [ 34,35] both on the existing benchmarks
and the newly proposed OW-CZSL setting.
2. Related works
Compositional Zero-Shot Learning. Early vision works
encode compositionality with hierarchical part-based mod-
els, to learn robust and scalable object representations
[24,23,6,38,25,28]. More recently, compositionality has
been widely considered in multiple tasks such as composi-
tional reasoning for visual question answering [ 14,16,12]
and modular image generation [ 37,30,26].
In this work, we focus on Compositional Zero-Shot
Learning (CZSL) [ 20]. Given a training set containing a set
of state-object compositions, the goal of CZSL is to recog-
nize unseen compositions of these states and objects at test
time. Some approaches address this task by learning ob-
jects and states classiﬁer in isolation and composing them to
build the ﬁnal recognition model. In this context, [ 4] trains
an SVM classiﬁer for seen compositions and infers class
weights for new compositions through a Bayesian frame-
work. LabelEmbed [ 20] learns a transformation network on
top of pretrained state and object classiﬁers. [ 21] proposes
to encode objects as vectors and states as linear operators
that change this vector. Similarly, [ 17] enforces symmetries
in the representation of objects given their state transfor-
mations. Recently, [ 27] proposed a modular network where
states and objects are simultaneously encoded. The network
blocks are then selectively activated by a gating function,
taking as input an object-state composition.
All of these works assume that the training and test-
time compositions are known a priori. We show that re-
moving this assumption causes severe performance degra-
dation. Furthermore, we propose the ﬁrst approach for
Open World CZSL. There are some similarities between
our model and [ 20] (i.e. primitive representations are con-
catenated and projected in a shared visual-semantic space).
However, our loss formulation leads to signiﬁcant improve-
ments in the Open World CZSL results. More importantly,
our approach is the ﬁrst to estimate the feasibility of each
composition and exploits this information to isolate/remove
possible distractors in the shared output space.
Open World Recognition. In our open world setting, all
the combinations of states and objects can form a valid com-
positional class. This is different from an alternate def-
inition of Open World Recognition (OWR) [ 2] where the
goal is to dynamically update a model trained on a subset
of classes to recognize increasingly more concepts as new
data arrives. Our deﬁnition of open world is related to the
open set zero-shot learning (ZSL) [ 33] scenario in [ 7,8],proposing to expand the output space to include a very large
vocabulary of semantic concepts.
Our problem formulation and approach are close in spirit
to that of [ 8] since both works consider the lack of con-
straints in the output space for unseen concepts as a require-
ment for practical (compositional) ZSL methods. However,
there are fundamental differences between our work and
[8]. Since we consider the problem of CZSL, we have ac-
cess to images of all primitives during training but not all
their possible compositions. This implies that we can use
the knowledge obtained from the visual world to model the
feasibility of compositions and modifying the representa-
tions in the shared visual-compositional embedding space.
We explicitly model the feasibility of each unseen compo-
sition, incorporating this knowledge into training and test.
3. Compositional Cosine Logits
3.1. (OW)­CZSL Task Deﬁnition
Compositional zero-shot learning (CZSL) aims to pre-
dict a composition of multiple semantic concepts in images.
Let us denote with Sthe set of possible states, with Othe
set of possible objects, and with C=S × O the set of all
their possible compositions. T={(xi,ci)}N
i=1is a training
set where xi∈ X is a sample in the input (image) space X
andci∈ Csis a composition in the subset Cs⊂ C.Tis
used to train a model f:X → Ctpredicting combinations
in a space Ct⊆ C whereCtmay include compositions that
are not present in Cs(i.e.∃c∈ Ct∧c /∈ Cs).
The CZSL task entails different challenges depending on
the extent of the target set Ct. IfCtis a subset of Cand
Ct∩Cs≡ ∅, the task deﬁnition is of [ 20], where the model
needs to predict only unseen compositions at test time. In
caseCs⊂ Ctwe are in the generalized CZSL scenario, and
the output space of the model contains both seen and unseen
compositions. Similarly to the standard generalized zero-
shot learning [ 33], this scenario is more challenging due to
the natural prediction bias of the model in Cs, seen during
training. Most recents works on CZSL consider the gener-
alized scenario [ 27,17], and the set of unseen compositions
inCtis assumed to be known a priori, with Ct⊂ C.
In this work, we take a step further, analyzing the case
where the output space of the model is the whole set of
possible compositions Ct≡ C, i.e. Open World Composi-
tional Zero-shot Learning (OW-CZSL). Note that this task
presents the same challenges of the generalized case while
being far more difﬁcult since i) |Ct| ≫ |Cs|, thus it is hard
to generalize from a small set of seen to a very large set
of unseen compositions; and ii) there are a large number of
distractor compositions in Ct,i.e. compositions predicted
by the model but not present in the actual test set that can
be close to other unseen compositions, hampering their dis-
criminability. We highlight that, despite being similar to
5223