Mask Seen Unseen HM AUC
LE+ 14.83.1 3.2 0.3
✓ 5.0 4.6 0.5
TMN 15.91.3 1.7 0.1
✓ 4.1 4.1 0.4
SymNet 23.67.9 7.6 1.2
✓ 7.9 7.7 1.2
CompCosCW28.06.0 7.0 1.2
✓ 8.1 8.7 1.6
CompCos 27.111.0 10.8 2.1
✓ 11.2 11.0 2.2
Table 3. Results on MIT states validation set for applying our
feasibility-based binary masks ( fHARD ) on different models.
particular, computing the scores starting from state informa-
tion (ρstate) brings good best unseen and HM results while
under-performing on the best seen accuracy. On the other
hand, using similarities among objects ( ρobj) performs well
on the seen classes while achieving slightly lower perfor-
mances on unseen ones and HM.
Nevertheless introducing both states and objects give the
best result at AUC of 2.1 as it combines the best of both.
Merging objects and states scores through their maximum
(ρmax) maintains the higher seen accuracy of the object-
based scores, with a trade-off between the two on unseen
compositions. However, merging objects and states scores
through their average brings to the best performance over-
all, with a signiﬁcant improvement on unseen compositions
(almost 1%) as well as the harmonic mean. We ascribe this
behavior to the fact that, with the average, the model is less-
prone to assign either too low or too high feasibility scores
for the unseen compositions, smoothing their scores. As a
consequence, more meaningful margins are used in Eq. ( 7)
and thus the network achieves a better trade-off between
discrimination capability on the seen compositions and bet-
ter separating them from unseen compositions (and distrac-
tors) in the shared embedding space.
Effect of Masking. We consider mainly two ways of us-
ing the feasibility scores: during training as margins and/or
during inference as masks on the predictions. We analyze
the impact of applying the mask during inference, i.e. using
as prediction function Eq. ( 6) in place of Eq. ( 1), with the
threshold τcomputed empirically. We run this study on our
closed world model CompCosCW, our full model CompCos
and three CZSL baselines, LE+, TMN, and SymNet. Note
that, since seen compositions are not masked, best seen per-
formances are shared across a single model.
As shown in Table 3, if we apply binary masks on top
of CompCosCWthe AUC increases by 0.5, best harmonic
mean by 1.7%, and best unseen accuracy by 2.1%. This is
because our masks ﬁlter out the less feasible compositions,rather than just restricting the output space. At the same
time, the improvements are not as pronounced for the full
CompCos model. Indeed, including the feasibility scores
as margins during training makes the model already robust
to the distractors. The hard masking still provides a slight
beneﬁt over all compositional metrics, with an 11% on ac-
curacy on unseen compositions. This conﬁrms the impor-
tance of restricting the search space under a criterion taking
into account the probability of a composition of being a dis-
tractor, such as our feasibility scores.
An interesting observation is that applying our
feasibility-based binary masks on top of other approaches
(i.e. LE+, TMN, and SymNet) is beneﬁcial. SymNet, mod-
eling states and objects separately, sees a minor increase in
performance in HM while maintaining the AUC and unseen
accuracy. However, LE+ and TMN, which learn a joint
compatibility between compositions and images, see a big
increase in performance with the introduction of feasibility.
TMN improves from 0.1 to 0.4 in the AUC while seeing
a big increase in the HM from 1.7 to 4.1. Similarly, LE+
improves from 0.3 AUC to 0.5 with a signiﬁcant increase
in the HM, from 3.2 to 4.6.
4.3. Qualitative results
We show example composition predictions for a set of
images of our CompCosCWand our CompCos in the open
world setting. Furthermore, we show examples of most-
and least-feasible compositions determined by our model.
Compositions Corrected due to Feasibility Scores. We
qualitatively analyze the reasons for the improvements of
CompCos over CompCosCW, by looking at the example
predictions of both models on simple sample images of
MIT states. We compare predictions on samples where the
closed world model is “distracted” by a distractor while the
open world model is able to predict the correct class label.
As shown in Figure 3, the closed world model is gener-
ally not capable of dealing with the presence of distractors.
For instance, there are cases where the object prediction
is correct ( e.g.broken dog ,molten chicken ,unripe boul-
der,mossy bear ,rusty pie ) but the associated state is not
only wrong but also making the compositions unfeasible.
In other cases, the state prediction is almost correct ( e.g.
cracked fan ,barren wave ,inﬂated eggs ) but the associated
object is unrelated, making the composition unfeasible. All
these problems are less severe in our full CompCos model
since our feasibility-driven objective helps in isolating the
implausible distractors in the shared embedding space, re-
ducing the possibility to predict them.
Discovered Most and Least Feasible Compositions. The
most crucial advantage of our method is its ability to esti-
mate the feasibility of each unseen composition, to later in-
ject these estimates into the learning process. Our assump-
tion is that our procedure described in Section 3.3is robust
5228