4. Experiments
Datasets. We experiment with two standard CZSL bench-
mark datasets. MIT states [ 13] contains 53K images of
245 objects in 115 possible states. We adopt the standard
split from [ 27]. For the closed world experiments, the out-
put space contains 1262 seen and 300/400 unseen (valida-
tion/test) compositions. For the open world scenario, we
consider all possible 28175 compositions as present in the
search space. Note, that 26114 out of 28175 ( ∼93%) are
not present in any splits of the dataset but are included in
our open world setting.
UT Zappos [ 34,35] contains 12 different shoe types (ob-
jects) and 16 different materials (states). In the closed world
setting, the output space is constrained to the 83 seen and to
additional 15 and 18 unseen compositions for validation and
test respectively. Although 76 out of 192 possible composi-
tions (∼40%) are not in any of the splits of the dataset, we
consider them in our open world setting.
Metrics. For the primitives, we report the object and state
classiﬁcation accuracies. Since we focus on the generalized
scenario and the model has an inherent bias for seen com-
positions, we follow the evaluation protocol from [ 27]. We
consider the performance of the model with different bias
factors for the unseen compositions, reporting the results as
best accuracy on only images of seen compositions ( best
seen), best accuracy on only unseen compositions ( best un-
seen), best harmonic mean ( best HM ) and Area Under the
Curve (AUC) for seen and unseen accuracies at bias values.
Benchmark and Implementation Details. As in [ 27,17]
our image features are extracted from a ResNet18 pre-
trained on ImageNet [ 5] and we learn the visual embedding
moduleωon top of these features. We initialize the em-
bedding function ϕwith 300-dimensional word2vec [ 19]
embeddings for UT Zappos and with 600-dimensional
word2vec+fastext [ 3] embeddings for MIT states, follow-
ing [ 32], keeping the same dimensions for the shared em-
bedding space Z. We train both ω(ϕandW) andφusing
Adam [ 15] optimizer with a learning rate and a weight de-
cay set to 5·10−5. The margin factor αand the temperature
Tare set to 0.4and0.05respectively for MIT states and
1.0and0.02for UT Zappos. We linearly increase αfrom
0 to the previous values during training, reaching the val-
ues after 15 epochs. We consider the mixing function gas
the average to merge state and object feasibility scores and
fHARD as predictor for OW-CZSL, unless otherwise stated.
We compare with four state-of-the-art methods, At-
tribute as Operators (AOP) [ 21], considering objects as vec-
tors and states as matrices modifying them [ 21]; LabelEm-
bed+ (LE+) [ 20,21] training a classiﬁer merging state and
object embeddings with an MLP; Task-Modular Neural
Networks (TMN) [ 27], modifying the classiﬁer through a
gating function receiving as input the queried stat-object
composition; and SymNet [ 17], learning object embeddingsshowing symmetry under different state-based transforma-
tions. We train each model with their default hyperparame-
ters, reporting the closed and open world results of the mod-
els with the best AUC on the validation set.
4.1. Comparing with the State of the Art
We compare CompCos and the state of the art in the stan-
dard closed world and the proposed open world setting.
Closed World Results. The results analyzing the perfor-
mance of CompCos in the standard closed world scenario
are reported on the left side of Table 1for the MIT states and
UT Zappos test sets. Although being a substantially sim-
ple approach, our CompCos achieves remarkable results.
On MIT states our model either outperforms or is compa-
rable to all competitors in all metrics. In particular, while
obtaining a comparable best harmonic mean with SymNet,
it achieves 4.5 AUC, which is a signiﬁcant improvement
over 3.0 from SymNet. This highlights how our model is
more robust to the bias on unseen test compositions. Com-
pared to the closest method to ours, LabelEmbed+ (LE+),
CompCos shows clear advantages for all metrics (from 2 to
4.5 AUC, and from 10.7% to 16.4% on the best harmonic
mean), underlying the impact of our embedding functions
and the cross-entropy loss on cosine logits.
On UT Zappos, our model is superior to almost all meth-
ods (except TMN in two cases). It is particularly interest-
ing how CompCos surpasses AoP, LE+, and SymNet with
more than 2%on best harmonic mean and at least by 2.8
in AUC. In comparison with TMN, while achieving a lower
best harmonic mean (-1.9%) and a slightly lower AUC (-
0.6), it achieves the best unseen accuracy (+2.5%) and im-
proves of 4%the accuracy in recognizing each primitive in
isolation. These results show that CompCos is less sensitive
to the value of the bias applied to the unseen compositions
in the generalized scenario, thanks to the use of cosine sim-
ilarity as prediction score. We would like to highlight that
our model uses a magnitude lower trainable parameters, e.g.
0.8M vs 2.3M for TMN, to achieve these results.
Open World Results. The results on the challenging OW-
CZSL setting are reported on the right side of Table 1. As
expected, the ﬁrst clear outcome is the severe decrease in
performance of every method. In fact, the OW-CZSL per-
formances ( e.g. best unseen, best HM, and AUC) are less
than half of CZSL performances in MIT states. The largest
decrease in performance is on the best unseen metric, due
to the presence of a large number of distractors. As an ex-
ample, LE+ goes from 20.1% to 2.5% of best unseen accu-
racy and even the previous state of the art, SymNet, loses
18.2%, conﬁrming that the open world scenario is signiﬁ-
cantly more challenging than the closed world setting.
In the OW-CZSL setting, our model (CompCos) is more
robust to the distractors, due to the injected feasibility-based
margins which shape the shared embedding space during
5226