CompCosCW   
CompCos
broken  dog
small  dogrusty  pie
browned  piebarren  wave
windblown  sandmossy  bear
large  bearcracked  fan
broken  mirrorinflated  eggs
huge  balloonmolten  chicken
cooked  chickenunripe  boulder
mossy  boulder
CompCosCW   
CompCosbroken  laptop
old laptopfresh  beach
sunny  beachpeeled  copper
thick  necklaceburnt  iguana
weathered  concretecoiled  bread
sliced  breadfrozen  gemstone
melted  plasticengraved  cable
engraved  swordsteaming  shoes
crumpled  bagFigure 3. Examples correct predictions of CompCos in the OW-CZSL scenario when the CompCosCWfails. The ﬁrst row shows the
predictions of the closed world model, the bottom row shows the results of CompCos. The images are randomly selected.
Compositions
Most Feasible (Top-1) Least Feasible (Bottom-1)
browned tomato short lead
caramelized potato cloudy gemstone
thawed meat standing vegetable
small dog full nut
large animal blunt milk
Objects States
Most Feasible (Top-3) Least Feasible (Bottom-3)
tomato browned, peeled, diced tight, full, standing
dog small, old, young fallen, toppled, standing
cat wrinkled, huge, large viscous, smooth, runny
laptop small, shattered, modern cloudy, sunny, dull
camera tiny, huge, broken diced, caramelized, cloudy
Table 4. Unseen compositions wrt their feasibility scores (Top:
Top-5 compositions on the left, Least-5 on the right; Bottom: Top-
3 highest and Bottom-3 lowest feasible state per object.
enough to model which compositions should be more fea-
sible in the compositional space and which should not, iso-
lating the latter in the shared embedding space. We would
like to highlight that here we are focusing mainly on visual
information to extract the relationships. This information
can in principle be coupled with knowledge bases ( i.e. [18])
and language models ( i.e. [31]) to further reﬁne the scores.
Table 4(Top) shows qualitative examples of the most and
least feasible compositions discovered by CompCos. As an
example, it correctly ranks browned tomato andsmall dog
as one of the most feasible compositions, while full nut and
blunt milk among the least feasible ones. Since the dataset
has a lot of food classes, we see that the top and bottom are
mostly populated by them. However, the presence of rele-
vant and irrelevant states with these objects is promising and
shows the potential of our feasibility estimation strategy.Table 4(Bottom) shows the top-3 most feasible compo-
sitions and bottom-3 least feasible compositions given ﬁve
randomly selected objects. These objects speciﬁc results
show a tendency of the model to relate feasibility scores
to the subgroups of classes. For instance, cooking states
are considered as unfeasible for standard objects ( e.g.diced
camera ) as well as atmospheric conditions ( e.g.sunny lap-
top). Similarly, states usually associated with substances
are considered unfeasible for animals ( e.g.runny cat ). At
the same time, size and ages are mostly linked with animals
(e.g.young dog ) while cooking states are correctly associ-
ated with food ( e.g.diced tomato ). Interestingly, the top
states for catare all present with dogas seen compositions,
thus the similarities between the two classes has been used
to transfer these states from dogtocat, following Eq. ( 3).
5. Conclusions
In this work, we propose a new benchmark for CZSL
that extends the problem from the closed world to an open
world where all the combinations of states and objects could
potentially exist. We show that state-of-the-art methods fall
short in this setting as the number of unseen compositions
signiﬁcantly increases. We argue that not all combinations
are valid classes but it is unrealistic to assume that test set
pairs are the only valid compositions. We propose a way to
model the feasibility of a state-object composition by using
the visual information available in the training set. This fea-
sibility is independent of an external knowledge base and
can be directly incorporated in the optimization process.
We propose a novel model, CompCos, that incorporates this
feasibility and achieves state-of-the-art performance in both
closed and open world on two real-world datasets.
Acknowledgments This work has been partially funded by
the ERC (853489 - DEXIM) and by the DFG (2064/1 –
Project number 390727645).
5229