ACTOR-CRITIC METHOD FOR HIGH DIMENSIONAL STATIC
HAMILTON{JACOBI{BELLMAN PARTIAL DIFFERENTIAL
EQUATIONS BASED ON NEURAL NETWORKS
MO ZHOUy, JIEQUN HANz,AND JIANFENG LUx
Abstract. We propose a novel numerical method for high dimensional Hamilton{Jacobi{
Bellman (HJB) type elliptic partial dierential equations (PDEs). The HJB PDEs, reformulated
as optimal control problems, are tackled by the actor-critic framework inspired by reinforcement
learning, based on neural network parametrization of the value and control functions. Within the
actor-critic framework, we employ a policy gradient approach to improve the control, while for the
value function, we derive a variance reduced least-squares temporal dierence method using sto-
chastic calculus. To numerically discretize the stochastic control problem, we employ an adaptive
step size scheme to improve the accuracy near the domain boundary. Numerical examples up to 20
spatial dimensions including the linear quadratic regulators, the stochastic Van der Pol oscillators,
the diusive Eikonal equations, and fully nonlinear elliptic PDEs derived from a regulator problem
are presented to validate the eectiveness of our proposed method.
Key words. Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equations; high dimensional partial dierential equa-
tions; stochastic control; actor-critic methods
1. Introduction. The Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation is an impor-
tant family of partial dierential equations (PDEs), given its connection with optimal
control problems that lead to a wide range of applications. The unknown in the
HJB equation can be viewed as the total expected value function for optimal control
problems. The equation can be derived from the dynamic programming principle
pioneered by Bellman [8], which gives a necessary and sucient condition of the opti-
mality. Theoretical results for the existence and uniqueness of the HJB equations are
well established; see, e.g., [68]. From the viewpoint of stochastic control, the relation-
ship between the viscosity solution of the HJB equations and the backward stochastic
dierential equations (BSDEs) is introduced in [14,52{55].
The wide applications of HJB equations call for ecient numerical algorithms.
Various numerical approaches have been developed in the literature, including the
monotone approximation scheme [3, 21], the nite volume method [60, 65], and the
Galerkin method [4, 5]. In [50], nonoscillatory schemes are developed to solve the
HJB equations exploring the connection with hyperbolic conservation laws. The HJB
equations related to reachability problems are studied in [42,45,46]. A general survey
for classical methods to solve the optimal control problem numerically can be found,
e.g., in [59]. While these conventional approaches have been quite successful, they fall
short for solving HJB equations in high dimensions due to the curse of dimensional-
ity [8]: the computational cost goes up exponentially with the dimensionality. Many
works attempt to mitigate this fundamental diculty by leveraging dimension reduc-
tion techniques such as proper orthogonal decomposition, sparse grid, pseudospectral
collocation, and tensor decomposition (see e.g., [16, 35, 36, 41, 51]). The performance
of these algorithms heavily depends on how well the low dimensional representation
Date: February 20, 2021. Please address correspondence to Jiequn Han or Jianfeng Lu.
Funding: The work of JL and MZ is supported in part by National Science Foundation via
grant DMS-2012286. The authors are grateful for computing time at the Terascale Infrastructure for
Groundbreaking Research in Science and Engineering (TIGRESS) of Princeton University.
yDepartment of Mathematics, Duke University (mo.zhou366@duke.edu).
zDepartment of Mathematics, Princeton University (jiequnhan@gmail.com).
xDepartment of Mathematics, Department of Physics, and Department of Chemistry, Duke Uni-
versity (jianfeng@math.duke.edu).
1arXiv:2102.11379v2  [math.OC]  6 Jan 2022