2 MO ZHOU, JIEQUN HAN, AND JIANFENG LU
matches the solutions, and is typically problem dependent and thus with limited ap-
plicability.
To better address the challenge of high dimensionality, a promising direction
is to consider the articial neural network as a more 
exible and ecient function
approximation tool. This topic has received a considerable amount of attention and
been a rapidly developing eld in recent years. Several numerical approaches for high
dimensional PDEs based on neural network parametrization have been proposed; see
e.g., the reviews [6,20] and references therein.
For HJB type equations and related optimal control problems, the most tightly
connected approach to our work is the deep BSDE method [19,27], which reformulates
parabolic PDEs as control problems using BSDEs, and uses deep neural network
parametrization for the solution and control to solve this problem. Theoretical results
for convergence of this method are studied in [28]. The deep BSDE method and its
variants have been applied to solve HJB type equations, stochastic control problems,
and dierential games (see e.g., [13, 19, 24, 26, 27, 32, 34, 40, 49, 56, 58]). Numerical
algorithms for solving high dimensional deterministic and stochastic control problems
based on other forms combined with deep learning approximation have also been
investigated in [7,18,25,48].
While some methods mentioned above have been successful in solving PDEs in
high dimensions, there have been two issues that remain to be addressed. On the
one hand, most of these works concern parabolic PDEs of nite time horizon (often
of order one), while only a few works investigate the static elliptic HJB equations
corresponding to control problems with innite time horizon. On the other hand,
most existing works consider equations where the optimal controls are explicitly known
given the value function or without controls, while there are many important HJB
type equations for which the optimal control is cast through an optimization problem
and hence implicit. Recently, an algorithm for a high dimensional nite-time horizon
stochastic control problem with implicit optimal control is considered in [33], based on
the deep BSDE formulation associated with the stochastic maximum principle. In this
paper, we take a dierent approach and focus on solving the static elliptic type HJB
equation with implicit control, in which the above two challenges are compounded.
Our proposed numerical method is heavily inspired by the literature on reinforce-
ment learning (RL) [63], which is of course closely related to control problems. Our
motivation for borrowing techniques from RL is due to the impressive revolution and
great success in recent years in deep RL by utilizing neural network parametriza-
tion [17, 47, 61]. In the RL context, the control problem is usually formulated as a
Markov decision process (MDP) on discrete time and state space. If the model is
given, nding the optimal policy can be viewed as solving a discrete HJB equation.
It is then natural to ask whether algorithms developed in the RL context can be
generalized to the context of solving high dimensional HJB equations.
In this paper, we reformulate the HJB type fully nonlinear elliptic PDEs into
stochastic control problems and leverage the actor-critic framework in conjunction
with a neural network approximation to solve the equations. The actor-critic methods
are a class of algorithms in RL [63]. These algorithms iteratively evaluate and improve
the current policies (i.e., controls) until nal convergence. The critic refers to the
value function of a given policy. The process of estimating the critic is called policy
evaluation. The most common algorithms for policy evaluation are temporal dierence
(TD) methods [10, 39, 64], or their variants, such as the TD( ) [15] and the least-
squares TD (LSTD) [11,43,57]. The actor refers to the policy function, and we need
to make policy improvement based on a given value function. In this case, the most