91:22 F.Jahan et al.
erroneous control commands, and actuator attacks could directly alter the control com-
mands. Kwon et al. ( 2013) modeled the stealthy deception attack and analyzed the security of a
cyber-physical system in case of a deception attack on sensors, actuators, or both, which causes
anunboundestimationerrorwithoutbeingdetectedbythemonitoringsystemusingasteady-state
KalmanFilter.Theyextendedtheirworktomodeladirectcontrolacquisitionattackandonboard
navigation attack, which includes individual as well as combined stealthy deception attacks on
Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) and GPS. They further proposed a real-time safety assessment
algorithm to verify the safety of the UAV subject to cyberattacks based on reachability analy-
sis (Kwon et al. 2016). Su et al. ( 2016) define the UAV model under a GPS spoofing attack where
falsifieddatacouldbeinjectedintothenavigationcomponenteitherthroughaGPSsignalsimula-
tor or by injecting a data level GPS spoofing attack in a hacked onboard navigation system. They
formulated a real-time manipulation method for the UAV under the GPS spoofing attack to drive
the UAV toward a malicious destination without triggering the fault detector, and computed the
attainablelocationsetof theUAVundersuchattacks.
Decision-makingtheorieshavealsobeenusedbymanyresearcherstomodelattackstrategiesas
games(BhattacharyaandBasar 2010;Merricketal. 2016;Sanjabetal. 2017;SourabhBhattacharya
andTamerBasar 2012).BhattacharyaandBasar( 2010)analyzedthecoordinationofmultipleUAVs
incaseofajammingattackonthecommunicationchannelbyanaerialjammerandmodeledthis
scenario as a zero-sum pursuit-evasive game. A zero-sum network interdiction game between a
vendorofadeliverydroneandattackerwasmodeledusingtheprospecttheory(Sanjabetal. 2017).
Here,theattacker’sobjectivewastopreventthegoodsdeliverydronefromtakingtheoptimalpath
from thewarehouseto thecustomer’slocationchosenby thevendor.
6 DISCUSSION
The technological world is progressing from smart gadgets to smart homes, smart vehicles, and
smartcities.Therehavebeensomereal-worldattacksexploitingthevulnerabilitiesofthecurrent
cyber-physicalsystemsandnetwork.Withtheadvancementintechnologiestowardautonomous
systems, the rate of attacks is bound to increase. It has become more important than ever before
that the security challenges and concerns related to autonomous systems are addressed in the
development phaseitself.
Inthisarticle,westartedwithaglimpseintothehistoricalevolutionofautonomyandthepro-
gressive work done in this broad field. An idea of the background behind complex topics always
clearsthequestionsofhowandwhenfornewresearchers,andgivesacomprehensiveunderstand-
ing of the subject. The different approaches to implement autonomy in intelligent systems could
be a good start to thinking about how the system’s autonomy is going to work. A supervisory
approachcanverywellbeusedforrobotsthatwouldneedsupervisionatsomepointthroughthe
task completion process. A goal-driven autonomy could be applied to driverless cars. Depending
uponthetrafficsituationorroadblocks,itcouldalteritsroutetothedestination.Itcoulddecideto
pickupafellowriderina“Share-a-Ride”businessmodelwhileonitswaytodropoffitscustomer
and update its goal. The mixed-initiative approach is also one of the better approaches toward
autonomyinasemi-autonomouscar.Thesmoothtransferofcontrolbetweenthevehicleandthe
driver is a challenge and a topic of further research where each can take control if one feels that
other is not in a situation to make a better decision. For example, if the driver is sleepy or in a
drunken state, the car can take control of the driving. In a weather condition like heavy rain or
a blizzard, it would be difficult to rely on optical sensors. In such a scenario, the car will not be
in a good state to be driven autonomously, and the driver should take control of the vehicle to
avoid mishaps. In the same scenario, an autonomous vehicle with sliding scale autonomy would
loweritsautonomyandgivemorecontroltotheuser,andastheweatherclears,itcouldtakeback
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.