Security Modelingof Autonomous Systems: A Survey 91:19
—Robots:Gage(1985)wasthefirstworktopresentagenericmodelofanautonomousrobot
related to security modeling. Recently, some industrial researchers presented the architec-
ture of an industrial robot for security and threat modeling. In this architecture, a pro-
grammer communicates with the robot controller over the network, which, in turn, sends
the command signals to the sensors and actuators of the robot to accomplish the assigned
task(Maggi et al. 2017).
5.1.2 Analytical Model. Each autonomous system has some unique system dynamics, and a
generalizedstudyofsuchsystemscouldbelimitedtostandardparts.Goppertetal.( 2012)modeled
the dynamics of a UAV system using JSBSim and Scios for the control, guidance, and navigation
system of the UAV, which was used to simulate the response of the UAVs to several identified
cyberattackssuchasafuzzingattackanddigitalupdaterateattack,whereanincreasedsampling
rate would make the system unstable. Some of the works describe a UAV as a linear transitional
time-invariant dynamic system with zero-mean Gaussian white noise and a constant co-variance
matrix (Kwon et al. 2016;S ue ta l . 2016). Authors have also used game theory to describe the
kinematicmodelofaUAVusingvariablestoexpressthe3-Dcoordinateframe(Bhattacharyaand
Basar2010).Guoetal.( 2017)modeledamobilerobotasanonlineardiscrete-timedynamicsystem
where the robot states evolve from xk−1toxkafter the robot actuators execute the command
generatedbytheplanner.
5.2 Threat Modeling
Threat modeling is a process of identifying and understanding the threats to a system and then
defining countermeasures to mitigate the threats. Not only does it helps to visualize the system
model through potential adversaries’ eyes, but it also helps to evaluate security risks and coun-
termeasures in the case of possible attacks (Oladimeji et al. 2006). Envisioning potential threats
is a daunting task. Modeling strategies like STRIDE (Spoofing, Tampering, Repudiation, Informa-
tion Disclosure, Denial of Service, and Elevation of Privilege) can help to analyze the data flow
throughthesystem(Madanetal. 2016).AnotherthreatmodelingapproachisPersonaNon-Grata
thatfocuseson attackers,theirmotivations,andabilities(Shull 2016).
AnalyzingeachpartofthesystemforadifferentaspectofsecuritybyfollowingtheCIAmodel
(Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability) lays the foundation for researchers to identify certain at-
tacks(Javaidetal. 2012).Astechnologyadvances,sodotheattackers’strategiesandattackvectors
(TomasFoltyn 2018).BasedonthevulnerabilitiesoftheUAV’sauto-pilot,threatsindifferentcom-
ponents and the effect on the proper functioning of the UAV were analyzed in Kim et al. ( 2012).
These were preliminary works in this field that lacked identification of hardware vulnerabilities
orinsiderthreatstothesystem.Anothergroupofresearchersdevelopedathreatmodelforsmart
devicegroundcontrolstation(aportablehand-heldgroundcontrolstationsforUAVs)thatallows
soldiers to pilot UAVs in the battlefield. The key components addressed in the model are attack
motivation,vulnerabilitiesinthesesystems,cybersecuritythreats,andmitigationstepsincaseof
attacksonthesedevices(Mansfieldetal. 2013).Theypresentedariskanalysissummaryofthreats
andtheirimpactbasedonhardware,software,communicationnetwork,andhumanerrors.Similar
discussionbasedonpoliciestodefendagainstCIAthreatsinthecontextofunmannedautonomous
systems has been done in Madan et al. ( 2016) along with threat modeling and risk analysis using
the STRIDE approach. Some software products like Microsoft Threat Modeling Tool and Threat-
Modeler automate threat modeling, with the latter offering more sophisticated features (Beyst
2016).
The study of cybersecurity issues in robotics is also gaining pace in academia and industries.
Mostpreliminaryworkintheidentificationofdirectandindirectthreatstoroboticsystemscould
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.