Security Modelingof Autonomous Systems: A Survey 91:17
Fig. 4. Statistics of the number of devices connected worldwide from 2015 to 2025 (in billions) published in
Statista,2016 (Statista 2018). Note: Datais aforecast from 2017–2025.
As big data, machine learning, and Blockchain technologies advance alongside the innovation
of IoT devices, it would be sooner than expected that these devices would achieve autonomy at
the level of human actors (Industry 2017). Future IoT infrastructures should be able to support
heterogeneous platforms, locations, and environments. For smart and reliable autonomous IoT
infrastructures, it should be easily scalable via decentralized management mechanisms and self-
adaptingtothechangesintheenvironmentalcontext(KyriazisandVarvarigou 2013).Moreover,it
shouldsupportconfidentialityandpreventpersonalinformationinfringement,allowingtheusers
tokeeptheirconfidentialdata“in-house.”Forexample,anAIoTwouldrangefromthesmartpantry
forautomaticinventorytrackingorwashingmachinesthatwouldorderdetergentoncethesupply
isabouttofinish(UniversityofNottingham-MixedRealityLaboratory 2016).Again,sincethisarea
itself calls for further research, cybersecurity and privacy of data should be one of the primary
goals in the architectural design of such a network. For sure, a list of cyberattacks that could be
performedonIoTdevices (Abdul-Ghani etal. 2018)would beapplicableonAIoTdevices aswell.
4.5 Swarms
An emerging area of research is swarm robotics. It is directly inspired by nature where, for ex-
ample, a swarm of insects or a flock of birds perform tasks beyond individual capabilities. It has
foundapplicationsinvariedareas(Sahin 2005)suchasdetectinglivesindisasterrescuemissions,
an inspection of industrial machinery (Correll and Martinoli 2009), mapping agricultural fields
(Albani et al. 2017), and monitoring for undesired environmental events. Swarm robotics is much
researched for military applications as well. Since individual entities that make the swarm are
dispensableandredundant,theycanbeappliedinminingorplacesdangerous/inaccessibletohu-
mans. Also, swarms of robots can complete a particular task faster than an individual robot as
they are self-organized and work in parallel with a distributed command and control structure of
communication.
Currently,researchersmainlyfocusonmodelingmethodsandalgorithmsofswarmroboticsof
flocking,foraging(WinfieldandT. 2010),navigating,andsearchingapplications(Haqueetal. 2018;
Tan, Ying and Zheng 2013). The papers of Higgins et al. ( 2009) and Sharma and Bagla ( 2009)a r e
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.