91:10 F.Jahan et al.
suggestsafive-levelcontrolhierarchyforautonomousmobilerobotstospeedupcommunications
and controlin thehierarchylevels.
3.2.6 Policy-based Approach. Policies are a set of guidelines defined by the designer that an
autonomous system must abide by in any given situation. They are permissions given to the au-
tonomous system for the adjustment of autonomy in changing operational environment without
changing the code. Such an approach increases the trust of the user in the system as he/she can
setboundsonthesystembasedonhiscompetencylevel.Moreover,apolicy-basedapproachpro-
vides re-usability, efficiency, extensibility, context-sensitivity, verifiability, protection from mal-
ware, poorly-designed or buggy agents, and reasoning about agent’s behavior (Bradshaw et al.
2004b).Onesuchworkbasedonpoliciesisthedrivingmissionforthehuman-robotteam(DeBrun
etal.2008)inwhichoneofthepoliciescouldbe“iftheroadisslippery,thehumanshoulddrive.”
AnotherexampleistheElectricElves,amulti-agentsystemactingasapersonalassistanttoagroup
ofresearchersfortheirdailyactivitiessuchasordering,schedulingmeetings,selectingpresenters
intheresearchgroup,andorganizinglunchmeetings.Thissystemisbasedonpoliciestothestrate-
gictransferofcontrol(Scerrietal. 2003).TheKnowledgeableAgent-orientedSystem(KAoS)isan
example of platform-independent policy services (Bradshaw et al. 2003) used in areas like model-
ing human-machine team, military, and space applications (Bradshaw et al. 2004a), which enable
users to define policies of autonomous systems or agents that govern the autonomy and adjust
themdynamicallysothatthesystemcouldadapttothechangingsituation(Bradshawetal. 2005).
3.2.7 Goal-driven Approach. It is a conceptual model to build an autonomous agent that ob-
serves a set of expectations during the execution of a plan, detects discrepancies if they occur,
details the reasons of failures, and creates new goals to pursue if the execution of a current plan
fails(Weberetal. 2012).Itincorporatesamodelforgoalreasoningandhasbeenappliedinvarious
domainssuchasrespondingtounexpectedeventsinstrategysimulations(Klenketal. 2013),Star-
Craftgameforstrategicplanning,andsoon.Agroupofresearchersdemonstratedthisconceptual
framework through Autonomous Response to Unexpected Events (ARTUE) in a navy training
simulation—Tactical Action Officer (TAO) Sandbox—and showed that it could perform well in a
complexdynamicenvironment(Molineauxetal. 2010).PreliminaryworksbyWilsonetal.( 2016)
showthatagoal-drivenautonomousunderwatervehiclecansuccessfullydetectapotentiallyhos-
tile surfacevehiclewhenpursuinga different goalof surveyinga bayarea.
3.2.8 Collaborative Approach. Incollaborativeautonomy,multipleindividualagents,eachhav-
ingtheirownspecificindividualtasktocomplete,collaboratetoservetowardcompletingahigher
collectivegoal.Themultipleindividualagentsformacomplexsystemwhoseautonomyisdecided
based on the autonomous actions of the collective individual agents depending on sharing infor-
mation and goals (Dufrene 2005). A conceptual example of this approach could be seen in the
system design for Mars exploration with a UAV and a ground vehicle in collaboration. The goal
is that UAV would have the capability to dock to a charging station on the ground rover without
humanintervention.Thegroundroverwouldserveasamobile-basethatwouldprovidecharging,
communication,and dockingcapabilitiestotheUAV(Lacerda etal. 2018).
3.3 Current Trends
Inrecentyears,theresearchfocushasmovedtoimplementadjustableautonomyintherealworld,
and other more challenging areas such as transfer-of-control, goal reasoning, deliberation, and
collaboration with multiple heterogeneous agents and individuals. Companies like Google and
Nissan are predictedto launchtheir self-driving cars by 2020,while GM’s Cruiseand Waymo are
notbehind.AlthoughcarslikeTesla,Navya,andothershaveadvancedautonomousfeatures,there
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.