91:2 F. Jahan et al.
already begun, and the self-driving technology has been embraced by Tesla, Uber, and Waymo
(McBride 2018). Robots will soon be integrated into our lives as a home assistant, a pet (Dormehl
2017),or afriend like Sophia(theAI)(Galeon 2017).
Theprimaryobjectivetodevelopanautonomoussystemistocollaboratewithhumansandas-
sisttheminvarioustasks.Thesetaskscouldbetheonesthatrequire:precisionsuchassurgeries;
operation in challenging and life-threatening situations, such as space exploration, search and
rescuemissions,ornuclearpowerplants;orassistancetoeldersathome.However,improperim-
plementationormaliciousintentmayleadtodisasters.AnincidentwasreportedinaSanFrancisco
mallwhereapatrollingrobotfailedtorecognizeatoddlerandaccidentallyattackedhim(Kashmir
Hill2016). Recently, a self-driving Uber vehicle was caught up in a fatal accident (Wakabayashi
2018).Armedandautonomousweaponsaremanufacturedbyhigh-techmilitaryorganizationsin
the USA, China, and South Korea. Sci-Fi novels and movies like “I, Robot” and “Terminator” have
created a negative image and fear for these systems that they may go against humans and harm
them.Thereisanongoingcampaignagainstkillerrobots(fullyautonomousweapons)thatwould
have complete decision controls on their target (CCW 2018). If malicious users hack or control
suchsystemsbyexploitingtheirvulnerabilities,machinesturningagainsthumanswouldnotjust
be concepts and scenes from movies. These autonomous systems are still in the evolving stage.
Analyzing the security and safety issues associated with these machines and thoroughly testing
thembeforetheyaremade partof ourlives (Caughill 2017;Galeon2017)becomeessential.
The researchers from different focus groups have put a lot of effort to bring us to the current
level of understandingregardingautonomy.Inthelast fewyears,excellentsurveysonautonomy
havebeenpublished(Baxteretal. 2012;Beeretal. 2014;Mostafaetal. 2017).Goodrichetal.( 2007)
presentedan overview of human-robot interaction(HRI).Huanghas describedautonomy related
terminologies and jargon in Huang ( 2004). Level of trust could be a significant factor in deciding
theautonomylevelsinautonomoussystems—discussedinShahrdaretal.( 2017).However,tothe
best of our knowledge, the research community lacks literature that discusses the cybersecurity
of autonomous systems in general. The primary objective of this work is to provide an in-depth
study of cybersecurity modeling of different classes of autonomous systems. The work can help
carry out further research on the security modeling of a generalized autonomous system archi-
tecture. In addition, we discuss the historical evolution of the concepts and factors that define
autonomyanditslevels.Ingeneral,theterm“autonomy”discussestherepresentationandimple-
mentationofitslevelsdeterminedbyfactorsandfunctionalityofthesystemfrombeingmanualto
fully-autonomous and in-between. Having a perspective of the application domain and the scope
of implementation may provide a different look to the security modeling of these systems. The
following are the key contributions of the article toward the body of knowledge on autonomous
systems:
—Adiscussionon thehistoricalevolution ofautonomy and thecurrenttrendsin thisarea,
—Adiscussiononthecybersecurityofthesesystemsthatarebeingexploredinindustryand
academiaalike,
—Threats,vulnerabilities,andattackmodelingof variousautonomoussystems.
Thisarticleisorganizedasfollows.Section 3reflectsonthehistoricalevolutionofautonomy,ap-
proaches, and current trends in this domain. Section 4discusses cybersecurity issues related to
thesesystems.Section 5discussesthesystemmodelingalongwiththreats,vulnerabilities,andat-
tacksmodeling.Section 6summarizestheoverallconceptofthearticle.Finally,wediscusssomeof
theresearchchallengesandfuturedirectionsinSection 7andconcludeinSection 8.Thecomplete
structureofthearticleisshownin Figure 1.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.