91:4 F. Jahan et al.
Table 1. Keywords Used
Core Concepts Primarykeywords
Autonomy autonomoussystems,level of automation(LoA),autonomy
approaches,U XVs,driverlesscars,
ArtificialIntelligence robots,softwareagents,IoT
Human MachineTeaming swarms,transferof control
Autonomous SystemModeling analyticaland theoreticalsystemmodeling; threats,
vulnerabilities,andattackmodeling
Autonomous SystemSecurity DDoS,jamming, ransomware,stealthydeceptionattack
Secondarykeywords
supervisorycontrol,mixed-initiative, goal-driven,
collaborativecontrol,sliding scale,hierarchical,healthcare,
home-assistants,industrialrobots
—cybersecurityof anautonomoussystem
—modelingof anautonomoussystem,vulnerabilities,threats,and attacks
We further refined the selected articles using primary and secondary keywords for each section.
We identified the theoretical and analytical security modeling of the autonomous systems and
carriedoutanotherleveloffiltrationtoobtainthemostappropriateresearchwork.Experimental
modelingandevaluationofthesesystemswerebeyondourscopeofresearch.Hundredsofarticles
were narrowed out in the search process based on the keywords and objectives. Out of these, a
total of 88 articles were considered to discuss the cybersecurity of the autonomous systems and
26 articlesto discussthecybersecuritymodelingof thesesystems.
2.3 Limitations
A fundamental constraint that we found during the review process is the lack of literature that
discusses the security of individual as well as generalized autonomous systems. The study of cy-
bersecurity is new in this domain and so is its implementation. This resulted in a limited number
of primary articles reviewed for the security and modeling sections of the survey. The discussion
focuses on the security of three autonomous systems (Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), robots
and driverless cars) that are worth a detailed review because of their popularity. Swarms are an
extensionofthesesystems,andAutonomousInternetofThings(AIoT)isanewconceptyettobe
explored.Webelieveinhavingstudiedthemostapplicableworksavailableinthisareaofresearch.
3 HISTORICAL EVOLUTION OF AUTONOMY, APPROACHES, ANDCURRENT
TRENDS
3.1 HistoricalEvolution
In the last few decades, concepts and modeling of automation have evolved considerably. Fields
such as HRI, Human Machine Teaming (HMT), AI, and Unmanned Systems (UMS) share the
concepts of autonomy. As with many inconceivable technologies of the current era, the ideation
of such systems can be dated back to religious myths (Origins 2013), poets (Homer n.d.; Yeats
1933), artists (Rosheim 2006), and storytellers (Wiener and Others 1964), thereby materializing
into remote-controlled inventions (Turi 2014a,2014b), movies (Wold and Staff 2015; ZDNet
2018), and science fiction literature (Newitz 2013). With the advancement in associated areas and
state-of-the-art technologies like robot mechanics, sensors and actuators, processors, navigation
and communication, the definition and levels of autonomy (LoA) have gone through multiple
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.