91:18 F.Jahan et al.
early works on considering security challenges in swarm robotics and analyzing possible threats
to the swarms. They also compare the specific characteristics of the swarms with other similar
systems such as multi-robots, multi-agent systems, mobile sensor networks, and Mobile Ad hoc
Network(MANET).Thisareaofresearchisstillraw,andnotmuchworkhasbeendonerelatedto
individualattacksontheswarmroboticnetwork.
5 MODELING SYSTEM,VULNERABILITIES, THREATS, ANDATTACKS
It is of utmost importance to have a clear picture of what an autonomous system can do, when it
needs to send an alarm signal to the user, when it must transfer the control altogether, or when
it is under attack. At the same time, the operator should also be aware of the cues the system is
sending.Researchershavetriedtomodeldifferentaspectsofthesystemusingdifferenttechniques.
Fromasecuritypointofview,itisessentialtoanalyzethesystemmodeltofindthevulnerabilities
and threats to each part of the system, which can be further utilized to create an attack model.
Theseareashavebeenstudied,andvarioustheoreticalandanalyticalmodelshavebeenproposed.
We have tried to capture these works concerning UAVs, robots, and driverless cars as these au-
tonomous systemsarewidely beingresearchedand incorporatedintotherealworld.
5.1 SystemModeling
System modeling describes an abstract view of a system, ignoring its details. It can be used to
illustrate the functions, behavior, or architecture of the system without going into other details.
It reflects how the system reacts at certain events or how it communicates with sub-parts and its
environment.
5.1.1 Theoretical Model.
—UAVs: Significant parts of a UAV architecture, which make up the guidance, navigation,
and control systems, have been described in Kim et al. ( 2012). Modeling a UAV from the
communication network perspective has been discussed in Javaid et al. ( 2012), detailing
communicationamongvariousmodules.Themodeldescribedinthepaperhassixmodules
starting from the data acquisition module, which collects data from the sensors and sends
the required information to respective modules such as altitude data to the Altitude and
Heading Reference System (AHRS) module, and camera data to the telemetry module. The
navigation module provides PNT information while the control module sends speed and
orientation control signals to actuators of the system. These systems also have a data log-
ging module that logs flight details such as PNT data to keep track of the missions and for
further analysis in case of failure. Another work proposed a hierarchical model for coor-
dinatedcontrol of multiple UAVsand used differential game theoryfor collision avoidance
andformation controlas apursuit-evasivegame (Vachtsevanosand Reimann 2004).
—Autonomous Vehicles : DARPA Urban Challenge accelerated the research for full-sized
autonomousvehicles.AteamfromMITwasoneofthemwhocompletedtherace.Theydis-
cussedtheirautonomousvehiclearchitectureinLeonardetal.( 2008)wheretherequirement
wastoperceiveandnavigatearoadnetworksegmentinaGPS-deniedandhighlydynamic
environment. Another team designed the autonomous vehicle based on the “Sense-Plan-
Act”modelofanautonomoussystem(Urmsonetal. 2007).Basedontheseworks,Guoetal.
modeled a mobile robot system that consists of a robotic platform and a planner to detect
sensorandactuatorattacks.Sensorsaretheeyesandearsofanautonomoussystemtothe
outsideworldwhileactuatorscanbecomparedtothelimbsthatexecutecontrolcommands
transmittedby thesensors(Guo etal. 2017).
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.