91Security Modeling of Autonomous Systems: A Survey
FARHAJAHANand WEIQING SUN, Universityof Toledo
QUAMAR NIYAZ, PurdueUniversityNorthwest
MANSOOR ALAM, Universityof Toledo
Autonomoussystemswillsoonbeintegratingintoourlivesashomeassistants,deliverydrones,anddriverless
cars.Theimplementationofthelevelofautomationinthesesystemsfrombeingmanuallycontrolledtofully
autonomouswoulddependupontheautonomyapproachchosentodesignthesesystems.Thisarticlereviews
the historical evolution of autonomy, its approaches, and the current trends in related fields to build robust
autonomous systems. Toward such a goal and with the increased number of cyberattacks, the security of
these systems needs special attention from the research community. To gauge the extent to which research
has been done in this area, we discuss the cybersecurity of these systems.It is essential to model the system
from a security perspective, identify the threats and vulnerabilities, and then model the attacks. A survey in
thisdirectionexploresthetheoretical/analyticalsystemandattackmodelsthathavebeenproposedoverthe
years andidentifies the research gap that needs tobeaddressedby theresearch community.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies →Modeling and simulation ;Model development and
analysis;•Computer systems organization →Robotic autonomy ;Evolutionary robotics ;•Security
and privacy →Systems security ; Security services; • Human-centered computing →Human computer
interaction(HCI) ;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Cybersecurity, modeling, autonomous system (AS), Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UAVs),driverless car,robots
ACM Reference format:
FarhaJahan,WeiqingSun,QuamarNiyaz,andMansoorAlam.2019.SecurityModelingofAutonomousSys-
tems:ASurvey. ACM Comput.Surv. 52,5, Article 91(September 2019), 34 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3337791
1 INTRODUCTION
With the advancement in the field of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) in the
last few decades, the increased usage of autonomous systems is evident in almost every domain.
Thedesignanddevelopmentofautonomousvehiclesinseveraldevelopedcountriestoeasetrans-
portation is no secret. On the other hand, domains such as agriculture, healthcare, military, and
spaceexplorationhavefoundmanyusecasesforthesesystems.Thedriverlesscarrevolutionhas
Authors’ addresses: F. Jahan, W. Sun, and M. Alam, University of Toledo, Toledo, OH, 43606; emails: farha.jahan@
rockets.utoledo.edu, {weiqing.sun, mansoor.alam2}@utoledo.edu; Q. Niyaz, Purdue University Northwest, Hammond, IN,
46323;email:qniyaz@pnw.edu.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee.Request permissions from permissions@acm.org .
© 2019Association forComputingMachinery.
0360-0300/2019/09-ART91$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3337791
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.