91:6 F. Jahan et al.
survivability was autonomy (DC 2001). Within the next decade, ongoing research and goals of
the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) were to demonstrate the autonomous capability of
level8outof10basedonautonomouscapabilitylevel(ACL)metrics(Clough 2002).TheNational
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) realized the need for some standard definitions
for autonomous levels based on system specifications and performance measurements. They
assembled an ad hoc group for the generic framework development of unmanned systems’
autonomy level specification called Autonomy Levels for Unmanned Systems (ALFUS) (Huang
et al.2003a).Theresultsoftheirvariousworkshopsinclude:
—acompletelist of terminologiesand definitions(Huang 2004),
—a set of metrics for ALFUS detailed model identifying “mission complexity, environmental
difficulty,andHRI”asthecombinationoffactorsindicatingLoA(Huangetal. 2003b,2004a,
2004b),
—an executive model showing general trends in the transitions of levels of aforementioned
factors(Huangetal. 2005),and
—illustrating applications of ALFUS in military, homeland security, and manufacturing
(Huang2007).
Meanwhile, research communities were moving toward “adjustable autonomy” where the hu-
man user, autonomous system, or another system itself can adjust the LoA during the operation.
Afterthecomebackfromasevere“AIwinter”(Cognilytica 2018),AIcreatedaboominintelligent
and smart systems such as smartphones, smart home appliances, and assisted technologies. In AI
research domain, these intelligent autonomous systems are referred to as “agents.” Research in
the areas of adaptive and advanced interfaces facilitated the easy deployment and operations of
adjustableautonomousagentsprovidingmultiplechannelsofcommunicationbetweenthehuman
user and the system such as gestures, voice, and touch. Social acceptability, trust, reliability, mu-
tual situation awareness, coordination of tasks among users and agents, and transfer of control
strategies formed the elements of the new set of concerns for the researchers along with safety
and robustness. Efforts were made to include these variables in the LoA framework (Beer et al.
2014).
Insummary,industrialandacademicresearchonroboticsandautomationstartedinthe1950s.
However, the progress was slow for more than a decade due to the lack of proper understanding
and implementation of autonomy; trained operators that had good situational awareness in case
of failures; and resources such as high-computing processors, cameras, and sensors. Supervisory
controladvancedtoadaptiveandadjustableautonomy.AsummaryofvarioustaxonomyforLoA
that various researchers proposed over the years, listed in Table 2, shows the work done to over-
comethechallengesraisedbydesignapproachesofautonomoussystems.Researchadvancement
intheareasofAIandHMTalsopavedthewayformoretrustandsocialacceptancetowardthese
systems.
3.2 ApproachesofAutonomy
ThechallengesinanautonomoussystemarehowtoimplementtheLoAandwhowouldhavethe
controltoadjustitandinwhatscenarios.Itwouldfundamentallymeanwhat,when,who,andhow
the necessary actions need to be taken. Various works have been done to recognize the balance
between the flexibility of control over the autonomy levels such that HMT outperforms either
the human or machine working alone. Comparative studies were also done to test the efficiency,
robustness, and workload in various modes of an autonomy spectrum (Heger and Singh 2006;
Hegeretal. 2005).Asystematicliteraturereviewonadjustableautonomyhasbeendone(Mostafa
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.