91:20 F.Jahan et al.
Fig.5. Vulnerabilities of anautopilot systemreproducedfromKimet al.( 2012).
befoundinGage( 1985).Gagediscusseddirectthreatsonthesensor,actuator,communicationnet-
work, and processing elements along with some derived threats. Cornelius et al. ( 2017) identified
four threat vectors in a mobile service robot: attacks on sensor data, hardware attacks, software
attacks,andattacksoninfrastructure.WhileClarketal.( 2017)discussescyberthreatstorobotsat
“hardware, firmware/OS, and application levels,” Lera et al. ( 2017) models cybersecurity threats,
risks, and safety issues of using robots. They grouped the threats based on the origin of attack
(natural, accidental, or intentional), the target (physical, cyber, or both), the impact on robot and
external entities, and the risk associated with them. Threat scenarios based on the vulnerabilities
found in the security analysis of an industrial robot have been discussed in Maggi et al. ( 2017).
An attacker could alter the production outcome, introduce defects in the products, cause physi-
cal damage to the robot, or cause harm to coworkers. They can also be used as an entry point to
extract companysensitivedataor hackedtoperformransomwareattacks.
5.3 VulnerabilityModeling
Kim et al. ( 2012) identified control system security and application logic security as the two vul-
nerabilities of an autopilot system in UAVs and categorized the identified threats under them, as
s h o w ni nF i g u r e 5. In control system vulnerability, the attackers exploit the vulnerabilities in the
hardware or software programs such as buffer overflow attack and malware installation. Attacks
inwhichmanipulatedinputdataarefedintothecontrolsystemsexploittheapplicationlogicvul-
nerability such as GPS spoofing and automatic dependent surveillance-broadcast (ADS-B) attack.
ThemodeofcommunicationamongUAVsorwithgroundcontrolstationisoverwirelesscommu-
nication networks. It widens the grounds for cyber-physical attacks ranging from the disruption
of communication links to the capture and use of one of the UAVs as an adversary. In Behzadan
(2017), the author emphasized on the vulnerabilities of different layers (physical layer, link layer,
network layer) of a communication network of UAVs. Krishna and Murphy ( 2017)r e v i e w e dt h e
cybervulnerabilitiesof UAVsbasedon recentrealand simulatedattacks.
There are more than 100 built-in or installed Electronic Control Units (ECUs) within a mod-
ern car, listed in Koscher et al. ( 2010), to control and regulate various functions of the vehicle.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.