91:24 F.Jahan et al.
and attack modeling of a few widely researched autonomous systems, which show how much
work has been done in these areas. Our insight into these discussions is that cybersecurity and
modeling of individual autonomous systems are at a very early stage. As per our findings and
to the best of our knowledge, UAV is the most active field of research concerning the system
modelingandattackscenarios.SystemmodelingofautonomousvehiclesstartedwiththeDARPA
challenge.Whilelotsofworkrelatedtonetworksecurityofvehicle-to-vehicle(V2V)andvehicle-
to-infrastructure(V2I)VANETnetworkhasbeendone,themodelingofthreatandattackvectorsof
autonomous vehicles needs lots of attention. Identification of vulnerabilities and threats on robot
security started very recently, which can be inferred from Table 6, as most of the work on robot
securitywaspublishedin2017.Thereisavastscopeofresearchandsimulation/implementationin
theseareas.Ageneralizedstudyonthecybersecurityoftheseindividualsystemscouldbeanarea
of research. New modeling techniques like game theory and machine learning could be applied
intheseareasaswell.Also,theautonomyapproachshouldbetakenintoaccountwhilemodeling
threatsandattackscenariosfor theseautonomoussystems.
7 RESEARCHCHALLENGESANDFUTURE DIRECTIONS
To ensure and assure that these systems are safe and secure to be used by humans, a new ap-
proachtowardcybersecurityandautonomyisneeded.Theresearchcommunityinthisarealacks
algorithmic solutionstoaddress:
—uncertaintiesin modeling
—securityof autonomoussystemsfrommaliciousattacks
—accomplishinghighergoals throughcooperationandcollaboration
Autonomy is a dynamic property that needs to adapt to varying unknown situations, depending
on the mission complexity. We need a resilient system that performs well over its lifetime. Rig-
orous mathematical modeling could provide a basis for a framework that would help in the early
development study of various capabilities, factors, and tradeoffs between human interaction and
machineautomation.Itcouldfurtherbeusedinthedevelopmentofanautonomyassessmenttool,
keepingfactorslikesecurityinmind.Thoughwearemovingaheadtowardanautonomousfuture,
therearemanyresearchchallengesthatresearcheshavetoface.Wehavetriedtosummarizeafew
of themasfollows:
—BuildingHumanTrust: AfterUber’sself-drivingcarcrashin2018,asurveyperformedby
Statistashowsthattrustinself-drivingcarsdroppedto27%(FelixRichter 2018).Thisisthe
most intimidating challenge the developer of autonomous systems is about to face. While
these systems promise a more comfortable and efficient life, safety and security measures
needtobetakenbeforedeploymentamongthepublic.Theworldshouldbereadyinlegal,
social, economic, and ethical context before these systems are incorporated in our lives,
as failures of these systems are inevitable at some point in time, either through known or
unknown causes. The trust in these systems could only be built by thorough analysis and
testing.Theserviceprovidersandmanufacturersofthesesystemsshouldbestringentwhen
talkingaboutsecurityandbe readywithcountermeasureswhenitis compromised.
—Diverse Training Dataset : Autonomous systems need to be trained on a large, diverse,
and complete dataset to be secure and safe. A simulated dataset is incomplete as it fails to
capture critical conditions in the real world. Its relevancy and integrity are questionable
as it lacks the human factor. Machine learning is an area that could be applied to enhance
the cybersecurity of autonomous vehicles. As discussed in Causevic ( 2018), if a car’s in-
vehicular network logs are monitored and analyzed by a machine learning-based system,
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.