Security Modelingof Autonomous Systems: A Survey 91:25
itcandetectmaliciousactivityearlyandalertthedriverortakesomepreventivemeasures
tosaveitselffromfatalaccidents.Withthecollecteddata,machinelearningalgorithmscan
beusedtodetectmalwareactivities,networkattacks,orunusualcommands.Theycanalso
be used to establish behavioral profiles of any potential attacker (Critchley 2018). It would
alsoimprovetheeffectivenessofthesecurityalgorithmsasthedatawouldbecontinuously
updatedand would beunbiasedof anytechnicalorhumanintentions.
—DataSecurity :Alotmoreresearchneedstobedoneintheareaofsecurityofcommunica-
tiondataandover-the-airupdates.Blockchainisanemergingtechnologythatcanbeused
to provide a more secure and robust solution for these autonomous systems. Blockchain,
devisedinitiallyfordigitalcurrency(Bitcoin),isachainofblockslinkedthroughacrypto-
graphic hash from the previous block with a timestamp and distributed over the network,
whichmakesitresistanttomodificationofthedata.Ferrer( 2016)showsthatBlockchainhas
the necessary capabilities for swarm robotics operations to be more secure, autonomous,
and flexible. This technology would not only provide a private and reliable communica-
tionamongswarmagents,butitwouldalsoovercomethevulnerabilities,potentialthreats,
andattacksassociatedwiththem(Aggarwal 2017).ThedecentralizedstorageofBlockchain
wouldguaranteetheconfidentialityandintegrityofthedriver’sdatawithnodowntimein
networkconnectivityofautonomousvehicles.Itwouldalsoensuretheaccuracyofdatain
a V2VorV2Icommunication (Williamson 2018).
—Computing Power and Network Management : Current status of autonomous systems
lacks the computational capability to perform computationally intensive tasks on large
datasets such as encryption of collected data to be shared securely over the network. The
end controller of these systems in many cases would be handheld devices such as mobile
phonesandcontrollers,whichlackthecomputationalpowertorunadvancedsecurityalgo-
rithms. One solution is to embed security into the hardware design. Another solution is to
securethenetworkagainstcyberattacksbynetworksoftwarizationsuchasNetworkFunc-
tionVirtualization(NFV)andSoftwareDefinedNetworking(SDN)(Shakhatrehetal. 2018).
SDNprovidesefficientnetworkmanagement,programmability,andeaseofreconfiguration
(Zhangetal. 2017).Itprovidesaflexibleanddynamicenvironmentwithaviewoftheentire
network topology, which helps to block specific attacks such as DDoS based on network’s
policy (Niyaz et al. 2016; Ydenberg et al. 2018). A group of researchers proposed a secure
mobility model between UAVs and ground Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) nodes where
communication would be through the SDN controller for authentication and coordination
(Kumaretal. 2017).SDNprovidesavirtual,centralized,software-basedcontrolthatallows
easyintegrationofsecurity-relevantfunctionsintoanSDNcontroller.Alongwiththeholis-
tic view of security, SDN provides an improved response in case of any security incidents,
which would otherwise take a long time to respond to in a traditional network (Edward
Amoroso 2019).
8 CONCLUSION
This article presents a survey on security modeling of autonomous systems. We looked at the
history of automation and the various approaches of autonomy to get a deeper understanding
of the scope of automation in these systems. We also highlighted significant research done to-
ward the study of security in some widely researched systems both in the industry as well as
academia, followed by identification of survey papers regarding the modeling of the systems and
possible attacks. Finally, we provided an overall analysis of the surveyed papers and concluded
withadiscussiononfutureresearchdirectionsandchallengestoenhancetheautomationandse-
curityofthesesystems.Adoptionofautonomoussystemsdiscussedabovewillusheraneweraof
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.