Security Modelingof Autonomous Systems: A Survey 91:11
are still significant challenges to make them completely driverless. Automated path and motion
planningwithefficientcomputationalparadigmandawell-plannedexecutionmodelwouldfacil-
itate a smooth transfer of control between the user and the system. As discussed in Zilberstein
(2010), to build robust autonomous systems, a human action model, a user’s state monitoring, in-
tent recognition techniques, and efficient interfaces to facilitate collaboration between the user
and the system are required. These emerging fields of AI and HMT are gaining momentum and
works are being done in facial and emotion recognition (Corneanu et al. 2016; Mehta et al. 2018)
that would be helpful in monitoring a user’s state while augmented reality devices, gesture, and
voiceuserinterfacewould facilitateeasycommunication.
Autonomous systems operating in the complex dynamic environment need to make informed
decisions promptly to react safely and reliably in complex dynamic situations based on an accu-
rate perception of its surrounding. More than one sensor is employed in these systems to assess
the surrounding environment accurately. The fusion of data from multiple sensors and multiple
modalities has become crucialin the perceptionprocessof autonomous systems in various appli-
cation fields and can be used in image registration (Giering et al. 2015) along with the detection
and mapping of static and dynamic obstacles along the trajectory (Korthals et al. 2018). A recent
surveydiscussesthecurrentdevelopmentsintheareasofperception,planning,coordination,and
controlof autonomoussystems(Pendletonetal. 2017).
Thefastpaceofresearchadvancementsinautonomoussystemsrequirethatdifferentaspectsof
thesesystemshaveabenchmarkandapropermetricdesignatedforeachofthem.Itwouldnotonly
set a standard for the development of an autonomous system with a certain degree of autonomy
butwouldbehelpfulaswelltorecognizeappropriatesystemsforparticularscenariosthatrequirea
certainlevelofautonomy(Hrabiaetal. 2015).Someearlierworksweredonetoestablishacommon
metricforautonomoussystemsbygovernmentagencies(Clough 2002;Huangetal. 2004b).Inthe
field of HRI, common metrics for autonomous systems concerning five categories of “navigation,
perception,management,manipulation,andsocial”havebeenpresentedinSteinfeldetal.( 2006),
while another work addresses the benchmarking of socially assistive robots on aspects of robot
technology, social interaction, and assistive technology (Feil-Seifer et al. 2007). A review of these
works is presented in Damacharla et al. ( 2018) to identify common metrics and set a benchmark
in the field of HMT. Most recent works reviewed autonomy measures to compare and contrast
autonomy approachesanddiscussedthecapabilitiesofautonomoussystems(Bihletal. 2018).
4 CYBERSECURITYOF AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
Autonomoussystemscanbebroadlyseenasatypeofcyber-physicalsystemsthathasembedded
computers and physical elements connected and controlled by sophisticated software, exhibiting
distinctbehaviorsthroughmultiplemeansofcommunicationwiththeoutsideworld.Mostofthese
systems are deployed in critical areas such as nuclear power plants, automatic pilot avionic, and
warzones.Someofthesesystemsarehighlyvulnerabletocyberattacks;hence,thesecurityofthese
systems poses significant concerns if they are entrusted with our lives. Complete failure of these
systems through cyberattacks, failure to correctly respond to critical missions, or even a slight
change in the desired output data can leave the operator in a confused or ignorant state. Some
researchworkhasbeendoneonthecomprehensivereviewofthreats,vulnerabilities,attacks,and
controloncyber-physicalsystems(Abdul-Ghanietal. 2018;Alguliyevetal. 2018;Dingetal. 2018;
Huang et al. 2003a; Lin et al. 2016;W ue ta l . 2016). Extrapolated from these works, we present a
taxonomyofcommonattacksonautonomoussystemsinFigure 2andabriefdescriptionofsome
of these attacks and their effects in Table 4. A comprehensive list of cyberattacks and its detailed
surveyonautonomoussystemsisbeyondthescopeofthearticle.Inthissection,wediscusssome
of thehighlyresearchedautonomoussystems(Figure 3)and workdoneon theircybersecurity.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.