Variational Few-Shot Learning
Jian Zhang1Chenglong Zhao1Bingbing Ni1∗Minghao Xu1Xiaokang Yang2
1Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{stevenash0822,cl-zhao,nibingbing,xuminghao118,xkyang }@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
We propose a variational Bayesian framework for en-
hancing few-shot learning performance. This idea is mo-
tivated by the fact that single point based metric learning
approaches are inherently noise-vulnerable and easy-to-be-
biased. In a nutshell, stochastic variational inference is in-
voked to approximate bias-eliminated class speciﬁc sam-
ple distributions. In the meantime, a classiﬁer-free pre-
diction is attained by leveraging the distribution statistics
on novel samples. Extensive experimental results on sev-
eral benchmarks well demonstrate the effectiveness of our
distribution-driven few-shot learning framework over pre-
vious point estimates based methods, in terms of superior
classiﬁcation accuracy and robustness.
1. Introduction
Relying on substantial labelled data, deep learning [27,
41, 20] based approaches have led a series of breakthroughs
in computer vision community. However, collecting and
annotating such a scale of data are both labor-intensive, se-
riously restricting their practicability in actual applications.
Inspired by human visual system, which has the instinct to
recognize novel objects by learning with only a few exam-
ples, few-shot learning [9] is proposed to mimic this ability.
More explicitly, we consider a common few-shot learn-
ing scenario where a learning agent, acquiring decision-
making strategy with substantial data during training, is ex-
erted on previously unseen classes with limited auxiliary su-
pervision during test. Many prior works [25, 45, 7, 6] stress
on learning a well-organized matching mechanism. This
mechanism attempts to seek a best match between support
set(scarce labelled data) and target set (unlabelled data),
via parametric [35, 18] or non-parametric [45, 42] meth-
ods as measurement. While non-parametric methods utilize
designated metric, its counterpart parametric methods lever-
age neural network to measure the similarity. The essence
∗Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni
(a) Point Estimate
(b) Our Method
……
Target Set
 Support Set…
Figure 1. Variational few-shot learning: (a) Prior works choose
a speciﬁc point to represent each class. (b) Our method estimates
the distributions of each class. Best viewed in color.
of both methods is to search for the nearest support class of
target data within an embedding space.
As mentioned above, points of the same class scatter in
a certain range of embedding space. A common manner is
that choosing a speciﬁc point ( e.g. central point) to represent
the same class points, which can be represented as point
estimates . Despite their favorable performance in public
datasets, there exists two issues: 1) Estimating such a spe-
ciﬁc point is difﬁcult when limited support points distribute
unevenly in embedding space. For instance, prototype-
based methods [42, 15, 1] compute the mean of embed-
ded support examples for each class, which is vulnerable
to noise since data is severely limited. 2) They are lack of
interpretability since a single embedding is insufﬁcient for
indicating a class. We consider that each point of the same
class is not isolated in embedding space, but is sampled
from a high-dimensional distribution. As shown in Figure
1, it is obvious that the distributions of each class have su-
perior descriptive power than several points.
To explicitly address the issues caused by point esti-
mate methods, we propose a distribution estimate frame-
work via variational inference. While exact inference is
computationally intractable, variational inference is a the-
oretically attractive method and suitable for computation.
1685