Support Set
Target Set
ℒ𝑹𝑹
ℒ𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊
…Feature
ExtractorShared data pool
Aggregated
DistributionEmbedding Distribution
Figure 2. Diagram of the proposed method in a 1-shot, 3-way exemplar. Our variational method shares the identical mechanism to generate
the distribution of each support and target data, and then aggregate them into class-speciﬁc distributions. By back-propagating errors of
two loss terms ( i.e.,LRfor penalizing classiﬁcation mistake. Lintra for correcting the relationship within the same class), the framework
acquire transferable distribution estimation knowledge that is amenable to unseen tasks in test phase. Best viewed in color.
how to obtain class-speciﬁc distributions. Details are dis-
cussed as follows:
Generate statistics for single data. While there is much
freedom in the form qφandpθ, we assume that latent vari-
ablezwithin the same class satisﬁes multivariate Gaussian
with a mean and diagonal covariance structure. For the pur-
pose of learning latent distribution( i.e., learning the class
mean and variance) quickly from a single instance, a statis-
tics generating pipeline is tailored with two cascaded struc-
tures and an additional transform function: 1) A feature ex-
tractorF(x;ϕF)extracts a representation rfrom single data
x. 2) A raw generator G(r;ϕG)takes the representation
as input and directly split the output into two equivalent
partsµrawandσ2
rawwith equal dimensions. 3) A trans-
form function is applied to σ2
rawto yield the ﬁnal variance
vectorσ2whileµrawremains identical to yield the ﬁnal
meanµ. The entire process is formulated as follows:
/bracketleftbig
µraw,σ2
raw/bracketrightbig
=G/parenleftbig
F(x;ϕF);ϕG/parenrightbig
,
µ=µraw,
σ2=|w|∗S(σ2
raw)+|b|.(7)
In practical application, FandGare modeled as convolu-
tional networks and fully-connected layers with learnable
parameters ϕFandϕG, respectively. The transform func-
tion is a Sigmoid mapping S(·)with learnable scale wand
offsetb, rescaling the raw variance vector σ2
rawto a new
range(|b|,|w|+|b|). We clarify that predicting a well-
constrained variance vector is of great signiﬁcance for sub-
sequent estimation in Section 4.2. The predicted mean µ
and variance σ2for single data jointly comprise N(µ,σ2)
to denote corresponding class distribution. Nevertheless,
it is not reliable of the distribution generated from single
data without extra supervision. Although each data con-tains sufﬁcient class information, we still require estimating
posterior distribution and approaching prior on a large set
to eliminate class-irrelevant representation of a single data.
Estimate posterior distribution. It is of low conﬁdence
to generate posterior distribution with single data. We then
impose support subsets of the same class on making a more
precise distribution estimation. Unlike the strategy ( i.e.,
generate distributions with an averaged feature of a mini-
batch) frequently adopted in [21, 14, 8], which implies ev-
ery sample weighs the same, our method uniﬁes distribution
of every single data into the ﬁnal one. Concretely, given n
data with generated mean {µi|i= 1,...,n}and variance/braceleftbig
σ2
i|i= 1,...,n/bracerightbig
, we estimate the overall distribution pa-
rametersµandσ2on the following criterion:
µ=/parenleftBiggn/summationdisplay
i=1σ−2
i/parenrightBigg−1/parenleftBiggn/summationdisplay
i=1σ−2
iµi/parenrightBigg
,
σ2=/parenleftbigg/summationtextn
i=1σ−2
i
n/parenrightbigg−1
.(8)
On one hand, the overall mean in Eq. 8 is a variance-
weighted linear combination of individual components.
And components with small variance are allocated big
weights. On the other hand, the overall variance tends to
approach the least variance component. To minimize dis-
turbance, the network tends to predict small variance for
those data which lies in the class center (more representa-
tive), but predict relatively large variance for those at the
boundary (less representative). Otherwise either uniform
variance or the converse situation results in misleading ag-
gregation because of undersampling in support set. Thus,
our aggregation choice aims to ease the burden of automat-
ically selecting the most representative components.
1688