Previous work [8] applying variational inference requires
a full dataset through the model, inefﬁciently aggregating
the embeddings of all elements ﬁrst to generate the distri-
bution. We instead share the distribution generation mecha-
nism across elements of both support and target set and then
merge them into large class-speciﬁc distributions. By esti-
mating distributions of each class, we can straightforwardly
calculate the conﬁdence of each class the target point be-
longs to and perform classiﬁcation by the conﬁdence. This
facilitates use of the entire distribution rather than sample
from it, which makes our method immune from the sample
bias. In a nutshell, the key of our method is to precisely
infer these distributions and concisely predict outputs with
distributions. We show that a combination between few-
shot learning and variational inference can be extended to
greatly eliminate the bias of original point estimates and im-
prove performance in prediction. Furthermore, our method
allows for full Bayesian analysis of the model, and it’s sig-
niﬁcantly more interpretable over prior arts.
Notably, our variational learning method estimates
distributions via tightening intra-class relationships. A
classiﬁer-free prediction is then obtained via calculating the
sample probabilities of target samples from those estimated
distributions. This metric is proven to be an extension of
weighted Euclidean distance where class-speciﬁc features
are strengthened and irrelevant features are suppressed.
Our method is evaluated on public benchmarks and re-
sults in state-of-the-art performance w.r.t. few-shot classi-
ﬁcation accuracy. Not only that, we achieve lowest vari-
ance compared with contemporary methods, which is mean-
ingful for many real world applications where robustness
of prediction is extremely desired, e.g., autonomous driv-
ing or medical diagnosis [49]. Additionally, we extend
our variational-based learning strategy on a recently re-
leased one-shot segmentation benchmark [31], achieving
incremental progress over the initial architecture. It further
demonstrates the transportability of the proposed method.
2. Related work
Metric-learning based approaches. Metric learning
approaches attempt to map the few-shot labelled and un-
labelled points into a non-linear embedding space and per-
form classiﬁcation by assessing which labelled points are
closest to the unlabelled points. The key assumption of
those approaches is that they can learn feature embeddings
which preserve the intrinsic class relationships. Koch et
al. [25] pioneer Siamese network to generate embeddings of
same/different pairs and compute a weighted L1metric for
measuring the similarity. Vinyals et al. [45] propose Match-
ing Network to accumulate information on a given task with
memory mechanism and utilize cosine distance in an atten-
tion kernel as measurement. In Prototypical Network [42],
a metric space is learned in which nearest neighbor classi-ﬁcation can be performed with prototype representations of
each class. Sung et al. [43] introduce a learnable similar-
ity metric by calculating the relation score between query
images and the prototype of each class. On this basis, label-
propagation-related approaches [29, 22] are developed to
explore intra-class or inter-class relationships in the classiﬁ-
cation task. In addition, contrastive loss [17, 25] and triplet
loss [40, 44] are used for strengthen learned metrics by fully
exploring pair/triplet relationships within the dataset.
We emphasize that metric-learning methods are re-
stricted in the quality of feature embeddings. This point
estimate approach is sensitive to sample noise from random
selection of support dataset and inductive bias from scarce
data. In contrast, we estimate class-speciﬁc distributions in-
stead, which possesses general stability and interpretability.
Meta-learning based approaches. The natural incon-
sistency between training and testing data is a bottleneck
of contemporary few-shot learning. A generic term, “meta-
learning”, is ﬁrst formulated to tackle this problem. The
core of primary methods [10, 33, 11] is to initialize weight
conﬁguration that can be swiftly ﬁne-tuned in test phase
within a fewsteps. In MAML [10],parameters are optimized
within a task pool so that they can be quickly adapted to a
particular task. In “Optimization as a model” [37], a LSTM-
based meta-learner is trained to coverage a learner classi-
ﬁer. Considering time-consuming drawback of ﬁne-tuning
in test phase, recent works [39, 4, 26] inference in a feed-
forward pass. [15, 36, 48, 16, 3] further implicitly adopt
meta-learning as an auxiliary phase to predict the parame-
ters from the activations in the last stage.
Data augmentation based approaches. Data insufﬁ-
ciency and overﬁtting remain huge challenges. To alleviate
it, GAN-based techs [46, 19, 47] exploit diverse training
data patterns and apply it into test phase to expand the sup-
port set capacity. Ren et al. [38] and Garcia et al. [13] also
beneﬁt from leveraging unlabelled data, where the former is
to reﬁne class centroids and the latter is to construct graph-
ical models. Nevertheless, these data-augmented methods
fail to thoroughly solve the issue as they might introduce
noise when improper patterns are deployed.
3. Methodology
3.1. Problem Formulation
Suppose we sample a small support set S=
{(xi,yi)}K×C
i=1⊂X×Yof pairs of inputs xi∈Xand
corresponding outputs yi∈Y(e.g., labels or masks in clas-
siﬁcation and segmentation tasks), where Klabelled sam-
ples for each of Cunique classes are obtained, a target set
T={(/tildewidexi,/tildewideyi)}N×C
i=1⊂X×Yis similarly formed with an-
otherNsamples for each of Cclasses. Notably, /tildewideyiis only
available in training phase, remaining the target set unla-
belled during testing. The large collection X×Yin training
1686