Approach prior distribution. Similarly as the aggre-
gating posterior distribution conditional on the support set,
the prior distribution is accessed with a larger combination
of support and target set. With smoothed class-irrelevant in-
formation along with the larger set, the prior focuses more
on class-speciﬁc information and is thus well-ﬁtted for a
discriminative process. We then approach our estimated
posterior with the prior, force the network capable of lo-
cating representative information from small support set.
3.3.3 Predict Output with Distribution
With class-speciﬁc distribution estimated from support set,
we solve the classiﬁcation task in a straightforward way to
calculate the probability of target data. The ﬁnal prediction
is consistent with the maximum probability among classes.
Explicitly, we encode the target sample xinto class dis-
tribution and utilize the mean vector µ(x)to represent it, as
the mean vector centralizes the class information extracted
from this sample. The posterior distribution qφ(z|Sc)con-
ditional on category csatisﬁesN(µc,σ2
c), where the vari-
ance vector indicates the signiﬁcance of different dimen-
sions. We thus denote Pr/parenleftbig
µ(x)|qφ(z|Sc)/parenrightbig
as the probabil-
ity ofµ(x)if sampled from the distribution qφ(z|Sc), which
is calculated as follows:
Pr/parenleftbig
µ(x)|qφ(z|Sc)/parenrightbig
=N/parenleftbig
µ(x);µc,σ2
c/parenrightbig
. (9)
Those probabilities, are transformed into logarithmic
form and then normalized with a softmax function to repre-
sent the conﬁdence of which category the sample xbelongs
to. On this basis, we reformulate the ﬁrst term in Eq. 5 to
derive the recognition loss LRfor the whole target set Tas:
LR=T/summationdisplay
(xi,yi)log/parenleftbigg
1+C/summationdisplay
c/ne}ationslash=yiPr/parenleftbig
µ(xi)|qφ(z|Sc)/parenrightbig
Pr/parenleftbig
µ(xi)|qφ(z|Syi)/parenrightbig/parenrightbigg
.(10)
Overall loss function. By tightening the intra-class re-
lationship and fulﬁlling the recognition gap, the overall loss
function is established as:
L=LR+Lintra. (11)
3.3.4 Implementation Details
Figure 2 illustrates our overall framework. Similarly as
many recent methods [43, 32], we follow their four-block
convolutional architecture to form our feature extractor F.
Each block contains a 3×3convolution with 64 ﬁlters, a
batch normalization, a ReLU non-linear layer and a 2×2
max-pooling layer. A little difference is that we clip the
max-pooling layer of the last two blocks. Thus, the output
size of the feature extractor is 64×5×5 = 1600 . Taking the
representation as input, we then construct the raw generatorGby a fully-connected layer of 128 dimensions. After ap-
plying the transformation function Hand aggregation rules
mentioned in Section 3.3.2, 64-dimensional distributions of
support and target sets are achieved. We emphasize that our
ﬁnal distributions are consistent with embeddings of those
comparable works w.r.t. the number of dimensions.
The training procedure is split into 2 stages. In ﬁrst stage,
we only train the feature extractor with the entire super-
vised training set. This is done in exactly the same way as
any other standard recognition model. In second stage, we
awaken the whole architecture and allocate distinct learning
strategy for two learnable components. We use an initial
learning rate of 10−4and10−3for the feature extractor F
and the raw generator G, respectively. Those two learning
rates are cut by half every 5000 episodes. All of our train-
able parameters are trained via Adam optimizer [23].
3.4. Discussion
Relation with previous variational arts. Recent works
[8, 21] have already imposed variational inference on few-
shot scenario. However, they are both generative models fo-
cusing more on reconstruction and utilizing ﬁxed standard
Gaussian prior to guide the latent space exploration. We
argue that our framework is the ﬁrst discriminative model
to tackle with few-shot problem via variational inference,
to the best of our knowledge. Also, our method improves
generalization by exploiting the dataset to weaken irrele-
vant features and obtain class-speciﬁc prior. Our recogni-
tion performance degenerates to those two methods only if
data distribution is identical between training and testing,
which is not the case in few-shot learning.
Relation with euclidean distance metric. Even though
widely used for evaluating the similarity between support
and target features [42, 12], in the presence of noise Eu-
clidean distance loses in performance, due to equal contri-
bution over all features. In our framework, we predict the
log-probability from Gaussian distribution as the metric, to
overcome this drawback by weighting features on each di-
mension. Under the assumption of multivariate Gaussian
densities, we can rewrite our metric Das:
D= logPr/parenleftbig
µ(x)|qφ(z|Sc)/parenrightbig
,
=−1
2d/summationdisplay
i=1(µi(x)−µc,i)2
σ2
c,i−d/summationdisplay
i=1logσc,i−d
2log2π,
(12)
whereddenotes the feature dimension and idenotes the i-
th component of the vector. Thus, our proposed metric is
equivalent to a combination of a weighted Euclidean dis-
tance, a variance regularization term and a constant. By
giving low weight ( i.e., big variance) to noisy features and
high weight ( i.e., small variance) to class-speciﬁc features,
a reliable similarity measurement is achieved.
1689