transferring to downstream tasks [59]. The learned model
can not only be transferred to ImageNet classiﬁcation in a
zero-shot manner and achieve state-of-the-art performance,
but can also perform recognition on object categories be-
yond ImageNet. Inspired by this line of research, we ask
the question: Can we also learn a semantic segmentation
model purely with text supervision, and without any per-
pixel annotations, capable of generalizing to different sets
of objects categories, or vocabularies, in a zero-shot man-
ner?
To accomplish this, we propose to bring back the group-
ing mechanism into deep networks, which allows semantic
segments to emerge automatically with only text supervi-
sion. An overview of our approach is illustrated in Fig. 1.
By training on large-scale paired image-text data with con-
trastive losses, we enable the model to be zero-shot trans-
ferred to several semantic segmentation vocabularies, with-
out requiring any further annotation or ﬁne-tuning. Our key
idea is to leverage the Vision Transformer (ViT) [22] and
incorporate a new visual grouping module into it.
We call our model GroupViT (Grouping Vision Trans-
former). Compared to convolutional neural networks (Con-
vNets), which operate on regular grids, the global self-
attention mechanism of Transformers naturally provides the
ﬂexibility to combine visual tokens into non-grid-like seg-
ments. Thus, instead of organizing visual tokens into grids,
as recent ViT-based applications [16, 23, 44, 81] do, we
propose to perform hierarchical grouping of visual tokens
into irregular-shaped segments. Speciﬁcally, our GroupViT
model is organized in different stages through a hierarchy
of Transformer layers, where each stage contains multiple
Transformers to perform information propagation among
the group segments, and a grouping module that merges
smaller segments into larger ones. With different input
images, our model dynamically forms different visual seg-
ments, each intuitively representing a semantic concept.
We train GroupViT with text supervision only. To per-
form learning, we merge visual segment outputs in the ﬁnal
stage of GroupViT using average pooling. We then com-
pare this image-level embedding to those derived from tex-
tual sentences via contrastive learning. We construct pos-
itive training pairs by using corresponding image and text
pairs, and negative ones by using text from other images.
We extract the text embedding with a Transformer model,
trained jointly along with GroupViT from scratch. Interest-
ingly, even though we only provide textual training super-
vision at the image level, we ﬁnd that semantically mean-
ingful segments automatically emerge using our grouping
architecture.
During inference, for the task of semantic segmentation,
given an input image, we extract its visual groups using
GroupViT (Fig. 1). Each ﬁnal group’s output represents a
segment of the image. Given a vocabulary of label namesfor segmentation, we use the text Transformer to extract
each label’s textual embedding. To perform semantic seg-
mentation, we then assign the category labels to image seg-
ments according to their mutual similarity in the embedding
space. In our experiments, we show that GrouViT trained
on the Conceptual Caption [10, 63] and Yahoo Flickr Cre-
ative Commons [69] datasets with text supervision alone,
can transfer to semantic segmentation tasks on the PASCAL
VOC [24] and PASCAL Context [54] datasets in a zero-shot
manner. Without any ﬁne-tuning, we achieve a mean in-
tersection over union (mIoU) of 52.3% on PASCAL VOC
2012 and an mIoU of 22.4% on PASCAL Context, perform-
ing competitively to state-of-the-art transfer-learning meth-
ods requiring greater levels of supervision. To our knowl-
edge, our work is the ﬁrst to perform semantic segmentation
on different label vocabularies in a zero-shot manner with
text supervision alone, without requiring any pixel-wise la-
bels.
Our contributions are the following:
• Moving beyond regular-shaped image grids in deep
networks, we introduce a novel GroupViT architecture
to perform hierarchical bottom-up grouping of visual
concepts into irregular-shaped groups.
• Without any pixel-level labels and training and with
only image-level text supervision using contrastive
losses, GroupViT successfully learns to group image
regions together and transfers to several semantic seg-
mentation vocabularies in a zero-shot manner.
• To our knowledge, ours is the ﬁrst work to explore
zero-shot transfer from text supervision alone to sev-
eral semantic segmentation tasks without using any
pixel-wise labels and establishes a strong baseline for
this new task.
2. Related Work
Vision Transformer. Inspired by the success of Trans-
formers in NLP [20,76], the Vision Transformer (ViT) [22]
was recently proposed and has been successfully applied to
multiple computer vision tasks, including image classiﬁca-
tion [44, 72, 73, 86], object detection [44, 79, 88], semantic
segmentation [44, 82, 91] and action recognition [4, 5, 25,
45, 61]. However, much like ConvNets, most variants of
ViT still operate on regular image grids. For example, Liu
et al. [44] divide the image into regular shaped windows
and apply a Transformer block to each one. The convolu-
tional operations are also inserted back into the Transformer
block in [16, 23, 81]. While these variants of ViT achieve
remarkable performance, they don’t fully leverage the ﬂex-
ibility of the global self-attention mechanism in Transform-
ers. That is, self-attention, by design, can be applied to any
arbitrary image segments and is not limited to rectangular-
shaped and scan-ordered ones only. Our GroupViT model,
on the other hand, leverages this property of Transformers
18135