to learn to group visual information into several arbitrary-
shaped segments. With a hierarchical design, it further
merges smaller segments into larger ones and yields differ-
ent semantic groups for each image.
Representation Learning with Text Supervision. With
large-scale image-text paired data available on the Internet,
representation learning with text supervision [14,19,30,32,
37, 39, 49, 59, 89] has been shown to be successful in trans-
ferring to various down stream tasks such as visual question
answering [2, 92] and visual reasoning [87]. For example,
Desai et al. [19] pre-train ConvNets with the image cap-
tioning task, and transfer the representation by ﬁne-tuning
with downstream task annotations, e.g., object detection la-
bels. Recently, Radford et al. [59] propose to perform con-
trastive learning between image and text. They show that
the learned model can be directly transferred to ImageNet
classiﬁcation [18] in a zero-shot manner without any ﬁne-
tuning. Going beyond image classiﬁcation, our GroupViT
model further explores zero-shot transfer to semantic seg-
mentation tasks with only text supervision, which has not
been shown in previous work to the best of our knowledge.
Visual Grounding. Visual grounding aims to learn im-
age region-text correspondence. One line of research ex-
plores a fully supervised approach to detecting text-related
bounding boxes within an image [14, 27, 33, 49, 57] us-
ing datasets such as Flickr30k Entities [58] and Visual
Genome [35]. To scale up learning, weakly-supervised
visual grounding has been introduced where the bounding
box and text correspondence is not available during train-
ing [11, 28, 41, 42, 78, 85]. However, to localize object
bounding boxes these approaches still rely on pre-trained
object detectors [78, 85], which, in turn, utilize box anno-
tations from other datasets. While related, we emphasize
there are two main differences between our problem set-
ting and that of visual grounding: (i) We train our model on
millions of noisy image-text pairs from the web, while vi-
sual grounding requires human curated and annotated data
at a relatively smaller scale; (ii) Our GroupViT provides
a bottom-up mechanism for progressive visual grouping
where object segments automatically emerge with text su-
pervision, while visual grounding needs bounding box an-
notations borrowed from other datasets.
Semantic Segmentation with Less Supervision. Multi-
ple research directions have been proposed to learn to seg-
ment with less supervision than dense per-pixel labels. For
example, few-shot learning [21, 43, 50, 55, 70, 77, 84] and
active learning [8, 62, 66, 67, 83] are proposed to perform
segmentation with as few pixel-wise labels as possible. Go-
ing further, zero-shot approaches [6, 38] are proposed to
learn segmentation models for unseen categories without
using pixel-wise labels for them. However, it still requires
learning with segmentation labels on seen categories as the
initial step. Another line of related research is of weakly-supervised semantic segmentation [1,9,26,31,36,40,65,68,
80], which aims to learn semantic segmentation with only
image-level object category supervision. While it largely
reduces supervision, it still requires manual labeling us-
ing a ﬁnite vocabulary on a carefully-curated image dataset.
Different from all previous work, our approach completely
gets rid of human annotations and GroupViT is trained with
large-scale noisy text supervision. Instead of a ﬁxed vocab-
ulary, we show that GroupViT can be generalized to any set
of categories in a zero-shot manner for semantic segmenta-
tion.
3. Method
We propose the GroupViT architecture for zero-shot
transfer to semantic segmentation with text supervision
only. GroupViT introduces a new hierarchical group-
ing Transformer architecture that exploits the global self-
attention mechanism of Transformers to partition input im-
ages into progressively larger arbitrary-shaped groups. We
ﬁrst describe GroupViT’s architecture in detail in Sec. 3.1.
To train it, we employ carefully-designed contrastive losses
between image-text pairs, which we describe in Sec. 3.2.
Lastly, we transfer the trained GroupViT model, without
further ﬁne-tuning, to the task of zero-shot semantic seg-
mentation as described in Sec. 3.3.
3.1. Grouping Vision Transformer
We introduce the GroupViT image encoder (Fig. 2),
which performs hierarchical progressive grouping of vi-
sual concepts via a Transformer-based architecture. In
GroupViT, we separate Transformer layers into multiple
grouping stages. In each stage, we learn a number of group
tokens (as learnable parameters) via self-attention that ag-
gregate information globally from all image tokens (seg-
ments). We then use the learned group tokens to merge sim-
ilar image tokens together via a Grouping Block . Through a
hierarchy of grouping stages, we group smaller image seg-
ments into larger ones. We describe each component next.
Architecture Following the design of ViT [22], we ﬁrst
split an input image into Nnon-overlapping patches and
linearly project each into a latent space. We treat each pro-
jected patch as an input image token and denote the set of all
of them asfpigN
i=1. In each grouping stage, besides the im-
age tokens, we concatenate a set of learnable group tokens
and input them into the Transformer for that stage.
Multi-stage Grouping As Fig. 2(a) shows, instead of for-
warding all the Ninput image tokens through all the layers
of the Transformer, we separate its layers into a hierarchy of
grouping stages. Each stage incorporates a Grouping Block
at its end to merge the smaller groups into larger ones.
Formally, suppose there are Lgrouping stages, each in-
dexed byland with a set of learnable group tokens fgigMl
i=1.
18136