GroupViT: Semantic Segmentation Emerges from Text Supervision
Jiarui Xu1*Shalini De Mello2Sifei Liu2Wonmin Byeon2
Thomas Breuel2Jan Kautz2Xiaolong Wang1
1UC San Diego2NVIDIA
Abstract
Grouping and recognition are important components of
visual scene understanding, e.g., for object detection and
semantic segmentation. With end-to-end deep learning
systems, grouping of image regions usually happens im-
plicitly via top-down supervision from pixel-level recogni-
tion labels. Instead, in this paper, we propose to bring
back the grouping mechanism into deep networks, which
allows semantic segments to emerge automatically with
only text supervision. We propose a hierarchical Group-
ing Vision Transformer (GroupViT), which goes beyond
the regular grid structure representation and learns to
group image regions into progressively larger arbitrary-
shaped segments. We train GroupViT jointly with a text en-
coder on a large-scale image-text dataset via contrastive
losses. With only text supervision and without any pixel-
level annotations, GroupViT learns to group together se-
mantic regions and successfully transfers to the task of se-
mantic segmentation in a zero-shot manner, i.e., without
any further ﬁne-tuning. It achieves a zero-shot accuracy
of 52.3% mIoU on the PASCAL VOC 2012 and 22.4%
mIoU on PASCAL Context datasets, and performs compet-
itively to state-of-the-art transfer-learning methods requir-
ing greater levels of supervision. We open-source our code
at https://github.com/NVlabs/GroupViT.
1. Introduction
Visual scenes are naturally composed of semantically-
related groups of pixels. The relationship between group-
ing and recognition has been studied extensively in visual
understanding even before the deep learning era [52,53]. In
bottom-up grouping, the idea is to ﬁrst re-organize pixels
into candidate groups and then to process each group with
a recognition module. This pipeline has been successfully
applied in image segmentation from superpixels [60], con-
structing region proposals for object detection [75, 94] and
semantic segmentation [3]. Beyond bottom-up inference,
top-down feedback from recognition can also provide sig-
nals to perform better visual grouping [74, 93].
*Jiarui Xu was an intern at NVIDIA during the project.
GroupViTText EncoderContrastive LossRoyal Caribbean International Oasis of the …
Cat walking in the snow. Grey cat walking in the …
Student on the Quad with a dog and Frisbee
A delivery worker on a motorcycle. …
cat…motorbike dogboat
boat
dogpotted plant
chaircat
personmotorbikeTrainingZero-shot TransferFigure 1. Problem Overview . First, we jointly train GroupViT
and a text encoder using paired image-text data. With GroupViT,
meaningful semantic grouping automatically emerges without any
mask annotations. Then, we transfer the trained GroupViT model
to the task of zero-shot semantic segmentation.
However, on moving to the deep learning era, the ideas
of explicit grouping and recognition have been much less
separated and more tightly coupled in end-to-end train-
ing systems. Semantic segmentation, e.g., is commonly
achieved via a Fully Convolutional Network [47], where
pixel grouping is only revealed at the output by recognizing
each pixel’s label. This approach eliminates the need to per-
form explicit grouping. While this method is very powerful
and still delivers state-of-the-art performance, there are two
major limitations that come with it: (i) learning is limited by
the high cost of per-pixel human labels; and (ii) the learned
model is restricted only to a few labeled categories and can-
not generalize to unseen ones.
Recent developments in learning visual representations
from text supervision have shown tremendous success on
18134