will be assisted by an AI agent that monitors tele-
conversations in real time. For example, using advanced voice
analysis capabilities, an AI agent might be able to infer from a
customer ’s tone that an unmentioned issue remains a problem
and provide real-time feedback to guide the (human)
salesperson ’s next approach. In this sense, AI could augment
salespersons ’capabilities, but it also might trigger unintended
negative consequences, especially if customers feel uncom-
fortable about AI monitoring conversations. Also, in the fu-
ture, firms may primarily use AI bots,1which —in some
cases—function as well as human salespeople, to make initial
contact with sales prospects. But the danger remains that if
customers discover that they are interacting with a bot, they
may become uncomfortable, triggering negative
consequences.
Third, the business model currently used by online retailers
generally requires customers to place orders, after which the
online retailer ships the products (the shopping-then-shipping
model —Agrawal et al. 2018 ;G a n se ta l . 2017 ). With AI,
online retailers may be able to predict what customers will
want; assuming that these predictions achieve high accuracy,
retailers might transition to a shipping-then-shopping business
model. That is, retailers will use AI to identify customers ’
preferences and ship items to customers without a formal or-
der, with customers having the option to return what they do
n o tn e e d( A g r a w a le ta l . 2018 ;G a n se ta l . 2017 ). This shift
would transform retailers ’marketing strategies, business
models, and customer behaviors (e.g., information search).
Businesses like Birchbox, Stitch Fix and Trendy Butler al-
ready use AI to try to predict what their customers want, with
varying levels of success.
The three use cases (above) illustrate why so many aca-
demics and practitioners anticipate that AI will change the
face of marketing strategies and customers ’behaviors. In fact,
a survey by Salesforce shows that AI will be the technology
most adopted by marketers in the coming years (Columbus
2019 ). The necessary factors to allow AI to deliver on its
promises may be in place already; it has been stated that “this
very moment is the great inflection point of history ”(Reese
2018 , p. 38). Yet this argument can be challenged. First, the
technological capability required to execute the preceding ex-
amples remains inadequate. By way of an exemplar, self-
driving cars are not ready for deployment (Lowy 2016 ),
as—amongst other things —currently self-driving cars cannot
handle bad weather conditions. Predictive analytics also need
to improve substantially before retailers can adopt shipping-
then-shopping practices that avoid substantial product returns
and the associated negative affect. Putting all this together, it
appears that marketing managers and researchers needinsights about not only the ultimate promise of AI, but also
the pathway and timelines along which AI is likely to develop.
This paper addresses the issues above, building not only from
a review of literature across marketing (and more generally,
business), psychology, sociology, computer science, and ro-
botics, but also from extensive interactions with practitioners.
Second, the preceding examples highlight mostly positive
consequences of AI, without detailing the widespread, justifi-
able concerns associated with their use. Technologists such as
Elon Musk believe that AI is “dangerous ”(Metz 2018 ). AI
might not deliver on all its promises, due to the challenges it
introduces related to data privacy, algorithmic biases, and
ethics (Larson 2019 ).
We argue that the marketing discipline should take a lead
role in addressing these questions, because arguably it has the
most to gain from AI. In an analysis of more than 400 AI use
cases, across 19 industries and 9 business functions,
McKinsey & Co. indicates that the greatest potential value
of AI pertains to domains related to marketing and sales
(Chui et al. 2018 ), through impacts on marketing activities
such as next-best offers to customers (Davenport et al.
2011 ), programmatic buying of digital ads (Parekh 2018 ),
and predictive lead scoring (Harding 2017 ). The impact of
AI varies by industry; the impact of AI on marketing is highest
in industries such as consumer packaged goods, retail, bank-
ing, and travel. These industries inherently involve frequent
contact with large numbers of customers, and produce vast
amounts of customer transaction data and customer attribute
data. Further, information from external sources, such as so-
cial media or reports by data brokers, can augment these data.
Thereafter, AI can be leveraged to analyze such data and de-
liver personalized recommendations (relating to next product
to buy, optimal price etc.) in real time (Mehta et al. 2018 ).
Yet marketing literature related to AI is relatively sparse,
prompting this effort to propose a framework that describes
both where AI stands today and how it is likely to evolve.
Marketers plan to use AI in areas like segmentation and ana-
lytics (related to marketing strategy) and messaging, person-
alization and predictive behaviors (linked to customer behav-
iors) (Columbus 2019 ). Thus, we also propose an agenda for
future research, in which we delineate how AI may affect
marketing strategies and customer behaviors. In so doing,
we respond to mounting calls that AI be studied not only by
those in computer science, but also studied by those who can
integrate and incorporate insights from psychology, econom-
ics and other social sciences (Rahwan et al. 2019 ;a l s os e e
Burrows 2019 ).
Introduction to artificial intelligence
Researchers propose that AI “refers to programs, algorithms,
systems and machines that demonstrate intelligence ”(Shankar1Miller ( 2016) outlines the difference between an AI bot and a chatbot. In
brief, chatbots rely on (relatively) simple algorithms, whereas AI bots have
greater capabilities, incorporating complex algorithms and NLP.J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2020) 48:24 –42 25