are numeric. As in a regular coffeehouse, customers can select
various options: latte or espresso, with different amounts of
froth, and various ingredients such as organic Swedish oat
milk. The goal is not to replace baristas, but rather to augment
baristas ’capabilities by taking over more routine operations.
The Cafe X robot barista augments the capabilities of the
human barista, who can then focus on providing high-
quality customer service, and also facilitating what the com-
pany calls “coffee education ”(e.g., managing tastings).
Cell 4: Data robot This cell is similar to cell 2, except that the
robotic form can process all types of data (not just numeric
data). For example, the Lowebot at Lowe ’sH o m e
Improvement stores (Hullinger 2016 ) can scan a product held
up by a customer (or listen to the customer speak the name of
the desired product), confirm whether the item is in stock, and
then roll along with the customer to the exact spot in the store
where he or she can find the product. This task requires com-
prehension and examination of both numeric and non-numeric
data, as well as an indoor navigation capability, which repre-
sents a significant advance over the capabilities embodied in
the Café X robot. Using the Lowebot augments the capabili-
ties of Lowe ’s human sales associates, allowing focus on more
complex customer service requests.
Other retailers have similar app lications. Our discussions with
senior managers at 84.517indicate that they are working with
Kroger to implement in-store robo ts that can identify misshelved
or out-of-stock items. In another example, Walmart has partnered
with Bossa Nova Robotics to deploy robots in its stores to scan
shelves. The goal appears to be to get robots to perform tasks that
repeat and are predictable, enabling (human) associates to focus
on serving customers (Avalos 2018).
Finally, security robots, such as the K5 from Knightscope,
roam offices and malls at night. These robots have better sens-
ing capabilities than humans, because they incorporate ther-
mal cameras and other high-technology sensing tools. Here
again, the objective is to augment human security guards ’
capabilities (Robinson 2017 ).
Long-term time horizon
For completeness, we also examine what might happen when
AI applications incorporate context awareness, as summarized
in the two cells in the lower half of Fig. 1. We reiterate that
there is no indication that such developments will occur in the
short or medium term, as exemplified by the case of driverless
cars. Tesla has removed any “self-driving ”labels from its
website, noting that these la bels were causing confusion
(Hawkins 2019 ). The CEO of Waymo admits that driverless
cars are unable to drive in poor weather conditions withouthuman input (Lashinsky 2019 ). Put simply, the dream of get-
ting into a driverless car outside in one city, falling asleep, and
waking up in another city is not reality and may not be achieved
anytime soon. Even the less consequential forms of AI remain
problematic. Google ’s AlphaGo Zero might have successfully
learned the complex game of Go in a short period, using adver-
sarial networks that pit two (competing) AI systems against
each other so that they can learn; yet in this case, the outcome
space was very well defined. Furthermore, all these AI systems
received significant training data. In contrast, the outcome
spaces (i.e., business domains) for most likely AI applications
are poorly defined, and relevant training data is hard to obtain.
These points reiterate the challenges of moving from task au-
tomation to context awareness. As such, the use cases we pres-
ent for the last two cells are hypothetical, and this section is
deliberately brief, reflecting th at our discussion is more aspira-
tional than descriptive of any near-term reality.
Cell 5: Data virtuoso Advanced AI could be embedded in a
digital form, as exemplified by the AI Jarvis in Iron Man
movies. Jarvis has advanced data capabilities that can examine
multiple data types. Perhaps most notably, Jarvis adapts to
new contexts, beyond those for which it has been trained, such
as when it hides from the more advanced AI Ultron and finds
ways to thwart Ultron ’s hacking attempts. Futurists would
have us believe that such AI will emerge in the long term,
with strong predictive abilities for customers ’preferences
and high capability levels for managing customer service.
Thus, the term virtuoso seems appropriate for such AI.
Cell 6: Robot experts An advanced AI also could be embedded
in a robot form, such as the AI Dorian from the television
show Almost Human . Dorian ’s advanced capabilities include
facial recognition, bio scans, analyses of non-numeric stimuli
such as DNA, speed-reading, speaking multiple languages,
and taking the temperature of fluids using his finger. Like
Jarvis, Dorian can adapt to a variety of new contexts.
Futurists predict that such robot experts will emerge in the
long term to serve as companions that meet various customer
needs (e.g., in-home service, home security, medical support).
Such robots even might be able to bond emotionally with
(human) customers, and potentially replace human partners
and animal partners.
Agenda for future research
Having described AI and presented a framework to better
understand it, we pivot to outlining some important areas for
future research. These include how firms may need to change
their marketing strategy, how customers ’behaviors will be
impacted, and issues relevant to policymakers. We outline
these areas in Fig. 2, linking these to the cells in Fig. 1.7This consulting firm is a subsidiary of Kroger and provides retail insights to
Kroger and its partners; it has strong analytics and AI capabilities.J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2020) 48:24 –42 34