Moving beyond AI adoption, we pivot to how customers
interact with robots with embedded AI. Early research sug-
gests that interactions with AI-embedded robots trigger dis-
comfort (linked to the UVH) and so further trigger (negative)
compensatory behaviors, like buying of status goods, or eating
more food (Mende et al. 2019 ). From a theory perspective,
this work not only shows the downsides of anthropomorphism
(especially in the case of robots), but also the existence of
compensatory consumption6specifically linked to robots.
More broadly, sociologists ponder how AI (and specifically
robots with embedded AI) might transform economy and so-
ciety (Boyd and Holton 2018 ). For example, cloud-based
technology facilitates deep learning in robots, which can learn
from human agents through repeated interactions.
Sociologists particularly note ways that robots may en-
ter multiple aspects of social life, not only in (expected)
areas such as service and transportation, but also in
domains like the arts and music.
The current state and likely evolution of AI
Short- and medium-term time horizon
In Fig. 1, we combine all the above considerations to depict
the current state of AI and its likely evolution. The upper half
of Fig. 1(four cells) relates to task automation and thus the
likely state of AI in the short to medium time horizon. The
lower half of Fig. 1(two cells) relates to context awareness
applications that are only likely in the long term (if at all), due
to the constraints associated with the current state of AI. Notethat in the lower half of Fig. 1, we do not distinguish between
numeric and non-numeric data, because context awareness –
capable AI likely will be able to handle any types of data.
The first four use cases, associated with short to medium
term developments, involve task automation (see Fig. 1).
Cell 1: Controller of numerical data The first cell in Fig. 1
reflects what AI can do very well, namely, statistical analyses
of numeric data using machine learning. A typical use case is
the application of AI to optimize prices (Antonio 2018 ).
Pricing strategies must balance two competing concerns; that
the price is low enough to attract customers versus high
enough to enable the firm to earn sufficient profits. Firms
use AI to analyze vast amounts of numeric data (including
less intuitive predictor variables) to both set optimal prices
and then change prices in real time. For example, Kanetix
helps Canadian customers find deals on car insurance by
allowing prospective buyers to compare and evaluate policies
and rates offered by more than 50 providers. Scott Emberley,
the Business Development Director of integrate.ai, which
partnered with Kanetix to build an AI application, indicated
that the goal was identify three sets of customers (1) those
highly likely to buy, (2) those very unlikely to buy, and (3)
those in-between. Thereafter, Kanetix would direct their ad-
vertising towards these “in-between ”customers, which would
provide the greatest returns, and not expend efforts on those
either very likely to buy or very unlikely to buy. With four
years of data, integrate.ai developed a machine learning model
that could identify such customers. Five months later, Kanetix
estimated 2.3 times return on its AI investment, and a more
than 20% increase in sales among previously undecided cus-
tomers. In another example, the Bank of Montreal (BMO)
uses IBM Interact to analyze customer data across all its chan-
nels and identify personalized product offerings. If a customer6Compensatory consumption is consumption “motivated by a desire to offset
or reduce a self-discrepancy ”(Mandel et al. 2017,p .1 3 4 ) .Table 2 (continued)
Paper Domain Dimension Takeaways
Mende et al. ( 2019 ) MKTG ROBOT Interactions with robots trigger discomfort (linked to UVH) and so
further trigger compensatory behaviors.
Boyd and Holton ( 2018 ) SOC ROBOT Will the combination of robotics and AI lead to an unprecedented
social transformation?
Pedersen et al. ( 2018 ) SOC ROBOTS Outlines the issues surrounding use of social robots in medical treatment,
care facilities, and private homes. Also, outlines ethical concerns.
André et al. ( 2018 ) MKTG LVLINT Because AI facilitates data-driven, micro-targeting marketing offerings,
customers should view such offerings favorably, because it reduces
search costs. Yet this could undermine customers ’perceived autonomy,
with implications for their subsequent evaluations and choices.
Aguirre et al. ( 2015 ) MKTG LVLINT Proposes the privacy –personalization paradox, whereby individuals
balance privacy concerns against the benefits of personalized recommendations.
Wang and Kosinski ( 2018 ) PSY TSKTYPE How to use deep neural networks to identify sexual orientation, merely
by analyzing facial images
MKTG Marketing; BUS Business; PSYPsychology; SOC Sociology; CS/ R Computer Science/ Robotics.
Dimension: LVLINT levels of intelligence; TSKTYPE task type; ROBOT w h e t h e rA Ii nr o b o t sJ. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2020) 48:24 –42 32