AI and policy issues
Finally, AI is of interest to policymakers. We note three broad
areas in which policymakers seek to ensure that firms strike a
suitable balance between their own commercial interests and
the interests of customers: data privacy, bias, and ethics.8All
three of these areas generally align with all cells in Fig. 2.
Data privacy Today, the combination of AI and big data im-
plies that firms know much about their customers (Wilson
2018 ). Hence, two issues deserve research attention. First,
customers worry about the privacy of their data (Martin and
Murphy 2017 ; Martin et al. 2017 ). Privacy is complicated
(Tucker 2018 ), for three reasons: (1) the low cost of storage
implies that data may exist s ubstantially longer than was
intended, (2) data may be repackaged and reused for rationales
different than those intended, and (3) data for a certain indi-
vidual may contain information about other individuals.
Policy related to data privacy requires balancing two compet-
ing priorities. Too little protection means that customers may
not adopt AI-related applications; too much regulation may
strangle innovation.
Second, important research questions pertain to whether
data privacy management efforts should be driven by legal
regulations or self-regulation, in that “it is not clear yet if
market driven incentives will be sufficient for firms to adopt
policies that favor consumers or whether regulatory oversight
is required to ensure a fair outcome for consumers ”(Verhoef
et al. 2017 , p. 7). Cultural perspectives on data privacy also
vary, which is an important consideration; some have sug-
gested that the lack of data privacy in China, for example, is
consistent with Confucian cultural ideals (Smith 2019 ).
Third, we need insights into how best to acknowledge and
address privacy concerns at the moment data are collected, as
well as how to manage data privacy failures (e.g., data
breaches). Amazon already sells doorbells with cameras (the
Ring device) and may be planning to add facial identification
AI to the devices (Fowler 2019 ). Customers thus may become
concerned if Amazon has access to data recorded through
Ring, which it could use or sell. Neighbors also might protest
if Ring cameras record their front yard activities without their
permission. Also, the data from Ring arguably could be
subpoenaed by law enforcement agencies or obtained illegally
by hackers. Such issues reflect topics for further research.
Finally, we consider the privacy –personalization paradox
(Aguirre et al. 2015 ). Customers must balance privacy con-
cerns against the benefits of personalized recommendations
and offers. Important questions relate to how customers deter-
mine the optimal trade-off, including which individual differ-
ence variables and state variables might moderate theirchoices. Does the trade-off depend on the product category
or the level of the customer ’s trust in the firm, for example?
Also, how would this trade-off shift over time?
BiasThe potential algorithmic bias embedded in AI applica-
tions could stem from multiple causes (Villasenor 2019 ), in-
cluding the data sets that inform AI. For example, Amazon
abandoned a tool that used AI intelligence to rate job appli-
cants, in part because it discriminated against female appli-
cants (Weissman 2018 ). This bias emerged because the train-
ing data sets used to develop the algorithm were based on data
relating to previous applicants, who were predominantly men.
Exacerbating the issue, many AI algorithms are opaque black
boxes, so it is difficult to isolate which exact factors these
algorithms consider. Testing for whether there is bias in AI
applications is an important topic.
In addition, AI may not be able to distinguish attributes that
could induce potential bias. Villasenor ( 2019)a r g u e sa sf o l l o w s .
In general, it may not be offensive when insurance companies
treat men and women differently, with one set of premiums for
male drivers and another set of premiums for female drivers.
Does this mean that it is acceptable for AI to calculate auto
insurance premiums based on religion? Many would argue that
basing auto insurance premium s on religion is offensive, but
from the point of view of an AI algorithm designed to “slice-
and-dice ”data in every way possible, the distinction between
using gender versus religion, as a basis to determining auto
insurance rates, may not be obvious. All this suggests that issues
relating to bias remain a non-trivial problem (Knight 2017).
Ethics Finally, AI developers must grapple with ethics; we
highlight two issues. First, data privacy choices may reflect
af i r m ’s strategy (e.g., if it wants to be perceived as a trusted
firm; Martin and Murphy 2017 ; also see Goldfarb and Tucker
2013 ) but also could be driven by ethical concerns. In this
sense, research should address “how can normative ethical
theory pave the way for what organizations should be doing
to exceed consumer privacy expectations, as well as to over-
comply with legal mandates in order to preserve their ability to
self-regulate ”(Martin and Murphy 2017 , p. 152). A related
research topic might involve examining how ethical concerns
about AI vary across cultures.
Second, firms choose to deploy AI by defining which prob-
lems the AI will tackle. For example, two Stanford researchers
used deep neural networks to identify people ’ss e x u a lo r i e n -
tation, merely by analyzing facial images (Wang and Kosinski
2018 ). The deep neural network tools (vs. human judges) were
better able to differentiate between gay and straight men.
However, the work raised ethical concerns, in that many ar-
gued that this AI-based technology may be used by spouses
on their partners (if they suspected their partners were closet-
ed), or —more frighteningly —may be used by certain govern-
ments to “out”and then prosecute certain populations (Levin8Firms are aware of this, and are taking steps to suitably respond (Deloitte
Insights, as reported in Schatsky et al. 2019)J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2020) 48:24 –42 38