Table 2 (continued)
Paper Domain Dimension Takeaways
Leung et al. ( 2018) MKTG LVLINT If a certain consumption activity is central to a customer ’s identity,
the customer would like to take credit for consumption outcomes.
Some customers perceive that using AI for these consumption
activities is tantamount to cheating, and this hinders the attribution
of credit post-consumption. Hence if an activity is central to a
customer ’s identity, then the customer may be less likely to adopt
AI for this activity.
Kim and Duhachek ( 2018 ) MKTG LVLINT Customers do not associate AI applications with autonomous goals
(Kim and Duhachek 2018 ). In line with this perception, customers
are more likely to focus on “how”(rather than “why”) the AI application
performs; implying that when engaging with AI, customers will be in
a low level construal mindset. Because persuasion is more effective
when the perceived characteristics of the persuasion source and the
persuasion message match, communication from AI should be more
effective when it highlights how rather than why in its messaging
(regulatory construal fit; Lee et al. 2009 ; Motyka et al. 2014 ). AI
persuasion messages are more effective in persuading consumers to
buy the recommended product or services when the message highlights
“how”to use the product rather than “why”to use the product. These
effects are because customers doubt whether AI can understand “why”
it is important for customers to engage in certain behaviors.Builds from: Lee et al. ( 2009 )M K T G
Motyka et al. ( 2014 )M K T G
Longoni et al. ( 2019) MKTG LVLINT Examining the case of medical decision making, Longoni et al. ( 2019 )
propose that customers ’reservations are due to their concerns about
uniqueness neglect (i.e., the AI is perceived as less able to identify and
relate with customers ’unique features). Further, building from prior
work ( Şimşek and Yal ınçetin 2010 ; also see Haslam et al. 2005 ), Longoni
et al. ( 2019 ) propose that these reservations would be more for customers
w h oh a v eh i g h e rs c o r e so nt h e ‘personal sense of uniqueness ’scale
(Şimşek and Yal ınçetin 2010 ).Builds from: Şimşek
and Yal ınçetin ( 2010 )PSY
Haslam et al. ( 2005 )P S Y
Luo et al. ( 2019 ) MKTG LVLINT Examines how (potential) customers engage with AI bots. In reality, AI
bots can be as effective as trained salespersons, and 4 times effective
as inexperienced salespersons. However, if it is disclosed that the customer
is conversing with an AI bot, purchase rates reduce by 75%. Because
customers perceive the AI bot as less empathetic, they are curt when
interacting with AI bots, and so purchase less. Ties into themes from
Castelo et al. ( 2018).
LeCun et al. ( 2015) CS/R TSKTYPE How deep learning has improved the state-of-the-art in speech and visual
object recognition.
You et al. ( 2016 ) CS/R TSKTYPE How using a new algorithm improves visual object recognition.
Milgram et al. ( 1995 ) PSY ROBOT Proposes the virtuality-reality continuum.
Wainer et al. ( 2006 ) CS/R ROBOT Interacting with a physical robot is perceived as more enjoyable than either
interacting with a simulated robot on a computer or interacting with a
real robot presented through teleconferencing.
Kwak et al. ( 2013 ) CS/R ROBOT When asked to administer electric shocks to a (physical) robot or a simulated
robot on a computer screen, individuals empathized more with the
(physical) robot.
Kidd and Breazeal ( 2008 ) CS/R ROBOT Interactions were longer with a robot diet coach than either a virtual diet
coach or a pen-and-paper diet diary.
Lammer et al. ( 2014) CS/R ROBOT Individuals express reciprocity towards robots.
Adami ( 2015 ) CS/R ROBOT With suitable machine learning algorithms, robots can learn from past
experiences.
Kober et al. ( 2013 ) CS/R ROBOT Reinforcement learning can work for robots embedded with suitable
machine learning algorithms.
Mori ( 1970 ) PSY ROBOT Making robots look more human is beneficial, but only up to a certain
point, after which such robots elicit negative reactions (UVH).
Gray and Wegner ( 2012) PSY ROBOT Machines are perceived as more unnerving when individuals ascribe
to machines the capacity to feel, rather than capacity to do.J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2020) 48:24 –42 31