or else positioning the AI application as one that combines AI
and human inputs (as in Stitch Fix), may help partially miti-
gate the impact of the points above. Longoni et al. ( 2019 )
propose that offering customers the opportunity to slightly
modify the AI may get these customers to look past unique-
ness neglect, and focus more on the benefits of personaliza-
tion. This too may be a way to mitigate the points raised prior.
The discomfort with AI is accentuated in case the AI ap-
plication is embedded in a robot. As robots become more
humanlike, then due to the UVH, customers find these robots
unnerving. Such factors may hinder AI adoption and deserve
study. An interesting moderator of this effect —worth investi-
gating —may be whether the AI form is perceived by cus-
tomers as a servant or partner; UVH effects may be stronger
if AI achieves partner status. Also deserving of study is other
ways of mitigating such effects. Early efforts in this direction
involve trying to prime empathy, by convincing customers
that robots have some ability to see things from the customers ’
viewpoint, and (also) have some ability to feel sympathy for
the customer if the customer were suffering (Castelo 2019 ).
Other possible methods could relate to anthropomorphizing
the AI, as this may persuade customers that the AI has some-
what more empathy (this point needs to balance with concerns
about the UVH).
Sociologists appear especially interested in how robots
with embedded AI might make inroads into society (Boyd
and Holton 2018 , p. 338), noting that “complexities arise
when cultural preferences associated with human as opposed
to machine delivery of personal services are considered. Do
…consumers find social robots acceptable? ”Broadly speak-
ing, research can address how attitudes toward robots vary by
culture (Li et al. 2010 ). Beyond concerns associated with cul-
ture, it may be pertinent to examine which other trait factors
determine whether customers are willing to have their hair
styled by robots or accept childcare/elderly care services de-
livered by robots (Pedersen et al. 2018 ). In addition to physical
well-being considerations, some sociologists suggest that ro-
bots may assist with spiritual well-being (Fleming 2019 ), as
exemplified by the robot priest BlessU-2 (Sherwood 2017 )
and Buddhist monk Xian ’er (Andrews 2016 ). Understanding
how robots with embedded AI can assist in various ways,
beyond improving customers ’physical well-being, is a good
area for research.
AI usage When customers interact with an AI application, it
might prime a low-level construal mindset (Kim and
Duhachek 2018 ). Research should determine what other
mindsets might be primed by AI, e.g., AI may prime preven-
tion focus among customers for whom AI is a relatively new
technology. Related insights would have implications for how
the AI application should communicate with the customer,
because communication exerts stronger impacts when it fits
with (a primed) mindset.When AI is embedded in robots, the robots likely have
important roles in customers ’lives, functioning as frontline
service providers (Wirtz et al. 2018 ), companions, nannies,
or pet replacements. In addition to the UVH-related challenges
documented previously, some research results suggest
that interactions with AI-e mbedded robots trigger dis-
comfort and compensatory behaviors (Mende et al. 2019 ). It
is important to determine when customers perceive AI-
embedded robots negatively and whether these perceptions
may improve over time.
Finally, if customers ’ideal preferences actually differ from
their past behaviors (e.g., customers trying to stop eat-
ing unhealthy foods), AI might make it harder for them
to find and move toward their preferred options, by
only presenting them with choices reflecting their past
behaviors. The widespread “retargeting ”of digital ads is one
example of this phenomenon. How to train AI to best manage
this issue?
Post-adoption The downstream consequences of AI adoption
also suggest some relevant research topics. In particular, cus-
tomers might perceive a loss of autonomy if AI can substan-
tially predict their preferences. In theory, because AI facilitates
data-driven, micro-targeting marketing offerings (e.g., Gans
et al. 2017 ; Luo et al. 2019 ), customers should view offerings
more favorably, because it reduces their search costs. Yet it
also could undermine customers ’perceived autonomy, with
implications for their evaluations and choices (André et al.
2018 ). If customers learn that an AI algorithm can predict their
preferred choices, they may deliberately choose a non-
preferred option, to reaffirm their autonomy (André et al.
2018 ; Schrift et al. 2017 ). Such considerations evoke a variety
of research questions. For example, which factors determine
whether (and how much) customers value perceived autono-
my in AI-mediated choice settings? In this regard, it may be
helpful to examine individual difference variables, such as
culture and whether customers regard AI as a servant or part-
ner. Research also might address state factors, such as the
product type; perceived autonomy may be less relevant for
utilitarian product choices than for hedonic ones, because of
differential links to customers ’identity.
Also, there is a generalized fear of a loss of human con-
nectedness, if humans form bonds with robots with embedded
AI. The popular press (e.g., Marr 2019 ) stokes concerns about
robots with embedded AI becoming popular (over humans) as
partners. Robots like Harmony (by Realbotix) appear promis-
ing in this regard, able to take on different personae and dis-
play some expression. But such robots arguably could be
damaging to society at large, by increasing social isolation,
reducing the incidence of marriage, or reducing birthrates —
which is critical for countries like Japan, where birthrates are
already low. This point suggests some interesting research
opportunities.J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2020) 48:24 –42 37