AI adoption Customers appear to hold AI to a higher standard
than is normatively appropriate (Gray 2017 ), as exemplified
by the case of driverless cars. Customers should adopt AI if its
use leads to significantly fewer accidents; instead, customers
impose higher standards and seek zero accidents from AI.
Understanding the roots of this excessive caution is important.
A preliminary hypothesis suggests that customers trust AI
less, and so hold AI to a higher standard, because they believe
that AI cannot “feel”(Gray 2017 ).
Task characteristics also influence AI adoption. To the ex-
tent a task appears subjective, involving intuition or affect,
customers likely are even less comfortable with AI (Castelo
2019 ). Research confirms that customers are less willing to
use AI for tasks involving subjectivity, intuition, and affect,
because they perceive AI as lacking the affective capability or
empathy needed to perform such tasks (Castelo et al. 2018 ).
Tasks differ in their consequences; choosing a movie is
relatively less consequential, but steering a car may involve
more consequences. Using AI for consequential tasks is per-
ceived as involving more risk, in turn reducing adoption in-
tentions. Early work has found support for this hypothesis,
more so among more conservative consumers for whom risks
are more salient (Castelo et al. 2018 ; Castelo and Ward 2016 ).
Finally, customer characteristics may also impact AI adop-
tion. We build from two points: (1) when outcomes are con-
sequential, this increases perceptions of risk (Bettman 1973 ),
and (2) women perceive more risk in general (Gustafsod
1998 ) and take on less risk (Byrnes et al. 1999 ). Hence, early
work has found that women (vs. men) are less likely to adopt
AI, especially when outcomes are consequential (Castelo and
Ward 2016 ). Moving beyond demographics, other factors also
impact the extent of AI adoption, e.g., to the extent a task is
salient to a customer ’s identity, the customer may be less like-
ly to adopt AI (Castelo 2019 ). To elaborate, if a certain con-
sumption activity is central to a customer ’s identity, then the
customer likes to take credit for consumption outcomes
(Leung et al. 2018 ). Some customers perceive that using AI
for these consumption activities is tantamount to cheating, and
this hinders the attribution o f credit post-consumption.
Therefore, if an activity is central to a customer ’s identity, then
the customer may be less likely to adopt AI (for this activity).
AI usage Moving past adoption issues, we note some usage
considerations, including how AI should communicate with
customers. Customers do not associate AI applications with
autonomous goals (Kim and Duhachek 2018 ); for example,
customers do not believe Google ’s AlphaGo has the self-
driven goal to be a national Go champion. Rather, they believe
that this AI application is programmed to play the game Go.
Consistent with this perception, customers are more likely to
focus on “how”(rather than “why”) the AI application per-
forms; implying that when engaging with AI, customers will
be in a low level construal mindset. From extant research, weknow that messages are more effective when the perceived
characteristics of the message source and the contents of the
actual message match, communication from AI should be
more effective when it highlights how rather than why in its
messaging (regulatory construal fit; Lee et al. 2009 ;M o t y k a
et al. 2014 ). In line with the above, Kim and Duhachek ( 2018 )
showed that a message from an AI application is more persua-
sive when the message is about how to use a product, rather
than why to use this product. This is because customers doubt
whether AI can “understand ”the importance of engaging in
certain consumption behaviors.
Next we pivot to factors that impact the propensity of cus-
tomers to engage with AI. Examining the case of medical
decision making, Longoni et al. ( 2019 )s h o wt h a tc u s t o m e r s ’
reservations are due to their concerns about uniqueness ne-
glect (i.e., the AI is perceived as less able to identify and relate
with customers ’unique features). Further, building from prior
work ( Şimşek and Yal ınçetin 2010 ; also see Haslam et al.
2005 ), Longoni et al. ( 2019 ) show that these reservations are
more for customers who have higher scores on the ‘personal
sense of uniqueness ’scale. In other work on how customers
engage with AI, Luo et al. ( 2019 ) examined how (potential)
customers engage with AI bots. In reality, AI bots can be as
effective as trained salespersons, and 4x as effective as inex-
perienced salespersons. However, if it is disclosed that the
customer is conversing with an AI bot, purchase rates drop
by 75%. Linked to points made prior in this paper, because
customers perceive the AI bot as less empathetic, they are curt
when interacting with AI bots, and so purchase less.
Task type
Task type refers to whether the AI application analyzes num-
bers versus non-numeric data (e.g., text, voice, images, or
facial expressions). These different data types all provide in-
puts for decision making, but analyzing numbers is substan-
tially easier than analyzing other data forms. Practitioners,
such as senior managers from Infinia ML, formulate this cat-
egorization slightly differently, noting that data that can be
organized into tabular formats are significantly easier to ana-
lyze than those data that cannot. In our discussions with em-
ployees of Stitch Fix, we gained further clarity on this point.
Stitch Fix elicits data from customers using both direct ques-
tions about their preferences (which can be put in tabular
formats) and indirect elicitations from customers ’Pinterest
pages and likes. Stitch Fix uses proprietary AI algorithms to
analyze the latter, non-numeric data and regards these data as
very useful, because it has learned that customers cannot al-
ways articulate their preferences on numeric scales.
The distinction in the above paragraph is critical, because
much data is non-tabular in form, and so being able to com-
prehend and analyze such data significantly enhances the im-
pact of AI. Many AI applications have started to analyze text,J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2020) 48:24 –42 28