voice, image, and face data inputs. These data inputs are ini-
tially in non-numeric formats, but are often translated into
numerical formats, e.g., pixel brightness values, relating to
images. Applications that can process such data inputs in-
clude, for example (1) IPSoft, which processes words spoken
to customer agents to interp ret what customers want (2)
Affectiva, which is working on in-car AI that can sense driver
emotion and fatigue and switch control to an autonomous AI,
and (3) Cloverleaf ’s shelfPoint, installed on retail store
shelves, which examines customers ’facial expressions to an-
alyze their emotional responses at the point of purchase.
Although currently AI ’s abilities to comprehend and analyze
such non-numeric data formats remain somewhat limited, de-
veloping this ability will be critical for the full realization of
the power of AI, and computer scientists are working towards
improving AI capabilities in this regard (e.g., LeCun et al.
2015 ; You et al. 2016 ).
Separate to the above, it is worth pointing out that the
ability to analyze unstructured data may be limited by legacy
infrastructures. A senior manager in Infinia ML indicated that
often data is stored in formats and structures less amenable to
AI deployment. Also, Kroger has an AI application that auto-
mates visual inspection of out-of-stock items on its grocery
shelves. In an interview with one of the authors of this paper, a
Kroger data scientist reported that the proper functioning of
Kroger ’s AI application requires hardware upgrades; specifi-
cally, it needs to upgrade its cameras to higher resolution
levels if the AI application is to work properly.
AI in robots
Virtuality-reality continuum Most AI is virtual in form. For
example, Replika is available on smartphones, and Libratus
uses a digital platform. However, AI can also be embedded in
a real entity or robot form, with some elements of physical
embodiment. The extent to which a form is virtual versus
embodied reflects its position on the Milgram virtuality –
reality continuum (Milgram et al. 1995 ). In this sense, re-
searchers and practitioners should conceive of virtual and real
forms not as distinct categories but rather as endpoints on a
continuum, within which AI entities are spread out. An AI like
Conversica is purely virtual, with no physical embodiment —
although some companies that use virtual AI do give it names.
In contrast, an AI application embedded in a robot barista
(e.g., Tipsy Robot in Las Vegas) appears somewhere on the
continuum between virtuality and reality, because it has some
physical embodiment; however, that embodiment can only
operate in a narrow range and on a specific task (making a
drink). Finally, the AI embedded in proposed multifunctional,
companion robots (that today remain under development)
would entail substantially more reality, featuring both physical
embodiment and the capacity to operate in wide range
of contexts (specifically, sha re physical proximity withindividuals without any protective barrier, travel with
individuals, etc.).
Overview of extant research Prior research (Table 2) indicates
that using robots offer substantial advantages, especially in
cases involving customer interactions. As prior work indi-
cates, customers form more personal bonds with robots than
with AI that lack any physical embodiment. For example,
individuals enjoy interacting with a physically present robot
than with either a robot simulation (on a computer) or a robot
presented via teleconference (Wainer et al. 2006 ). Further,
customers empathize with robots. When individuals are asked
to administer pain —via electric shocks —to a (physically pres-
ent) robot or a robot simulation, both of which go on to display
marks indicating pain after being subjected to an shocked,
individuals empathized more with the physically present robot
(Kwak et al. 2013 ). Finally, customers interacted longer with a
robot diet coach than with either a virtually present diet coach
or a diet diary in a paper form (Kidd and Breazeal 2008 ).
Other studies find that customers demonstrate reciprocity-
based perceptions, e.g., they express more positive percep-
tions of a care robot that asks for help and then returns this
help by offering a favor (Lammer et al. 2014 ). In a prisoner ’s
dilemma experiment, participants exhibited similar reciprocity
levels toward both robot partners and human partners
(Sandoval et al. 2016 ), and their reciprocity towards the robot
partner increased even more if the robot provided early signs
of cooperation (vs. random behavior). Noting the benefits of
embedding AI in robots, work in robotics is examining how
best to improve not only the physical capability of robots but
also the robot –AI interface (e.g., Adami 2015 ; Kober et al.
2013 ; Steels and Brooks 2018 ). Further, to take advantage of
the preference for physical embodiment, some vendors of vir-
tual agents (or bots) try to present these agents as having a
physical form. IPsoft ’s virtual agent, for example, is called
Amelia and is often represented by a lifelike avatar image
and voice.
However, other research shows that customers ’discomfort
with AI is accentuated when the AI application is embedded in
a robot. As robots appear more humanlike, they become more
unnerving, in line with the uncanny valley hypothesis (UVH;
Mori 1970 ).5UVH arises because the appearance of robots
“prompts attributions of mind. In particular, we suggest that
machines become unnerving when people ascribe to them
experience (the capacity to feel and sense), rather than agency
(the capacity to act and do) ”(Gray and Wegner 2012 ,p .1 2 5 ) .
Such factors may hinder AI adoption.
5Masahiro Mori wrote an influential paper arguing that making robots look
more human is beneficial, but only up to a certain point, after which such
robots elicit negative reactions. Thus, reactions become negative as robots
move. From somewhat human to human-like. Thereafter, if robots look per-
fectly human, reactions turn positive. The valley reflects these trends, as reac-
tions initially becoming more negative, then turn positive.J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2020) 48:24 –42 29