Sales and AI As we discussed with regard to Conversica, AI
may alter all stages of the sales process, from prospecting to
pre-approach to presentation to follow-up (Singh et al. 2019 ;
Syam and Sharma 2018 ). Thus, a wide variety of research
questions arise:
&Can AI analyze customer communication and other cus-
tomer information (e.g., social media posts) in ways to
devise future communications that are more persuasive
or increase engagement?
&Can AI provide real-time feedback to salespeople to help
them improve their sales pitches, based on assessments of
customers ’verbal and facial responses?
&How might AI combine text and other communication
inputs (e.g., voice data), actual customer behavior, and
other information (e.g., behaviors of similar customers)
to predict repurchases? This effort demands non-numeric
data, in line with cells 2, 4, 5 and 6.
&Considering Luo et al. ’s(2019 ) findings, how should
firms deploy AI sales bots effectively?
Answering these questions could help firms design sales to
take the most advantage of AI.
In addition, firms need to consider how they (re)organize
their sales and innovation processes. These points are not
listed in Fig. 2, as they do not tie neatly into the cells shown
in Fig. 1.
Sales process In the presence of AI, how should sales be or-
ganized and what skills will salespeople need? First, how best
to structure the sales organization wherein organizational
components include both AI bots and human salespeople.
Secondly, how should the firm manage the tradeoff between
AI focusing on customers ’expressed needs versus salespeople
being relatively better able to manage issues like customer
stewardship. Lastly, will salespeople be able to be trained/ to
be able to manage customers ’concerns relating to AI, specif-
ically issues related to data privacy and ethics. It is clear that
sales processes will require innovation related not only to AI
technologies, but also in job design and skills (Barro and
Davenport 2019 ).
AI innovation process Because the impact of AI is uncertain,
firms need to figure out how best to (continually) develop AI.
In our discussions with senior managers at Stitch Fix, they
indicated that the company encourages its data scientists to
pursue projects on their own (Colson 2018 ), such that they
continually engage in preliminary testing of new project ideas.
One Stitch Fix data scientist created a Tinder-like app called
Style Shuffle, to allow users to indicate preferences for various
clothing styles. This app not only informed stylists about cus-
tomers ’preferences (the expected benefit) but also helped
match stylists with specific customers (an unexpected benefit).Clothing suggestions from stylists who “swiped ”on the app
similarly to particular customers elicited more positive re-
sponses from the customers (i.e., both qualitative feedback
about the stylist and increased sales of clothes curated by that
stylist). When implementing AI, firms thus may achieve better
outcomes if they let their data scientists spend some amount of
time on unauthorized “pet projects, ”a research and develop-
ment practice already in place in firms like 3 M (Shum and Lin
2007 ). Researching the best way to implement AI, to take
advantage of both expected and unexpected benefits, is a fruit-
ful area for research.
Modeling the evolution of AI Finally, firms need to develop
realistic expectations, because “in the short run, AI will pro-
vide evolutionary benefits; in the long run, it is likely to be
revolutionary ”(Davenport 2018 , p. 7). That is, the benefits of
AI could be overestimated in the short term but
underestimated in the long term, a point (sometimes called
Amara ’s Law) in accordance with Gartner ’sh y p ec y c l em o d e l
of how new technologies evolve (Dedehayir and Steinert
2016 ; also see van Lente et al. 2013 ;S h a n k a r 2018 ). This view
is popular among practitioners, according to our personal dis-
cussions and interviews with various senior managers. Will
the evolution of AI reflect this model, or will its evolution
differ and more closely map onto models that also integrate
more traditional innovation models (e.g., Roger ’sm o d e l ,t h e
Bass model)? Research that tests which innovation model best
predicts AI evolutions will be useful.
AI and customer behavior
New technologies often alter customer behavior (e.g.,
Giebelhausen et al. 2014 ; Groom et al. 2011; Hoffman and
Novak 2018 ;M o o n 2003 ), and we expect that AI will do so as
well. We propose three research topics, related to AI adoption,
AI usage, and post-adoption issues.
AI adoption As a general point, due to a wide variety of fac-
tors, customers view AI negatively, which is a barrier to adop-
tion. As noted, these negative views often stem from cus-
tomers ’sense that AI is unable to feel (Castelo et al. 2018 ;
Gray 2017 )o rt h a tA Ii sr e l a t i v e l yl e s sa b l et oi d e n t i f yw h a ti s
unique about each customer (Longoni et al. 2019 ). Also Luo
et al. ( 2019 ) suggest that customers perceive AI bots as being
less empathetic. Customers also are less likely to adopt AI in
consequential domains (Castelo et al. 2018 ; Castelo and Ward
2016 ) and for tasks salient to their identity (Castelo 2019 ;
Leung et al. 2018 ).
Thus, an important area for future research, important from
the standpoint of both research and practice, would be to ex-
amine how best to mitigate the impact of the above. Initial
brainstorming with fellow researchers and with practitioners
suggests that positioning AI as a learning (artificial) organism,J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2020) 48:24 –42 36