CONCEPTUAL/THEORETICAL PAPER
How artificial intelligence will change the future of marketing
Thomas Davenport1&Abhijit Guha2&Dhruv Grewal3&Timna Bressgott4
#The Author(s) 2019
Abstract
In the future, artificial intelligence (AI) is likely to substantially change both marketing strategies and customer behaviors.
Building from not only extant research but also extensive interactions with practice, the authors propose a multidimensional
framework for understanding the impact of AI involving intelligence levels, task types, and whether AI is embedded in a robot.
Prior research typically addresses a subset of these dimensions; this paper integrates all three into a single framework. Next, the
authors propose a research agenda that addresses not only how marketing strategies and customer behaviors will change in the
future, but also highlights important policy questions relating to privacy, bias and ethics. Finally, the authors suggest AI will be
more effective if it augments (rather than replaces) human managers.
Keywords Artificial intelligence .Marketing strategy .Robots .Privacy .Bias .Ethics
AI is going to make our lives better in the future.
—Mark Zuckerberg, CEO, Facebook
Introduction
In the future, artificial intelligence (AI) appears likely to in-
fluence marketing strategies, including business models, sales
processes, and customer service options, as well as customer
behaviors. These impending transformations might be best
understood using three illustrative cases from diverse indus-
tries (see Table 1). First, in the transportation industry, driver-
less, AI-enabled cars may be just around the corner, promising
to alter both business models and customer behavior. Taxi andride-sharing businesses must evolve to avoid being marginal-
ized by AI-enabled transportation models; demand for auto-
mobile insurance (from individual customers) and breathaly-
zers (fewer people will drive, especially after drinking) will
likely diminish, whereas demand for security systems that
protect cars from being hacked will increase (Hayes 2015 ).
Driverless vehicles could also impact the attractiveness of real
estate, because (1) driverless cars can move at faster speeds,
and so commute times will reduce, and (2) commute times
will be more productive for passengers, who can safely work
while being driven to their destination. As such, far flung
suburbs may become more attractive, vis-à-vis the case today.
Second, AI will affect sales processes in various industries.
Most salespeople still rely on a telephone call (or equivalent)
as a critical part of the sales process. In the future, salespeople
Thomas Davenport, Abhijit Guha, Dhruv Grewal and Timna Bressgott
contributed to the writing of the paper. Mark Houston served as accepting
Editor for this article.
*Timna Bressgott
t.bressgott@maastrichtuniversity.nl
Thomas Davenport
tdavenport@babson.edu
Abhijit Guha
abhijit.guha@moore.sc.edu
Dhruv Grewal
dgrewal@babson.edu1Department of Technology, Operations, and Information
Management, Babson College, Babson Park, MA 02457, USA
2Department of Marketing, Darla Moore School of Business,
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208, USA
3Department of Marketing, Babson College, Babson
Park, MA 02457, USA
4Department of Marketing and Supply Chain Management,
Maastricht University, Tongersestraat 53, 6211, LM
Maastricht, The Netherlandshttps://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-019-00696-0Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science (2020) 48:24 –42
Published online: 10 October 2019