2018 ,p .v i ) ,i s “manifested by machines that exhibit aspects of
human intelligence ”(Huang and Rust 2018 ,p .1 5 5 ) ,a n di n -
volves machines mimicking “intelligent human behavior ”
(Syam and Sharma 2018 , p. 136). It relies on several key
technologies, such as machine learning, natural language pro-
cessing, rule-based expert systems, neural networks, deep
learning, physical robots, and robotic process automation
(Davenport 2018 ). By employing these tools, AI provides a
means to “interpret external data correctly, learn from such
data, and exhibit flexible adaptation ”(Kaplan and Haenlein
2019 , p. 17). Another way to describe AI depends not on its
underlying technology but rather its marketing and business
applications, such as automating business processes, gaining
insights from data, or engaging customers and employees
(Davenport and Ronanki 2018 ). We build on this latter per-
spective. A listing of this research is provided in Table 2.
First, to automate business processes, AI algorithms per-
form well-defined tasks with little or no human intervention,
such as transferring data from email or call centers into
recordkeeping systems (updating customer files), replacing
lost ATM cards, implementing simple market transactions,or“reading ”documents to extract key provisions using natu-
ral language processing. Second, AI can gain insights from
vast volumes of customer and transaction data, involving not
just numeric but also text, voice, image, and facial expression
data. Using AI-enabled analytics, firms then can predict what
a customer is likely to buy, anticipate credit fraud before it
happens, or deploy targeted digital advertising in real time.
For example, stylists working at Stitch Fix, a clothing and
styling service, use AI to identify which clothing styles will
best suit different customers. The underlying AI integrates
data provided by customers ’expressed preferences, their
Pinterest boards, handwritten notes, similar customers ’pref-
erences, and general style trends. Finally, AI can engage cus-
tomers, before and after the sale. The Conversica AI bot works
to move customer transactions along the marketing pipeline,
and the AI bot used by 1 –800-Flowers provides both sales and
customer service support. AI bots offer advantages beyond
just 24/7 availability. Not only do these AI bots have lower
error rates, but also they free up human agents to deal with
more complex cases. Further, AI bot deployment can be
scaled up or down as needed, when demand ebbs or flows.Table 1 Select use cases (in the order in which they appear in the paper)
Industry or Usage Context (specific firm or AI application) Description
AI in driverless cars (e.g., Tesla) In the future, AI-enabled cars may allow for car journeys without
any driver input, with the potential to significantly impact various
industries (e.g., insurance, taxi services) and customer behaviors
(e.g., whether they still buy cars).
Online retailing AI (e.g., Birchbox) AI will enable better predictions for what customers want, which may
cause firms to move away from a shopping-then-shipping business
model and toward a shipping-then-shopping business model.
Fashion-related AI (e.g., Stitch Fix) AI applications support stylists, who curate a set of clothing items for
customers. Stitch Fix ’s AI analyzes both numeric and image/other non-numeric data.
Sales AI (e.g. Conversica) AI bots can automate parts of the sales process, augmenting the capabilities
of existing sales teams. There may be backlash if customers know (upfront)
that they are chatting with an AI bot (even if the AI bot is otherwise capable)
Customer service robots (e.g., Rock ’em
and Sock ’em; Pepper)Robots with task-automating AI respond to relatively simple customer
service requests (e.g., making cocktails).
Emotional support AI (e.g., Replika) AI aims to provide emotional support to customers by asking meaningful
questions, offering social support, and adjusting to users ’linguistic syntax.
In-car AI (e.g., Affectiva) In-car AI that analyzes driver data (e.g., facial expression) to evaluate drivers ’
emotional and cognitive states.
Customer screening AI (e.g. Kanetix) AI used to identify customers who should be provided incentives to buy
insurance (and avoid those who (1) are already likely to buy and (2)
those unlikely to buy).
Business process AI (e.g., IBM Interact) AI used for multiple (simple) applications, such as customized offers
(e.g., Bank of Montreal).
Retail store AI (e.g., Café X, Lowebot,
84.51, Bossa Nova)Robots that can serve as coffee baristas, respond to simple customer service
requests in Lowe ’s stores, and identifying misshelved items in grocery stores.
Security AI (e.g., Knightscope ’s K5) Security robots patrol in offices or malls, equipped with superior sensing
capabilities (e.g., thermal cameras).
Spiritual support AI (e.g., BlessU-2; Xian ’er) Customizable robot priest/monk offering blessings in different languages
to the user.
Companion robot AI (e.g., Harmony from Realbotix) Customizable robot companion, which promises reduced loneliness
to the user.J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2020) 48:24 –42 26