As these descriptions suggest, AI offers the potential to
increase revenues and reduce costs. Revenues may increase
through improved marketing decisions (e.g., pricing, promo-
tions, product recommendations, enhanced customer engage-
ment); costs may decline due to the automation of simple
marketing tasks, customer service, and (structured) market
transactions. Furthermore, the above discussions indicate that
rather than replacing humans, firms generally are using AI to
augment their human employees ’capabilities, such as when
Stitch Fix uses AI to augment its stylists ’efforts to make
appropriate choices for clients (Gaudin 2016 ). This point
aligns well with sentiments expressed by Ginni Rometty, the
CEO of IBM, who proposed that AI would not lead to a world
of man “versus ”machine but rather a world of man “plus”
machines (Carpenter 2015 ).
A framework for understanding artificial
intelligence
Building on insights from marketing (and more generally
business), social sciences (e.g., psychology, sociology), and
computer science/robotics, we propose a framework to help
customers and firms anticipate how AI is likely to evolve. We
consider three AI-related dimensions: levels of intelligence,
task type, and whether the AI is embedded in a robot.
Level of intelligence
Task automation versus context awareness Davenport and
Kirby ( 2016 ) contrast task automation with context aware-
ness. The former involves AI applications that are standard-
ized, or rule based, such that they require consistency and the
imposition of logic (Huang and Rust 2018 ). For example,
IBM’s Deep Blue applied standardized rules and “brute force ”
algorithms to beat the best human chess player. Such AI is best
suited to contexts with clear rules and predictable outcomes,
like chess. On the cruise ship Symphony of the Seas ,t w o
robots, Rock ‘em and Sock ‘em, make cocktails for customers.
Elsewhere, the robot Pepper can provide frontline greetings,
and IBM ’s Watson can provide credit scoring and tax prepa-
ration assistance. Notwithstanding that these AI applications
involve fairly structured contexts, many firms struggle to im-
plement even these AI applications2and rely on specialized
businesses like Infinia ML and Noodle, or consulting firms
like Accenture or Deloitte, to develop and set up initial AI
initiatives.3
In contrast, context awareness continues to be developed,
and researchers in computer science are working on movingAI capabilities forward, from task automation to context
awareness (e.g., Ghahramani 2015 ;M n i he ta l . 2015 ).
Context awareness is a form of intelligence that requires ma-
chines and algorithms to “learn how to learn ”and extend
beyond their initial programming by humans. Such AI appli-
cations can address complex, idiosyncratic tasks by applying
holistic thinking and context-specific responses (Huang and
Rust 2018 ). However, such capabilities remain distant; a 2016
survey of AI researchers indicated there was only a 50%
chance of achieving context awareness (or its equivalent) by
2050 (Müller and Bostrom 2016 ). Building on the above
point, Reese ( 2018 , p. 61) cautions that such AI “does not
currently exist …nor is there agreement …if it is possible. ”
Nevertheless, this capability constitutes the goal of AI devel-
opments, as predicted by compelling examples from science
fiction, such as Jarvis from the Iron Man movies or Karen
from Spider Man –Homecoming ; both AI can understand
new and complex contexts and create solutions therein.
The differences between task automation and context
awareness map onto concepts of narrow versus general AI
(Baum et al. 2011; Kaplan and Haenlein 2019 ; Reese 2018 ).
As Kaplan and Haenlein ( 2019 ) state, both narrow and general
AI may equal or outperform human performance, but narrow
AI is focused on a specific domain and cannot learn to extend
into new domains, whereas general AI can extend into new
domains.
It is important to clarify that although in this paper we
consider two levels of intelligence (task automation vs. con-
text awareness), ideally levels of intelligence are best concep-
tualized as a continuum. Some AI applications have moved
beyond task automation but still fall well short of context
awareness, such as Google ’s DeepMind AlphaGo (which beat
the world ’s best Go player), the AI poker player Libratus, and
Replika.4These applications represent substantial advances,
yet state-of-the-art AI still is closer to task automation
(Davenport 2018 ).
Overview of extant research Research into the psychology of
automation (Longoni et al. 2019 ), examines how customers
may respond to AI. Notwithstanding the fact that AI
may be more accurate and/ or more reliable than
humans, customers have reservations about AI, and
these reservations tend to increase as AI moves towards
context awareness. In turn, these increased reservations
negatively impact the propensity to adopt AI, propensity
to use AI, etc. A listing of such research is shown in Table 2.
Moving forward, we discuss (separately) issues relating to AI
adoption and AI usage.
2Reese ( 2018, p. 61) cautions that this type of AI is in no way “easy AI. ”
3To clarify, businesses like Infinia ML etc. also provide support moving
forward, when the firm initiates more advanced AI initiatives.4Replika (replica.ai) aims to serve as an AI friend, programmed to ask ques-
tions about you and your life that are “meaningful, ”and to offer emotional
support (French 2018;a l s os e eH a s s l e r 2018).J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2020) 48:24 –42 27