has been exploring mortgages on BMO ’s site and later calls
the contact center, IBM Interact prioritizes the list of available
mortgage offers for the contact center service agent —in effect
augmenting agents ’capabilities and facilitating more relevant
customer conversations.
Cell 2: Controller of data Efforts to analyze non-numeric data
offer the potential to improve understanding of what cus-
tomers want, and firms ’customer service. Some AI applica-
tions can analyze non-numeric data (in some cases, after con-
version to numeric data), primarily using speech and image
recognition capabilities achieved with deep learning neural
networks (Chui et al. 2018 ). For example, Conversica AI, as
manifested in a virtual AI assistant named Angie, sends out-
bound emails to up to 30,000 leads per month, then interprets
the responses to identify the most promising leads (Power
2017 ). Angie engages in initial conversation with the pros-
pect, and then routes to most promising leads to a (human)
salesperson. In effect, Conversica ’s AI augments
salespersons ’capabilities. In a pilot test with a telecommuni-
cations company called Century Link, Angie appropriately
understood more than 95% of emails received (and sent the
rest to human agents for interpretation), and Century Link
earned a 20-fold return on its investments in Angie.
The Stitch Fix ’s business model offers another example. As
we noted, Stitch Fix delivers apparel directly to customers
(Wilson et al. 2016 ), without requiring the customers to actu-
ally engage in a formal shopping task. No Stitch Fix retaillocation exists. Instead, customers fill out style surveys, pro-
vide their physical measurements, evaluate sample styles, cre-
ate links to their Pinterest boards, and send in personal notes.
As may be expected, customers have trouble explicating their
exact style preferences using words and numbers, but their
pins and likes can be (better) indicators of their preferences.
Stitch Fix ’s proprietary machine learning algorithms examine
numbers, words, and Pinterest pins, then summarize the find-
ings for the company ’s fashion stylists, who in turn select
suitable clothing to send to each customer. The above example
illustrates the need to suitably balance AI input and human
input; senior managers from Stitch Fix told us that —in their
experience —their AI works best when it augments the
(human) stylists ’capabilities.
Noting that the AI applica tions in companies like
Conversica and Stitch Fix use all types of data (i.e., use nu-
meric data and non-numeric data), we term the AI applications
in this cell as reflecting “Controller of Data. ”
Cell 3: Numerical data robot This cell is similar to cell 1,
except that it incorporates AI embedded in a robotic form,
and so these AI applications can best be described as robots
that process numerical data inputs. Such robots are well suited
to retail environments with well-structured operations. At
Café X, for example, a robot barista can serve up to 120
coffees per hour (Hochman 2018 ). Each robotic barista fea-
tures a $25,000, six-axis animatronic arm. Customers place
orders on a kiosk touchscreen (or via an app), so all inputs
Task 
automation
technologies, 
deployed 
currently or to 
be deployed in 
the short to 
medium termDigital form Robot form
Analyze 
numbers1 – Controller of 
Numerical Data
Business Use Case
Kanetix
IBM3 – Numerical Data Robot
Business Use Case
Café X
Tipsy Robot 
Analyze 
text, 
voice, 
faces, 
images2 – Controller of Data
Business Use Case
Conversica 
Stitch Fix
Replika4 – Data Robot
Business Use Case
Lowebot
84.51/ Kroger
Walmart/ Bossa Nova
K5 from Knightscape
Context 
awareness
technologies 
that may be 
deployed in the 
long termDigital form Robot form
Analyze 
numbers, 
text, 
voice, 
faces, 
image5 – Data Virtuoso
Example Use Case
Jarvis6 – Robot Expert
Example Use Case
DorianFig. 1 AI frameworkJ. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2020) 48:24 –42 33