1
Vol.:(0123456789) Scientific Reports  |        (2022) 12:13270  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-17620-2
www.nature.com/scientificreportsComparison of multi‑class 
and fusion of multiple single‑class 
SegNet model for mapping karst 
wetland vegetation using UAV 
images
Tengfang Deng, Bolin Fu*, Man Liu, Hongchang He, Donglin  Fan, Lilong Li*, 
Liangke Huang & Ertao Gao
Wetland vegetation classification using deep learning algorithm and unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) 
images have attracted increased attentions. However, there exist several challenges in mapping karst 
wetland vegetation due to its fragmentation, intersection, and high heterogeneity of vegetation 
patches. This study proposed a novel approach to classify karst vegetation in Huixian National 
Wetland Park, the largest karst wetland in China by fusing single‑class SegNet classification using 
the maximum probability algorithm. A new optimized post ‑classification algorithm was developed to 
eliminate the stitching traces caused by SegNet model prediction. This paper evaluated the effect of 
multi‑class and fusion of multiple single‑class SegNet models with different EPOCH values on mapping 
karst vegetation using UAV images. Finally, this paper carried out a comparison of classification 
accuracies between object ‑based Random Forest (RF) and fusion of single‑class SegNet models. 
The specific conclusions of this paper include the followings: (1) fusion of four single‑class SegNet 
models produced better classification for karst wetland vegetation than multi‑class SegNet model, 
and achieved the highest overall accuracy of 87.34%; (2) the optimized post ‑classification algorithm 
improved classification accuracy of SegNet model by eliminating splicing traces; (3) classification 
performance of single‑class SegNet model outperformed multi‑class SegNet model, and improved 
classification accuracy (F1‑ Score) ranging from 10 to 25%; (4) Fusion of single‑class SegNet models 
and object ‑based RF classifier both produced good classifications for karst wetland vegetation, and 
achieved over 87% overall accuracy.
Wetlands are some of the most productive habitat and ecosystem types on the  planet1,2. Karst wetland has been as 
a unique type of underground wetland system in the Ramsar classification, with or without a surface water com-
ponent, commonly associated with caves or other underground cavities. Karst wetlands have played important 
environmental adjustment roles, such as maintain water sources, purify water quality etc., and possesses unique 
ecological benefits and research  values3–5. The Huixian Karst National Wetland Park (HKWP) of the study area 
is in the core of the East Asia karst area, the third-largest karst area in the world and the largest karst wetland 
in China, and possesses unique ecological and landscape values that help promote Guilin city as a world tourist 
attraction. However, karst wetlands in the HKWP have been seriously damaged under the influence of human 
activities, which have already appeared area reduction, functional degradation and biodiversity loss. Vegetation 
is an important indicator of wetland environmental  change6. Therefore, mapping spatial distribution of vegeta-
tion is essential for protecting, managing and restoring karst wetlands of HKWP .
Current researches for karst wetlands mainly focus on monitoring the organic matter or microorganism 
content in the soil to evaluate the pollution status of karst  wetland7,8,including monitoring chemical and iso-
topic evolution of groundwater in an evaporite karst plateau (including wetland areas and saline to hyper-saline 
springs) located at southern  Spain9. Some scholars constructed mass balances of both calcium and phosphorus 
for two watersheds in Big Cypress National Preserve in southwest Florida (USA) to evaluate the time scales over OPEN
College of Geomatics and Geoinformation, Guilin University of Technology, No.319 Yanshan Street, Guilin 541006, 
China. *email: fubolin@glut.edu.cn; Lllong99@glut.edu.cn