10
Vol:.(1234567890) Scientific Reports  |        (2022) 12:13270  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-17620-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/type, but the differences in kappa coefficient were not statistically significant. These results demonstrated that 
the fusion of multiple single-class SegNet model could provide more accurate classifications for karst wetland 
vegetation, and the SegNet model with EPOCH 15 also outperformed the models with EPOCH 5 or 10 in veg -
etation classification.
Single‑class SegNet classifications with texture feature. This study added textural features into the 
deep-learning image dataset of Area B for exploring the effect of texture feature on single-class SegNet classifica-
tions of karst wetland vegetation (Fig.  8). In order to comparison of visual difference in classifications, the typical 
area of each model classification was marked with red circles, and the correct vegetation type at the correspond-
ing position was marked with a white circle from semantic labeling dataset.
The single-class SegNet model produced better visually accurate depictions of karst water  and karst aquatic 
flora  than karst grass  and karst broad-leaved forest . The single-class SegNet model with EPOCH 15 and textural 
features accurately identified four karst vegetation. When the EPOCH value was set 10, the four models without 
textural features produced more visually accurate depictions than that with textural features. While the four 
models with textural features and EPOCH 15 provided the better depictions. Comparison of the models with 
texture features, the karst vegetation classifications were better depicted by the model with the EPOCH 15 than 
by the model with the EPOCH 10. The model-w  with the EPOCH 15 produced the confusion between karst water  
and other land use types. The model-b  with the EPOCH 10 produced the better depiction of karst broad-leaved 
forest  than the model with EPOCH 15 or texture features (Fig.  8).
Table  5 showed the classification accuracies for four single-class SegNet models with or without texture feature 
in the area B. The single-class SegNet models for classifying karst vegetations achieved over 83% of F1-score, 
especially for the models with the textural features producing 0.97 F1-score and 0.94 kappa coefficient for karst 
aquatic flora . These results indicated that the single-class SegNet model provides the capability for monitoring 
spatial distribution of karst wetland vegetation using UAV images. The four models with the textural features 
improved the 4% F1-score and 6% kappa coefficient when comparing the model without texture feature clas-
sifications, respectively. The studies found that the classifications produced by combining single-class SegNet 
with texture features typically outperform only SegNet-based classifications. The texture feature enhances the 
capability of SegNet models in discriminating karst vegetations, and achieved over 0.92 F1-score for karst aquatic 
flora , Karst Grass  and karst water . When the deep-learning dataset without texture feature, the SegNet model 
(model-a ) with EPOCH 15 achieved over 0.95 F1-score for karst aquatic flora , which was higher than the other 
two karst vegetation types. When comparing the model classifications with the different EPOCH values, this 
paper found the following results: (1) the model-a  with EPOCH 15 and texture features produced 0.97 F1-score 
for karst aquatic flora , which was 0.06 higher than this model with EPOCH 10 and without texture features. the 
model-a  using just EPOCH 10 achieved 0.90 kappa coefficient, a decrease of 4% in comparison of the model 
with EPOCH 15 and texture features; (2) the model-b  with EPOCH 15 improved F1-score and kappa coefficient 
to 0.86 and 0.72 in comparison of the model with the EPOCH 10, while the model-b  using the combination of 
EPOCH 15 and texture features achieved higher classification accuracy for karst broad-leaved forest , reaching 
Figure 8.  Single-class SegNet-based classifications for all karst wetland types with textural features. ArcGIS 10.6 
software (http:// www. esri. com/ softw are/ arcgis) was used to process and map the data by first author (T. D.). The 
semantic labeling dataset was collected and created by T. D. and B. F.