2
Vol:.(1234567890) Scientific Reports  |        (2022) 12:13270  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-17620-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/which its striking landscape pattern  developed10. Several studies have analyzed the distribution and change of 
karst vegetation using field survey and field  sampling11,12. However, in situ floristic mapping and data collection 
usually are expensive, labor intensive and inaccessible or even dangerous to human beings in the karst wetlands.
Remote sensing techniques have been used to classify vegetation in marsh, estuary and coastal wetlands, 
and other wetland  types13–16. Lane et al. explored and evaluated the utility of a newly launched high-resolution, 
eight-band Worldview-2 images for classifying freshwater deltaic wetland vegetation and aquatic habitats in the 
Selenga River Delta of Lake  Baikal17. Betbeder et al. classified wetland vegetation formations at a 1:10,000 scale 
using eight dual-polarization TerraSAR-X images acquired in 2013 during dry and wet  seasons18. Franklin et al. 
distinguished circumboreal Canadian bogs and fens by differences in soil, hydrology, vegetation, and morpho -
logical features by combining Radarsat-2 full-polarimetric synthetic aperture radar (SAR) data and Landsat-8 
Operational Land Imager (OLI) multi-spectral  images19. The aforementioned studies confirmed that remote 
sensing provides a practical means for data collection and vegetation mapping in the wetland. Unmanned aerial 
vehicles (UAVs) offer a cost-effective, flexible approach to acquire the ultra-high spatial and temporal resolu-
tion images for discriminating and mapping salt marsh species (2020) and mangrove  species20,21. However, the 
composition and spatial distribution patterns of karst wetland vegetation have great different from other wetland 
types, due to its unique hydrogeological condition. In addition, the vegetation patches are usually very small, and 
located around karst rivers and lakes. Classification of karst wetland vegetation still faces great challenges with 
a large number of fragmentations, intersection, and high heterogeneity of vegetation patches.
Shallow machine learning algorithms, such as maximum likelihood, k-nearest neighbor (KNN), support 
vector machine (SVM), decision tree and random forest (RF) classifiers have long been the main methods for 
discriminating wetland  vegetation22–26. However, these algorithms usually spend a lot of time and effort to select 
optimal input features from raw data. Transfer learning produced by shallow machine learning algorithms also 
has a large learning cost. However, deep learning algorithms have provided an effective method to automatically 
learn and identify features from large amounts of raw data with little or no  preprocessing27. Several deep learning 
architectures, such as convolutional neural network (CNN), fully convolutional network (FCN), SegNet, PSPNet 
and DeepLabV3 plus networks have achieved state-of-the-art performance in land cover  classification28 and water 
body  extraction29. These studies confirmed that a powerful CNN requires a large amount of training  data30,31. 
However, the important semantic labeling data of training dataset for deep-learning model has been currently 
produced by visual interpretation, which usually consumes a lot of time and labor intensive. This paper presents 
an approach to create semantic labeling data by combing object-based RF classification with visual interpretation 
of UAV images. In addition, there exist many challenges in identifying multi-class land cover types using deep 
learning algorithms, such as a large dataset and for a lot of time training, class imbalance, etc. In order to solve 
some of these problems, we propose a novel single class deep learning approach for classifying karst wetland 
vegetation, and demonstrated that the feasibility of fusing single-class SegNet classification for karst wetland 
vegetation mapping using the maximum probability approach.
The main original contributions of this study are that: (1) we propose a novel classification technique for map-
ping karst wetland vegetation by fusing multiple single-class SegNet models using the maximum probability(MP), 
and evaluated the performance of multi-class SegNet model and fusion of single-class SegNet models on karst 
wetland vegetation mapping in Huixian National Wetland Park;(2) this paper present a new approach to create 
semantic labeling dataset by combining object-based RF classification model with visual interpretation; (3) we 
developed an optimized post-classification algorithm to eliminate the splicing traces caused by model prediction 
of SegNet network; (4)we explored the effects of EPOCH values and texture feature on karst wetland vegetation 
classification.
Study area and data source
Study area. Huixian National Wetland Park (25°01′30″ N ~ 25°11′15″ N, 110°08′15″ E ~ 110°18′00″ E) is 
located in Guilin city, Guangxi province, southeast China. The total length of wetland park is about six kilom-
eters from east to west. The total width is about 2.8 km from north to south. The Huixian wetland is the most 
evocative and largest karst wetland in China and even the world’s low-lying and low-altitude karst areas. This 
wetland feature and its surroundings are extremely rare in the global peak forest karst plain features and are typi-
cally wetlands of significant research  values32,33. Since the 1950s, the original karst wetlands have been continu-
ously undermined, due to human activities and the lack of effective management and protection. The water body 
of wetland has gradually been shrinking, and extensive karst wetlands were reclaimed as paddy field and fish 
ponds, which have resulted in the decrease of biodiversity. In addition, invasive species, such as water hyacinth, 
have increasingly threatened wild plant species in the karst wetlands.
Through field investigation and analysis of the basic characteristics of Huixian National Wetland Park, the core 
areas A and B of Huixian National Wetland Park were selected as the test area (Fig.  1), which covered the original 
and complete karst wetland vegetation types, such as lotus , water hyacinth , bamboo  and linden . The ecological 
appearance is less damaged by human activities. Wetland vegetation usually surrounded by karst rivers and lakes.
UAV image collections and preprocessing. The original UAV images were collected using a DJI 
Phantom 4 Pro professional V2.0 drone with a 1-inch 20MP CMOS camera from 10:00 am to 3:00 pm (UTC/
GMT + 8.00) during July 10 ~ 20, 2018. During the acquisition process, the weather was sunny, windless, and the 
field of vision was good. The flight path was automatically generated using the ground station software (DJI GS 
PRO), where the heading overlap rate was 80%, the side overlap rate was 75%. The flight height and field of view 
(FOV) was 90 m and default value 84°, respectively. Ground Control Points (GCPs) were obtained using a Trim-
ble R6 GPS-RTK with positioning accuracy ± 2 cm (Trimble, CA, USA) for georeferencing and image stitching 
during UAV images processing.