5
Vol.:(0123456789) Scientific Reports  |        (2022) 12:13270  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-17620-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/(3) Classification model training and prediction. The tuning parameters of object-based RF classification 
included the max number of trees (ntree ), the number of split variables (mtry ). In this study, the optimal param-
eters of ntree and mtry were set 1200 and 8, respectively. The RF-based model training and classification for karst 
wetland vegetation were carried out using the randomForest package.
SegNet‑based classification of Karst wetland. SegNet architecture is designed to be an efficient archi-
tecture for pixel-wise semantic segmentation, which mainly composed of encoder network, decoder network, 
and pixel-wise classification  layer37. The layers are followed by batch  normalization38 and the rectified linear unit 
(ReLU)activation function. It provides a good balance between accuracy and computational cost. In addition, 
symmetrical architecture and combination of the pooling/upsampling of SegNet architecture are very effective 
for precise re-localization of  features39–42, which is intuitively crucial for remote sensing image classification.
Previous studies reported that as the number of iterations increases, the loss function of DeeplabV3 plus 
decreased rapidly and gradually stabilized, and the classification accuracy of model is rapidly improved and 
 stabilized43. Textural features can improve the spectral separability of wetland  vegetation44. In order to construct a 
high-precision SegNet model for mapping karst wetland vegetation, this paper added the textural features into the 
input image features, and developed four single-class and two multi-class SegNet models with different EPOCH 
values, which were described as shown in Table  2. An optimized image algorithm and conditional random field 
(CRF) algorithm were used to conduct post-processing of SegNet-based classifications in this study.
Creating training dataset for SegNet model. This study attempted to explore the effect of texture features on the 
SegNet model for classifying karst wetland vegetation. The deep-learning image dataset of karst wetland (Area 
B) was added texture features from UAV DOM image. The textural feature was calculated from the grey-level co-
occurrence matrix (GLCM) with window size 3 × 3, 5 × 5, and 7 × 7 and 64 greyscale quantization levels to obtain 
the mean, variance, homogeneity, contrast, dissimilarity, entropy, second moment and correlation features in ENVI 
5.4 software, respectively. The deep-learning image dataset of karst wetland (Areas A and B) is randomly divided 
into 100,000 image datasets with the size of 256 × 256 pixels, of which 75% was as training datasets and 25% was 
as testing datasets. The data enhancement of training dataset was executed including randomly flipped along the 
x-axis or y-axis mirrored or rotated 90º, 180º, 270º, color shifted, randomly scaled and invert operation.
To evaluate the classification performance of SegNet model for mapping karst wetland vegetation, this study 
constructed four single-class SegNet model for identifying karst water , karst grass , karst broad-leaved forest , and 
karst aquatic flora , respectively. In addition, the paper also established two multi-class SegNet model for map -
ping all karst wetland vegetation types.
Figure 3.  The semantic labeling dataset for SegNet classification (a ) DOM image of area A. (b ) semantic 
labeling dataset of Area A, 10,550*5320 pixels. (c ) DOM image of area B. (d ) semantic labeling dataset of area B, 
11,290*7176 pixels.). ArcGIS 10.6 software (http:// www. esri. com/ softw are/ arcgis) was used to process and map 
the data by first author (T. D.) and corresponding author (B. F.). The DOM images and semantic labeling dataset 
were collected and created by T. D. and B. F.