Self-
Attention
A
Add & Norm
Feed Forward
Add & Norm 'A(a) Reﬁning - without AoA
Self-
Attention
A
Add & Norm 'A
AoA (b) Reﬁning - with AoA
Figure 6: Reﬁning modules w/o and w/ AoA.
Linear
Concat
ReLUtc
thˆta
(a) Base
LSTMtc
Concat
thˆta (b) LSTM
ˆta
th
AoAtc (c) AoA
Figure 7: Different schemes for decoders to model ct.
4.3. Qualitative Analysis
Table 3 shows a few examples with images and captions
generated by our AoANet and a strong baseline as well as
the human-annotated ground truths. We derive the baseline
model by re-implementing the Up-Down [2] model with the
settings of AoANet. From these examples, we ﬁnd that the
baseline model generates captions which are in line with
the logic of language but inaccurate for the image content,
while AoANet generates accurate captions in high quality.
More speciﬁcally, our AoANet is superior in the following
two aspects: 1) AoANet counts objects of the same kind
more accurately. There are two birds/cats in the image of
the ﬁrst/second example. However, the baseline model ﬁnds
only one while our AoANet counts correctly; 2) AoANet
ﬁgures out the interactions of objects in an image. For ex-
ample, AoANet knows that the birds are on top of a giraffe
but not the tree, in the ﬁrst example; the boy is hitting the
tennis ball with a racket but not holding , in the fourth ex-
ample. AoANet has these advantages because it can ﬁgure
out the connections among objects and also knows how they
are connected: in the encoder, the reﬁning module uses self-
attention to seek interactions among objects and uses AoA
to measure how well they are related; in the decoder, AoA
helps to ﬁlter out irrelative objects which don’t have the re-
quired interactions and only keeps the related ones. While
the baseline model generates captions which are logically
right but might not match the image contents.
4.4. Ablative Analysis
To quantify the impact of the proposed AoA module, we
compare AoANet against a set of other ablated models with
various settings. We ﬁrst design the “base” model whichTable 4: Settings and results of ablation studies. The results
are reported after XE training stage.
Model B@1 B@4 R C
Base 75.7 34.9 56.0 109.5
+ Enc: Reﬁne (w/o AoA) 77.0 35.6 56.4 112.5
+ Enc: Reﬁne (w/ AoA) 76.7 36.1 56.7 114.5
+ Dec: LSTM 76.8 35.9 56.6 113.5
+ Dec: AoA 76.6 35.8 56.6 113.8
+ Dec: LSTM + AoA unstable training process
+ Dec: MH-Att 75.8 34.8 56.0 109.6
+ Dec: MH-Att, LSTM 76.6 35.8 56.7 113.8
+ Dec: MH-Att, AoA 76.9 36.1 56.6 114.3
Full: AoANet 77.4 37.2 57.5 119.8
doesn’t have a reﬁning module in its encoder and adopts a
“base” decoder in Figure 7(a), using a linear transformation
to generate the context vector ct.
Effect of AoA on the encoder. To evaluate the effect of
applying AoA to the encoder, we design a reﬁning module
without AoA, which contains a self-attention module and
a following feed-forward transition, in Figure 6(a). From
Table 4 we observe that reﬁning the feature representations
brings positive effects, and adding a reﬁning module with-
out AoA improves the CIDEr-D score of “base” by 3.0. We
then apply AoA to the attention mechanism in the reﬁning
module and we drop the feed-forward layer. The results
show that our AoA further improves the CIDEr-D score by
2.0.
Effect of AoA on the decoder. We compare the per-
formance of using different schemes to model the context
vectorct: “base” (Figure 7(a)), via a linear transformation;
“LSTM” (Figure 7(b)), via an LSTM; AoA (Figure 7(c)),
by applying AoA. We conduct experiments with both sin-
gle attention and multi-head attention (MH-Att). From Ta-
ble 4, we observe that replacing single attention with multi-
head attention brings slightly better performances. Using
LSTM improves the performance of the base model, and
AoA further outperforms LSTM. Comparing to LSTM or
GRU, which uses some memories (hidden states) and gates
to model attention results in a sequential manner, AoA is
more light-weighted as it involves only two linear transfor-
mation and requires little computation. Even so, AoA still
outperforms LSTM. We also ﬁnd that the training process
of “LSTM + AoA” (building AoA upon LSTM) is unstable
and could reach a sub-optimal point, which indicates that
stacking more gates doesn’t provide further performance
improvements.
To qualitatively show the effect of AoA, we visualize the
caption generation process in Figure 8 with attended im-
age regions for each decoding time step. Two models are
compared: the “base” model, which doesn’t incorporate the
4640