A
 teddy
 bear
 sitting
 on
 a
book
 on
 a
 book
 .
(a) Base – A teddy bear sitting on a book on a book .
A
 teddy
 bear
 sitting
 on
 a
chair
 with
 a
 book
 .
(b) AoA – A teddy bear sitting on a chair with a book .
Figure 8: Visualization of attention regions in the caption generation process for the “base” model and “decoder with AoA”.
The “base” model can be easily misled by irrelevant attention while “decoder with AoA” is less likely so.
AoA module, and “decoder with AoA”, which employs an
AoA module in its caption decoder. Observing the attended
image regions in Figure 8, we ﬁnd that the attention module
isn’t always reliable for the caption decoder to generate a
word, and directly using the attention result might result in
wrong captions. In the example, the book is attended by the
base model when generating the caption fragment “A teddy
bear sitting on a ... ” . As a result, the base model outputs
“book” for the next word, which is not consistent to what
the image shows since the teddy bear is actually sitting on
achair but not on a book . In contrast, “decoder with AoA”
is less likely to be misled by irrelevant attention results, be-
cause the AoA module in it adds another attention on the at-
tention result, which suppress the irrelevant/misleading in-
formation and keeps only the useful.
4.5. Human Evaluation
We follow the practice in [44] and invited 30 evaluators
to evaluate 100 randomly selected images. For each image,
we show the evaluators two captions generated by “decoder
with AoA” and the “base” model in random order, and ask
them which one is more descriptive. The percentages of
“decoder with AoA”, “base”, and comparative are 49.15%,
21.2%, and 29.65% respectively, which shows the effective-
ness of AoA as conﬁrmed by the evaluators.
4.6. Generalization
To show the general applicability of AoA, we perform
experiments on a video captioning dataset, MSR-VTT [41]:we use ResNet-101 [18] to extract feature vectors from sam-
pled 20 frames of each video and then pass them to a bi-
LSTM and a decoder, “base” or “decoder with AoA”. We
ﬁnd that “decoder with AoA” improves “base” from BLEU-
4: 33.53,CIDEr-D: 38.83, ROUGE-L 56.90 to 37.22, 42.44,
58.32, respectively, which shows that AoA is also promis-
ing for other tasks which involve attention mechanisms.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose the Attention on Attention
(AoA) module, an extension to conventional attention
mechanisms, to address the irrelevant attention issue. Fur-
thermore, we propose AoANet for image captioning by ap-
plying AoA to both the encoder and decoder. More re-
markably, we achieve a new state-of-the-art performance
with AoANet. Extensive experiments conducted on the MS
COCO dataset demonstrate the superiority and general ap-
plicability of our proposed AoA module and AoANet.
Acknowledgment
This project was supported by Shenzhen Key Lab-
oratory for Intelligent Multimedia and Virtual Real-
ity (ZDSYS201703031405467), National Natural Science
Foundation of China (NSFC, No.U1613209, 61872256,
61972217), and National Engineering Laboratory for Video
Technology - Shenzhen Division. We would also like to
thank Qian Wu, Yaxian Xia and Qixiang Ye, as well as the
anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments.
4641