Similarity
SoftMax
Mat Mul
weights
scores
Q K VˆV(a) Attention
Attention
Concat
Linear
Linear
Sigmoid
Multiply
IG
QKVˆVˆI (b) Attention on Attention
Figure 2: Attention and “ Attention on Attention ” (AoA).
(a)The attention module generates some weighted aver-
ageˆVbased on the similarity scores between QandK;
(b)AoA generates the “information vector” Iand “atten-
tion gate” G, and adds another attention via element-wise
multiplication.
LSTM/GRU, which uses gates and memories to model its
inputs in a sequential manner.
2.4. Summarization
We summarize the differences between our method and
the work discussed above, as follows: We apply Attention
on Attention (AoA) to image captioning in this paper; AoA
is a general extension to attention mechanisms and can be
applied to any of them; AoA determines the relevance be-
tween the attention result and query, while multi-modal fu-
sion combines information from different modalities; AoA
requires only one “attention gate” but no hidden states.
In contrast, LSTM/GRU requires hidden states and more
gates, and is applicable only to sequence modeling.
3. Method
We ﬁrst introduce the Attention on Attention (AoA) mod-
ule and then show how we derive AoANet for image cap-
tioning by applying AoA to the image encoder and the cap-
tion decoder.
3.1. Attention on Attention
An attention module fatt(Q,K,V )operates on some
queries, keys and values and generates some weighted av-
erage vectors (denoted by Q,K,VandˆVrespectively), in
Figure 2(a). It ﬁrst measures the similarities between Qand
Kand then uses the similarity scores to compute weightedaverage vectors over V, which can be formulated as:
ai,j=fsim(qi,kj),αi,j=eai,j
/summationtext
jeai,j(1)
ˆvi=/summationdisplay
jαi,jvj (2)
whereqi∈Qis theithquery,kj∈Kandvj∈Vare
thejthkey/value pair; fsimis a function that computes the
similarity score of each kjandqi; andˆviis the attended
vector for the query qi.
The attention module outputs a weighted average for
each query, no matter whether or how QandK/Vare re-
lated. Even when there is no relevant vectors, the attention
module still generates a weighted average vector, which can
be irrelevant or even misleading information.
Thus we propose the AoA module (as shown in Figure
2(b)) to measure the relevance between the attention result
and the query. The AoA module generates an “information
vector”iand an “attention gate” gvia two separate linear
transformations, which are both conditioned on the atten-
tion result and the current context ( i.e. the query) q:
i=Wi
qq+Wi
vˆv+bi(3)
g=σ(Wg
qq+Wg
vˆv+bg) (4)
whereWi
q,Wi
v,Wg
q,Wg
v∈RD×D,bi,bg∈RD, andD
is the dimension of qandv;ˆv=fatt(Q,K,V )is the
attention result, fattis an attention module and σdenotes
the sigmoid activation function.
Then AoA adds another attention by applying the atten-
tion gate to the information vector using element-wise mul-
tiplication and obtains the attended information ˆi:
ˆi=g⊙i (5)
where⊙denotes element-wise multiplication. The through-
out pipeline of AoA is formulated as:
AoA(fatt,Q,K,V ) =σ(Wg
qQ+Wg
vfatt(Q,K,V )+bg)
⊙(Wi
qQ+Wi
vfatt(Q,K,V )+bi)(6)
3.2. AoANet for Image Captioning
We build the model, AoANet, for image captioning
based on the encoder/decoder framework (Figure 3), where
both the encoder and the decoder are incorporated with an
AoA module.
3.2.1 Encoder with AoA
For an image, we ﬁrst extract a set of feature vectors A=
{a1,a2,...,ak}using a CNN or R-CNN based network,
4636