requirement of a speciﬁc query, the attention module still
returns a vector which is a weighted average on the candi-
date vectors and thus is totally irrelevant to the query.
To address this issue, we propose Attention on Atten-
tion(AoA), which extends the conventional attention mech-
anisms by adding another attention. Firstly, AoA generates
an “information vector ” and an “ attention gate ” with two
linear transformations, which is similar to GLU [10]. The
information vector is derived from the current context ( i.e.
the query) and the attention result via a linear transforma-
tion, and stores the newly obtained information from the
attention result together with the information from the cur-
rent context. The attention gate is also derived from the
query and the attention result via another linear transforma-
tion with sigmoid activation followed, and the value of each
channel indicates the relevance/importance of the informa-
tion on the corresponding channel in the information vector.
Subsequently, AoA adds another attention by applying the
attention gate to the information vector using element-wise
multiplication and ﬁnally obtains the “ attended informa-
tion”, the expected useful knowledge.
AoA can be applied to various attention mechanisms.
For the traditional single-head attention, AoA helps to
determine the relevance between the attention result and
query. Specially, for the recently proposed multi-head at-
tention [35], AoA helps to build relationships among differ-
ent attention heads, ﬁlters all the attention results and keeps
only the useful ones.
We apply AoA to both the image encoder and the caption
decoder of our image captioning model, AoANet. For the
encoder, it extracts feature vectors of objects in the image,
applies self-attention [35] to the vectors to model relation-
ships among the objects, and then applies AoA to determine
how they are related to each other. For the decoder, it ap-
plies AoA to ﬁlter out the irrelevant/misleading attention
results and keep only the useful ones.
We evaluate the impact of applying AoA to the encoder
and decoder respectively. Both quantitative and qualitative
results show that AoA module is effective. The proposed
AoANet outperforms all previously published image cap-
tioning models: a single model of AoANet achieves 129.8
CIDEr-D score on MS COCO dataset ofﬂine test split; and
an ensemble of 4 models achieves 129.6 CIDEr-D (C40)
score on the online testing server. Main contributions of
this paper include:
•We propose the Attention on Attention (AoA) module,
an extension to the conventional attention mechanism,
to determine the relevance of attention results.
•We apply AoA to both the encoder and decoder to con-
stitute AoANet: in the encoder, AoA helps to better
model relationships among different objects in the im-
age; in the decoder, AoA ﬁlters out irrelative attention
results and keeps only the useful ones.•Our method achieves a new state-of-the-art perfor-
mance on MS COCO dataset.
2. Related Work
2.1. Image Captioning
Earlier approaches to image captioning are
rule/template-based [48, 34] which generate slotted
caption templates and use the outputs of object detection
[30, 39, 38], attribute prediction and scene recognition to
ﬁll in the slots. Recent approaches are neural-based and
speciﬁcally, utilize a deep encoder decoder framework,
which is inspired by the development of neural machine
translation [8]. For instance, an end-to-end framework
is proposed with a CNN encoding the image to feature
vector and an LSTM decoding it to caption [37]. In [42],
the spatial attention mechanism on CNN feature map is
used to incorporate visual context. In [6], a spatial and
channel-wise attention model is proposed. In [27], an adap-
tive attention mechanism is introduced to decide when to
activate the visual attention. More recently, more complex
information such as objects, attributes and relationships are
integrated to generate better descriptions [50, 2, 49, 44].
2.2. Attention Mechanisms
The attention mechanism [32, 9], which is derived from
human intuition, has been widely applied and yielded sig-
niﬁcant improvements for various sequence learning tasks.
It ﬁrst calculates an importance score for each candidate
vector, then normalizes the scores to weights using the soft-
max function, ﬁnally applies these weights to the candidates
to generate the attention result, a weighted average vector
[42]. There are other attention mechanisms such as: spa-
tial and channel-wise attention [6], adaptive attention [27],
stacked attention [46], multi-level attention [51], multi-head
attention and self-attention [35].
Recently, Vaswani et al. [35] showed that solely us-
ing self-attention can achieve state-of-the-art results for ma-
chine translation. Several works extend the idea of employ-
ing self-attention to some tasks [40, 19] in computer vision,
which inspires us to apply self-attention to image caption-
ing to model relationships among objects in an image.
2.3. Other Work
AoA generates an attention gate and an information vec-
tor via two linear transformations and applies the gate to
the vector to add a second attention, where the techniques
are similar to some other work: GLU [10], which replaces
RNN and CNN to capture long-range dependencies for lan-
guage modeling; multi-modal fusion [43, 14, 22, 4, 17],
which models interactions between different modalities
(e.g. text and image) and combines information from them;
4635