Attention on Attention for Image Captioning
Lun Huang1Wenmin Wang1,3∗Jie Chen1,2Xiao-Yong Wei2
1School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
2Peng Cheng Laboratory
3Macau University of Science and Technology
huanglun@pku.edu.cn, {wangwm@ece.pku.edu.cn, wmwang@must.edu.mo },{chenj, weixy }@pcl.ac.cn
Abstract
Attention mechanisms are widely used in current en-
coder/decoder frameworks of image captioning, where a
weighted average on encoded vectors is generated at each
time step to guide the caption decoding process. How-
ever, the decoder has little idea of whether or how well
the attended vector and the given attention query are re-
lated, which could make the decoder give misled results. In
this paper, we propose an “Attention on Attention” (AoA)
module, which extends the conventional attention mecha-
nisms to determine the relevance between attention results
and queries. AoA ﬁrst generates an “ information vector ”
and an “ attention gate ” using the attention result and the
current context, then adds another attention by applying
element-wise multiplication to them and ﬁnally obtains the
“attended information ”, the expected useful knowledge.
We apply AoA to both the encoder and the decoder of our
image captioning model, which we name as AoA Network
(AoANet). Experiments show that AoANet outperforms all
previously published methods and achieves a new state-of-
the-art performance of 129.8 CIDEr-D score on MS COCO
“Karpathy” ofﬂine test split and 129.6 CIDEr-D (C40)
score on the ofﬁcial online testing server. Code is available
athttps://github.com/husthuaan/AoANet .
1. Introduction
Image captioning is one of the primary goals of com-
puter vision which aims to automatically generate natural
descriptions for images. It requires not only to recognize
salient objects in an image, understand their interactions,
but also to verbalize them using natural language, which
makes itself very challenging [25, 45, 28, 12].
Inspired by the development of neural machine trans-
lation, attention mechanisms have been widely used in
current encoder/decoder frameworks for visual captioning
∗Corresponding author
Attention Gate
Information
Attended Information
Query
Key/Value
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Attended ResultFigure 1: Attention on Attention (AoA). AoA generates an
information vector and an attention gate using the atten-
tion result and the attention query, and adds another atten-
tion by applying the gate to the information and obtains the
attended information .
[42, 27, 47, 2, 7, 16, 15] and achieved impressive results.
In such a framework for image captioning, an image is ﬁrst
encoded to a set of feature vectors via a CNN based net-
work and then decoded to words via an RNN based net-
work, where the attention mechanism guides the decoding
process by generating a weighted average over the extracted
feature vectors for each time step.
The attention mechanism plays a crucial role in such a
system that must capture global dependencies, e.g. a model
for the sequence to sequence learning task like image/video
captioning, since the output is directly conditioned on the
attention result. However, the decoder has little idea of
whether or how well the attention result is related to the
query. There are some cases when the attention result is
not what the decoder expects and the decoder can be mis-
led to give fallacious results, which could happen when the
attention module doesn’t do well on its part or there’s no
worthful information from the candidate vectors at all. The
former case can’t be avoided since mistakes always hap-
pen. As for the latter, when there’s nothing that meets the
4634