15 As codes related to non-maleficence outnumber those related to beneficence, it appears that, for the current AI community, the moral obligation to preventing harm takes precedence over the promotion of good. This fact can be partly interpreted as an instance of the so-called negativity bias, i.e. a general cognitive bias to give greater weight to negative entities108,109. This negative characterization of ethical values is further emphasized by the fact that existing guidelines focus primarily on how to preserve privacy, dignity, autonomy and individual freedom in spite of advances in AI, while largely neglecting whether these principles could be promoted through responsible innovation in AI110.  The issue of trust in AI, while being addressed by less than one third of all sources, tackles a critical ethical dilemma in AI governance: determining whether it is morally desirable to foster public trust in AI. While several sources, especially those produced within the private sector, highlight the importance of fostering trust in AI through educational and awareness-raising activities, a smaller number of sources contend that trust in AI may actually diminish scrutiny and undermine some societal obligations of AI producers111. This possibility would challenge the dominant view in AI ethics that building public trust in AI is a fundamental requirement for ethical governance112.   The relative thematic underrepresentation of sustainability and solidarity suggests that these topics might be currently flying under the radar of the mainstream ethical discourse on AI. The underrepresentation of sustainability-related principles is particularly problematic in light of the fact that the deployment of AI requires massive computational resources which, in turn, require high energy consumption. The environmental impact of AI, however, does not only involve the negative effects of high-footprint digital infrastructures, but also the possibility of harnessing AI for the benefit of ecosystems and the entire biosphere. This latter point, highlighted in a report by the World Economic Forum113 though not in the AI guidelines by the same institution, requires wider endorsement to become entrenched in the ethical AI narrative. The ethical principle of solidarity is sparsely referenced, typically in association with the development of inclusive strategies for the prevention of job losses and unfair sharing of burdens. Little attention is devoted to promoting solidarity through the emerging possibility of using AI expertise for solving humanitarian challenges, a mission that is currently being pursued, among others, by intergovernmental organisations such as the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS)114 or the World Health