17 (IEEE) through the “Ethically Aligned Designed” initiative117. Finally, soft governance mechanisms such as Independent Review Boards (IRBs) will be increasingly required to assess the ethical validity of AI applications in scientific research, especially those in the academic domain. However, AI applications by governments or private corporations will unlikely fall under their oversight, unless significant expansions to the IRBs’ purview are made.  The international community seems to converge on the importance of transparency, non-maleficence, responsibility, and privacy for the development and deployment of ethical AI. However, enriching the current ethical AI discourse through a better appraisal of critical yet underrepresented ethical principles such as human dignity, solidarity and sustainability is likely to result into a better articulated ethical landscape for artificial intelligence. Furthermore, shifting the focus from principle-formulation to translation into practice must be the next step. A global agenda for ethical AI should balance the need for cross-national and cross-domain harmonization over the respect for cultural diversity and moral pluralism. Overall, our review provides a useful starting point for understanding the inherent diversity of current principles and guidelines for ethical AI and outlines the challenges ahead for the global community.  Limitations This study has several limitations. First, guidelines and soft-law documents are an instance of gray literature, hence not indexed in conventional scholarly databases. Therefore, their retrieval is inevitably less replicable and unbiased compared to systematic database search of peer-reviewed literature. Following best practices for gray literature review, this limitation has been mitigated by developing a discovery and eligibility protocol which was pilot-tested prior to data collection. Although search results from search engines are personalized, the risk of personalization influencing discovery has been mitigated through the broadness of both the keyword search and the inclusion of results. A language bias may have skewed our corpus towards English results. Our content analysis presents the typical limitations of qualitative analytic methods. Following best practices for content analysis, this limitation has been mitigated by developing an inductive coding strategy which was conducted independently by two reviewers to minimize subjective bias. Finally, given the rapid pace of publication of AI guidance documents, there is a possibility that new policy