16 Organization (WHO) and private companies such as Microsoft115. As the humanitarian cost of anthropogenic climate change is rapidly increasing116, the principles of sustainability and solidarity appear strictly intertwined though poorly represented compared to other principles.  While numerical data indicate an emerging convergence around the promotion of some ethical principles, in-depth thematic analysis paints a more complicated picture, as there are critical differences in how these principles are interpreted as well as what requirements are considered to be necessary for their realization. Results show that different and often conflicting measures are proposed for the practical achievement of ethical AI. For example, the need for ever larger, more diverse datasets to “unbias” AI appears difficult to conciliate with the requirement to give individuals increased control over their data and its use in order to respect their privacy and autonomy. Similar contrasts emerge between the requirement of avoiding harm at all costs and that of balancing risks and benefits. Furthermore, it should be noted that risk-benefit evaluations will lead to different results depending on whose well-being it will be optimized for by which actors. If not resolved, such divergences and tensions may undermine attempts to develop a global agenda for ethical AI.   Despite a general agreement that AI should be ethical, significant divergences emerge within and between guidelines for ethical AI. Furthermore, uncertainty remains regarding how ethical principles and guidelines should be implemented. These challenges have implications for science policy, technology governance and research ethics. At the policy level, they urge increased cooperative efforts among governmental organisations to harmonize and prioritize their AI agendas, an effort that can be mediated and facilitated by inter-governmental organisations. While harmonization is desirable, however, it should not come at the costs of obliterating cultural and moral pluralism over AI. Therefore, a fundamental challenge for developing a global agenda for AI is balancing the need for cross-national harmonization over the respect for cultural diversity and moral pluralism. This challenge will require the development of deliberative mechanisms to adjudicate disagreement concerning the values and implications of AI advances among different stakeholders from different global regions. At the level of technology governance, harmonization is typically implemented in terms of standardizations. Efforts in this direction have been made, among others, by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers