18 documents were published after our search was completed. To minimize this risk, continuous monitoring of the literature was conducted in parallel with the data analysis and until April 23, 2019.   Methods We conducted a scoping review of the gray literature reporting principles and guidelines for ethical AI. A scoping review is a method aimed at synthesizing and mapping the existing literature118, which is considered particularly suitable for complex or heterogeneous areas of research118,119. Given the absence of a unified database for AI-specific ethics guidelines, we developed a protocol for discovery and eligibility, adapted from the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) framework120. The protocol was pilot-tested and calibrated prior to data collection. Following best practices for gray literature retrieval, a multi-stage screening strategy involving both inductive screening via search engine and deductive identification of relevant entities with associated websites and online collections was conducted. To achieve comprehensiveness and systematicity, relevant documents were retrieved by relying on three sequential search strategies (cf. Figure 2): First, a manual search of four link hub webpages (“linkhubs”)121–124 was performed. 68 sources were retrieved, out of which 30 were eligible (27 after removing duplicates). Second, a keyword-based web search of the Google.com search engine was performed in private browsing modus, after log-out from personal accounts and erasure of all web cookies and history.125,126 Search was performed using the following keywords: [AI principles], [artificial intelligence principles], [AI guidelines], [artificial intelligence guidelines], [ethical AI] and [ethical artificial intelligence]. Every link in the first thirty search results was followed and screened (i) for AI principles, resulting in 10 more sources after removing duplicates, and (ii) for articles mentioning AI principles, leading to the identification of 3 additional non-duplicate sources. The remaining Google results up to the 200th listings for each Google search were followed and screened for AI principles only. Within these additional 1020 link listings we identified 15 non-duplicate documents. After identifying relevant documents through the two processes above, we used citation-chaining to manually screen the full-texts and, if applicable, reference lists of all eligible sources in order to identify other relevant documents. 17 additional sources were identified. We continued to monitor the literature in parallel with the data analysis and until April 23, 2019, to retrieve eligible documents that were released after our search was completed. Twelve