3 strong interest of these stakeholders to shape the ethics of AI in ways that meet their respective priorities16. Notably, the private sector’s involvement in the AI-ethics arena has been called into question for potentially using such high-level soft-policy as a portmanteau to either render a social problem technical16 or to eschew regulation altogether22. Beyond the composition of the groups that have produced ethical guidance on AI, the content of this guidance itself is of interest. Are these various groups converging on what ethical AI should be, and the ethical principles that will determine the development of AI? If they diverge, what are these differences and can they be reconciled?  To answer these questions, we conducted a scoping review of the existing corpus of guidelines on ethical AI. Our analysis aims at mapping the global landscape of existing principles and guidelines for ethical AI and thereby determining whether a global convergence is emerging regarding both the principles for ethical AI and the requirements for its realization. This analysis will inform scientists, research institutions, funding agencies, governmental and inter-governmental organisations and other relevant stakeholders involved in the advancement of ethically responsible innovation in AI.   Results Our search identified 84 documents containing ethical principles or guidelines for AI (cf. Table 1). Data reveal a significant increase over time in the number of publications, with 88% having been released after 2016 (cf. SI Table S1). Data breakdown by type and geographic location of issuing organisation (cf. SI Table S1) shows that most documents were produced by private companies (n=19; 22.6%) and governmental agencies respectively (n=18; 21.4%), followed by academic and research institutions (n=9; 10.7%), inter-governmental or supra-national organisations (n=8; 9.5%), non-profit organisations and professional associations/scientific societies (n=7 each; 8.3% each), private sector alliances (n=4; 4.8%), research alliances (n=1; 1.2%), science foundations (n=1; 1.2%), federations of worker unions (n=1; 1.2%) and political parties (n=1; 1.2%). Four documents were issued by initiatives belonging to more than one of the above categories and four more could not be classified at all (4.8% each).