20 English, German, French, Italian, Greek; (ii) issued by institutional entities from both the public and the public sectors; (iii) referred explicitly in their title/description to AI or ancillary notions, (iv) expressed a normative ethical stance defined as a moral preference for a defined course of action (cf. SI Table S2). Following full-text screening, 84 sources or parts thereof were included in the final synthesis (cf. SI Table S1).  Content analysis of the 84 sources was independently conducted by two researchers in two cycles of manual coding and one cycle of code mapping within the qualitative data analysis software Nvivo for Mac v.11.4. During the first cycle of coding, one researcher exhaustively tagged all relevant text through inductive coding128 attributing a total of 3457 codes, out of which 1180 were subsequently discovered to pertain to ethical principles. Subsequently, two researchers conducted the code mapping process in order to reduce subjective bias. The process of code mapping, a method for qualitative metasynthesis129, consisted of two iterations of themeing128, whereby categories were first attributed to each code, then categorized in turn (cf. SI Table S3). For the theming of ethical principles, we relied deductively on normative ethical literature. Ethical categories were inspected and assessed for consistency by two researchers with primary expertise in ethics. Thirteen ethical categories emerging from code mapping, two of which were merged with others due to independently assessed semantic and thematic proximity. Finally, we extracted significance and frequency by applying focused coding, a second cycle coding methodology used for interpretive analysis128, to the data categorized in ethical categories. Consistency check was performed both by reference to the relevant ethical literature and a process of deliberative mutual adjustment among the general principles and the particular judgments contained in the policy documents, an analytic strategy known as ‘reflective equilibrium’130.