13 acceptance31, automated classification38, and unknown human-AI interaction38. It is argued that AI should not diminish33 or destroy80 but respect82, preserve69 or even increase human dignity36,37. Dignity is believed to be preserved if it is respected by AI developers in the first place96 and promoted through new legislation38, through governance initiatives36, or through government-issued technical and methodological guidelines82.  Solidarity Solidarity is mostly referenced in relation to the implications of AI for the labor market104. Sources call for a strong social safety net37,84. They underline the need for redistributing the benefits of AI in order not to threaten social cohesion49 and respecting potentially vulnerable persons and groups33. Lastly, there is a warning of data collection and practices focused on individuals which may undermine solidarity in favour of ‘radical individualism’38.  Discussion We found a rapid increase in the number and variety of guidance documents for ethical AI, demonstrating the increasing active involvement of the international community. Organisations publishing AI guidelines come from a wide range of sectors. In particular the nearly equivalent proportion of documents issued by the public sector (i.e. governmental and inter-governmental organisations) and the private sector (companies and private sector alliances) indicate that the ethical challenges of AI concern both public entities and private enterprises. However, there is significant divergence in the solutions proposed to meet the ethical challenges of AI. Further, the relative underrepresentation of geographic areas such as Africa, South and Central America and Central Asia indicates that the international debate over ethical AI may not be happening globally in equal measures. MEDC countries are shaping this debate more than others, which raises concerns about neglecting local knowledge, cultural pluralism and global fairness.  The proliferation of soft-law efforts can be interpreted as a governance response to advanced research into AI, whose research output and market size have drastically increased106 in recent years. Our analysis shows the emergence of an apparent cross-stakeholder convergence on promoting the ethical principles of transparency, justice, non-maleficence, responsibility, and privacy. Nonetheless, our thematic analysis reveals substantive divergences in relation to four major factors: (i) how ethical principles are interpreted, (ii)