2 MAIN ARTICLE Introduction Artificial Intelligence (AI), or the theory and development of computer systems able to perform tasks normally requiring human intelligence, is widely heralded as an ongoing “revolution” transforming science and society altogether1,2. While approaches to AI such as machine learning, deep learning and artificial neural networks are reshaping data processing and analysis3, autonomous and semi-autonomous systems are being increasingly used in a variety of sectors including healthcare, transportation and the production chain4. In light of its powerful transformative force and profound impact across various societal domains, AI has sparked ample debate about the principles and values that should guide its development and use5,6. Fears that AI might jeopardize jobs for human workers7, be misused by malevolent actors8, elude accountability or inadvertently disseminate bias and thereby undermine fairness9 have been at the forefront of the recent scientific literature and media coverage. Several studies have discussed the topic of ethical AI10–13, notably in meta-assessments14–16 or in relation to systemic risks17,18 and unintended negative consequences like algorithmic bias or discrimination19–21.  National and international organisations have responded to these societal fears by developing ad hoc expert committees on AI, often commissioned with the drafting of policy documents. These include the High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence appointed by the European Commission, the expert group on AI in Society of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the Advisory Council on the Ethical Use of Artificial Intelligence and Data in Singapore, and the select committee on Artificial Intelligence of the United Kingdom (UK) House of Lords. As part of their institutional appointments, these committees have produced or are reportedly producing reports and guidance documents on AI. Similar efforts are taking place in the private sector, especially among corporations who rely on AI for their business. In 2018 alone, companies such as Google and SAP have publicly released AI guidelines and principles. Declarations and recommendations have also been issued by professional associations and non-profit organisations such as the Association of Computing Machinery (ACM), Access Now and Amnesty International. The intense efforts of such a diverse set of stakeholders in issuing AI principles and policies demonstrate not only the need for ethical guidance, but also the