14 why they are deemed important, (iii) what issue, domain or actors they pertain to, and (iv) how they should be implemented. Furthermore, unclarity remains as to which ethical principles should be prioritized, how conflicts between ethical principles should be resolved, who should enforce ethical oversight on AI and how researchers and institutions can comply with the resulting guidelines. These findings suggest the existence of a gap at the cross-section of principles formulation and their implementation into practice which can hardly be solved through technical expertise or top-down approaches.  Although no single ethical principle is explicitly endorsed by all existing guidelines, transparency, justice and fairness, non-maleficence, responsibility and privacy are each referenced in more than half of all guidelines. This focus could be indicating a developing convergence on ethical AI around these principles in the global policy landscape. In particular, the prevalence of calls for transparency, justice and fairness points to an emerging moral priority to require transparent processes throughout the entire AI continuum (from transparency in the development and design of algorithms to transparent practices for AI use), and to caution the global community against the risk that AI might increase inequality if justice and fairness considerations are not adequately addressed. Both these themes appear to be intertwined with the theme of responsibility, as the promotion of both transparency and justice seems to postulate increased responsibility and accountability on the side of AI makers and deployers.  It has been argued that transparency is not an ethical principle per se, but rather “a proethical condition for enabling or impairing other ethical practices or principles”107. The proethical nature of transparency might partly explain its higher prevalence compared to other ethical principles. It is notable that current guidelines place significant value in the promotion of responsibility and accountability, yet few of them emphasize the duty of all stakeholders involved in the development and deployment of AI to act with integrity. This mismatch is probably associated with the observation that existing guidelines fail to establish a full correspondence between principles and actionable requirements, with several principles remaining uncharacterized or disconnected from the requirements necessary for their realization.