J. Pers. Med. 2021 ,11, 745 10 of 12
principles of ethics that govern the use of artiﬁcial intelligence in health in general [ 45] will
also apply to digital twins.
5.3. AI and (Big) Data Issues and Challenges
Digital twins share many of the same issues and challenges faced by modern AI
and (big) data analytics [ 45], namely, data availability and quality issues; data integration
and interoperability issues; data sharing issues, including concerns about intellectual
property; data privacy and security across platforms and systems; and AI bias, (and poor)
explainability and reproducibility issues.
Data (of good quality) are the lifeblood of modern AI/machine learning and new
knowledge discovery. Data of all sizes are vital, not just ‘big data’. More traditional ‘small
data(sets)’ should also be curated; catalogued; and used, alone or combined with ‘big data’,
for best results, where and as applicable. In each case, one should ﬁnd, and opt for, the
‘right-sized data’ rather than the ‘big(gest) data’. The adoption of standardised metadata,
relevant ontologies, including controlled clinical terminologies, as well as other established
best practices in (digital twin) data management will be critical to avoid ending up with a
‘data swamp’ and poor, unreliable results.
Enhanced AI reproducibility and bias reduction in intelligent digital twins can be
achieved by ensuring target populations are well represented in their corresponding digital
twins/digital twin aggregates. Digital twins also offer opportunities for more explainable
AI in medicine, e.g., [ 46]. Their core ‘digital thread’ tracing and tracking feature, in
particular, can play a key role in realising a more explainable AI.
6. Conclusions
Intelligent digital twins, combining data, knowledge, and algorithms (AI), are set to
revolutionise medicine and public health. First pioneered by NASA in 2010 on the basis
of a concept proposed by Grieves in 2002, digital twins are increasingly used today in
different industry sectors. Applied to medicine and public health, they can drive a much-
needed radical transformation of traditional electronic health/medical records (focusing
on individuals) and their aggregates (covering populations) to make them ready for a new
era of precision (and accuracy) medicine and public health.
From the ‘small’ big data of one person to the big data of one or multiple populations,
digital twin instances and aggregates enable learning and discovering new knowledge, new
hypothesis generation and testing, in silico experiments and comparisons, and enhanced
reproducibility with bias reduction (by ensuring target populations are well represented in
the corresponding digital twin representations).
Digital twins will be key to delivering highly personalised treatments and interven-
tions, and thanks to their key features, such as digital thread tracing and tracking, we will
have more explainable AI to rely upon. Human digital twins’ banks could one day become
critical for highly successful clinical trial matching, among other uses.
Author Contributions: Paper conceptualisation and scope, M.N.K.B.; literature review, M.N.K.B.
(main) and P .Z.; manuscript writing, M.N.K.B. (main) and P .Z. Both authors have read and agreed to
the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Marr, B. What is Digital Twin Technology and Why Is It so Important? Forbes 2017 . Available online: https://www.forbes.com/
sites/bernardmarr/2017/03/06/what-is-digital-twin-technology-and-why-is-it-so-important/ (accessed on 2 July 2021).
2. U.S. FDA. Paving the Way for Personalized Medicine-Fda’s Role in a New Era of Medical Product Development ; U.S. Food and Drug
Administration: Silver Spring, MD, USA, 2013. Available online: https://www.fdanews.com/ext/resources/ﬁles/10/10-28-13-
Personalized-Medicine.pdf (accessed on 2 July 2021).