J. Pers. Med. 2021 ,11, 745 4 of 12
Different digital twin types can be conceived (Figure 2); for example, one can have
twins of whole human body, or of just one body system or body function (e.g., digestive
system/function), of a single body organ (e.g., liver), or of ﬁner body component levels
(e.g., cellular, subcellular (organelle/sub-organelle), or molecular levels). Digital twins can
also be created for a speciﬁc disease or disorder (represented under one or more of the
aforementioned types; for example, a diseased body organ, e.g., liver with non-alcoholic
fatty liver disease), or for other relevant organisms (e.g., a virus, interacting with one of
the previous human digital twin types). Composite digital twins integrate two or more of
the above-mentioned types, while reference digital twins orproto-twins serve as templates or
archetypes for building more complex, individualised digital twins of each type.
J. Pers. Med. 2021 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 13 
 
 Given the increasing number of health and lifestyle management devices and ser-
vices available today, such as activity tracke rs, diet monitors, and telemedicine services, 
the demand and expectations for higher quality of care are also rising. As a result, digital twins are being explored to assess the feasib ility of creating dynamic models and simula-
tions of humans in order to improve medical diagnostics and prognostics, treatments, and 
the overall wellbeing of patients [8,9,12]. In the following sections, we describe digital 
twin technology in detail with some recent use cases in personalis ed medicine and popu-
lation health.  
2. Human Digital Twins: Key Concepts and Potential 
A key feature of digital twins is their dynamic bidirectional mapping . Digital twins are 
not a mere unidirectional map, digital shadow /snapshot, or simulati on model of a physi-
cal real-world entity in the digital domain.  
Different digital twin  types  can be conceived (Figure 2); for example, one can have 
twins of whole human body, or of just one bo dy system or body function (e.g., digestive 
system/function), of a single body organ (e.g.,  liver), or of finer body component levels 
(e.g., cellular, subcellular (organelle/sub-organelle), or molecular levels). Digital twins can also be created for a specific disease or diso rder (represented under one or more of the 
aforementioned types; for example, a diseased  body organ, e.g., liver with non-alcoholic 
fatty liver disease), or for other relevant organisms (e.g., a virus, interacting with one of 
the previous human digital twin types). Composite digital twins  integrate two or more of 
the above-mentioned types, while reference digital twins  or proto-twins  serve as templates 
or archetypes for building more complex, individualised digital twins of each type.  
Healthcare organisations, e.g., a hospital, can also have their co rresponding (and of-
ten composite) digital twins of organisations  (DTOs) to better plan, monitor and optimise 
their running.  
 
Figure 2. Key concepts and examples of  human digital twins: digital twin types and aggregates. 
From left to right: Different types of digital twins can be conceived, covering the whole human body, 
one body system or body function (e.g., digestive system), one body organ (e.g., stomach or liver), 
one cell of a given type, or even simply some specific subcellular (organelle/sub-organelle) or mo-lecular level of interest within a cell. Digital twins can equally cover healthy/normal and diseased 
Figure 2. Key concepts and examples of human digital twins: digital twin types and aggregates.
From left to right: Different types of digital twins can be conceived, covering the whole human
body, one body system or body function (e.g., digestive system), one body organ (e.g., stomach or
liver), one cell of a given type, or even simply some speciﬁc subcellular (organelle/sub-organelle) or
molecular level of interest within a cell. Digital twins can equally cover healthy/normal and diseased
entities; for example, a diseased cell (e.g., a cancerous cell of some given type), a diseased organ
(e.g., a fatty liver in type 2 diabetes), or a disease or syndrome affecting the whole body or multiple
parts of it (e.g., Parkinson’s disease). Healthcare institutions (e.g., a hospital) can also have their
corresponding ‘digital twins of organisations’. Left inset: Aggregates of the corresponding digital
twins belonging to different individuals can be used to represent one family, population group, or
whole population.
Healthcare organisations, e.g., a hospital, can also have their corresponding (and
often composite) digital twins of organisations (DTOs) to better plan, monitor and optimise
their running.
Digital twin levels refer to the different levels of sophistication (or degrees of abstrac-
tion) that apply to the rendering and execution of each of the above types ( cf.the different
levels of detail found in digital photos of the same scene, taken at the same time and in
same lighting and other conditions, but at different capture resolutions, or the different
sound reproduction quality or ﬁdelity levels obtained for the same digital audio segment