J. Pers. Med. 2021 ,11, 745 5 of 12
at different sampling rates). The level achieved by a given digital twin depends on the
twin’s ﬁdelity (level of captured real-world detail and whether connected instrumentation
updates (e.g., via clinical sensors) are occurring in real-time or less frequently), and on the
embedded learning ,intelligence , and autonomy (data and algorithms) of the digital twin in
question [13].
Digital twin instances are identical copies of a digital twin, all belonging to the same
individual, e.g., for use in in silico testing and comparisons, to answer questions such as
‘which treatment or intervention will be most successful for a particular patient?’ (Figure 3) .
J. Pers. Med. 2021 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13 
 
 entities; for example, a diseased cell (e.g., a cancerous cell of some given type), a diseased organ 
(e.g., a fatty liver in type 2 diab etes), or a disease or syndrome a ffecting the whole body or multiple 
parts of it (e.g., Parkinson’s disease). Healthcare institutions (e.g., a hospital) can also have their 
corresponding ‘digital twins of organisations’. Left  inset: Aggregates of the corresponding digital 
twins belonging to different individuals can be used to represent one family, population group, or 
whole population. 
Digital twin levels  refer to the different levels of so phistication (or degrees of abstrac-
tion) that apply to the rendering and execution of each of the above types ( cf. the different 
levels of detail found in digital photos of the same scene, taken at the same time and in 
same lighting and other conditions, but at diffe rent capture resolution s, or the different 
sound reproduction quality or fidelity levels  obtained for the same digital audio segment 
at different sampling rates). The level achieved by a given digital twin depends on the 
twin’s fidelity  (level of captured real-world detail and whether connected instrumentation 
updates  (e.g., via clinical sensors) are occurring in real-time or less frequently), and on the 
embedded learning , intelligence , and autonomy  (data and algorithms) of the digital twin in 
question [13].  
Digital twin instances  are identical copies of a digita l twin, all belonging to the same 
individual, e.g., for use in in silico  testing and comparisons, to answer questions such as 
‘which treatment or intervention will be most  successful for a particular patient?’ (Figure 
3). 
 
Figure 3. Digital twin instances of the same person or patient can be used for in silico  testing and 
comparison of different treatment or preventive in tervention possibilities to  find out which option 
will work best for that particular individual. Note  the data flow from clinical sensors, DNA (deox-
yribonucleic acid) sequencing, and other data  sources and streams to the digital domain. 
Digital twin aggregates  are aggregates of digital twin instances belonging to different 
individuals, e.g., sets covering one family, po pulation group, or wh ole population (Figure 
2). A human digital twins’ bank  is an organised repository (with version control) of instances 
Figure 3. Digital twin instances of the same person or patient can be used for in silico testing
and comparison of different treatment or preventive intervention possibilities to ﬁnd out which
option will work best for that particular individual. Note the data ﬂow from clinical sensors, DNA
(deoxyribonucleic acid) sequencing, and other data sources and streams to the digital domain.
Digital twin aggregates are aggregates of digital twin instances belonging to differ-
ent individuals, e.g., sets covering one family, population group, or whole population
(Figure 2) . Ahuman digital twins’ bank is an organised repository (with version control)
of instances and aggregates. Exchange and interoperability with similar banks are also
possible. Clinical trial matching is one application area where such banks could prove very
useful in the future.
Adigital thread is a digital twin’s temporal data pipeline (i.e., data pipeline over
time), e.g., from a person’s or cell’s birth to death, or from, say, 2010 to 2030 for a given
population, enabling tracing and tracking, asking questions, and the discovery of useful
relations between various data elements over time (Figure 1).
3. Digital Twins in Personalised Medicine
Like many disciplines in industry, IoT has provided extensive support in the health/care
sector [ 14], from collecting real-time data streams from connected clinical, health, and other
(e.g., environmental) sensors, as well as devices to facilitate communications between