J. Pers. Med. 2021 ,11, 745 8 of 12
A key research opportunity is to develop a virtual system for tracking and man-
aging disease outbreaks so that the public can be better prepared to respond to them.
Deren et al. [ 31] presented such a system as an integrated component of a smart city based
on experience learned from handling the COVID-19 pandemic in China. Their model
involves multiple pieces, including a spatiotemporal patient database populated from
multiple sources, cloud computing platforms, and AI location technology, all of which
work in conjunction to effectively respond to an outbreak. The system is able to provide
disease traceability through proximity analysis of the patient database, as well as to quickly
identify individuals who have had close contact with those affected. It can also use the
location information in the dataset to virtually assess the risk levels of different regions.
Areas with high risk of disease transmission are mapped out, which can be used to provide
real-time alerts to visitors.
EL Azzaoui et al. [ 32] demonstrated a framework for managing the COVID-19 pan-
demic (and other pandemics) at the city (population) level, using digital twins integrated
with blockchain technology. The latter is a decentralised system that allows data to be
recorded in its shared database, while making it very hard or impossible to tamper with
recorded data. Blockchain has been explored by healthcare researchers and informaticians
as a potential backbone to address many pressing healthcare challenges [33,34].
In the framework by EL Azzaoui et al., a digital twin of a person is represented by that
person’s smartphone. The user is responsible for her/his own smartphone digital twin data
uploading. These data range from static data that are input once, such as the user’s name,
age, gender, and underlying health issues, to data that are updated on the basis of the user’s
current symptoms (suggestive of COVID-19) and/or COVID-19 test results, including
hospital-veriﬁable test identiﬁcation data. Each hospital is similarly paired with a digital
twin represented on a shared blockchain for better resource management between different
hospitals, using and updating data about currently available medical resources, such as
beds, medical staff, and equipment. Digital twins of patients automatically recognise
close contacts using smartphone location information and record them for traceability
purposes. Patient digital twin data, including data about frequently visited locations, close
contacts, symptoms, any underlying health conditions, and test identiﬁcation are sent to
the blockchain, allowing patients, on the basis of the gravity of their symptoms, to be
automatically assigned to the right hospital that can best respond to their needs or to the
one with enough medical resources. Only when a patient has been conﬁrmed as having
contracted the virus will their hospital report non-sensitive location and symptom case data
to a trusted global agency (e.g., World Health Organisation) for the purposes of aggregating
case data and tracking diagnosed cases all over the world [32].
Digital Twins for Smart Healthy Cities
Besides the aforementioned COVID-19 city-wide application examples [ 31,32], digital
twin technology coupled with geographic information systems (GIS) can deliver much
desired intelligent decision support functionality for urban and public health planners in
a wide range of applications, from road trafﬁc management (e.g., to reduce road trafﬁc
congestion, air and noise pollution, and injuries/accidents) to ﬂood monitoring and ﬂood
situation services, in the context of smart healthy cities. These city twins go beyond tradi-
tional 3D models of cities, allowing smart cities to dynamically integrate key factors, such
as time (temporal dimension, especially using real- and near-real-time data) and human
behaviour, to better monitor conditions of interest, test various intervention scenarios
in silico , and predict how a city system will react to changes and modiﬁcations and how
its population will be impacted [ 31]. Informed decisions can then be made by urban and
public health planners to take appropriate courses of action and/or revisit policies to
achieve desired public health and wellbeing outcomes.
The U.S. city of Boston digital twin, for example, is helping planners visualise pro-
posed buildings, especially tall ones and skyscrapers, and their impacts on healthy living
and working conditions in the surrounding neighbourhoods, such as shadows cast on the