J. Pers. Med. 2021 ,11, 745 9 of 12
city through the seasons [ 35]. (It is a well-known fact that reduced exposure to sunshine
is linked to seasonal affective disorder, especially in winter in places and ofﬁces where
surrounding tall buildings are casting long shadows and blocking direct sunlight. Good
urban planning can help mitigate this situation.)
5. Issues and Challenges in Human Digital Twins
5.1. Design Considerations and Desiderata
Schwartz et al. present sone important design considerations for digital twins in
medicine and healthcare, including, among others, clear data visualisation, ease of access
and accessibility, ease of adding and removing data sources (e.g., data removal due to
privacy breaches or known errors in the data), and integration into clinical workﬂow [36].
Masison et al. propose a highly modularised architecture for digital twins in medicine
that could well enable the addition and removal of data sources with ease. This architecture
treats each dynamic biological process in a digital twin, or related collection of processes,
as a separate module of the twin, e.g., a module for molecular processes and a separate one
for cellular processes. Individual modules are only indirectly connected by communicating
through a central data structure, the global digital twin model state, rather than exchanging
data with each other directly. This approach has a key advantage of preventing any direct
dependencies between the computational side of modules, enabling the digital twin model
to be easily extended or modiﬁed [37].
Digital twin consortia bringing together the industry, government, academia, and
practitioners from around the world will increasingly play an important role in the stan-
dardisation of digital twin methods and interoperability protocols over the coming years.
Examples of these consortia include the medical and health industry-focused Swedish
Digital Twin Consortium [38] and DigiTwins Consortium [39], as well as the Digital Twin
Consortium®, which caters for all industries [ 40]. It is hoped that a dedicated, multi-
purpose human/medical digital twin software development kit (SDK) will become widely
available at some point in the future to complement existing (generic) digital twin software
tools (e.g., [41]) and optimise them for medical and healthcare applications.
5.2. Ethical Implications of Human Digital Twins: Potential Inequalities and the Need for Robust
Governance Mechanisms
Digital twins can be seen as a ‘social equaliser’ that can potentially deliver signiﬁcant
beneﬁts to the society, e.g., by helping us formulate better precision public health inter-
ventions. However, on the other hand, digital twin technology for personalised medicine
might not be accessible for every individual or community, thus introducing an additional
form of ‘digital divide’ among persons and populations. Furthermore, patterns identiﬁed
across a population of digital twins might result in unacceptable segmentation and dis-
crimination. Governance mechanisms should therefore be introduced to safeguard the
rights of individuals who have digital twins, ensure data privacy and protection of people’s
personal biological information, and foster transparency and fairness of data usage and of
all derived beneﬁts at both the individual and wider societal levels [19].
Braun [ 42] offers some interesting and rather philosophical reﬂections on the ethical
challenges posed by digital twins in personalised medicine, calling for people to be granted
adequate control over their simulated twin representations. However, one should not forget
that, in practice, control will also be shared (and often managed) by the clinical or public
health organisation involved in developing or using these digital twin representations,
hence, again, the need to have robust governance mechanisms and policies in place to
oversee the ethical control and management of these digital assets. Braun’s paper [ 42]
sparked a useful academic debate on the subject, e.g., [ 43,44], that should be carefully
considered by all those involved in developing or using digital twin technology and the
associated governance mechanisms and policies.
As digital twins use machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence to better understand,
and make predictive analyses about, the simulated persons or populations, the same