J. Pers. Med. 2021 ,11, 745 2 of 12
In contrast to physical products and processes in engineering and manufacturing, one
of the major source entities to be digitally mirrored in the healthcare industry—the human
body itself—is substantially more complex. Fortunately, given today’s advanced scientiﬁc
knowledge and extensive simulation capabilities, it is possible to construct digital twins
for modelling different aspects or functions, such as the bio-physical systems or protein
structures, of the human body. This would allow research questions about drug interactions,
treatment effectiveness, procedure safety, and so on to be assessed with higher efﬁcacy. By
harnessing electronic medical records of individual patients and patient-generated data,
digital twin technology can also empower personalised medicine research.
According to statistics reported by the FDA (United States Food and Drug Admin-
istration) in 2013 [ 2], the percentages of patients whose medications are ineffective range
from 38% to 75% for a number of conditions from depression to cancer. This is due to the
variabilities among patients who receive the same or similar drugs (as standard treatment
that has been studied to work for the average patient). Personalised medicine is a rising
approach in healthcare that aims to address this very issue by providing disease treatments
and preventive interventions tailored to the variables, e.g., genetic makeup, lifestyle, and
environmental factors, that make each patient unique. Having the ability to model individ-
ual patients with varying physiological traits and mechanistic differences, digital twins are
thus a natural, complementary strategy to implement personalised medicine.
This paper explores the adoption of digital twin technology in health, medicine, and
healthcare. We ﬁrst provide an overview of its concepts and a brief history of the technology,
and then present a number of applications of digital twins for personalised medicine and
public health. We also describe how this concept can be used for smart healthy cities,
followed by some key challenges involved in its adoption, including ethical issues that
arise when digital twins are applied to model humans. Our goal is to shed some light on
the real-world practicality and implications of digital twins.
Overview of Digital Twins
The idea of digital twins made its ﬁrst appearance in David Gelernter’s book in the
early 1990s [ 3]. In 2002, Michael Grieves introduced the initial conceptual model of digital
twins in applications of product lifecycle management for manufacturing, but under differ-
ent names, i.e., ‘Mirror Space Model’ and later ‘Information Mirror Model’ [4,5] . However,
the ﬁrst practical application that gave rise to the present name of this concept came later
in 2010, during NASA’s (United States National Aeronautics and Space Administration)
attempt to create digital simulations of spacecraft for testing [ 6]. Digital twin technology
has since gained traction in both industry and research, and has been adopted in a growing
number of industrial applications. Different categories of digital twins exist today, but the
conceptual model itself is comprised of three components: the physical (source) product
in the physical space, the digital representation of the physical product in the virtual
environment, and connections between the two—data and information ﬂowing between
the physical and digital products [7] (Figure 1).
The last few decades have fostered rapidly growing and maturing technologies that
have accelerated numerous business processes and the development of innovative solutions.
In particular, developments in sensor technologies and wireless networks have pushed
forward the applications of the Internet of Things (IoT), and contributed to the practical
applications of digital twin technology. (IoT refers to internet-connected sensors and
devices, embedded in everyday objects or attached to the human body, e.g., as wearables,
that can collect, send, and receive data about the instrumented entities and/or their
environment.) Thanks to IoT, digital twins can now be created to collect much more real-
world and real-time data from a wide range of sources, and thus can establish and maintain
more comprehensive simulations of the physical entities, their functionality, and changes
they undergo over time.