J. Pers. Med. 2021 ,11, 745 3 of 12
J. Pers. Med. 2021 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 13 
 
  
Figure 1. Composition of a digital twin. Note the bidirectional link between the real world (human 
body and its component parts) an d the corresponding digital twin. 
The last few decades have fostered rapidl y growing and maturing technologies that 
have accelerated numerous bu siness processes and the development of innovative solu-
tions. In particular, developments in sensor  technologies and wireless networks have 
pushed forward the applications of the Internet of Things (IoT), and contributed to the 
practical applications of digital twin technolo gy. (IoT refers to internet-connected sensors 
and devices, embedded in everyday objects or attached to the human body, e.g., as wear-
ables, that can collect, send, and receive data  about the instrumented entities and/or their 
environment.) Thanks to IoT, digital twins can now be created to collect much more real-world and real-time data from a wide range of sources, and thus can establish and main-
tain more comprehensive simulations of the physical entities, their functionality, and 
changes they undergo over time.  
Another important modern feature of a digital twin is its ability to predict how the 
object or process will perform, and the predic tions are gradually incr easing in accuracy 
thanks to integration with other technologies, such as artificial intelligence and advanced 
analytics. This ability leads to the predicted outcomes being shared as part of the infor-
mation feedback to the original physical en tity. Having a two-way dynamic flow of infor-
mation between the physical and virtual products enables this technology to create pow-
erful and complex digital representations of the physical entity, which further enhances 
in-depth testing and facilitates decision-mak ing without tampering with, or exhausting, 
the original, physical product.  
Since its inception, digital twin technology has been applied extensively to monitor, 
manage, and diagnose different lifecycles of  complex physical components and systems. 
For example, NASA and the U.S. Air Force leve raged digital twins in aircraft health man-
agement and maintenance [8,9]. Mondora and Grisso integrated digital twins in fatigue 
assessment of naval surface ships [10]. In the energy sector, Sivalingam et al. created a 
digital twin-based framework for predictive maintenance of offshore wind turbine power 
converter [11]. More recently, it has permeated in other disciplines and particularly in 
healthcare.  
Figure 1. Composition of a digital twin. Note the bidirectional link between the real world (human
body and its component parts) and the corresponding digital twin.
Another important modern feature of a digital twin is its ability to predict how the
object or process will perform, and the predictions are gradually increasing in accuracy
thanks to integration with other technologies, such as artiﬁcial intelligence and advanced
analytics. This ability leads to the predicted outcomes being shared as part of the in-
formation feedback to the original physical entity. Having a two-way dynamic ﬂow of
information between the physical and virtual products enables this technology to create
powerful and complex digital representations of the physical entity, which further enhances
in-depth testing and facilitates decision-making without tampering with, or exhausting,
the original, physical product.
Since its inception, digital twin technology has been applied extensively to monitor,
manage, and diagnose different lifecycles of complex physical components and systems.
For example, NASA and the U.S. Air Force leveraged digital twins in aircraft health
management and maintenance [ 8,9]. Mondora and Grisso integrated digital twins in
fatigue assessment of naval surface ships [ 10]. In the energy sector, Sivalingam et al.
created a digital twin-based framework for predictive maintenance of offshore wind turbine
power converter [ 11]. More recently, it has permeated in other disciplines and particularly
in healthcare.
Given the increasing number of health and lifestyle management devices and services
available today, such as activity trackers, diet monitors, and telemedicine services, the
demand and expectations for higher quality of care are also rising. As a result, digital
twins are being explored to assess the feasibility of creating dynamic models and simu-
lations of humans in order to improve medical diagnostics and prognostics, treatments,
and the overall wellbeing of patients [ 8,9,12]. In the following sections, we describe dig-
ital twin technology in detail with some recent use cases in personalised medicine and
population health.
2. Human Digital Twins: Key Concepts and Potential
A key feature of digital twins is their dynamic bidirectional mapping . Digital twins are
not a mere unidirectional map, digital shadow/snapshot, or simulation model of a physical
real-world entity in the digital domain.