J. Pers. Med. 2021 ,11, 745 6 of 12
equipment, machines, and humans. It has helped make important data available through
electronic medical records, diagnostic processes, remote monitoring, and patient-generated
reports. Other technologies that are blooming in parallel, led by artiﬁcial intelligence
(including machine learning), which offers advanced data analytics, and cloud computing,
which provides powerful, on-demand networked computational resources, which have
also become crucial tools for not only processing large quantities of (IoT) data and new
knowledge discovery, but also for doing so in real time. The outcomes of combining all
these technologies have tremendous synergistic effect, as they can produce timely and
valuable insights for medical professionals and individual patients alike, helping them
make more informed and proactive decisions. These technologies can certainly serve as
the backbone for shifting healthcare to a direction that focuses more on precision and pre-
ventive care. However, by adding digital twins to the combination, the vision of achieving
high quality care will be even more complete.
What digital twin technology can particularly bring to the desired picture is replacing
(at least partially) the generally expensive and resource-intensive laboratory experiments
with in silico simulations (Figure 3); cf.[15], which used computer models of the SARS–
coronavirus 2 or SARS-CoV-2 spike protein and the angiotensin converting enzyme 2–
ACE2 receptors of different human and animal species to conduct an in silico comparison
of protein receptor binding afﬁnities across species. Given the intricacy and complex
interconnections of the diverse types of systems within the human body, establishing an
adequate, complete human digital twin may be far from reality. Nevertheless, the ability
to mirror even a small portion of the human counterpart, e.g., a cell receptor or some
subcellular organelle of interest, could propel modern medicine to a whole new level. In
fact, many research initiatives have set the foundation for constructing digital human
twins by collecting molecular, genomic, and other big data from healthy individuals and
patients [ 16–18]. Moreover, discussions and applications of digital twins in healthcare have
also made noteworthy appearance in recent literature.
Bruynseels et al. [ 19] observed close similarities between healthcare practices driven by
data and modern engineering approaches driven by digital twins. They noted that the latter
applies digital twins for predictive management and maintenance of complex systems, such
as identifying faulty parts and simulating intervention outcomes. The notion of leveraging
the virtual model to assess the impact of actions on the physical model resembles what
in silico clinical analyses aim to achieve by harnessing the dynamic representation of an
individual’s unique details, such as molecular status, physiological status, and lifestyle,
over time in the digital domain.
Lehrach et al. [ 20] proposed an individualised care and disease prevention system
for Europe through the use of ‘virtual twins’ or ‘guardian angels’, which are intended to
model the biology of European patients and their disease states using data collected on a
wide range of domains that characterise the included individuals (e.g., clinical, imaging,
and sensor data). With computing resources and big data technologies becoming more
cost-effective, they visioned that it would be increasingly easier to create such personalised
digital models on which physicians can test all possible treatments and measures before
prescribing them to real patients. The value of such an effort would signiﬁcantly improve
the quality of life for European citizens, while reducing costs associated with care provision.
Instead of creating a wholistic model, several studies also focused on assisting our
understanding or management of a target condition or class of conditions with digital
twins. One application was described in a case study of trauma management [ 21], where
the authors proposed a ‘mirror world’ that captured not only the trauma patient but also
the patient’s surrounding environment. The goal of this study was to capture important
and relevant contextual information around the patient (e.g., the hospital environment,
physicians, or trauma team of contact) via ‘cognitive, social, and temporal augmentations’.
Software agents were also incorporated into the prototype to observe the virtual world and
provide assistance to the digital twins of the trauma team.