J. Pers. Med. 2021 ,11, 745 7 of 12
In another study, Cho et al. [ 22] demonstrated the use of digital twins in providing
appropriate orthodontic treatment to Korean adult females by carefully assessing their
facial proﬁles using facial scans and three-dimensional (3D) imaging (cone-beam computed
tomography, CBCT). To account for the variations in facial structures of Korean and
Caucasian patients, the authors reconstructed a 3D digital twin of each patient under study
by fusing her/his facial scan and CBCT image to provide more accurate measurements
and assessments of the ‘sagittal relationship’ between the maxillary central incisors and
the forehead.
There has also been recent interest in digital twins for management of multiple scle-
rosis [ 23,24], a chronic multidimensional disease known of being a common cause of
neurological disability in young adults. Because of the complexity and heterogeneity of the
disorder and its course, considerable amounts of data have been collected, presenting good
opportunities for data-driven approaches. Creating the diverse genomic prototypes of the
patients with digital twins would help assess the effects of various intervention strategies
and therapies, whereas simultaneously modelling parameters external to the genomic
traits but relevant to the patient, such as environmental factors, treatment side effects,
and disease management costs, may further beneﬁt the patient by enabling predictions of
disease progression or treatment effects.
Another important area of research centres around establishing precision cardiology
with the use of cardiac digital twins (CDT) [ 25]. As one of the most critical components
of the human body, the cardiovascular twin model is expected to maximise the synergy
between the anatomic, mechanistic, and functional understanding of the cardiovascular
system on the one hand and advanced analytical models created around related data on the
other hand, with a view of moving from descriptions to predictions of conditions. This topic
has received attention from both industry and academia. In 2015, a commercial implemen-
tation of the digital twin technology was created to mimic the human heart with adjustable
electrical and muscular properties. The released software, ‘Living Heart’, was able to
transform a person’s two-dimensional (2D) scan into a full-dimensional model of their
heart, providing capabilities for users to manipulate the virtual heart model [ 26]. A recent
research study proposed a workﬂow for automating the generation of CDTs that prioritised
ﬁdelity of the replicated model and computational efﬁciency of its construction [27].
Digital twins are also being explored by the biopharmaceutical industry [ 28,29] in an
increasing range of applications, e.g., for drug discovery and development. Subramanian
describes a digital twin of the liver created by integrating the knowledge and understanding
gained about various liver functions, diseases, and the effect of drugs, using a mathematical
framework of ordinary differential equations. The resulting virtual liver can effectively
reproduce the normal liver function and simulate the evolution of disease and the impact
of drug treatment. A system coupling the liver twin with experimental measurements has
been shown to offer insights into drug-induced liver injury [30].
4. Digital Twins in Precision Public Health
Human digital twins in personalised medicine are constructed to represent organs
or micro-structures within the body, and can be expanded to incorporate external factors,
including the environment surrounding the individual and social interactions during some
observed period, and this would be sufﬁcient to analyse and produce personalised care
recommendations for the individual. Public health, on the other hand, tends to be more
concerned with person-to-person interactions, ongoing medical conditions of patients
within a community, and factors affecting health at population level. This is because
public health mostly works to promote population wellness, as well as to track, control,
and prevent disease outbreaks and epidemics. In the previous section, we discussed at
length about the opportunities of creating digital twins for personalised medicine, but this
technology plays an equally crucial role and presents important research opportunities for
precision public health, especially after the lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic.