Clustering for deep representation learning. Our work is also related to clustering-based meth-
ods [ 2,3,6,7,17,25,50,53,54,59]. Caron et al. [6] show thatk-means assignments can be used as
pseudo-labels to learn visual representations. This method scales to large uncurated dataset and can
be used for pre-training of supervised networks [ 7]. However, their formulation is not principled and
recently, Asano et al. [2] show how to cast the pseudo-label assignment problem as an instance of the
optimal transport problem. We consider a similar formulation to map representations to prototype
vectors, but unlike [ 2] we keep the soft assignment produced by the Sinkhorn-Knopp algorithm [ 12]
instead of approximating it into a hard assignment. Besides, unlike Caron et al. [6,7] and Asano et
al. [2], we obtain online assignments which allows our method to scale gracefully to any dataset size.
Handcrafted pretext tasks. Many self-supervised methods manipulate the input data to extract a
supervised signal in the form of a pretext task [ 1,13,26,28,30,36,38,41,42,47,48,57]. We refer
the reader to Jing et al. [27] for an exhaustive and detailed review of this literature. Of particular
interest, Misra and van der Maaten [ 37] propose to encode the jigsaw puzzle task [ 39] as an invariant
for contrastive learning. Jigsaw tiles are non-overlapping crops with small resolution that cover
only part (20%) of the entire image area. In contrast, our multi-crop strategy consists in simply
sampling multiple random crops with two different sizes: a standard size and a smaller one.
3 Method
Our goal is to learn visual features in an online fashion without supervision. To that effect, we
propose an online clustering-based self-supervised method. Typical clustering-based methods [ 2,6]
are ofﬂine in the sense that they alternate between a cluster assignment step where image features of
the entire dataset are clustered, and a training step where the cluster assignments, i.e., “codes” are
predicted for different image views. Unfortunately, these methods are not suitable for online learning
as they require multiple passes over the dataset to compute the image features necessary for clustering.
In this section, we describe an alternative where we enforce consistency between codes from different
augmentations of the same image. This solution is inspired by contrastive instance learning [ 49] as
we do not consider the codes as a target, but only enforce consistent mapping between views of the
same image. Our method can be interpreted as a way of contrasting between multiple image views by
comparing their cluster assignments instead of their features.
More precisely, we compute a code from an augmented version of the image and predict this code
from other augmented versions of the same image. Given two image features ztandzsfrom two
different augmentations of the same image, we compute their codes qtandqsby matching these
features to a set of Kprototypesfc1;:::;cKg. We then setup a “swapped” prediction problem with
the following loss function:
L(zt;zs) =`(zt;qs) +`(zs;qt); (1)
where the function `(z;q)measures the ﬁt between features zand a code q, as detailed later.
Intuitively, our method compares the features ztandzsusing the intermediate codes qtandqs. If
these two features capture the same information, it should be possible to predict the code from the
other feature. A similar comparison appears in contrastive learning where features are compared
directly [49]. In Fig. 1, we illustrate the relation between contrastive learning and our method.
3.1 Online clustering
Each image xnis transformed into an augmented view xntby applying a transformation tsampled
from the setTof image transformations. The augmented view is mapped to a vector representation by
applying a non-linear mapping ftoxnt. The feature is then projected to the unit sphere, i.e.,znt=
f(xnt)=kf(xnt)k2. We then compute a code qntfrom this feature by mapping zntto a set of
Ktrainable prototypes vectors, fc1;:::;cKg. We denote by Cthe matrix whose columns are the
c1;:::;ck. We now describe how to compute these codes and update the prototypes online.
Swapped prediction problem. The loss function in Eq. (1) has two terms that setup the “swapped”
prediction problem of predicting the code qtfrom the feature zs, andqsfromzt. Each term represents
the cross entropy loss between the code and the probability obtained by taking a softmax of the dot
3