Unsupervised Learning of Visual Features
by Contrasting Cluster Assignments
Mathilde Caron1;2Ishan Misra2Julien Mairal1
Priya Goyal2Piotr Bojanowski2Armand Joulin2
1Inria 2Facebook AI Research
Abstract
Unsupervised image representations have signiﬁcantly reduced the gap with su-
pervised pretraining, notably with the recent achievements of contrastive learning
methods. These contrastive methods typically work online and rely on a large num-
ber of explicit pairwise feature comparisons, which is computationally challenging.
In this paper, we propose an online algorithm, SwA V, that takes advantage of con-
trastive methods without requiring to compute pairwise comparisons. Speciﬁcally,
our method simultaneously clusters the data while enforcing consistency between
cluster assignments produced for different augmentations (or “views”) of the same
image, instead of comparing features directly as in contrastive learning. Simply put,
we use a “swapped” prediction mechanism where we predict the code of a view
from the representation of another view. Our method can be trained with large and
small batches and can scale to unlimited amounts of data. Compared to previous
contrastive methods, our method is more memory efﬁcient since it does not require
a large memory bank or a special momentum network. In addition, we also propose
a new data augmentation strategy, multi-crop , that uses a mix of views with
different resolutions in place of two full-resolution views, without increasing the
memory or compute requirements. We validate our ﬁndings by achieving 75:3%
top-1 accuracy on ImageNet with ResNet-50, as well as surpassing supervised
pretraining on all the considered transfer tasks.
1 Introduction
Unsupervised visual representation learning, or self-supervised learning, aims at obtaining features
without using manual annotations and is rapidly closing the performance gap with supervised pre-
training in computer vision [ 9,20,37]. Many recent state-of-the-art methods build upon the instance
discrimination task that considers each image of the dataset (or “instance”) and its transformations as
a separate class [ 15]. This task yields representations that are able to discriminate between different
images, while achieving some invariance to image transformations. Recent self-supervised methods
that use instance discrimination rely on a combination of two elements: (i) a contrastive loss [ 19] and
(ii) a set of image transformations. The contrastive loss removes the notion of instance classes by
directly comparing image features while the image transformations deﬁne the invariances encoded in
the features. Both elements are essential to the quality of the resulting networks [ 9,37] and our work
improves upon both the objective function and the transformations.
* Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France
Correspondence to mathilde@fb.com
Code: https://github.com/facebookresearch/swav
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.