The contrastive loss explicitly compares pairs of image representations to push away representations
from different images while pulling together those from transformations, or views, of the same image.
Since computing all the pairwise comparisons on a large dataset is not practical, most implementations
approximate the loss by reducing the number of comparisons to random subsets of images during
training [ 9,20,49]. An alternative to approximate the loss is to approximate the task—that is to
relax the instance discrimination problem. For example, clustering-based methods discriminate
between groups of images with similar features instead of individual images [ 6]. The objective in
clustering is tractable, but it does not scale well with the dataset as it requires a pass over the entire
dataset to form image “codes” ( i.e., cluster assignments) that are used as targets during training. In
this work, we use a different paradigm and propose to compute the codes online while enforcing
consistency between codes obtained from views of the same image. Comparing cluster assignments
allows to contrast different image views while not relying on explicit pairwise feature comparisons.
Speciﬁcally, we propose a simple “swapped” prediction problem where we predict the code of a
view from the representation of another view. We learn features by Swapping Assignments between
multiple Views of the same image ( SwA V ). The features and the codes are learned online, allowing
our method to scale to potentially unlimited amounts of data. In addition, SwA V works with small
and large batch sizes and does not need a large memory bank [49] or a momentum encoder [20].
Besides our online clustering-based method, we also propose an improvement to the image trans-
formations. Most contrastive methods compare one pair of transformations per image, even though
there is evidence that comparing more views during training improves the resulting model [ 37]. In
this work, we propose multi-crop that uses smaller-sized images to increase the number of views
while not increasing the memory or computational requirements during training. We also observe that
mapping small parts of a scene to more global views signiﬁcantly boosts the performance. Directly
working with downsized images introduces a bias in the features [ 45], which can be avoided by
using a mix of different sizes. Our strategy is simple, yet effective, and can be applied to many
self-supervised methods with consistent gain in performance.
We validate our contributions by evaluating our method on several standard self-supervised bench-
marks. In particular, on the ImageNet linear evaluation protocol, we reach 75:3%top-1accuracy with
a standard ResNet-50, and 78:5%with a wider model. We also show that our multi-crop strategy
is general, and improves the performance of different self-supervised methods, namely SimCLR [ 9],
DeepCluster [ 6], and SeLa [ 2], between 2%and4%top-1 accuracy on ImageNet. Overall, we make
the following contributions:
We propose a scalable online clustering loss that improves performance by +2% on ImageNet and
works in both large and small batch settings without a large memory bank or a momentum encoder.
We introduce the multi-crop strategy to increase the number of views of an image with no
computational or memory overhead. We observe a consistent improvement of between 2%and4%
on ImageNet with this strategy on several self-supervised methods.
Combining both technical contributions into a single model, we improve the performance of self-
supervised by +4:2%on ImageNet with a standard ResNet and outperforms supervised ImageNet
pretraining on multiple downstream tasks. This is the ﬁrst method to do so without ﬁnetuning the
features, i.e., only with a linear classiﬁer on top of frozen features.
2 Related Work
Instance and contrastive learning. Instance-level classiﬁcation considers each image in a dataset
as its own class [ 4,15,49]. Dosovitskiy et al. [15] assign a class explicitly to each image and learn a
linear classiﬁer with as many classes as images in the dataset. As this approach becomes quickly
intractable, Wu et al. [49] mitigate this issue by replacing the classiﬁer with a memory bank that stores
previously-computed representations. They rely on noise contrastive estimation [ 18] to compare
instances, which is a special form of contrastive learning [ 24,40]. He et al. [20] improve the training
of contrastive methods by storing representations from a momentum encoder instead of the trained
network. More recently, Chen et al. [9] show that the memory bank can be entirely replaced with the
elements from the same batch if the batch is large enough. In contrast to this line of works, we avoid
comparing every pair of images by mapping the image features to a set of trainable prototype vectors.
2