a colour image to estimate the missing depth information, as shown in ﬁgu re (14).
The colour image is used to estimate surface normals for the entire scen e which are
then combined with the sparse set of depth measurements to infer d epth for the entire
scene.
The main drawback of this work is the processing time, as the authors s tates a
processing time of between 0.3 and 1.5 seconds, depending on the hard ware used. It
can be argued that the processing time is not a big issue as it may not be necessary
to use depth completion on every single frame received from the sens or. However, a
beneﬁt of this approach is that it will work with sensors mounted in a ﬁx ed position,
as opposed to the SLAM-like approaches mentioned earlier.
(a) Color information.
 (b) Depth information.
 (c) Completed depth.
Figure 14. Example of depth completion using the algorithm from Zhang a nd Funkhouser [46].
An area which could also improve the system’s ability to sense its i mmediate envi-
ronment is the actual sensors employed by each system. Most of the rev iewed systems
rely on stereo vision to gather depth information and it may hence be in teresting to
explore other options such a ToF cameras like the Kinect v2 used by [23, 24] . The
absence of ToF cameras amongst the other reviewed paper can likely be attri buted to
the available ToF cameras at the time, which were likely expensive an d bulky.
A general diﬀerence between ToF cameras and stereo vision cameras is th at the
former does not rely on a baseline to estimate depth. ToF cameras can hen ce be made
more compact, making it possible to mount them in location not possible f or stereo
vision cameras. For instance, inside the gripper of the ARM. An example of such is
the CamBoard Pico ﬂexx camera from PMD Technologies [47] which is signiﬁc antly
smaller than the Kinect sensors while featuring a minimum working distance of 0 .1 m.
5. Conclusion
The focus of this review paper was on computer vision systems enablin g movement
impaired individuals to do object manipulation using an assistive rob otic manipulator
(ARM). The initial literature search yielded 257 results which wer e narrowed down
to 14 relevant papers. These papers where reviewed in relation to th eir selection of
hardware and their use of computer vision for the semi-autonomous behavi our of the
system. Diﬀerent schemes for the semi-autonomous control were revi ewed as well.
A four-stage model was used during the review of each system to charact erize their
behavioursintermsof;informationacquisition,informationanalysis, decisionselection
and action implementation. A scale, consisting of 10 levels[15], was used to rate the
autonomy of each system as well.
The reviewed papers mainly made use of stereo vision-based sensors t o capture
depth information. Many of the papers used the Kinect from Microsoft wh ich was
often mounted near the shoulder or head of the user, viewingthe scene from adistance.
20