groups are then plotted, as shown in ﬁgure (7), with respect to their l evel of autonomy
for the decision selection and action implementation stage.
Table 5. Grouping of the reviewed systems based on their level of auto nomy for the decision selection and
action implementation stage. The indicators (a,b) signiﬁe s diﬀerent conﬁgurations of the same system, as
outlined in Table 2
Group Paper(s)
A[19, 21, 23, 24]
B[16, 18, 22]
C[8] and [20]a
D[17]
E[20]b
F[25]
G[10]
H[9]
I[11]
Looking at the plot in ﬁgure (7) it is quite clear that most of the reviewed systems
are placed in the upper left quadrant. Such systems are characterize d by having a quite
clear-cut strategy for sharing control, as the user decides what to grasp whereas the
system performs the actual grasping. These approaches are hence quite s imilar to e.g.
the claw machines found at arcades; the user points the machine toward s the object of
interest, the user presses a button and the machine takes over. A f ew of the reviewed
systems did however allow the user some control in such scenarios, f or instance the
systems found in group CandE. These systems rely on constant conﬁrmation from
the user, e.g. holding down a button, to continue executing the pl anned action.
An entirely diﬀerent approach for semi-autonomous control can be seen in gr oupG
consisting of only the system by M¨ ulling et al. [10]. This group diﬀer s from the others
due to its adaptive nature which is also sought illustrated in ﬁgure (7) by having this
group span the entire action implementation continuum.
Another outlier is group I, consisting of the system by Loconsole et al. [11], which
have the highest possible level of autonomy for both its decision selec tion and action
implementation stage. It can hence be argued that this system is fully autonomous and
hence of no interest when discussing semi-autonomous systems. To be fair, it should
be noted that the focus of Loconsole et al. [11] is skewed towards computer vision and
not semi-autonomous control.
4. Discussion
The purpose of this section is to expand upon the ﬁndings in the previ ous sections
by pointing out challenges in relation to reviewed systems and suggest further po-
tential avenues to explore. Three challenges will be discussed; ensuring optimal semi-
autonomous control, handling arbitrary objects and sensing the environm ent.
4.1. Challenge: Optimal Semi-Autonomous Control
Most of the reviewed systems tend to rely on pre-deﬁned roles for re spectively the
human and the system, as shown earlier in ﬁgure (7). The user decides what to do
and the system takes over control, thereby creating this claw machi ne-like behaviour.
14