issue by employing an optical sensor to detect when an object is insi de the gripper and
force sensors to ensure suﬃcient force when picking up the object . Another approach,
used by Zeng et al. [25], is to make the simplifying assumption that all objects are
cuboids and placed on a table.
Looking at the positioning of the sensors, over half of the reviewed sys tems employ
a ﬁxed position, which could make them susceptible to blind spots. For instance, the
ARM occluding the view of the camera. A strategy to avoid such issue is to enable
the user to inﬂuence the position of the sensor by mounting it on the e nd-eﬀector as
done in several of the reviewed systems (see table (2) from earlier). A third option is
to have the system automatically position the camera [8, 18, 19, 22].
3.2.2. Information Analysis
This stage can generally be characterized by two important tasks; 1) segme ntation
of data into what is of interest and what is not and 2) recognizing patterns i n the
data to recognize e.g. an object. Computer vision-systems will often h ave well-deﬁned
strategies for these tasks which is why it was chosen to focus on these two aspects for
this stage.
Looking at segmentation, a quite popular strategy is to remove the main pl anar
surface in the scene, leaving behind objects placed on e.g. a table. An example of such
is shown in ﬁgure (5). This planar surface is often found by using RANSAC (Random
Sample Consensus) [28] to ﬁt a plane to the point cloud data. The main draw back of
this approach is the underlying assumption that the objects of intere st are placed on
a single planar surface without much else in the scene.
(a) Before segmentation.
 (b) After segmentation.
Figure 5. Example of segmentation of objects in a scene.
Another often used strategy amongst the reviewed papers is to rely on the user to
manually perform the segmentation task. This is done either by drawin g a bounding
box around the object of interest or by selecting a single point on said ob ject. In case of
the latter, the point is used as the initial seed for segmentation algorit hms such as the
system describes by Pitzer et al. [16]. However, some of the reviewe d papers, such as
[19, 9], downright skip the segmentation step and are therefore process ing information
from the entire scene during the subsequent recognition step. Th is is possible as these
systems relies on the SURF keypoint extractor and feature descriptor [29] which are
optimized to be fast.
In terms of recognition, many of the reviewed papers relies on matching against a
database of known objects. This is commonly done by extracting a set of fe atures from
the input data and then applying machine learning to match the featur es against the
database of known objects. The majority of the papers either rely on poin t cloud or
image data during this process, with only Jiang et al. [21] making use of b oth infor-
mation sources in this step. Zhang et al. [23] combines both the feature e xtraction and
matching process by training a CNN (Convolutional Neural Network) to dis tinguish
10