A Review of Computer Vision for Semi-autonomous Control
of Assistive Robotic Manipulators (ARMs)
Stefan Hein Bengtsona, Thomas Bakb, Lotte N. S. Andreasen Struijkcand Thomas
B. Moeslunda
aVisual Analysis of People (VAP) Laboratory, Department of Architecture, Des ign, and
Media Technology, Aalborg University, Denmark
bAutomation and Control, Department of Electronic Systems, Aalborg Univers ity, Denmark
cDepartment of Health Science and Technology, Aalborg University, Aalborg, De nmark
ABSTRACT
Purpose: The advances in artiﬁcial intelligence have started to reach a l evel where
autonomous systems are becoming increasingly popular as a way to aid people
in their everyday life. Such intelligent systems may especial ly be beneﬁcially for
people struggling to complete common everyday tasks, such as i ndividuals with
movement-related disabilities. The focus of this paper is hen ce to review recent
work in using computer vision for semi-autonomous control of as sistive robotic
manipulators (ARMs).
Methods: Four databases were searched using a block search, yielding 257
papers which were reduced to 14 papers after apply-ing various ﬁlte ring criteria.
Each paper was reviewed with focus on the hardware used, the auton omous
behaviour achieved using computer vision and the scheme for s emi-autonomous
control of the system. Each of the reviewed systems were also sou ght characterized
by grading their level of autonomy on a pre-deﬁned scale.
Conclusions: A re-occurring issue in the reviewed systems was the inability
to handle arbitrary objects. This makes the systems unlikely to p erform well
outside a controlled environment, such as a lab. This issue cou ld be addressed by
having the systems recognize good grasping points or primitive shapes instead
of speciﬁc pre-deﬁned objects. Most of the reviewed systems did also use a
rather simple strategy for the semi-autonomous control, where th ey switch either
between full manual control or full automatic control. An alterna tive could be a
control scheme relying on adaptive blending which could provid e a more seamless
experience for the user
KEYWORDS
computer vision; assistive robotic manipulators; ARM; semi- autonomous control;
shared control; robotics; machine learning; exoskeleton
1. Introduction
Machines are becoming increasingly smarter and the eﬀort invested in to research in
artiﬁcial intelligence is at an all time high. This large interest in art iﬁcial intelligence
is triggered by its ability to make smart decision to aid us in our every day life.
The healthcare sector is one area which could beneﬁt immensely from ar tiﬁcial
intelligence by enabling assistive devices to act autonomously. Auton omous machines
could for instance assist the elderly and disabled individuals in fe eding, getting dressed
and other activities of daily living. This is especially of interest gi ven the increasing