Confidenceα1
0 1(a) Linear function.
Confidenceα1
0 1 (b) Sigmoid function.
Confidenceα1
0 1
(c) Unit step function.
Confidenceα1
0 1 (d) Constant function.
Figure 9. Examples of diﬀerent functions which can be used to control t he arbitration factor.
behaviours is shown in ﬁgure (9).
Theideaofdeﬁningthebehaviourofthesystemusingarbitrationfu nctionsmayalso
make it easier to customize the behaviour of the system to the prefe rence of the user. A
lot of diﬀerent behaviours can be achieved by simply changing the fun ction governing
the arbitration factor used during the blending. For instance, the be haviour of the
system by M¨ ulling et al. [10] can be characterized by ﬁgure (9b) where as the behaviour
of e.g. [16, 18] can be characterized by ﬁgure (9d) as the action implementation stage
is always fully automatic for these systems. Customization through the se arbitration
curves may also be beneﬁcial due to their visual nature making it eas ier to understand
for people with a non-technical background.
However, an important prerequisite for adaptive semi-autonomous control is for the
systemtobeabletogaugeitsconﬁdence.Forinstance,howconﬁdentth esystemisthat
the user is reaching for object B and not object A. One way of inferring c onﬁdence in
thisscenariocouldbetorelyonproximity,i.e.howcloseisthee nd-eﬀectoroftheARM
to each object. Such proximity-based approaches is used in the work of [10, 30, 31].
A possible downside of proximity-based approaches is that they are me mory-less, i.e.
they only consider the system in its current state. An example of why this lack of
memory can be problematic is shown in ﬁgure (10), where the user is reac hing for
objectAbut the system misinterprets the user’s goal as being object Bdue to the
proximity-based approach.
A way to introduce memory into the process of inferring the inte ntion of the user
is to consider the trajectory of the ARM, as done by [30, 32]. Looking at ﬁgure ( 10)
again, it is possible to see that considering the trajectories it woul d have been possible
to correctly infer that the user was reaching for object A.
BASU
Figure 10. A scenario with two objects, AandB, with an ARM denoted by the current position Uand
initial position Sof its end-eﬀector. The ﬁgure is adapted from Dragan et al. [3 0].
The diﬀerent measures of conﬁdence, mentioned above, are all related to stage 3,
16