between four pre-deﬁned objects.
The drawback of relying on a pre-deﬁned set of known objects is the i nability to
deal with objects which are not present in the database. Especially th e approach
by Arrichiello et al. [24] suﬀers from this issue as it also requires t he objects to be
physically marked using pre-deﬁned tags. A much more general approach i s to match
against primitive shapes, for instance cylinders [11]. In doing so, the system should be
able to handle anything cylinder-shaped.
An even more general approach is used by Gualtieri et al. [22] which relies on iden-
tifying good grasping points instead of detecting objects in the sce ne. This essentially
negates the need for both the segmentation and recognition steps for this s ystem. The
main problem of this approach is the time it takes to detect the grasping points in the
scene, with the authors stating a processing time of two minutes on average.
3.2.3. Decision Selection
In this stage, each reviewed system was sought characterized based on; 1) how the
system selects what to do, for instance what object to grasp and 2) its appr oach when
deciding how to grasp an object. I.e. how to position and orient the end -eﬀector of the
ARM for the grasping procedure.
Inrelationtothedecisionselectionofeachreviewedsystemitisq uitenaturaltoalso
consider the associated level of autonomy. The scale presented earlie r, see table (1),
have hence been used to determine the level of autonomy for each syst em. The result
is shown in table (3).
Table 3. The reviewed papers and their level of autonomy based on thei r decision selection behaviour (stage
3). The indicators (a,b) signiﬁes diﬀerent conﬁgurations o f the same system, as outlined in Table 2.
Decision selection
(level of autonomy)
Level 1[17, 8, 16, 18, 22] and
[20]a
Level 2 [25] and [20]b
Level 3 [19, 9, 21, 23, 24]
Level 6 [10]
Level 10 [11]
Many of the reviewed systems rely on the user directly selecting the object to
interact with. This is either done by having the user draw a bound ing box around the
object or selecting a point on it, as mentioned above. Such approaches re ly entirely on
the user and can hence be associated with the lowest level of autonomy. A few systems
are a bit more restrictive, as they narrow the user’s options down, e ither based on
the objects detected in the scene by the system or a pre-deﬁned s et of options. These
systems are given a rating of 2 and 3, respectively.
The system by Loconsole et al. [11] is however characterized by a high le vel of
autonomy, as it will try to grasp any cylinder-shaped object presented to it. This
system has been given a rating of 10, as the user has no say in the matter. An other
outlier is the system described by M¨ ulling et al. [10], as it automati cally infers the
intention of the user based on the end-eﬀectors proximity to object s and how well the
end-eﬀectors orientation aligns with these objects. The system wil l automatically start
to act on this estimated intention, but the user can still veto this decision by moving
the end-eﬀector in another direction, hence the rating of 6.
11