tomatically moving the sensor(s) to better observe certain things. For instance,
re-positioning the camera to get a better view of an object.
•Stage 2: Information analysis
This stage is associated with the cognitive functions of the system. T his is es-
sentially the stage where the system interprets the information acq uired during
the previous stage. An example of such could be recognition of an object in an
image, i.e. detecting an object’s position and classifying the type of object.
•Stage 3: Decision selection
The focus of this stage is to make a decision based on the multiple alter native
options identiﬁed in the previous stage. The decision could for instan ce be which
of the detected objects to pick-up and how to grasp said object. A syst em with
a low level of autonomy would for instance oﬀer the user all possible option s. A
system with a high level of autonomy would, on the other hand, act without u ser
input and grab an object based on some pre-deﬁned measure, e.g. the neares t
object.
•Stage 4: Action implementation
The ﬁnal stage encompasses the actual execution of the necessary actions on ce a
decision has been made. This includes sending the correct signals t o the actua-
tors, i.e. motors, of the robot to reach the desired goal such as the position of an
object. It is also the stage responsible for actuating the gripper duri ng grasping
of objects.
Furthermore, Parasuraman et al. [15] also suggests a continuum when speaki ng of
autonomous behaviour, ranging from a low-level to a high-level of autonomy . The au-
thorsspeciﬁcallysuggest10levelsofautonomy,asoutlinedintable(1).T hisautonomy
scale mainly relates to the last two stages of the four-stage model, i.e. decision selec-
tion and action implementation, and will hence only be applied in relati on to these
two stages.
Table 1. The diﬀerent levels of autonomy. Adapted from Parasuraman e t al. [15].
Levels of autonomy
1)The system oﬀers no assistance.
2)- oﬀers a complete set of decisions/actions.
3)- narrows down the selection to a few.
4)- suggests one alternative.
5)- executes the suggestion if the human approves.
6)- allows the human a restricted time to veto before executing .
7)- executes automatically, then necessarily informs the hum an.
8)- informs the human only if asked.
9)- informs the human only if it, the system, decides to.
10)- decides everything, ignoring the human.
3. Results
The ﬁrst part of this section summarizes the diﬀerent hardware used in each of the
reviewed papers. The second part outlines the semi-autonomous behav iour of each
reviewed system by following the four-stage model presented earl ier.
5