Figure 13. Example of an object and its decomposition into primitive sh apes. This approach was used by
Milleret al. [39].
an unknown object could be added to the set of known objects by the use r showing
the system how to grasp said object. This is somewhat similar to the app roach by
Herzog et al. [42], where the system learns grasp poses through demonstrati on by the
user. The work of Krainin et al. [43] could also help expand this idea as it describes an
approach for creating 3D models of objects once they have been grasped by a robotic
manipulator.
4.3. Challenge: Sensing the Environment
The last challenge which this paper will touch upon is how to acquire c omplete and
precise data about the environment that the ARM is to operate in. These aspects
are important as the subsequent stages in any system will suﬀer if the information
acquisition stage is not up to par.
Roughly half of the reviewed papers decided to mount their sensors ne ar or on
the end-eﬀector, a conﬁguration sometimes called eye-in-hand. Such as conﬁguration
is advantageous as it is near impossible for the ARM to occlude the view of t he
sensor and it oﬀers some ﬂexibility, as the sensor can be re-positioned using the ARM.
Allowing the user to re-position the sensor, by controlling the end -eﬀector, could also
make it easier to infer the intention of the users as they would likel y orient the end
eﬀector towards the object they are interested in. A few of the revi ewed papers, see
[8, 18], utilize this option by having the system automatically re-posi tioning the end-
eﬀector such that the user’s selection is centred in the view of th e camera. The idea is
to get a better view of the object to interact with.
The work by Gualtieri et al. [22] takes this approach a step further by re -positioning
the sensor to gather information from multiple viewpoints in order to i ncrease the
quality of the gathered point cloud. The authors speciﬁcally states that doing so have
shown an improvement in grasp detection according to their prior work [44]. This idea
is somewhat similar to the work by Klingensmith et al. [45] where an end- eﬀector
mounted depth sensor is used to map the nearby environment using a S LAM-like
approach (Simultaneous Localization And Mapping). The authors demonstrate t hat
theirapproachimprovesthequalityofthedatagatheredwhilecontinu ouslyestimating
the position of the end-eﬀector, i.e. the localization part of SLAM. Empl oying some
strategy for accumulating data from multiple viewpoints may hence be beneﬁcial when
dealing with an eye-in-hand conﬁguration [22, 45].
Another way to improve upon the depth information acquired by the sys tem could
be to use techniques for depth completion [46]. The idea is to use in formation from
19