The second most popular sensor placement was at the end-eﬀector, making it possible
for both the user and the system to re-position the sensor. However, on ly a few of the
reviewed systems fully utilized this option by mapping the imme diate environment
using data from multiple viewpoints. Furthermore, exploring othe r options in terms
of sensor choice may be interesting as well. For instance, a small ToF c amera which
could be mounted inside the gripper of the ARM.
Handling of arbitrary objects was found to be a general issue with only a fe w of
the reviewed systems being able to do so. The majority made simpli fying assumptions
such as all objects having a certain shape or all object being in a database of pre-
deﬁned objects. A way to approach the issue of handling arbitrary objec ts could be to
reduce it to a problem of detecting good grasping points or decomposing objects into
primitive shapes.
Most of the reviewed papers rely on a clear switch between the user an d the system
for the semi-autonomous control of said system. Adaptable automation, in the f orm of
linear blending, is used in one of the reviewed papers but should be e xplored further.
Such a scheme could be beneﬁcial as it allows the user some control at all times which
is especially important for movement impaired users. A scheme base d on linear blend-
ing may also allow for easy customization of the semi-autonomous control. Su ch an
adaptive approach may also beneﬁt from the concept of ﬂow, known from psy chology,
to adjust the level of assistance based on the skill level of the user an d the diﬃculty
of the task at hand.
To summarize; there is a substantial amount of on-going research focusi ng on using
computer vision for semi-autonomous control of ARMs. Several working protot ypes
have demonstrated that this idea can work in a controlled environment , such as a lab.
The next big step is to advance the technology to a point where it is pos sible to move
beyond the labs and into the home of the actual user. The beneﬁt of doing s o would
be priceless for the individual user, and society in general may be neﬁt as well due to
less demand for caregivers.
References
[1] Marasinghe KM. Assistive technologies in reducing caregiver burde n among infor-
mal caregivers of older adults: a systematic review. Disability and Re habilitation:
Assistive Technology. 2016;11(5):353–360.
[2] Bedaf S, Marti P, Amirabdollahian F, et al. A multi-perspective eval uation of a
service robot for seniors: the voice of diﬀerent stakeholders. Disabi lity and Reha-
bilitation: Assistive Technology. 2017;0(0):1–8.
[3] Romer G, Stuyt H, Peters A. Cost-savings and economic beneﬁts due to the assis-
tive robotic manipulator (arm). 9th International Conference on Rehabili tation
Robotics, 2005 ICORR 2005. 2005;:201–204.
[4] Maheu V, Archambault PS, Frappier J, et al. Evaluation of the jaco robotic
arm: Clinico-economic study for powered wheelchair users with upp er-extremity
disabilities. In: 2011 IEEE International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics;
June; 2011. p. 1–5.
[5] Prior SD. An electric wheelchair mounted robotic arm a survey of pote ntial users.
Journal of Medical Engineering & Technology. 1990;14(4):143–154.
[6] KINOVA. Robotic arms series ; 2019. Visited on 05/20/2019; Available from:
https://www.kinovarobotics.com/en/products/robotic-arm-series .
21