(4)Autonomous behaviour : The papers should describe a system capable of ex-
hibiting some degree of autonomous behaviour. Papers solely describin g a way
of directly controlling an ARM are discarded.
(5)Details: The paper should be described in a suﬃciently detailed way. A pap er
is considered suﬃciently detailed if it is possible to identify the parameters and
information described in the next section.
The initial set of 257 papers was reduced to 14 papers after applying the ab ove criteria.
Papers which were of interest, even though they failed the criteri a, are included in the
discussion part later.
2.3. Data Extraction
The ﬁrst set of parameters extracted from each of the included papers r elates to the
platform and the hardware used in the system, namely: the type of sens or(s) used,
the placement of the sensor(s), the type of robotic manipulator and the as sociated
number of degrees of freedom. These parameters are of interest as they i mpact how
both the computer vision and the semi-autonomous control functions. Fur thermore,
this information could reveal interesting tendencies in terms of h ardware selection.
It should be noted that the technologies for the user to interface with the diﬀerent
systems are not covered in this review.
The second set of parameters extracted from each paper focuses on the se mi-
autonomous behaviour of the diﬀerent systems. This is done by identi fying which
parts of the system that acts autonomous, using computer vision, and in wh ich part
the human is still in control. These parameters are extracted in syst ematic way by
using the widely cited framework proposed by Parasuraman et al. [15].
This framework suggests that a semi-autonomous system can be split into four
stages, as shown in ﬁgure (2). This model is based on a simple model of th e way
humans process information and act on it. The model is hence not intend ed to be
perfect and all-encompassing but rather a simpliﬁcation making it pos sible to impose
some structure when analysing a system.
Information Acquisition
Data acquisition
Sensor position
Action Implementation
Actuation of links
Actuation of gripper
Information Analysis
Data segmentation
Object recognition
CupMug
BallDecision Selection
Make decision
Grasp detection
Target
Figure 2. The four-stage model originally proposed by Parasuraman et al. [15], with examples of the tasks
associated with each individual stage. The ﬁgure is adapted from Pitzer et al. [16].
The diﬀerent stages of this four-stage model are:
•Stage 1: Information acquisition
This stage contains functions related to sensing the environment su ch as gath-
ering raw data from e.g. a camera. Calculations related to depth estimat ion can
also be considered to belong in this step, for instance the registrat ion between
twocamerasinastereovisionsetup.Thisstagecanalsoincludestrat egiesforau-
4