An important part of the decision selection stage is to ﬁgure out how to grasp an
object to manipulate it. This entails ﬁguring out how to position and ori ent the end-
eﬀector for the best grasp. How much to close the gripper is an important s tep in the
grasping procedure as well but this part is not included in this rev iew.
Several of the reviewed systems rely on both grasp positions and poses be ing pre-
deﬁned for a set of known objects. The drawback of relying on pre-deﬁ ned information
for a small set of objects is the inability to handle unknown objects, as stated earlier.
Other papers ignore the problem of identifying a proper orientation of t he end-eﬀector
and only estimates where to position the end-eﬀector for grasping. This approach is
possible as these systems makes assumptions like the objects always being placed such
that their major axis is aligned vertically with the ARM. Such assumpt ions restrict
the system’s ability to function in an uncontrolled environment, w here the objects are
likely to be placed arbitrarily.
A few of the reviewed systems, like [8, 18], uses a PCA-based approach (P rincipal
Component Analysis) in order to estimate the major axis of each object. Th is ap-
proach relies on point cloud data for each object and are hence dependent on proper
segmentation of the object. Another drawback is that the estimated axis of the object
may easily be miscalculated in cases where parts of the object are not pr esent in the
point cloud.
The approach used by Loconsole et al. [11] avoids this issue as it is quite s traight-
forward to extract the major axis of a cylinder, which the system ide ntiﬁed during
the information analysis step. The disadvantage of this approach is the und erlying
assumption that every object is cylinder-shaped.
The only reviewed system which is truly able to grasp arbitrary objec ts is the one
described by Gualtieri et al. [22] as it relies on detecting good graspi ng poses. The
process of detecting these grasping poses is split into two stages; grasp synthesis and
grasp analysis, as illustrated in ﬁgure (6). The synthesis stage seeks t o generate a large
number of grasp candidates whereas the analysis seeks to reduce the lar ger number of
candidates to a few good ones. It should be noted that M¨ ulling et al. [10] describes a
similar extension of their system in their future works which enab les them to handle
arbitrary objects as well.
(a) Grasp synthesis stage.
 (b) Grasp analysis stage.
Figure 6. Detecting grasping poses for an arbitrary object using the a lgorithm by Gualtieri et al. [22].
12