searching each database.
The keywords in each of these blocks were as follows:
•Block 1 - computer vision :(”computer vision” OR ”robot vision” OR ”robotic
vision” OR ”object detection” OR ”image-based” OR ”grasp detection” OR
”vision-based” OR perception*)
•Block 2 - robotic manipulators :(”robot arm” OR ”robotic arm” OR ”robot
manipulator” OR ”robotic manipulator” OR exoarm OR exoskeleton O R ”per-
sonal robot”)
•Block 3 - people with disabilities :(disab* OR impair* OR adl* OR ”activ-
ities of daily living” OR handicap* OR ”personal robot” OR rehabili tat*)
It should be noted that the asterisk *serves as a wildcard for unknown terms and
diﬀerent inﬂections of the same word.
Only the titles, abstracts and keywords were used while searching and any results
not in English were removed. Publications before 2008 and duplicates we re removed
as well. Only conference proceedings, reports and journals were inc luded during the
literature search and book chapters or book reviews were removed from the list of
results. This initial search resulted in 257 results after applyin g the above ﬁlters, as
illustrated in ﬁgure (1).
Enginnering
Village
Scopus
Web of
Sciencecombined215
204
68531257
Embase44Remove
duplicatesRemove
booksRemove
pre-2008
Figure 1. Databases and exclusion criteria used during the initial li terature search.
2.2. Filtering Criteria
Additional criteria were imposed on the initial search to further nar row down the
amount of relevant papers. Each paper should fulﬁl each of the following c riteria to be
considered relevant:
(1)Purpose : The intended use of the system described in the paper should be
object manipulation tasks. Papers focusing on e.g. rehabilitation and wh eelchair
navigation were discarded. This criterion was imposed to focus the s cope of the
review.
(2)Camera : The system described in the paper should make use of a camera or a
similar visual sensor, such as a laser scanner. Any papers failing this criterion
are not doing computer vision and are hence outside the scope of this revi ew.
(3)Disabled user : The intended user of the system described in the paper should
be a person suﬀering some kind of movement impairment, such that th ey would
beneﬁt from an ARM.
3