demand for caregivers [1, 2].
Persons suﬀering from quadriplegia, i.e. total or partial loss of control of al l four
limbs, would especially beneﬁt from such assistance due to the sev erity of their dis-
ability. For instance, a study found that the use of an assistive robotic manipulator
(ARM) could reduce the need for assistance with 1.25 hours per day for pe rsons with
upper-extremity disabilities [3]. Another study conﬁrmed these ﬁndings as their results
showed that the use of an ARM could reduce the need for assistance by 41% [4] . This
reduced need for assistance would not only be economically beneﬁcial bu t also increase
the users’ quality of life by empowering them and providing them with some privacy.
Furthermore, a survey on disabled persons found that 86% of the particip ants would
consider purchasing an ARM given the possibility [5] .
Another factor making autonomous control of ARMs increasingly interesting i s how
readily available the necessary hardware is becoming. For instance, th e commercially
available ARMs, which are speciﬁcally targeted at empowering users w ith movement
impairments, such as JACO from Kinova [6] or iARM from Exact Dynamics [7] .
However, any system which is to behave autonomously must rely on some s ort of
input to make informed decision, for instance knowledge of its immed iate environment.
Computer vision is hence often a part of such autonomous systems as it enab les the
systemtocaptureandunderstandvisualinformation.Forinstance,re cognizingobjects
in an image and ﬁguring out how to grasp said object [8, 9, 10].
The purpose of introducing autonomous behaviour into these systems is to reduce
both the time it takes to execute a task and to reduce the cognitive bu rden on the user.
This research has been expanded to other types of ARMs as well, such as e xoskeletons
[11, 12]. The idea of using an exoskeleton is to provide a more integrated s olution than
e.g. a robotic arm mounted on a wheelchair.
However, having an ARM act autonomously is not necessarily a bliss for the user,
even though it might reduce the time it takes to execute diﬀerent t asks [13, 14]. An
important aspect of using this technology is hence how the control is sh ared between
the human and the machine, i.e. the design of a scheme allowing for sem i-autonomous
control of the ARM.
The contribution of this paper is hence a review of recent eﬀorts in e mploying com-
puter vision for semi-autonomous control of ARMs, such as exoskeletons or rob otic
arms. The goal of this review is to: (1) provide an overview of existing e ﬀorts in using
computer vision for semi-autonomous control of ARMs; (2) highlight the curr ent chal-
lenges associated with this area of research; and thereby (3) point out n ew directions
of interest for this ﬁeld.
2. Methods
The following outlines how the review was conducted in the terms of the literature
search and subsequent sorting of found material. The extraction of data f rom each
reviewed paper is described as well.
2.1. Data sources
The literature search was based on the following databases: Engineering Village ,Web
of Science ,Scopus, andEmbase. The search was conducted by constructing blocks of
keywordsrelatedtocomputervision,roboticmanipulatorsandpeoplewi thdisabilities.
A paper had to match at least one keyword from each of these blocks to show u p when
2