3.2.4. Action Implementation
This stage is sought characterized by considering who is in control of th e ARM’s
movement, i.e. who controls the actuation of the ARM’s links and its en d-eﬀector.
Factors like how trajectories are planned could have been considere d as well in this
stage, but it is deemed outside the scope of this review.
The action implementation stage is also a good candidate for judging a syst em’s
level of autonomy and this stage have hence been mapped using the autonomy scale
as well. The result is shown in table (4).
Table 4. The reviewed papers and their level of autonomy based on thei r action implementation behaviour
(stage 4).
Action implementation
(level of autonomy)
Level 5 [8, 20]
Level 6 [17]
Level 7 [9, 25]
Level 10[16, 18, 19, 11, 21, 22,
23, 24]
Adaptive [10]
The majority of the reviewed systems is assigned a score of 10, as the actu ation of
both the ARM’s links and end-eﬀector is fully automatic once a decision have been
made. Jiang et al. [9] and Zeng et al. [25] are assigned a lower score of 7, as thes e
two systems relies on the idea of dividing the control of the ARM into ﬁne and coarse
control. Coarse control entails moving the end-eﬀector to the general p osition of the
object to manipulate and is done automatically. Fine control deals with gras ping the
objectandisinitiatedbythesystem,whichthenaskstheusertot akeoverandperform
the grasping. It should be noted that Zeng et al. [25] does estimate the ori entation of
the object to be grasped but this information is only used to guide the u ser during
ﬁne control.
The system by Remazeilles et al. [17] is assigned a rating of 6 as it essen tially allows
the user to veto the automatic actuation of the ARM. Kim et al. [8] and Quint ero
et al.[20] employs a scheme where the user continuously have to allo w the system to
operate automatically, for instance by holding down a button. This resu lts in a score
of 5 as the system is essentially limited to only executing actions i f the user approves.
Finally, the system by M¨ ulling et al. [10] is not assigned a score as the automation level
changes depending of the system’s conﬁdence in inferring the int ention of the user.
For instance, the user will be completely in control if the system h as no idea about the
intention of the user. Furthermore, it should be noted that authors of P arasuraman et
al. [15] do point out that their framework fails to encompass such adaptive au tomation
well.
3.3. Level of Autonomy Summary
The purpose of this section is to summarize the results related to t he level of autonomy
of the reviewed systems to highlight tendencies. This is done by gr ouping each of the
reviewed papers, as shown in table (5).
These groups are created by grouping systems where the level of autonomy is iden-
tical for both the decision selection and action implementation stage. Th e resulting
13