The papers which mount their sensor near the end-eﬀector primarily rely on cus-
tomized stereo vision setups, likely because it allows them to con trol the baseline
distance and hence their minimum distance. The only exception bei ng [22] utilizing
the Carmine camera from PrimeSense but this device is also markete d as having a
minimum distance of ≈0.35 m, making it more suitable for such a mounting location
than the Kinect.
Another discerning characteristics in terms of sensor choice is whe ther active or
passive stereo vision is used. Active stereo vision relies on a ligh t source, e.g. infrared
light,toactivelyilluminatethescenewhereaspassivestereovi sionreliesontheambient
light only. Active stereo vision is hence more robust in terms of lacki ng illumination.
Another beneﬁt of active stereo vision is its ability to handle lack of t exture as the
active light source can be used to introduce texture in the scene. Lack of texture is a
general problem in stereo vision as it makes it harder to recognize the s ame point in
two images, which is needed to estimate the depth to said point. Howe ver, most of the
reviewed systems using passive stereo vision are tested using h ighly textured objects,
for instance [17, 8, 18], and may hence not experience this problem durin g the tests.
Furthermore, all the custom stereo vision setups found in the revi ew are of the
passive variety. This is not surprising as active stereo vision set ups are generally more
complicated to implement due to the active light source.
3.1.2. Robotic platform
There is a clear tendency of using robotic arms amongst the selected pap ers, as only
one of them relies on an exoskeleton as their platform. This tendency can likely be
explained by the accessibility of robotic arms, as they are generally ch eaper than
an exoskeleton and more readily available in the market. This observation is further
emphasized by the fact that all the robotic arms listed in table (2) are com mercially
available.
The single exoskeleton, the L-Exos, is on the other hand custom made by one of
the co-authors of the paper as described in [27]. This exoskeleton is also notable in the
sense of its high number of degrees of freedom in comparison to the other s ystem. It
should however be noted that Loconsole et al. [11] states the redundancy of some of
these DoFs.
AnotheroutlierintermsofplatformselectionisthePR2fromWillowG arage,which
is a full-blown robot featuring two arms and multiple sensors, such as the Kinect. This
robot is intended to be used for teleoperation, i.e. being controlled remotely from a
distance. Baxter from Rethink Robotics is a full-blown robot as well, intended for
industrial purposes. Gualtieri et al. [22] did however describe th at they salvaged an
arm from a Baxter robot, essentially reducing it to an ARM on-par with e.g. JACO
from Kinova. A few of the mentioned robotic platforms are shown in ﬁgure ( 3).
3.2. Semi-autonomous Control Overview
The aspects related to the semi-autonomous behaviour of each reviewed system is
summarized in table (2). The table follows the four-stage model from ear lier and seeks
to characterize the autonomous behaviour of each system by highlighting how each
of them deals with certain aspects associated with each stage. Note that th e system
presented by Quintero et al.[20] can function in two distinct ways when considering
the information analysis stage and the decision selection stage. This is s igniﬁed by the
notation [20]a and [20]b which is used to distinguish between these two conﬁgurations
7