could be interesting to consider it in relation to semi-autonomous con trol.
Task difficultySkill level
HighHigh
LowFlow
AnxietyBoredom
Figure 12. Illustration of how ﬂow can be achieved by matching task diﬃc ulty and skill level. The ﬁgure is
adapted from Csikszentmihalyi et al. [34].
4.2. Challenge: Handling Arbitrary Objects
Another challenging aspect of using computer vision for semi-autonomous c ontrol of
ARMs is to be able to handle arbitrary objects, i.e. objects never enc ountered by the
system before. Most of the reviewed papers seem to agree that this is an important
issue but only a few of them actually address it.
Looking at the reviewed systems, both Gualtieri et al. [22] and M¨ ullin g et al. [10]
address this issue by discarding the notion of detecting separate obj ects and instead
rely on detecting good grasping points on arbitrary object. However, de tecting good
grasping points can be rather slow [22] due to the synthesis stage which is time-
consuming because of the large search space (six variables; three for gras p position
and three for grasp orientation).
A way to speed up this process could be to look into approaches such as [35, 36],
which rely on a range image instead of a point cloud data during grasp synthe sis. Do-
mae et al. [35] reports a processing time of 0.31 seconds or less, making it signiﬁcantly
faster than Gualtieri et al. [22]. The work by [37, 38] relies on both RGB and ran ge
images to infer grasping points using CNNs, with Redmon et al. [37] reporti ng pro-
cessing times of ≈77 milliseconds. The low processing time is likely because a GPU is
used to accelerate the computations by taking advantage of the highly parall elizable
nature of CNNs.
Another way of handling arbitrary objects is to decompose them into pri mitive
shapes like cylinders, cuboids and spheres, as illustrated in ﬁgur e (13). This is some-
whatsimilartotheideausedbyLoconsoleetal.[11],whichfocusedonc ylinder-shaped
objects only. The idea is to expand this approach to encompass any object by including
more shapes than just cylinders and by allowing these shapes to be com bined [39, 40].
How to handle arbitrary objects is not necessarily limited to one of the approaches
mentioned above. In fact, combining multiple approaches could be a vi able solution.
An example of such is the work by Ciocarlie et al. [41], which deﬁnes a gras ping
procedure for known objects and a procedure for unknown objects not encountered
before. This idea is especially interesting in the scope of semi- autonomous control as
18