i.e. decision selection. However, it is possible to expand the mod el to make use of
conﬁdences derived from the other stages as well. For instance, the con ﬁdence of the
sensor data gathered during the information acquisition stage. Another id ea could be
extract a conﬁdence measure from the information analysis stage based on ho w certain
objects are commonly used.
This idea could be achieved through aﬀordance detection, with aﬀordance being
the notion that objects “invite” the user to interact with them in ce rtain ways. A
handle on a mug would for instance be an obvious aﬀordance for grasping. The ide a
of grasp detection, as discussed earlier, could hence be considered a limited form
of aﬀordance detection, which only focuses on the aﬀordance related to gras ping.
However, multiple other aﬀordances exist, for instance; cutting, sc ooping, containing,
pounding and supporting. These aﬀordances are the focus in the work by f or instance
Myers et al. [33], which proposes a way of detecting diﬀerent aﬀordance s using RGB
and depth information. An example of their results is shown in ﬁgure (11) .
Aﬀordance detection could hence be useful in scenario where the use r is trying to
accomplish a task involving multiple objects. For instance, using a spoon to scoop
something or when the user wants to pour a liquid into a container.
Input scene. Grasp detection.
Support detection. Scoop detection.
Figure 11. Example of aﬀordances detected in a scene. The input scene is from the dataset published by
Myers et al. [33].
Yet another possibility is to incorporate the system’s conﬁdence in the user, which
is suggested by Dragan et al. [30] as well. An interesting addition to this i dea could
be for the system to provide a level of assistance which keeps the u ser in a state of
ﬂow or “being in the zone”. The idea of ﬂow is described as a mental state where the
user would feel a sense of mastery and satisfaction by ensuring that th e diﬃculty of
the tasks matches the skill of the user [34].
This idea is often illustrated as shown in ﬁgure (12), where a person i s kept in a
state of mental ﬂow by matching the diﬃculty of the task with the skil l level of the
person. Failure to match these two parameters could cause a person to e nter either a
state of boredom or anxiety, which is not desirable. The presence of the ﬂow state can
hence inﬂuence a person’s sense of accomplishment and satisfaction w hich is why it
17