Decision selection
(autonomy level)Action implementation
(autonomy level)
HighHigh
Low
I B
CD
EFH
GAFigure 7. Plot of the groups from table (5). The size of each circle incr eases with the number of members in
the group. The large span of group Gsigniﬁes the adaptive nature of the action implementation s tage for the
system by M¨ ulling et al. [10].
The beneﬁt of such schemes is that the user is never in doubt as to wh o is in control
at any time.
However, this behaviour could be problematic as the user has no or very limited
control once the system is in charge. This issue was outlined in a stud y by Chung et
al. [13] which found that the users felt less accomplished when relyi ng entirely on the
system to complete the task automatically. The participants did in fac t experience
a lower level of satisfaction, despite completing the task faster, d ue to this lack of
accomplishment. A similar observation was made by Kim et al. [14] where in dividuals
with movement impairment appeared less inclined to relinquish control of the ARM
than able-bodied persons.
A way to address the above issue could be to rely on adaptive semi-auton omous
control, as seen in the system by M¨ ulling et al. [10]. Such a scheme w ill allow the user
somecontrolthroughouttheentireprocess,therebyprovidingthe userwithsomesense
of accomplishment when ﬁnishing a task, while still aiding the use r to some extent.
This form of semi-autonomous control can be viewed as an arbitration of control
between the system and the user which can essentially be reduced to a linear blending,
controlled by the arbitration factor α, as shown in ﬁgure (8). This is also the approach
used by M¨ ulling et al. [10] where αis computed using a sigmoid function dependent
on the conﬁdence of the goal predicted by the system.
User Input U
Predicted goal PBlending
(1-α)U + αPARM
actuation
Figure 8. Arbitration between the user Uand the goal Ppredicted by system using linear blending. The
ﬁgure is adapted from [30].
The idea of viewing the arbitration as a blending problem is based on th e work by
Dragan et al. [30], which also uses the plots of diﬀerent arbitration factors αto charac-
terize the behaviour of semi-autonomous systems. An example of diﬀere nt arbitration
15