DySAT: Deep Neural Representation Learning on Dynamic
Graphs via Self-Attention Networks
Aravind Sankar∗, Yanhong Wu†, Liang Gou†, Wei Zhang†, Hao Yang†
∗University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
†Visa Research, Palo Alto, CA, USA
∗asankar3@illinois.edu†{yanwu, ligou, wzhan, haoyang}@visa.com
ABSTRACT
Learning node representations in graphs is important for many
applications such as link prediction, node classification, and com-
munity detection. Existing graph representation learning methods
primarily target static graphs while many real-world graphs evolve
over time. Complex time-varying graph structures make it chal-
lenging to learn informative node representations over time.
We present Dynamic Self-Attention Network (DySAT), a novel
neural architecture that learns node representations to capture dy-
namic graph structural evolution. Specifically, DySAT computes
node representations through joint self-attention along the two
dimensions of structural neighborhood andtemporal dynamics . Com-
pared with state-of-the-art recurrent methods modeling graph evo-
lution, dynamic self-attention is efficient, while achieving consis-
tently superior performance. We conduct link prediction experi-
ments on two graph types: communication networks and bipar-
tite rating networks. Experimental results demonstrate significant
performance gains for DySAT over several state-of-the-art graph
embedding baselines, in both single and multi-step link prediction
tasks. Furthermore, our ablation study validates the effectiveness
of jointly modeling structural and temporal self-attention.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Information systems →Social networks ;•Computing method-
ologies →Neural networks ;
KEYWORDS
Dynamic Graphs, Self-Attention, Representation Learning
ACM Reference Format:
Aravind Sankar, Yanhong Wu, Liang Gou, Wei Zhang, Hao Yang. 2020.
DySAT: Deep Neural Representation Learning on Dynamic Graphs via Self-
Attention Networks. In The Thirteenth ACM International Conference on Web
Search and Data Mining (WSDM ’20), February 3–7, 2020, Houston, TX, USA.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 9 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3336191.3371845
∗Work done while at Visa Research
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
WSDM ’20, February 3–7, 2020, Houston, TX, USA
©2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6822-3/20/02. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3336191.33718451 INTRODUCTION
Learning latent representations (or embeddings) of nodes in graphs
is a fundamental problem due to its prevalence in varied domains
including social media [ 22], bioinformatics [ 8], and knowledge
bases [ 36]. The objective is to learn low-dimensional vectors that
capture the structural properties of a node and its neighborhoods.
Such embeddings can benefit a plethora of applications, including
node classification, link prediction, and recommendation [ 8,15].
Existing graph representation learning work primarily target static
graphs, which contain a fixed set of nodes and edges. However,
many real-world graphs are dynamic where graph structures con-
stantly evolve over time. They are usually represented as a sequence
of graph snapshots at different time steps [ 16]. Examples include
co-authorship networks where authors may periodically switch col-
laboration behaviors and email communication networks whose in-
teraction structures may change dramatically due to sudden events.
Learning dynamic node representations is challenging due to
the complex time-varying graph structures: nodes can emerge and
leave, links can appear and disappear, and communities can merge
and split. This requires the learned node representations to not
only preserve structural proximity but also jointly capture their
temporal evolution . In addition, multiple latent facets affect graph
evolution, e.g., in a co-authorship network, authors of different
research communities or at different career stages, may expand
their collaboration circles at varying rates. Latent facets such as
research community or career stage, serve as unique perspectives to
model temporal graph evolution. Thus, modeling multi-faceted vari-
ations in dynamic graph representation learning is crucial towards
accurately predicting node properties and future links.
Existing dynamic graph representation learning methods mainly
fall into categories: temporal regularizers that enforce smoothness
of node representations from adjacent snapshots [ 39,40], and recur-
rent neural networks [ 6,9] that summarize historical snapshots via
hidden states. Smoothing methods while effective in high-sparsity
settings, may fail when nodes exhibit significantly distinct evo-
lutionary behaviors. Conversely RNNs, while expressive, require
large amounts of training data to outperform even static methods
and scale poorly with an increase in the number of time steps.
Attention mechanisms have recently achieved great success in
many sequential learning tasks [ 2,37]. The underlying principle
is to learn a function that aggregates a variable-sized input while
focusing on the parts relevant to a given context. When a single
sequence is used as both the input and context, it is called self-
attention . Though attention mechanisms were initially designed to
facilitate Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) to capture long-range
dependencies, Vaswani et al . [33] demonstrate the efficacy of a pure