from its top to bottom: structural attention block; temporal attention
block; and graph context prediction. Our key innovation lies in
decoupling graph evolution into two modular blocks, which enables
highly efficient computations of dynamic node representations.
The structural and temporal self-attention layers together model
graph evolution, and can realize graph neural networks of arbitrary
complexity through layer stacking. Finally, we present our proposed
neural architecture DySAT, built upon these modules.
4.1 Structural Self-Attention
The input of this layer is a graph snapshot G ∈Gand a set of
input node representations {xv∈RD,∀v∈V} where Dis the
input embedding dimension. The input to the initial layer is set as
one-hot encoded vectors for each node. The output is a new set of
node representations {zv∈RF,∀v∈V} with Fdimensions, that
capture the local structural properties in snapshot G.
Specifically, the structural self-attention layer attends over the
immediate neighbors of a node v(in snapshotG), by computing
attention weights as a function of their input node embeddings.
The operation of the structural attention layer is defined as:
zv=σÕ
u∈NvαuvWsxu
,αuv=exp(euv)Í
w∈Nvexp(ewv)(1)
euv=σ
Auv·aT[Wsxu||Wsxv]
∀(u,v)∈E
whereNv={u∈V :(u,v)∈E} is the set of immediate neigh-
bors of node vin snapshotG;Ws∈RF×Dis a shared weight
transformation applied to each node in the graph; a∈R2Dis a
weight vector parameterizing the attention function implemented
as feed-forward layer; ||is the concatenation operation and σ(·)
is a non-linear activation function. Note that Auvis the weight of
link(u,v)in the current snapshot G. The set of learned coefficients
αuv, obtained by a softmax over the neighbors of each node in
V, indicate the contribution of node uto nodevat the current
snapshot. We use a LeakyRELU non-linearity to compute attention
weights, followed by an exponential linear unit (ELU) activation for
the output representations. We employ sparse matrices to efficiently
implement masked self-attention over neighbors, since αuvis zero
for all non-links in G. Thus, a structural attention layer applied on
a snapshotGoutputs node embeddings, through a self-attentional
aggregation of neighboring node embeddings, which can be viewed
as a single message passing round among immediate neighbors.
4.2 Temporal Self-Attention
To further capture temporal evolutionary patterns in a dynamic
graph, we design a temporal self-attention layer. The input of this
layer is a sequence of representations for a particular node vat
different time steps. The input representations are assumed to suf-
ficiently capture local structural information at each time step,
which enables a modular separation of structural and temporal
modeling. Specifically, for each node v, we define the input as
{x1v,x2v, . . . , xTv},xtv∈RD′where Tis the total number of time
steps and D′is the dimensionality of the input representations.
The layer output is a new representation sequence for vat each
time step, i.e.,zv={z1v,z2v, . . . , zTv},ztv∈RF′with dimensionalityF′. We denote the input and output representations of v, packed
together across time, by Xv∈RT×D′andZv∈RT×F′respectively.
The key objective of the temporal self-attentional layer is to
capture the temporal variations in graph structure over multiple
time steps. The input representation of node vat time-step t,xtv,
encodes the current local structure around v(equation 1) We use
xtvas the query to attend over its historical representations ( <t),
tracing the evolution of the local neighborhood around v. In con-
trast to structural attention which operates on the representations
of neighboring nodes, temporal attention depends entirely on the
temporal history of each node, thus facilitating efficient parallelism
across nodes. The decoupling of local neighborhood and temporal
history of each node into independent layers, is one of the key
factors contributing to the efficiency of our model.
To compute the output representation of node vatt, we use
the scaled dot-product form of attention [ 33] where the queries,
keys, and values are set as the input node representations. The
queries, keys, and values are first transformed to a different space
through linear projection matrices Wq∈RD′×F′,Wk∈RD′×F′and
Wv∈RD′×F′respectively. We allow each time-step tto attend over
all time-steps up to and including t, to preserve the auto-regressive
property. The temporal self-attention function is defined as:
Zv=βv(XvWv),βij
v=exp(eij
v)
TÍ
k=1exp(eikv),
eij
v=((XvWq)(XvWk)T)ij√
F′+Mij
(2)
where βv∈RT×Tis the attention weight matrix obtained by the
multiplicative attention function and M∈RT×Tis a mask matrix
with each entry Mij∈ {−∞ ,0}to enforce the auto-regressive
property. To encode the temporal order, we define Mas:
Mij=(
0, i≤j
−∞,otherwise
When Mij=−∞, the softmax results in a zero attention weight,
i.e.,βij
v=0, which switches off the attention from time-step itoj.
4.3 Multi-Faceted Graph Evolution
By stacking structural and temporal self-attentional layers, our
approach can sufficiently capture a single type or facet of graph
evolution. However, real-world dynamic graphs typically evolve
along multiple latent facets, e.g., evolution of users’ movie-watching
preferences across different genres (such as sci-fi, comedy, etc.)
exhibit significantly distinct temporal trends. Thus, we endow our
model with expressivity to capture dynamic graph evolution from
different latent perspectives through multi-head attentions [33].
Multi-head attention, which creates multiple independent in-
stances of the attentional function named attention heads that oper-
ate on different portions of the input embedding, is widely utilized
to improve the diversity of attention mechanisms. This facilitates
joint attention over different subspaces through projections along
multiple latent facets. Multi-head attention also improves model
capacity and stability by avoiding prediction bias. We use multiple
attention heads in both structural and temporal layers: