self-attentional network in achieving state-of-the-art performance
in machine translation, while being significantly more efficient.
As dynamic graphs usually have periodical patterns such as re-
current links or communities, self-attentions can draw context from
all past graph snapshots to adaptively assign interpretable weights
for previous time steps. In this paper, we present a novel neural
architecture named Dynamic Self-Attention Network (DySAT), to
learn latent node representations on dynamic graphs. DySAT gen-
erates a dynamic node representation by joint self-attention along
two dimensions: structural neighborhoods andtemporal dynamics .
Structural attention extracts features from local node neighbor-
hoods in each snapshot through self-attentional aggregation, while
temporal attention captures graph evolution over multiple time
steps by flexibly weighting historical representations. To model
multi-faceted variations in graph structures, we learn multiple at-
tention heads in both structural and temporal attention layers that
enable joint attention over different latent subspaces.
We conduct experiments on single-step and multi-step link pre-
diction, using four benchmarks of different sizes including two
communication networks [ 14,21] and two rating networks [ 11].
Our results indicate significant gains (4.8% macro-AUC on average)
for DySAT over several state-of-the-art baselines and consistent
performance over time steps. We demonstrate the benefits of joint
structural and temporal attention through an ablation study and
visualize temporal attention weights to illustrate the capability
of DySAT in adapting to datasets with varying evolutionary trends.
We summarize the key contributions of this paper below:
•We propose a novel neural architecture named Dynamic Self-
Attention Network that utilizes joint structural and temporal
self-attention for dynamic graph representation learning.
•We propose a modular architectural design of DySAT with stacked
structural and temporal self-attentional layers, which enables
efficient computations compared with RNN-based solutions.
•We conduct a wide spectrum of experiments that demonstrate
consistently superior performance for DySAT over state-of-the-
art methods in single and multi-step link prediction tasks.
2 RELATED WORK
Our work is related to representation learning on static graphs, dy-
namic graphs, and recent advances in self-attentional architectures.
Static graph embeddings. Early unsupervised graph represen-
tation learning work exploit spectral graph properties to perform di-
mensionality reduction [ 30]. To improve scalability, skip-gram was
utilized to learn node embeddings that maximize the likelihood of
co-occurrence in fixed-length random walks [ 8,22,23,26]. Recently,
several graph neural network architectures have achieved tremen-
dous success, among which many methods are designed for super-
vised or semi-supervised learning tasks [ 3,13,19,25,26,34]. Hamil-
ton et al . [10] , Veličković et al . [35] extend graph convolutional
methods through trainable neighborhood aggregation functions,
to propose a general framework applicable to unsupervised graph
representation learning. However, these methods are not designed
to model temporal evolution in dynamic graphs.
Dynamic graph embeddings. Dynamic graphs are defined in
two common ways: snapshot sequence [16], which is a collection
of evolving graph snapshots at multiple discrete time steps; andtimestamped graph [31], which is a single graph with continuous-
valued timestamped links. Though snapshot-based methods may
be applied to a timestamped graph by suitably creating snapshots,
the converse is infeasible due to lack of fine-grained timestamps. In
this paper, we target representation learning over graph snapshots.
Existing dynamic graph embedding techniques fall into two
broad categories. Temporal smoothness methods ensure embedding
stability across consecutive time-steps [ 27,40]. Zhou et al . [39] addi-
tionally use the concept of triadic closure as guidance in social net-
works. Goyal et al . [7]explore graph-autoencoders to incrementally
update node embeddings through initialization from the previous
step. However, these methods cannot capture long-range variations
in graph structure, and are inadequate when nodes exhibit vastly
differing evolutionary behaviors. Recurrent methods [6,9] capture
temporal dynamics by maintaining hidden states to summarize his-
torical snapshots, and achieve state-of-the-art results on dynamic
link prediction. However, recurrent methods scale poorly with the
increase in number of time-steps and cannot model multi-faceted
graph evolution without encountering prohibitive costs. In con-
trast, DySAT captures the most relevant historical contexts through
efficient self-attentions, to learn dynamic node representations.
A related problem is representation learning in streaming graphs
where the objective is to improve efficiency over repeatedly re-
training static models, by proposing incremental temporal up-
dates [ 4,17,18,38]. In contrast, our goal is to improve representation
quality by exploiting the temporal evolution of graph structure.
In the scenario of timestamped graphs , representative methods
include temporal random walks [ 20], and neural extensions of tem-
poral point-processes [ 31,32,42]. As discussed earlier, this scenario
is orthogonal to our setting and further, such techniques cannot be
applied to graph snapshots that lack fine-grained timestamps.
Self-attention mechanisms. Recent advances in many NLP
tasks have demonstrated the superiority of self-attention both in
efficiency and performance [ 28,29,33]. A related approach is Graph
Attention Network (GAT) [ 34], which employs neighborhood at-
tention for node classification on static graphs. We propose joint
self-attention on structural and temporal domains to learn dynamic
node representations that capture its evolving neighborhoods.
3 PROBLEM DEFINITION
We formally define the problem of dynamic graph representation
learning. A dynamic graph is defined as a series of observed static
graph snapshots, G={G1, . . . ,GT}where Tis the number of time
steps. Each snapshot Gt=(V,Et)is a weighted undirected graph
with a shared node set V, a link setEt, and a weighted adjacency
matrix Atat time step t. Unlike some previous methods that assume
links can only be added in dynamic graphs, we also support removal
of links over time. Dynamic graph representation learning aims to
learn latent representations etv∈Rdfor each node v∈V at time
steps t={1,2, . . . , T}, such that etvpreserves both the local graph
structures centered at vand its temporal evolutionary behaviors
such as link connection and removal up to time step t.
4 DYNAMIC SELF-ATTENTION NETWORK
In this section, we first present the major components or building
blocks of DySAT. As depicted in Figure 1, DySAT has three modules