2 Y . Liu et al.
Novel data sets for benchmarking knowledge graph completion approaches, there-
fore, are important contributions to the community. This is especially true since one
method performing well on one data set might perform poorly on others [31]. With this
paper we introduce M MKG (Multi-Modal Knowledge Graphs), a collection of three
knowledge graphs for link prediction and entity matching research. Contrary to exist-
ing data sets, these knowledge graphs contain both numerical features and images for
all entities as well as entity alignments between pairs of KGs. There is a fundamental
difference between M MKG and other visual-relational resources (e.g. [15,32]) . While
MMKG is intended to perform relational reasoning across different entities and images,
previous resources are intended to perform visual reasoning within the same image.
We use F REEBASE 15K[5] as the blue print for the multi-modal knowledge graphs
we constructed. F REEBASE 15Kis the major benchmark data set in the recent link pre-
diction literature. In a ﬁrst step, we aligned most FB15k entities to entities from D B-
PEDIA and Y AGO through the sameAs links contained in DB PEDIA and Y AGO dumps.
Since the degree of a node relates to the probability of an entity to appear in a sub-
sampled version of a KG, we use this measure to populate our versions of DB PEDIA
and Y AGO with more entities. For each knowledge graph, we include entities that are
highly connected to the aligned entities so that the number of entities in each KG is
similar to that of FB15 K. Lastly, we have populated the three knowledge graphs with
numeric literals and images for (almost) all of their entities. We name the two new
data sets D BPEDIA 15Kand Y AGO15K. Although all three data sets contain a similar
number of entities, this does not prevent potential users of M MKG from ﬁltering out
entities to benchmark approaches in scenarios where KGs largely differ with respect to
the number of entities that they contain.
The contributions of the present paper are the following:
–The creation of two knowledge graphs DB PEDIA 15Kand YAGO15 K, that are the
DBPEDIA and YAGO [29] counterparts, respectively, of F REEBASE 15K. Further-
more, all three KGs are enriched with numeric literals and image information, as
well as sameAs predicates linking entities from pairs of knowledge graphs. sameAs
predicates, numerical literals and (links to) images for entities so as the relational
graph structure are released in separate ﬁles.
–We validate our hypothesis that knowledge graph completion related problems can
beneﬁt from multi-modal data:
We elaborate on a previous learning framework [10] and extend it by also
incorporating image information. We perform completion in queries such as
(head ?;sameAs;tail )and(head;sameAs;tail ?), where head andtail are
entities, each one from a different KG. This task can be deemed something in-
between link prediction and entity matching.
We analyze the performance of the different modalities in isolation for different
percentages of known aligned entities between KGs, as well as for different
combinations of feature types.
The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we discuss the relevance of M MKG
for link prediction and entity matching research. Section 3 elaborates on how the differ-
ent elements of M MKG were constructed and provides relevant statistics of the resource.