MMKG: Multi-Modal Knowledge Graphs 13
Table 6. Performance comparison for P= 80% .
MRR HITS@1 HITS@10
FB-DBCONCAT 2.1 1.7 2.7
ENSEMBLE 40.1 34.3 50.2
PoE- lrni 72.1 66.6 82.0
FB-Y AGOCONCAT 0.18 0.18 0.04
ENSEMBLE 47.6 42.3 57.5
PoE- lrni 63.5 57.3 74.6
his an entity of the ﬁrst KG, we replaced the tail by each of the second KB’s entities
in turn, sorted the triples based on the scores or probabilities, and computed the rank of
the correct entity. We repeated the same process for the queries of type (h?;SameAs;t),
wherein tin this case corresponds to an entity of the second KG and we iterate over the
entities of the ﬁrst KG to compute the scores. The mean of all computed ranks is the
Mean Rank (lower is better) and the fraction of correct entities ranked in the top nis
called hits@ n(higher is better). We also computer the Mean Reciprocal Rank (higher
is better) which is an evaluation metric that is less susceptible to outliers. Note that the
ﬁltered setting described in [5] does not make sense in this problem, since an entity can
be linked to an entity via a SameAs relationship only once.
We report the performance of the PoE in its full scope in Tables 4 and 5. We also
show feature ablation experiments, each of which corresponds to removing one modal-
ity from the full set. The performance of each modality in isolation is also depicted.
We use the abbreviations PoE- sufﬁx to refer to the different instances of PoE. sufﬁx is
a combination of the letters L(Latent), R(Relational), N(Numerical) and I(Image) to
indicate the inclusion of each of the four feature types. Generalizations are complicated
to make, given that performance of PoE’s instances differ across percentages of aligned
entities and pairs of knowledge graphs. Nevertheless, there are two instances of our PoE
approach, PoE- lrniand PoE- rni, that tend to outperform all others for low and high per-
centages of aligned entities, respectively. Results seem to indicate that the embedding
expert response dominates over others, and hence its addition to PoE harms the perfor-
mance when such expert is not the best-performing one. Table 3 and Figure 7 provides
examples of queries where numerical and visual information led to good performance,
respectively. It is hard to ﬁnd one speciﬁc reason that explains when adding numerical
and visual information is beneﬁcial for the task at hand. For example, there are entities
with a more canonical visual representation than others. This relates to the difﬁculty of
learning from visual data in the sameAs link prediction problem, as visual similarity
largely varies across entities. Similarly, the availability of numerical attributes largely
varies even for entities of the same type within a KG. However, Tables 4 and 5 provide
empirical evidence of the beneﬁt from including additional modalities.
Table 6 depicts results for the best-performing instance of PoE and baselines dis-
cussed in Section 4. The best performing instance of PoE signiﬁcantly outperforms the
approaches C ONCAT and E NSEMBLE . This validates the choice of the PoE approach,
which can incorporate data modalities to the link prediction problem in a principled
manner.