MMKG: Multi-Modal Knowledge Graphs 3
 
 
 
  Latitude: 35.65
Area: 2,2 Avg. salary: 520,060 Latitude: 36.21Area: 378Avg. salary: 482,163 
captialOflocatedInhasArtAbout bornIn
locatedIn 
  Lat: 35.15
Avg. salary: 520,150 Lat: 36
Size: 378.0caplocationfeatures
location
sameAs
location
Fig. 1. Illustration of M MKG .
Section 4 presents the learning framework and our extension, which is followed by ex-
perimental evidence in Section 5 that validates our hypothesis about the need of such
data set. Finally, Section 6 presents our conclusions.
2 Relevance
There are a number of problems related to knowledge graph completion. Named-entity
linking (NEL) [7,12] is the task of linking a named-entity mention from a text to an
entity in a knowledge graph. Usually a NEL algorithm is followed by a second proce-
dure, namely relationship extraction [19,25], which aims at linking relation mentions
from text to a canonical relation type in a knowledge graph. Hence, relation extraction
methods are often used in conjunction with NEL algorithms to perform KG completion
from natural language content.
Link prediction and entity matching are two other popular tasks for knowledge
graph completion. M MKG has been mainly created targeting these two tasks.
Link prediction. It aims at answering completion queries of the form (head ?;
predicate;tail )or(head;predicate;tail ?), where the answer is supposed to
be always within the KG.
Entity Matching. Given two KGs, the goal is to ﬁnd pairs of records, one from
each KG, that refer to the same entity. For instance, DBpedia :NYCFB:NewYork .
2.1 Relevance for Multi-Relational Link Prediction Research
The core of most of multi-relational link prediction approaches is a scoring function.
The scoring function is a (differentiable) function whose parameters are learned such
that it assigns high scores to true triples and low scores to triples assumed to be false.
The majority of recent work fall into one of the following two categories:
1. Relational approaches [17,11] wherein features are given as logical formulas which
are evaluated in the KG to determine the feature’s value. For instance, the formula
9x(A;bornIn;x)^(x;capitalOf;B)corresponds to a binary feature which is 1
if there exists a path of that type from entity Ato entity B, and 0otherwise.
2. Latent approaches [20] learn ﬁxed-size vector representations (embeddings) for all
entities and relationships in the KG.