4 Y . Liu et al.
While previous work has almost exclusively focused on the relational structure of
the graph, recent approaches have considered other feature types like numerical liter-
als [10,24]. In addition, recent work on visual-relational knowledge graphs [23] has
introduced novel visual query types such as ” How are these two unseen images related
to each other? ” and has proposed novel machine learning methods to answer these
queries. Different to the link prediction problem addressed in this work, the methods
evaluated in [23] solely rely on visual data.
MMKG provides three data sets for evaluating multi-relational link prediction ap-
proaches where, in addition to the multi-relational links between entities, all entities
have been associated with numerical and visual data. An interesting property of M MKG
is that the three knowledge graphs are very heterogeneous (w.r.t. the number of relation
types, their sparsity, and so on) as we show in Section 3. It is known that the perfor-
mance of multi-relational link prediction methods depends on the characteristics of the
speciﬁc knowledge graphs [31]. Therefore, M MKG is an important benchmark data set
for measuring the robustness of the approaches.
2.2 Relevance for Entity Matching Research
There are numerous approaches to ﬁnd sameAs links between entities of two different
knowledge graphs. Though there are works [21,9] that solely incorporate the relational
graph structure, there is an extensive literature on methods that perform the matching
by combining relational structural information with literals of entities, where literals are
used to compute prior conﬁdence scores [28,16,22].
A large number of approaches of the entity matching literature have been evalu-
ated as part of the Ontology Alignment Evaluation Initiative (OAEI) [1] using data sets
such as Y AGO, FREEBASE , and I MDB [16,28,22]. Contrary to the proposed multi-modal
knowledge graph data sets, however, the OAEI does not focus on tasks with visual and
numerical data. The main advantages of M MKG over existing benchmark data sets for
entity matching are: (1) M MKG ’s entities are associated with visual and numerical data,
and (2) the availability of ground truth entity alignments for a high percentage of the
KG entities. The former encourages research in entity matching methods that incor-
porate visual and numerical data. The latter allows one to measure the robustness in
performance of entity matching approaches with respect to the number of given align-
ments between two KGs. The benchmark KGs can also be used to evaluate different
active learning strategies. Traditional active learning approaches ask a user for a small
set of alignments that minimize the uncertainty and, therefore, maximize the quality of
the ﬁnal alignments.
3 M MKG : Dataset Generation
We chose F REEBASE -15K(FB15 K), a data set that has been widely used in the knowl-
edge graph completion literature, as a starting point to create the multi-modal knowl-
edge graphs. Facts of this KG are in N-Triples format, a line-based plain text format for
encoding an RDF graph. For example, the triple
</ns/g.112ygbz6> </ns/type.object.type> </ns/film.film> .