MMKG: Multi-Modal Knowledge Graphs 9
4.1 Task: SAME ASLink Prediction
We validate the hypothesis that different modalities are complementary for the sameAs
link prediction task. Different to the standard link prediction problem, here the goal is to
answer queries such as (head ?;sameAs;tail )or(head;sameAs;tail ?)where head
andtail are entities from different KGs. We do not make the one-to-one alignment
assumption, that is, the assumption that one entity in one KG is identical to exactly (at
most) one in the other. A second difference is that in the evaluation of the S AME AS
prediction task, and in general in the link prediction literature, only one argument of a
triple is assumed to be missing at a time. That partial knowledge of the ground truth is
not given in the entity matching literature.
4.2 Model: Products of Experts
We elaborate on previous work [10] and extend it by incorporating visual information.
Such learning framework can be stated as a Product of Experts (PoE).
In general, a PoE’s probability distribution is
p(dj1;:::; n) =Q
ifi(dji)P
cQ
ifi(cji);
where dis a data vector in a discrete space, iare the parameters of individual model
fi,fi(dji)is the value of dunder model fi, and the c’s index all possible vectors
in the data space. The PoE model is now trained to assign high probability to observed
data vectors.
In the KG context, the data vector dis always a triple d= (h;r;t)and the objec-
tive is to learn a PoE that assigns high probability to true triples and low probabilities
to triples assumed to be false. For instance, the triple (Paris;locatedIn;France )
should be assigned a high probability and the triple (Paris;locatedIn;Germany )a
low probability. If (h;r;t)holds in the KG, the pair’s vector representations are used as
positive training examples. Let d= (h;r;t). We can now deﬁne one individual expert
f(r;F)(dj(r;F))for each (relation type r, feature type F) pair
f(r;L)(dj(r;L)) :the embedding expert for relation type r
f(r;R)(dj(r;R)) :the relational expert for relation type r
f(r;N)(dj(r;N)) :the numerical expert for relation type r
f(sameAs ;I)(dj(r;I)) :the visual expert for relation type sameAs
The joint probability for a triple d= (h;r;t)of the PoE model is now
p(dj1;:::; n) =Q
F2fR;L;N;Igf(r;F)(dj(r;F))
P
cQ
F2fR;L;N;Igf(r;F)(cj(r;F)));
where cindexes all possible triples.
For information regarding the latent, relational and numerical experts, we refer the
reader to [10]. Although entity names are not used to infer sameAs links in this work,
one may also deﬁne an expert for such feature.