Grid R-CNN
Xin Lu1Buyu Li2Yuxin Yue3Quanquan Li1Junjie Yan1
1SenseTime Research,2The Chinese University of Hong Kong,3Beihang University
{luxin,liquanquan,yanjunjie }@sensetime.com, libuyu braiten@outlook.cn, yueyuxin@buaa.edu.cn
Abstract
This paper proposes a novel object detection framework
named Grid R-CNN, which adopts a grid guided local-
ization mechanism for accurate object detection. Differ-
ent from the traditional regression based methods, the Grid
R-CNN captures the spatial information explicitly and en-
joys the position sensitive property of fully convolutional
architecture. Instead of using only two independent points,
we design a multi-point supervision formulation to encode
more clues in order to reduce the impact of inaccurate pre-
diction of speciﬁc points. To take the full advantage of the
correlation of points in a grid, we propose a two-stage in-
formation fusion strategy to fuse feature maps of neighbor
grid points. The grid guided localization approach is easy
to be extended to different state-of-the-art detection frame-
works. Grid R-CNN leads to high quality object localiza-
tion, and experiments demonstrate that it achieves a 4.1%
AP gain at IoU=0.8 and a 10.0% AP gain at IoU=0.9 on
COCO benchmark compared to Faster R-CNN with Res50
backbone and FPN architecture.
1. Introduction
Object detection task can be decomposed into object
classiﬁcation and localization. In recent years, many
deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) based detection
frameworks are proposed and achieve state-of-the-art re-
sults [9, 8, 25, 17, 11, 1]. Although these methods improve
the detection performance in many different aspects, their
bounding box localization modules are similar. Typical
bounding box localization module is a regression branch,
which is designed as several fully connected layers and
takes in high-level feature maps to predict the offset of the
candidate box (proposal or predeﬁned anchor).
In this paper we introduce Grid R-CNN, a novel ob-
ject detection framework, where the traditional regression
formulation is replaced by a grid point guided localization
mechanism. And the explicit spatial representations are ef-
ﬁciently utilized for high quality localization. In contrast
to regression approach where the feature map is collapsed
Figure 1. (a) Traditional offset regression based bounding box lo-
calization. (b) Our proposed grid guided localization in Grid R-
CNN. The bounding box is located by a fully convolutional net-
work.
into a vector by fully connected layers, Grid R-CNN di-
vides the object bounding box region into grids and em-
ploys a fully convolutional network (FCN) [21] to predict
the locations of grid points. Owing to the position sensitive
property of fully convolutional architecture, Grid R-CNN
maintains the explicit spatial information and grid points
locations can be obtained in pixel level. As illustrated in
Figure 1.b, when a certain number of grid points at spec-
iﬁed location are known, the corresponding bounding box
is deﬁnitely determined. Guided by the grid points, Grid
R-CNN can determine more accurate object bounding box
than regression method which lacks the guidance of explicit
spatial information.
Since a bounding box has four degrees of freedom, two
independent points (e.g. the top left corner and bottom
right corner) are enough for localization of a certain object.
However the prediction is not easy because the location of
the points are not directly corresponding to the local fea-
tures. For example, the upper right corner point of the cat
in Figure 1.b lies outside of the object body and its neigh-
borhood region in the image only contains background, and
7363