(b) (a)
Figure 3. An illustration of the 3×3case of grid points feature
fusion mechanism acting on the top left grid point. The arrows
represent the spatial information transfer direction. (a) First order
feature fusion, feature of the point can be enhanced by fusing fea-
tures from its adjacent points. (b) The second order feature fusion
design in Grid R-CNN.
Taking the upper boundary yuas an example, it is the prob-
ability weighted average of y axis coordinates of the three
upper grid points.
3.2. Grid Points Feature Fusion
The grid points have inner spatial correlation, and their
locations can be calibrated by each other to reduce overall
deviation. Thus a spatial information fusion module is de-
signed.
An intuitive implementation is a coordinate level aver-
age, but the rich information in the feature maps are dis-
carded. A further idea is to extract the local features corre-
sponding to the grid points on each feature map for a fusion
operation. However this also discards potential effective in-
formation in different feature maps. Taking the 3×3gird
as an example, for the calibration of top left point, the fea-
tures in the top left region of other neighbor points’ feature
maps (e.g. the top middle point) may provide effective in-
formation but not used. Therefore we design a feature map
level information fusion mechanism to take full advantage
of feature maps of each grid point.
To distinguish the feature maps of different points, we
useN×Ngroup of ﬁlters to extract the features for them
individually (from the last feature map) and give them in-
termediate supervision of their corresponding grid points.
Thus each feature map has speciﬁed relationship with a cer-
tain grid point and we denote the feature map corresponding
to the i-th point as Fi.
For each grid point, the points that have a L1distance
of 1 (unit grid length) will contribute to the fusion, which
are called source points. We deﬁne the set of source points
w.r.t the i-th grid point as Si. For the j-th source point in Si,
Fjwill be processed by three consecutive 5×5convolution
layers for information transfer and this process is denoted as
a function Tj→i. The processed features of all source points
are then fused with Fito obtain an fusion feature map F′
i.
An illustration of the top left grid point in 3×3case is in
Figure 4. Illustration of the extended region mapping strategy. The
small white box is the original region of the RoI and we extend the
representation region of the feature map to the dashed white box
for higher coverage rate of the grid points in the the ground truth
box which is in green.
Figure 3.a. We adopt a simple sum operation for the fusion
in implementation and the information fusion is formulated
as the following equation:
F′
i=Fi+/summationdisplay
j∈SiTj→i(Fj) (3)
Based on F′
ifor each grid point, a second order of fu-
sion is then performed with new conv layers T+
j→ithat don’t
share parameters with those in ﬁrst order of fusion. And the
second order fused feature map F′′
iis utilized to output the
ﬁnal heatmap for the grid point location prediction. The
second order fusion enables an information transfer in the
range of 2 ( L1distance). Taking the upper left grid point in
3×3grids as an example (shown in Figure 3.b), it synthe-
sizes the information from ﬁve other grid points for reliable
calibration.
3.3. Extended Region Mapping
Grid prediction module outputs heatmaps with a ﬁxed
spatial size representing the conﬁdence distribution of the
locations of grid points. Since the fully convolutional net-
work architecture is adopted and spatial information is pre-
served all along, an output heatmap naturally corresponds
to the spatial region of the input proposal in original image.
However, a region proposal may not cover the entire object,
which means some of the ground truth grid points may lie
outside of the region of proposal and can’t be labeled on the
supervision map or predicted during inference.
During training, the lack of some grid points labels leads
to inefﬁcient utilization of training samples. While in in-
ference stage, by simply choosing the maximum pixel on
the heatmap, we may obtain a completely incorrect location
for the grid points whose ground truth location is outside
the corresponding region. In many cases over half of the
grid points are not covered, e.g. in Figure 4 the proposal
(the small white box) is smaller than ground truth bounding
7366