Figure 2. Overview of the pipeline of Grid R-CNN. Region proposals are obtained from RPN and used for RoI feature extraction from the
output feature maps of a CNN backbone. The RoI features are then used to perform classiﬁcation and localization. In contrast to previous
works with a box offset regression branch, we adopt a grid guided mechanism for high quality localization. The grid prediction branch
adopts a FCN to output a probability heatmap from which we can locate the grid points in the bounding box aligned with the object. With
the grid points, we ﬁnally determine the accurate object bounding box by a feature map level information fusion approach.
locate the grid points accurately. Furthermore, we designed
feature fusion module to exploit the features of related grid
points and calibrate for more accurate grid points localiza-
tion than two corner points only.
3. Grid R-CNN
An overview of Grid R-CNN framework is shown in Fig-
ure 2. Based on region proposals, features for each RoI are
extracted individually from the feature maps obtained by a
CNN backbone. The RoI features are then used to perform
classiﬁcation and localization for the corresponding propos-
als. In contrast to previous works, e.g. Faster R-CNN, we
use a grid guided mechanism for localization instead of off-
set regression. The grid prediction branch adopts a fully
convolutional network [21]. It outputs a ﬁne spatial layout
(probability heatmap) from which we can locate the grid
points of the bounding box aligned with the object. With the
grid points, we ﬁnally determine the accurate object bound-
ing box by a feature map level information fusion approach.
3.1. Grid Guided Localization
Most previous methods [9, 8, 25, 17, 11, 1] use several
fully connected layers as a regressor to predict the box off-
set for object localization. Whereas we adopt a fully convo-
lutional network to predict the locations of predeﬁned grid
points and then utilize them to determine the accurate object
bounding box.
We design an N×Ngrid form of target points aligned
in the bounding box of object. An example of 3×3case is
shown in Figure 1.b, the gird points here are the four cor-
ner points, midpoints of four edges and the center point
respectively. Features of each proposal are extracted by
RoIAlign [11] operation with a ﬁxed spatial size of 14×14,
followed by eight 3×3dilated(for large receptive ﬁeld) con-
volutional layers. After that, two 2 ×group deconvolution
layers are adopted to achieve a resolution of 56×56.The grid prediction branch outputs N×Nheatmaps with
56×56resolution, and a pixel-wise sigmoid function is
applied on each heatmap to obtain the probability map. And
each heatmap has a corresponding supervision map, where
5 pixels in a cross shape are labeled as positive locations of
the target grid point. Binary cross-entropy loss is utilized
for optimization.
During inference, on each heatmap we select the pixel
with highest conﬁdence and calculate the corresponding lo-
cation on the original image as the grid point. Formally,
a point(Hx,Hy)in heatmap will be mapped to the point
(Ix,Iy)in origin image by the following equation:
Ix=Px+Hx
wowp
Iy=Py+Hy
hohp(1)
where(Px,Py)is the position of upper left corner of the
proposal in input image, wpandhpare width and height of
proposal, woandhoare width and height of output heatmap.
Then we determine the four boundaries of the box of ob-
ject with the predicted grid points. Speciﬁcally, we denote
the four boundary coordinates as B= (xl,yu,xr,yb)rep-
resenting the left, upper, right and bottom edge respectively.
Letgjrepresent the j-th grid point with coordinate (xj,yj)
and predicted probability pj,. Then we deﬁne Eias the set
of indices of grid points that are located on the i-th edge,
i.e.,j∈Eiifgjlies on the i-th edge of the bounding box.
We have the following equation to calculate Bwith the set
ofg:
xl=1
N/summationdisplay
j∈E1xjpj, y u=1
N/summationdisplay
j∈E2yjpj
xr=1
N/summationdisplay
j∈E3xjpj, y b=1
N/summationdisplay
j∈E4yjpj(2)
7365