it may share very similar local features with nearby pixels.
To overcome this problem, we design a multi-point super-
vision formulation. By deﬁning target points in a gird, we
have more clues to reduce the impact of inaccurate predic-
tion of some points. For instance, in a typical 3×3grid
points supervision case, the probably inaccurate y-axis co-
ordinate of the top-right point can be calibrated by that of
top-middle point which just locates on the boundary of the
object. The grid points are effective designs to decrease the
overall deviation.
Furthermore, to take the full advantage of the correlation
of points in a gird, we propose an information fusion ap-
proach. Speciﬁcally, we design individual group of feature
maps for each grid point. For one grid point, the feature
maps of the neighbor grid points are collected and fused
into an integrated feature map. The integrated feature map
is utilized for the location prediction of the corresponding
grid point. Thus complementary information from spatial
related grid points is incorporated to make the prediction
more accurate.
We showcase the effectiveness of our Grid R-CNN
framework on the object detection track of the challenging
COCO benchmark [19]. Our approach outperforms tradi-
tional regression based state-of-the-art methods by a signif-
icant margin. For example, we surpass Faster R-CNN [25]
with a backbone of ResNet-50 [14] and FPN [17] archi-
tecture by 2.2% AP. Further comparison on different IoU
threshold criteria shows that our approach has overwhelm-
ing strength in high quality object localization, with a 4.1%
AP gain at IoU=0.8 and 10.0% AP gain at IoU=0.9.
The main contributions of our work are listed as follows:
1. We propose a novel localization framework called Grid
R-CNN which substitute traditional regression net-
work by fully convolutional network that preserves
spatial information efﬁciently. To our best knowledge,
Grid R-CNN is the ﬁrst proposed region based (two-
stage) detection framework that locate object by pre-
dicting grid points on pixel level.
2. We design a multi-point supervision form that predicts
points in grid to reduce the impact of some inaccurate
points. We further propose a feature map level infor-
mation fusion mechanism that enables the spatially re-
lated grid points to obtain incorporated features so that
their locations can be well calibrated.
3. We perform extensive experiments and prove that Grid
R-CNN framework is widely applicable across differ-
ent detection frameworks and network architectures
with consistent gains. The Grid R-CNN performs even
better in more strict localization criterion (e.g. IoU
threshold = 0.75). Thus we are conﬁdent that our grid
guided localization mechanism is a better alternative
for regression based localization methods.2. Related Works
Since our new approach is based on two stage object de-
tector, here we brieﬂy review some related works. Two-
stage object detector was developed from the R-CNN ar-
chitecture [9], a region-based deep learning framework that
classify and locate every RoI (Region of Interest) gener-
ated by some low-level computer vision algorithms [30, 34].
Then SPP-Net [12] and Fast-RCNN [8] introduced a new
way to save redundant computation by extracting every re-
gion feature from the shared feature generated by entire im-
age. Although SPP-Net and Fast-RCNN signiﬁcantly im-
prove the performance of object detection, the part of RoIs
generating still cannot be trained end-to-end. Later, Faster-
RCNN [25] was proposed to solve this problem by utilizing
a light region proposal network(RPN) to generate a sparse
set of RoIs. This makes the whole detection pipeline an end-
to-end trainable network and further improve the accuracy
and speed of the detector. In addition, some single-stage
frameworks [20, 18, 24, 16] are also proposed to balance
the performance and efﬁciency of the model.
Recently, many works extend Faster R-CNN architecture
in many aspects to achieve better performance. R-FCN [3]
proposed to use region-based fully convolution network to
replace the original fully connected network. FPN [17] pro-
posed a top-down architecture with lateral connections for
building high-level semantic feature maps for variant scales.
Mask R-CNN [11] extended Faster R-CNN by adding a
branch for predicting an pixel-wise object mask. Differ-
ent from Mask R-CNN, our method replaces the regression
branch with a new grid branch to locate objects more ac-
curately. Also, our method needs no extra annotation other
than bounding box.
LocNet [7] proposed a boundary-based method for ac-
curate localization in object detection. It relies on condi-
tional probabilities of region boundaries while our method
is based on grid points prediction. In addition, LocNet is
used for proposal generation(like RPN) and Grid R-CNN is
used for bounding box prediction.
CornerNet [15] is a single-stage object detector which
uses paired key-points to locate the objects. It’s a bottom-
up detector that detects all the possible bounding box (cor-
ner point) location through a hourglass [22] network. In the
meanwhile, an embedding network was designed to map the
paired keypoints as close as possible. With above embed-
ding mechanism, detected corners can be group as pairs and
locate the bounding boxes.
It’s worth noting that our approach is quite different from
CornerNet. CornerNet is a bottom-up method, which means
it directly generate keypoints from the entire image without
deﬁning instance. The key step of the CornerNet is to recog-
nize keypoints and grouping them correctly. In contrast to
that, our approach is a top-down two-stage detector which
deﬁnes instance at ﬁrst stage. What we focus on is how to
7364