4.3 ICT 
KGs have been widely used to improve  several subdomains  related to Information and Communication 
Technology  as follows:  
Cybersecurity  – Detecting  and preventing cyberattack is inevitable to ensure providing continuous and 
uninterrupted services. Interestingly, various  cybersecurity -relate d KGs have been introduced and developed. For 
example, [90] presented a practical approach for cybersecurity. They first developed a domain ontology that put 
forward a technique to construct the cybersecurity KG. Then they proposed a quintuple model that was used to 
obtain new knowledge using the path- ranking algo rithm. Deng et al. [91] discussed another cybersecurity -related 
KG that was constructed to serve students who seek concepts in this domain. Despite the Adhoc mecha nism to 
construct their KG and the absence of a benchmark comparison for utility evaluation, the line of research is 
important per se; providing KGs that facilitate personalized learning and benefit education is highly 
recommended [92]. Kiesling et al. [ 93] followed a bottom- up approach to build their cybersecurity KG using 
National U.S. Vulnerability Database (NVD) and set of security online references. The authors demonstrated the 
effectiveness of the developed KG by means of two case studies in vulnerability assessment and intrusion 
detection systems. Cybersecurity KGs were also reported in [ 94-96]. 
Software development  – Software development is a sophisticated process that encompasses an array of 
challenges and decisions to be made  in a timely manner [97]. Hence, the software engineering domain has also 
benefited from the propagational use of domain -specific KG s due to their efficacy to store and manage relevant 
entities and relations of high complexity. For example, Nayak et al. [ 98] developed a KG that was used to extract 
test cases that would assist in the functional requirements gathering process. As a backbone schema, the authors 
designed an ontology for software testing and applied a series of NLP tools including Constituency Pars e Tree 
(CPT) to mine and populate the KG with test cases. Schindler et al. [ 99] introduced a KG (SoftwareKG) that 
embodies information pertaining to the software mentioned in academic articl es of social science. SotwareKG 
depicts various aspects of the software including its availability, source and links with other knowledge 
repositories. Designing a framework to industrial software design and development processes was proposed by 
[100]. The authors applied a knowledge- driven QA system for parameters searching and can be also used for 
carrying out variable calculation and ontology reasoning. The proposed model integrated the constructed KG with an SQL database and efficiency
 is demonstrated in certain industrial scenarios. Fu et al.  [101] made use of 
IT crowdsourcing services to construct a KG (ITServiceKG) to improve existing IT services IR system. The author s 
implemented a learning -to-rank model (Gradient Decision Tree) that was leveraged to re- rank the obtained 
results, thereby attainin g much relative search results. Constructing KGs to improve software engineering 
practices and internal processes were also addressed in [ 102-105]. 
Telecommunication  – Defining and conceptualizing the structure of telecommunication networks can be 
explicitly delivered through incorporating KGs. Aumayr et al. [ 106] benefited from the unique structure of KG to 
build a graph that can be used to solving issues that confront telecom operators.  The authors populated the KG with entities captured form community knowledge in forms of telecom and products documentations, o nline 
sites, engineering reports, etc. The aim was to build an automated system to improve network 
incident 
management processes and to provide better customer service. Krinkin et al. [ 107] proposed a 
telecommunication network monitoring model by means of incorporating a domain -specific KG at the top of the 
telecommunications service domain ontology. In particular, the autho rs encompass an array of components that 
are integrated into monitoring cable television operator networks. These components are: the billing model,  user