several efforts where KGs have been constructed using heterogenous resources to build consolidated QA and 
recommender systems in healthcare [ 47, 56, 65], to discover relations in biodata [ 122], to predict ecotoxicological 
effects in environment engineering [ 130], to detect fraud in finance [ 156], and to discover and visualise political 
relationships [174, 176]. These attempts demonstrate how knowledge can be obtained from different sources, 
which perhaps exist in different formats, and can be then fed into one coherent schema to be formally used to conceptualise the designated domain. At the same time, we observe that several other works, particularly in the sciences and engineering domain, have not taken advantage of this important feature of KGs, but have employed 
limited data sources to fe ed their constructed KGs. Further observations and findings from this study are 
discussed in the next section.  
5. Findings from the Survey  
The review of KG construction approaches  which are  drawn from academic works in seven domains reveals a 
correlated array of limitations and deficiencies related to the following summarised points :  
A) KG data quality, privacy, and credibility: The reviewed articles have not consistently used standardized 
and appropriate data quality measures, particul arly with the construction of large -scale KGs. Various 
approaches imported data collected from noisy and low -quality data sources (such as social media) with 
little consideration given to the credibility or privacy of generated information. This is also se en in 
electronic medical records from which it is difficult to collect data due to privacy and confidentiality 
constraints. This raises a question regarding the quality and robustness of KGs that are constructed from 
such data repositories.  Despite some at tempt to tackle data quality issues [ 43, 46], the endeavours in this 
direction have been inadequate. Blockchain technology presents a promising breakthrough in this regard  
as it provides continuous verification and advanced audit trails of all transactions. Blockchain technology does not only provide a complete mechanism to ensure data quality, integrity, and accuracy; it also has a 
secure and tamper -proof architecture for data storage, which would be extremely beneficial for 
healthcare information. Future research should be steered toward designing methodologies  that establish 
best practices to construct immutable  domain -specific KGs leveraging both KG and blockchain 
technologies . 
 
B) Knowledge resources and semantic expansion : Semantic Web technologies and Linked Open Data 
(LOD) have opened the door wide to improving several domain applications [ 205
]. KGs are extensions to 
these efforts and are commonly associated with LOD projects as they  enrich the semantics of data by  
providing conceptual representations of concepts and entities [ 10]. Therefore, the interoperability of 
information is facilitated by relevant entity interlinking obtained from other KG repositories, thereby 
constructing multi -modal KGs. However, the approaches examined in the designated domains have 
demonstr ated limitations in achieving interoperability of information. In particular, semantic 
expansion/broadening techniques were insufficiently incorporated to benefit from the openly available 
vocabularies and curated semantic repositories. Essentially, the underlying structure of KGs is designed 
to pave the way for data integration, unification, and information sharing and usability. Research in this 
direction should be reinforced to ensure that the essence of KGs adheres to FAIR (Findable, Accessible, 
Interoperable, Reusable) principles21. 
 
 
21 https://www.go -fair.org/fair -principles/