C) KG construction algorithms : Deriving meaningful knowledge from a diversity of data formats is not a 
trivial task; it involves extracting facts about entities and their potential relationships, which requires a 
correlated array of various Information Extraction (IE) techniques and sophisticated Natural Language 
Processing (NLP) approaches. The review of the selected artic les revealed only limited discussions on 
techniques used for entity recognition and/or relation extraction. Most of these studies either neglected to specify the algorithm(s) used in the KG construction including techniques for entity and relation 
extracti on (e.g. [ 135, 144, 155
]) or presented few details and poor rationale for using such techniques (e.g. 
[51, 90, 107, 145]).  From the analysis, we also identified an existing research gap -   there were no 
consolidated methodologies for automating the process of constructing a domain -specific KG that 
facilitates the selection of suitable algorithms for the designated techniques (involving both NLP 
methods and data -driven approaches [ 206]). Such methodologies would not only improve KG 
construction practices; they could also make the knowledge broadly available for access by both humans 
and machines.  
 
D) Time -aware KGs : The dynamic nature of knowledge is highly correlated  to contextual situations; hence, 
various facts that describe entities might change over time. Therefore, the temporal dimension should be integrated into KGs. Various currently propagated KGs are static  but temporary,  and do not consider the 
time factor [207
]. This applies to both open -world and domain -specific KGs.  Neglecting the dynamic 
nature of knowledge harms the quality and correctness of facts contained in the KGs and might lead to poor decision making that is based merely on such data sources. Consequently, despite some exceptions 
such as Wikidata and YAGO in which certain facts are already 
endowed with the time information, the 
construction of KGs should consider the validity period of facts [ 208].  
 
E) KG evaluation : During the process of constructing KGs,  incorrect facts in terms of entities and/or 
relations could be captured. This process is prone to errors, particularly in regard to the information 
derived from mix -quality data sources. As mentioned  previously, it is vital to consider the credibility of 
the data source, as is the evaluation of the overall construction process. In fact, among the reviewed 
articles, the evaluation of KGs was the predominant weakness. For example, some studies carried o ut a 
superficial and subjective evaluation of the KG construction with no incorporation of concrete evaluation 
metrics [134, 144, 199]. Another thread of efforts attempted to involve theoretically -proven evaluation 
metrics to systematically measure KG completion and KG correctness approaches. The former approaches were commonly measured using 
recall, precision, and f -measure [64, 66, 80, 90]. The latter incorporate d 
accuracy and/or area under the ROC curve (AUC) [7, 57, 147]. Nevertheless, our study endorses the work 
conducted by [ 7] in that, providing holistic techniques which simultaneously improve the quality of KGs 
in dissimilar domains, is still an open research problem. Further, the absence of testbeds and benchmark 
datasets has prevented the community from undertaking an appropriate and fair evaluation of techniques used for KG creation [
209]. Lastly, in their evaluation methodologies, researchers should consid er various 
other data quality indicators including completeness, believability, relevance, objectivity, consistency, 
understandability, etc. [ 210]. 
 
F) Computing performance in Big KGs : There is a notable consensus amongst the research community 
that the conventional technologies used to process and analyse the continuous propagation large- scale 
datasets are no longer adequate [ 211]. Machine Learning and Art ificial Intelligence have become the 
preferred methods for the processing and analysis of Big data, by means of which the hoped -for added