domain -specific KG s were also implemented in [ 69-71]. Further, tackling challenges in healthcare systems 
leveraging KGs technologies was discussed in [ 72-74]. 
4.2 Education  
The construction and usage of educational KGs have been extended recently due to the significance of KGs 
application to the learning systems as well as the abundance of pedagogical data  [75]. The following subdomains 
are inferred from the collected education- related papers.  
Teaching and classroom resources  – KGs have proven ability to foster learning [76] and been used in popular 
massive open online course (MOOC) platforms [ 77, 78]. For example, Chen et al. [79] presented K12EduKG, a KG 
constructed based on K -12 educational subjects. Domain -specific educational data (Chinese curriculum standards 
of mathematics ) was the s ource of knowledge that was used in K12EduKG. Concepts and relations are identified 
and imported into K12EduKG using CRF model and probabilistic association rule mining. Su and Zhang [ 80] 
designed a KG schema that can accommodate e ducational Big data. Their KG was enriched by using two large 
datasets, namely subject teaching resources and an online encyclopedia resource. Another attempt  has been 
undertaken to build a KG (MathGraph) that can be used to solve high school mathematical exercises including 
mathematical derivation and calculation  [81]. The authors of [ 81] used MathGraph, that was  initially constructed 
with the help of crowdsource, to embody dissimilar mathematical objects, operations and constraints.  KnowEdu 
[77] is one of the important efforts in educational KG design and construction.  By using standard curriculum and 
learning assessm ent data as data sources, and by using neural network models for concepts and relations 
identification, KnowEdu is created to facilitate learner's cognitive and educational process.  
Education management  – Aliyu et al. [ 82] presented an approach for implementing a KG to be used for course 
allocation scheduling and managemen t. Although the evaluation of the constructed KG was inadequate, the work 
is promising toward this important research direction. Liu et al. [ 83] and Lian et al. [ 84] provided approaches that 
adopted graph -based relational learning for concept prerequisite learning in education domain. The former 
introduced an automatic tech nique for prerequisites prediction by inferring directed graph at the course and 
concept levels. The latter incorporated active learning to the concept prerequisite learning problem. Modelling internal control in higher education using KG technology was di scussed in [
85]. The author proposed a KG that 
can conceptualise the internal control policy in the higher educational institutions.  Despite the author’s attempt to demonstrate the utility in a visualisation task, the overall mec hanism to construct and evaluate the designated 
KG is inadequate and inferior. Applying KGs to benefit education management was also outlined in [
86]. 
Educational technologies  – Designing a KG that can be used to depi ct academic networks was discussed in [ 87]. 
The authors proposed a model of scientific publication management that can integrate scientific metadata in 
terms of academic entities . The model embodies a KG which conveys the relationship between research entities 
and research topics . Incorporating KG embedding techniques in the process of constructing the educational KGs 
is inadequate, part icularly those leverage the rich literals of the designated KGs, thus Yao et al. [ 88] attempted to 
tackle this issue by reporting on a model for embedding learning of educational KGs . With the use of three 
experimental KGs in the education domain, the authors demonstrated the significance of the proposed model when processing educational KGs . In particular, authors of [
88] presented a method that can jointly learn 
embeddings built on pre -trained structural (i.e. TransE) and literal embedding vectors (i.e. BERT). Evaluating the 
utility of the educational  KG by means of visualisation analysis  was rarely discussed in the literature. An attempt 
in this direction was undertaken by Su n et al.  [ 89] who integrated an education KG  and demonstrated its utility 
by carrying out visual analysis  so as to provide a better understanding to its topological structure.