value is obtained. Large- scale KGs (i.e., those with trillions of triples) adhere to various Big data features. 
Volume  is not the only feature of Big KGs; they can be described by the variety in data sources, the velocity 
of data generation, veracity of data quality, volatility of data currency and availability, etc. Despite some 
growing efforts to integrate large -scale K Gs in Big Data processing [ 212], there is a need for a deeper and 
congruent integration of Big Data technology infrastructures and sophisticated statistical models required for reasoning over domain- specific KGs, and this remains an open research venue.  
 
G) Domain -specific KG Reasoning : KG reasoning aims to provide new interpretations and conclusions from 
constructed KGs. It is a mechanism whereby new facts can be inferred from an existing KG [ 213]. KG 
embedding -based approaches (including tensor decomposition, distance, and semantic matching 
models) have gained considerable attention in the literature due to their scalability and efficiency in accommodating large -scale KGs so as to deduce a general izable context about the KG that can be applied 
to infer new relations [
8, 214]. This study discloses a lack of incorporating KG embedding techniques into 
the examined approaches. Applying KG embeddings extends these efforts and tackles the deficiencies that might occ ur in the KG construction process, which subsequently leads to incomplete graphs. To 
address this issue and to establish a technical ground for conducting relational reasoning in AI systems, KG embeddings should be integrated and implemented in domain- specific KG construction models.  
 
H) Availability of domain -specific KGs : Unlike open -world and generic KGs, most of the constructed and 
populated domain- specific KGs are not published on the Web and thus are not accessible to other 
researchers. The paucity of su ch annotated and enriched data silos makes the process of benchmark 
comparison more difficult, as well as limiting reusability, interlinking and interoperability. At the same time, there is a scarcity of relevant experts who can perform data annotation. Fo r example, in the 
healthcare domain, there is a lack of detailed clinical entities and relations. This is due to the shortage of both clinical repositories [ 50] and clinicians to conduct data annotation [ 215
].  This issue has also been 
highlighted by researchers in Cybersecurity [216], Finance [217], and Social Science [218], to name a few.  
 
I) Room for further research on do main -specific KGs : this study attempts to capture a snapshot of recent 
advances in KGs in certain domains of knowledge. Due to limitations of space, not all KGs construction attempts in every domain and its subdomains could be considered. Hence, there are still various specific areas of the selected high- level domains that can exploit KG technology. For example, there is a need for 
technical solutions to respond to COVID -19 as a critical catalyser of various technological applications. 
KG technology can pro vide a shared conceptualised structure which can be used to map all dispersed 
facts stored in various data silos which are relevant to this pandemic. Integrating information from various 
available resources pertaining to COVID -19 can help to bridge the kno wledge gap and provide a better 
understanding of this disease. COVID -19 has also given impetus to the adoption of new technologies for 
remote and online education. The propagation of online learning resources has established a space where 
domain -specific K Gs can be employed to alleviate the problem of selecting relevant resources to benefit 
both teachers and learners. KG technology can be applied to solve an array of problems in any domain 
where the data is collected from different sources. In these applica tions, KG technology is an excellent 
means of achieving interoperability, unification, interlinking, and data integration.