Figure 3: A taxonomy for KG construction 
In terms of knowledge extraction, KG construction is the process of extracting entities and relationships between 
these entities. Entity extraction comprises three key tasks [ 21], namely: i) Named Entity Recognition (NER) which 
involves the process of finding individuals, organisation, locations, events, and other entities from (un )(semi -
)structured data sources; ii) N amed Entity Disambiguation (NED) which aims to eliminate the ambiguity of an 
inferred entity by mapping it to the factual real -world entity; and iii) Named Entity Linking (NEL) which assigns a 
unique IRI identified to the disambiguated entity. The purpose of relation extraction is to discover the semantic 
relationships between the identified and disambiguated entities. Relation extraction can be done by either local -
based or global -based relation extraction methods. The former indicates the mention- level relation which is 
commonly inferred form short textual contents, and the latter aims to infer those relations that span several local -
based relations. The reader can obtain further details on these tasks in relevant literature such as [ 22, 23].  
Another perspective conceives that the KG construction depends on whether a predefined ontology schema is  
used (schema -based), or the KG is constructed with no predefined schema (schema -free) [24], or if the 
construction comprises a hybrid of schema -based and schema -free approaches. The first methodology (schema -
based) can be categorised according to two groups based on the selection of data s ources and ontology [ 25, 26] 
namely:  (i) the bottom- up method whereby the structural nature of an ontology is incorporated to build the KG 
(e.g. Wikipedia is established by using the predefined ontology model, i.e. DBpedia [ 27]); and (ii) the top -down 
method where the ontology schema is inferred from the underlying structured data (e.g. YAGO) [28]) or build 
taxonomies (hierarchy) are constructed based on information from the Web [ 29]. Schema -free approaches are 
open information extraction techniques which rely on the openness of the Web; hence, the information is 
KG 
Construction
Level of 
Knowledge 
Extraction 
Entity -level
Named Entity 
Recognition (NER)
Named Entity 
Disambiguation 
(NED)
Named Entity 
Linking (NEL)
Relation -level
Global -based
Local -based
Type of Knowledge 
base
Schema -based
Bottom -up
Top-down
Schema -free
Open IE
Hybrid
Construction 
Method
Rule(Knowledge) -
based 
Un(Semi -) 
Supervised
Neural Networks
off-the-shelf