We examined more than 140 research articles that appeared between 2016 to 2020 in high- quality computer 
science and information systems publication venues. Figure 1 indicates the number of papers collected for the 
review. As seen in the figure, the interest  in domain -specific KGs has increased dramatically over recent years.   
 
Figure 1. Number of studied papers per year.  
Our study is different from other similar works. For example, the current important researches in this arena, suc h 
as [6-8], either focus on generic and domain- independent KGs, or only touch upon and do not discuss in depth 
domain -specific KGs [ 5, 9]. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attem pt to provide both an inclusive 
definition of the term ‘domain- specific KG’ as well as a thorough analysis of various domain -based KG 
construction approaches. Furthermore, the review reveals the shortcomings of current approaches and proposes 
solutions to address them. 
3. Preliminaries  
3.1 Generic Knowledge Graph s   
Generic KGs (a.k.a . open- world, cross -domain, or domain -independent) were constructed  long before the term 
“knowledge graph” was coined, and such constructions have been ongoing. In fact, since the invention of the Semantic Web, generic KGs have been associated with linked data, being natural representations of the 
interlinking of entities  [10
]. Nevertheless, the term has gained much momentum recently as it has given rise to 
new computing paradigms by shifting from traditional databases to knowledge databases [11]. Ironically, there 
is no consensus on the definition of the term despite the few attempts to provide a reasonable description. For example,  Ehrlinger and 
Wöß [10] perceive the KG as the process of acquiring and correlating knowledge to an 
ontology and applying a reasoner to infer knowledge. A further technical depiction of the term i s provided by 
Wang et al. [8] who conceive the KG as a multidimensional graph comprising entities/nodes and relations/edges.  
A KG is commonly described as a directed graph ( 𝐺𝐺), where 𝐺𝐺 =(𝑉𝑉,𝐸𝐸). This notation depicts the relationship 
between vertices ( 𝑉𝑉) of the graph and edges ( 𝐸𝐸) between these vertices. The vertices represent the set of real -
world entities and the edges represent the relationships between these entities. Vertices/entities/nodes are 010203040506070
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020NUMBER OF PAPERS