Domain -specific  Knowledge Graph s:  A survey  
 
Bilal Abu -Salih  
King Abdullah II School of Information Technology  
The University of Jordan  
 b.abusalih@ju.edu.jo   
Abstract   
Knowledge Graphs (KGs) have made a qualitative leap and effected a real revolution in knowledge representation. 
This is leveraged by the underlying structure of the KG which underpins a better comprehension, reasoning and interpretation of knowledge for bo th human and machine. Therefore, KGs continue to be used as the main means 
of tackling a plethora of real -life problems in various domains. However, there is no consensus in regard to a 
plausible and inclusive definition of a 
domain -specific KG. Further, i n conjunction with several limitations and 
deficiencies, various domain- specific KG construction approaches are far from perfect. This survey is the first to 
offer a comprehensive definition of a domain- specific KG. Also, the paper presents a  thorough revi ew of the 
state -of-the-art approaches drawn from academic works relevant to seven domains of knowledge. An 
examination of current approaches reveals a range of limitations and deficiencies. At the same time, uncharted territories on the research map are highlig hted to tackle extant issues in the literature and point to directions for 
future research.  
Keywords: Knowledge Graph; Domain -specific  Knowledge Graph;  Knowledge Graph Construction;  Knowledge 
Graph Embeddings ; Knowledge Graph evaluation;  Domain Ontology; S urvey . 
 
1. Introduction  
KGs, one of the key trends which are driving the next wave of technologies [ 1], have now become a new form of 
knowledge representation, and the cornerstone of several applications ranging from generic to specific industrial 
usage cases [2]. The ever -increasing interest in this technology is due to its underlying abstract structure which 
effectively facilitates domain conceptualization and data management, and its usage as the main driver of several 
Artificial Intelligence applications. In p articular, the KG depicts an integrated collection of real -world entities 
which are connected by semantically -interrelated relations. In this respect, data are  given formal semantics via 
data annotation and manipulation in a machine -readable format , thereb y reducing ambiguity and deriving 
meaningful information that is specific to an application’s domain. Therefore, the incorporation of KGs has extended the existing data models depicted by domain ontologies and established a new form of data analytics 
that is able to capture semantically -interconnected, large -scale data sets.  
Beyond the generic and open- world KGs such as Google KG [ 3
], most of the current KGs are domain- specific, 
with certain underlying ontologies in their design [4]. Because of the lack of a ‘one- size fits all’ schema or ontology 
that can be applied to address real -life problems, effo rts to establish, polish, and augment domain- specific KGs 
are continuing to be made in several domains of knowledge [ 5]. However, this ongoing interest in domain-