KG-based event embedding framework that is designed for  event -driven quantitative investment . In particular, 
the constructed KG (named FinKG) a nd the implemented embeddings performs learn informative representations 
based on both the relations of event argument and the lead -lag relations amongst the entire KG. Liu et al. [ 146] 
demonstr ated the use of a KG embedding framework to predict stock prices using news sentiment analysis. 
Although the authors did not provide much discussion on the validity of the mechanism followed to construct 
the KG, the utility was demonstrated in the predicti on task. In the same line of research, Long et al. [ 147] 
integrated trading data, public market information and investor’s records to construct a KG that is incorporated 
to model the market and its features. The KG was then embedded using node2vector approa ch and used in a 
deep neural network model for forecasting trends in stock prices. Authors of [ 148] depicted the relevance of 
using a knowledge -empowered model on event representation and stock prediction.  Zhang et al. [149] 
supported the aforementioned endeavours by proposing an approach to detect short -term stock price 
movement. The authors developed an enterprise KG and designed a top- up power vector model and inf luence 
propagation model. The aim was to compute the effect of a specific relationship from the relevant enterprise. 
The construction of the KG involved incorporating Named Entities Recognition (NER) and Neural Relation Extraction (NRE) for entities extrac tion and Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) for relation inference.  Stock 
management and stock prediction tasks have been also discussed in [
150-154].  
Fraud Detection  – Financial fraud detection is an important area of financial risk management. KGs have been 
leveraged to establish approaches that can be used to stop such criminal activity. For example, Wang et al.  [155] 
used  a finance KG as a basis for label propagation algorithm to detect online fraud. Their model embodies a 
partition algorithm th at is used to distinguish fraudulent groups of users. They  argue d that fraudulent users tend 
to position a close distance, whereas normal users commonly  exist in  isolated tense or firmly connected groups. 
Zhan et al. [ 156]    also proposed a model that was applied in the fraud detection domain. In particular, the authors 
designed a call network KG that is enriched with call historical data and loan transactional data. Although the 
mechanism followed to construct the KG and the evaluation metrics are inadequate and inferior, the research 
topic is important and emphasises the significance of combining KGs with machine learning techniques to detect fraud in finance  [
157, 158]. 
4.6 Society and  Politics  
Societies were initially formed men who have intuitively established political systems by making formal and informal decisions concerning the production, distribution, and the use o f various resources [ 159
]. Thus, entities 
in terms of people, organisations, and resources have been involved to establish various forms of relations which exist among them [
160]. The formal representation of KGs provides an excellent mean to conceptualise 
relationships in social sciences and politics.  
Social Science – The current advances in information and communication technologies have made a qualitative 
leap and have created new venues where people can exchange thought, ideas and interest  [97, 161-163]. This 
ICT revolution is embodied into various el ectronic means  depicted by the emergence of social media. The data 
created by such platforms are propagating posing questions on the quality of the data being generated by these platforms  [
164-167]. Hence, there is a vital need to study  these platforms and provide ground truth of trustworthy 
data sets  [166, 168-170]. Tchechmedjiev et al. [ 171] introduced ClaimsKG, a knowledge graph of fact-checked 
claims originated from International Fact -Checking Network (IFCN). The purpose of ClaimsKG is to enable users 
search ing for true facts of a certain entity. Similarly, it can be used to infer false facts of people, organisations, 
etc. Nguyen et  al. [172] created a KG that embodied social events decomposed from social media using 
Independent Component Analysis (ICA) and the SocioScope Knowledge Graph (SKG) model.  ICA is used to cluster