as eCommerce. The constructed KG was fed by entities and relations extracted from Destination Management 
Organizations (DMOs) and Geographical Information Systems (GIS)  and other tourism and accommodation -
related websites . Establishing  a touristic KG for C hina was introduced in [190]. The authors designed the domain-
specific KG by using data obtained from Chinese encyclopedia KG and unstructured web pages. For ent ity 
alignment, the authors made use of Skip- Gram Model to fitch relative entities during the knowledge acquisition 
phase. Another attempt to construct a KG for Chinese tourism was undertaken by [187]. The aim was to build a 
QA system based on the implemented KG of tourism. The authors followed a proposed entity recognition 
algorithm  for entity extraction  and utilised CNN model for relation inference.  In a different  context, Calleja et al. 
[191] created “DBtravel ” KG over the Spanish entries of Wikitravel19. The authors followed GATE20 pipeline that  
encompasses three internal processes, namely : (1) tokenizer, (2) sentence splitter and (3) named entity 
recognition.  Employing KGs in the tourism domain has been highly active recently and used in various 
applications [192-194].  
Transportation and traffic  – Applying KGs in transportation and traffic  has also obtained much attention 
recently due to the population growth, air pollution, and other  sophisticat ed embedded issues  that require 
intelligent systems to resolve them efficiently [ 195]. For example, Zhou et al. [ 196] introduced a model to predict 
urban traffic congestion. In this model urban KG was constructed from miscellanies static and dynamic raw urban 
data. The author s applied CNN to model spatio -temporal correlation between each indicated region. One of the 
well- known KGs that was applied to the US transportation system is ATMGRAPH [ 197] which was built at the top 
of the NASA ATM Ontology (ATMONTO) [ 198]. M. Keller [197] in  ATMGRAPH combined an array of structured 
aviation data obtained from the large part by US federal agencies. The developed KG conceptualises the US 
National Airspace System by incorporating entities describing, airspac e infrastructure, flights, and flight operating 
conditions. Detecting traffic events by employing KG was proposed in [ 199]. The authors built a KG named ITSKG 
(Imagery -based Traffic Sensing Knowledge Graph) that was used to comprehend traffic patterns based on 
stationary traffic camera imagery data.  Further, Wang et al. [ 200] followed a semi- automated KG construction  
approach based on China railway electrical accidents data. The purpose of the work is to analyse and identify the 
faulty equipment of railway electrical accidents in China as well  to infer patterns and trends from such data. In a 
different context,   Zhang et al.  [201] have expanded the exertions in the maritime transport ation by applying KG 
to build a knowledge representation of the regulations depicted by International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code (IMDG Code). They aimed to facilitate the access and retrieval of
 detailed guidelines embedded in IMDG. 
Knowledge -based mode ls in transportation domain were also benchmarked [202] and others were used in travel -
related  intelligent systems to facilitate information sharing and interoperability [203, 204]. 
4.8 Summary  
The aim of this study was to review the latest publications concerned with KG construction approaches in seven domains of knowledge, namely: healthcare, education, ICT, science and engineering, finance, society and politics, 
and travel. A close examination of these interesting domains reveals important areas of research that can greatly 
benefit from KG technology. This study not only demonstrates the popularity of incorporating KGs to arrive at 
solutions for real -life problems, but also illustrates how KGs have proven to be an effective overall solution to 
mitigate complexity, ensure flexibility, and establish a common -ground topology whereby data can be integrated 
from different sources. This is clearly articulated in the selected articles in which there is  a consensus that KG 
technology facilitates the integration of information captured from various sources. For example, we observe 
 
19 https://wikitravel.org/  
20 https://gate.ac.uk/