social events obtained from a matrix of collected hashtags. This was followed by using the SKG model do 
automatically construct event -driven KGs from Twitter data. Huang et al. [ 173] reported a KG that can be used in 
social media to detect entity morphs (aliases that are commonly used to conceal the identity of a certain entity). 
The developed KG includes the real entity linked with all identified morphs mansions. A topic modelling algorithm( i.e. CorrLDA2), as well as SVM models, were used in the KG construction process. Various comparative 
studies were undertaken to demonstrate the effec tiveness of the proposed approach.
 
Politics – Processing social data to infer domain knowledge that can be used to design a political KG was also 
discussed in the literature. For example, our previous work [ 174] developed a credibi lity-based Politics and 
applied various KG embedding techniques to validate the KG’s utility. In particular, BBC politics ontology was 
incorporated and extended as a backbone schema for the Politics KG. Then, various domain knowledge inference tools were used to enrich the KG with political entities captured from the collected datasets. Finally, several KG 
embedding models were implemented and tested over a set of link prediction, clustering, and visualisation tasks. 
The work proposed by [
175] crossed with the former model as both efforts emphasized the significance of ad ding 
trust aspect in the process of designing and constructed a KG. In particular, the authors  presented POLARE, an 
ontology that conceptualised the political system, and built a KG based on the provided ontology schema so as to be used for a better unders tanding the existing relations between agents in the political system in Brazil.  
Another attempt to detect and infer Political ideology was proposed by [ 176
] whereby the authors introduced 
an opinion- aware KG that was used for conducting political ideology forecasting. The model integrated 
knowledge captured from social media, DBpedia and ideological books corpus. Rudnik et al. [177] made use of 
Wikidata to semantically annotating news articles. The annotated articles were then fed into a predefined event -
oriented KG that was used for semantic -based search engine.  News recommendation by means of a KG was also 
examined in [178]. The authors applied a filtering method to elimina te irrelevant relations from the currently 
incorporated and propagated KG. Microsoft Satori KG was used as a backbone knowledge- based and enriched 
with entities captured from MSN news corpus. Also , the authors introduced article topic entities and the 
collaborative edges as two new categories of information to be embedded in the original graph.  Mehdi et al. 
[179] designed a KG embedding approach based on socio -scholarly KG which embodies scientific artifacts on 
social good. The developed system incorporated various KG embedding approaches so as to retrieve, for a given entity (i.e., publication, author, domain and  venue), all related and semantically -matched entities. Other studies 
were further established systems over KGs to benefit news and journalism domain [
180-182].  
Culture – Modelling culture and hi story of societies have been also conceptualised using domain -specific KG s. 
For example, Liu et al. [183] developed a KG that depicts  ancient Chinese history and culture. The author 
constructed the KG employing  Baidu Encyclopedia18 as the knowledge source, BiLSTM -CRF for entity recognition, 
and DeepKE  (developed by Zhejiang University) for relation inference. Constructing cultural knowledge bases 
that benefit from domain ontology and cultural KGs was elaborated further in [ 184-186]. 
4.7 Travel  
Travel  is one of the key domains which availed from the grow ing use of KGs. In particular, Tourism and 
Trafic /Transportation are amongst the subdomains that have largely employed KGs.  
Tourism – KGs have been constructed and used in touristic QA systems [187] or in tourism recommender systems 
to recommend personalized attractions [ 188] and the best accommodation prices [ 189]. For example, Kärle et al. 
[189] gathered data about Tirol region at Austria and constructed “ Tirol Tourism ” KG to benefit applications such 
 
18 https://baike.baidu.com/