by domain experts. Another importa nt effort that integrated plausible reasoning with fine- grained biomedical 
ontologies to tackle data incompleteness problem in generic health data was undertaken by 
Mohammadhassanzadeh et al. [ 47]. The authors proposed Semantics -based Data analytics (SeDan) framework 
that performs an exploratory and plausible analysis of the KG using plausible OWL extension and query rewriting 
algorithm. The framework incorporates various knowledge bases includ ing the DrugBank, Disease Ontology, and 
the large -scale semantic MEDLINE database (SemMedDB). Rastogi et al. [ 52] framed the personal health KG as a 
combination of context, personalization, and integration with other knowledge- bases. Their study indicated that 
the literature on personalised heal th-related KGs is inadequate and lacks a unified standard representation to 
depict the designated domain. Incorporating health KGs for Query Answering (QA) system was discussed by Sahu et al. [
53]. The authors offered a system that can be used to search for v arious health- based KGs to obtain a set 
of healthcare -related response sub -graphs. Incorporating KG in the medical domain to benefit QA applications 
was also discussed in [54].  
Diseases  – The advances  of constructing KGs to conceptualise health- related problems and diseases were 
discussed in the literature. Rotmensch et al. [ 55] constructed a KG that captures diseases and symptoms related 
entities form 273 ,174 electronic medical records . The a uthors incorporate Google Health Knowledge Graph 
(GHKG) and created  a KG that embodies  diseases and symptoms and relationships between them. Constructing 
KGs that can describe depression was provided by Huang et al. [ 56]. In particular, they  attempted to generate a 
sub-graph, that describes depression disorder, obtained by parsing a variety of large knowledge sources such as 
PubMed, Medical Guidelines, DrugBank, Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) etc. Evaluating the robustness 
of a constr ucted KG in healthcare is of utmost significance to ensure the quality of the inferred knowledge in this 
sensitive domain. In this context, Chen et al. [ 57] present ed a methodology to measure and evaluate the 
robustness of knowledge in terms of diseases and symptoms captured from existing health knowledge graphs 
as well as records of patient visits to the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center (BIDMC). Addressing the t emporal 
dimension in KG creation is an important dimension in healthcare. Ma et al. [ 58] established a temporal KG  that 
can be used for cognitive episodic memory. This tempora l KG was initially derived from the Integrated Conflict 
Early Warning System (ICEWS) dataset as well as Global Database of Events, Language and Tone (GDELT). Their 
work was different from other seminal works by generalizing four significant static KGs embedding to 4 -
dimensional temporal/episodic KGs. Also, two novel generalizations of RESCAL were proposed and discussed. 
Application of KGs in healthcare and medical domains was demonstrated in other relevant tasks such as fraud, waste, and abuse Detection [
59], drugs similarity [ 18], drug repurposing [ 60], clinical decision support systems 
[61], and medical recommender systems [62, 63]. 
Healthcare management  – Constructing a KG to benefit health management and to address current health-
related problems and chronic diseases were proposed in the literature [ 64-67]. For example, Huang et al. [ 64] 
suggested a KG construction model that benefits people seeking knowledge regarding a healthy diet. The authors proposed a domain ontology as an underlying structure of a diet KG. The KG was then enriched with entities extracted from a set of healthcare websites using Conditional Random Fields (CRF), Support Vector 
Machine (SVM) and Decision Tree (DT) algorithms. Another effort was carried out by Haussmann et al. [
65] who 
proposed an integrated KG (FoodKG) that embodies knowledge on healthy food, recipes, and nutrition. The 
authors ensured the credibility of the obtained knowledge by adopting RDF Nanopublication specification [68]. 
On the same research direction, an inclusive healthy diet KG  was also constructed by Chi et al. [66]. The reported 
KG integrated five key concepts that included food m aterial, dish, nutritional element, symptom, and the crowd. 
Through semi -automatically extraction approach, the proposed model was capable to collect and import entities 
captured from a set of online resources using various NLP and machine learning algorit hms. Modeling food