collected using various knowledge extraction techniques with no consideration given to creating a unified 
ontology design ( e.g. OpenIE [30]). Hybrid knowledge -based approaches: are the techniques whereby the 
knowledge is obtained based on a predetermined ontology, as well as facts gathered from the Web (e.g. Knowledge Vault [
25], NELL [ 31]).  
The third thread of research sees the KG construction as being based on the technical solutions and methods used to mine the Web and other data silos and repositories to deduce entities and relations, thereby constructing the KG. Various approaches were proposed in the literature to address this issue. These fall under four key 
categories [6, 21, 23
]: (1) Knowledge -based approaches: these methods mainly i nvolve domain experts to 
establish human- crafted rules (Association Rules) by incorporating domain -knowledge and lexicon resources. (2) 
Learning -based methods: these methods encompass (un)(semi -)supervised techniques. Examples of these 
methods that are employed for entities recognition and relations extraction are Conditional Random Field (CRF), Hidden Markov Models (HMM), Support Victor Machine (SVM), Naïve Bayes (NB), Logistic Regression (LR), and 
Decision Trees, and bootstrapped methods. (3) Neural netwo rk models: these methods incorporate neural 
networks and deep learning to infer features. These methods require neither domain ontologies nor domain-
specific corpora, thereby making them suitable for domain- independent KGs. Examples of these methods 
Convol utional Neural Network (CNN), Recurrent Neural Network (RNN),  Bidirectional Long Short -Term Memory 
(BiLSTM). (4) Off -the-shelf NLP tools: those are commonly commercial/open source ready -to-use tools which 
might embed one or more of the aforementioned appr oaches to analyse textual content and extract entities and 
relations. Examples of these tools are spaCy
8, Stanford CoreNLP9, AllenNLP 10, and IBM Watson NLU11.  
3.4 Knowledge Graph E mbedding     
KG Embedding (KGE) is the process of creating propositional f eature vector representations of the constituents 
of a KG (entities and relationships) [8] so as to apply numeric techniques that produce scalable and effective 
results [32]. KGE techniques can simplify the resolution of various complex real -life graph problems for which 
conventional graph presentation (i.e., adjacency matrix) is inadequate and inferior. H ence, currently, KGE is being 
used extensively to tackle problems such as  KG completion, entity recognition, and link -based clustering [24, 33, 
34]. 
The core idea underlying KGE is to create a vector for each entity and each relation in the KG, then define a set 
of score functions that are used to measure the space distance of two entities relative to the type of the relation 
in the low -dimensional embedding vector space. The aim is to capture latent properties of the semantics in the 
KG so that like entities and like relations will be represented with sim ilar vectors, and those not semantically 
connected are detached. The embedding of a KG is learned via training a neural architecture over a KG, and usually includes three main steps [ 35
], namely: (i) encoding entities into dispersed points in the semantic space, 
and encoding relations as vectors; (ii) scoring function or model -specific function that is used to assemble the 
information combing from a triple; and (iii) applying an optimization procedure represented by the loss function in which the objective is defined and minimised during the KG embedding process. 
Table 2 shows the most 
popular of the many models which are commonly used for KG embeddings .  
 
8 https://spacy.io/  
9 http://corenlp.run/  
10 https://allennlp.org/  
11 https://www.ibm.com/cloud/watson -natural-language -understanding