specific KGs   raises questions about their quality and robustness, and whether adequate evaluation measures 
have been applied, particularly to those KGs derived from data sources of inconsistent quality. Also, the dynamic 
nature of domain knowledge is highly correlated  to contextual situations, and various facts that describe entities 
might change over time. Neglecting the dynamic nature of knowledge diminishes the quality and correctness of 
facts represented by KGs, and could lead to poor decision making that is based merely on such data sources. Therefore, it is important that a comprehensive review be conducted of the current state -of-the-art approaches 
for domain -specific KG construction so as to highlight such issues and address them with viable solutions.  
In this survey, we provide an inclusive definition to domain- specific KGs. Further, we discuss various notable KG 
construction approaches in seven domains of knowledge. These approaches are reviewed and a sum mary is 
provided for each domain showing how the KG in each case has been constructed, the resources used to construct the KG, whether any of the KG embedding techniques have been incorporated, the measures used to evaluate the KG construction approach, and the limitations and shortcomings of each approach. This survey 
paper is different from other similar researches that tend to either focus on generic and domain- independent 
KGs such as [6-8], or only briefly discuss domain -specific KGs [ 5, 9
]. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first 
attempt to provide both an inclusive definition of a domain- specific KG as well as a thorough analysis of various 
domain -based KG construction approaches. Further, this paper provides a summary of the main issues derived 
from the conducted analysis. At the same time, several improvements, recommendations, and opportunities are 
suggested to address these limitations which point to dir ections for future research. The contributions of this 
paper are:  
• To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to provide an inclusive definition of a domain- specific 
KG and the first comprehensive survey of domain -specific KGs.  
• We conduct a thorough analysis of more than 140 papers on KG construction approache s, covering seven 
domains.   
• The paper highlights research gaps in the area of domain- specific KG construction and suggests venues 
for future research.  
The rest of this paper is organised as follows: Section 2 discusses the methodology adopted in this stud y. Section 
3 establishes the necessary ground for this work by including important preliminaries and relevant terminologies. Section 4 analyses the KG construction approaches in seven domains and presents an in- depth discussion of the 
findings as well as t he identified research gaps. Section 6 concludes the paper.     
 
2. Methodology  
As the first step, seven domains were chosen and the articles for review were collected accordingly. The domains 
are: healthcare, education, ICT, science and engineering, finance, society and politics, and travel. Articles relevant 
to any of these domains were obtained by searching recent volumes of both conference proceedings of relevant 
series (such as ACM SIGKDD, ACM WSC, WWW, ICWE, ISWC, etc.) and high -quality journals (such as Knowledge-
based Systems, Expert Systems with Applications, IEEE Access, Journal of Web Semantic, etc.). Furthermore, we 
used keywords such as “knowledge graph for engineering”, “knowledge graph for healthcare”, etc. to search for 
articles in Google Scholar. Although the articles chosen for each domain intuitively depict the KG construction 
approaches to the domain of interest, it was noted that some papers were concerned with more than one high-level domain of knowledge. Those papers dealing with interrelated domains are positioned under the domain 
umbrella that is explicitly indicated by the papers’ authors.