16 Li
set and then training an E2E model with all the data [38, 131, 149, 276, 298].
Such an E2E model is a universal ASR model which is capable of recognizing
the speech from any language as long as that language has been used during
training. However, pooling all languages together to train a multilingual model
is a double-edged sword. Although it is simple and maximizes the sharing
across languages, it also brings confusion between languages during recognition.
If the multilingual model can condition on the language identity (LID),
significant improvement can be obtained over the universal multilingual model
without LID because the one-hot LID guides the ASR model to generate the
transcription of the target language by reducing the confusion from other
languages [119, 148, 218, 267, 276, 350]. However, such a multilingual E2E
model with LID relies on the prior knowledge of which language the user will
speak for every utterance, working more like a monolingual model. To remove
the dependency on knowing one-hot LID in advance, one way is to estimate the
LID and use it as the additional input to E2E multilingual models. However,
the gain is very limited, especially for streaming E2E models, because the
estimation is not very reliable [220, 301].
Because there are more multilingual users than monolingual users [195],
there is an increasing demand of building multilingual systems which can
recognize multiple languages without knowing in advance which language
each individual utterance is from. One solution is to build a corresponding
multilingual E2E model for any set of language combinations. However, this
is impractical because the number of possible language combinations is huge
given so many languages in the world. Zhou et al. proposed a configurable
multilingual model (CMM) [343] which is trained only once by pooling the
data from all languages, but can be configured to recognize speeches from any
combination of languages. As shown in Figure 7, the hidden output of CMM is
calculated as the weighted sum of the output from a universal module and the
outputs from all language-specific modules. At runtime, the universal module
together with corresponding language-specific modules are activated based
on the user choice. Because multilingual users usually speak a few languages,
CMM reduces the language confusion space from dozens to a few. Therefore,
it performs much better than the multilingual model without LID, and can
serve the multilingual users well.
There are several factors to be considered when designing multilingual
E2E models. When scaling the multilingual model to cover a large amount
of languages (e.g., 50 languages in Pratap et al. [218]), the data from those
languages is heavily imbalanced, which usually leads to a model performing
well on resource-rich languages while failing on low-resource languages. To
solve that issue, data sampling is usually used to balance the training data
amount [119, 218]. The model capacity should also be expanded to recognize
a large amount of languages. In Li et al. [146] and Pratap et al. [218],
multilingual models are scaled to billions of parameters.