Recent Advances in End-to-End Automatic Speech Recognition 15
models at the same time. Such a co-learning strategy not only simplifies the
training process but also boosts the accuracy of student models.
4.2 Minimum Word Error Rate Training
The minimum word error rate (MWER) training criterion tries to mitigate
the discrepancy between the training criterion and the evaluation metric of a
speech recognition model. Instead of minimizing the negative log loss of the
probability P(y|x), MWER minimizes the expected word errors [251] as
LMWER =X
hiˆP(hi|x)R(hi,hr), (20)
where ˆP(hi|x)denotes the posterior probability of an hypothesis hi,R(·)
denotes the risk function which measures the edit-distance between the hy-
pothesis hiand the reference transcription hrat word-level. While the exact
posterior probability is computationally intractable, in practice, an N-best list
of hypotheses from beam search decoding are used to compute the empirical
posterior probability [216] as
ˆP(hi|x) =P(hi|x)P
hiP(hi|x), (21)
where P(hi|x)istheprobabilityofanhypothesis hi, computedinEquation (4)
for AED models or Equation (8) for RNN-T models.
MWER has been shown to improve the accuracy of AED models [47, 216],
RNN-T models [78, 303], and hybrid autoregressive transducer (HAT) models
[169]. However, the gain is not as significant as what has been reported in
hybrid models. One possible reason is that the MWER training of hybrid
models follows the cross-entropy training which is frame-based. In contrast,
E2E models have already been optimized with sequence-level training, therefore
further sequence-level MWER training gives less gain.
5 Multilingual Modeling
Building a multilingual ASR system with traditional hybrid models is difficult
because every language usually has its own language-specific phonemes and
word inventories. Most hybrid multilingual works focus on building an acoustic
model with shared hidden layers [70, 84, 100], while every language has its
own lexicon model and language model. In contrast, it is very easy to build
a multilingual E2E ASR system by simply taking a union of the token (e.g.,
character, subword, or even byte) sets of all languages as the output token