18 Li
6 Adaptation
The performance of ASR systems can degrade significantly when the test
conditions differ from training. Adaptation algorithms are designed to address
such challenging issues. A comprehensive overview of adaptation technologies
in ASR can be found in Bell et al. [18]. In this section, we highlight some
adaptation technologies for E2E models.
6.1 Speaker Adaptation
Speaker adaptation adapts ASR models to better recognize a target speaker’s
speech. It is a common practice to adapt the acoustic encoder of CTC [55,
160], AED [181, 304], RNN-T [104, 255], and Conformer Transducer [105].
Another popular methodology is to augment the input speech with speaker
embeddings [52, 242, 341].
The biggest challenge of speaker adaptation is that the adaptation data
amount from the target speaker is usually very small. There are several ways to
address such a challenge. The first one is using regularization techniques such
as Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence regularization [316], maximum a posteriori
adaptation [106], or elastic weight consolidation [132], to ensure the adapted
models do not overfit the limited adaptation data [160, 181, 255, 304]. The
second approach is multi-task learning. E2E models typically use subword units
as the output target in order to achieve high recognition accuracy. Sometimes,
the number of subword units is at the scale of thousands or even more. These
units usually cannot be fully observed in the limited speaker adaptation data.
In contrast, the small number of character units usually can be fully covered.
Therefore, multi-task learning using both character and subword units can
significantly alleviate such sparseness issues [160, 181]. The third approach
is to use multi-speaker text-to-speech (TTS) to expand the adaption set for
the target speaker [104, 255]. Because the transcription used to generate
the synthesized speech is also used for model adaptation, this approach also
alleviatesthehypothesiserrorissueinunsupervisedadaptationwhencombining
the synthesized speech with the original speech from the target speaker.
It is desirable to use E2E models on devices because of the compact model
size. There are interesting works [256, 257] which study how to do secure
adaptation on devices with continuous learning so that the user data never
leaves devices. Several engineering practices were described in order to deal
with the limited memory and computation power on devices.
6.2 Domain Adaptation
Domain adaptation is the task of adapting ASR models to the target domain
which has content mismatch from the source domain in which the ASR models