10 Li
time tandxl
tis the input vector for the l-th layer with
xl
t=(
hl−1
t,ifl >1
xt,ifl= 1, (11)
where xtis the speech input at time step t. The last layer output, hL
t, is used
as the encoder output.
Because of the streaming request in most commercial ASR systems, unidi-
rectional LSTM is used more widely. When the encoder is an LSTM-RNN,
CTC and RNN-T work in the streaming mode by default while AED still needs
streaming attention strategies in order to work in the streaming mode. In con-
trast, when the encoder is a BLSTM-RNN, all E2E models are non-streaming
models.
There is a clear accuracy gap between the LSTM encoder and the BLSTM
encoder because the latter uses the whole utterance information to generate
the encoder output. In order to reduce the gap, it is a natural idea to use
future context frames to generate more informative encoder output with the
methods such as latency controlled BLSTM (LC-BLSTM) [336] or contextual
LSTM (cLSTM) [151, 158]. LC-BLSTM works in an overlapped multi-frame
chunk mode. BLSTM is still used within a chunk, while the state of the
forward direction is carried across chunks. In contrast, cLSTM works in a
frame-by-frame uni-directional way by taking the lower layer’s output from
future frames as the input of the current frame.
3.2 Transformer
Although LSTM can capture short-term dependencies, Transformer is much
better at capturing long-term dependencies because its attention mechanism
sees all context directly. Transformer was shown to outperform LSTM [120,
152, 323] and is now replacing LSTM in all E2E models [58, 88, 120, 152, 323,
327]. The encoder of Transformer-based E2E models is composed of a stack of
Transformer blocks, where each block has a multi-head self-attention layer and
a feed-forward network (FFN), as shown in Figure 5a. Residual connections
[81] and layer normalization [8] are used to connect different layers and blocks.
The input of a Transformer block can be linearly transformed to the query
q, keyk, and value vvectors with matrices Wq,Wk, and Wv, respectively.
Self-attention is used to compute the attention distribution over the input
speech sequence with the dot-product similarity function as
αt,τ=exp(β(Wqxt)T(Wkxτ))P
τ′exp(β(Wqxt)T(Wkxτ′))
= softmax( βqT
tkτ), (12)