Recent Advances in End-to-End Automatic Speech Recognition 9
confident by visiting more future frames of the current label. The green path
in Figure 4 is an example alignment of such a delayed decision. In order to
ensure low latency for RNN-T, constrained alignment [174, 231] was proposed
to restrict the training alignment within a delay threshold of the ground truth
time alignment and forbid other alignment paths. Strict alignment between the
input speech sequence and output label sequence is enforced in Tripathi et al.
[280] to generate better alignment for streaming RNN-T. In addition to the
benefit of latency, another advantage of all these alignment restricted RNN-T
methods is GPU-memory saving and training speed-up because less alignment
paths are used during training. FastEmit [317] was proposed to reduce latency
without the need of the ground truth alignment. It encourages the emission of
vocabulary tokens and discourages the blank transition at all positions in the
time-label grid. Therefore, it pushes all alignment paths to the left direction of
the time-label grid. However, this operation is a little aggressive at reducing
latency, which can result in recognition accuracy loss. In Kim et al. [125], a
self-alignment method was proposed to reduce latency in a mild way. It uses
the self alignment of the current model to find the lower latency alignment
direction. In Figure 4, the blue path indicates a self-alignment path and the
red path is one frame left to the self-alignment path. During training, the
method encourages the left-alignment path, pushing the model’s alignment to
the left direction. The proposed method was reported to have better accuracy
and latency tradeoff than the constrained-alignment method and FastEmit.
In addition to these three popular E2E models, there are also other E2E
models such as neural segmental model [270] and recurrent neural aligner [238],
to name a few.
3 Encoder
In all E2E ASR models, the most important component is the encoder which
converts speech input sequences into high-level feature representations.
3.1 LSTM
In early E2E ASR works, LSTM is the most popular model unit. The encoder
can be either a multi-layer unidirectional LSTM-RNN as Equation (9)
hl
t=LSTM (xl
t,hl
t−1) (9)
or a multi-layer bidirectional LSTM (BLSTM)-RNN as Equation (10)
hl
t= [LSTM (xl
t,hl
t−1),LSTM (xl
t,hl
t+1)], (10)
whereLSTM ()denotes the standard LSTM unit with an optional projection
layer [237]. Here, hl
tis the hidden output of the l-th (l= 1. . . L) layer at