36 Li
technologies usually have better use of text only data from the new domain
while the successful customization methods can deal with the challenge of
a very large context biasing list. In addition to the standard E2E model
training criterion, T/S training is used to either learn a small student model
approaching the performance of a large teacher model or learn a streaming
student model approaching the performance of a non-streaming teacher model.
MWER training is to ensure E2E models are optimized with the training
criterion consistent with ASR evaluation metrics. Recently, there is a trend
of developing advanced models such as non-autoregressive models which have
much fast decoding speed by doing inference with one shot; unified models
which are trained once but can be flexibly configured to meet different runtime
requirements; and two-pass models which can leverage the advantages of both
streaming and non-streaming models.
A few years ago, there were very few people who believed E2E models would
replace hybrid models which have lots of features designed for commercial ASR
products. Within a very short time, we have witnessed that E2E models not
only surpass hybrid models in terms of accuracy but also catch up with the
practical features in commercial ASR systems. Because of the power of E2E
modeling, the trend is not only building E2E models to replace traditional
ASR models but also unifying speech processing modules such as speech
separation, signal processing, and speaker identification into a single E2E ASR
model. Multi-talker E2E models and multi-channel E2E models are examples
of such a direction. The multi-talker E2E modeling was further extended with
identifying speakers [115, 168]. There are also works of joint ASR and speaker
diarization using E2E models by inserting speaker category symbols into ASR
transcription [61, 176, 260]. As E2E ASR models directly map speech signals
into target word sequences, they can be extended to E2E speech translation
models when the target word sequence is from another language [53, 109, 302].
The major challenge for E2E speech translation is how to get enough training
data with paired speech in the source language and text in the foreign language.
The amount of such speech translation data is much smaller than the amount
of ASR training data. Another challenge is how to handle the word reordering
[41].
Although E2E modeling has already become the dominating ASR technol-
ogy, there are still lots of challenges to be addressed before E2E models fully
replace traditional hybrid models in both academic and industry. First, in
hybrid modeling, paired speech-text data is used to build an acoustic model
while a very large amount of text only data is used to build LM. In contrast,
general E2E models are only built with paired speech-text data. How to
leverage the text only data to improve the accuracy of E2E models instead of
simply doing LM fusion is a future direction to explore. In [228], a multi-modal
data augmentation method was proposed by having two separate encoders:
one for acoustic input and the other for text input, sharing the same attention