20 Li
Figure 8: An example of the spliced data method. It generates “Cortana close door” from
3 utterances from the source training data by extracting the audio segments of “Cortana,”
“close,” and “door” out and then concatenating them.
pre-set in training enables a robust LM fusion on test sets from different
domains.
Because LM fusion methods require interpolating with an external LM,
both the computational cost and footprint are increased, which may not be
applicable to ASR on devices. With the advance of TTS technologies, a new
trend is to adapt E2E models with the synthesized speech generated from the
new-domain text [158, 213, 255, 342]. This is especially useful for adapting
RNN-T, in which the prediction network works similarly to an LM. It was
shown that such domain adaptation method with TTS is more effective than
LM fusion methods [158].
The TTS-based adaptation method also has its drawbacks. The first is
that TTS speech is different from the real speech. It sometimes also degrades
the recognition accuracy on real speech [147]. This issue was alleviated in
Kurata et al. [138] by inserting a mapping network before the encoder network
when the input is TTS audio in both the training and adaption stage. This
mapping network works as feature space transformation to map the space of
TTS audio to the space of real speech. During testing with real speech, the
mapping network was removed. The second is that the speaker variation in
the TTS data is far less than that in the large-scale ASR training data. The
third is the cost of training a multi-speaker TTS model and the generation
of synthesized speech from the model is large. These issues were solved by a
spliced data method [340] which was used to adapt E2E models with better
performance than the TTS-based adaptation method. For any text sentence
in the new domain, the method randomly extracts the corresponding audio
segments from the source training data, and then concatenates them to form
new utterances. Figure 8 gives an example of how this spliced data method
works. Similar ideas have been used for data augmentation by replacing some
word segments in an utterance with new word segments from another utterance
to train a general E2E model [140, 268].
Both the TTS-based adaptation and the spliced data method need to
synthesize audios from text, and then update E2E models. Recently, a fast