30 Li
input and multi-channel output, and in [29] with Transformer. Figure 15a
shows the network architecture of these methods. The overlapping speech
goes through a mixture encoder for separation followed by two branches which
generate the recognition results from two speakers. Most modules are shared
between two branches except the attention module and speaker encoder. For
the overlapping speech with Sspeakers, the training loss is calculated by
considering all possible speaker permutation Φ(1, . . . , S )as
LPIT= min
ϕ∈Φ(1,...,S )SX
s=1CE(ys,rϕ[s]), (24)
where CE()is the cross entropy function with the s-th output ysand the
permuted reference rϕ[s].
There are three theoretical limitations in the models with PIT-ASR loss
in Equation (24). First, the number of output branches is the same as S,
the number of the speakers. After the model is trained, it cannot handle the
overlappingspeechwithmorespeakers. Second, thetrainingcostis O(S3)using
theHungarianalgorithm, whichpreventsitfrombeingappliedtoscenarioswith
a large number of speakers. Third, there is possible leakage with duplicated
decoding hypothesis between output branches because the outputs in different
branches do not have a direct dependency. To address these limitations, Kanda
et al. proposed a simple but effective serialized output training (SOT) method
[116] which uses a single AED model to predict the merged label sequence
Ψ(1, . . . , S )from all speakers as in Figure 15b. A ⟨sc⟩symbol is inserted
between the reference label sequences of speakers to represent speaker change.
Furthermore, the reference label sequences are ordered according to their start
time in a first-in first-out manner. In this way, the training loss is significantly
simplified as
LSOT= CE( y,Ψ(1, . . . , S )). (25)
Given the large demand of streaming ASR in the industry, the backbone
model of multi-talker ASR is also moving from the non-streaming AED model
to the streaming RNN-T model. Although RNN-T was used in [279] for multi-
talker ASR, it’s encoder is a bi-directional LSTM which is a non-streaming
setting. In [167, 258], the Streaming Unmixing and Recognition Transducer
(SURT) was proposed as in Figure 15c. A mask-based unmixing module is
used to estimate masks in order to separate the speech input into two branches
for recognition with RNN-T. Although PIT ASR loss in Equation (24)can be
used, it will introduce large computational cost due to the label permutation.
Therefore, Heuristic Error Assignment Training (HEAT) [167] was proposed