6 Li
can be significant because such a setup needs to obtain the full utterance
before decoding, and it is impractical for streaming ASR scenarios where the
speech signal comes in a continuous mode without segmentation. There are
lots of attempts to build streaming AED models. The basic idea of these
methods is applying attention on the chunks of the input speech. The difference
between these attempts is the way the chunks are determined and used for
attention. Figure 3a shows the full attention of AED, which spreads attention
weights across the whole utterance. One major school of streaming AED
models is to use monotonic attention. In Raffel et al. [225], a monotonic
attention mechanism was proposed to use integrated decision for triggering
ASR. Attention is only on the time step corresponding to the trigger point
as shown in Figure 3b. The method was improved in Chiu and Raffel [36],
where a monotonic chunkwise attention (MoChA) method was proposed to
stream the attention by splitting the encoder outputs into small fixed-size
chunks so that the soft attention is only applied to those small chunks, as
shown in Figure 3c. Adaptive-size instead of fixed-size chunks were used in
Fanet al. [63]. Recently, monotonic infinite lookback (MILK) attention [5]
was proposed to attend the entire sequence preceding the trigger point, as
shown in Figure 3d. Another popular streaming AED method is triggered
attention [192] which uses CTC segments to decide the chunks and is applied
to lots of AED models [93, 190, 191].
While all these methods can achieve the goal of streaming ASR to some
extent, they usually do not enforce low-latency which is another important
factor for commercial ASR systems. This challenge was addressed in Inaguma
et al. [110], which proposed to train low-latency streaming AED models by
leveraging the external hard alignment. In Wang et al. [290], a scout network
was used to predict word boundary which is then used by the ASR network to
predict the next subword by utilizing the information from all speech frames
before it for low latency streaming.
All streaming AED models need some complicated strategies to decide the
trigger point for streaming. A comparison of streaming ASR methods was
conducted in Kim et al. [126] which shows RNN Transducer has advantages
over MoChA in terms of latency, inference time, and training stability. AED
models also cannot perform well on long utterances [35, 197]. Therefore,
although there are still many activities [57, 111, 122, 127, 161, 162, 186, 190,
266, 272, 282] in the area of streaming AED models, the industry tends to
choose RNN Transducer introduced next as the dominating streaming E2E
model while AED has its position in some non-streaming scenarios.
2.3 RNN Transducer
RNN Transducer (RNN-T) [72] provides a natural way for streaming ASR
because its output conditions on the previous output tokens and the speech