28 Li
way, the first-pass RNN-T model provides immediate recognition results while
the second-pass AED model can provide better accuracy with small additional
perceived latency. This work was extended as the deliberation model which
uses an LSTM AED decoder [99] or a Transformer AED decoder [98] to attend
both the encoder output and first-pass decoding hypothesis.
However, AED models cannot perform well on long utterances [35]. There-
fore, an RNN-T model with the cascaded encoder was proposed [198] as shown
in Figure 14. Such a model can also be considered as a unified model which
provides both streaming and non-streaming solutions, and is a special case
of Y-model [278] which has both streaming and non-streaming branches in
a Y-shape. The causal encoder output hc
tis fed into a non-causal encoder
to generate hnc
t. Depending on applications, a switch is used to let hc
tor
hnc
tgo to the joint network. In the context of two-pass modeling, the causal
output hc
tis used in the first pass and the non-causal output hnc
tis used in
the second pass. Such a cascaded model is trained in one stage, while the
first-pass and second-pass models in deliberation are trained in two stages.
Another advantage of the RNN-T model with a cascaded encoder is its better
performance on long utterances because the RNN-T decoder better handles
long utterances than the AED decoder.
Note that the second-pass model brings additional latency and computa-
tional costs to ASR systems, therefore, careful designs have been studied to
hide these costs in commercial systems [26, 145, 236].
7.4 Multi-talker Models
WhileASRsystemshaveachievedveryhighrecognitionaccuracyinmostsingle-
speaker applications, it is still very difficult to achieve satisfactory recognition
accuracy in scenarios with multiple speakers talking at the same time. A
common practice in the industry is to separate the overlapped speech first
and then use an ASR model to recognize the separated speech streams [313].
The biggest challenge to multi-talker overlapping ASR is the permutation
problem which occurs when the mixing sources are symmetric and the model
cannot predetermine the target signal for its outputs. Deep clustering [85] and
permutation invariant training (PIT) [315] were proposed to address such a
challenge to separate overlapping speech signals. Specifically, PIT is simpler
to implement and easier to be integrated with other methods. Therefore, it
becomes the most popular speech separation method. Instead of the two-stage
processing, Yu et al. [314] proposed to directly optimize the ASR criterion
with a single model using PIT without having an explicit speech separation
step.
The first E2E model for overlapping speech was proposed in [248] with
PIT loss in the label level without using the source signal from each speaker.
It was further extended in [28] without pretraining, in [30] for multi-channel