Recent Advances in End-to-End Automatic Speech Recognition 37
and decoder modules. There are some cycle-consistency works using unpaired
speech-text data to improve ASR accuracy [16, 274]. Because the amount of
text only data is much larger than that of the paired speech-text data, the
cost is formidable to generate TTS audio from such large scale text only data
for industry application although it is doable for small scale. TTS audio some-
times also degrades the recognition accuracy on real speech [147]. Therefore,
although using TTS audio for domain adaptation is a good practice, it may
not be a good way to build an industry-scale E2E model by synthesizing TTS
audio from the text data used for LM training. In [177, 233], a joint acoustic
and text decoder was proposed to leverage the text data by synthesizing TTS
audio from the text to improve the decoder in AED. This was simplified in
[292] by using multitask training with text only data. In [14, 65], an LM
trained on large scale text is used as a teacher model to generate soft labels
as the regularization of the AED model training. One promising way is the
factorized neural transducer work [32] in Figure 9 which has a standalone block
working as a neural LM. Therefore, that LM-function block can be trained
with large-scale text data efficiently.
Another challenge is how to integrate knowledge into a single E2E model.
For example, it is very easy for an E2E model with display format output to
generate “5:45” when a user says “five forty five”. However, it is very hard for
an E2E model to output “5:45” when a user says “a quarter to six” because
standard E2E models do not have the knowledge unless the training has seen
such examples.
In hybrid models, it is very easy to continuously add any new word not
seen during training. However, this is very challenging for E2E models. The
customization work described in Section 6.6.3 provides a way to bias the ASR
results towards a contextual phrase list. This is different from expanding
the E2E models’ capability of recognizing new words without biasing the
ASR results. Although there are few works that allow injecting any out-of-
vocabulary word into the vocabulary of acoustic-to-word E2E models during
inference via subword-to-word embedding [45, 247], this problem is far from
being solved.
Finally, it is always challenging to train good E2E models with low-resource
languages. Given, the recent success of SSL which does not need any labeled
data to pre-train a representation for downstream tasks, we predict that SSL
will be closely coupled with E2E models in the near future.