22 Li
6.3 Customization
Different from speaker adaptation which adjusts a speaker independent E2E
model toward the speaker audio and domain adaptation which lets an E2E
model recognize the content of a new domain better, customization here
specifically refers to the technologies that leverage context such as contacts,
location, music playlist etc., of a specific user to significantly boost the ASR
accuracy for this user. For example, an English ASR system usually cannot
recognize the contact names of a Chinese person well. However, if the English
ASR system is presented with the contact list of this Chinese person, the ASR
output can be biased toward the contact names. Such biasing is even more
effective when designed with context activation phrases such as “call,” “email,”
“text,” etc.
While it is relatively easier for hybrid systems to do so with the on-the-fly
rescoring strategy which dynamically adjusts the LM weights of a small number
of n-grams which are relevant to the particular recognition context, it is more
challenging to E2E systems. One solution is to add a context bias encoder in
addition to the original audio encoder into the E2E model, which was first
proposed in He et al. [82] to bias a keyword spotting E2E model toward a
specific keyword. The idea was then extended into a contextual LAS (CLAS)
ASR model [219], plotted in Figure 10. LAS (Listen, Attend, and Spell) [22]
is one particular instantiation of AED. Compared to the standard AED model
in figure 1b, CLAS adds the context encoder in the bottom right of the figure
which takes the context list z1:Nas the input, where zidenotes the i-th phrase.
An attention module is used to generate the contextual vector cz
uas one of
the inputs to the decoder. In this way, the network output conditions not only
on the speech signal and previous label sequence but also on the contextual
phrase list. It was further extended into a two-step memory enhanced model
in Huber et al. [107]. It is common that a contextual phrase list contains rare
words, especially names which are not observed during training. In such a
case, E2E models have not learned to map the rare words’ acoustic signal to
words. This issue can be alleviated by further adding a phoneme encoder in
addition to the text encoder for the contextual phrase list [20, 34]. The same
idea has also been applied to RNN-T [113].
However, as shown in [219], it becomes challenging for the bias attention
module to focus if the biasing list is too large (e.g., more than 1000 phrases).
Therefore, a more popular way to handle a large contextual phrase list is
shallow fusion with the contextual biasing LM [142, 339]. A challenge for the
fusion-based biasing method is that it usually benefits from prefix which may
not be available all the time. In Huang et al. [102], class tags are inserted into
word transcription during training to enable context aware training. During
inference, classtagsareusedtoconstructcontextualbiasfinite-statetransducer.
In Le et al. [141], trie-based deep biasing, WFST shallow fusion and neural