Recent Advances in End-to-End Automatic Speech Recognition 17
Figure 7: Diagram of configurable multilingual model (CMM). Uni denotes a universal
multilingual module, and Li denotes the ith language.
Because there are differences across languages, it may not be optimal if a
simple E2E structure is used to blindly model all the multilingual data. In
[119], language-specific adapt layers are used to further boost the multilingual
model performance. Similar ideas are used with the mixture of expert structure
for multilingual models [51, 66].
While E2E models have achieved remarkable success in multilingual mod-
eling, an even more challenging topic is the ASR of code-switching (CS) utter-
ances which contain mixed words or phrases from multiple distinct languages.
TherearetwocategoriesofCS:oneisintra-sententialCSwhereswitcheshappen
within an utterance and the other is inter-sentential CS where switches occur
between utterances with monolingual words inside each utterance. The former
one is more difficult, attracting most studies. In [246], synthetic utterance-level
CS text was generated to improve the AED model’s ASR accuracy on inter-
sentential CS utterances. The challenge of intra-sentential CS to E2E models
was addressed in Li et al. [159] by using the LID model to linearly adjust the
posterior of a CTC model, followed by lots of recent studies (e.g., [48, 54, 123,
171, 200, 224, 319, 330]). One major challenge to CS ASR is the lack of the
CS data while E2E models are more data hungry. Therefore, methods have
been studied to effectively leverage monolingual data. A constrained output
embedding method [123] was proposed to encourage the output embedding
of monolingual languages similar in order to let the ASR model easily switch
between languages. In Dalmia et al. [48] and Lu et al. [171], a bi-encoder
which has a separate encoder for each language is used to train the model
from monolingual data. This was further extended with both language-specific
encoder and language-specific decoder to recognize CS speech [347].