Recent Advances in End-to-End Automatic Speech Recognition 13
x10. The full attention case is plotted in Figure 6a, where the reception field
is the full sequence, and every element of the mask matrix is 1. For the strict
streaming setup without any latency, the attention should not be performed on
any future frame, as shown in Figure 6b. The major drawback of this attention
mechanism is that the memory and runtime cost increases linearly as the
utterance history grows. The context operation [327] was proposed to address
the issue by working on a limited history at every layer. Shown in Figure 6c,
because of context expansion, the model still can access a very long history. If
the attention operates on Fhistory frames at every layer and the model has
LTransformer layers, then the model can access FxLhistory frames. In order
to improve modeling accuracy, it is better to also include some future frames
into the prediction. In Zhang et al. [327], the same context expansion strategy
is applied to not only the history but also the future frames. However, because
of context expansion, it needs a large amount of future frames when there
are many Transformer layers, introducing significant latency. A better future
access strategy was proposed in Chen et al. [33] and Shi et al. [254] where the
input speech sequence is segmented into fixed-size chunks. The frames in the
same chunk can see each other and each frame can see fixed numbers of the
left chunks so that the left reception field propagates. Plotted in Figure 6d,
this strategy helps to build high accuracy models with a very small latency. In
addition to these methods, there are lots of variations [103, 190, 272, 281, 290,
328] of localizing full self-attention in order to have a streaming Transformer
encoder.
Another popular method is Gaussian soft-mask [262] which changes the
softmax calculation in self-attention in Equation (12) as
αt,τ= softmax( βqT
tkτ+Mt,τ), (15)
where Mt,τis a mask. It can be either a hard mask which sets all weights
outside the band bto 0 as
Mt,τ=(
0,if|t−τ|<b
2
−∞,otherwise(16)
or a soft mask as
Mt,τ=−(t−τ)2
2σ, (17)
where σis a trainable parameter. While both masks can enforce the locality
which is good for the speech signal, the soft-mask method cannot reduce com-
putational cost and latency because it sill attends the full sequence, although
the weights of far-away time steps are small.