2 Li
1 Introduction
The accuracy of automatic speech recognition (ASR) has been significantly
boosted since deep neural network (DNN) based hybrid modeling [89] was
adopted a decade ago. This breakthrough used DNN to replace the traditional
Gaussian mixture model for the acoustic likelihood evaluation, while still
keeping all the components such as the acoustic model, language model, and
lexicon model, etc., as the hybrid ASR system. Recently, the speech community
has a new breakthrough by transiting from hybrid modeling to end-to-end
(E2E) modeling [13, 22, 40, 46, 74, 80, 188, 215] which directly translates an
input speech sequence into an output token sequence using a single network.
Such a breakthrough is even more revolutionary because it overthrows all the
modeling components in traditional ASR systems, which have been used for
decades.
There are several major advantages of E2E models over traditional hybrid
models. First, E2E models use a single objective function which is consistent
with the ASR objective to optimize the whole network, while traditional hybrid
models optimize individual components separately, which cannot guarantee
the global optimum. Therefore, E2E models have been shown to outperform
traditional hybrid models not only in academics [300] but also in the industry
[158, 230]. Second, because E2E models directly output characters or even
words, it greatly simplifies the ASR pipeline. In contrast, the design of
traditional hybrid models is complicated, requiring lots of expert knowledge
with years of ASR experience. Third, because a single network is used for
ASR, E2E models are much more compact than traditional hybrid models.
Therefore, E2E models can be deployed to devices with high accuracy.
While E2E models achieve the state-of-the-art results in most benchmarks
in terms of ASR accuracy, hybrid models are still used in a large proportion
of commercial ASR systems at the time of writing because the ASR accuracy
is not the only factor for the production choice between hybrid and E2E
models. There are lots of practical factors such as streaming, latency, adapta-
tion capability, etc., which affect the commercial model deployment decision.
Traditional hybrid models, optimized for production for decades, are usually
good at these factors. Without providing excellent solutions to all of these
factors, it is hard for E2E models to be widely commercialized. To that end, in
this paper, we overview popular E2E models with a focus on the technologies
addressing those challenges from the perspective of the industry.
2 End-to-End Models
The most popular E2E techniques for ASR are: (1) Connectionist Temporal
Classification (CTC) [73], (2) Attention-based Encoder-Decoder (AED) [12,