34 Li
clean-trained E2E model to a noisy environment [183]. Noise-invariant feature
was learned to improve robustness in [165, 331]. Data augmentation [283] is
another effective way to expose more testing environments to E2E models
during training.
Last but not least, it is always beneficial to examine technologies using
a public database. There are lots of E2E works evaluated on Librispeech
[204], pushing the state-of-the-art (SOTA) forward. Tables 1 and 2 give some
representative works on Librispeech with non-streaming and streaming E2E
models, respectively.2It is amazing to see how significantly WER is reduced
within only a few years, thanks to fast developing technologies. There are
two clear trends: from CTC to AED/RNN-T in the model aspect and from
LSTM to Transformer in the encoder aspect. As achieving SOTA results on
Librispeech is the goal of most works, there are much more non-streaming
E2E studies. Because Librispeech only has 960 hours of labeled data, methods
helpful to limited resource scenarios such as SSL and data augmentation are
essential to boost the ASR accuracy on Librispeech.
9 Conclusions and Future Directions
In this paper, we gave a detailed overview of E2E models and practical
technologies that enable E2E models to not only surpass hybrid models in
academic tasks but also potentially replace hybrid models in the industry.
Although CTC is revived with advanced encoder structures, the most popular
E2E models are AED and RNN-T. Because of the streaming nature, research
has been gradually shifted from AED to RNN-T. The encoder is the most
important module in E2E models, and attracts the most research. The
trend is also very clear – the encoder structure has shifted from LSTM to
Transformer and its variants. Masking strategy is used to design efficient
transformer encoders with low latency and small computational costs for
industry application. In order to serve multilingual users well, multilingual
E2E models are trained by pooling all the language data together. However,
there is still a clear accuracy gap between the multilingual models with and
without language ID. A configurable multilingual model can fill in the gap by
training the model once and being configured based on the language selection
by any multilingual user. Adaptation may be the most important area to work
on in order to enable E2E models to replace hybrid models in the industry
because of the huge accuracy improvement with adaptation for new speakers
and new domains. Specifically, there is more research on domain adaptation
and customization than speaker adaptation. The successful domain adaptation
2Factors such as model size and latency are not listed in the Tables. They all affect the
final word error rate (WER) of E2E models, especially streaming E2E models. Therefore, a
method obtaining lower WER than another does not always mean that method is superior.