8 Li
Figure 4: Example alignment paths of RNN-T.
as the sum of all possible alignment paths that are mapped to the label
sequence y. The mapping from the alignment path ato the label sequence y
is defined as A(a) =y.1
In Figure 4, three example alignment paths are plotted for speech sequence
x= (x1,x2, . . . ,x8)and label sequence y= (⟨s⟩, t, e, a, m ), where ⟨s⟩is a
token for sentence start. All valid alignment paths go from the bottom left
corner to the top right corner of the TxUgrid, hence the length of each
alignment path is T+U. In an alignment path, the horizontal arrow advances
one time step with a blank label by retaining the prediction network state
while the vertical arrow emits a non-blank output label.
The posteriors of the alignment grid composed by the encoder and predic-
tionnetworksneedtobecalculatedateachgridpoint. Thisathree-dimensional
tensor that requires much more memory than what is needed in the training
of other E2E models such as CTC and AED. Equation (8)is calculated based
on the forward-backward algorithm described in Ma et al. [72]. In Bagby et al.
[11], to improve training efficiency, the forward and backward probabilities
can be vectorized with a loop skewing transformation, and the recursions can
be computed in a single loop instead of two nested loops. Function merging
was proposed in Li et al. [156] to significantly reduce the training memory
cost so that larger minibatches can be used to improve the training efficiency.
It is worth noting that ASR latency is a very important metric that affects
user experience. If the latency is large, users will feel the ASR system is
not responding. Therefore, practical systems need to have a small latency in
order to give users a good experience [236]. Shangguan et al. [250] recently
gave a very good study of the factors affecting user perceived latency. In
Chang et al. [27], RNN-T is designed to generate end of sentence (EOS)
token together with the ASR transcription. The latency of EOS detection is
improved in Li et al. [144] with early and late penalties. While RNN-T is now
the most natural E2E model for streaming, the vanilla RNN-T still has latency
challenges because RNN-T tends to delay its label prediction until it is very
1Note this mapping is different from the CTC mapping Bin Equation (2).