Recent Advances in End-to-End Automatic Speech Recognition 5
function, and therefore enjoy the simplicity of CTC modeling. By replacing the
underlying long short-term memory (LSTM) [91] with Transformer [286] in the
encoder, which allows a more powerful attention mechanism to be used, CTC
thrives again in recent studies [88]. It gets further boosted by the emerged
self-supervised learning technologies [10, 42, 97, 338] which can learn a very
good representation that carries semantic information.
2.2 Attention-based Encoder-Decoder
The attention-based encoder-decoder (AED) model is another type of E2E
ASR model [13, 22, 40, 170, 325]. As shown in Figure 1b, AED has an encoder
network, an attention module, and a decoder network. The AED model
calculates the probability as
P(y|x) =Y
uP(yu|x,y1:u−1), (4)
where uis the output label index. The training objective is also to minimize
−lnP(y|x).
The encoder network performs the same function as the encoder network
in CTC by converting input feature sequences into high-level hidden feature
sequences. The attention module computes attention weights between the
previous decoder output and the encoder output of each frame using attention
functions such as additive attention [13] or dot-product attention [22], and
then generates a context vector as a weighted sum of the encoder outputs.
The decoder network takes the previous output label together with the context
vector to generate its output to calculate P(yu|x,y1:u−1), which is operated
in an autoregressive way as a function of the previous label outputs without
the conditional independence assumption.
While the attention on the full sequence in AED is a natural solution
to machine translation which has the word order switching between source
and target languages, it may not be ideal to ASR because the speech signal
and output label sequence are monotonic. In order to have better alignment
between the speech signal and label sequence, the AED model is optimized
together with a CTC model in a multi-task learning framework by sharing the
encoder [129]. Such a training strategy greatly improves the convergence of
the attention-based model and mitigates the alignment issue. It becomes the
standard training recipe for most AED models [52, 95, 121, 127, 166, 277, 284,
300]. In Hori et al. [94], a further improvement was proposed by combining
the scores from both the AED model and the CTC model during decoding.
MostcommercialsetupsneedASRsystemstobestreamingwithlowlatency,
which means ASR systems should produce the recognition results at the same
time as the user is speaking. In vanilla AED models, the attention is applied
to the whole utterance in order to achieve good performance. The latency