Recent Advances in End-to-End Automatic Speech Recognition 19
were trained. Because E2E models tend to memorize the training data well,
their performance usually degrades a lot in a new domain. Such a challenge
attracts much more works on domain adaptation than speaker adaptation.
This is not a severe issue for hybrid models because their language model
(LM) is trained with a much larger amount of text data than that is used in
the paired speech-text setup for E2E model training. The big challenge of
adapting E2E models to a new domain is that it is not easy to get enough
paired speech-text data in the new domain, which requires transcribing the
new-domain speech. However, it is much easier to get text data in the new
domain. Therefore, the mainstream of domain adaptation methods for E2E
models focuses on the new-domain text only.
A widely adopted approach to adapt E2E models to a new domain is
fusing E2E models with an external LM trained with the new-domain text
data. There are several LM fusion methods, such as shallow fusion [76], deep
fusion [76], and cold fusion [263]. Among them, the simplest and most popular
method is shallow fusion in which the external LM is log-linearly interpolated
with the E2E model at inference time [275].
However, shallow fusion does not have a clear probabilistic interpretation.
As an improvement, a maximum a posteriori based decoding method [117,
118] was proposed for the integration of an external LM for CTC. A density
ratio approach based on Bayes’ rule was proposed in McDermott et al. [178]
for RNN-T. During inference, the output of the E2E model is modified by
the ratio of the external LM trained with the new-domain text data and the
source-domain LM trained with the transcript of the training set which has
the paired speech-text data for E2E model training. Another similar model is
the hybrid autoregressive transducer (HAT) model [285] designed to improve
the RNN-T model. In the HAT model, the label distribution is derived by
normalizing the score functions across all labels excluding blank. Hence, it
is mathematically justified to integrate the HAT model with an external LM
using the density ratio method.
In Meng et al. [184], an internal LM estimation (ILME)-based fusion
was proposed to enable a more effective LM integration. During inference,
the internal LM score of an E2E model is estimated by zeroing out the con-
tribution of the encoder and is subtracted from the log-linear interpolation
between E2E and external LM scores. An internal LM training (ILMT)
method [182] was further proposed to minimize an additional internal LM
loss by updating only the components that estimate the internal LM. ILMT
increases the modularity of the E2E model and alleviates the mismatch be-
tween training and ILME-based fusion. Tuning the LM weights on mul-
tiple development sets is computationally expensive and time-consuming.
To eliminate the weights tuning, the MWER training with LM fusion was
proposed in Meng et al. [185] and Peyser et al. [212] where the LM fu-
sion is performed during MWER training. During inference, LM weights