26 Li
Figure 13: The training and decoding of dynamic encoder [253].
single unified model which can be configured with multiple streaming, latency,
and computational cost setups during decoding. In Yu et al. [318], a dual E2E
model was proposed with shared weights for both streaming and non-streaming
ASR. In order to have a dual-mode Conformer encoder, the authors designed
dual-mode modules for the components such as convolution, pooling, and
attention layers inside Conformer. An in-place T/S learning was used to train
the student streaming mode from the full-context non-streaming mode. Such
training even brought accuracy and latency benefits to the streaming ASR.
Another model unifying streaming and non-streaming modes was proposed in
Audhkhasi et al. [6] which decomposes the Transformer’s softmax attention
into left-only causal attention and right-only anti-causal attention. For the
streaming scenario, it just uses the causal attention while the non-streaming
mode uses both attentions.
There are several studies working on a unified model with dynamic compu-
tational cost during inference. In Wu et al. [306], a dynamic sparsity network
is used as the encoder of RNN-T. It only needs to be trained once and then can
be set with any predefined sparsity configuration at runtime in order to meet
various computational cost requirements on different devices. An even more
direct way to have a dynamic encoder was proposed in [253]. During training,
layer dropout is applied to randomly drop out encoder layer as shown in Figure
13a. The pruned model can be used to decode full utterances for constant low
computational cost as shown in Figure 13b. An example of advanced usage of
the dynamic encoder is plotted in Figure 13c, where the dynamic encoder is
configured with a small number of layers in the beginning of the utterance, and
then configured with full layers in the remaining. The idea of having different
computational costs within an utterance was also studied in [173] for RNN-T.
The model has a fast encoder and a slow encoder. An arbitrator is used to
select which encoder should be used given an input speech frame.
It requires a small latency for applications such as voice search and com-
mand control, while the applications such as dictation and video transcription