DAAAM  INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC BOOK 2019  pp. 081 -098 Chapter 07  
 
 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN MANUFACTURING 
COMPANIES  AND BROADER : AN OVERVIEW  
 
BUCHMEISTER , B., PALCIC , I. & OJSTERSEK , R. 
 
Abstract:  The workplace as we know it and production systems as a whole will not be 
recognizable in a decade’s time. In this chapter an overview of expected future changes 
in manufacturing systems is given. Artificial intelligence (AI) is the key driver in this 
change and it is critical to prepare us for a future do minated by AI. Robots and AI will 
prove far more disruptive than anything we have seen before. The most effective AI 
systems will be designed around the concept of intelligent augmentation. They will 
handle the math and basic analysis, relieving skilled op erators of a tedious burden, 
absorb data, classify and prioritize information, conduct simulations and ultimately 
leave it to the human operator to decide the course of action. In the AI future, jobs 
requiring human creativity and management expertise will  enjoy the greatest job 
security. This is our competitive advantage as humans. Those who understand the 
collaboration with other humans while working with AI tools to enhance their 
organization’s effectiveness will create maximum value. An energy - and reso urce-
friendly production is an important key performance indicator for industrial 
companies to work economically and remain competitive.  
 
Key words: Intelligent manufacturing , Artificial intelligence , Robots , Sustainability, 
Jobs 
 
  
 
 
Authors´ data:  Prof. Dr. Sc. Buchmeister , B[orut] ; Assoc. Prof. Dr. Sc. Palcic , 
I[ztok]; M. Sc. Ojstersek , R[obert] , University of Maribor, Faculty of Mechanical 
Engineering, Laboratory for Production  Management, Smetanova 17, 2000  Maribor, 
Slovenia , borut.buchmeister@um.si, iztok.palcic@um.si, robert.ojstersek@um.si  
 
This Publication has to be referred as:  Buchmeister, B[orut]; Palcic, I[ztok] & 
Ojstersek, R[obert] (2019). Artificial Intelligence in Manufacturing Companies and 
Broader: An Overview, Chapter 07 in DAAAM International Scientific Book 2019, 
pp.081 -098, B. Katalinic (Ed.), Published by DAAAM Int ernational, ISBN 978 -3-
902734 -24-2, ISSN 1726 -9687, Vienna, Austria  
DOI: 10.2507/daaam.scibook.2019.07
081