DAAAM  INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC BOOK 2019  pp. 081 -098 Chapter 07  
 
 There is also no question that AI holds the key to future growth and success in 
manufacturing. In a recent Forbes Insights survey on artificial intelligence, 44 % of 
respondents from the automotive and manufacturing sectors classified  AI as “highly 
important” to the manufacturing function in the next five years, while 49 % said it was 
“absolutely critical to success” (Forbes, 2018).  
AI in manufacturing promises massive leaps forward in productivity, 
environmental friendliness and quali ty of life, but research shows that while 58 % of 
manufacturers are actively interested, only 12 % are implementing it (Puittinen, 2018).  
 
3. Industrial Sector , Manufacturing  
 
The industrial sector is responsible for one third of the world’s GDP and half of 
the world’s energy consumption. It is a major user of freshwater and other natural 
resources, as well as a mass generator of waste and emissions. With such a large impact 
on the environment, the efficiency improvements of industrial processes are pivota l to 
the world’s sustainable future (Zavalishina, 2017).  
There is a tremendous opportunity for manufacturers. However, it can only be 
realised by using emerging information technologies like social, mobile, analytics, and 
cloud alongside operational technologies like sensors, machine -to-machine 
communication, additive manufacturing, and robotics.  
Much of the emphasis has been put on the replacement of the old technologies 
with new renewable energy sources and a variety of “green” production initiative s. It 
is inconceivable to think that these could be implemented short term across the world. 
Particularly when you consider that, the heavy industries – that contribute most to the 
waste and resource consumption – operate in a slim -margin sector that is st ruggling to 
remain competitive. Instead, businesses are focusing on their survival rather than 
investments into a sustainable future.  
For manufacturers, growth in an Industry 4.0 environment will be intrinsically 
linked with a business’s ERP system. Certai nly, the boundaries between production 
and management must disappear, and ERP and manufacturing execution systems 
(MES) must form an integrated unit if businesses are to realise the growth opportunities 
presented by this new age of intelligent manufacturin g (Fig. 1) , involves intelligent 
products, intelligent manufacturing processes, and intelligent services . 
 
 
Fig. 1. AI solutions are  revolutionizing manufacturing (Kushmaro, 2018) . 
085