Buchmeister, B.; Palcic, I. & Ojstersek, R.: Artificial Intelligence in Manufacturing...  
 1. Introduction  
 
The development of Artificial Intelligence  (AI) is one to the most important 
events in recent human history. Human activity has long become the most defining 
influence on our global ecosystem. The pace of change has rapidly accelerated in the 
last 250 years since the invention of the steam engine and t he resulting first industrial 
revolution.  
Now, we are at the brink of a new revolution, which is driven by the 
transformative power of emerging technologies. Technologies like Artificial 
Intelligence, genetic engineering, virtual reality, robotics, and 3D printing will 
fundamentally change our lives in the future. They are incomparably more powerful 
and develop at a much faster pace than any technology before.  
Over the last few hundred years, technology and innovation have led to a vast 
improvement of our l iving conditions. While surely, technology is also among the 
culprits of many of our problems, it is clear that technological development and 
innovation will be at the heart of moving towards a sustainable future.  
The possibilities of machine or artificial  intell igence  were already recognized and 
discussed in the mid -1940s by Turing. Technology enthusiast and AI researcher 
Tegmark (2017) talks about the opportunities of AI and is convinced we can grow the 
world’s prosperity through automation, without leavi ng people lacking income or 
purpose; according to Tegmark, when AI is utilized in this manner, humanity does not 
have to fear an arms race. Rather than worry about an unlikely existential threat, the 
consideration of how AI will enhance human life  is neede d. Intelligent machines can 
fail in ways that are different from human error patterns, ways we do not expect or are 
prepared for and that call for holding on ever tighter to human values and ethics. 
Important questions address the relation between AI and s ustainability, as well as 
sustainable development, in terms of a technology impact assessment.  
In our study  (related and limited with existent reports) , we provide an overview 
of the major future changes in the production branch (and more broadly in the so cial 
sense) triggered by the use of artificial intelligence. We also discuss the critical points, 
opportunities and threats that new technologies and anticipated changes can cause.  
 
2. AI Tools - Technology  
 
AI can play an important role in forwarding sustainable development. The hopes 
are based on the application of some key capabilities within the domain of AI. These 
are capabilities in the area of Natural Language Processing, like Speech Recognition, 
or Machine Translation; or in Computer Vision, wit h Image Recognition and 
Classification.  
AI has been a constant theme in computing research and many researchers, 
including Turing, have conducted research on AI. The study of Artificial Intelligence 
began back in 1956 when a group of researchers got togeth er in New Hampshire to 
discuss how machines could perform “intelligent actions”. Since then the landscape 
has gradually evolved, thanks to technological changes such as increased 
computational power and new discoveries in neuroscience (Silva, 2018). With o ver 60 
082