DAAAM  INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC BOOK 2019  pp. 081 -098 Chapter 07  
 
 designed to support sustainable production. The investigations were carried out 
prototypically using an ANN in combination with fuzzy logic and evolution ary 
algorithms (EA).  
Thanks to increased energy use and requirements, we’re going to need more 
power. Resources are growing scarcer despite the focus on climate change and 
sustainability, and there will be continued reliance on fossil fuels. This could 
potentially be mitigated by innovative recycling technologies, and using technology 
platforms to streamline processes and improve efficiency  (Hall, 2017) . 
 
5. Societal Impact  
 
It is unclear what implications AI will have on society now and in the long term. 
Sure, there is a significant impact, with positive and negative consequences, and value, 
collaboration, sharing responsibilities and ethics will play a vital role in any future 
sustainable development of AI in society.  
Academic studies and books have vario usly examined the potential of intelligent 
machines to disrupt labour markets (Brinjolfsson & McAfee, 2011; Ford, 2015), re -
define social interaction and relations (Carr, 2014), and even detailed, serious -minded 
study of its potential threat to human exist ence (Bostrom, 2014).  
The expansion of computing and machine intelligence is likely to affect 
healthcare, education, privacy and cybersecurity, and energy and environmental 
management. It will imply an education system shifting from a focus on mathematics 
and reading to a different set of personal and intellectual skills that facilitate working 
in tandem with intelligent machines  (Brinjolfsson & McAfee, 2014) . 
Other concerns lie in the field of digital ethics, which tries developing guidelines 
to make sure that autonomous agents comply with our moral and ethical standards. 
Data privacy will become even more important as we need to protect individuals from 
the growing desire from corporations and intelligence agencies for data as the most 
valuable resource fo r the development of more powerful algorithms. Widespread AI 
education and accessibility is crucial in order to prevent that AI will increase the global 
divide and lead to an unfair advantage in the hands of very few countries and 
organizations.  
We are see ing population growing in some nations and shrinking in others, a 
growing middle class, consumer markets shifting from the west to the east and an 
ageing population with fewer people entering the manufacturing field.  
Three major societal trends (Berry, 201 9) are:  
1) The value of personal data is increasing.  
People have a right from forced disclosure. They have a right to privacy. Like many 
rights, we make choices, either collectively or individually, to relax that right. More 
people value their right from f orced disclosure and adopt technologies that protect 
their personal data. The trend toward encryption and ad blocking are in part related 
to the reassessment of the value of their own data. More firms are able to augment 
the value of personal data they get  by mixing it with additional data sources. For 
instance, your CV, by itself, has value.  
089