DAAAM  INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC BOOK 2019  pp. 081 -098 Chapter 07  
 
 3.1 Product Design  
Artificial intelligence is also changing the way we design products. One method is to 
enter a detailed brief defined by designers and engineers as input into an AI algorithm 
(generative design).  
The brief can include data describing restrictions and various parameters such as 
material types, available production methods, budget limitations and time constraints. 
The algorithm explores every possible configuration, until an optimal design solution 
is reached  (Buchmeister  & Palcic, 2017) . One of the major advantages of this approach 
is that an AI algorithm is completely objective.  
 
3.2 Digital Twins 
A digital twin is a virtual model of a process, product or service. The digital twin 
leverages the Internet of Things (IoT) but requires the skills of machine learning and 
AI. Digital twins are especially useful when working with equipment from a remote 
distance.  
 
3.3 Virtual Reality  
Virtual Reality will enable new tools that help to perform testing in the virtual world. 
It allows people, remotely located, to connect and jointly work on situations that 
require trouble shooting. Simulation and product -creati on can help reduce the 
manufacturing time drastically.  
 
3.4 Automation  
Automation will help the manufacturing industry reach a high level of accuracy and 
productivity, a level that is even beyond human ability  (Haskovic et al. , 2018) . It can 
even work in e nvironments that are otherwise dangerous, tedious or complicated for 
humans. Robotics, which is expected in the future, will have capabilities like voice and 
image recognition that can be used to re -create complex human tasks.  
 
3.5 Quality  
Quality involves  the use of AI algorithms to notify manufacturing teams of emerging 
production faults that are likely to cause product quality issues.  
Machine -vision tools can find microscopic defects in products at resolutions well 
beyond human vision, using a machine -learning algorithm trained on remarkably small 
volumes of sample images. When integrated with a cloud -based data processing 
framework, defects are instantly flagged and a response is automatically coordinated  
(Xue et al., 2018) . 
 
3.6 Smart Maintenance  
In man ufacturing, ongoing maintenance of production line machinery and equipment 
represents a major expense, having a crucial impact on the bottom line of any asset -
reliant production operation. Therefore, predictive maintenance has become a must -
have solution f or manufacturers. Predictive maintenance uses advanced AI algorithms 
in the form of machine learning and artificial neural networks to formulate predictions 
regarding asset malfunction. This allows for drastic reductions in costly unplanned 
087