Buchmeister, B.; Palcic, I. & Ojstersek, R.: Artificial Intelligence in Manufacturing...  
 downtime, as we ll as for extending the Remaining Useful Life of production machines 
and equipment.  
Predictive maintenance saves businesses valuable time and resources, including 
labour costs, while guaranteeing optimal manufacturing performance. With digital 
twins, senso rs and advanced analytics embedded in manufacturing equipment this is  
possible. They enable predictive maintenance by responding to alerts and resolving 
machine issues.  
 
3.7 Other Possibilities  
Cloud -based machine learning is allowing manufacturers to streamline communication 
between their many branches. Data collected on one production line can be interpreted 
and shared with other branches to automate material provision, maintenance and other 
previously manual undertakings. AI in manufacturing is reach ing a wider and wider 
level of adoption, and for good reason. McKinsey predicts that ‘smart factories’ will 
drive $37 trillion in new value by 2025 (Puittinen, 2018).  
AI facilitates to conquer many internal challenges that have been around in the 
industry:  from expertise shortage to complexity in decision -making, issues related to 
integration, and overloaded information. Making use of AI in manufacturing plants 
enables businesses to completely transform their proceedings (Plant Automation, 
2019):  
• Robots are  capable to work for 24/7 in the production line. Businesses can be 
witnessed to expand in terms of production capabilities and meet the high demand 
of customers worldwide.  
• A step towards AI means less human resources have to carry out dangerous and 
overly  laborious work. As robots replace humans and perform normal and risky 
activities, the number of workplace accidents will decrease all across.  
• Although, bringing AI onto the manufacturing industry would necessitate a huge 
capital investment, the ROI is sig nificantly high – businesses can enjoy 
considerably lower operating cost.  
 
4. Energy Sector  
 
In the energy sector, a lot excitement is around the implementation of intelligent 
networks that connect producers, consumers, and storage, and supply energy just in 
time when needed. AI is used to predict energy consumption peaks and help with real -
time optimization of operations settings.  
An energy - and resource -friendly production is an important key performance 
indicator for industrial companies to work economic ally and thus remain competitive. 
For this software systems are necessary for analysis, evaluation, diagnosis and 
planning. Thanks to intensive research efforts in the field of AI a number of AI based 
techniques such as machine learning, deep learning and artificial neural networks 
(ANN) have already been established in industry, business and society. Willenbacher 
et al. (2018) addressed the problem of energy - and resource efficiency in production 
processes of manufacturing companies. They present an approa ch to improve energy - 
and resource efficiency by methods of AI. An integrated database of measures was 
088