DAAAM  INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC BOOK 2019  pp. 081 -098 Chapter 07  
 
 Aggregate employment remains stable, even as sectors are disr upted and replace 
by new ones. Suppose that the human want for new things (goods or services) is 
essentially unlimited. The desire for new products drives technological innovation. 
More technology leads to yet more new possibilities for products and servic es, 
entailing as yet unfathomed employment possibilities for workers. Expansion driven 
by intelligent machines, which produce like skilled workers but do not consume, would 
disrupt the process of labour absorption.  
As AI takes over the manufacturing plant and automates boring and ordinary 
human tasks, workers will get to focus on complex and innovative tasks. Automation 
does substitute for labour, but it also complements labour and raises output in ways 
that lead to a higher demand for labour. The expansion  in high -skill employment can 
be explained by the falling price of carrying out routine tasks by means of computers, 
which complements more abstract and creative services. In manufacturing, AI is more 
likely to change your job than eliminate it (Fig. 3). If it is true that workers are in a race 
against technology, the question is how long education can keep giving them an edge.  
 
 
Fig. 3. AI changes manufacturing jobs . 
 
Jobs with a high share of tasks involving judgement, creativity and persuasion, 
which are not easily quantified and codified, are less suitable for automation. Jobs 
requiring visual and language recognition, adaptability and in -person interactions, are 
also not susceptible to automation.  
Automation changes the types of employment, with sign ificant dislocation in 
some sectors, with job gains disproportionately going to high -skilled and low -skilled 
workers, coupled with a hollowing -out of routine middle -income jobs. Automation will 
continue to put downward pressure on the wages of the low skil led and is starting to 
impinge on the employment prospects of middle -skilled workers. By contrast, the 
potential returns to highly skilled and more adaptable workers are increasing.  
Managerial, professional and technical occupations have benefited from 
computerization – the surge of technology into their workplaces has complemented the 
work of those engaged in abstract jobs, with less time on acquiring and calculation and 
091