DAAAM  INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC BOOK 2019  pp. 081 -098 Chapter 07  
 
 The individual will have more interaction with machines. This will subsequently 
reduce the meaningfulness of the human -to-human interactions that we have with 
others, disconnecting us from the world arou nd us, creating more social isolation and 
limiting us with digital emotions.  
Additional questions raise on how much privacy individuals really have in the era 
of AI when data are collected intentionally or unknowingly.  
 
6.5 Social  Dimension  
AI can take a minor role in assisting in communities, managing social media and 
automating routine tasks that are commonly outsourced. We can see benefits, as well 
as the dangers; there is the chance to strengthen communities, but also a requirement 
to develop legal fra meworks around AI, and all of the strengths and weaknesses here 
come with the threat of turning over too much power to AI (Wisskirchen et al., 2017). 
A mistaken interpretation of a real -world event by an AI system could lead to serious 
conflicts. We live i n a world of limited resources, including time, energy, money and 
the great transitions. In this context, nations, organizations compete to design AI 
enabled system to gain power and to have influence over others. All European Union 
members have signed a D eclaration of Cooperation on AI to put forward the European 
approach to Artificial Intelligence based on three pillars (EU Commission , 2018):  
• being at the forefront of technological developments and encouraging their uptake 
by the public and private sectors,  
• preparing for socio -economic changes brought about by AI, and  
• ensuring an appropriate ethical and legal framework.  
 
7. Conclusion  
 
This chapter discusses influence of intelligent manufacturing from the 
perspectives of the problems and challenges of the manufacturing industry, major 
opportunities and core technologies of the new round of industrial revolution , from 
current status to future trends . 
In today’s fast moving global markets, manufacturers need to respond quickly to 
changing demands and m aximise new market opportunities. From all indications, we 
are in an era of significant convergence, where information technology, operational 
technology, and global megatrends are on a collision course. This will drive changes 
in how we do business and ho w we interact with customers and suppliers.  
Today’s students ought to pay close attention to AI trends. They would be best 
served by focusing on developing general skills that are highly adaptable, such as 
mathematical modelling, statistics and science. Th at way, they will be prepared to use 
increasingly powerful AI tools.  
AI can and will make an impact in many different cases. The key to making AI 
contribute to a smarter, greener world is to take action now in order to visualise and 
direct how this technol ogy could look like in 5 to 10 years. The outcomes of our 
investment in AI must be in line with a sustainable future and a better place for all of 
us. AI has become an innovative and revolutionary assistant in a wide range of 
applications and fields.  
095