DAAAM  INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC BOOK 2019  pp. 081 -098 Chapter 07  
 
 years of research, much progress has been made in AI, and especially, different types 
of AI are accelerating together with their related technologies. Not to mention, the 
invention of intelligent machines have further accelerated the development of AI 
(Müller, 2014).  
How then should we describe AI today? AI refers to “any computer system able 
to perform tasks that generally require human intelligence”, according to the 
dictionary. How is that possible in practice? AI capabilities today derive from th ree 
major sources:  
• First, data – the huge amount of information provided by the Internet of Things.  
• Second, perception – that is, the ability to recognise voice and images.  
• Third, cognition and problem solving – that is, the ability to continuously learn  and 
improve.  
AI is a pervasive technology, the application and impact of which span all sectors 
of the economy, from manufacturing and media to education to healthcare. The four 
types of intelligences are as follows (Huang & Rust, 2018):  
• mechanics (minimal degree of learning or adaption),  
• analytical (learns and adapts systematically based on data),  
• intuitive (learns and adapts intuitively based on understanding),  
• empathetic (learns and adapts empathetically based on experience).  
The activities may i nclude creativity, the ability to understand spoken language, 
rational inference, and making judgments based on insufficient and conflicting data as 
well as previous experiences. Such activities may have both benefits and disadvantages 
in today’s society. Pavaloiu and Kose (2017) suggest that outsourcing ethics is 
impossible in AI, even though there is algorithmic responsibility since every other 
system, cannot always perform the right things in the correct manner and for the proper 
reasons. Systems such as  robots are unreliable and cannot be fully trusted due to their 
unreliability. Fear exists in our minds of these robots doing the right thing, becoming 
autonomous, and rebelling against humans one day. Ethical laws must be considered 
when designing and dep loying robots.  
Most of the recent advances in AI are based on the application of different   
 machine learning techniques. Deep -learning AI is becoming ever more capable. Using 
such algorithms, computers are equipped with the ability to learn without being 
explicitly programmed. You need a suitable set of training data, and you need sufficient 
computational resources to do the training. Such systems are ideal for classification 
tasks, but the person using AI algorithms of this sort is in the dark about how the system 
actually makes its decisions.  
A gener al, deep -learning AI routine  could, some time from now, be trained  with 
a company’s data, automatically run simulations of the feasible futures and create 
algorithms needed to deliver the desired business efficiencies. The AI might use 
already known operat ions research algorithms, apply them to new situations and 
constantly adjust and recalculate to maintain optimal efficiency. It could develop 
algorithms to optimize the shipment of consumer products for a single device 
manufacturer, identifying the most ef ficient way to deliver each item from the factory 
to the store shelf or the consumer’s doorstep. It would gradually expand capabilities to 
083