Buchmeister, B.; Palcic, I. & Ojstersek, R.: Artificial Intelligence in Manufacturing...  
 Information technology (IT) has become much better at generating new data, in 
particular from sensors embedded in wearable and connected devices. The value of 
personal  data is increasing because it is more valuable to the people who own it, 
and to the organizations that lease the privilege to use it.  
2) The demand for equity is increasing.  
Equity is a strategy of enabling people to have an equal opportunity to succeed. It 
should not be confused with equality, which is a strategy for causing equal 
outcomes. This trend also applies to recommendation engines. Sometimes the 
biases that are inherent in society appear in the data that society produces. This has 
led to increase d interest in fairness, accountability and transparency in machine 
learning and greater regulatory demand for the explainability of the decisions 
produced by a recommendation engine.  
3) The sense of polarization is increasing.  
For many reasons, people are more polarized. In spite of an increase in connectivity 
and wealth, our political and economic systems appear to be increasingly polarized 
too. 
The three societal trends are fuelling new regulation. State regulation on data 
collection, processing and use i s heterogeneous. For instance, under GDPR, data about 
ethnic origin, health, sexual orientation and political, philosophical and religious 
beliefs is prohibited.  
In order for the society to benefit from AI, one way of reducing the negative 
impacts within t he sustainability dimension is through aligning the values of all 
stakeholders during the design process of AI -enabled applications so that their goals 
and behaviours resemble the human values.  
 
5.1 Availability of Jobs 
Manufacturers will feel the challenges of a decreasing talent pool. There will not be 
enough skilled people to perform the jobs of the future. The available pool of workers 
will likely come from developing countries as we see greater percentages of the 
population earning post -seconda ry degrees in their more developed counterparts. An 
ever-increasing mobile workforce will continue to present challenges to employers and 
may lead to a global struggle for talent. Their wants and needs are very different to 
those of the generation before  (Hall, 2017) . 
The present and coming wave of artificial intelligence will displace humans faster 
than we can adapt, through the acquisition of new skills and education. The robots are 
going to win the race. On the other hand, there are those who seek to emp hasise that 
the introduction of technologies tends to lead to aggregate growth in employment, as 
the economy adjusts and demand is created in new sectors (Autor, 2015).  
Since the end of 2018, there are more than 1.3 million industrial robots at work in 
factories all over the world (Kushmaro, 2018). In theory, as more and more jobs are 
taken over by robots, workers will be trained for more advanced positions in design, 
maintenance, and programming. In this interim phase, human -robot collaboration will 
have t o be efficient and safe as more industrial robots enter the production floor 
alongside human workers. Automation will render obsolete as many as 800 million 
jobs worldwide by 2030 (Byrum, 2018).  
090