Buchmeister, B.; Palcic, I. & Ojstersek, R.: Artificial Intelligence in Manufacturing...  
 more time on interpretation and application (Autor, 2015). Workers in these abstract -
intensive occupations have made wage gains due to:  
• combination of complementarity of information technology with these occupations,  
• growing demand for their services, and  
• relatively scarce labour supply.  
The same has not been true for workers in occupations  that are intensive in manual 
skills, which are only weakly complimented by computerization, do not benefit from a 
rising demand, and where there is a relatively large labour pool. The dynamics of 
employment are also influenced by globalization and trade a greements. Given that 
capital is highly mobile, but labour is not, employment in tradable sectors can be eroded 
by unfavourable terms of trade.  
The likelihood that a job will in the future be automated depends on:  
• certain attributes of a job, such as wheth er it entails creativity or persuasion,  
• the capability of technology, in other words the degree to which machines acquire 
or can mimic human intelligence, and  
• social and cultural norms.  
The future of automation is difficult to predict, as is society’s will ingness to guide 
and steer its adoption. Some of the issues that should be considered by policymakers 
could include:  
• strengthening social protection systems,  
• implementing education policies that foster the skills required for a flexible work 
force,  
• policies that promote shifting the labour force from low to higher skilled jobs, with 
enhanced retraining and safety nets for workers affected by trade agreements, and  
• policies that promote investment in R&D, fostering innovation in developed 
countries and  emulation in developing countries.  
AI tools will provide a competitive advantage to the companies that use them, 
meaning operations research (OR) will be in more demand , too; the OR jobs would 
grow 27 % over the next decade (U. S. Bureau of Labor Statisti cs, 2018).  
With growing intelligence of robots, robots will soon replace the workforce in 
factories. Every stage can be closely monitored with the help of sensors and data can 
be shared with AI and analytics software. Increased output, defect detection and  
corrective action are much faster and the entire production cycle is much more efficient 
(Khanna, 2018).  
In the AI future, jobs requiring human creativity and management expertise will 
enjoy the greatest job security. Those who understand how to collabora te with other 
humans while working with AI tools to enhance their organization’s effectiveness will 
create maximum value. The power of AI makes optimization techniques more 
generalized and easier to use. The key to professional survival will be in understa nding 
the big picture of business optimization. No particular outcome is guaranteed, of 
course.  
Some fear that as AI improves, it will supplant workers, creating an ever -growing 
pool of unemployable humans who cannot compete economically with machines.  This 
092