Buchmeister, B.; Palcic, I. & Ojstersek, R.: Artificial Intelligence in Manufacturing...  
 Exist ing manufacturing systems and manufacturing levels can hardly meet the 
needs of value -added upgrades to high -end, personalized, intelligent products and 
services.  New -generation intelligent manufacturing will bring revolutionary changes 
to the manufacturin g sector, set the stage for a real fourth industrial revolution.  The 
manufacturing sector is a perfect fit for the application of AI. Even though the Industry 
4.0 revolution is still in its early stages, we are  already witnessing significant benefits 
from AI. From the design process and production floor, to the supply chain and 
administration, AI is destined to change the way we manufacture products and process 
materials forever.  
AI may be efficient at creating things, improving them, and making them cheaper. 
Nevertheless, there is no replacement for human ingenuity in dealing with the 
unanticipated changes in tastes and demands or in deciding whether to make things at 
all. We have to significantly shift our thin king towards a transformation mind -set for a 
joint sustainable vision of the future.  
We analyse the rapid development of core technologies in the new AI era, which 
is triggering a great change in the models, means, and ecosystems of the manufacturing 
indus try. Our findings show that new technologies are urgently needed to resolve the 
key problems in knowledge generation, efficient utilization, and large -scale application 
in the manufacturing processes and further realize the capability and value in the enti re 
manufacturing system. Of course, broader social influence should not be ignored too.  
The key technology of new -generation intelligent manufacturing systems, that is, new -
generation AI technology, provides the systems with the ability to learn and discov er 
relevant knowledge and mechanisms and achieve human -machine collaboration 
through big data intelligence, human -machine hybrid enhancement intelligence, crowd 
intelligence, and other means.  
The wide application of intelligent manufacturing will push the new round of the 
industrial revolution to its culmination, bringing revolutionary changes to the 
manufacturing industry and human society in the direction of people -oriented, 
intelligent, harmonious, green, and safe development.  
In our future research, we will focus on the introduction requirements of AI in key 
areas of production and at essential technologies in connection with the appropriate 
support of production management, likewise supported with AI.  
 
8. Acknowledgement  
 
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the Slovenian Research 
Agency (research core funding No. P2 -0190).  
 
9. References  
 
Autor, D. (2015). Why are there still so many jobs? The history and future of workplace 
automation. Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 29, No. 3, pp. 3 -30, ISSN 0895 -
3309  
Berry, C. (2019). Societal trends create new challenges for data scientists. Analytics, 
Jan/Feb Issue, in Forum (published online), doi:10.1287/LYTX.2019.01.07  
096