Buchmeister, B.; Palcic, I. & Ojstersek, R.: Artificial Intelligence in Manufacturing...  
 6.1 Economic Dimension  
Governments of countries with advanced economies and large technology 
companies are investing in the implementation of AI to create a competitive advantage. 
Such investments give a competitive advantage at the national level for advanced 
economies; however, they also have negative impacts on the globalization of 
production and services. AI's capabilities will reduce or stop the outsourcing in the 
emerging market and bring services in -house. These will disrup t local businesses and 
the job markets of emerging economies, resulting in a rise in unemployment and a 
decrease in individuals’ spending power. This will eventually affect the global 
economy. AI is already a major industry and can displace low -skilled wor kers.  
 
6.2 Technical  Dimension  
Deep learning allows models that are composed of multiple processing layers to 
learn representations of data that have multiple levels of abstraction. This will lead to 
progress in AI being able to code AI (Simonite, 2018) ca using disruption towards jobs 
in the IT industry. In terms of the positive impact, we can expect more capable systems 
that can take over tasks that are more complex. In terms of the negative impacts, we 
can perceive the necessity of stronger engineering et hics as more and more 
responsibilities are placed into the hands of the developers who engineer the systems 
upfront and hence must foresee many wanted and unwanted usage scenarios.  
 
6.3 Environmental  Dimension  
AI may be useful in helping us take better care of the planet in terms of supporting 
waste and pollution management, but also, predictive systems can be used for 
earthquakes and weather forecasting to better recognize the likelihood of extreme event 
occurrences.  
The adoption of autonomous vehicles could be a possible turning point for 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions through less fuel consumption (Iglinski & Babiak, 
2017).  
AI can also have negative impact towards environmental dimension especially 
due to the contribution it makes towards further ac celeration, and consumption of 
technological devices. The increased production and consumption of technological 
devices will have two adverse effects, namely planned obsolescence and depletion of 
natural resources.  
 
6.4 Individual  Dimension  
We have become increasingly more productive in the last 50 years (Lightman, 
2018). However, due to job requirements and inflation, individuals are working more 
than before. A person working more than normal working hours has a significantly 
higher risk of poor self -rated  health and that this affects mental and emotional well -
being.  
AI-powered digital assistants, chatbots, analytical tools, and robots could help 
individuals in terms of working less hours, increase work efficiency, improve workers’ 
physical well -being and r educe work -related injuries (Khakurel et al., 2018).  
094