Buchmeister, B.; Palcic, I. & Ojstersek, R.: Artificial Intelligence in Manufacturing...  
 ensure an optimized delivery of the raw materials needed to produce the devices and 
every other logistical task neede d to cut costs and boost factory productivity. This AI 
application might then optimize marketing efforts, ensuring the product design meets 
customer expectations, as well as ensuring that advertising accurately targets those 
most interested in the product.  It might adapt to help retailers in optimizing product 
placement on store shelves, and then provide support for logistics, marketing, 
accounting and all the other common business tasks (Byrum, 2018).  
AI’s negative side:  AI looks like incredibly promising technology. It is inspiring 
and exciting but that is  probably also, what makes it partially terrifying. There is  still 
too much vagueness around it. A fair and varied amount of criticism has been raised in 
relation to what extent AI can be used to promote development, touching upon the 
human elements that a machine lacks such as the ability to understand ethical and 
philosophical questions. AI can compute, but cannot judge, as it inevitably lacks crucial 
human qualities such as wisdom, empathy, compassion a nd so on. Without a political 
and societal environment to support its development, AI alone certainly cannot foster 
sustainable transformation.  
The type of AI we are dealing with today is known as “narrow” AI. This is 
different to the much referenced “stro ng” AI which is thought to mimic the general 
human consciousness. Each of these existing systems can be brilliant in specifically 
defined, constrained tasks, where they can deal with uncertainty better than humans 
do. In the real industrial world, nothing is ever fully known (Zavalishina, 2017).  
AI can bring some daunting impressions. Widespread job losses and apocalyptic 
scenarios of super intelligence confronting mankind are just two of topics that the 
media like to focus on. The ethical responsibility ar ound algorithmic decisions tends 
to command much attention but mostly overlooking  the benefits of AI.  
As data processing and storage costs drop, and computing power and algorithms 
become readily available, AI occupies unique spot. It cannot only bring tang ible 
business returns in a very short term but also positively impacts energy consumption, 
and related environmental aspects in global production.  
By 2020, there will be 30 billion connected devices on earth. This is leading to 
the Big Data mountain growin g beyond recognition. Machines communicating with 
people and other machines are creating so much data that we have generated more in 
the past two years than in the previous 5,000 years of human history (Hall, 2017).  
There is  no doubt that the manufacturing  sector is leading the way in the 
application of AI technology. From significant cuts in unplanned downtime to better 
designed products, manufacturers are applying AI -powered analytics to data to 
improve efficiency, product quality and the safety of employees (Kushmaro, 2018).  
AI algorithms formulate estim ations of market demands by looking for patterns 
linking location, socioeconomic and macroeconomic factors, weather patterns, 
political status, consumer behaviour and more. This information is invaluable to 
manufacturers as it allows them to optimize staff ing, inventory control, energy 
consumption and the supply of raw materials.  
AI technology is now making its way into manufacturing, and the machine -
learning technology and pattern -recognition software at its core could hold the key to 
transforming factorie s of the near future.  
084