111:2 Yang Wang
to the fusion strategy over multi-modal information, the above literature can be roughly classified
into early fusion [46], late fusion [9, 119, 120] and collaborative fusion [133, 134].
Specifically, early fusion fused the multi-view information, which is subsequently processed by
the specific models; late fusion performed the specific algorithm over each view independently,
then combine the output from each view to be the final outcome. Different from them, as claimed
by Wang et al [ 133,134],collaborative fusion is more intuitive than both early fusion andlate fusion ,
since it can effectively promote the collaboration among multi-modals to achieve the ideal consensus
[45,88–90,167], which is critical to multi-modal data analytics, and be widely verified by a large
range of applications, such as classification, clustering and retrieval etc.
With the development of web technology, big data has become ubiquitous everywhere, along
with the vast access to efficient toolkit, such as GPU, which largely pushed forward the reviving of
deep neural networks, to well model the nonlinear distributions of high-dimensional data objects
and complex relationship, to further extract the high-level feature representations. A surge of related
research on deep multi-modal architectures, which consisted of multiple deep networks with each
branch corresponding to one modal, have been proposed to further improve the performance of
the shallow models. Beyond that, another featured interaction for deep multi-modal data lies in
the Generated Adversarial Networks (named GAN for short), which offered a new manner of
multi-modal collaboration via a “rivalry" fashion, but improved each other to better solve the tasks.
In what follows, we revisit the typical state-of-the-art multi-modal methods especially the deep
multi-modal architectures.
2 DEEP MULTI-VIEW/MODAL LEARNING
It is widely known that deep network has become the powerful toolkit in the field of pattern
recognition [ 141,143]. That largely improved the performance of the traditional multi-modal
models, yielding the so called deep multi-view/modal models, which can effectively extract the
high-level nonlinear feature representation to benefit the tasks. In this section, we discuss some
recent research of deep multi-modal models for fundamental problems in terms of clustering and
classification, which is often of great importance for other applications.
2.1 Deep Multi-modal methods for Clustering and Classification
The literature so far demonstrated that multi-modal tasks solved by deep networks have achieved
remarkable performance in fundamental problems such as clustering and classification, which is
validated by significant progress below.
Specifically, Zhang et al. [ 168] proposed a latent multi-view subspace clustering method (LMSC),
which can integrate multiple views into a comprehensive latent representation and encode multi-
view complementary information. In particular, it utilized a multi-view subspace clustering method
based on deep neural networks to explore more general relationships between different views.
Huang et al. [ 49] proposed a multi-view spectral clustering network called MvSCN for brevity,
which defined the local invariance of views with a deep metric learning network. MvSCN optimized
the local invariance of a single view and the consistency of different views, so that it can obtain the
ideal clustering results.
Beyond the above, deep multi-modal models contributed a lot to classification . Specifically, Hu et
al. [41] proposed multi-view metric learning (MvML) method based on the optimal combination of
various metric distance from multiple views for a joint learning. Based on that, the author further
extended MvML to the method, named MvDML, by using a deep neural network to construct a
nonlinear transformation of the high-dimensional data objects. Li et al. [ 66] proposed a probabilistic
hierarchical model for multi-view classification. The proposed method projected latent variables
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.