Survey on Deep Multi-modal Data Analytics: Collaboration, Rivalry and Fusion 111:17
Based on transfer learning, Huang et al. [ 48] proposed to conduct knowledge transfer from single-
modal source domain to cross-modal target domain. They construct a novel model, namely modal-
adversarial hybrid transfer network (MHTN), to improve the cross-modal performance. Similar as
the studies above, they utilized modal-adversarial consistency loss to learn modality-consistent
representations. Wen et al. [ 137] developed a cross-modal similarity transferring (CMST) framework
to explore the semantic correlations between unpaired items in an unsupervised way. They studied to
learn the quantitative single-modal similarities, and transferred them to the common representation
subspace. Wang et al. [ 123] combined autoencoder and adversarial learning to construct a novel
multi-view representation learning method, named AdvCAE, which comprehensively utilized the
information from all views and enforced the aggregated posteriors of different views to be identical.
Some other deep cross-modal methods have also been proposed to deal with various tasks. Zhang
et al. [ 171] constructed a cross-modal hashing model based on GANs in an unsupervised fashion.
They also developed a correlation graph based approach that can capture the underlying manifold
structure across multi-modalities. Gupta et al. [ 37] proposed a novel cross-modal method which
can transfer supervision from labeled RGB images to unlabeled depth and optical flow images.
Therefore, it can extend various deep CNN architectures to novel imaging modalities without
training deep CNNs using a large set of collected images. Dan et al. [ 64] proposed a cross-modal
image generation model which can deal with semi-supervised problems. It contained one generator
and two discriminators and leveraged large amounts of unpaired data. Li et al. [ 65] focused on the
problem of person re-identification and introduced an auxiliary X modality which is generated by a
lightweight deep network. Then, the network is learned in a self-supervised manner with the labels
inherited from visible images. With the help of the auxiliary X modality, cross-modal learning is
guided by a carefully designed modality gap constraint, which achieved excellent performance for
person re-identification [ 139,142,144,146,148]. Deep Modality Invariant Adversarial Network
(DeMIAN) [ 38] aimed to learn modality-invariant representations from paired modalities, while
enabling to train a classifier on source modality samples, which can perform well on target modality.
To reveal the correlations in human perception of auditory and visual, Chen et al. [ 11] attempted
to deal with the cross-modal generation task by leveraging GANs. AugGAN [ 47] served as a
structure-aware image-to-image translation network that is capable of handling cross-modal data
augmentation. AugGAN can extract structure-aware information through the supervision of a
segmentation subtask, which can achieve good performance for object detection.
As discussed above, [ 93] proposed CM-GANs framework that utilized GANs to model cross-
modal joint distribution of different modalities. CM-GANs is a cross-modal GAN architecture which
is trained by jointly solving the learning problem of two parallel GANs as follows:
min
GI,GTmax
DI,DT,DCi,DCtLGAN 1(GI,GT,DI,DT)+LGAN 2(GI,GT,DCi,DCt) (2)
The intra-modality discriminative model are composed of two sub-nets for image and text,
denoted as DIandDT. Inter-modality discriminative model denoted as DC.DCiandDCtrepresent
image pathway and text pathway, respectively. GIandGTrepresent the generative models for
image and text. A cross-modal adversarial training mechanism is proposed in CM-GANs as Eq.2,
which deployed two kinds of discriminative models to simultaneously conduct intra-modality and
inter-modality discrimination. They can mutually boost each other to make the generated common
representations more discriminative via the adversarial training process.
4 POSSIBLE FUTURE DIRECTION
All the above work concentrated on fusing the multi-view information to obtain a better per-
formance than single view counterparts. We state that the multi-modal research may enhance
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.