111:18 Yang Wang
Fig. 3. Two candidates from two modalities attempt to reach the destinations throughout same network,
where they may provide the information to each other to avoid being trapped into bomb, and arrived at the
destination. The spatial-temporal multi-modal collaboration are required.
larger weight on how to solve the problem for each modal by referring to the information from other
modalities for future work.
Suppose that we solve the specific problem of path selection over the road network with two
modalities. For either of them, the challenges of large complexity or uncertainty may be available.
To address the bottleneck, the informative knowledge may be required from other modal, enabling
the problem to be feasible. We provide an example in Fig. 3, where two candidates (two modalities)
aim at reaching the final destinations from the starting points in the context of the same road
networks, the challenge lies in which paths should follow. Besides, some paths may be trapped,
others may be awarded. One straightforward strategy goes to brute force manner, which, however,
is prohibited in term of complexity for large scale networks. Hence, each candidate is expected for
the informative knowledge from the other candidate, such as the correct selection for some local
network to simultaneously reduce the complexity and uncertainty, to reach the final destination.
4.0.1 Spatial-Temporal Multi-modal Collaboration. Based on the example above, one natural ques-
tion is raised up. That is, how could two candidates help each other? To answer this questions,
we need to resolve two basic questions, namely where andwhen to collaborate. Specifically, one
candidate needs to figure out the right time slot, to guide the other one to capture the information.
Here are two major scenarios:
•If too late, the candidate cannot step back;
•If too early, the candidate cannot even be aware of the situation unless skip the current
context.
To effectively solve that, the ideal deep multi-modal models are expected to obtain powerful
feature representations and spaces, where the robust model can be trained to achieve the goal. Such
motivation may call for interesting research to solve the problem under more practical context.
5 CONCLUSIONS
We provide a comprehensive overview of the state-of-the-arts regarding Deep Multi-modal data
analytics. We claim that the critical issue over existing state-of-the-arts is how to perform the multi-
modal collaborations, including adversarial deep multi-modal collaboration, so as to fuse these
complementary multi-modal information to be the final output. We also summarize the experimental
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.