Survey on Deep Multi-modal Data Analytics: Collaboration, Rivalry and Fusion 111:11
Deep Cross -Modal 
Representation Learning
Common Representation 
Subspace
Query
Results
...
TextImage
VideoHeterogeneity Gap
Semantic  Gap
AudioMulti -Modal DataFeature Space
Text
Image
Video
Audio
Fig. 2. Illustration of deep cross-modal representation learning framework. Text, Image, video and audio
represented different modalities, each of which learned a deep neural network for nonlinear feature represen-
tation. Based on that, a common subspace is learned, where all the feature representations are projected. The
final cross-modal retrieval is conducted against such common representations.
learning, then exploited a multi-modal denoising autoencoder (DAE) to reconstruct the missing
view. Kanojia et al. [ 57] proposed a conditional generative adversarial networks based model to
synthesize an image with the completed missing regions by using multi-view images. To solve
multi-view frame missing problem, Mahmud et al.[ 83] employed conditional generative adversarial
network to generate the joint spatial-temporal representation of the missing frame. In this approach,
all of the multi-view frames are fused together following a weighted average strategy: synthetic
representations within the camera are given more weight when they are close to the missing frame,
and representations from other overlapping cameras are given more weight when the available
intra-camera frames are far apart.
3 DEEP CROSS-MODAL LEARNING
Recently, deep cross-modal learning has been broadly discussed and explored. Compared with
the cross-modal method that only handled the hand-craft features, the deep cross-modal learning
using has become a hot topic of current research, where the basic architecture is shown in Fig. 2.
To evaluate the existing research. There are many benchmark cross-modal datasets, which are
summarized in Table 4.
One big question is how to effectively bridge the semantic gap and capture the correlation
between heterogeneous modalities. To this end, abundant research has been proposed. In what
follows, we discuss several categories for this filed.
Table 4. Summary of typical benchmark cross-modal datasets
Datasets Samples Classes Types Modals
NUS-WIDE [19] 269,648 81 Web images Image-text
MIRFlickr-25k [50] 25,015 24 Images Image-text
MS COCO [73] 123,287 80 Images Image-text
UND Collection X1 [152] 4,584 82 Facial corpus Visible, thermal images
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.