111:4 Yang Wang
2.2 Deep Multi-view Learning for Other Multimedia Applications
Multi-view learning methods have also been widely applied in the area of multimedia analytics,
mainly including image retrieval, image representation and image recognition. In this section, we
discussed some typical algorithms as follows.
There have been several deep multi-view learning methods [ 36,158] that are proposed to deal
with image retrieval. A multi-view 3D object retrieval approach [ 36] was proposed based on a
deep embedding network, which is jointly supervised by triplet loss and classification loss. After
generating a comprehensive description for each 3D object by extracting deep features from
different views, the multi-view 3D object retrieval could be formulated as a set-to-set matching
problem. A lot of deep multi-modal hashing models [ 145,158] designed feature descriptors into
a similarity preserving hamming space to perform large-scale retrieval. For example, Yan et al.
[158] exploited a view stability evaluation to obtain the relationship among views. Meanwhile, the
above methods integrated multi-modal dependencies that are designed to obtain hash code, which
preserve the merits of convolutional network from multi-view perspective.
For deep image representation, multi-view learning methods [ 81,160] have been proposed
to represent the image based on deep auto-encoder. SkeletonNet [ 160] proposed a hybrid deep
network based on deep auto-encoder, which adopted skeleton embedding process for unsupervised
multi-view subspace learning. Throughout the tensor factorization, it takes full use of the strength
of both shallow and deep architectures when dealing with low-level and high-level views. Bimodal
Correlative Deep Autoencoder (BCDA) [ 81] constructed fashion semantic space based on the
image-scale space. Then it captures the internal correlations between visual features and fashion
styles by utilizing the intrinsic matching rules of tops and bottoms.
Beyond the above, deep multi-view learning methods [ 23,72,91,106,149] are widely employed
in the field of image recognition. Deep Multi-Modal Face Representation (MM-DFR) [ 23] first
adopted multiple Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) to extract features for face images. Then
all these features are concatenated as a raw feature vector. To reduce the dimension the feature
vector, auto-encoder is adopted to compress the raw feature. Coupled Deep Learning (CDL) [ 149]
transformed the heterogeneous face matching problem as the homogeneous face matching based on
deep model. Furthermore, it supplements trace norm and a block-diagonal prior to the loss function,
to enhance the relevance between the projection matrices of images from different views. Lin et
al. [72] proposed a 3D fingerprint segmentation network and a multi-view generation network to
obtain the deep representation to better match 3D fingerprint. The recognition performance could
be improved with the global shape and texture information by integrating respective 3D contour
map. Niu et al. [ 91] proposed a multi-scale CNN architecture to extract deep features at multiple
scales corresponding to visual concepts of different levels. The proposed architecture solved the
problem of variable label number by explicitly estimating the optimum label quantity. Moreover,
multi-modal extension is formulated to utilize the noisy user-provided tags.
Multi-Modal CNN for Multi-Instance Multi-Label (MMCNN-MIML) [ 106] first generated multi-
modal instances from the image and text description. Then, it concatenated the visual instances
and its corresponding context embedding, which directly incorporated the groupings of class labels
into the network by sharing the layers among related labels within the same group. Throughout
this way, it performed the final predictions on the bag level to solve multi-label classification.
To study the problem of multi-view learning via an end-to-end network, Jia et al. [ 51] took multi-
view learning criteria into consideration, while proposed a neuron-wise correlation-maximizing
regularizer, named CorrReg. Particularly, CorrReg belonged to an intermediate network layer to
concatenate the features of individual views, leading to the superior classification performance.
Deep Explicit Attentive Multi-View Learning Model (DEAML) [ 30] is a deep multi-view learning
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.