Survey on Deep Multi-modal Data Analytics: Collaboration, Rivalry and Fusion 111:9
Table 2. Summary of Some Studies in the Application of Generative Adversarial Networks: Task Type (Classi-
fication, Clustering), Dataset Used, View (Single-view, Multi-view) and a Brief Method Description
Method Datasets Views Method
Classification
[101]CIFAR-10,
MNIST,
SVHN,
ImageNetS Presented a variety of new structural features and train-
ing procedures based on the GAN framework. The
method focused on two applications of GANs: semi-
supervised learning, and the generation of images to be
visually realistic.
Classification
[17]CelebA,
RaFDS Proposed a scalable image-to-image translation model
among multiple domains using a single generator and
a discriminator. StarGAN generated images of higher
visual quality compared with the existing methods.
Classification
[21]CIFAR-10,
MNIST,
SVHNS Proposed SGAN for semi-supervised conditional gen-
erative modeling, which learned from a small set of
labeled instances to disentangle the semantics of our
interest from other elements in the latent space.
Classification
[26]CIFAR-10,
SVHN,
CelebAS proposed the adversarially learned inference (ALI)
model, which jointly learned a generation network and
an inference network using an adversarial process.
Classification
[18]CIFAR-10,
MNISTS Consisted of a unified game-theoretical framework with
three players-a generator, a discriminator and a classi-
fier, to conduct semi-supervised learning with compati-
ble utilities.
Clustering
[153]Reuters,
BDGP,
YoutubeM Tried to seek a common high-level representation for
incomplete multi-view data. Moreover, the hidden infor-
mation of the missing data is captured by the missing
data inference via the element-wise reconstruction and
the GAN.
Clustering
[53]NUS-
WIDE-10K,
WikipediaTM Unified the modality-specific representations by learn-
ing the cycle-consistent mappings across modalities
via an adversarial manner. Subsequently, the method
performed a common clustering with the unified repre-
sentations.
Clustering
[87]MNIST,
Fashion-10S Proposed ClusterGAN, an architecture that enabled clus-
tering in the latent space, which considered discrete-
continuous mixtures for sampling noise variables.
Clustering
[121]HW, BDGP,
MNISTM Simultaneously learned an excellent clustering struc-
ture and inferred the incomplete views on the common
subspace structure via GAN model.
Clustering
[31]CIFAR-10,
MNISTS Defined a minimum entropy loss on the real data along
with a balanced self-paced learning algorithm based on
the GAN to enhance the training for clustering.
Clustering
[33]CIFAR-10,
MNISTS deployed the tied discriminator and encoder, along with
the adversarial loss as a data-dependent regularization
for unsupervised learning of hash function.
distribution matching. Based on shared latent representations of two different views, MALI gener-
ated arbitrary number of paired synthetic samples to support mapping learning. For multi-view
human action recognition, Wang et al. [ 118] proposed a generative multi-view action recognition
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.