Survey on Deep Multi-modal Data Analytics: Collaboration, Rivalry and Fusion 111:15
Supervised Model. Jiang et al. [ 52] proposed a novel deep cross-modal hashing model, named
DCMH, which consisted of feature learning model and hash-code learning model, to outperform
the cross-modal hashing with hand-crafted features. Tu et al. [ 111] proposed to jointly learn an
end-to-end Deep Cross-Modal Hashing network and unified Hash Codes (DCHUC). It jointly
learned unified hash codes for cross-modal instances and a pair of hash functions for queries.
Cao et al. [ 10] proposed collective deep quantization to jointly learn deep representations and the
quantizers for both modalities. Jin et al. [ 55] proposed a novel end-to-end ranking-based hashing
framework, named deep semantic-preserving ordinal hashing (DSPOH). Instead of relying on binary
quantization functions, DSPOH learned hash functions with deep neural networks by exploring the
ranking structure of feature dimensions. Xie et al. [ 151] developed a novel deep hashing approach,
termed as Multi-Task Consistency Preserving Adversarial Hashing (CPAH), to capture cross-modal
semantic correlation. Two modules, i.e., consistency refined module (CR) and multi-task adversarial
learning module (MA), are developed to learn semantic consistency information. Liong et al. [ 75]
developed a cross-modal deep variational hashing (CMDVH). Instead of a single pair of projections,
CMDVH characterized a couple of deep neural network to learn non-linear transformations from
cross-modal sample pairs. In their another work [ 74], a cross-modal deep variational and structural
hashing (CM-DVStH) is developed, including a deep fusion network with a structural layer to
maximize the correlation between different modalities so as to generate unified binaries. Based on
ranking technique, Liu et al. [78] proposed a deep cross-modal hashing approach (RDCMH). This
method utilized the feature and label information to generate a semi-supervised semantic ranking
list. Then, it integrated the semantic ranking information into deep cross-modal hashing to optimize
the model. Inspired by adversarial learning, Li et al. [ 62] constructed a self-supervised adversarial
hashing (SSAH) method, which exploited two adversarial networks to maximize the semantic
correlation and consistency of the representations between different modalities. Meanwhile, a
self-supervised semantic network is integrated to explore high-level semantics. Deng et al. [ 20]
proposed a triplet-based deep hashing (TDH) network for cross-modal retrieval, which captured
relative semantic correlation of various modalities in the supervised manner via triplet labels.
Chen et al. [ 15] proposed a tri-stage deep cross-modal hashing method, which exploited two deep
networks to generate hash codes of different modalities.
Unsupervised Model . Li et al. [ 69] proposed a model named Deep Binary Reconstruction
(DBRC) network, which directly learned the binary hashing codes in an unsupervised fashion.
Wu et al. [ 138] proposed UDCMH framework for cross-modal hash code generation. This method
integrated deep learning and matrix decomposition with a binary latent factor model and then con-
ducted multi-modal data searches in a self-learning manner. Considering the underlying manifold
structure across multi-modal data, Zhang et al. [ 170] proposed an unsupervised multi-pathway
generative adversarial hashing modal (MGAH), in which the generative model tried to fit the
distribution over the manifold structure, and then learned to distinguish the generated data and the
true positive data sampled from the correlation graph to improve the recognition accuracy. Wang
et al. [ 122] introduced an Unsupervised Deep Cross-modal Hashing with Virtual Label Regression
(UDCH-VLR) approach, which is an unified framework that simultaneously integrated deep hash
function training, virtual label learning and regression.
Results Analysis . We summarized the results in Table 6 and 7, where they reported the com-
parison results of the above-mentioned deep cross-modal hashing methods on IAPRTC-12 [ 27],
MIRFlickr-25k [ 50] and NUS-WIDE [ 19] benchmarks for Image-to-Text retrieval and Text-to-Image
retrieval, respectively. The most common lengths of hashing codes are 16 bits, 32 bits and 64 bits.
MIRFlickr-25k dataset has totally 25000 images collected from Flickr, belonging to 24 basic cate-
gories, such as "bird", "sky", "tree" etc. These categories are relatively independent on semantics, in
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.