Survey on Deep Multi-modal Data Analytics: Collaboration, Rivalry and Fusion 111:5
method which focused on the task of recommender system. DEAML first adopted an explainable
deep structure to construct an initial network. Meanwhile, it developed an attentive multi-view
learning framework to optimize key variables with an explainable structure, which can largely
improve the recommendation precision. Zhang et al. [ 169] aimed to deal with the problem of
incomplete view and constructed a novel framework, namely Cross Partial Multi-View Networks
(CPM-Nets). The encoding networks in CPM-Nets ensured that all samples and all views can be
jointly exploited regardless of view-missing patterns. Furthermore, it jointly considered multi-view
complementary information and class distribution, which enforced all views to learn from each
other and enhanced the classification performance.
Deep multi-view learning methods are also well applied to other applications. For taxi demand
prediction, Yao et al. [ 162] proposed a Deep Multi-View Spatial-Temporal Network (DMVST-Net)
framework which considered three views simultaneously, including temporal view, spatial view
and semantic view, respectively. Extensive experiments on a large-scale taxi request dataset from
“Didi Chuxing" validated the performance of DMVST-Net. Multi-view Subspace Learning to Rank
(MvSL2R) aimed to deal with the problem of learning to rank from multiple information sources.
MvSL2R introduced an autoencoder to capture the information of feature mappings from both
intra-modal and cross-modals. Furthermore, an end-to-end architecture is constructed to learn
both the joint ranking objective and the individual rankings. Medical concept normalization is also
a specific task in biomedical research. In order to address non-standard expressions and short-text
problem, Luo et al. [ 80] proposed a multi-view CNN to extract semantic matching patterns and
learned to synthesize them from different views. Meanwhile, multi-task shared structure is also
adopted to obtain medical correlations between disease and procedure, which is beneficial for the
disambiguation tasks.
Wang et al. [ 116] proposed a deep multi-modal method to learn compact hash codes, which
can fully exploit intra-modality and inter-modality correlations to learn accurate representations.
Furthermore, an orthogonal regularizer is proposed to address the challenge of redundancy lying
in the binary codes. Yu et al. [ 165] developed a novel deep multi-modal distance metric learning
(named Deep-MDML ) method, which well retrieved the images given the queries. Deep-MDML
learned a nonlinear distance metric instead of a linear one. It adopted gradient descent optimization
to assign optimal weights and distance metric for different modalities. Furthermore, local geometry
(encoding the visual similarity) is combined with the structure regression (encoding the penalty of
click features) to obtain a novel objective function which benefited from both the click features and
visual features.
As aforementioned, one critical issue for multi-modal learning is to promote the effective multi-
modal collaborations for multi-modal information fusion. Unlike the research stated in previous
sections, another adversarial correlations among multi-modal is proposed, which is motivated by
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). In what follows, we revisit the preliminaries, followed
by the research on its deep multi-modal applications.
2.3 Generative Adversarial Networks and Its Applications
The traditional generative adversarial networks (GANs) [ 34] consist of two parts: a generator and a
discriminator . The generator is able to generate realistic samples to confuse the discriminator. Such
objective is formulated by a minimax game between a generator and a discriminator, which compete
with each other to synthesize more realistic samples and identify the real samples. Mathematically,
the GANs framework is to optimize the following:
min
θmax
ϕV(D,G)=Ex∼Pdata(x)[log(D(x))]+Ez∼P(z)[log(1−D(G(z)))] , (1)
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.