111:16 Yang Wang
which the samples have discriminative features. This may be the major reason that the approaches
perform the best on two data sets. For image query, CM-DVStH wins the competition by mAP
= 0.882, 0.916 and 0.928, much higher than others. But for text query, CDQ shows competitive
performance on MIRFlickr-25k and NUS-WIDE.
3.1.3 Deep Cross-Modal Learning for Other Applications. In addition to the above researches, some
deep methods for other multimedia applications have been proposed. To name a few: Sarfraz et
al. [102] proposed a deep neural network to capture the highly non-linear mapping relationship
between two modes in which the mapping process kept identity information. Aytar et al. [ 3]
proposed a novel cross-modal scene dataset, along with an optimized cross-modal convolutional
neural network, which learned a modal-independent shared representation. Zheng et al. [ 174]
proposed a novel hetero-manifold regularization (HMR) method, which defined multiple sub-
manifolds to jointly supervise the learning of hash functions and multi-modal representations.
They verified the advanced performance of HMR on cross-camera re-id task and cross-age face
recognition task. Kim et al. [ 58] recently proposed a novel descriptor that has better discriminative
power and greater robustness to non-rigid image deformation. Zhang et al. [ 172] proposed a cross-
modal projection matching (CMPM) loss and cross-modal projection classification (CMPC) loss, to
optimize data distribution and improve image-text matching results. It can be seen that most of the
deep cross-modal hashing methods used paired optimization approaches, which have no advantages
for large scale datasets. In [ 84], a large-scale structured corpus is proposed and a neural network is
trained. In order to do so, they used deep neural networks to combine images for retrieval tasks.
Li et al. [ 76] proposed encoding hashing heterogeneous data with varied lengths, which used an
effective objective function to learn the semantic correlation of different modalities. Such hash
encoding method is robust to various challenging tasks for cross-modal search. Yuan et al. [ 166]
proposed an adaptive cross-modal (ACM) feature learning framework based on graph convolutional
neural network for RGB-D scene recognition. This method adaptively selected important local
features for each modal to construct a cross-modal graph.
3.2 Deep Cross-Modal Learning based GANs
Recently, with the development of GANs, many popular deep cross-modal learning methods
have been proposed based on GANs. Among these, cross-modal retrieval is a hot research topic
attracting tremendous attention. To deal with the problem of cross-modal retrieval, Wang et
al. [114] presented ACMR, a novel cross-modal subspace learning method that generates modality-
invariant representations by inter-modal adversarial loss. Peng et al. [ 93] proposed Cross-modal
Generative Adversarial Networks (CM-GANs), which consisted of two GAN models. This approach
explored inter-modality and intra-modality correlation simultaneously. Li et al. [ 63] proposed an
Unsupervised coupled Cycle generative adversarial Hashing networks (UCH), where outer-cycle
network is used to learn powerful common representation, and inner-cycle network is explained
to generate reliable hash codes. The proposed UCH has achieved excellent performance for the
task of cross-modal retrieval. Inspired by zero-shot learning, Xu et al. [ 156] proposed a novel
model called ternary adversarial networks with self-supervision (TANSS). TANSS can employ
self-supervised learning to zero-shot cross-modal retrieval problem, which learned the common
semantic space with some additional supervision, rather than directly relying on the labels. He et al.
[39] constructed an unsupervised cross-modal method, named UCAL, which can deal with the cross
modal retrieval based on adversarial learning. Specially, UCAL proposed an additional regularization
using adversarial learning, which can maximize the correlations between different modalities.
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.