111:10 Yang Wang
Table 3. Summary of the Features of the Datasets for GAN-based clustering methods in multi-view samples
Datasets Features Multi-view description
Reuters
[1]6 categories and
111,740 documentsThree views: English, French and German. The subset con-
sists of 3000 documents from 6 categories.
HW
[112]10 classes and
2,000 imagesTwo views: 76 Fourier coefficients and 216 profile correla-
tions.
BDGP
[6]5 categories and
2,500 imagesTwo views: Visual view and textual view. Each image is
represented by a 1,750-D visual feature vector and a 79-D
textual feature vector.
MNIST
[61]10 classes and
7,000 imagesTwo views: The first view is the original dataset, and the
second view is the images of the first view with additive
noise.
CCV [ 54]20 categories and
9,000 videosThree views: STIP features with 5,000-D BoWs representa-
tion, SIFT features extracted every two seconds with 5,000-
D BoWs representation, and MFCC features with 4,000-D
BoWs representation.
Youtube
[82]31 categories and
92,457 videosThree views: 512-D vision feature, 2000-D audio feature and
1000-D text feature.
method, named GM-VAR , to bridge the gap between different feature domains. By exploring the
latent connection knowledge in both intra-view and cross-view, the proposed method generated
one latent representations for one view conditioning on the other view. Besides, the high-level
label information is incorporated by a view correlation discovery network. Xuan et al. [ 157] em-
ployed multi-view generative adversarial network to address automatic pearl classification problem.
Particularly, they developed a multi-view GAN to automatically expand the labeled training set.
For multi-view facial expression recognition task, Lai et al. [ 60] proposed a GAN based multi-task
learning approach to learn the emotion-preserving representations. This method utilizes generator
to frontalize input non-frontal face images into frontal face images while preserving the identity
and expression characteristics. Cao et al. [ 8] presented Load Balanced Generative Adversarial
Networks (LB-GAN) to address multi-view face imagine synthesis, which decomposes the synthesis
task into two well constrained subtasks supported by two pairs of GAN: face normalizer and
face editor. Tian et al. [ 110] studied a multi-view generation method named CR-GAN, which is a
two-pathway learning model leveraging labeled and unlabeled data for self-supervised learning to
improve generation quality. Sun et al. [ 108] studied the multi-view network representation problem
and constructed a GAN based model MEGAN to generate multi-view network embedding, which
preserves the knowledge from the individual network views and the correlations across different
views. For Learning to Rank problem, Cao et al. [ 7] proposed to capture information from different
views. They introduced a generic framework for multi-view subspace learning to rank, named
MvSL2R, based on which two multi-view learning solutions are developed.
One of the obstacles in multi-view applications is the problem of missing view or missing data.
Recently, several studies are proposed to tackle this challenge. For example, Chen et al. [ 12] proposed
Multi-view BiGAN, a BiGAN based model that can deal with missing views. Doinychko et al. [ 24]
proposed a biconditional GAN model that contained two generators and a common discriminator,
which can deal with missing views. By conducting a tripartite game with two generators and a
discriminator, this technique can learn missing view conditionally. Shang et al. [ 103] constructed a
GAN based model, termed as VIGAN, to combat missing view imputation problem. This approach
handled each view as a separate domain and identified domain-to-domain mappings by adversarial
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.