Survey on Deep Multi-modal Data Analytics: Collaboration, Rivalry and Fusion 111:7
[26] and Triple-GAN [ 18] learned a generator network and an inference network throughout an
adversarial process, where they are specifically designed for semi-supervised classification.
Chen et al. [ 14] proposed the method, named InfoGAN, by maximizing the mutual information
between a small subset of the latent variables and the observation, the InfoGAN is effective to learn
disentangled representations in a completely unsupervised manner. Dizaji et al. [ 32] proposed a
novel semi-supervised deep generative model to target gene expression inference, based on GAN to
approximate the joint distribution of landmark and target genes. More accurate prediction results
were obtained for the types of gene expression.
2.4 Deep Generative Adversarial Networks for multi-modal clustering
GAN based clustering models attract great attention. Specifically, Dizaji et al. [ 33] proposed a deep
unsupervised hashing function, called HashGAN, which efficiently obtained the binary representa-
tion of the input images to achieve sufficiently good performance in single-view image clustering.
Zhou et al.[ 175] developed a novel unsupervised deep subspace clustering model following a GAN
framework, which was termed deep adversarial subspace clustering (DASC) that learned to super-
vise the generator by evaluating clustering quality via an unsupervised manner. Mukherjee et al.
[87] proposed ClusterGAN as a mechanism for clustering using GANs. By sampling latent variables
from a mixture of one-hot encoded variables and continuous latent variables, coupled with an
inverse network. Dizaji et al. [ 31] proposed a generative adversarial clustering network, called
ClusterGAN, which adopted the adversarial game in GAN for the clustering task in single-view
samples, and employed an efficient self-paced learning algorithm to boost its performance.
Upon the traditional model, a lot of work have been proposed in the field of Multi-modal GAN
based models. Despite the variant of the existing work, the basic deep architecture is illustrated in
Fig.1, which motivates substantial research output.
In particular, Wang et al. [ 121] proposed Consistent GAN for the two-view problem, which
utilized one view to generate the missing data of the other view, and then performed clustering on
the generated complete data. Yang et al. [ 159] proposed deep clustering via a Gaussian mixture
variational auto-encoder (VAE) with graph embedding, taking Gaussian mixture model (GMM) as
the prior to facilitate clustering in VAE and applied graph embedding to handle data with complex
spread. Tao et al. [ 109] proposed an adversarial graph auto-encoders (AGAE) model to incorporate
ensemble clustering into a deep graph embedding process, and developed an adversarial regularizer
to guide the network training with an adaptive partition-dependent prior. Sage et al. [ 100] proposed
to adopt the synthetic labels obtained throughout clustering to disentangle and stabilize GAN
training, and validated this approach on single-view images to demonstrate its generality. Jiang
et al. [ 53] proposed a deep adversarial learning framework for clustering with mixed-modal data.
In particular,the framework learned the mappings across individual modality spaces by virtue of
cycle-consistency. Li et al. [ 71] constructed a novel deep adversarial multi-view clustering (DAMC)
framework, which developed multi-view auto-encoder networks with shared weights to learn
effective mapping from original features to a common low-dimensional embedding space. Xu et al.
[153] presented an adversarial incomplete multi-view clustering (AIMC) method, which sought the
common latent space of multi-view data and performed missing data inference simultaneously.
2.5 Datasets for deep multi-modal GAN-based clustering methods
A number of benchmark datasets for GAN-based clustering methods in multi-view samples have
been proposed, which consist of Reuters, HW, BDGP, MNIST, CCV, and Youtube. Important statistics
are summarized in Table 2 and a brief descriptions of the datasets is presented below. Reuters [ 1]
consists of 111740 documents written in 5 languages of 6 categories represented as TFIDF vectors.
A subset of the Reuters database consists of English, French and German as three views. For each
J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.