2. We ask you to only use the provided data for developing your solution (unless otherwise
explicitly stated).
3. Algorithmic submissions may not rely on external intervention (e.g. humans, extra data).
The results should be reproducible and extensible to other datasets.
4. Your developed solution should be practical and reasonably efﬁcient given the scope of the
challenge (e.g., your algorithm shouldn’t perform an exhaustive search).
5. Rules regarding participation:
• Participants can only belong and participate in one team
• Individuals are considered a team
• Teams must be deﬁned before the end of the challenge
• Each team must have a leader who is responsible for submissions to the online evaluation
platform
• Participants should not access or inspect submissions or selection code from other partici-
pating teams until after the challenge concludes
6. Each training set that is part of the ﬁnal submission will be limited to 1,000 data points.
Training sets with more than 1,000 ( imageID, label) pairs will be rejected
7. For this challenge, the provided candidate pool (i.e. embeddings) has no labels, and as
such, part of the challenge involves using the information contained in the embeddings as
effectively as possible.
8. The provided candidate pool is a custom subset of the training set for the Open Im-
ages dataset. You may refer to non-labels metadata from the Open Images dataset
(https://storage.googleapis.com/openimages/web/download.html)
A.6 Data Acquisition
We reproduce documentation from https://github.com/facebookresearch/Data_
Acquisition_for_ML_Benchmark as a centralized reference here.
The github repo serves as the starting point for submissions and evaluations for data acquisi-
tion for machine learning benchmark, or in short, DAM, as part of the DataPerf benchmark suite
https://dataperf.org/20
dataperf-dam : A Data-centric Benchmark on Data Acquisition for Machine Learning
1. What is the DAM benchmark?
An increasingly large amount of data is purchased for AI-enabled data science applications. How
to select the right set of datasets for AI tasks of interest is an important decision that has, however,
received limited attention. A naive approach is to acquire all available datasets and then select which
ones to use empirically. This requires expensive human supervision and incurs prohibitively high
costs, posing unique challenges to budget-limited users.
How can one decide which datasets to acquire before actually purchasing the data to optimize the
performance quality of an ML model? In the DAM (Data-Acquisition-for-Machine-learning) bench-
mark, the participants are asked to tackle the aforementioned problem. Participants need to provide
a data purchase strategy for a data buyer in K (=5 in the beta version) separate data marketplaces.
In each data marketplace, there are a few data sellers offering datasets for sale, and one data buyer
interested in acquiring some of those datasets to train an ML model. The seller provides a pricing
function that depends on the number of purchased samples. The buyer ﬁrst decides how many data
points to purchase from each seller given a data acquisition budget b. Then those data points are
compiled into one dataset to train an ML model f(). The buyer also has a dataset Db to evaluate the
performance of the trained model. Similar to real-world data marketplaces, the buyer can observe
no sellers’ datasets but some summary information from the sellers.
2. How to participate this challenge?
20<https://dataperf.org/>
22