Selection Eval
(Model Training) 
MLCommons Submitter Eval
IDs
Generated Train 
Vectors 
Allowed 
Train 
IDsScore Eval
Vectors 
Selected 
Training 
IDsFigure 2: System design and component ownership for the speech selection benchmark.
examples include the wakeword interfaces for Google V oice Assistant, Siri and Alexa. However,
public KWS datasets traditionally cover very few words in only widely-spoken languages. In
contrast, the Multilingual Spoken Words Corpus [35] (MSWC), is a large dataset of over 340,000
spoken words in 50 languages (collectively, these languages represent more than ﬁve billion people).
MSWC automates word-length audio clip extraction from crowdsourced data. Due to errors in
the generation process and source data, some samples are incorrect. For instance, they may miss
part of the target sample (e.g., “weathe-” instead of “weather”) or may contain part of an adjacent
word (e.g., “time to” instead of “time”). This benchmark focuses on estimating the quality of each
automatically-generated sample in KWS training pipelines intended for low-resource languages.
Additionally, this benchmark establishes the DataPerf platform’s capabilities for hosting speech
challenges in multiple languages.
Benchmark Design Participants design a training-set-selection algorithm to propose the fewest
possible data samples for training three keyword-spotting models for ﬁve target words each across
three languages: English, Portuguese, and Indonesian, representing high, medium, and low-resource
languages. The benchmark evaluates the algorithm on the mean F1score of each evaluation set
(additional details in Appendix A.3). The model is an ensemble of SVC and logistic-regression
classiﬁers, which output one of six categories (ﬁve target classes and one “unknown” class). The
inputs to the classiﬁer are 1,024-dimensional vectors of embedding representations from a pretrained
keyword feature extractor [34]. Participants may only specify which training samples are used by the
model; all other conﬁguration parameters are ﬁxed, thereby emphasizing the importance of selecting
the most informative samples. For each language there are separate leaderboards for submissions
with25 samples or 60 samples, evaluating the algorithm’s sensitivity to the training set size.
Participants are given a tutorial baseline which uses crossfold validation in a Google Colab note-
book and an ofﬂine copy of the evaluation pipeline, for ease of setup and and rapid experimentation.
This system design addresses a problem identiﬁed in the data-centric AI challenge (Section 2.1) -
enabling ofﬂine development reduces the computational requirements for online evaluation, though
participants must agree to challenge rules on not inspecting the evaluation set. The DataPerf server
evaluates and veriﬁes submitted training sets automatically (Sec. 2.2) for inclusion in the live leader-
board. Figure 2 illustrates the speech-selection benchmark workﬂow.
Baseline Results We provide two baseline implementations, nested cross-fold selection and a
data-cleaning approach using the Cleanlab framework [40]. The cross-fold selection method uses
nested cross-validation where the outer loop selects different subsets of the target samples and the
inner loop selects different subsets of the nontarget samples, and the best performing subsets are
reported back as the selected training set. The Cleanlab method rejects outliers using out-of-sample
predicted probability estimates for each candidate sample (also computed via cross-validated mod-
els). All baseline scores are averaged across 10 random seeds.
Table 1: Baseline results (macro F1scores) for the Selection for Speech challenge.
English Portuguese Indonesian
Training set size 25 60 25 60 25 60
Nested cross-fold 0.32 0.41 0.42 0.52 0.36 0.42
Cleanlab 0.49 0.49 0.47 0.57 0.37 0.43
5