A Appendix
A.1 Terminology for Training Sample Selection
In this section, for convenience, we clarify the terminology related to training sample selection
used in our challenges, where (in accordance with widely-used terminology) a training sample is an
individual data point in a dataset. Sec. 2.3 clariﬁes our distinction between challenges, benchmarks,
and leaderboards.
• Training set selection: this task refers to choosing a small set of samples for training a
model from a larger pool of potentially noisy training data. This task is also commonly
referred to as coreset selection.
• Training IDs are integer enumerations of training data samples ( [1,2,3,...] ), or
unique strings each corresponding to a ﬁle containing data for an individual sample
([audio1.wav, audio2.wav, ...] )
• Allowed training IDs: This term refers to the list of potential samples which can be included
in a proposed coreset by a challenge participant. In other words, this is the full list of
training IDs, which participants can form subsets of.
• Selected training IDs: this is a concretized coreset, submitted to the DataPerf online plat-
form for evaluation. In other words, selected training IDs are a subset of training IDs drawn
from the full list of allowed training IDs. This is indicated as "New Train Set" in Figure 1.
A.2 Reproducibility
Source code for the inaugural DataPerf challenges is hosted at github.com/mlcommons/dataperf. We
use git submodules to reference a ﬁxed commit hash of the respective parent repositories for each
challenge. This preserves ﬂexibility for a diverse set of challenges and allows challenge owners
to maintain control of their benchmarks and promote community visibility within their own GitHub
organizations while simultaneously ensuring the challenges remain static during the competition and
are archived as-is with respect to each round of challenges.
We additionally provide links to each benchmark’s repository here, containing code and documen-
tation for reproducibility.
1.Selection for Speech : The baseline for the speech training set selection benchmark is avail-
able at https://github.com/harvard-edge/dataperf-speech-example
2.Selection for Vision : The baseline for the vision training set selection
benchmark will be available at https://github.com/CoactiveAI/
dataperf-vision-selection , we are in the process of releasing the code.
3.Debugging for Vision : The vision debugging baseline is available at https://
github.com/DS3Lab/dataperf-vision-debugging
4.Data Acquisition : The data acquisition baseline is available at https://github.
com/facebookresearch/Data_Acquisition_for_ML_Benchmark
5.Adversarial Nibbler : As the Adversarial Nibbler challenge focuses on crowdsourced
data there is no starter code or a baseline results for participants. The server code for
the challenge is available as part of Dynabench (Sec. 2.2) at https://github.com/
mlcommons/dynabench
In the following sections, to provide a ﬁxed reference, we include extended documentation for each
challenge reproduced from each of their respective source-code repositories, as of August 2023,
which reﬂects the challenge requirements and evaluation structure for all inaugural challenges in
the DataPerf suite. Though future training set selection and debugging challenges in DataPerf may
diverge from some of the technical speciﬁcations provided here, we emphasize that these challenges
as described can also serve as ﬁxed benchmarks by the data-centric AI community, and future so-
lutions can be submitted to the leaderboards for these rounds of challenges in adherence to these
speciﬁcations and rules.
15