3 Related Work
To ensure academic innovations have real-world impact, systems research in the machine learning
industry has relied on benchmarking, including MLPerf [33, 46], DawnBench [10] and related ef-
forts [19, 60, 51]. Data-centric benchmarking has similarly received increased focus. Zha et al. [59]
surveys recent efforts, including benchmarks in AutoML [61], semi-supervised strategies [56], data
selection [16], and data cleaning approaches [30]. Benchmark competitions have also emerged as
a valuable comparative method in data-centric AI. DataComp [18] is a recent competition focused
on ﬁltering multimodal training data for language-image pairs, with a focus on improving accu-
racies under different ﬁxed compute budgets. The Crowdsourcing Adverse Test Sets for Machine
Learning (CATS4ML) Data Challenge [3] asked participants to ﬁnd examples that are confusing
or otherwise problematic for image classiﬁcation algorithms to process, in which participants sub-
mitted misclassiﬁed samples from the Google Open Images dataset, identifying 15,000 adversarial
examples. Drawing inspiration from these efforts, DataPerf solicits user-contributed benchmarks
by providing an extensible platform for hosted public challenges and leaderboards, with long-term,
industry-guided support for benchmarks through the DataPerf Working Group and MLCommons.
Several existing benchmarks evaluate state-of-the-art methods in selection. For instance, prior work
in benchmarking high-dimensional feature selection [8] and augmentation strategies [38] are con-
ceptually similar to the vision selection and roman numeral tasks. DCBench [16] is a benchmark
and Python API for ﬁxed-budget cleaning, slice discovery [17], and coreset selection[11], which
are applicable to our speech selection, vision selection, and data debugging tasks. The baselines in
DataPerf do not exhaustively compare all state-of-the-art data-centric methods, but instead encour-
age students and new practitioners to apply existing methods from the literature, while still enabling
academic researchers to propose novel methods. Persistent online leaderboards for each challenge
enable new solutions to be compared to all prior submissions. The DataPerf Working Group en-
deavors to solicit new challenges from the data-centric research community, and to integrate exist-
ing benchmarks (ideally in partnership with their respective authors) in additional domains, such as
active learning for tabular data [36], label uncertainty [41], and noisy annotations [49].
4 Statement of Ethics
Dynabench collects self-declared usernames and email addresses during registration, and these user-
names may correspond to personal identiﬁable information. Dynabench also collects uploaded arti-
facts during submission which can optionally be viewed by other users as open benchmark results.
Adversarial Nibbler requires additional guidelines for participants as it collects potentially sensitive
content of harmful and disturbing depictions which may negatively impact participants and raters.
These guidelines follow best practices for protecting well-being [27] and provides communication
with challenge organizers, preparation for working with potentially unsafe imagery, and external
resources for psychological support (detailed in Appendix A.7)
5 Conclusion and Future Work
The purpose of DataPerf is to improve machine learning by expanding AI research from justmodels
to models and datasets . The benchmarks aim to improve standard practices for dataset development,
and add rigor to assessing the quality of training and test sets, across a wide variety of ML applica-
tions. Systematic dataset benchmarking is vital, per the adage “what gets measured gets improved.”
The initial version of DataPerf comprises ﬁve benchmarks, each with unique rules, evaluation meth-
ods, and baseline implementations, and an open-source, extensible evaluation platform.
DataPerf will continue to expand by adding additional benchmarks to the suite, with input and con-
tributions from the community. Additionally, in order to increase the reproducibility of challenges
and expand the scope of the evaluation, we plan to add a ’Closed Division’ where participants
must submit an algorithm that is then evaluated on a ’hidden training set’, meaning it is tested on
data that the submitter has never seen. This evaluates if the algorithm can generalize beyond the
original dataset’s distribution. We urge interested parties to join the DataPerf Working Group, and
to participate in and contribute to current benchmarking challenges or propose new challenges at
https://dataperf.org .
10