Data Parsing Data Quality 
Assessment 
Data 
Augmentation Data 
Acquisition 
Data 
Selection Data Cleaning 
Data 
Debugging 
D ML Model Training Data 
Testing Data 
Other Data Sources New Train Set 
New Test Set 
Data-Centric Iterations Training Data-Centric Operations Figure 1: Typical benchmarks are model-centric, and therefore focus on the model design and train-
ing stages of the ML pipeline (shown in orange). However, to develop high-quality ML applications,
users often employ a collection of data-centric operations to improve data quality and repeated data-
centric iterations to reﬁne these operations. DataPerf aims to benchmark all major stages of such a
data-centric pipeline (shown in green) to improve ML data quality.
issues [9, 15, 37] once they leave the lab to enter service. In conventional model-centric ML, the
term benchmark often means a standard, ﬁxed dataset for model accuracy comparisons and per-
formance measurements. While this paradigm has been useful for advancing model design, these
benchmarks are now saturating (attaining perfect or above “human-level” performance) [26]. This
raises two questions: First, is ML research making real progress on the underlying capabilities, or
is it just overﬁtting to existing benchmark datasets or suffering from data artifacts? A growing body
of literature explores the evidence supporting benchmark limitations [57, 24, 43, 53, 47, 5, 21, 55].
Second, how should benchmarks evolve to push the frontier of ML research?
In response to these concerning trends, we introduce DataPerf, a data-centric benchmark suite that
introduces competition to the ﬁeld of dataset improvement. We survey a suite of complex data-
centric development pipelines across multiple ML domains and isolate a subset of concrete tasks
that we believe are representative of current bottlenecks, as illustrated in Figure 1. We freeze model
architectures, training hyperparameters, and task metrics to compare solutions strictly via relative
improvements from changes to the datasets themselves.
Our contributions are as follows:
• We have developed a comprehensive suite of novel data-centric benchmarks covering a
wide range of tasks. These tasks encompass training set selection for speech and vision,
data cleaning and debugging, data acquisition, and diffusion model prompting.
• Each benchmark speciﬁes a data-centric task based on a real-world use case rationale. We
provide rules for submissions, along with evaluation scripts, and a baseline submission for
each benchmark task.
• We provide an extensible and open-source platform for hosting data-centric benchmarks,
allowing other organizations and researchers to propose new benchmarks for inclusion in
the DataPerf suite, and to host data challenges themselves.
Critically, DataPerf is not a one-off competition. We have established the DataPerf Working Group,
which operates under the MLCommons Association. This working group is responsible for the
ongoing maintenance of the benchmarks and platform, as well as for fostering the development of
data-centric research and methodologies in both academic and industrial domains. The aim is to
ensure the long-term sustainability and growth of DataPerf beyond a single competition.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2.1, we review lessons learned from
an exploratory data-centric challenge. Section 2.2 details the hosting platform we developed in
response and Section 2.3 presents the DataPerf suite of ﬁve novel benchmarks and challenges. We
conclude with a survey of related efforts (Section 3) and future directions (Section 5).
2