"accuracy": 0.5185185185185185,
"recall": 0.6261682242990654,
"precision": 0.638095238095238,
"f1": 0.6320754716981132
}
}
Evaluation Criteria In this challenge, your task will be to design a data selection strategy that
chooses the best training examples from a candidate pool of training images (a custom subset of the
Open Images Dataset V6 training set) which maximizes the F1 score across a set of binary classiﬁ-
cation tasks for different visual concepts (e.g., “Cupcake”, “Hawk”, “Sushi”). Your submission will
be a training set for each of the classiﬁcation tasks in this challenge.
Rules
1. We ask you to please not look at or use the provided test sets in any way other than for
ofﬂine evaluation.
2. We ask you to only use the provided data for developing your solution (unless otherwise
explicitly stated).
3. Submissions that rely on human intervention are allowed. The intervention strategy must
be clearly explained such that the results are as reproducible and extensible as possible.
4. Algorithmic submissions may not rely on external intervention (e.g. humans, extra data).
The results should be reproducible and extensible to other datasets.
5. Your developed solution should be practical and reasonably efﬁcient given the scope of the
challenge (e.g., your algorithm shouldn’t perform an exhaustive search).
6. Rules regarding participation:
• Participants can only belong and participate in one team
• Individuals are considered a team
• Teams must be deﬁned before the end of the challenge
• Each team must have a leader who is responsible for submissions to the online evaluation
platform
• Participants should not access or inspect submissions or selection code from other partici-
pating teams until after the challenge concludes
7. Each training set that is part of the ﬁnal submission will be limited to 1,000 data points.
Training sets with more than 1,000 ( imageID, label) pairs will be rejected
8. The provided candidate pool has no labels, and as such, part of the challenge involves using
the information contained in the embeddings as effectively as possible.
9. The provided candidate pool is a custom subset of the training set for the Open Images
dataset. You may refer to metadata from the Open Images dataset.
10. If needed, you can leverage the human-veriﬁed and/or machine generated labels available
in the metadata from the Open Images dataset. However, we encourage creative solutions
that minimize the amount of labels used.
A.5 Debugging for Vision
We reproduce documentation from https://github.com/DS3Lab/dataperf-vision-debugging as a cen-
tralized reference here.
Training Set Cleaning
When dealing with massive datasets, noises in the datasets become inevitable. This is increasingly
the problem for ML training and noises in the dataset can come from many places:
• Natural noises come in during data acquisition.
• Algorithmic labeling: e.g., weak supervision, and automatically generated labels by ma-
chines.
• Data collection biases (e.g., biased hiring decisions).
If trained over these noisy datasets, ML models might suffer not only from lower quality, but also
potential risks on other quality dimensions such as fairness. Careful data cleaning can often ac-
commodate this, however, it can be a very expensive process if we need to investigate and clean
20