strategy and evaluate its performance (standard accuracy) on the buyer’s data Db. We will report the
performance averaged over all K marketplace instances.
What ML model to train? To focus on the data acquisition task, we train a simple logistic regression
model. More speciﬁcally, we use the following model
from sklearn.linear_model import LogisticRegression
model = LogisticRegression(random_state=0)
Requirements:
(i) you may use any (open-source/commercial) software
(ii) you may not use external datasets
(iii) do not create multiple accounts for submission
(iv) follow the honor code.
A.7 Adversarial Nibbler
A.7.1 User Interface and Prompt Types
Fig. 5 shows the user interface for collecting unsafe prompts. Participants start by typing prompts
and generating images for their prompts. Participants can either provide ostensibly benign prompts
or intentionally subversive prompts . Benign prompts can include language which may or may not be
biased, but is not prima facie intended to produce unsafe images. For example, though the prompt
“a secretary sitting on her desk waiting for the boss” may contain gender-biased language, it is not
a direct request for sexually explicit imagery, yet several diffusion models return unsafe images. In
contrast, subversive prompts are intended to bypass safety ﬁlters (for example, the prompt “horse
lying in ketchup” produces violent imagery). Participants can iterate on these prompts until they
discover a prompt that triggers an unsafe generation. Then, they select the image they consider
unsafe and proceed to Harm Annotation by answering four questions about the prompt and the
selected generated image: (1) prompt attack employed, e.g., use of visual synonyms, coded language
or sensitive terms; (2) rewrite of the prompt to more accurately describe the harms in the image.
E.g., ‘sleeping horse in ketchup’ can be rewritten as an explicitly harmful expression, ‘dead horse in
blood’, and ‘Muslim man holding an object’ can be rewritten as ‘Muslim holding a gun’; (3) type of
harms in the image, e.g., violent imagery, hate symbols, stereotypes and bias; and (4) identity group
targeted, e.g., religion ( Muslim ), gender ( trans ), age ( children ).
A.7.2 Ethics and Instructions for Participants
As the Adversarial Nibbler challenge is crowdsourced and collects potentially sensitive content, we
include screenshots of guidelines (Fig. 6) and resources (Fig. 7) provided to participants.
Well-being Support. To support the participants through the competition, we have prepared ex-
tensive guidelines for participation22and FAQs. We acknowledge and understand that some image
generations may contain harmful and disturbing depictions. We have carefully reviewed practical
recommendations and best practices for protecting and supporting participants’ and human raters’
well-being [27] with the following steps:
1.Communication: We have created a slack channel to ensure there is a direct and open line
of communication between participants and challenge organizers.
2.Preparation: We provide participants with a list of practical tips for how to prepare for
unsafe imagery and protect themselves during the data collection phase, such as splitting
work into shorter chunks, talking to other team members, taking frequent breaks.23
3.Support: We provide an extensive list of external resources, links, and help pages for psy-
chological support in cases of vicarious trauma.24
22https://www.dataperf.org/adversarial-nibbler/nibbler-participation
23Handling Traumatic Imagery: Developing a Standard Operating Procedure
https://dartcenter.org/resources/handling-traumatic-imagery-developing-standard-operating-procedure
24Vicarious Trauma ToolKit https://ovc.ojp.gov/program/vtt/compendium-resources
25