2 DataPerf Benchmarking Suite
We describe the initial challenge which inspired the suite of DataPerf benchmarks and identiﬁed
which features are needed for hosting data-centric challenges online. We then describe the plat-
form that enables ﬂexible data-centric benchmarking at scale. Finally, we share the initial DataPerf
benchmark deﬁnitions in vision, speech, acquisition, debugging, and text-to-image prompting.
2.1 The Data-Centric AI Challenge
The DataPerf effort began with an early benchmark which served to validate feasibility and pro-
vide real-world insights into the concept of dataset benchmarking. In traditional ML challenges,
contestants must train a high-accuracy model given a ﬁxed dataset. This model-centric approach is
ubiquitous and has accelerated ML research, but it has neglected the surrounding systems and in-
frastructure requirements of ML in production [50]. To draw more attention to other areas of the ML
pipeline, we created the Data-Centric AI (DCAI) competition [39], inviting competitors to focus on
optimizing accuracy by improving a dataset given a ﬁxed model architecture, thus ﬂipping the con-
ventional challenge format of submitting different models which are evaluated on a ﬁxed dataset.
The limiting element was the size of the submitted dataset; therefore, submitters received an ini-
tial training dataset to improve through data-centric strategies such as removing inaccurate labels,
adding instances that illustrate edge cases and using data augmentation. The competition, inspired
by MNIST, focuses on classiﬁcation of Roman-numeral digits. Just by iterating on the dataset, par-
ticipants increased the baseline accuracy from 64.4% to 85.8%; human-level performance (HLP)
was 90.2%. We learned several lessons from the 2,500 submissions and applied them to DataPerf:
1.Common data pipelines. Successful entries followed a similar procedure: picking seed
photos, augmenting them, training a new model, assessing model errors and slicing groups
of images with comparable mistakes from the seed photos. We believe more competitions
will further establish and reﬁne generalizable and effective practices.
2.Automated methods won. We expected participants would discover and remedy labeling
problems, but data-selection and data-augmentation strategies performed best.
3.Novel dataset optimizations. Examples of successful tactics include automated methods
for recognizing noisy images and labels, identifying mislabeled images, deﬁning explicit
labeling rules for confusing images, correcting class imbalance, and selecting and enhanc-
ing images from the long tail of classes. We believe the right set of challenges and ML
tasks will yield other novel data-centric optimizations.
4.New methods emerged. In addition to conventional evaluation criteria (the highest perfor-
mance on common metrics), we created a separate category that evaluated a technique’s
innovativeness. This approach encouraged participants to explore and introduce novel sys-
tematic techniques with potential impact beyond the leaderboard.
5.New supporting infrastructure isnecessary. The unconventional competition format neces-
sitated a technology that simultaneously supports a custom competition pipeline as well as
ample storage and training time. We quickly discovered that platforms and competitions
need complementary functions to support the unique needs of data-centric AI development.
Moreover, the competition was computationally expensive. Therefore, we require a more
efﬁcient way to train the models on user-submitted data. Computational power, memory
and bandwidth are all major limitations.
These ﬁve lessons inﬂuenced our online platform design and initial suite of DataPerf challenges, as
described in the following sections.
2.2 Evaluation Platform
DataPerf provides an online platform where challenge participants can submit their solutions for
evaluation, and a working group which invites members in academia and industry to propose new
data-centric benchmarks for inclusion in the DataPerf suite. The DataPerf benchmarks, evaluation
tools, leaderboards, and documentation are hosted in an online platform called Dynabench1[26],
1https://dynabench.org/
3