2.3.2 Selection for Vision
DataPerf includes a data selection algorithm challenge with a vision-centric focus. The objective
of this task is to develop a data selection algorithm that chooses the most effective training samples
from a large candidate pool of images. This resulting training sets will then be used to train a
collection of binary classiﬁers for various visual concepts. The benchmark evaluates the algorithm
on the basis of the resulting models’ classiﬁcation performance on the evaluation set.
Use-Case Rationale Large datasets have been critical to many ML achievements, but they impose
signiﬁcant challenges. Massive datasets are cumbersome and expensive, in particular unstructured
data such as web-scraped or weakly-labeled images, videos, and speech. Careful data selection
can mitigate some of the difﬁculties by focusing computational and labeling resources on the most
valuable examples and emphasizing quality over quantity, reducing training cost and time.
The vision-selection-algorithm benchmark evaluates binary classiﬁcation of visual concepts (e.g.,
“monster truck” or “jean jacket”) in unlabeled images. Familiar production examples of similar
models include automatic labeling services by Amazon Rekognition, Google Cloud Vision API and
Azure Cognitive Services. Successful approaches to this challenge will enable image classiﬁcation
of long-tail concepts where discovery of high-value data is critical, and advances the democratiza-
tion of computer vision [20]. This benchmark demonstrates DataPerf’s support for challenges with
unlabeled image data and is a template for future benchmarks that target automatic labeling.
Benchmark Design The task is to design a data-selection strategy that chooses the best training
examples from a large pool of training images. We evaluate submissions on their ability to algorith-
mically propose a subset of the Open Images Dataset V6 training set [29] that maximizes the mean
F1-score over a set of ﬁxed concepts (“cupcake,” “hawk” and “sushi”). We provide a set of positive
examples for each classiﬁcation task that participants can use to search for images containing the
target concepts. Participants must submit a training set for each classiﬁcation task in addition to a
description of the data selection method by which they generated the training sets. The challenge
platform (Sec. 2.2) automates evaluation of submissions.
Baseline Results We provide three baseline results, namely, farthest point sampling, pseudo-label
generation, and modiﬁed uncertainty sampling. Farthest point sampling selects negative examples
by attempting to sample the feature search space through iterative maximum l2distances, afterwards
returning the best coreset under nested cross-validation. Pseudo label generation trains multiple
neural networks and classical models on a subset of data to classify the remainder of points and uses
the best-performing model for coreset proposal under multiple sampling experiments. Modiﬁed
uncertainty sampling trains a binary classiﬁer on noisy positive labels from OpenImages and uses
this classiﬁer to assign positive and negative image pools, with the coreset randomly sampled from
both pools. For each baseline, F1scores on the three test concepts are provided in Table 2.
Table 2: Baseline results ( F1scores) for the Selection for Vision challenge.
Cupcake Hawk Sushi Mean F1-score
Farthest point sampling 0.75 0.87 0.82 0.81
Pseudo label generation 0.70 0.86 0.81 0.79
Modiﬁed uncertainty sampling 0.71 0.83 0.80 0.78
2.3.3 Debugging for Vision
The debugging challenge is to detect candidate data errors in the training set that cause a model to
have inferior quality. The aim is to assist a user in prioritizing which samples to inspect, correct,
and clean. A debugging method’s purpose is to identify the most detrimental data points from a
potentially noisy training set. After inspecting and correcting the selected data points, the cleaned
dataset is used to train a new classiﬁcation model. Evaluation is based on the number of data points
the debugging approach must correct to attain a certain accuracy.
6