which allows challenge participants to submit, evaluate, and compare solutions for all data-centric
benchmarks deﬁned in Section 2.3. The DataPerf benchmarks and the Dynabench platform are open-
source, and are hosted and maintained by the MLCommons Association2, a nonproﬁt organization
supported by more than 50 member companies and academics, ensuring long-term availability and
beneﬁt to the community.
We believe DataPerf can serve as a uniﬁed benchmark suite for the majority of data-centric use
cases, and we welcome proposals from the creators of new and existing data-centric benchmarks.
Our ﬁve current benchmarks are also intended to serve as representative examples for future authors
to host their own challenges on DataPerf, with customized modular submission pipelines for dif-
ferent data modalities and submission artifact types. DataPerf introduces three key extensions to
the Dynabench codebase to support data-centric benchmarks: (1) We add support for a wide variety
of submission artifacts, such as training subsets, priority values/orderings, and purchase strategies.
Users can also submit fully containerized systems as artifacts, such as in the debugging challenge.
(2) To support a diverse set of evaluation algorithms and scoring metrics, we develop modular soft-
ware adaptors to allow for running custom benchmark evaluation tools and displaying or querying
scores in Dynabench’s online leaderboards. (3) DataPerf utilizes serverless [4] deployment which
dynamically scales resources based on demand, ensuring optimal performance and efﬁcient resource
allocation, and allowing the platform to automatically scale with the growth of the benchmark suite
and the number of participants. DataPerf additionally offers ofﬂine evaluation scripts, enabling lo-
cal iteration on solutions before submitting for veriﬁcation, further reducing load on the Dynabench
platform. These improvements to Dynabench ensure DataPerf can accommodate a large suite of
community-contributed data-centric challenges in the future.
2.3 Challenges, Benchmarks, and Leaderboards
DataPerf uses leaderboards and challenges to encourage constructive competition and inspire ad-
vances in building and optimizing datasets. In this section, we clarify DataPerf’s terminology. A
leaderboard is a public summary of benchmark results; it helps to quickly identify state-of-the-art
approaches. A challenge is a public contest to achieve the best result on a leaderboard in a ﬁxed
timeframe. Challenges motivate rapid progress through recognition and awards. Our leaderboards
and challenges are hosted on the online platform Dynabench (Section 2.2) developed and supported
by MLCommons. Benchmarks are ﬁxed speciﬁcations for comparative evaluation on a static task,
and the key leave-behind of each challenge. MLCommons will provide long-term support for each
benchmark through leaderboards which remain open for submission and comparison once a chal-
lenge concludes. Each challenge also provides a baseline implementation to set a minimum bar for
each leaderboard metric and to discourage uninformative or random submissions.
DataPerf’s initial suite consists of tasks in training set selection for speech and vision, data cleaning
and debugging, data acquisition, and generative model prompting. Figure 1 depicts underserved
components in benchmarking machine learning pipelines, and these ﬁve tasks were selected by the
DataPerf working group among the initial proposals for challenges in order to cover as many of these
components as possible while also exercising the infrastructure requirements for our online platform.
The following sections describe the benchmarks that compose the ﬁrst iteration of the DataPerf
benchmark suite. Documentation for each benchmark’s deﬁnition, metrics, submission rules, and
introductory tutorials are available on dataperf.org and reproduced in our Appendix, and our open-
source baseline implementations are available at https://github.com/MLCommons/dataperf.
2.3.1 Selection for Speech
DataPerf includes a dataset-selection-algorithm challenge with an emphasis on low-resource speech.
The objective of the speech selection task is to develop a selection algorithm that chooses the most
effective training samples from a large and noisy multilingual corpus of spoken words, expanding
sample quality estimation techniques to low-resource language settings. The provided training set is
used to train and evaluate an ensemble of ﬁxed keyword-detection models.
Use-Case Rationale Keyword spotting (KWS) is a ubiquitous speech classiﬁcation task present
on billions of devices. A KWS model detects a limited vocabulary of spoken words. Production
2https://www.mlcommons.org/
4