Pricing 
Mechanisms 
Dataset 
Summaries 
Eval
Dataset Observations 
Description of 
Strategy/Algo 
Purchased 
Fractions 
Script (Optional) Submissions 
Budget Verifier 
Sellers’ Datasets 
ML Models Executions 
Eval Dataset Figure 3: Data acquisition benchmark design. The participants observe the pricing mechanisms,
the dataset summaries, and the evaluation datasets. They then need to develop and submit the data
acquisition strategies. The evaluation is executed automatically on the DataPerf server.
Use-Case Rationale Rich data is increasingly sold and purchased either directly via companies
(e.g., Twitter [54] and Bloomberg [6]) or data marketplaces (e.g., Amazon AWS Data Exchange [1],
Databricks Marketplace [13], and TAUS Data Marketplace [52]) to train a high-quality ML model
customized for speciﬁc applications. Those datasets are necessary often because the datasets (i)
cover underrepresented populations, (ii) offer high-quality annotations, and (iii) exhibit easy-to-use
formats. On the other hand, the datasets are also expensive due to the tremendous efforts spent
to curate and clean data samples. Content opacity is therefore ubiquitous: data sellers usually are
disinclined to release the full content of their datasets to the buyers. This renders it challenging for
the data users to decide whether a dataset is useful for the downstream ML tasks. Based on our
conversations with practitioners, existing data acquisition methods for ML are ad-hoc : one has to
manually identify data sellers, articulate their needs, estimate the data utilities, and then purchase
them. It is also iterative in nature: the datasets may show limited improvements on a downstream
ML task after being purchased, and then one has to search for a new dataset again. With this in
mind, the goal of this challenge is to mitigate a data buyer’s burden by automating and optimizing
the data acquisition strategies. This challenge demonstrates the platform’s ability to handle data-
valuations and demonstrates a unique metric based on a pricing function and a budget, which is a
useful template for future challenges that wish to capture the nuance of resource expenditure.
Benchmark Design Participants in this challenge must submit a data acquisition strategy. The
data acquisition strategy speciﬁes the number of samples to purchase from each available data seller
in a data marketplace. Then the benchmark suite generates a training dataset based on the acquisi-
tion strategy to train an ML classiﬁer. To mimic data acquisition in a real-world data marketplace,
participants do not have access to sellers’ data. Instead, the participants are offered (1) a few samples
(=5) from each data seller, (2) summary statistics about each dataset, (3) the pricing functions that
quantify how much to pay when a particular number of samples is purchased from one seller, and
(4) a budget constraint. The participant’s goal is to identify a data acquisition strategy within the
budget constraint that maximizes the trained classiﬁer’s performance on an evaluation dataset. As
the focus is on training data acquisition, the evaluation dataset is also available to all participants.
The overall system design can be found in Figure 3.
Table 3: We measure three baselines’ performance on all ﬁve data market instances. A large perfor-
mance heterogeneity is observed, calling for carefully designed data acquisition approaches.
Market Instance 0 1 2 3 4
Baselines PerformanceUNIFORM 0.732 0.757 0.771 0.754 0.742
RSS 0.705 0.732 0.73 0.721 0.679
FSS 0.727 0.719 0.735 0.699 0.678
Baseline Results We offer three baseline methods, namely, UNIFORM, RSS (random single
seller), and FSS (ﬁxed single seller). UNIFORM purchases data points uniformly randomly from
every sellers. RSS spends all budgets to buy as much as possible data points from one uniformly
randomly chosen seller, while FSS does the same from a ﬁxed seller. The baseline performance
8