Use-Case Rationale Datasets are rapidly growing in size. For instance, Open Images V6 has 59
million image-level labels. Such datasets are annotated either manually or using ML. Unfortunately,
noise is unavoidable and can originate from both human annotators and algorithms. Models trained
on noisy annotations suffer in accuracy and carry risks of bias and unfairness. Dataset cleaning is a
common approach to dealing with noisy labels. However, it is a costly and time-consuming process
that typically involves human review. Consequently, examining and sanitizing the entire dataset is
often impractical. A data-centric method that focuses human attention and cleaning efforts on the
most important data elements can signiﬁcantly reduce the time, cost, and labor of dataset debugging.
This challenge demonstrates the DataPerf platform’s ability to simulate human-in-the-loop data-
centric tasks, in this case label cleaning, while remaining scalable.
Benchmark Design The debugging task is based on binary image classiﬁcation. For each activity,
participants receive a noisy training set (i.e., some labels are inaccurate) and a validation set with
correct labels. They must provide a debugging approach that assigns a priority value (harmfulness)
to each training set item. After each trial, all training data will have been examined and rectiﬁed.
Each time a new item is examined, a classiﬁcation model is trained on the clean dataset, and the test
accuracy on a hidden test set is computed. Then a score is returned.
The image sets are from the Open Images Dataset [29], with two important considerations: (1) The
number of data points should be sufﬁcient to permit random selection of samples for the training,
validation and test sets. (2) The number of discrepancies between the machine-generated label and
the human-veriﬁed label varies by task; the challenges thus reﬂect varying classiﬁcation complex-
ity. We introduce two types of noise into the training set’s human-veriﬁed labels: some labels are
arbitrarily inverted, and machine-generated labels are substituted for some human-veriﬁed labels to
imitate the noise from algorithmic labeling.
We use a 2,048-dimensional vector of embedding representations extracted from a pretrained
ResNet50 model [32] as the classiﬁer’s input data. Participants may simply prioritize each training
sample used by the classiﬁer; all other conﬁgurations are ﬁxed for all submissions. By precomputing
all embeddings, participants are encouraged to propose data-centric debugging methods for arbitrary
features rather than approaches speciﬁc to the image domain. This also removes the need for GPU
acceleration during submission evaluation.
We use a concealed test set to evaluate the trained classiﬁcation model’s performance on each task.
Since the objective of the debugging challenge is to determine which method produces sufﬁcient
accuracy while analyzing the fewest data points, the assessment metric in the debugging challenge
is the proportion of inspections necessary to achieve 95% of the accuracy that the classiﬁer trained
on the cleaned training set achieves. We verify submissions by incrementally cleaning the data
and training a model on each step. Each submission contains a list of indices in the order that
the submitter wishes to clean. We incrementally prepare a new dataset for each cleaned sample.
For instance, assuming the submission is [5,4,3,2,1], we will prepare 5 datasets that are [5-cleaned,
4,3,2,1], [5-cleaned, 4-cleaned, 3, 2, 1], and so forth. We then train a XGBoost classiﬁer on each
dataset, and report back the step at which the accuracy is high enough (>95%) on the test dataset.
Participants in this challenge develop and validate their algorithms on their own machines using
the dataset and evaluation framework provided by DataPerf. Once they are satisﬁed with their
implementation, they submit a containerized version to the server (Sec. 2.2). The server then reruns
the uploaded implementation on several hidden tasks and posts the average score to a leaderboard.
Baseline Results The benchmark system provides three baseline implementations: consecutive,
random and DataScope [25], which achieve the score of 53:50 ,51:75 and15:54 respectively. In
other words, DataScope needs to ﬁx 15:54 % of data samples to achieve the threshold, consecutive
needs 53:50 % and random needs to ﬁx 51:75 %. DataScope is a fast approximation for Shapley
values [31] for importance estimates of each sample included and the effect of noise. As Shapley
values require calculating the payoff of every subset ( O(2N)evaluations), approximation techniques
such as DataScope are necessitated.
2.3.4 Data Acquisition
The data acquisition challenge explores which dataset or combination of datasets to purchase in a
multi-source data marketplace for speciﬁc ML tasks.
7