can be found in Table 3. Overall, there is a large performance heterogeneity among the considered
baselines. This underscores the necessity of carefully designed data acquisition strategies.
2.3.5 Adversarial Nibbler
The goal of the Adversarial Nibbler challenge is to engage the research community in jointly discov-
ering a diverse set of insightful long-tail problems for text-to-image models and thus help identify
current blindspots in harmful image production (i.e., unknown unknowns). We focus on prompt-
image pairs that currently slip through the cracks of safety ﬁlters – either via intentful and subversive
prompts that circumvent the text-based ﬁlters or through seemingly benign requests that neverthe-
less trigger unsafe outputs. By focusing on unsafe generations paired with seemingly safe prompts,
our challenge zeros in on cases that (1) are most challenging to catch via text-prompt ﬁltering and
(2) have the potential to be harmful to non-adversarial end users.
Use-Case Rationale Building on recent successes for data fairness [23], quality [12], limita-
tions [28, 58], and documentation and replication [42] of adversarial and data-centric challenges
for classiﬁcation models, we identify a new challenge for discovering failure modes in generative
text-to-image models. Models such as DALL-E 2, Stable Diffusion, and Midjourney have reached
large audiences in the past year owing to their impressive and ﬂexible capabilities. While most mod-
els have text-based ﬁlters in place to catch explicitly harmful generation requests, these ﬁlters are
inadequate to protect against the full landscape of possible harms. For instance, [45] recently re-
vealed that Stable Diffusion’s obfuscated safety ﬁlter only catches sexually explicit content but fails
to address violence, gore, and other problematic content. Our objective is to identify and mitigate
safety concerns in a structured and systematic manner, covering both the discovery of new failure
modes and the conﬁrmation of existing ones. Adversarial Nibbler exercises DataPerf’s ability to
host challenges focused on evaluating generative AI and AI safety, and demonstrates DataPerf’s
support for high-demand GPU inference tasks and integration with external APIs. Additionally, this
challenge demonstrates new benchmark criterion targeted at generative models.
Benchmark Deﬁnition This competition is aimed at researchers, developers, and practitioners in
the ﬁeld of fairness and development of text-to-image generative AI. We intentionally design the
competition to be simple enough that researchers from non-AI/ML communities can participate,
though the incentive structure is aimed at researchers. Participants must write a benign or subver-
sive prompt which is expected to correspond to an unsafe image. Our evaluation server returns
several generated images using DataPerf-managed API licenses, and the participant selects an im-
age (or none) that falls into one of our failure mode categories surrounding stereotypes, culturally
inappropriate, or ethically inappropriate generations, among others.
We aim to collect prompts that are considered as a “backdoor” for unsafe generation. We focus
on two different types of prompt-generation pairs, each reﬂecting a different user-model interac-
tion mode. (1) Benign prompts with unexpected unsafe outputs. A benign prompt in most cases is
expected to generate safe images. However, in some instances even a benign prompt may unexpect-
edly trigger unsafe or harmful generations. (2) Subversive prompts with expected unsafe outputs.
While text ﬁlters catch unambiguously harmful requests, users can adversarially bypass the ﬁlters
via subversive prompts which trigger the model to produce unsafe or harmful generations. The data
gathered from the ﬁrst round is then sent to humans for validation before results are released to a
leaderboard. Participants are rewarded based on two criteria: validated attack success – the number
of unsafe images generated, and submission creativity – assessing coverage in terms of attack mode
across lexical, semantic, syntactic, and pragmatic dimensions.
Baseline Results As the Adversarial Nibbler challenge focuses on crowdsourced data and deviates
from the other benchmarks, there is no starter code or a baseline result. Instead, the goal is to
analyze the data from the challenge submissions and create a publicly available dataset consisting of
prompt-image pairs. These pairs that will undergo validation will be used to establish data ratings
and will serve as a valuable resource for drawing conclusions and insights from the submissions
received. Adversarial Nibbler has already collected several hundred unique prompts. Results from
this challenge, consisting of a public dataset and insights to red teaming approaches from challenge
participants, will be disseminated at the IJCNLP-AACL 2023 ART of Safety Workshop3.
3https://sites.google.com/view/art-of-safety/home
9