Grid-GCN for Fast and Scalable Point Cloud Learning
Qiangeng Xu1Xudong Sun2Cho-Ying Wu1Panqu Wang2Ulrich Neumann1
1University of Southern California2Tusimple, Inc
{qiangenx,choyingw,uneumann }@usc.edu {xudong.sun,panqu.wang }@tusimple.ai
Abstract
Due to the sparsity and irregularity of the point cloud
data, methods that directly consume points have become
popular. Among all point-based models, graph convolu-
tional networks (GCN) lead to notable performance by fully
preserving the data granularity and exploiting point inter-
relation. However, point-based networks spend a signif-
icant amount of time on data structuring (e.g., Farthest
Point Sampling (FPS) and neighbor points querying), which
limit the speed and scalability. In this paper, we present a
method, named Grid-GCN, for fast and scalable point cloud
learning. Grid-GCN uses a novel data structuring strategy,
Coverage-Aware Grid Query (CAGQ). By leveraging the
efﬁciency of grid space, CAGQ improves spatial coverage
while reducing the theoretical time complexity. Compared
with popular sampling methods such as Farthest Point Sam-
pling (FPS) and Ball Query, CAGQ achieves up to 50×
speed-up. With a Grid Context Aggregation (GCA) module,
Grid-GCN achieves state-of-the-art performance on ma-
jor point cloud classiﬁcation and segmentation benchmarks
with signiﬁcantly faster runtime than previous studies. Re-
markably, Grid-GCN achieves the inference speed of 50fps
on ScanNet using 81920 points as input. The supplementary
1and the code2are released.
1. Introduction
Point cloud data is popular in applications such as au-
tonomous driving, robotics, and unmanned aerial vehicles.
Currently, LiDAR sensors can generate millions of points
a second, providing dense real-time representations of the
world. Many approaches are used for point cloud data pro-
cessing. Volumetric models are a family of models that
transfer point cloud to spatially quantized voxel grids and
use a volumetric convolution to perform computation in the
grid space [ 28,45,28]. Using grids as data structuring
methods, volumetric approaches associate points to loca-
tions in grids, and 3D convolutional kernels gather infor-
mation from neighboring voxels. Although grid data struc-
1https://xharlie.github.io/papers/GGCN supCamReady.pdf
2https://github.com/xharlie/Grid-GCN
Figure 1: Overview of the Grid-GCN model. (a) Illustration
of the network architecture for point cloud segmentation. Our
model consists of several GridConv layers, and each can be
used in either a downsampling or an upsampling process. A
GridConv layer includes two stages: (b) For the data struc-
turing stage, a Coverage-Aware Grid Query (CAGQ) module
achieves efﬁcient data structuring and provides point groups
for efﬁcient computation. (c) For the convolution stage, a Grid
Context Aggregation (GCA) module conducts graph convolu-
tion on the point groups by aggregating local context.
tures are efﬁcient, high voxel resolution is required to pre-
serve the granularity of the data location. Since compu-
tation and memory usage grows cubically with the voxel
resolution, it is costly to process large point clouds. In addi-
tion, since approximately 90% of the voxels are empty for
most point clouds[ 51], signiﬁcant computation power may
be consumed by processing no information.
Another family of models for point cloud data process-
ing is Point-based models . In contrast to volumetric models,
point-based models enable efﬁcient computation but suf-
fer from inefﬁcient data structuring. For example, Point-
Net [ 29] consumes the point cloud directly without quan-
tization and aggregates the information at the last stage of
the network, so the accurate data locations are intact but
the computation cost grows linearly with the number of
points. Later studies [ 30,47,41,37,46] apply a down-
sampling strategy at each layer to aggregate information
1
5661