Figure 2: Illustration of Coverage-Aware Grid Query (CAGQ). Assume we want to sample M= 2 point groups and query
K= 5 node points for each group. (a)The input is Npoints (grey). The voxel id and number of points is listed for each
occupied voxel. (b)We build voxel-point index and store up to nv= 3 points (yellow) in each voxel. (c)Comparison of
different sampling methods: FPS and RPS prefer the two centers inside the marked voxels. Our RVS could randomly pick any
two occupied voxels (e.g. (2,0) and (0,0)) as center voxels. If our CAS is used, voxel (0,2) will replace (0,0). (d)Context points
of center voxel (2,1) are the yellow points in its neighborhood (we use 3×3as an example). CAGQ queries 5points (yellow
points with blue ring) from these context points, then calculate the locations of the group centers.
group, and GCN aggregates point data according to rela-
tions between points. SpecConv[ 37] blends the point fea-
tures by using a graph Fourier transformation. Other studies
model the edge feature between centers and nodes. Among
them, [ 47,26,17,41,49] use the geometric relations, while
[6,39] explore semantic relations between the nodes. Apart
from those features, our proposed Grid Context Aggrega-
tion module considers coverage and extracts the context fea-
tures to compute the semantic relation.
3. Methods
3.1. Method Overview
As shown in Figure 1, Grid-GCN is built on a set of Grid-
Conv layers. Each GridConv layer processes the informa-
tion ofNpoints and maps them to Mpoints. The down-
sampling GridConv ( N > M ) is repeated several times un-
til a ﬁnal feature representation is learned. This represen-
tation can be directly used for tasks such as classiﬁcation
or further up-sampled by the upsampling GridConv layers
(N < M ) in segmentation tasks.
GridConv consists of two modules:
1. A Coverage-Aware Grid Query (CAGQ) module that
samplesMpoint groups from Npoints. Each group in-
cludesKnode points and a group center. In the upsampling
process, CAGQ takes centers directly through long-range
connections, and only queries node points for these centers.
2. A Grid Context Aggregation (GCA) module that
builds a local graph for each point group and aggregates
the information to the group centers. The Mgroup centers
are passed as data points for the next layer.
We list all the notations in the supplementary for clarity.3.2. Coverage­Aware Grid Query (CAGQ)
In this subsection, we discuss the details of the CAGQ
module. Given a point cloud, CAGQ aims to effectively
structure the point cloud, and ease the process of center
sampling and neighbor points querying. To perform CAGQ,
we ﬁrst voxelize the input space by setting up a voxel size
(vx,vy,vz). We then map each point to a voxel index
Vid(u,v,w) =floor(x
vx,y
vy,z
vz). Here we only store up
tonvpoints in each voxel.
LetOvdenote all of the non-empty voxels. We then sam-
pleMcenter voxels Oc⊆Ov. For each center voxel vi,
we deﬁne its voxel neighbors π(vi)as the voxels within the
neighbor-hood of a center voxel. In Figure 2d, π(v(2,1))
are the 3X3 voxels inside the red box. We call the stored
points inside π(vi)ascontext points . Since we build the
point-voxel index in the previous step, CAGQ can quickly
retrieve context points for each vi.
After that, CAGQ picks Knode points from the context
points of each vi. We calculate the barycenter of node points
in a group, as the location of the group center. This entire
process is shown in Figure 2.
Two problems remain to be solved here. (1) How do we
sample center voxels Oc⊆Ov. (2) How do we pick K
nodes from context points in π(vi).
To solve the ﬁrst problem, we propose our center voxels
sampling framework, which includes two methods:
1.Random Voxel Sampling (RVS) : Each occupied voxel
will have the same probability of being picked. The
group centers calculated inside these center voxels are more
evenly distributed than centers picked on input points by
RPS. We discuss the details in Section 4.
2.Coverage-Aware Sampling (CAS) : Each selected cen-
5663