ter voxel can cover up to λoccupied voxel neighbors. The
goal of CAS is to select a set of center voxels Ocsuch that
they can cover the most occupied space. Seeking the op-
timal solution to this problem requires iterating all combi-
nations of selections. Therefore, we employ a greedy algo-
rithm to approach the optimal solution: We ﬁrst randomly
pickMvoxels from Ovasincumbents ; From all of the un-
picked voxels, we iteratively select one to challenge a ran-
dom incumbent each time. If adding this challenger (and in
the meantime removes the incumbent) gives us better cov-
erage, we replace the incumbent with the challenger. For a
challenger vCand an incumbent vI, the heuristics are cal-
culated as:
δ(x) =/braceleftBigg
1,ifx= 0.
0,otherwise .(1)
Hadd=/summationdisplay
V∈π(VC)δ(CV)−β·CV
λ(2)
Hrmv=/summationdisplay
V∈π(VI)δ(CV−1) (3)
whereλis the amount of neighbors of a voxel and CVis
the number of incumbents covering voxel V.Haddrepre-
sents the coverage gain if adding VC(penalize by a term of
over-coverage). Hrmvrepresents the coverage loss after re-
movingVI. IfHadd> Hrmv, we replace the incumbent by
the challenger voxel. If we set βas 0, each replacement is
guaranteed to improve the space coverage.
Comparisons of those methods are further discussed in
section 4.
Node points querying CAGQ also provides two strate-
gies to pick Knode points from context points in π(vi).
1.Cube Query : We randomly select Kpoints from con-
text points. Compared to the Ball Query used in PointNet++
[30], Cube Query can cover more space when point den-
sity is imbalanced. In the scenario of Figure 2, Ball Query
samplesKpoints from all raw points (grey) and may never
sample any node point from voxel (2,1) which only has 3
raw points.
2.K-Nearest Neighbors : Unlike traditional k-NN where
the search space is all points, k-NN in CAGQ only need to
search among the context points, making the query substan-
tially faster (We also provide an optimized method in the
supplementary materials). We will compare these methods
in the next section.
3.3. Grid Context Aggregation
For each point group provided by CAGQ, we use a Grid
Context Aggregation (GCA) module to aggregate features
from the node points to the group center. We ﬁrst construct
a local graph G(V,E), whereVconsists of the group center
andKnode points provided by CAGQ. We then connect
each node point to the group center. GCA projects a node
Figure 3: The red point is the group center. Yellow points
are its node points. Black points are node points of the yel-
low points in the previous layer. The coverage weight is an
important feature as it encodes the number of black points
that have been aggregated to each yellow point.
point’s features fito/tildewidefi. Based on the edge relation between
the node and the center, GCA calculates the contribution
of/tildewidefiand aggregates all these features as the feature of the
center/tildewidefc. Formally, the GCA module can be described as
/tildewidefc,i=e(χi,fi)∗M(fi) (4)
/tildewidefc=A({/tildewidefc,i},i∈1,...,K) (5)
where/tildewidefc,iis the contribution from a node, and χiis the
xyz location of the node. Mis a multi-layer perceptron
(MLP),eis the edge attention function, and Ais the ag-
gregation function. The edge attention function ehas been
explored by many previous studies [ 47,6,39]. In this work,
we design a new edge attention function with the follow-
ing improvements to better ﬁt into our network architecture
(Figure 4):
Coverage Weight Previous studies [ 47,26,17,41,49]
useχcof the center and χiof a node to model edge attention
as a function of geometric relation (Figure 4b). However,
the formulation ignores the underlying contribution of each
node point from previous layers. Intuitively, node points
with more information from previous layers should be given
more attention. We illustrate this scenario in Figure 3. With
that in mind, we introduce the concept of coverage weight ,
which is deﬁned as the number of points that have been ag-
gregated to a node in previous layers. This value can be eas-
ily computed in CAGQ, and we argue that coverage weight
is an important feature in calculating edge attention (see our
ablation studies in Table 6).
Grid Context Pooling Semantic relation is another im-
portant aspect when calculating the edge attention. In pre-
vious works [ 6,39], semantic relation is encoded by us-
ing the group center’s features fcand a node point’s fea-
turesfi, which requires the group center to be selected from
node points. In CAGQ, since a group center is calculated as
the barycenter of the node points, we propose Grid context
pooling that extracts context features fcxtby pooling from
all context points, which sufﬁciently covers the entire grid
space of the local graph. Grid context pooling brings the
following beneﬁts:
•fcxtmodels the features of a virtual group center, which
5664