Figure 4: Different strategies to compute the contribution /tildewiderfc,ifrom a node nito its center c.fi,χiare the feature maps and the
location of ni.eiis the edge feature between niandccalculated from the edge attention function. (a)Pointnet++ [ 30] ignores
ei.(b)computes eibased on low dimensional geometric relation between niandc.(c)also consider semantic relation between
the center and the node point, but chas to be sampled on one of the points from the previous layer. (d). Grid-GCN’s geo-relation
also includes the coverage weight. It pools a context feature fcxtfrom all stored neighbors to provide a semantic reference in ei
computing.
allows us to calculate the semantic relation between the
center and its node points.
•Even when group center is picked on a physical point,
fcxtis still a useful feature representation as it covers
more points in the neighborhood, instead of only the
points in the graph.
•Since we have already associated context points to its
center voxel in CAGQ, there is no extra point query
overhead. fcxtis shared across all edge computation in
a local graph, and the pooling is a light-weighted oper-
ation requiring no learnable weights, which introduces
little computational overhead.
GCA module is summarized in Figure 4d, and the edge at-
tention function can be model as
e=mlp(mlpgeo(χc,χi,wi),mlpsem(fcxt,fi)) (6)
4. Analysis of CAGQ
To analyze the beneﬁt of CAGQ, we test the occu-
pied space coverage and the latency of different sam-
pling/querying methods under different conditions on Mod-
elNet40 [ 43]. Center sampling methods include Random
Point Sampling (RPS), Farthest Point Sampling (FPS), our
Random V oxel Sampling (RVS), and our Coverage-Aware
Sampling (CAS). Neighbor querying methods include Ball
Query, Cube query, and K-Nearest Neighbors. The condi-
tions include different numbers of input points, node num-
bers in a point group, and numbers of point groups, which
are denoted by N,K, andM. We summarize the qualita-
tive and quantitative evaluation result in Table 2and Figure
5. The reported occupied space coverage is calculated as
the ratio between the number of voxels occupied by node
points of all groups, and the number of voxels occupied by
the original Npoints. Results under more conditions are
presented in the supplementary.4.1. Space Coverage
In Figure 5a, the centers sampled by RPS are concen-
trated in the areas with higher point density, leaving most
space uncovered. In Figure 5b, FPS picks the points that
are far away from each other, mostly on the edges of the 3D
shape, which causes the gap between centers. In Figure 5c,
our CAS optimizes the voxel selection and covers 75.2%of
occupied space. Table 2lists the percentage of space cov-
erage by RPS, FPS, RVS, and CAS. CAS leads the space
coverage in all cases (30 % more than RPS). FPS has no
advantage over RVS when Kis small.
The factors that beneﬁt CAGQ in space coverage can be
summarized as follows:
•Instead of sampling centers from Npoints, RVS sam-
ples center voxels from occupied space, therefore it is
more resilient to point density imbalance (Figure 5).
•CAS further optimizes the result of RVS by conducting
a greedy candidate replacement. Each replacement is
guaranteed to result in better coverage.
•CAGQ stores the same number of points in each oc-
cupied voxel. The context points are more evenly dis-
tributed, so are the Knode points picked from the con-
text points. Consequently, the strategy reduces the cov-
erage loss caused by density imbalance in a local area.
4.2. Time complexity
We summarize the time complexity of different methods
in Table 1. The detailed deduction is presented in the sup-
plementary. Table 2shows the empirical results of latency.
We see that our CAS is much faster than FPS and achieves
50×speed-up. CAS + Cube Query can even outperform
RPS + Ball Query when the size of the input point cloud is
large. This is due to the higher neighborhood query speed.
Because of better time complexity, RVS + k-NN leads the
performance under all conditions and achieves 6×speed-up
over FPS + k-NN.
5665