What is the State of Neural Network Pruning?
inference, different parameters may have different impacts.
For instance, in convolutional layers, ﬁlters applied to spa-
tially larger inputs are associated with more computation
than those applied to smaller inputs.
Regardless of the goal, pruning imposes a tradeoff between
model efﬁciency and quality, with pruning increasing the
former while (typically) decreasing the latter. This means
that a pruning method is best characterized not by a single
model it has pruned, but by a family of models correspond-
ing to different points on the efﬁciency-quality curve. To
quantify efﬁciency, most papers report at least one of two
metrics. The ﬁrst is the number of multiply-adds (often
referred to as FLOPs) required to perform inference with
the pruned network. The second is the fraction of param-
eters pruned. To measure quality, nearly all papers report
changes in Top-1 or Top-5 image classiﬁcation accuracy.
As others have noted (Lebedev et al., 2014; Figurnov et al.,
2016; Louizos et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2017; Han et al.,
2015; Kim et al., 2015; Wen et al., 2016; Luo et al., 2017;
He et al., 2018b), these metrics are far from perfect. Param-
eter and FLOP counts are a loose proxy for real-world la-
tency, throughout, memory usage, and power consumption.
Similarly, image classiﬁcation is only one of the countless
tasks to which neural networks have been applied. How-
ever, because the overwhelming majority of papers in our
corpus focus on these metrics, our meta-analysis necessar-
ily does as well.
3 L ESSONS FROM THE LITERATURE
After aggregating results from a corpus of 81 papers, we
identiﬁed a number of consistent ﬁndings. In this section,
we provide an overview of our corpus and then discuss
these ﬁndings.
3.1 Papers Used in Our Analysis
Our corpus consists of 79 pruning papers published since
2010 and two classic papers (LeCun et al., 1990; Hassibi
et al., 1993) that have been compared to by a number of
recent methods. We selected these papers by identifying
popular papers in the literature and what cites them, sys-
tematically searching through conference proceedings, and
tracing the directed graph of comparisons between prun-
ing papers. This last procedure results in the property that,
barring oversights on our part, there is no pruning paper
in our corpus that compares to any pruning paper outside
of our corpus. Additional details about our corpus and its
construction can be found in Appendix A.
3.2 How Effective is Pruning?
One of the clearest ﬁndings about pruning is that it works.
More precisely, there are various methods that can sig-
niﬁcantly compress models with little or no loss of accu-racy. In fact, for small amounts of compression, pruning
can sometimes increase accuracy (Han et al., 2015; Suzuki
et al., 2018). This basic ﬁnding has been replicated in a
large fraction of the papers in our corpus.
Along the same lines, it has been repeatedly shown that, at
least for large amounts of pruning, many pruning methods
outperform random pruning (Yu et al., 2018; Gale et al.,
2019; Frankle et al., 2019; Mariet & Sra, 2015; Suau et al.,
2018; He et al., 2017). Interestingly, this does not always
hold for small amounts of pruning (Morcos et al., 2019).
Similarly, pruning all layers uniformly tends to perform
worse than intelligently allocating parameters to different
layers (Gale et al., 2019; Han et al., 2015; Li et al., 2016;
Molchanov et al., 2016; Luo et al., 2017) or pruning glob-
ally (Lee et al., 2019b; Frankle & Carbin, 2019). Lastly,
when holding the number of ﬁne-tuning iterations constant,
many methods produce pruned models that outperform re-
training from scratch with the same sparsity pattern (Zhang
et al., 2015; Yu et al., 2018; Louizos et al., 2017; He et al.,
2017; Luo et al., 2017; Frankle & Carbin, 2019) (at least
with a large enough amount of pruning (Suau et al., 2018)).
Retraining from scratch in this context means training a
fresh, randomly-initialized model with all weights clamped
to zero throughout training, except those that are nonzero
in the pruned model.
Another consistent ﬁnding is that sparse models tend to
outperform dense ones for a ﬁxed number of parameters.
Lee et al. (2019a) show that increasing the nominal size
of ResNet-20 on CIFAR-10 while sparsifying to hold the
number of parameters constant decreases the error rate.
Kalchbrenner et al. (2018) obtain a similar result for audio
synthesis, as do Gray et al. (2017) for a variety of additional
tasks across various domains. Perhaps most compelling of
all are the many results, including in Figure 1, showing that
pruned models can obtain higher accuracies than the origi-
nal models from which they are derived. This demonstrates
that sparse models can not only outperform dense counter-
parts with the same number of parameters, but sometimes
dense models with even more parameters.
3.3 Pruning vs Architecture Changes
One current unknown about pruning is how effective it
tends to be relative to simply using a more efﬁcient archi-
tecture. These options are not mutually exclusive, but it
may be useful in guiding one’s research or development
efforts to know which choice is likely to have the larger
impact. Along similar lines, it is unclear how pruned mod-
els from different architectures compare to one another—
i.e., to what extent does pruning offer similar beneﬁts
across architectures? To address these questions, we plot-
ted the reported accuracies and compression/speedup levels
of pruned models on ImageNet alongside the same metrics