WHAT IS THE STATE OF NEURAL NETWORK PRUNING ?
Davis Blalock* 1Jose Javier Gonzalez Ortiz* 1Jonathan Frankle1John Guttag1
ABSTRACT
Neural network pruning—the task of reducing the size of a network by removing parameters—has been the
subject of a great deal of work in recent years. We provide a meta-analysis of the literature, including an overview
of approaches to pruning and consistent ﬁndings in the literature. After aggregating results across 81 papers
and pruning hundreds of models in controlled conditions, our clearest ﬁnding is that the community suffers
from a lack of standardized benchmarks and metrics. This deﬁciency is substantial enough that it is hard to
compare pruning techniques to one another or determine how much progress the ﬁeld has made over the past
three decades. To address this situation, we identify issues with current practices, suggest concrete remedies, and
introduce ShrinkBench, an open-source framework to facilitate standardized evaluations of pruning methods. We
use ShrinkBench to compare various pruning techniques and show that its comprehensive evaluation can prevent
common pitfalls when comparing pruning methods.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Much of the progress in machine learning in the past
decade has been a result of deep neural networks. Many
of these networks, particularly those that perform the best
(Huang et al., 2018), require enormous amounts of compu-
tation and memory. These requirements not only increase
infrastructure costs, but also make deployment of net-
works to resource-constrained environments such as mo-
bile phones or smart devices challenging (Han et al., 2015;
Sze et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2017).
One popular approach for reducing these resource require-
ments at test time is neural network pruning , which entails
systematically removing parameters from an existing net-
work. Typically, the initial network is large and accurate,
and the goal is to produce a smaller network with simi-
lar accuracy. Pruning has been used since the late 1980s
(Janowsky, 1989; Mozer & Smolensky, 1989a;b; Karnin,
1990), but has seen an explosion of interest in the past
decade thanks to the rise of deep neural networks.
For this study, we surveyed 81 recent papers on pruning
in the hopes of extracting practical lessons for the broader
community. For example: which technique achieves the
best accuracy/efﬁciency tradeoff? Are there strategies that
work best on speciﬁc architectures or datasets? Which
high-level design choices are most effective?
There are indeed several consistent results: pruning param-
eters based on their magnitudes substantially compresses
*Equal contribution1MIT CSAIL, Cambridge, MA, USA.
Correspondence to: Davis Blalock <dblalock@mit.edu >.
Proceedings of the 3rdMLSys Conference , Austin, TX, USA,
2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).networks without reducing accuracy, and many pruning
methods outperform random pruning. However, our cen-
tral ﬁnding is that the state of the literature is such that our
motivating questions are impossible to answer. Few papers
compare to one another, and methodologies are so inconsis-
tent between papers that we could not make these compar-
isons ourselves. For example, a quarter of papers compare
to no other pruning method, half of papers compare to at
most one other method, and dozens of methods have never
been compared to by any subsequent work. In addition,
no dataset/network pair appears in even a third of papers,
evaluation metrics differ widely, and hyperparameters and
other counfounders vary or are left unspeciﬁed.
Most of these issues stem from the absence of standard
datasets, networks, metrics, and experimental practices. To
help enable more comparable pruning research, we identify
speciﬁc impediments and pitfalls, recommend best prac-
tices, and introduce ShrinkBench, a library for standard-
ized evaluation of pruning. ShrinkBench makes it easy to
adhere to the best practices we identify, largely by provid-
ing a standardized collection of pruning primitives, models,
datasets, and training routines.
Our contributions are as follows:
1. A meta-analysis of the neural network pruning litera-
ture based on comprehensively aggregating reported re-
sults from 81 papers.
2. A catalog of problems in the literature and best prac-
tices for avoiding them. These insights derive from an-
alyzing existing work and pruning hundreds of models.
3. ShrinkBench, an open-source library for evaluating
neural network pruning methods available at
https://github.com/jjgo/shrinkbench .