What is the State of Neural Network Pruning?
• Report and plot means and sample standard deviations,
instead of one-off measurements, whenever feasible.
• Ensure that all methods being compared use identical
libraries, data loading, and other code to the greatest ex-
tent possible.
We also recommend that reviewers demand a much greater
level of rigor when evaluating papers that claim to offer a
better method of pruning neural networks.
7 S HRINK BENCH
7.1 Overview of ShrinkBench
To make it as easy as possible for researchers to put our
suggestions into practice, we have created an open-source
library for pruning called ShrinkBench. ShrinkBench pro-
vides standardized and extensible functionality for training,
pruning, ﬁne-tuning, computing metrics, and plotting, all
using a standardized set of pretrained models and datasets.
ShrinkBench is based on PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2017) and
is designed to allow easy evaluation of methods with ar-
bitrary scoring functions, allocation of pruning across lay-
ers, and sparsity structures. In particular, given a callback
deﬁning how to compute masks for a model’s parameter
tensors at a given iteration, ShrinkBench will automati-
cally apply the pruning, update the network according to a
standard training or ﬁne-tuning setup, and compute metrics
across many models, datasets, random seeds, and levels of
pruning. We defer discussion of ShrinkBench’s implemen-
tation and API to the project’s documentation.
7.2 Baselines
We used ShrinkBench to implement several existing prun-
ing heuristics, both as examples of how to use our library
and as baselines that new methods can compare to:
•Global Magnitude Pruning - prunes the weights with
the lowest absolute value anywhere in the network.
•Layerwise Magnitude Pruning - for each layer, prunes
the weights with the lowest absolute value.
•Global Gradient Magnitude Pruning - prunes the
weights with the lowest absolute value of (weight gra-
dient), evaluated on a batch of inputs.
•Layerwise Gradient Magnitude Pruning - for each
layer, prunes the weights the lowest absolute value of
(weightgradient), evaluated on a batch of inputs.
•Random Pruning - prunes each weight independently
with probability equal to the fraction of the network to
be pruned.
Magnitude-based approaches are common baselines in the
literature and have been shown to be competitive with morecomplex methods (Han et al., 2015; 2016; Gale et al., 2019;
Frankle et al., 2019). Gradient-based methods are less com-
mon, but are simple to implement and have recently gained
popularity (Lee et al., 2019b;a; Yu et al., 2018). Random
pruning is a common straw man that can serve as a useful
debugging tool. Note that these baselines are not reproduc-
tions of any of these methods, but merely inspired by their
pruning heuristics.
7.3 Avoiding Pruning Pitfalls with Shrinkbench
Using the described baselines, we pruned over 800 net-
works with varying datasets, networks, compression ratios,
initial weights and random seeds. In doing so, we identi-
ﬁed various pitfalls associated with experimental practices
that are currently common in the literature but are avoided
by using ShrinkBench.
We highlight several noteworthy results below. For addi-
tional experimental results and details, see Appendix D.
One standard deviation bars across three runs are shown
for all CIFAR-10 results.
Metrics are not Interchangeable. As discussed previ-
ously, it is common practice to report either reduction in the
number of parameters or in the number of FLOPs. If these
metrics are extremely correlated, reporting only one is suf-
ﬁcient to characterize the efﬁcacy of a pruning method. We
found after computing these metrics for the same model un-
der many different settings that reporting one metric is not
sufﬁcient. While these metrics are correlated, the correla-
tion is different for each pruning method. Thus, the relative
performance of different methods can vary signiﬁcantly un-
der different metrics (Figure 6).
1 2 4 8 16
Compression Ratio0.400.450.500.550.600.650.70Accuracy
 Global Weight
Layer Weight
Global Gradient
Layer Gradient
1 2 4 816 32
Theoretical Speedup
ResNet-18 on ImageNet
Figure 6: Top 1 Accuracy for ResNet-18 on ImageNet
for several compression ratios and their corresponding
theoretical speedups. Global methods give higher accu-
racy than Layerwise ones for a ﬁxed model size, but the
reverse is true for a ﬁxed theoretical speedup.
Results Vary Across Models, Datasets, and Pruning
Amounts Many methods report results on only a small
number of datasets, models, amounts of pruning, and ran-
dom seeds. If the relative performance of different methods
tends to be constant across all of these variables, this may