What is the State of Neural Network Pruning?
A C ORPUS AND DATA CLEANING
We selected the 81 papers used in our analysis in the fol-
lowing way. First, we conducted an ad hoc literature
search, ﬁnding widely cited papers introducing pruning
methods and identifying other pruning papers that cited
them using Google Scholar. We then went through the con-
ference proceedings from the past year’s NeurIPS, ICML,
CVPR, ECCV , and ICLR and added all relevant papers
(though it is possible we had false dismissals if the title
and abstract did not seem relevant to pruning). Finally,
during the course of cataloging which papers compared to
which others, we added to our corpus any pruning paper
that at least one existing paper in our corpus purported to
compare to. We included both published papers and un-
published ones of reasonable quality (typically on arXiv).
Since we make strong claims about the lack of compar-
isons, we included in our corpus ﬁve papers whose meth-
ods technically do not meet our deﬁnition of pruning but
are similar in spirit and compared to by various pruning
papers. In short, we included essentially every paper intro-
ducing a method of pruning neural networks that we could
ﬁnd, taking care to capture the full directed graph of papers
and comparisons between them.
Because different papers report slightly different metrics,
particularly with respect to model size, we converted re-
ported results to a standard set of metrics whenever possi-
ble. For example, we converted reported Top-1 error rates
to Top-1 accuracies, and fractions of parameters pruned to
compression ratios. Note that it is not possible to con-
vert between size metrics and speedup metrics, since the
amount of computation associated with a given parameter
can depend on the layer in which it resides (since convo-
lutional ﬁlters are reused at many spatial positions). For
simplicity and uniformity, we only consider self-reported
results except where stated otherwise.
We also did not attempt to capture all reported metrics, but
instead focused only on model size reduction and theoret-
ical speedup, since 1) these are by far the most commonly
reported and, 2) there is already a dearth of directly compa-
rable numbers even for these common metrics. This is not
entirely fair to methods designed to optimize other metrics,
such as power consumption (Louizos et al., 2017; Yang
et al., 2017; Han et al., 2015; Kim et al., 2015), memory
bandwidth usage (Peng et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2015), or
ﬁne-tuning time (Dubey et al., 2018; Yamamoto & Maeno,
2018; Huang & Wang, 2018; He et al., 2018a), and we con-
sider this a limitation of our analysis.
Lastly, as a result of relying on reading of hundreds of
pages of dense technical content, we are conﬁdent that we
have made some number of isolated errors. We therefore
welcome correction by email and refer the reader to the
arXiv version of this paper for the most up-to-date revision.B C HECKLIST FOR EVALUATING A
PRUNING METHOD
For any pruning technique proposed, check if:
• It is contextualized with respect to magnitude prun-
ing, recently-published pruning techniques, and prun-
ing techniques proposed prior to the 2010s.
• The pruning algorithm, constituent subroutines (e.g.,
score, pruning, and ﬁne-tuning functions), and hyper-
parameters are presented in enough detail for a reader
to reimplement and match the results in the paper.
• All claims about the technique are appropriately
restricted to only the experiments presented (e.g.,
CIFAR-10, ResNets, image classiﬁcation tasks, etc.).
• There is a link to downloadable source code.
For all experiments, check if you include:
• A detailed description of the architecture with hyper-
parameters in enough detail to for a reader to reimple-
ment it and train it to the same performance reported
in the paper.
• If the architecture is not novel: a citation for the ar-
chitecture/hyperparameters and a description of any
differences in architecture, hyperparameters, or per-
formance in this paper.
• A detailed description of the dataset hyperparameters
(e.g., batch size and augmentation regime) in enough
detail for a reader to reimplement it.
• A description of the library and hardware used.
For all results, check if:
• Data is presented across a range of compression ratios,
including extreme compression ratios at which the ac-
curacy of the pruned network declines substantially.
• Data speciﬁes the raw accuracy of the network at each
point.
• Data includes multiple runs with separate initializa-
tions and random seeds.
• Data includes clearly deﬁned error bars and a measure
of central tendency (e.g., mean) and variation (e.g.,
standard deviation).
• Data includes FLOP-counts if the paper makes argu-
ments about efﬁciency and performance due to prun-
ing.