What is the State of Neural Network Pruning?
2 O VERVIEW OF PRUNING
Before proceeding, we ﬁrst offer some background on neu-
ral network pruning and a high-level overview of how ex-
isting pruning methods typically work.
2.1 Deﬁnitions
We deﬁne a neural network architecture as a function fam-
ilyf(x;). The architecture consists of the conﬁguration of
the network’s parameters and the sets of operations it uses
to produce outputs from inputs, including the arrangement
of parameters into convolutions, activation functions, pool-
ing, batch normalization, etc. Example architectures in-
clude AlexNet and ResNet-56. We deﬁne a neural network
model as a particular parameterization of an architecture,
i.e.,f(x;W)for speciﬁc parameters W. Neural network
pruning entails taking as input a model f(x;W)and pro-
ducing a new model f(x;MW0). HereW0is set of
parameters that may be different from W,M2f0;1gjW0j
is a binary mask that ﬁxes certain parameters to 0, andis
the elementwise product operator. In practice, rather than
using an explicit mask, pruned parameters of Ware ﬁxed
to zero or removed entirely.
2.2 High-Level Algorithm
There are many methods of producing a pruned model
f(x;MW0)from an initially untrained model f(x;W0),
whereW0is sampled from an initialization distribution D.
Nearly all neural network pruning strategies in our survey
derive from Algorithm 1 (Han et al., 2015). In this algo-
rithm, the network is ﬁrst trained to convergence. After-
wards, each parameter or structural element in the network
is issued a score, and the network is pruned based on these
scores. Pruning reduces the accuracy of the network, so
it is trained further (known as ﬁne-tuning ) to recover. The
process of pruning and ﬁne-tuning is often iterated several
times, gradually reducing the network’s size.
Many papers propose slight variations of this algorithm.
For example, some papers prune periodically during train-
ing (Gale et al., 2019) or even at initialization (Lee et al.,
2019b). Others modify the network to explicitly include
additional parameters that encourage sparsity and serve as
a basis for scoring the network after training (Molchanov
et al., 2017).
2.3 Differences Betweeen Pruning Methods
Within the framework of Algorithm 1, pruning methods
vary primarily in their choices regarding sparsity structure,
scoring, scheduling, and ﬁne-tuning.
Structure. Some methods prune individual parameters
(unstructured pruning ). Doing so produces a sparse neuralAlgorithm 1 Pruning and Fine-Tuning
Input:N, the number of iterations of pruning, and
X, the dataset on which to train and ﬁne-tune
1:W initialize ()
2:W trainToConvergence (f(X;W))
3:M 1jWj
4:foriin1toNdo
5:M prune (M;score (W))
6:W fineTune (f(X;MW))
7:end for
8:returnM;W
network, which—although smaller in terms of parameter-
count—may not be arranged in a fashion conducive to
speedups using modern libraries and hardware. Other
methods consider parameters in groups ( structured prun-
ing), removing entire neurons, ﬁlters, or channels to ex-
ploit hardware and software optimized for dense computa-
tion (Li et al., 2016; He et al., 2017).
Scoring. It is common to score parameters based on their
absolute values, trained importance coefﬁcients, or contri-
butions to network activations or gradients. Some prun-
ing methods compare scores locally, pruning a fraction of
the parameters with the lowest scores within each struc-
tural subcomponent of the network (e.g., layers) (Han et al.,
2015). Others consider scores globally, comparing scores
to one another irrespective of the part of the network in
which the parameter resides (Lee et al., 2019b; Frankle &
Carbin, 2019).
Scheduling. Pruning methods differ in the amount of the
network to prune at each step. Some methods prune all
desired weights at once in a single step (Liu et al., 2019).
Others prune a ﬁxed fraction of the network iteratively over
several steps (Han et al., 2015) or vary the rate of pruning
according to a more complex function (Gale et al., 2019).
Fine-tuning. For methods that involve ﬁne-tuning, it is
most common to continue to train the network using the
trained weights from before pruning. Alternative propos-
als include rewinding the network to an earlier state (Fran-
kle et al., 2019) and reinitializing the network entirely (Liu
et al., 2019).
2.4 Evaluating Pruning
Pruning can accomplish many different goals, including re-
ducing the storage footprint of the neural network, the com-
putational cost of inference, the energy requirements of in-
ference, etc. Each of these goals favors different design
choices and requires different evaluation metrics. For ex-
ample, when reducing the storage footprint of the network,
all parameters can be treated equally, meaning one should
evaluate the overall compression ratio achieved by prun-
ing. However, when reducing the computational cost of