Figure 3 : Samples from conﬁgura-
tions of DDPMs for toy 2D contin-
uous datasets. MLP has batch size
256 and two hidden layers size 256.
+Batch increases the batch size to
4096 and +capacity uses batch size
4096 and 3 hidden layers. LN_Resnet
follows the same pattern, but uses 2
hidden blocks originally and then 3
hidden blocks for +capacity.
to model complex distributions in images [ 20] as well as in continuous action spaces [ 44,36] prior.
Therefore, for the practical implementation of our general IQL algorithm depicted in Algorithm 1
and Algorithm 2, we use a diffusion model parameterization for (ajs)and the DDPM objective
(Equation 4). We dub this method Implicit Diffusion Q-learning (IDQL).
Issues in continuous space expression with diffusion. A naïve DDPM implementation on con-
tinuous spaces can have issues with outputting outliers and expressing the distribution accurately. As
an example, we test a simple implementation of DDPMs on 2D continuous datasets. In Figure 3, the
simple MLP architecture fails to capture the data distributions and produces many out-of-distribution
samples. The outliers are particularly problematic because they might be out-of-distribution for a
trained Q-function and as a result, might receive erroneously high Q values.
As demonstrated with diffusion on images [ 35], we ﬁnd that increasing the batch size and capacity
of the MLP network ﬁts the distribution better, but many outliers remain. Inspired by architectures
that work well for transformers [ 39], we ﬁnd that a more ideal network for diffusion should have
high capacity while being well-regularized. We use a residual network [ 18] with layer normalization
[2] (LN_resnet) as our score network parameterization (depicted in Appendix G). Figure 3 shows
our architecture choice producing higher quality samples with fewer outliers compared to a standard
MLP architecture. We demonstrate in Section 6.4 that this architecture choice is crucial for strong
performance and reduced sensitivity to N. This section provides contributions on how batch size,
capacity, and architecture choices affect the modeling of continuous spaces with diffusion. Though,
similar architectures for action modeling with diffusion have been proposed before [7, 36, 40].
6 Experimental Evaluation
In order to assess the performance, scalability, and robustness of our approach, we compare it to
prior works using two protocols: (1) a direct comparison on D4RL benchmarks [ 11] with reported
numbers, and (2) a “one hyperparameter evaluation” where we rerun top-performing methods with
one hyperparameter setting tuned per domain. We also analyze our method’s performance over the
critic objectives mentioned in Section 4 and in online ﬁnetuning. Additional experiment details and
results can be found in Appendix D and Appendix F respectively.
6.1 Ofﬂine RL Results
A major appeal of ofﬂine RL methods is their ability to produce effective policies without any
online interaction. The less tuning that is required for a given method, the easier it will be to use
in the real world. Therefore, in this section, we evaluate select methods both with any number of
hyperparameter allowed (or reported results) and in a regime where only one hyperparameter can be
tuned per domain. We select Conservative Q-learning (CQL) [ 28], Implicit Q-learning (IQL) [ 26],
and Diffusion Q-learning (DQL) [ 44] to focus on because of their strong performance in the standard
ofﬂine RL setting. We refer "-A" as reported results that allow any amount of tuning and "-1" as
results that only allow one hyperparameter to be tuned between domains (for IDQL, = 0:7for
all locomotion tasks and = 0:9for all antmaze tasks). Results are in Table 1. We also include
comparisons to %BC, Decision Transformers (DT) [ 8], TD3+BC (TD3) [ 12], Extreme Q-learning
(EQL) [ 14], and Selecting from Behavior Candidates (SfBC) [ 7] in Table 2 (full table in Appendix F).
In the standard evaluation protocol, IDQL performs competitively to the best prior methods on the
locomotion tasks while outperforming prior methods on the antmaze tasks. In the one hyperparameter
regime, the performance of IDQL degrades only slightly from the results in Table 1, while the other
7