IDQL: Implicit Q-Learning as an Actor-Critic
Method with Diffusion Policies
Philippe Hansen-Estruch Ilya Kostrikov Michael Janner
Jakub Grudzien Kuba Sergey Levine
UC Berkeley
{hansenpmeche, kostrikov, janner, kuba}@berkeley.edu
svlevine@eecs.berkeley.edu
Abstract
Effective ofﬂine RL methods require properly handling out-of-distribution actions.
Implicit Q-learning (IQL) addresses this by training a Q-function using only dataset
actions through a modiﬁed Bellman backup. However, it is unclear which policy
actually attains the values represented by this implicitly trained Q-function. In this
paper, we reinterpret IQL as an actor-critic method by generalizing the critic objec-
tive and connecting it to a behavior-regularized implicit actor. This generalization
shows how the induced actor balances reward maximization and divergence from
the behavior policy, with the speciﬁc loss choice determining the nature of this
tradeoff. Notably, this actor can exhibit complex and multimodal characteristics,
suggesting issues with the conditional Gaussian actor ﬁt with advantage weighted
regression (AWR) used in prior methods. Instead, we propose using samples from
a diffusion parameterized behavior policy and weights computed from the critic
to then importance sampled our intended policy. We introduce Implicit Diffusion
Q-learning (IDQL), combining our general IQL critic with the policy extraction
method. IDQL maintains the ease of implementation of IQL while outperforming
prior ofﬂine RL methods and demonstrating robustness to hyperparameters. Code
is available at github.com/philippe-eecs/IDQL .
1 Introduction
Ofﬂine RL holds promise in enabling policies to be learned from static datasets. Value function
estimation provides a basic building block for many modern ofﬂine RL methods, but such methods
need to handle the out-of-distribution actions that arise when evaluating the learned policy. While a
variety of methods based on constraints and regularization have been proposed to address this, in
this work we will study implicit Q-learning (IQL) [ 26], which avoids querying the value for unseen
actions entirely. In IQL the Q-function is trained with Bellman backups using the state value function
as the target value. The state value function is trained via expectile regression onto the Q-values
implicitly performing a maximization over actions. While IQL provides an appealing alternative to
other ofﬂine RL methods, it remains unclear what policy the learned value function corresponds to,
and in turn, makes it difﬁcult to understand the bottlenecks in IQL-style algorithms.
In this paper, we derive a variant of IQL that signiﬁcantly improves over the performance of the
original approach, is relatively insensitive to hyperparameters, and outperforms even more recent
ofﬂine RL methods. Our key observation is based on a new perspective that reinterprets IQL as an
actor-critic method. This is achieved through the generalization of the value optimization problem
in IQL to use an arbitrary convex loss, which we then link to an implicit behavior-regularized actor.
This generalization is signiﬁcant, as it demonstrates how different choices of critic objectives give
rise to distinct implicit actor distributions that diverge from the behavior policy to varying extents.
Preprint. Under review.arXiv:2304.10573v2  [cs.LG]  19 May 2023