Figure 1: Comparing unimodal A WR as used by IQL to our IDQL diffusion policy. (Left) 2D
bandit with three actions and reward function r(a1;a2) =a1+a2. For the 90th expectile of the
reward distribution, we compute contour plots for the corresponding unimodal Gaussian policy ﬁtted
with AWR (as used by IQL) for various inverse temperatures (center) as well as samples from our
proposed extraction method (right). The unimodal actor incorrectly approximates the implicit policy
for all temperatures, while the diffusion extraction method captures the implicit policy accurately.
Consequently, examining the characteristics of this implicit actor reveals not only the trade-offs made
by IQL in critic learning, but also potential avenues for improving the method.
Our analysis reveals that the implicit actor is complex and potentially multimodal which suggests
an issue with the policy extraction scheme used with IQL [ 26], where a unimodal Gaussian actor is
trained with advantage weighted regression (AWR) [ 38,37,33]. Such a parameterization is unlikely
to accurately approximate the implicit actor (Figure 1). In contrast to conventional actor-critic
algorithms, where the critic adapts to the explicit actor parameterization, IQL’s strength lies in its
fully decoupled critic training from the explicit actor, thereby avoiding instability and hyperparameter
sensitivity. However, this requires that the policy extraction approximates the implicit actor accurately.
One helpful observation to address this challenge is that the implicit actor induced through critic
learning can be expressed as a reweighting of the behavior policy, which can be approximated via
importance weights. Thus, for policy extraction, we propose reweighting samples from a diffusion-
parameterized behavior model with critic-computed weights, which can then be re-sampled to express
both the implicit and greedy policy. Diffusion models [ 41,20,43] are a crucial detail for enabling
our policy extraction method to represent multimodal distributions accurately.
We introduce Implicit Diffusion Q-learning (IDQL). Our main contributions are (1) the generalization
of IQL to an actor-critic method where the choice of critic loss induces an implicit actor distribution
that can be expressed as a reweighting of the behavior policy; (2) a diffusion based policy extraction
algorithm that combines samples from an expressive diffusion model with a reweighting scheme for
recovering an accurate approximation to the implicit actor, or maximizing the critic value. IDQL
outperforms prior methods on the D4RL ofﬂine RL benchmarks [ 11], including methods based on
IQL and other methods that use diffusion models. Furthermore, IDQL is very portable, requiring
limited tuning of hyperparameters across domains (e.g., antmaze, locomotion) to perform well for
both ofﬂine RL and online ﬁnetuning with ofﬂine pretraining.
2 Related Work
While ofﬂine RL has been approached with a wide range of algorithmic frameworks [ 30,31],
recent methods often use value-based algorithms derived from Q-learning and off-policy actor-critic
methods. To adapt approaches to the ofﬂine setting, it is necessary to avoid overestimated values
out-of-distribution actions [ 27]. To this end, recent methods use implicit divergence constraints
[38,37,33,45], explicit density models [ 47,13,27,15], and supervised learning terms [ 12]. Some
works also directly penalize out-of-distribution action Q-values [ 25,28]. Recently, implicit TD
backups have been developed that avoid the use of out-of-sample actions in Q-function by using
asymmetric loss functions with SARSA-style on-policy backups. This approach was proposed in
IQL [ 26], which trains a Q-function with an expectile loss and then extracts a policy with AWR [ 37].
However, the extraction procedure itself imposes a KL-divergence constraint, which is not consistent
with the policy the critic captures. Extreme Q-learning (EQL) [ 14] modiﬁes the Q-function objective
in IQL to estimate a soft value consistent with the entropy regularized AWR policy. Concurrently,
Xu et al. [49] provides another generalization of IQL in behavior-regularized MDPs, arriving at two
new implicit Q-learning objectives. Our generalized IQL derivation is related, but features a different
2