8  
 
machine learning methods. Indeed, unsupervised learning played a key role in the ‘renaissance ’ of 
deep learning in the mid -2000s, when data scientists discovered that neural networks could be pre -
trained  in an unsupervised  fashion,  thus making  them  more  eﬀective  in supervised  tasks  (Good - 
fellow,  Bengio,  and Courville  2016 , 528).  
The operational aspects of neural  networks are loosely based on an abstracted understanding of 
human learning as a bottom -up (inductive) process that relies on observation, experimentation and 
the dynamic adaptation to the new information extracted from the data. This process aims to 
approximate a model of the biological brain, where signals from multiple inputs are combined, 
‘weighted ’ and then trigger parallel neural activations once they pass a certain threshold. Following 
this approximate model, the standard deep learning model involve s the construction of artiﬁcial 
neural  networks  that consist  of layers  of sparsely  connected  units  through  which  data and the associ - 
ated errors  circulate,  while  the predictive  or classiﬁcatory  task is learnt.  These  can be seen in terms  of 
three distinct layers: (i) an input layer, (ii) a middle hidden layer where intermediate computations 
take place, and (iii) an output layer (see Figure  1). 
At this point, many readers ’ attention might understandably be piqu ed by the notion of the 
‘middle hidden layer ’. In brief, the hidden layer provides a buﬀer where the errors that inevitably 
emerge during the training process can be sent back and propagated through the network. Hastie, 
Tibshirani, and Friedman ( 2009 , 395) describe this as a ‘forward and backward sweep over the net - 
work’ in which errors are ﬁrst spread out and then recombined to compute the output layer. This 
optimisation  technique  is known  as ‘Stochastic  Gradient  Descent ’, essentially  showing  how the pat- 
terning of these errors change in tandem with changes to the weighting in the network. This is an 
incremental  process  that minimises  ‘loss’, i.e., a measure  of how eﬀective  the model  is at predicting 
a single case (e.g., an input -output pairing). The aim of the optimisation technique is therefore to 
stabilise on a set of weights that, on average, have low levels of loss across the entire dataset. The 
process concludes when a human agent decides that satisfactory results have been  obtained.  
One particular type of neural network used in the DKT controversy is the ‘recurrent neural net - 
work’ (RNN). This extends even further the functionalities of other so -called vanilla networks by 
allowing algorithms to operate with entire seq uences of observations (rather than individual obser - 
vations) that are mapped over long periods across the input and output layers. The recursive, tem - 
poral  nature  of this procedure  aims  to capture  the regularities  through  which  past observations  shape  
 
 
Figure 1. An artiﬁcial neural network. Source: wikipedia.org