5  
 
More  speciﬁcally,  then,  our study  is aligned  with recent  STS-inﬂected  research  on algorithms  and 
data.  Indeed,  this ‘algorithmic  turn’ in the social  sciences,  spurred  by a wave  of public  and economic 
interest in big data, automation and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, has reinvigorated interest in STS 
approaches.  STS therefore  oﬀers  a ready  means  of unpac king the claimed  objectivity  and operational 
complexity  of algorithmic  technologies  of enumeration,  classiﬁcation  and prediction  (e.g.,  Crawford 
and Joler 2018 ; Dourish 2016 ; Kitchin 2014 ; Mackenzie 2017 ; Selbst et al. 2018 ). This recent  work 
makes use of earlier STS authors like Collins ( 1993 ), Agre ( 1997 ), Forsythe ( 2002 ) and Suchman 
(1987 ) who problematised the development of AI and computer science from the 1960s onwards. 
Thus over the past 30 years, these aut hors have detailed key controversies about human reason   and 
machine intelligence that now have great bearing on recent developments  in the area of AI  and  
education.  
The key argument that we develop in this paper is that attempts to predict and automate  aspects 
of educational performance through the application of AI technologies is party to complex forms  of 
reductionism. While this is not in itself an original claim, there is something novel in the way com - 
putational  methods  like neural  networks,  ‘owne d’ by a small  elite of data experts  driven  by technical 
mindsets and commercial incentives, superimpose multiple layers of algorithmic complexity on 
stripped -down (and highly contentious) understandings of human learning. In this sense, we follow 
on from the work of Harry Collins ( 1993 ) who – drawing in turn on Dreyfus ( 1979 ) and Wittgen - 
stein ( 1953 ) – observed that data representation in AI and computer science begets a paradox: as 
reality is gradually reduce d to its commensurable constituents, the need for complex logical and 
mathematical abstraction grows stronger. In other words, the  more  things  are  simpliﬁed,  the more 
complexity they require to remain real. This paradox comes about because expressing social life and 
culture in terms of algorithmic and statistical rules assumes a ‘ceteris paribus ’ condition, i.e., that 
everything must stay the same for a computational system to remain internally coherent and capable 
to operate mechanically. However, thi s condition can only be upheld through an ‘inﬁnite regress ’ to 
underlying rules and requirements, in turn suﬀering from a tendency towards mathematical  
abstraction.  
This point is reprised and further clariﬁed in more recent work (Collins 2018 ), where Collins 
critiques bottom -up pattern recognition as the epistemological paradigm that underpins most cur - 
rent forms of applied AI. This paradigm is grounded in an inductivist logic – a distinctive mode of 
knowing – where predictio ns and generalisations are derived from past observations. It is also a very 
reductive paradigm because it relies, as suggested before, on a regressive modus operandi where 
patterns are assumed to be interpretable in the same standardised way across all cu ltures  and 
contexts. There exists a diﬀerent mode of knowing: the ‘top-down model of interpretative  soci- 
ology’ (Collins 2018 , 111) where knowledge depends on a productive engagement with ‘forms of 
life’ (Wittgenstein 1953 ). If we choose to operate in this mode, we no longer can interrogate mech - 
anical induction (bottom -up pattern recognition in AI), without entertaining a diﬀerent perspective 
on how knowledge is ﬁrst developed and then endowe d with cultural relevance. That is, without 
trying to understand ‘how people live their lives in diﬀerent societies ’ (Wittgenstein 1953 ). This 
alternative  epistemic  position  allowed  our empirical  framework  to emerge  as we followed  a speciﬁc 
predictive algorithm down the potentially inﬁnite regress of neural activations and ‘weightings ’, to 
arrive at a point where technical interrogation – a necessary but insuﬃcient ﬁrst step – became 
exhausted. In this sense, our falling sh ort in this task is not an indication of limited technical 
knowledge, but evidence that the only productive way to investigate algorithms and AI is by look - 
ing around, rather than inside, increasingly opaque and unknowable black boxes. Hence, our focus 
shifted towards  the analysis  of ‘forms  of life’: a range  of sociological  categories  such as the cultural 
meanings hidden in digital materialisations of student learning (a speciﬁc dataset from a person - 
alised learning platform), the economic interests of th e predictive industry, and the disciplinary  and 
professional entanglements of data science as a domain replete with controversies and uncertainties.