14   
 
Thirdly, then, we consider the cultural and economic underpinnings of the educational data science 
community involved in the DKT controversy and the ﬁeld of predictive AI research  and develop - 
ment in general. These are areas where methodological proﬁciency and analytic power have great 
currency,  and where  professional  reputations  and careers  are founded  on the capacity  to subject  radi- 
cally  diﬀerent  forms  of data to comparable  and scalable  forms  of computational  analysis.  As Adrian 
Mackenzie  notes,  the career  trajectories  of ‘machine  learners ’ regularly  imbue  a cultural  motif  of data 
as a computational challenge (Mackenzie 2013 ). In this sense, onl ine education is just one domain 
among many where this challenge can be engaged with. Here we can see, then, how the DKT con - 
troversy  was driven  (in part)  by data scientists  seeking  a fertile  context  where  they might  successfully 
apply  general  principles  of predictive  modelling.  As they moved  into the DKT  controversy,  the data 
scientists  who deployed  RNNs  onto educational  datasets  brought  two qualities  into the work  that are 
distinct  from  what  might  be conventionally  considered  ‘educational ’ concerns.  First was a functional 
reliance on a ‘black box ’ approach to mathematical modelling that treats prediction as an optimis - 
ation  task based  on opaque  (deep)  recursive  mechanics.  Second  was a preoccupation  with predictive 
performance as an indicator of their  own professional  accomplishment.  
These underpinning qualities are exempliﬁed by one of the papers written in response to Piech et 
al. (2015 ), where the authors stated that they were ‘driven by both noble goals (testing the repro - 
ducibility of scientiﬁc ﬁndings) and some selﬁsh ones (how did they [Piech and colleagues] do so 
much better at predicting student performance)?! ’ (Xiong et al. 2016 , 545). Indeed, if we trace the 
use of this key word  (‘performance ’) across  all eight  published  studies  then some  important  cultural 
assumptions implicit in the DKT debate are highlighted. For example, the term ‘performance ’ 
(alongside  various  stemmed  words:  perform,  performed,  outperform,  performing,  perfor ms) appears 
213 times  in the texts  across  the eight  empirical  articles.  Examining  the use of these  words  across  the 
eight DKT articles reveals a rhetorical relationship between two themes: ‘performance ’ of the  algo- 
rithmic model (how good it is at predicting) and the ‘performance ’ of students (what is being con - 
stantly monitored and automatically predicted). This is apparent in the following  examples:  
In Deep Knowledge Tracing a recurrent neural network was t rained to predict student responses and was shown 
to outperform the best published results ( …) We found that IRT -based methods consistently matched or 
outperformed DKT. (Wilson et al. 2016 , 539)  
Recently,  with a surge  of interest in deep  learning  models,  DKT  [12],  which  models  student ’s knowledge  state 
based on an RNN, has been shown to outperform the traditional models, such as BKT and PFA. (Yeung and 
Yeung 2018 , 1) 
When  we replicated  simulations  (… .) we obtained  signiﬁcantly  better  performance:  an AUC  of 0.73 versus  0.67 
on ASSISTments.  (Khajah,  Lindsey,  and Mozer  2016 , 98) 
A student  who performed  poorly  on the last trial because  they were  distracted  is likely  to perform  poorly  on the 
current trial. (Khajah, Lindsey, and Mozer 2016 , 97). 
The system continuously monitors the student ’s performance, updates the knowledge states and based on that 
takes further decisions. (Lalwan i and Agrawal 2017 , 448)  
As these excerpts illustrate, the eight DKT articles exhibit a tendency to extend the instrumental 
notion of predictive ‘performance ’ as computational challenge into an associated  understanding   of  
the educational  ‘performance ’ of students.  In other  words,  student  ‘learning ’ quickly  gets conﬂated 
with student  ‘performance ’, which  itself  is positioned  as a matter  of algorithmic  tractability  based  on 
temporal sequences of inputs and outputs. This discursive entanglement of predictive performance 
as an attribute of the model, and learning performance as an attribute of the students eventually 
stabilises around a ‘granular ’ view of education as a score -driven dynamic and collection of 
machine -readabl e signals:  
Given  three  exercises  each of skills  A and B, presenting  the exercises  in the interleaved  order  A1–B1–A2–B2– 
A3–B3 yields superior performance relative to presenting the exercises in the blocked order A1 –A2–A3–B1– 
B2–B3. (Khajah  et al: 97).