9  
 
the likelihood of future events. Recurrent Neural Networks are therefore described in the original 
DKT study as ‘a family of ﬂexible dynamic models which connect artiﬁcial neurons over time ’ 
(Piech et al. 2015 , 3). In the context of the example used before of learning algebra, the advantage 
of a RNN is the ability to ‘remember ’ past performance from a student and use this information    to 
produce predictions at a ‘much later point in time ’ (Piech et al.  2015 ). 
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have generated a signiﬁcant amount of interest amongst the 
AI community  in recent  years.  Formalised  decades  ago to assist  complex  computational  tasks  such as 
speech recognition (e.g., Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams 1986 ), they have gained popularity as 
appropriately large datasets became readily available alongside powerful computational resources. 
In particular, RNNs have been extensively researched within DeepMind: the ﬂagship Google 
research program on AI (Graves and Jaitly  2014 ). 
One ﬁnal point to make before we go on to consider the development of RNNs in the context of 
the DKT controversy relates to explainability (or lack of it). Like vanilla networks, RNNs achieve 
their outcomes through the back -propagation of errors – i.e., updating the values in th e model as 
new observations come in. However, unlike vanilla networks, RNNs can ‘remember ’ past infor - 
mation  given  the fact that connections  between  hidden  units  often  exhibit  a time delay.  This enables 
RNNs to ‘discover temporal correlations between even ts that are far away from each other in the 
data’ (Pascanu, Mikolov, and Bengio 2013 , 1310). For non -experts, the recursive and temporal 
nature of the process is diﬃcult to grasp, and it remains largely opaque even in the spe cialist litera - 
ture (Zeiler  and Fergus  2014 ), where  it is generally  accepted  that it is nigh-on impossible  to interpret 
weights  and neural  activations.  As a result,  RNNs  are deemed  capable  of discovering  unexpected  fea- 
tures of the data that appear confusing, other -worldly and/or ‘hallucinatory ’ (Perez 2018 ), given the 
approximate understanding of how they were  achieved.  
 
The disagreements and confusions of educational data science  
Having provided  a broad  introduction  of the AI method  and RNNs,  we will now examine  relationally 
its implication  in the DKT  case study,  starting  by the relations  between  the online  tutoring  system,  its 
underlying assumptions about knowledge modelling in algebra, and the resulting  data.  
 
(i) the digital environment and its  dataset  
 
Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITSs) have a long history as educational technologies, with the ﬁrst 
developments dating back  to the 1960s and 1970s (e.g., Carbonell, Michalski, and Mitchell 1983 ). 
ITSs  have  evolved  signiﬁcantly  over the past decades  and, nowadays,  they resemble  online  software 
platforms  that collect  large  amounts  of student  data.  One of the most  successful  ITSs  in recent  years, 
widely  adopted  in the US education  sector,  is called  ASSISTments.  This system  was developed  by the 
Worcester  Polytechnic  Institute  and is available  to teachers  free of charge.  It is oﬃcially  described  as 
a ‘collaborative  ecosystem ’ (Heﬀernan  and Heﬀernan  2014 ) which  has involved  teachers,  researchers 
and computer scientists working together to produce collections of problem sets and scaﬀolding 
materials to teach high school leve l maths, alongside the modelling of other subject domains such 
as physics, chemistry and English  grammar.  
ASSISTments  was launched  in 2003  in order  to automate  the remedial  instruction  for middle  and 
high school students preparing for high -stakes State examinations. The developers wanted to build 
‘an online  system  where  students  would  practice  the released  MCAS  (Massachusetts  Comprehensive 
Assessment System) items, with tutoring on how to work out problems oﬀered to students who got 
the problem wrong ’ (Heﬀernan and Heﬀernan 2014 , 475). This emphasis on the ‘Pass/Fail ’ binary 
typical of high -stake exams is computationally reinforced by ASSISTment ’s underlying model 
whic h is termed  ‘knowledge  tracing ’ (Corbett  and Anderson  1994 ). This approach  assumes  a simple 
two-state model of human knowledge, where student performance is observed in order to estimate 
(in a binary  fashion)  the presence  or absence  of knowledge  on a predeﬁned  skill.  Students  are deemed