7  
 
In order  to understand  RNNs,  it helps  to examine  what  preceded  them.  The 60 year old ﬁeld of AI 
is characterised  by periods  of hype  followed  by backlash,  which  involved  two well-documented  ‘AI 
winters ’ following  spells  of enthusiasm  and vigorous  research  activity.  The ﬁrst backlash  of the 1970s 
resulted  from  the failures  of so-called  ‘Good  Old Fashioned  AI’ (GOFAI),  also known  as ‘symbolic 
AI’, which emerged from work in mathematical logic where a number of principles derived from 
human reasoning were theorised and formalised. During the 1950s and 1960s, many researchers 
attempted (with limited success) to encode these principles in computational systems to simulate 
autonomous intelligence. This led to reduced funding and a subsequent sharp decline in research 
activity. However, the su bsequent development of ‘expert systems ’ in the 1980s was seen to herald 
a resurgence of AI research. These systems aimed to emulate the decisional processes of experts  by 
applying procedural (IF/THEN) logic methods to deﬁned knowledge bases that had been  devel - oped 
through consultation with human domain   experts.  
While  innovative,  the ﬁeld of expert  systems  stalled  after a decade  or so, prompting  the second  AI 
winter which lasted well into the early 1990s. However, this was followed by a resurgent phase  of 
radically diﬀerent AI that abandoned the previous emphasis placed on abstract formal logic prin - 
ciples  and began  instead  to rely on methods  of statistical  inference  as well as inductive  and abductive 
reasoning.  This phase  of so-called  ‘weak  AI’ is exempliﬁed  by developments  in the ﬁeld of machine 
learning,  where  computational  methods  are used to automate  speciﬁc  tasks  of classiﬁcation  and pre- 
diction.  The societal  application  of machine  learning  over the past 20 years  have  proven  numerous  – 
as reﬂected  in developments  in online  shopping,  face recognition,  self-driving  cars and cancer  diag- 
nosis.  In terms  of the speciﬁc  focus  in the present  paper,  there  has been  growing  educational  interest 
in the use of machine learning to model student performance and   behaviour.  
Broadly speaking, machine learning approaches follow a relatively straightforward ‘function  
ﬁtting paradigm ’ (Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman 2009 ): 
 
Y = f (X) + ε. 
Described  in plain  English,  this equation  posits  how an outcome  variable  ‘Y’ (e.g.,  in terms  of the 
DKT  controversy,  a prediction  of student  success  in completing  an algebra  problem)  is the result  of a 
function ‘f’ (i.e., a speciﬁc type of mathematical operation such as addition or division) applied to a 
predictor variable ‘X’ (e.g., the number of times the student seeks help while trying to solve the 
algebra problem). The equation takes also into account the likelih ood that the model will have errors  
(‘ε’). 
In terms of this function ﬁtting paradigm, then, the purpose of machine ‘learning ’ is to ﬁgure out  
what  f actually  does.  This can be a complex  process  that stretches  well beyond  simple  arithmetic.  In 
order  to learn  f, a human  agent  must  assemble  a ‘training  set’ of observations.  In so-called  supervised  
learning,  the data scientist  will use a pre-deﬁned  system  to label  (and therefore  categorise)  the inputs  
and the outputs  associated  with the phenomenon  that is being  modelled.  For example,  the process  of 
learning  algebra  can be modelled  according  to the established  consensus  in maths  education  and psy- 
chology.  This model  can be broken  down  in various  codiﬁed  steps  which  refer  to speciﬁc  inputs  and 
outputs.  Once  created,  this training  set can be fed to an algorithm  (a computer  program)  which  
‘learns ’ the various  interactions  and permutations  between  the inputs  and outputs  included  in the 
data set. If the approach  succeeds,  the algorithm  will ﬁgure  out what  f does,  and will then be able 
to predict an outcome whenever new, unseen instances of the same types of data are   encountered.  
In unsupervised machine learning, algorithms operate without pre -deﬁned labels and, according 
to one of the most popular technical text books currently available, ‘experience a dataset containing 
many  features,  then learn  useful  properties  of the structure  of this dataset ’ (Goodfellow,  Bengio,  and 
Courville  2016 , 105).  The notion  of an algorithm  ‘experiencing ’ something  is an anthropomorphism 
not uncommon  in the machine  learning  literature;  it evokes  a process  of independent  knowledge  dis- 
covery  whereby  meaningful  categories  can be constructed  in an ‘agentic ’ fashion.  It is precisely  in this 
arena  – unsupervised  knowledge  discovery  – that  neural  networks  began  outperforming  other