3  
This statement  was intended  not so much  as an expression  of total disapproval  as an invitation  to 
caution. Nevertheless, it began to expose interesting fault -lines in the debate on automation in edu - 
cation.  Going  back  a few years  to an interview  with the New  York  Times  Magazine,  also titled  ‘The 
machines  are taking  over’ (Murphy  Paul 2012 ), we learn  of the existence  of two ‘camps ’ in the edu- 
cational data mining and Intelligent Tutoring System communities – one (represented in the article 
by Heﬀernan) that sees humans and computers interacting in an organic manner, and another that 
pursues automation in a much more vigorous fashion (repor tedly championed by Ken Koedinger, a 
professor of human –computer interaction and psychology at Carnegie Mellon University). Heﬀer - 
nan is again quoted as saying ‘Let computers do what computers are good at, and people do what 
people are good at. ’ These exc erpts of voice from the mainstream media are valuable in illustrating 
how scholarly  divergences  encroach  into larger  public  controversies  around  automation  and human - 
machine cohabitation. They also point to the distinct ethos of development that un derpins the non - 
for-proﬁt ASSISTments platform, based on open research principles and supported by substantial 
public funding (https://www .neilheﬀ ernan.net/bio/grants).  This sets it apart from more corporate 
educational platforms like Khan Academy or Knewton, which do not tend to share datasets and 
conﬁdential information about their underlying analytical  models.  
Against this lively backgr ound, the claim for a huge improvement in predictive eﬃcacy made in 
the DKT study sparked a period of intense research activity amongst a small group of particularly 
interested  data scientists  and, within  a few years,  a number  of more  formal  responses  had been  pub- 
lished. These follow -up studies introduced other computational methods and, in some cases, other 
datasets on which the deep learning techniques were trained. In total, six educational datasets (only 
the ASSISTments one being open) were used durin g this period of replication and further testing  of 
the original claims. These studies challenged the original result on the basis of several arguments. 
Most were simply interested in the computational aspects or sought to show that pre -existing 
methods co uld perform just as well with careful adjustments (Lalwani and Agrawal 2017 ; Yeung 
and Yeung 2018 ; Wilson et al. 2016 ; Wang et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2017 ). One study developed a 
theoretical argument against the applicability of automated knowledge discovery to educational data 
(Khajah, Lindsey, and Mozer 2016 ), and another identiﬁed problems of data integrity in the original 
2015 study which, it was argued, contributed to inﬂated results (Xiong et al.  2016 ). 
By the standards of academic controversies, this sequence of claims and counterclaims w as of 
minor  signiﬁcance  – prompting  little excitement  beyond  the conﬁnes  of the educational  data science 
community. Research on deep learning in education neither ‘took oﬀ ’ nor ceased altogether as a 
result of these contestations, although a more reﬁned co nsensus was reached about the uses and 
misuses of neural networks. Instead, the DKT debate is perhaps most signiﬁcant in highlighting 
issues  that extend  beyond  the relatively  straightforward  aspects  of empirical  replication  and scholarly 
discussion.  In one sense,  the DKT  case is indicative  of a cycle  of particularly  exaggerated  initial  hype 
and ensuing backlash that AI seems to attract (Elish and Boyd 2017 ). Another signiﬁcant aspect of 
the DKT episode was the central involvem ent of for -proﬁt actors (such as Google, Khan Academy, 
Knewton and Funtoot). These organisations all share considerable economic interests in the edu - 
cational  take-up of AI-powered  predictive  modelling.  Indeed,  in general  terms  outside  of education, 
neura l networks  are poised  to become  a mainstream  tool through  the development  of oﬀ-the-shelf  AI 
frameworks  such as Google ’s TensorFlow.  Without  doubt,  there  is much  commercial  interest  in