15  
 
The task of knowledge tracing can be formalized as: given observations of interactions x 0 … xt taken by a stu - 
dent on a particular  learning  task, predict  aspects  of their next interaction  xt+1 [5] (…). The authors  found  that 
RNNs can robustly predict whether or not a student will solve a particular problem correctly given their per - 
formance on prior problems (Wang et al. 2017 , 325).  
This distinctive  motif  of learner  performance  as computati onal performance  can be considered  as the 
main ‘discursive work ’ enacted across the DKT studies, as their authors competed over prediction 
scores and contested the ‘stunning performance advantage ’ (Khajah et al: 94) of deep learning. As 
such, the theme of performance was an important linguistic/ideological device of ‘translation ’ that 
created  competitive  convergences  (Callon  1980 , 211) between  the following  actors:  
 
 
(a) the datasets  from  a handful  of online  learning  environments:  ASSISTments  (open),  Khan  Acad - 
emy (proprietary), Knewton (proprietary), Funtoot (proprietary), Hour of Code (open) and the 
Carnegie Tutor Geometry dataset  (open).  
(b) a small group of academic instit utions: Stanford University, University of Colorado Boulder, 
Hong Kong UST, Worcester Polytechnic  Institute;  
(c) the corporate entities who directly employed some of the data scientists involved in the  debate: 
Knewton, Funtoot,  Google.  
 
 
The relationships betw een these analytic entities/actors as evident from the eight DKT articles  is 
illustrated in Figure 5 . In this visualisation, the ASSISTments dataset and the study that ‘triggered ’ 
the discussion  (Piech  et al. 2015 ) occupy  a central  position  due to having  the largest  number  of con- 
nections. The study from Lalwani and Agrawal ( 2017 ) is also distinct as the sole study that relied 
exclusively on a  proprietary dataset from Funtoot, a popular Bangalore -based education  technology 
company.  Figure  5 therefore  illustrates  how applied  AI became  an ‘educational  thing’. This occurred 
through the competitive relations that the eight DKT studies mediated between academia, the cor - 
porate  sector  and, crucially,  a handful  of digital  educational  datasets  that shared  similar  assumptions 
about knowledge modelling and originated from platforms competing for market share in the K -12 
EdTech  sector.  
The ability to map these mediated relations in this manner therefore adds depth to our under - 
standing of the DKT controversy. While ASSISTments and Khan Academy are classiﬁed as non - 
for-proﬁt entities, the involvement of large, for proﬁt companies like Knewton and Funtoot points 
to their strategic  research  interests  in predictive  modelling,  as a potentially  integral  part of their port- 
folios of personalised, adaptive and ‘intelligent ’ educational products. The involvement of Google 
Brain (a leading deep learning research unit) is also signiﬁcant in ﬂagging Google ’s intention to 
shape the deployment of applied AI in education as one of its various domains of competitive 
activity.  
Of course,  these  relations  evident  within  the DKT  articles  are only the ‘tip of the iceberg ’ of deep 
learning as a much larger phenomenon shaped by market forces. The techniques developed  through 
the DKT  studies  are highly  portable  and scalable  across  various  domains  of society.  Thus  this map of 
educational AI is likely to be replicated in health, criminal justice, and multiple similar cases  where 
the same deep learning methods act as connective tissue between ensembles of academia and econ - 
omic  interests.  Indeed,  the past few years  have  witnessed  the rise of general -purpose  predictive  infra - 
structures with large technology companies developing various cloud -based or distributed AI/deep 
learning  frameworks.  The most  notable  development  in this regard  is Google ’s Tensorﬂow  – released 
under an Open Source licenc e in 2015 and rapidly established as a market leader. Indeed, the DKT 
case study suggests that Google ’s expertise was instrumental in enabling their particular brand of 
deep learning into the education domain, with Tensorﬂow chosen as the framework to buil d and train 
the models in two of the papers involved in the DKT controversy (Xiong et al. 2016 ; Zhang  et al.  
2017 ).