13  
cussion in academia and the public sphere. While it may appear ‘magical ’ and it  is  often  described 
as such in t he mainstream media (Naughton 2018 ), this mechanism relies in fact on a probabilistic 
logic that targets increasing degrees of plausibility. Plausibility is a  domain -dependent concept that 
may be beneﬁcial in areas like image  processing and recognition, where ‘hallucinated outcomes ’ are 
expected by -products of the iterative approximation process of deep learning, but it is more 
problematic when educational constructs are  involved.  
In this sense,  an important  tension  at the heart of the DKT  controversy  became  manifest  in one of 
the response  papers  (Khajah,  Lindsey,  and Mozer  2016 ), when  the authors  noted  that the application 
of deep learning to the ASSISTments knowledge model discounts the hand -crafted features  deﬁned 
by human experts on the basis of domain expertise, to favour instead the discovery  of  unintelligible 
(but ‘plausible ’, not unlike hallucinations) representations through the recursive propagation of 
information in the hidden layer of a neural   network.  
The features  discovered  by deep learning  exhibit  a complexity  and subtlety  that make  them  diﬃcult  to analyze 
and understand ( …) no human engineer could wire up a solution as thorough and accurate as solutions dis - 
covered  by deep  learning.  (…) (it) discards  hand -crafted  features  in favor  of representation  learning,  and often 
ignores domain knowledge and structure in favor of massive data sets and general architectural constraints on 
models. (Khajah, Lindsey, and Mozer 2016 : 94) 
This observation  signals  another  instance  of the DKT  scholarly  discussion  overﬂowing  into the broader 
public controversy about automation and human -machine equilibrium that was mentioned in the 
introduction,  thus bringing  into view  the fundamentally  non-human  nature  of automated  mechanical 
induction.  Indeed,  representation  discovery  makes  sense  in a perceptual,  sub-symbolic  image  classiﬁ - 
cation  task where  the relationships  between  the foundational  elements  of a digital  image (pixels)  can be 
decomposed,  learnt  and then recombined  in manifold  ways  without  human  intervention.  RNNs  have 
proved  quite  capable  to discover  the underlying  principles  that govern  this re-combinatorial  ﬂexibility. 
The academic  discipline  and the educational  practice  of human  learning  do not exhibit  the same  degree 
of ﬂexibility,  as their constructs  are largely  symbolic  abstractions  that reﬂect  an empirical  and discur - 
sive consensus  among  human  experts  about  cognition  and domain  knowledge.  
We are dealing  here with a crucial  tension  between  theoretical  and operational  ‘versions ’ of learn - 
ing, both problematic  from  an educational  point  of view.  On one side, the representation  discovery  of 
neural networks wants to proceed inductively from the data, leading to the paradoxical conclusion 
that deep learning might discover ‘unknown ’, yet plausible, algebra skills that, presumably, might 
even surprise mathematicians and maths educators. On the  other side, we have a highly structured 
process  of learning  and mastering  a form  of knowledge,  which  wants  to proceed  deductively  from  a 
binary and narrow knowledge model inspired by a desire to help students succeed in high stakes 
tests.  Unfortunately,  not much  was made  of this ‘philosophical ’ tension  between  two forms  of reduc - 
tionism,  as the DKT  debate  became  absorbed  in the inﬁnite  regress  of challenging  prediction  scores 
and tweaking computational models. In fact, the main ‘plot twist ’ in the debate could not be any 
further removed from these theoretical and philosophical considerations. In 2016, Xiong et al. ( 2016 ) 
discovered that the original study ’s inﬂated prediction scores were, in part at least, the  result of ﬂaws 
in the ASSISTments open data, determined by the ‘unclear transformational rules ’ (Xiong et al. 
2016 , 550) of RNNs, which exhibited a strange tendency to randomly duplicate rows of data as  part 
of its recursive,  unintelligible  work  of ‘discovery ’. While  this dealt  a serious  blow  to the orig- inal 
85% claim, it also prompted the authors to issue a reminder about the importance of basic data 
hygiene  when  using  such increasingly  opaque  methods:  ‘while  we advance  new algorithms  and ﬁne 
tune their parameters, we should also consider (and, if possible, report on) the robustness of the 
algorithms to common data glitches ’ (Xiong et al. 2016 , 550).  
 
(iii) Cultural, discursive and economic aspects of data science in education