17  
 
● Above all, the DKT debate exposed the problems and uncertainties surrounding the functional 
complexity of recurrent neural networks and the applicability of automated representation dis - 
covery to the educational  domain.  
 
As AI continues to develop diﬀerent pred ictive paradigms (including variations of the deep 
learning techniques described in this paper), the challenge facing education research over the  2020s 
will be to interrogate their assumptions and unresolved tensions in a critical way, avoiding   a 
wholes ale, unproductive closure. These are no wholly bad or incorrect developments to be bring - 
ing to bear on education. For example, while there is value in critiquing ASSISTments ’ original 
knowledge tracing model as limited and constrained, it is also worth a cknowledging that it is   based 
on a sociologically ‘real’ form of knowledge about cognition and learning. By real we   mean it is 
the result of meaningful patterns and ‘scientiﬁc generalizations, created through socially agreed 
choices about what was to c ount as sound observation and what as unsound ’ (Collins 2018 , 112).  
Ultimately,  this is where  our own analysis  departs  from  extreme  forms  of ‘relational  ontology ’ in 
STS and turns an eye toward critical realism (Archer 2010 ). While we fully accept that all entities 
(including theories of cognition and learning) result from a process of becoming and are not simply 
endowed with ‘substances ’, once they stabilise in accordance with politics as we ll as criteria of 
empirical credibility, they should be ascribed a distinctive, more robust status in the multifaceted 
social debate over truth and  knowledge.  
This latter  point  is particularly  pertinent  when  interrogating  the process  of knowledge  discovery  in 
deep  learning.  In particular,  it can be mobilised  to support  a critical  argument  against  automated  data 
representation  in education,  i.e., the fact that theories  of learning  cannot,  after all, be ‘discovered ’ by 
algorithms.  Once  we accept  that the input/output  dynamic  of proven  computational  models  of cogni - 
tion can have  a stable  basis  (i.e., they are not just plausible,  but ‘real’ in a sociological  way,  i.e., as stable 
forms  of enculturation  and socially  shaped  knowledge),  the problem  becomes  about  the constrained 
nature  of an algorithmic  framing,  rather  than the framing  per se. It becomes,  in other  words,  a matter 
of ‘heterogeneous engineering ’: a debate on how we can ‘redraw the boundaries of abstraction to 
include  people  and social  systems  as well,  such as local  incentives  and reward  structures,  institutional 
environments,  decision  making  cultures  and regulatory  systems ’ (Selbst  et al. 2018 , 9). 
In the case of ‘regular ’ knowledge  tracing,  this process  of boundary  redrawing  is possible  – but this 
will require a productive dialogue between the ﬁelds of educational assessment, computer science 
and critical educational research. Such dialogue might help fortify the ﬁeld of education research 
against adopting a  problematic inductivist position where the prospect of something along the   lines 
of ‘hallucinated school algebra ’ can be contemplated as an educational possibility (at least in theory). 
Indeed, this is a possible end -point that ‘deep’ knowledge tracing entertains through its reliance on 
bottom -up pattern recognition and representation discovery. Having followed closely the  DKT  
debate,  we can safely  conclude  that the achievability  of such ‘discoveries ’ in the education domain 
remains highly contestable (i f not something that deserves to be rejected outright). There - fore, we 
must remain vigilant against politically and commercially motivated attempts to downplay these 
contentious aspects and trade upon the mysterious and other -worldly connotations of AI - based 
speculation.  
In conclusion, this article provides an account of how AIED was ‘assembled ’ through a minor 
empirical debate about the use of deep learning with educational datasets. It also provides some 
methodological suggestions as to how social scientists can go about studying and critiquing similar 
episodes of unsettled knowledge -making.  
While we do not claim that our relational framework covers all possible lines of enquiry, we 
believe it represents a starting -point for further research by high lighting three important units of 
analysis: (i) the AI methods themselves, (ii) the digital platforms that produce the educational data - 
sets used to train algorithms, and (iii) the ‘social life ’ of computation in education as a site of epis - 
temic, ideolo gical and economic contestation. The DKT debate therefore provided us with an