18   
 
opening  through  which  the sociotechnical  nature  of predictive  modelling  was manifest  in a form  that 
could be meaningfully  investigated.  
As is the case with critical  research  on data-driven  education  in general,  the primary  focus  of this 
paper lies in: (i) questioning the attributes of scientiﬁc objectivity and neutrality ascribed to these 
technological  systems,  and then (ii) exploring  ways  in which  sociality  and diversity  can be reinjected 
in them.  In this sense,  one of the main  themes  highlighted  by our analysis  is the value  of combining  a 
precise examination of algorithms with a plural and experimental use of digital -ethnographic 
methods. Another concluding suggestion relates to the importance for critical education research   to 
engage in an interdisciplinary dialogue with cognitive science and data science. Such a dialogue 
must build on the acknowledgement that the models of cognition and learning encoded i n digital 
learning environments are meaningful analytic entities that cannot be glossed over in the pursuit   of 
social science  theorising.  
As a ﬁnal observation, we wish to remind the reader that we have examined a particular  instance 
of AIED in the form of the use of computational methods to categorise and predict performance in 
structured  learning  environments.  This speciﬁc  version  of AIED  is a reﬂection  of the so-called  ‘per- 
sonalised  learning ’ trend  in education,  which  has been  abundantly  critiqued  as an individualistic  dis- 
course that overemphasises market -inspired logics and is shaped by the interests of technology 
companies through metrics, automation and the pervasive collection of data. While not disagreeing 
with these existing critiques, the rel ational analysis developed in this paper suggests that the way  in 
which these phenomena actually ‘come together ’ is a nuanced process open, in theory, to alternate 
social shapings. As such, the continued application of AI methods to education is not someth ing to 
be rejected  outright,  but something  that is well worth  engaging  with on its own terms  and contesting. 
In this sense, AI in education needs to be talked about more often in controversial and circumspect 
terms, rather than accepted as a computational fait  accompli.  
 
 
Disclosure statement  
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the  authors.  
 
 
Notes on contributors  
Carlo  Perrotta  is senior  lecturer  in digital  literacies  in the Faculty  of Education  at Monash  University.  His background 
is in sociology and social psychology. Carlo has published on a variety of topics related to digital technology in edu - 
cation, including the social and political accountability of algorithms in education, the ethical use of video games in 
schoo ls and socio -material  analyses  of digital  education.  His research  as PI and Co-I has been  funded  by leading  inter- 
national bodies such as the European Commission, the ESRC, the Society for Educational Studies, as well as private 
donors (e.g. Microsoft and  Cisco  Systems).  
Neil Selwyn is a professor in the Faculty of Education, Monash University. His research and teaching focuses on the 
place  of digital  media  in everyday  life, and the sociology  of technology  (non)use  in educational  settings.  Neil has writ- 
ten extensively  on a number  of issues,  including  digital  exclusion,  education  technology  policymaking  and the student 
experience of technology -based learning. He has carried out funded research on digital technology, society and edu - 
cation  for the Australian  Research  Council  (ARC),  Economic  and Social  Research  Council  (ESRC),  British  Academy, 
the Swedish Research Council for Health, Working Life and Welfare (FORTE), the BBC, Nuﬃeld Foundation, the 
Spencer Foundation, Gates Foundation, Microsoft Part ners in Learning, Becta, Australian Government Oﬃce of 
Learning and Teaching (OLT), Australian Communications Consumer Action Network (ACCAN), Save The Chil - 
dren, Centre for Distance Education, the Welsh Oﬃce, National Assembly of Wales and various local authorities in 
the UK. 
 
 
ORCID  
Carlo Perrotta     http://orcid.org/0000 -0003 -3572 -0844  
Neil Selwyn    http://orcid.org/0000 -0001 -9489 -2692