10  
 
 
 
Figure 3. A digital -ethnographic materialisation: the ASSISTments dataset.  
 
the addition  and subtraction  of decimals,  and eventually  all independently  agreeing  on the same  ﬁnal 
response:  ‘Your  Mom’. 
In contrast, the work of abstraction carried out by predictive modelling and data science is not 
interested in these cultural and emotional aspects of the dataset, dismissing them  as background 
noise interfering with the primary task of predicting ‘knowledge states ’, following an underpinning 
model that relies on the involvement of human experts who manually label the skills required for a 
given  exercise.  Thus,  in terms  of how the ASSISTments  dataset  is used in the DKT  study,  the label - 
ling of skills and their encoding into the model preceded the algorithmic process of machine learn - 
ing, while the role of human agency in this process reminds us how machine learning   is: 
Both a fo rm of automated knowledge production and also one shaped by people working in speciﬁc labour 
conditions,  within  institutional  frameworks,  according  to professional  commitments,  worldviews  and disciplin - 
ary theories about the ways in which the world works.  (Williamson 2017 , 116) 
Aside from these issues of the human labour that underpins these seemingly automated processes, 
the knowledge model that frames (and curtails) the ASSISTments dataset is also notable in its rep - 
resent ation  of ‘learning ’. In particular,  the roots  of ASSISTments  as a tool designed  with summative 
testing in mind become visible in this entanglement between automation and human agency. This 
results in a problematic educational assumption ‘baked ’ into the data: knowledge about algebra is 
based on a ‘all or none ’ (Lindsey, Khajah, and Mozer 2014 ) learning binary. The key point is that 
this binary  construction  of knowledge  is a distinct  design  choice  which  reinforces  a pre-existing  edu- 
cational philosophy that can be traced back to the tool ’s origins in the pass/fail mentality of high 
stakes  testing.  Crucially,  this design  choice  also results  from  a process  of computational  performance 
enacted by knowledge tracing ’s method of choice: hidden Markov model, a probabilistic approach 
that predicts knowledge states according to a base -2 logic of 0 (knowledge is present) or 1 (knowl - 
edge is absent). It is important to consider the compromised and partial nature of  this enta nglement, 
which creates the very conditions in which ‘traditional ’ knowledge tracing can successfully model 
progression in closed software environments. At least, this was the case until the ‘mini-debate in the 
educational data -mining world ’ (private commu nication with one of the authors involved the DKT 
studies) that followed the application of recurrent neural  networks.  
 
(ii) The AI method meets the data: black boxes, tensions and  glitches