6  
 
Methodology  
Methodologically,  the paper  draws  on the case study  approach  favoured  in Science  and Technology 
Studies  (STS)  where  particular  attention  is paid to epistemic  ‘controversies ’. These  controversies  take 
the form  of disagreements  and debates  that illustrate  how social  aspects  inﬂuence  the otherwise  see- 
mingly  ‘objective ’ process  of knowledge  production  in science  and engineering  domains  (Law  2016 ). 
In this paper, we treat the academic debate around the DKT case as a minor controversy that can 
illuminate the sociotechnical factors involved in the prod uction of knowledge about data science and 
AI techniques in education. In particular, our paper presents an interpretative analysis of the 
disciplinary debate itself. This approach therefore follows the work of Kelty and Landecker ( 2009 ) 
by focusing on a corpus of formal knowledge analysed as an ethnographic informant: ‘something  to 
be observed and engaged as something alive with concepts and practices not necessarily visible 
through the lens of single actors ’ (177). In terms  of conventional educational research, this consti - 
tutes a relatively experimental and unconventional method. However, we argue that complex 
phenomena like ‘algorithmic education ’ can only be studied by focusing on their digital and episte - 
mic manifestat ions, and (it follows) through a pragmatic yet careful use of multiple methods that 
stretch well beyond a traditional reliance on interviews and other qualitative self -report  methods.  
In the remainder of the paper, we therefore take the eight articles that comprise the DKT contro - 
versy to develop an ethnographic understanding of the following three elements of a ‘relational 
framework ’: 
 
(1) The educational  data-set and broader  digital  ‘learning ’ platform.  The ﬁrst focus  is on one of the 
speciﬁc  ‘educational ’ datasets  involved  in the DKT  controversy.  As mentioned  earlier,  the DKT 
debate considered six datasets in total. In this paper, we focus on the most prevalent dataset in 
the controversy that featured in six of the eight articles. This dataset is from a US -based Intel - 
ligent  Tutoring  system  called  ASSISTments,  designed  to teach  (mostly)  the topic  of algebra.  For 
this element of our analysis we examine the technical documentation relating to ASSISTments 
and treat the actual dataset as a digital -ethnographic  artefact.  
(2) The AI method.  Second,  we focus  on the speciﬁc  machine  learning  method  implicit  in the DKT 
debate: recurrent neural networks (RNNs). Here we attempt an interpretative reading of the 
papers, looking beyond their face value as ‘objective ’ empirical reports. The interpretation 
focuses on tension between the ‘new knowledge ’ that RNNs tried to discover in the data, and 
the ‘existing knowledge ’ codiﬁed in the data environment as a result of an epistemic  consensus 
amongst the educationalists that created it (i.e., pedagogic consensus about how the topic of 
algebra is learnt, and  a pedagogic consensus about learning  progression).  
(3) The cultural,  discursive  and economic  aspects  of data science  in education.  Third,  we examine  the 
DKT debate as a speciﬁc instance of epistemic discourse. In particular, this involves analysing 
the patter ning of a speciﬁc  learning -related  keyword  (‘performance ’) across  the papers  as indica - 
tive of problematic cultural assumptions. We then place this discursive contestation in the con - 
text of competitive relations that the DKT studies mediated between universities, corporate 
entities and the six digital educational  datasets.  
 
 
Weak AI: hype, backlash and the complexities of ‘learning from data ’ 
Before examining each of these three elements, it is important to develop a good working under - 
standing of th e AI method that is under scrutiny here. In particular, we outline the speciﬁc  machine 
learning method implicit in the DKT debate: recurrent neural networks (RNNs), which    is one of 
many  methods  that  can be used  in AI. As  shall be clear  when we  g o on to consider  the three 
elements, understanding the logic of this method and the way it diﬀers from other machine learning 
approaches is an important pre -requisite to making sense of the DKT controversy.