2  
 
Deep learning goes to school: toward a 
relational understanding of AI in education  
Carlo Perrotta & Neil Selwyn  
Contact:  carlo.perrotta@monash.edu  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction  
In 2015,  a research  poster  presentation  titled  ‘Deep  Knowledge  Tracing ’ featured  in the twenty -ninth 
conference  on neural  information  processing  systems  (Piech  et al. 2015 ). The research  was a collab - 
oration  between  Stanford  University,  Google  Brain  (Google ’s research  unit on artiﬁcial  intelligence), 
and Khan  Academy  (the popular  online  learning  platform  combining  video  lectures  and algorithmic 
personalisation).  
This study saw the authors apply a state -of-the-art ‘deep learning ’ approach to two  ‘educational ’ 
datasets. One of these datasets derived from Kahn Academy, and another originated from an Intel - 
ligent Tutoring System used wid ely in the US secondary school sector called ASSISTments. Deep 
learning is a speciﬁc method of predictive modelling where computers are able to discover patterns 
in data using complex recursive operations which, through the use of artiﬁcial neural networks , 
loosely  mimic  how a biological  brain  works.  Once  a deep  learning  application  has learnt  how to pre- 
dict patterns in a ‘training dataset ’, it can be used subsequently to predict the same patterns when it 
encounters  new instances  of the same  sort of data.  Piech  and colleagues ’ proposal  for deep  knowledge 
tracing (DKT) revolved around the claim that neural networks can be used to discover unexpected 
(‘deep’) features of the data arising from students ’ use of online learning  environments.  
While deep learning  had been applied before to educational data, the Deep Knowledge Tracing 
study caused considerable interest among the data science community due to the authors ’ claims  of 
achieving  85 percent  predictive  eﬃciency.  Crucially,  the authors  reasoned  that their work  could  be 
generalised to other learning environments, this potentially having great implications for anyone 
working in the areas of personalised learning and adaptive learning. The ﬁnding even prompted 
favourable news media coverage, with headlines such as ‘RoboTutor is a Class Act ’ (Macdonald 
2016 ; Rutkin 2015 ). Nevertheless, these initial reports also acknowledged doubts over the applica - 
bility of the original study ’s ﬁndings for actual educational practi ce. Neil Heﬀernan, a computer 
scientist from Worcester Polytechnic Institute in Massachusetts involved in the original design of 
the ASSISTments system, put it bluntly: ‘What does that mean, to be able to do a much better     job 
at predicting stuﬀ? I wish  we could turn that into something that ’s  meaningful. ’ 
 
ABSTRACT  
In Applied AI, or ‘machine learning ’, methods such as neural networks are used to train computers to 
perform tasks without human intervention. In this article, we quest ion the applicability of these 
methods to education.    In particular, we consider a case of recent attempts from data scientists     to 
add AI elements to a handful of online lea rning environments, such as Khan Academy and the 
ASSISTments intelligent  tut oring  system. Drawing on Science and Technology Studies (STS), we 
provide a detailed examination of the scholarly work carried out by several data scientists around the 
use of ‘deep learning ’ to predict aspects of educational performance. This approach  d raws  attention  
to  relations  between various (problematic) units of analysis: ﬂawed data, partially incomprehensible 
computational methods, narrow forms of educational  knowledge baked into the online environments, 
and a reductionist discourse of data science with evident economic rami ﬁcations. These relations can 
be framed ethnographically as a ‘controversy ’ that casts doubts on AI as an objective scienti ﬁc 
endeavour, whilst illuminating the confusions,  the disagreements and the economic interests tha t 
surround  its  implementations.