16   
 
 
 
Figure  5. Mapping  the Deep  Knowledge  Tracing  controversy  – relations  between  datasets,  data scientists,  academia  and corporate 
tech. The main ‘nodes ’ are the individual  studies  and the datasets  used as part of the experiments.  
 
Conclusion  
While an initial broad -brush encounter with deep learning techniques in education, this article brings 
a number of diﬀerent perspectives and points of analysis to the study of AI in education.     In 
particular, our descriptions highlight a series of important relations. This includes relations    (and 
tensions) between ‘versions ’ of learning, relations between models and datasets, relations between 
academic and corporate entities, and relations between epistemic cultures and economic interests.  
The analysis  of these  relations  suggests  that the trajectory  of this particular  predictive  mod- elling 
approach in education was a complex sociotechnical aﬀair. This is consistent with the STS approach 
that informed the  study.  
In the spirit of this research tradition, the paper has raised the following observations about t he 
DKT controversy:  
● Some  aspects  of this DKT  controversy  are best seen as epistemic  in a traditional  sense,  related  to 
how the ﬁelds of data science, educational data mining and learning analytics interact with each 
other to develop knowledge through resea rch, publications and  conferences.  
● Some  aspects  of the DKT  controversy  could  be described  as semiotic,  as the meaning  of a speciﬁc 
predictive paradigm was negotiated across a number of studies, in relation to (and in tension with) 
aspects of human cognition and  learning.  
● Yet other aspects of the DKT controversy are distinctly sociocultural, as the overriding concern 
for predi ctive power in the deep knowledge tracing debate is consistent with the values, the dis - 
courses and the economic interests of the data science and AI community/industry where the 
authors of these ‘educational ’ studies  originated.