1
0  
 
to have  learnt  a skill (such  as adding  and subtracting  integers)  when  they get three  answers  right  in a 
row with no help and no mistakes. The exercises and the supporting materials are presented to stu - 
dents through a traditional software interface (see Figure 2 ), as they progress along a pre -deﬁned 
trajectory towards increas ed mastery of a range of  skills.  
Data  gathered  from  ASSISTments  in the school  year 2009–2010  has been  made  available  online  on a 
free-to-use basis (https://sites.google.com/site/assistmentsdata/home/assistment -2009 -2010 -data). 
Crucially, this dataset was u sed as a train/test split in the DKT studies (i.e., one half was used to train 
the algorithms, the other half for testing purposes). It is downloadable as a CSV ﬁle and can be 
imported in various analysis tools and programming environments for statistical computing, such  as 
Microsoft  Excel,  SPSS  and R. Once  opened  (Figure  3), the dataset  exhibits  the typical  charac - teristics  
of statistical  tabulation  with a total of 401,756  rows,  each indicating  an assignment  done  by a student,  
with all assignments  in chronological  order  and each student  tagged  with a speciﬁc  ID. 
This dataset is an insightful digital materialisation in its own right, demonstrating the extent of 
data capture performed in ASSISTments and other similar systems. It contains detailed  information 
about the school in which the task was performed, the ID of the teacher who assigned the problem, 
the skills  associated  with each problem,  the number  of student  attempts  on a problem,  the number  of 
times help was a ccessed and several other rows about individual performance  aspects.  
When  examined  closely,  there  are numerous  learning -related  ‘stories ’ in these  data:  trajectories  of 
educational  achievement  and struggle,  signs  of student  fragility  and maths -related  anxiety,  as well as 
school -level factors relating to the cultural contexts where these exercises were performed. We can 
see for example,  student  #70363  attempting  14 times  to complete  an exercise  about  box and whisker 
plotting in descriptive statistics. We  can also see student #79781 making 66 attempts to answer the 
same  task and then eventually  answer  ‘I have  no idea’. Then  again,  are students  #78897,  #88129,  
#78415, #88127 and #88129 – all tackling various exercises ranging from fraction conversion to  
 
 
 
Figure 2. The ASSISTments user interface.