4  
 
applying these developments to educational contexts. In view of this, the present paper explores  the 
‘minor ’ DKT  controversy  as a signiﬁcant  bellwether  for the likely  future  of AI in education.  Drawing 
on ideas  and methods  from  the ﬁeld of Science  and Technology  Studies  (STS),  we examine  the eight 
main  empirical  studies  that made  up the central  sequential  ‘back  and forth’ of the controversy.  These 
are approached in an interpretative manner – that is, not simply as empirical reports but as evidence 
of relationships between key sociotechnical elements. The remainder of this paper therefore 
approaches the DKT case in terms of three research questions relevant to any application of AI in 
education:  
 
(a) How  does educational  AI (AIED)  operationally  ‘act’ on datasets?  Or, more  speciﬁcally,  how can 
we gain a sense  of (a particular  brand  of) AIED ’s underlying  logics  of knowledge  modelling  and 
learning  progression?  
(b) Why  do educational  data scientists  claim  that new forms  of learning  can be ‘discovered ’ and pre- 
dicted by machines, without human  intervention?  
(c) If we explore the cultural assumptions operationalised in AIED in the context of commercial 
competitive relations, what would this tell us about how these assumptions were  formed?  
 
Before  exploring  questions,  we ﬁrst outline  some  basic  conceptual  assumptions  and identify  con- 
tributions from the STS literature that helped us operationalise our   approach.  
 
STS and arti ﬁcial intelligence  
While the subject of much discussion, in general terms Science & Te chnology Studies (STS) is a 
broad collection of theoretical orientations and empirical approaches that share one overarching 
goal: to deconstruct ‘objective ’ endeavours in technological and scientiﬁc domains, and  reconstruct 
them as complex entanglements o f humanity, discourse and materiality. In this sense, STS research 
sets out to challenge the workings and the assumptions of techno -scientiﬁc knowledge and recast 
them as the result of multiple social  inﬂuences.  
Various  strands  of STS prioritise  diﬀerent  inﬂuences,  such as the traditional  forces  of sociological 
structuration (Winner 1980 ), gender biases and engrained forms of bodily and social oppression 
(Haraway 1988 ), or more ﬂuid and dialecti c forms of social construction (Law 2010 ). Running 
throughout these diﬀerent theoretical concerns is a recurrent emphasis on the notion of relation. This  
refers  to the explicit  and implicit  linkages,  tensions  and dependencies  that work  to order  things in 
conditions of uncertainty. Through the detailed description of these relational processes of  order - ing 
and stabilisation – what Annamarie Mol called ‘ontological politics ’ (1999) – STS researchers have 
produced case studies o f how material technologies and forms of elite scientiﬁc knowledge are done 
and redone through practices and human/non -human alliances. We therefore seek to pos - ition the 
present paper within this   tradition.  
The implicit aim of this type of work is to h ighlight the plurality and uncertainty that undergird 
‘objective ’ techno -scientiﬁc facts, and to study how scientiﬁc things become real (i.e., are ‘materi - 
alised’) diﬀerently  through  enactments  and practices.  As Law (2010 , 184) puts it, ‘reality  is not des- 
tiny … if we attend consistently to practices, then we start to discover alternative forms of 
materialisation ’. One speciﬁc STS tradition that the speciﬁc paper pursues is the interrogation of 
specialised epistemic communi ties through engagement with technical aspects of their practical and 
discursive conventions, including their interactions in advanced laboratories and through scho - larly 
outputs (Latour and Woolgar 2013 ). Often leaning towa rds the sociology of knowledge, and inspired 
by diverse thinkers such as Foucault, Bourdieu and Kuhn, this approach has generated a wealth of 
case studies into the workings of various groups of scientists and engineers such as grav - itational 
wave physics (Collins 2010 ), high energy physics (Knorr -Cetina 1995 ), geneticists  (Mack - enzie et 
al. 2013 ), statisticians (MacKenzie 1978 ) and so on. The present paper therefore attempts something 
similar in terms of unpacking the epistemological work of ‘educational data  scientists ’.