JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 1
A Review on Generative Adversarial Networks:
Algorithms, Theory, and Applications
Jie Gui, Zhenan Sun, Y onggang Wen, Dacheng Tao, Jieping Y e
Abstract —Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are a hot research topic recently. GANs have been widely studied since 2014, and
a large number of algorithms have been proposed. However, there is few comprehensive study explaining the connections among
different GANs variants, and how they have evolved. In this paper, we attempt to provide a review on various GANs methods from the
perspectives of algorithms, theory, and applications. Firstly, the motivations, mathematical representations, and structure of most GANs
algorithms are introduced in details. Furthermore, GANs have been combined with other machine learning algorithms for speciﬁc
applications, such as semi-supervised learning, transfer learning, and reinforcement learning. This paper compares the commonalities
and differences of these GANs methods. Secondly, theoretical issues related to GANs are investigated. Thirdly, typical applications of
GANs in image processing and computer vision, natural language processing, music, speech and audio, medical ﬁeld, and data
science are illustrated. Finally, the future open research problems for GANs are pointed out.
Index Terms —Deep Learning, Generative Adversarial Networks, Algorithm, Theory, Applications.
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
GENERATIVE adversarial networks (GANs) have become
a hot research topic recently. Yann LeCun, a legend in
deep learning, said in a Quora post “GANs are the most
interesting idea in the last 10 years in machine learning.”
There are a large number of papers related to GANs accord-
ing to Google scholar. For example, there are about 11,800
papers related to GANs in 2018. That is to say, there are
about 32 papers everyday and more than one paper every
hour related to GANs in 2018.
GANs consist of two models: a generator and a dis-
criminator. These two models are typically implemented by
neural networks, but they can be implemented with any
form of differentiable system that maps data from one space
to the other. The generator tries to capture the distribution
of true examples for new data example generation. The
discriminator is usually a binary classiﬁer, discriminating
generated examples from the true examples as accurately
as possible. The optimization of GANs is a minimax opti-
mization problem. The optimization terminates at a saddle
point that is a minimum with respect to the generator and
a maximum with respect to the discriminator. That is, the
optimization goal is to reach Nash equilibrium [1]. Then,
the generator can be thought to have captured the real
distribution of true examples.
Some previous work has adopted the concept of making
two neural networks compete with each other. The most
J. Gui is with the Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics,
University of Michigan, USA (e-mail: guijie@ustc.edu).
Z. Sun is with the Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and
Computing, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China (e-mail:
znsun@nlpr.ia.ac.cn).
Y. Wen is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore 639798 (e-mail: ygwen@ntu.edu.sg).
D. Tao is with the UBTECH Sydney Artiﬁcial Intelligence Center and
the School of Information Technologies, the Faculty of Engineering and
Information Technologies, the University of Sydney, Australia. (e-mail:
Dacheng.Tao@Sydney.edu.au).
J. Ye is with DiDi AI Labs, P .R. China and University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor.(e-mail:jpye@umich.edu).relevant work is predictability minimization [2]. The connec-
tions between predictability minimization and GANs can be
found in [3], [4].
The popularity and importance of GANs have led to sev-
eral previous reviews. The difference from previous work is
summarized in the following.
1) GANs for speciﬁc applications : There are surveys of
using GANs for speciﬁc applications such as image
synthesis and editing [5], audio enhancement and
synthesis [6].
2) General survey : The earliest relevant review was
probably the paper by Wang et al. [7] which mainly
introduced the progress of GANs before 2017. Ref-
erences [8], [9] mainly introduced the progress of
GANs prior to 2018. The reference [10] introduced
the architecture-variants and loss-variants of GANs
only related to computer vision. Other related work
can be found in [11]–[13].
As far as we know, this paper is the ﬁrst to provide a
comprehensive survey on GANs from the algorithm, theory,
and application perspectives which introduces the latest
progress. Furthermore, our paper focuses on applications
not only to image processing and computer vision, but also
sequential data such as natural language processing, and
other related areas such as medical ﬁeld.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: The
related work is discussed in Section 2. Sections 3-5 introduce
GANs from the algorithm, theory, and applications perspec-
tives, respectively. Tables 1 and 2 show GANs’ algorithms
and applications which will be discussed in Sections 3 and
5, respectively. The open research problems are discussed in
Section 6 and Section 7 concludes the survey.
2 R ELATED WORK
GANs belong to generative algorithms. Generative algo-
rithms and discriminative algorithms are two categories ofarXiv:2001.06937v1  [cs.LG]  20 Jan 2020