4 X. Jia et al:
1x1identity
kxk3x3
Vanilla  BlockLK Block
TransMorph
BlockLN MHA MLP
3x3 3x3
2
U-Net ArchitectureC
2C
4C
8C
16C
LN
Fig. 2.BlocksusedinthevanillaU-Net,TransMorph,andLKU-Net.ThevanillaU-Net
usesthesameblocksinboththeencoderanddecoder,eachofwhichconsistsofmultiple
sequential 3 3 convolutional layers. TransMorph replaces four convolutional blocks in
the encoder with transformer-based blocks, each of which is built on a combination of
layer norm (LN), multi-head self-attention (MHA), and multi-layer perceptron (MLP).
For a fair comparison with TransMorph, we use four LK blocks in LKU-Net, each of
which contains one identity shortcut and three parallel convolutional layers (that have
the kernel sizes of 1 1, 33, and kk, respectively). The outputs of each LK block
are then fused by an element-wise addition.
3 Large Kernel U-Net (LKU-Net)
Large kernel (LK) block : According to [1], it is easy to compute that the
receptive ﬁeld of a vanilla 5-layer U-Net is large enough to cover the area
which could impact the deformation ﬁeld around a given voxel. However, as
per RepVGG [9] and RepLK-ResNet [10], in practice the eﬀective receptive ﬁeld
(ERF) of a convolutional network is much smaller than the one we compute. We
therefore adopt a LK block to increase the eﬀective receptive ﬁeld. Speciﬁcally,
in each LK block, there are four parallel sub-layers, including a LK convolutional
layer (kkk), a 333 layer, a 111 layer, and an identity shortcut. The
subsequent outputs of these sub-layers are then element-wisely added to pro-
duce the output of a LK block, as shown in Fig. 2. The parallel paths in each
LK block not only handle distant spatial information but also capture and fuse
spatial information at a ﬁner scale.
Directly enlarging the kernel size of a convolutional layer leads to the number
of parameters growing exponentially. For example, the number of parameters
increases by 463%and1270%when enlarging a 3 33 kernel to 555 and to
777, respectively. The resulting network is then cumbersome and prone to
collapsing or over-ﬁtting during training. The beneﬁts of using the proposed LK
block is that both the identity shortcut and the 1 11 convolutional layer help
the training. These numerical results are listed in our ablation studies (Table 1).