U-Net vs Transformer: Is U-Net Outdated in
Medical Image Registration?
Xi Jia1, Joseph Bartlett1;2, Tianyang Zhang1, Wenqi Lu3,
Zhaowen Qiu4, and Jinming Duan1;5
1School of Computer Science,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK
2Department of Biomedical Engineering,
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia
3Tissue Image Analytics Centre, Department of Computer Science,
University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK
4Institute of Information Computer Engineering,
Northeast Forestry University, Harbin, 150400, China
5Alan Turing Institute, London, NW1 2DB, UK
Abstract. Due to their extreme long-range modeling capability, vision
transformer-based networks have become increasingly popular in de-
formable image registration. We believe, however, that the receptive ﬁeld
of a 5-layer convolutional U-Net is suﬃcient to capture accurate defor-
mations without needing long-range dependencies. The purpose of this
study is therefore to investigate whether U-Net-based methods are out-
dated compared to modern transformer-based approaches when applied
to medical image registration. For this, we propose a large kernel U-Net
(LKU-Net) by embedding a parallel convolutional block to a vanilla U-
Net in order to enhance the eﬀective receptive ﬁeld. On the public 3D
IXI brain dataset for atlas-based registration, we show that the perfor-
mance of the vanilla U-Net is already comparable with that of state-
of-the-art transformer-based networks (such as TransMorph), and that
the proposed LKU-Net outperforms TransMorph by using only 1.12%
of its parameters and 10.8% of its mult-adds operations. We further
evaluate LKU-Net on a MICCAI Learn2Reg 2021 challenge dataset for
inter-subject registration, our LKU-Net also outperforms TransMorph
on this dataset and ranks ﬁrst on the public leaderboard as of the sub-
mission of this work. With only modest modiﬁcations to the vanilla U-
Net,weshowthatU-Netcanoutperformtransformer-basedarchitectures
on inter-subject and atlas-based 3D medical image registration. Code is
available at https://github.com/xi-jia/LKU-Net .
1 Introduction
Deformable image registration, a fundamental task in medical image analysis,
aims to ﬁnd an optimal deformation that maps a moving image onto a ﬁxed
image. The problem can be formulated as the minimization problem including
a data ﬁdelity term that measures the distance between the ﬁxed and warped
moving image and a regularization that penalizes non-smooth deformations.arXiv:2208.04939v2  [eess.IV]  13 Aug 2022