2 X. Jia et al:
Voxel Displacement Space & Voxel Space
Fig. 1.Displacement ﬁelds computed from the IXI brain dataset. The left ﬁgure plots
thedisplacementvectorsinvoxelaveragedoverthewholetrainingdata(averagelengths
of these vectors along x-axis, y-axis, and z-axis are 2.1 voxels, 2.3 voxels, and 1.4
voxels, respectively). The right ﬁgure is an illustration of the left ﬁgure where vectors
are represented by a sphere, the size of which is much smaller than the cubic which
represents the true size of the volumetric image.
Manyiterativeoptimizationapproaches[3,21,24]havebeenproposedtotackle
intensity-based deformable registration, and shown great registration accuracy.
However, such methods suﬀer from slow inference speeds and manual tuning for
each new image pair. Though some works, such as Nesterov accelerated ADMM
[22], propose certain techniques to accelerate the computation, their speed still
does not compare to approaches based on deep learning. Due to their fast infer-
ence speed and comparable accuracy with iterative methods, registration meth-
ods based on deep neural networks [4,25,5,27,18,19,13] have become a powerful
benchmark for large-scale medical image registration.
Deep learning based registration methods [25,5,18,19] directly take moving
and ﬁxed image pairs as input, and output corresponding estimated deforma-
tions. Most deep neural networks use a U-Net style architecture [20] as their
backbone and only vary preprocessing steps and loss functions. Such an archi-
tecture includes a contraction path to encode the spatial information from the
input image pair, and an expansion path to decode the spatial information to
compute a deformation ﬁeld (or stationary velocity ﬁeld). Inspired by the suc-
cessof thetransformerarchitecture [23],severalrecentregistrationworks [26,7,6]
have used it as the backbone to replace the standard U-Net. In this study, we
investigate whether U-Net is outdated compared to modern transformer archi-
tectures, such as the new state-of-the-art TransMorph [6], for image registration.
The motivation for this work can be found in Fig. 1, where we plotted the
average voxel displacement ﬁelds of the IXI brain dataset estimated by Trans-
Morph. We notice that the average length of displacements along x-axis,y-axis,
andz-axis are 2.1 voxels, 2.3 voxels, and 1.4 voxels, respectively. These displace-
ments are very small compared to the actual volumetric size (160 192224) of
the image. Therefore, we argue that it may not be necessary to adopt a trans-
former to model long-range dependencies for deformable image registration. In-
stead, we propose a large kernel U-Net (LKU-Net) by increasing the eﬀective
receptive ﬁeld of a vanilla U-Net with large kernel blocks and show that our