Improved Sample Complexity for Fisher-non-degenerate Policies
Only a few recent works provide global convergence guar-
antees for the case of stochastic policy gradients (Liu et al.,
2020; Zhang et al., 2021a; Ding et al., 2021; 2022; Yuan
et al., 2022b; Masiha et al., 2022).
Existing results under our setting. For the class of Fisher-
non-degenerate parameterized policies, Liu et al. (2020)
propose a stochastic variance-reduced and Natural PG meth-
ods for which they establish a ˜𝒪(𝜀−3)sample complexity
for finding an 𝜀-globally optimal policy (up to a compatible
function approximation error due to policy parameteriza-
tion). Later, Ding et al. (2022) achieve the same sample
complexity using a single-loop and finite-batch momentum-
based PG algorithm. However, the above works require
the strong assumption of bounded IS weights variance. Re-
cently, Yuan et al. (2022b) showed the same ˜𝒪(𝜀−3)sample
complexity for stochastic Vanilla-PG for the same policy
class under similar assumptions. Very recently, Masiha
et al. (2022) propose a stochastic cubic regularized method
(SCRN ) achieving a ˜𝒪(𝜀−2.5)sample complexity under
similar assumptions. Nevertheless, at each iteration, their
method needs a heavy subroutine to solve the cubic regu-
larized sub-problem and requires large batches of samples
to estimate the gradient and the Hessian (where batch-sizes
depend on the dimension 𝑑and the desired accuracy 𝜀, see
Lemma 11 therein). Masiha et al. (2022) further improve
the complexity to a ˜𝒪(𝜀−2)considering a variance-reduced
variant of SCRN (see Algorithm 2 therein) for stochastic
optimization. However, this algorithm also requires large
batch-sizes. Moreover, adapting this method to RL is not
trivial, since it would require introducing IS weights for both
stochastic gradients and Hessians and assuming a bound on
their variance to account for non-stationarity inherent to RL.
Global sample complexity for tabular and soft-max poli-
cies. In the tabular setting, Lan (2022) shows a ˜𝒪(𝜀−2)
sample complexity for a stochastic policy mirror descent
method. However, their analysis is specific to the tabular
setting with discrete state action spaces where no parameter-
ization is used. Under the soft-max policy parameterization,
Zhang et al. (2021a) obtain a global 𝜀-optimal policy us-
ing˜𝒪(𝜀−2)samples via a double-loop variance-reduced PG
algorithm with large batch sizes. Interestingly, this algo-
rithm implements a gradient truncation mechanism to relax
the boundedness assumption on the IS weights variance by
utilizing the special structure of the softmax policy param-
eterization. We highlight that Zhang et al. (2021a) focus
on the softmax policy parameterization only and consider a
hard-to-verify overparameterization assumption (Assump-
tion 5.11) to exploit hidden convexity. Very recently, when
finalizing the preparation of this work, we came across
the works of Alfano and Rebeschini (2022); Yuan et al.
(2022a) analyzing the convergence of NPG and its Q-version
(Q-NPG ) for log-linear policies. In particular, Yuan et al.
(2022a) achieves a ˜𝒪(𝜀−2)sample complexity using theframework of compatible function approximation. Further-
more, at each iteration, NPG andQ-NPG require using SGD
as a subroutine to solve a regression problem to find the up-
date direction and rely on complex sampling subprocedures
(Algorithms 3, 4 p. 28-30). Complementing all these works
considering direct and softmax parameterization for discrete
and finite state action spaces, our analysis addresses the case
of continuous state action spaces via the FND policy class,
which is a fundamentally different problem setting.
2. Preliminaries
2.1. Problem formulation
We consider a discrete-time discounted Markov Decision
Process (MDP) (Puterman, 2014) ℳ= (𝒮,𝒜,𝒫, 𝑟, 𝜌, 𝛾 ),
where𝒮and𝒜are (possibly continuous) state and action
spaces respectively, 𝒫:𝒮×𝒜×𝒮 → R+is the state
transition density, 𝑟:𝒮×𝒜→ [−𝑟max, 𝑟max]is the reward
function which is bounded by 𝑟max>0,𝜌is the initial
state distribution, and 𝛾∈(0,1)is the discount factor. A
parametrized policy is defined for every parameter 𝜃∈R𝑑
and state 𝑠∈𝒮as a probability density function 𝜋𝜃(·|𝑠)over
the action space𝒜. At each time step 𝑡∈Nin a state 𝑠𝑡∈𝒮,
the RL agent chooses an action 𝑎𝑡∈𝒜 according to the
distribution 𝜋𝜃(·|𝑠𝑡), observes a reward 𝑟(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡)and the
environment transitions to a state 𝑠𝑡+1in a region𝒮′⊂𝒮
according to𝒫(·|𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡).
The goal of the RL agent is to find a policy 𝜋𝜃maximizing
the expected return defined by:
𝐽(𝜃)def=E𝜌,𝜋𝜃[︃+∞∑︁
𝑡=0𝛾𝑡𝑟(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡)]︃
, (1)
where the expectation is taken with respect to the distribu-
tion of the Markov chain (𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡)𝑡∈N.1The agent only has
access to trajectories of finite length 𝐻generated from the
MDP, whereas the state transition kernel 𝒫and the reward
function 𝑟(·,·)are unknown. The probability distribution
induced by the initial distribution 𝜌and a policy 𝜋𝜃on the
space of trajectories of length 𝐻≥1has a density:
𝑝(𝜏|𝜋𝜃)def=𝜌(𝑠0)𝜋𝜃(𝑎0|𝑠0)𝐻−1∏︁
𝑡=1𝒫(𝑠𝑡|𝑠𝑡−1,𝑎𝑡−1)𝜋𝜃(𝑎𝑡|𝑠𝑡),
where 𝜏= (𝑠0, 𝑎0,···, 𝑠𝐻−1, 𝑎𝐻−1). We also define the
truncated expected return given the horizon 𝐻by𝐽𝐻(𝜃)def=
E𝜌,𝜋𝜃[︁∑︀𝐻−1
𝑡=0𝛾𝑡𝑟(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡)]︁
.
1In the rest of the paper, we will often omit the subscript in this
expectation where it is clear from the context.
3