Improved Sample Complexity for Fisher-non-degenerate Policies
parameterization without additional assumptions, while it is sufficient to validate smoothness of 𝐽and the bounded
variance of stochastic gradients, see (Yuan et al., 2022b, Lemma 4.2 and 4.4). However, in this work, we do not focus
on such technical relaxations and work with the standard assumption of bounded score function.
3.For a policy inducing an unbounded score function, an alternative is to partition the action space for instance according
to when the score function is bounded and integrable using an exploration parameter. We refer the reader to Section 5.1
in Bedi et al. (2021). Adopting this approach requires adjustments in the analysis.
Assumption 1- (ii)(Lipschitzness of the score function): We compute∇2log𝜋𝜃(𝑠, 𝑎) =−1
𝜎2𝜙(𝑠)𝜙(𝑠)⊤which is bounded
if the feature map is bounded.
Assumption 2(Second-order smoothness of the score function): This assumption trivially holds since ∇2log𝜋𝜃(𝑠, 𝑎)is
independent of 𝜃. Regarding this assumption, we further highlight that it is not required for (N)-HARPG (see Theorems 2
and 3). It is only required for N-PG-IGT . While this assumption is key for the improvement for N-PG-IGT , we point out
that (a) it is a mild assumption satisfied for the Gaussian policy as we just mentioned and (b) Table 2 (column ‘No 2nd.
smooth’) highlights it as an additional assumption compared to existing results for a fair comparison. In particular, we
compare to (Masiha et al., 2022) which makes the same additional assumption.
Assumption 3(Fisher non-degeneracy): The Fisher information matrix for a Gaussian policy can be written as 𝐹𝜌(𝜃) =
1
𝜎2𝜙(𝑠)𝜙(𝑠)⊤, which is positive definite for a full row-rank feature map. More generally10,
1.Linear mean parameterization : when the Gaussian policy is multivariate ( 𝒜=R𝑞) and parametrized by 𝜇𝜃(𝑠) =
Φ(𝑠)𝑇𝜃where Φ :𝒮→R𝑑×𝑞(𝑑being the dimension of the parameter 𝜃) and Σis a fixed covariance matrix, the Fisher
information matrix is independent of 𝜃as it is given by Φ(𝑠)Σ−1Φ(𝑠)𝑇.Hence, Assumption 3 is satisfied if Φ(𝑠)is
full-row-rank. For the usual setting where the dimension of the parameter 𝜃is smaller than the dimension of the action
space (i.e., 𝑑 < 𝑞 ), choosing the rows of Φ(𝑠)to be linearly independent would satisfy this full-rank requirement. This
is a common assumption in the RL literature when considering linear function approximation (see e.g., Tsitsiklis and
Van Roy (1997); Melo et al. (2008)).
2.Neural net mean parameterization : when 𝜇𝜃(𝑠)is nonlinear in 𝜃as in the celebrated case of neural networks,
Assumption 3 can be satisfied under adequate (uniform in 𝜃) assumptions on the Jacobian of 𝜇𝜃(𝑠)akin to the
conditions for the linear mean parameterization.
3. Full-rank exponential family distributions (DasGupta and DasGupta, 2011) with a parameterized mean 𝜇𝜃(𝑠)do also
satisfy Assumption 3. Let us mention that the Fisher information matrix is positive definite for many regular statistical
models (Kullback, 1997).
B.2. Cauchy policy
Let𝜙:𝒮→R𝑑be a feature map and set 𝒜=R. We suppose this feature map to be bounded (i.e., ‖𝜑(𝑠)‖≤𝐷for
every 𝑠∈𝒮for some positive constant 𝐷) and full-row-rank. The Cauchy distribution with linear mean parameterization
𝜙(𝑠)⊤𝜃and the scale parameter 𝜎 >0is given by:
𝜋𝜃(𝑎|𝑠) =1
𝜋𝜎(︂
1 +(︁
𝑎−𝜙(𝑠)⊤𝜃
𝜎)︁2)︂,
for every 𝜃∈R𝑑, 𝑠∈𝒮, 𝑎∈𝒜.In this case the score function can be written as
∇log𝜋𝜃(𝑎|𝑠) =2𝑥𝜃
1 +𝑥2
𝜃𝜙(𝑠)
𝜎,
where 𝑥𝜃=(︀
𝑎−𝜙(𝑠)⊤𝜃)︀
/𝜎.
Following (Bedi et al., 2022, Lemma 4.7), we verify our assumptions under this policy parameterization.
10We report some comments from the discussion in Appendix B.2 in (Liu et al., 2020) for completeness and for the convenience of the
reader.
19