Improved Sample Complexity for Fisher-non-degenerate Policies
Algorithm 1 N-PG-IGT
(Normalized-PG-with Implicit Gradient Transport)
1:Input :𝜃0,𝜃1,𝑑0,𝑇,{𝜂𝑡}𝑡≥0,{𝛾𝑡}𝑡≥0
2:for𝑡= 1, . . . , 𝑇−1do
3: ˜𝜃𝑡=𝜃𝑡+1−𝜂𝑡
𝜂𝑡(𝜃𝑡−𝜃𝑡−1)
4: ˜𝜏𝑡∼𝑝(·|𝜋˜𝜃𝑡)
5: 𝑑𝑡= (1−𝜂𝑡)𝑑𝑡−1+𝜂𝑡𝑔(˜𝜏𝑡,˜𝜃𝑡)
6: 𝜃𝑡+1=𝜃𝑡+𝛾𝑡𝑑𝑡
‖𝑑𝑡‖
7:end for
8:return 𝜃𝑇
3.1. Normalized PG with Implicit Gradient Transport
We start by introducing a policy gradient algorithm for pol-
icy optimization called Normalized-PG-with Implicit Gra-
dient Transport ( N-PG-IGT for short). We propose the N-
PG-IGT algorithm for solving our RL policy optimization
problem, inspired by the recently proposed NIGT method
which was considered in the context of stochastic optimiza-
tion (with i.i.d samples from a fixed distribution) (Cutkosky
and Mehta, 2020; Arnold et al., 2019).
Motivation. Before describing the N-PG-IGT algorithm,
we provide some motivation. When having access to exact
policy gradients, simple normalized PG enjoys a geometric
global convergence rate (Mei et al., 2021b) thanks to the
non-uniform smoothness of the policy optimization objec-
tive. It is then natural to investigate the properties of this
algorithm in the more realistic setting where only stochas-
tic policy gradients can be computed using samples from
the MDP. In this stochastic setting, the understanding of
this method is limited. Therefore, it is instructive to dis-
cuss known results from stochastic optimization regarding
the normalized stochastic gradient method. As explained
by Cutkosky and Mehta (2020, Sec. 2), the issue with the
simple normalized stochastic gradient method is that the
gradient estimate error before normalization may be larger
than the true gradient. To fix this issue, several works in the
literature propose to reduce the variance of the stochastic
gradients either by using very large batch sizes (see for e.g.
(Hazan et al., 2015)) or by using momentum without resort-
ing to large batches as recently suggested in (Cutkosky and
Mehta, 2020). Back to our policy optimization problem, we
investigated the sample complexity of the normalized PG
with momentum for global optimality beyond the first-order
stationarity convergence rates. However, our results for this
algorithm only match the performance of vanilla PG. We
defer the discussion of these results to Appendix I, where
we formally introduce this Algorithm 3 and prove conver-
gence guarantees in Theorem 8. Given these elements of
motivation, we can now present the N-PG-IGT algorithm
which also utilizes momentum with normalization and will
allow us to derive improved convergence rates.N-PG-IGT (Algorithm 1). This algorithm performs a nor-
malized gradient ascent in the policy parameter space fol-
lowing the direction of a normalized moment-based stochas-
tic policy gradient. Unlike in a simple normalized mo-
mentum PG algorithm, the direction 𝑑𝑡is computed using
the stochastic policy gradient 𝑔(˜𝜏𝑡,˜𝜃𝑡)instead of 𝑔(𝜏𝑡,𝜃𝑡)
with𝜏𝑡∼𝑝(·|𝜋𝜃𝑡). Here, the auxiliary sequence ˜𝜃𝑡is crucial
for faster convergence. Observe that its update rule (Step 3)
can be rewritten 𝜃𝑡=𝜂𝑡˜𝜃𝑡+ (1−𝜂𝑡)𝜃𝑡−1which shows
that using ˜𝜃𝑡can be seen as performing a lookahead step
extrapolating from previous iterates 𝜃𝑡and𝜃𝑡−1. We refer
the reader to (Cutkosky and Mehta, 2020, Sec. 3) for more
intuition regarding this scheme. Notice that the algorithm
does not implement any importance sampling mechanism to
account for the non-stationarity of our RL problem (which
makes RL different from standard stochastic optimization).
The algorithm samples a single trajectory at each iteration
and does not require large batches.
3.2. Hessian-Aided Recursive Policy Gradient
We now present two variants of Hessian-Aided policy gra-
dient algorithms, namely Hessian-Aided Recursive Policy
Gradient ( HARPG ) and its normalized version ( N-HARPG ).
We remark here that N-HARPG was previously proposed
in Salehkaleybar et al. (2022) under the name SHARP2.
(N)-HARPG (see Algorithm 2). The algorithm is based on
an idea similar to the STORM variance reduction method
(Cutkosky and Orabona, 2019) and uses second-order infor-
mation (Tran and Cutkosky, 2021) instead of the difference
between consecutive stochastic gradients. Interestingly, this
allows to bypass the use of IS and the resulting need for
controlling IS weights via unverifiable assumptions. To
compute the update direction 𝑑𝑡of the algorithm in step 7, a
second-order correction (1−𝜂𝑡)𝑣𝑡is added to the momen-
tum stochastic gradient (1−𝜂𝑡)𝑑𝑡−1+𝜂𝑡𝑔(𝜏𝑡,𝜃𝑡).Crucially,
the uniform sampling procedure in steps 3-6 guarantees
that𝑣𝑡is an unbiased estimator of ∇𝐽(𝜃𝑡)−∇𝐽(𝜃𝑡−1),
a term which is reminiscent of the one in the original
STORM .The last step of the algorithm (step 8) uses the
direction 𝑑𝑡with or without normalization to update the
parameter 𝜃𝑡.
Hessian-vector implementation (Step 6). We insist on
the fact that the Hessian-vector product defining the correc-
tion𝑣𝑡can be easily and efficiently implemented in 𝒪(𝐻𝑑)
computational complexity. Observe for this that for any
arbitrary vector 𝑢∈R𝑑, any trajectory 𝜏and any pa-
rameter 𝜃∈R𝑑, we can write the Hessian-vector prod-
2We use a different name for this algorithm since we are also
studying the algorithm without normalization (namely HARPG )
and we use different step-sizes and momentum paramemeters for
the normalized algorithm in our analysis.
5