Improved Sample Complexity for Fisher-non-degenerate Policies
fore, one needs to utilize the special structure of the policy
optimization problem to improve the sample complexity of
PG methods.
Vanilla-PG N-PG-IGT (N)-HARPG
FOSP˜𝒪(𝜀−4) ˜𝒪(𝜀−3.5)
(new)1˜𝒪(𝜀−3)
Global˜𝒪(𝜀−3) ˜𝒪(𝜀−2.5)
(new)˜𝒪(𝜀−2)
(new)
1The method based on implicit gradient transport was
previously studied in stochastic optimization for find-
ing FOSP (Cutkosky and Mehta, 2020), however, we
are not aware of its application in RL.
Table 1: Summary of complexity results for computationally
efficient PG methods. The first row of the table reports the
number of samples for finding an 𝜀-FOSP, and the second
one is for 𝜀-global optimum under Assumptions 3 and 4.
More recently, a line of research focused on establishing
global optimality convergence rates and deriving the sample
complexity to reach an 𝜀-approximate global optimum of
the expected return function (i. e., 𝐽*−𝐽(𝜃)≤𝜀where 𝐽*
is the optimal return) (Agarwal et al., 2021; Fazel et al.,
2018; Fatkhullin and Polyak, 2021; Bhandari and Russo,
2019; Mei et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020b; 2021b) instead
of a mere 𝜀-approximate FOSP. This growing body of work
leverages additional structure of the policy optimization
problem under the form of gradient dominance (Agarwal
et al., 2021), Łojasiewicz-like inequalities (Mei et al., 2020;
2021b) or hidden convexity (Zhang et al., 2021a). As previ-
ously exploited in deterministic optimization (Lojasiewicz,
1963; Polyak, 1963; Kurdyka, 1998) (see also for e.g., At-
touch and Bolte (2009)) and later on in stochastic optimiza-
tion (Fontaine et al., 2021; Fatkhullin et al., 2022; Scaman
et al., 2022; Masiha et al., 2022), these structural properties
guarantee that the non-concave policy optimization objec-
tive has no suboptimal stationary points and allow to derive
convergence rates for the function value. Most of these
works assume the access to exact policy gradients to show
fast convergence rates (Mei et al., 2020; 2021b; Xiao, 2022).
In contrast, the practically important case of stochastic gra-
dients, is addressed only in a few recent works (Liu et al.,
2020; Ding et al., 2022; Yuan et al., 2022b; Masiha et al.,
2022). This line of works establishes global convergence
guarantees of the expected return (up to a bias induced by
the policy parameterization). A key tool for their analysis
is a relaxed weak gradient dominance inequality satisfied
by the expected return function for the class of Fisher-non-
degenerate parameterized policies (FND) which includes
Gaussian policies as a canonical example. Drawing on this
structural property, Liu et al. (2020); Ding et al. (2022);
Yuan et al. (2022b) achieve a ˜𝒪(𝜀−3)global optimality
rate up to a bias error term due to policy parameterization.Very recently, Masiha et al. (2022) further improve this
complexity to ˜𝒪(𝜀−2.5)by analyzing a stochastic second-
order method. However, their algorithm needs to approx-
imately solve a cubic sub-problem, which requires addi-
tional ˜𝒪(𝜀−3)operations at each iteration and introduces
extra computational burden. A natural question that emerges
from these recent results is the following:
Is it possible to improve ˜𝒪(𝜀−3)sample complex-
ity for general FND parameterized policies using
a computationally efficient PG algorithm?
In this work, we answer this question in the affirmative. Our
contributions are summarized as follows.
1.1. Summary of contributions
•First, we propose a normalized momentum-based PG
method with implicit gradient transport ( N-PG-IGT )
and establish a ˜𝒪(𝜀−2.5)global convergence sample
complexity. Interestingly, this algorithm does not re-
quire the IS mechanism, does not use curvature infor-
mation such as Hessian estimates and only samples a
single trajectory at each iteration.
•Next, we consider two variants of Hessian-aided
momentum-based PG method: (𝑖)N-HARPG – with
normalization, and (𝑖𝑖)HARPG – without normaliza-
tion. We offer a refined convergence analysis for both
variants and establish the improved global convergence
achieving a ˜𝒪(𝜀−2)sample complexity. Unlike most
prior work, our analysis does not require the strong as-
sumption of boundedness of IS weights since HARPG
does not use IS. Moreover, these algorithms are single-
loop, only require to sample two trajectories per itera-
tion and can be implemented efficiently with memory
and computational complexity similar to Hessian-free
methods.
We highlight that our improved sample complexities are
derived under the same (or less restrictive) assumptions
compared to previous related work in this setting (Liu et al.,
2020; Ding et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2022b; Masiha et al.,
2022). We refer the reader to Tables 1 and 2 for a contextu-
alization of our contributions in the literature.
1.2. Related work
We briefly review the literature most closely related to our
results about the global convergence of stochastic PG meth-
ods. We defer a more detailed literature review including
a discussion of first-order stationarity of variance-reduced
PG methods and global optimality of exact PG methods to
Appendix D. For convenience, we refer the reader to Table 2
for an overview of related works and our main contributions.
2