Stochastic Policy Gradient Methods:
Improved Sample Complexity for Fisher-non-degenerate Policies
Ilyas Fatkhullin1Anas Barakat1Anastasia Kireeva2Niao He1
Abstract
Recently, the impressive empirical success of pol-
icy gradient (PG) methods has catalyzed the devel-
opment of their theoretical foundations. Despite
the huge efforts directed at the design of efficient
stochastic PG-type algorithms, the understanding
of their convergence to a globally optimal policy
is still limited. In this work, we develop improved
global convergence guarantees for a general class
of Fisher-non-degenerate parameterized policies
which allows to address the case of continuous
state action spaces. First, we propose a Normal-
ized Policy Gradient method with Implicit Gradi-
ent Transport ( N-PG-IGT ) and derive a ˜𝒪(𝜀−2.5)
sample complexity of this method for finding a
global 𝜀-optimal policy. Improving over the previ-
ously known ˜𝒪(𝜀−3)complexity, this algorithm
does not require the use of importance sampling
or second-order information and samples only one
trajectory per iteration. Second, we further im-
prove this complexity to ˜𝒪(𝜀−2)by considering
a Hessian-Aided Recursive Policy Gradient ( (N)-
HARPG ) algorithm enhanced with a correction
based on a Hessian-vector product. Interestingly,
both algorithms are (𝑖)simple and easy to imple-
ment: single-loop, do not require large batches of
trajectories and sample at most two trajectories
per iteration; (𝑖𝑖)computationally and memory ef-
ficient: they do not require expensive subroutines
at each iteration and can be implemented with
memory linear in the dimension of parameters.
1. Introduction
Dating back to the works of Williams (1992); Sutton et al.
(1999), Policy Gradient (PG) methods constitute one of the
1Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
2Department of Mathematics, ETH Zurich, Switzerland. Corre-
spondence to: I.F. <ilyas.fn979@gmail.com >.
Proceedings of the 40𝑡ℎInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).most popular and efficient classes of Reinforcement Learn-
ing (RL) algorithms. Combined with deep neural networks,
modern PG algorithms (Silver et al., 2014; Schulman et al.,
2015; 2017) have shown impressive empirical success in
several challenging tasks involving large and even continu-
ous state and action spaces.
In this class of methods, in order to learn a parameterized
policy, the agent performs stochastic gradient ascent in the
policy parameter space to maximize its expected return 𝐽(𝜃),
where 𝜃∈R𝑑are parameters of the policy parameteriza-
tion. Given the non-concavity of the policy optimization
objective, several works in the literature have focused on the
convergence of the policy parameter to an 𝜀-approximate
first-order stationary point (FOSP), i.e., ‖∇𝐽(𝜃)‖≤𝜀. This
performance measure allows to define the sample complex-
ity of PG methods as the number of random trajectory sim-
ulations (or samples) required to find an 𝜀-approximate
FOSP of the expected return function. In particular, using
a similar analysis to stochastic gradient descent in noncon-
vex smooth optimization (Ghadimi and Lan, 2013), it has
been shown that Vanilla-PG (REINFORCE ) enjoys a ˜𝒪(𝜀−4)
sample complexity (see for e.g., Yuan et al. (2022b)). In
the last few years, spurred by the development of variance-
reduction techniques in stochastic optimization, there has
been a tremendous amount of work in designing variance-
reduced variants of the PG method to improve sample effi-
ciency. Unlike in classical supervised learning, the sampling
distribution is non-stationary in RL due to policy update.
Therefore, adapting variance-reduction techniques to PG
methods requires to carefully address this non-stationarity.
The majority of works address this issue by introducing
importance sampling (IS) weights to correct the distribution
shift. However, the use of the IS mechanism often requires
a strong unverifiable assumption stating that the variance
of IS weights is bounded. Recently, Shen et al. (2019);
Salehkaleybar et al. (2022) proposed a promising alternative
to IS, which incorporates the second-order information to
correct the distribution shift due to the policy update. In
terms of sample complexity, both approaches guarantee to
find an 𝜀-FOSP with ˜𝒪(𝜀−3)samples. For stochastic opti-
mization, this complexity was recently shown to be optimal
and unimprovable even when higher order stochastic oracle
and smoothness are available (Arjevani et al., 2020). There-
1