Improved Sample Complexity for Fisher-non-degenerate Policies
no critic is needed (no function approximation error relative to this critic process is incurred) and no ergodicity assumption
is needed. We rather rely on the compatible function approximation framework. Besides this line of works, Zhang et al.
(2021b) provide global convergence rates for the REINFORCE algorithm for episodic RL with a fixed mini-batch instead of
arbitrarily large batch sizes. These results take the form of an anytime sublinear high probability regret bound as well as an
almost sure global convergence of the average regret with an asymptotically sublinear rate. In particular, for their regret
analysis, they consider the softmax parameterization with a vanishing log barrier regularization and the result translates to
a˜𝒪(𝜀−6)global sample complexity as also reported in (Yuan et al., 2022b). Recently, several works considered heavy-tailed
policy parameterizations offering better exploration in continuous control problems (Bedi et al., 2021; 2022).
D.4. Comparison to prior work in stochastic optimization
In the stochastic optimization setting, several recent works consider optimizing functions satisfying a weak gradient
domination inequality (see Lemma 2 (7) with 𝜀′= 0). In particular, (Fontaine et al., 2021; Fatkhullin et al., 2022; Scaman
et al., 2022) obtain a 𝒪(𝜀−3)sample complexity for finding a global optimum in expectation for Stochastic Gradient
Descent11, which is the same complexity as for (stochastic) Vanilla-PG algorithm in the RL setting (Yuan et al., 2022b).
Fatkhullin et al. (2022) further improves this complexity to 𝒪(𝜀−2)under additional average smoothness assumption by
proposing a variance reduced algorithm named PAGER . Their algorithm has a double loop structure and adopts a probabilistic
switch between two different batch-size sequences (increasing over iterations), which makes it more difficult to implement
and analyze. Another work by Masiha et al. (2022) considers stochastic second-order methods under similar assumptions.
Their Stochastic Cubic Regularized Newton’s algorithm ( SCRN ) achieves a ˜𝒪(𝜀−2.5)sample complexity under a similar set
of assumptions. However, SCRN uses a subroutine to approximately solve a cubic regularized subproblem (which makes it
computationally inefficient), it uses samples of stochastic Hessian and requires large batches for both stochastic gradient and
Hessian at every iteration. To the best of our knowledge (Fatkhullin et al., 2022) and (Masiha et al., 2022) are the only works,
which provide the sample complexity beyond 𝒪(𝜀−3)for stochastic optimization for functions satisfying weak gradient
dominance condition. However, these optimization works consider complicated algorithms involving parameter restart, cubic
regularization subproblem and/or large mini-batch sizes at each iteration. In contrast, our proposed algorithms improve over
𝒪(𝜀−3)sample complexity with simple algorithms ( N-PG-IGT ,HARPG ,N-HARPG ), which are computationally efficient
and batch-free (only require to sample one trajectory per iteration). In addition, our analysis is much simpler than the
analysis of algorithms in (Fatkhullin et al., 2022) and (Masiha et al., 2022). Our analysis is also of independent interest in
the study of stochastic optimization under the weak gradient domination assumption.
11These works consider more general assumptions, such as 𝛼-PŁ, i.e., there exists 𝛼∈[1,2]such that for all 𝜃∈R𝑑it holds
‖∇𝐽(𝜃)‖𝛼≥(2𝜇)𝛼/2(𝐽*−𝐽(𝜃)), and derive the sample complexities depending on the value of 𝛼. It turns out that when 𝛼= 1as in
our setting, the sample complexity is the worst (in 𝜀) compared to other 𝛼 >1.
23