Improved Sample Complexity for Fisher-non-degenerate Policies
Theorem 3 (Global convergence of N-HARPG ).Let As-
sumptions 1, 3 and 4 hold. Set 𝛾𝑡=6𝑀𝑔
𝜇𝐹(𝑡+2)and𝜂𝑡=2
𝑡+2,
𝐻= (1−𝛾)−1log(𝑇+ 1) . Then for every integer 𝑇≥1,
the output 𝜃𝑇ofN-HARPG (see Algorithm 2) satisfies
𝐽*−E[𝐽(𝜃𝑇)]≤ 𝒪(︂𝜎𝑔+𝐿𝑔+𝜎ℎ
(𝑇+ 1)1/2)︂
+√𝜀bias
1−𝛾,
where 𝜎𝑔, 𝜎ℎ, 𝐿𝑔are defined in Proposition 1.
Corollary 1. In the setting of Theorem 2 (Theorem 3), for
every 𝜀 >0,the output 𝜃𝑇of(N)-HARPG satisfies 𝐽*−
E[𝐽(𝜃𝑇)]≤𝜀+ 2√𝜀bias/(1−𝛾)for𝑇=𝒪(𝜀−2),i.e., the
total sample complexity is of the order ̃︀𝒪(𝜀−2).
We remark that while (N)-HARPG uses Hessian information,
our analysis does not require the second-order smoothness
of𝐽(𝜃)and, thus, Assumption 2. This is achieved by the
additional uniform sampling in steps 3-5 of the method.
5. Experiments
We empirically test the performance of the methods on
benchmark RL tasks with continuous state-action spaces.
We use the class of diagonal Gaussian policies where actions
are sampled from
𝑎=𝜇𝜃(𝑠) +𝜎𝜃(𝑠)⊙𝑧, 𝑧∼𝒩(0, 𝐼),
for every 𝜃∈R𝑑, 𝑠∈ 𝒮 =R𝑝, 𝑎∈ 𝒜 =R𝑞,where
𝒩(0, 𝐼)is the multivariate normal distribution, ⊙denotes
the elementwise product of two vectors, 𝜇𝜃(𝑠)and𝜎𝜃(𝑠)are
parameterized by fully-connected neural networks. We im-
plement the algorithms based on Vanilla-PG (REINFORCE )
implementation in the garage library (garage contributors,
2019) and test the methods on the commonly used MuJoCo
environments. In this section, we present the results on
Humanoid andReacher environments and defer the re-
sults on other tasks to Appendix A. For all methods, at each
iteration we sample 20trajectories per iteration, and each
trajectory has a maximum length 𝐻= 500 . To ensure the
same per-iteration cost for all methods, in (N)-HARPG we
sample half of the trajectories to compute the stochastic
gradient and another half to estimate the Hessian-vector
product. For a fair comparison of the different methods, we
start all our runs from the same initial policy 𝜋𝜃0, where 𝜃0is
randomly initialized. For all methods, we use time-varying
step-sizes 𝛾𝑡and momentum parameters 𝜂𝑡, which are cho-
sen according to theory for each method, see Appendix A.
5.1. Comparison with tuned initial step-sizes
In the first experiment, we compare the methods with in-
dividually tuned initial step-sizes on Humanoid task. We
run each algorithm with 13different values of initial step-
size𝛾0in the range[︀
10−3,4]︀
and select the one with thebestaverage reward (averaged over 5independent runs for
each algorithm and initial step-size) after 2·107system
probes (i.e., state transitions). In Figure 1 (left), we show
the median as well as the 1/4and3/4quantiles (shaded
area) of the average reward depending on the number of
system probes . We observe that N-PG-IGT outperforms
other methods and quickly increases the reward above 450.
Compared to Vanilla-PG , it stabilizes better around level
500. Surprisingly, theoretically better (N)-HARPG methods
perform consistently worse in our experiments with tuned
step-sizes. We believe this phenomenon could happen be-
cause the stochastic Hessian vector products sampled in
(N)-HARPG have much higher variance than stochastic gra-
dients in practice, which prevents us from choosing larger
step-sizes, see Remark 1.
5.2. Robustness to initial step-sizes
In this experiment, we test the robustness of the methods to
the choice of initial step-size on Reacher environment. In
Figure 1 (right), we report the number of system probes in
order to achieve average reward above−11points depend-
ing on the initial step-size 𝛾0. We plot the median together
with the 1/4and3/4quantiles based on 5independent runs.
We observe that (variance-reduced) HARPG can reach the
desired accuracy faster than Vanilla-PG for small initial step-
sizes 𝛾0. In contrast, N-PG-IGT tolerates larger step-sizes
than other methods and exhibits more robustness to initial
step-sizes.
Remark 1. It was previously reported that variance-
reduced methods including N-HARPG (named SHARP in
(Salehkaleybar et al., 2022)) outperform Vanilla-PG (Shen
et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2020) without tuned step-sizes. We
also observe similar behavior for small untuned step-sizes,
see Figure 4 in Appendix A.
6. Concluding Remarks
In this work, we improved the existing ˜𝒪(𝜀−3)global
optimality sample complexity for Fisher-non-degenerate
parametrized policies. We proposed two single-
loop momentum-based PG methods respectively achiev-
ing˜𝒪(𝜀−2.5)and˜𝒪(𝜀−2)sample complexities while only
using one or two trajectories per iteration. Notably, our anal-
ysis does not rely on the unrealistic assumption of bounded
IS weights variance unlike most prior work. To achieve
our best ˜𝒪(𝜀−2)sample complexity, our analysis hinges on
a careful combination of a structural weak gradient domi-
nance condition with the design of variance-reduced policy
gradients. Future directions of research include relaxing
our policy regularity conditions (Zhang et al., 2022) and
studying the convergence of more efficient policy search
methods for continuous control with non-compact spaces
and heavy-tailed policy parameterization, enhancing explo-
8