Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
2009;Schnabel, 2017 ). These two catalogs represent important
examples for a whole discussion that brings the importance of
futureskillstothefore.Theyconcentrateonskillsin
•Workingwithmedia,technology,information,anddata
•Virtual and face-to-face communication and collaboration
in diverse (e.g., interdisciplinary, intercultural,
intergenerational)contexts
•Creative problem solving, innovation, analytical and
criticalthought
•Flexibility, coping with ambiguity, self-motivation, and
workingindependently( Schnabel,2017 )
When thinking human centeredness from an adult learning
perspective, it is important to note that these skills will not replace
professional skills but will additionally be on top of professional
skills. Even more, they will be interlinked with professional skills.
So when preparing a workforce for an AI working world, degrees
will have to encompass professional skills as a basis plus these
futureskills.
/four.tnum./two.tnum. Designing learning: who should we
target and how?
Quality is not determined by knowing the skill needs and
contents of learning but also by methodologies that help to
teach these skills professionally, eﬀectively, and eﬃciently to a
whole range of target groups. When it comes to skill delivery
in companies, there is a vivid research landscape on how to
deliver sustainable learning success in digital transformation. The
learningandteachingmethodologiesinfocusrangefrominformal
learningintheworkplace,learningnuggets,non-formalworkshop
settings, or formal learning arrangements within chambers and
universities (e.g., Rohs and Ganz, 2015 ;Anderson and Rivera-
Vargas, 2020 ). From the company’s viewpoint, where there are
ﬁnancial and economic restrictions, these discussions are critical.
With a company’s decision to invest in one or another kind
of learning opportunity, it shapes structures and methodologies
of learning and, ﬁnally, participation rates in adult learning
opportunitiestoahighdegree.
Discussionsofteachingandlearningmethodologydiﬀerentiate
along the question of which knowledge or skill can be eﬃciently
and professionally taught in which setting to which target group.
Taking marginalized groups as an example, it is a common
educational argument based on Bourdieu ( Watkins and Tisdell,
2006) or biographical research ( Alheit, 2021 ) that low-skilled
people or functional illiterates have rather negatively experienced
learningthroughouttheirlives,sometimestheyhavegonethrough
biographies of failing in an educational system. Therefore, it is
highly challenging for professionally organized adult education to
getaccesstothesegroupsandtoteachthemeﬀectively-muchmore
challenging than teaching high-skilled people or managers who
havehadsuccessfullearningcareers.
Therefore, when implementing AI in a human-centered way,
quality learning opportunities need to ensure that all target
groups who are aﬀected by AI in the workplace get theopportunity to qualify for these changes. At the same time,
diﬀerent target groups will need diﬀerent skills in the workplace
and diﬀerent learning methodologies for acquiring these skills.
In addition, it is a professional adult education task to create
good learning opportunities with a well-ﬁtted methodology that
facilitates between the aﬀordances of a company within the digital
transformation,ontheonehand,andtheneedsofthetargetgroup
andtheirlearninghabits,ontheotherhand.
Intermsoflearningmethodologies,recentprojectshaveshown
(a) That professionally implemented learning projects in the
workplace can eﬀectively qualify low-skilled workers on the
job within digital transformation processes ( Goppold and
Frenz,2020 ).
(b) That worker’s councils have an important role to play as
facilitators of bringing together unskilled and low-skilled
workersorfunctionallyilliterateemployeeswithcontinuing
education activities. Still, the members of worker’s councils
needtobequaliﬁedtofulﬁlltheirrole( Lammersetal.,2022 ;
Arbeiter,2023 ).
In recent years, networked structures in adult education
have been brought to the fore (e.g., UNESCO, 2015 ). In the
case of implementing human-centered AI networks between
adult education providers, companies and worker’s councils will
probably be in favor of channeling professionally tailored learning
opportunities into companies. Taking Germany as an example,
vocational training providers create those networks in order to
target marginalized groups; in the case of high-skilled individuals,
universities of applied sciences have a mandate of developing
continuing education to create opportunities in cooperation with
companies ( Dollhausen and Lattke, 2020 ). It is an issue if these
networks allow scaling up learning opportunities for a whole
population or multiple companies and not to tailor adult learning
foronesinglecompany.
/five.tnum. Technology, autonomy, and trust:
HCAI in psychology and
human-computer interaction
Typically, the AI research community focuses on algorithmic
advances,deemingahuman-centeredapproachunnecessary,butat
thesametime,human-centeredthinkingisgainingpopularity,and
theAIcommunityisdiverse.However,thisnewthinkingchallenges
establishedpractices( Shneiderman,2022 ,p.40).Thisnewthinking
also inﬂuences the perception of psychology and HCI, which are
closely related, although they are separate disciplines, because
psychology plays a signiﬁcant role in HCI. For this reason, both
disciplines are discussed together in this section ( Clemmensen,
2006). From a psychological and human-computer interaction
(HCI) point of view, technology acceptance and adoption are also
becoming essential aspects of human-centered AI ( Del Giudice
et al., 2023 ), especially in human autonomy ( Bennett et al., 2023 )
and the development of guidelines for human-AI interaction
(Amershi et al., 2019 ). Such guidelines need to consider issues
with information overﬂow and should assist in using complex
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /zero.tnum/eight.tnum frontiersin.org