Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
principles, data, and methods to design in order to optimize
humanwellbeingandoverallsystemperformance( IEA,2000 ).The
termsergonomics andhumanfactors areoftenusedinterchangeably
or as a unit (HFE). Domains of HFE are physical ergonomics
(i.e., human anthropometric, physiological, and biomechanical
characteristics as they relate to work), cognitive ergonomics (i.e.,
concerningmentalprocesses),andorganizationalergonomics(i.e.,
optimization of socio-technical systems, including their structures
and processes). HFE is a multidisciplinary, human-centered
integrating science that is not domain-speciﬁc ( ILO and IEA,
2021). HFE encompasses not only safety and health but also the
cognitiveandpsycho-socialaspectsatwork.Additionally,HFEcan
focus on micro ergonomic design aspects—including the design
of the procedures, the context, and the equipment and tools used
to perform tasks—as well as macro ergonomic design aspects—
including the work organization, types of jobs, technology, work
roles, and communication ( Wilson, 2014 ). Through their work
activity, human beings acquire experiences about physical and
social, external as well as internal reality, and they change by
self-reﬂection( Schön,1983 ).
A socio-technical “work system” is part of a work process in
which a task is accomplished. Through the interaction of working
humans with work equipment, the function of the system is
fulﬁlledwithintheworkspaceandworkenvironmentunderspeciﬁc
workingconditions( ISO6385,2016 ).“Workdesign”isacollective
term for measures for the purposeful and systematic design of
work objects, work processes, and working conditions. The aim
of work design is the optimal fulﬁllment of work tasks, taking
into account human development requirements and economic
eﬃciency ( Dyckhoﬀ, 2006 ). In order to increase productivity,
work design is based on the rational principle of labor division
and the systematization of work processes. The division of labor
supports specialization, which makes it possible to use machines
and automate work processes. Work design determines which
functions are automated and which remain with humans ( Baxter
and Sommerville, 2011 ). The systematization of work sequences
aims at their method-based optimization ( Schlick et al., 2018 ).
Since the division of labor goes along with external supply and a
loss of autonomy, the social dimension of human-centered work
seems to be indispensable; it is expressed, among other things,
in committed cooperation, fair work relationships, and learning
opportunities( Ulich,2011 ).
/two.tnum./two.tnum. Human-centered work design and
interactive human-technology systems
Human-centered work design refers to a problem-solving
approach from a human perspective and the interactions of the
working human with technical and organizational factors. One
application focus concerns interactive human-technology systems
(i.e.,interactiondesign).Forthispurpose,knowledgeandmethods
fromhumanfactors,ergonomics,usability,anduserexperienceare
applied. Human-centered design criteria are documented in legal
regulations,standards,andrules( Karwowskietal.,2021 ).
Human-centered work is characterized by balanced workload
situations in order to avoid over-and under-strain and thusto promote performance, job satisfaction, and learning ( Schlick
et al., 2018 ). Work activities should not harm the health of
the working person, should not-or at most temporarily-impair
their wellbeing, meet their needs, enable individual and collective
inﬂuenceonworkingconditionsandworksystems,andcontribute
to the development of their personality in the sense of promoting
their capability potentials and competencies ( Ulich, 2011 ). Design
dimensions include work content, time, process, conditions,
workplace,orequipment.
Concerning the design of interactive human-technology
systems,ISO 9241-2 (1992) Part 2 speciﬁes the human-centered
requirements of user orientation, variety, holism, meaningfulness,
thescopeforaction,socialsupport,anddevelopmentopportunity.
InISO 9241-110 (2020) Part 110 (interaction principles), the
human-centered design criteria of task appropriateness, self-
describability, expectation conformity, learnability, controllability,
error robustness, and user binding of technical systems are
concretized. ISO 9241-210 (2019) Part 210 (Human-centered
design for interactive systems) emphasizes the user experience,
whichdescribesthefunctionalandemotionalimpressionsofauser
when interacting with a product or service. If users’ requirements
aremetinausefulway,itispleasanttouseaproduct.
/two.tnum./three.tnum. Human work and human factors
Technical rationalization measures aim to raise work
productivity and reduce costs also by substituting the human
workforce with machines. Such automation eﬀorts can aﬀect both
physical and mental work. To automate sophisticated forms of
work that were previously preserved by humans, the use of AI
aims to imitate human intelligence ( Landgrebe and Smith, 2022 ).
In order to assess the extent to which AI can explain, predict, and
inﬂuencehumanbehaviorrequiresHFEexpertise.
Humans represent a physical, biological, social, and mental
entity. They are generally aware that they have a perception, a
mind, and a will. A basic requirement of human existence is to
access the natural and social environment through interpretive
understanding to gain meaning. In communicating with other
humans and interacting with the environment, humans gain
a deep understanding of the world ( Bender and Kolle, 2020 ).
On this basis, they can act purposefully even in the face of
incomplete and contradictory information ( Wilkens et al., 2014 ),
transfer existing experiential knowledge to new contexts through
the understanding of meaning, adopt diﬀerent perspectives, and
anticipate the consequences of their actions. However, the world
can only be understood through knowledge of concepts and
symbols that emanate from human intelligence ( Whorf, 1963 ).
Human intelligence is a complex neurological capacity including
reasoning, memory, consciousness, emotions, will, intention, and
moral judgment. Humans can take responsibility for acting
solidaristicandmorally( Böhle,2009 ).Suchsubjectiveandimplicit
competenciesarethebasisofknowledgeandinnovationwork:
•“Knowledgework”referstotheexecutionofworkordersthat
are to be carried out according to available (un-) complete
rules that the working person knows. Knowledge includes
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /zero.tnum/three.tnum frontiersin.org