Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
TABLE/one.tnum Analysisofhuman-centeredAIperspectivesforinformationscie nce,adulteducation,human-computerinteraction,andpsychologyac cording
toWilkensetal. (/two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum).
Discipline Deﬁcit-oriented
(Perspective /one.tnum)Data reliability-
oriented
(Perspective /two.tnum)Protection-
oriented
(Perspective /three.tnum)Potential-oriented
(Perspective /four.tnum)Political-oriented
(Perspective /five.tnum)
Informationscience x x x
Adulteducation x x x
HCI x x
Psychology x x
AI machines. Information science and HCI provide details and
key features of how to calibrate this interaction of humans and
computers. A key factor lies in aspects of designing AI systems
withregardtopersonalityissues,searchbehavior,andinformation
literacyofusers.
From an adult education perspective, the success of human-
centered AI lies in providing learning opportunities across all
target groups aﬀected by AI. These learning opportunities need
to adapt to learners and their individual learning habits and
learning needs in terms of content and methodology instead of
one-ﬁts-all solutions. Especially marginalized learners will have to
be a focus. Information science can add to this perspective with
its diﬀerentiated insights on information literacy, a concept that
might be helpful when implementing HCAI solutions and, up-
to-date, is far away from being profoundly treated in the ﬁeld of
adult education with, e.g., low-skilled adults. Furthermore, HFE
perspectives can help in elaborating adult learning methodologies,
asHFEprovidesclearperspectivesonworkplacelearningandhow
itaddstoeﬀectivelearning.
Additionally, mutual reinforcement of humans and AI, which
considersethicalprinciplesduringdesign,isessentialandisactively
considered in information science , e.g., in aspects of usability and
interactiondesign.Especiallythemoreprofoundunderstandingof
sociotechnicalinformationsystemsandhowhumansinteractwith
digitalenvironmentsareessentialtoinformationscience.
Finally,for HCIandpsychology, human-centeredprocessesand
products are the foundation of human-centricity. As a result, user
experience design approaches and ongoing human performance
evaluationarerequired.Additionally,human-centeredAIproducts
areemphasizedbyhumancontrol( Shneiderman,2022 ,p.9).These
elements should be utilized to help tackle the six grand challenges
ofhuman-centeredAI:humanwellbeing,responsibledesignofAI,
privacy aspects, AI-related design and evaluation frameworks, the
role of government and independent oversight, and ﬁnally, HCAI
interaction in general ( Garibay et al., 2023 ). The overlap between
HFE and HCI is visible where interaction design is considered
from a perspective when knowledge and experience of usability
anduserexperienceareapplied.Thishelps,amongotherthings,to
implement technology acceptance models and, thus, to build trust
andsupportwhentheoverlapbetweenHFEandHCIisconsistently
implemented. In addition, HFE and psychology (and partly also
HCI) meet in the ﬁeld of human autonomy. Furthermore, the
relationshipbetweeninformationscienceandHCIisexempliﬁedin
theinteractionofanykindofinformationandthefocusonhuman-
centered systems, again considering usability and user experience.Recognition of the importance of information literacy should be
consideredanimportantlinkforHCAIinthisregard.
Inordertovalidatetheﬁndingscompiledhere,ademonstrator
is used. The project “Connect & Collect: AI-based Cloud for
Interdisciplinary Networked Research and Innovation for Future
Work (CoCo)” ( CoCo Website, 2023 ) promotes the transfer of
knowledge between HFE research and operational practice in
companiesaboutartiﬁcialintelligenceandisfundedbytheGerman
Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF). To support
ourtheorydevelopment,theCoCoprojectservesasademonstrator
to illustrate the interrelation between the diﬀerent disciplines. The
purpose of the demonstrator is to reveal the necessity of each
discipline, namely HFE, psychology, HCI, information science,
and adult education, to create successful HCAI implementation
at work and, therefore, to show the impact and potential in
society. Participants are predominantly transdisciplinary actors in
labor research from science, enterprises, unions, education, and
intermediaries pursuing an innovative new approach or applying
best practices and have joined forces in “Regional Competence
CentersforLaborResearch.”
It can be derived from the demonstrator that while many
companies are interested in implementing AI applications, they
shy away from the research and investment eﬀort involved in
developing company-speciﬁc solutions. Instead, they aim to use
proven AI applications. In this case, the importance of human-
centered AI design-especially regarding learning facilitation and
ethical-social compatibility-is not suﬃciently applied ( Pokorni
et al., 2021 ). Undesirable consequences usually emerge only after
a time delay and are rarely causally associated with AI use. An
essential part of the work of the demonstrator is to increase the
relevance of human-centered design of AI applications practically
andsystematically,whichwillalsoenhancetheroleofHFEexperts.
At the same time, it is crucial to qualify the workers for
the changes in the working society. The examples from the
demonstratorshowthat,whenimplementingAIsystemsonalarge
scale, it is important to develop and establish a broad range of
learningopportunitiesthatcanbeupscaledtodiversetargetgroups.
Within the digital transformation, especially marginalized groups
are at risk of getting lost in terms of workforce, labor markets,
and in a democratic society. There is a need to focus on these
marginalizedgroupswhenreferringtohumancenteredness.Adult
education providers and unions have an enormous role in this
challengebecausetheyhaveexpertiseinaccessingthemarginalized.
Human-centeredAIisstronglyrelatedtoHCIandpsychology,
albeit with diﬀerent emphases. As HCI has evolved from a mainly
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /one.tnum/two.tnum frontiersin.org