Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
/seven.tnum. Conclusions for human-centered AI
at work from theory and practice
In the last section, the article summarizes how it contributes
to the ongoing scientiﬁc discussion on HCAI. Conclusions are
drawn for HCAI at work by leveraging insights from disciplines
focusing mainly on individuals (psychology), technology (HCI),
work (HFE), or work context as one research ﬁeld amongst others
(information science and adult learning). From the fundamental
disciplinary considerations and the current experiences and
observations from the demonstrator, theoretical implications are
derivedtobringHCAIinlinewithtoday’sdemandsofworkersand
companies to reﬂect human centeredness when dealing with the
complexity of information, data, and decisions. Furthermore, the
article also highlights the relevant internal logic of the individual
disciplinesandrevealspossiblemutualcomplementarity.Itmainly
argues that, although human-centered AI is a popular concept
across disciplines today ( Capel and Brereton, 2023 ), successful
HCAI and its design are in strong need for an interdisciplinary
approach,asalldisciplinesconceptualize“theirhumans”diﬀerently
intheirviewsandmethodologicalapproaches.
Besidesthediﬀerencesindetail,ourcomparisonofthediﬀerent
disciplinary approaches to conceptualizing HCAI and bringing
it into practice has revealed important similarities. All presented
disciplines have the human at their cores — the development
of human-centered AI systems is therefore deeply connected
to aspects considered central to humans and that cannot be
substituted with machines, such as learning and constructing
information. Technology, along with its AI systems, is considered
a means for human development-therefore putting the human in
a superior position, which also has to be guaranteed by certain
regulationstopreventAIfromoverrulinghumandecision-making.
The disciplines also widely agree that human-centricity can only
be achieved if struggles with the use of technology are minimized.
In the end, it is always a human being in a company who will
use technology. Depending on the degree of how much the AI
designandAIimplementationprocessreﬂectstheusers,including
their skills, trust, and their work tasks — the users will cope or
fail with technology within their workplace. Hence, raising the
issue of humans practically coping or failing with technology use
in the workplace as a common theoretical and practical problem
of human centeredness might open scientiﬁc discourse between
disciplinesandpracticeincompanies( Nowotnyetal.,2001 ).
This article is based on collaborative scholarly inquiry and
a review of discipline-speciﬁc literature on the phenomenon
of HCAI and joint reﬂection against the background of the
demonstrator used in our research to study HCAI. This led to the
ﬁndings and arguments in this article, which are summarized in
Table2. The article combines perspectives from ﬁve disciplines-
however, we are still in the ﬁrst step, i.e., conceptualization, of
a ﬁve-phase model for theory building in the applied sciences
(Swanson and Chermack, 2013 ). The need to include further
or remove disciplines will become obvious further down the
road of the Theory-Research-Practice Cycle that is followed and
will include operationalization, conﬁrmation, application, and
reﬁnement ( Swanson and Chermack, 2013 ) of the concept we
have come up with. Hence, this research is not ﬁnished but atthe beginning of understanding what might be critical for HCAI
atwork.
The ﬁrst results of the conceptualization stage concerned with
successful HCAI implementation at work and with the common
focal points of the ﬁve disciplines are the founding pillars for a
SynergisticHuman-AISymbiosisTheory(SHAST),whichanswers
the research question of what is critical for HCAI at work. It has
become apparent, however, that determining the critical aspects of
HCAI at work, enabling a symbiotic relationship between humans
and AI systems, and describing their interplay theoretically is
a complex task. Whether the challenge does not rather require
investigation of more minimum ﬁelds of action, more disciplinary
backgroundslike,e.g.,knowledgemanagement,economics,process
management, simulation theory, operation research, philosophy,
history,sociology,andmanymore,oratransdisciplinaryapproach
(Deﬁla and Di Giulio, 2018 ) involving all stakeholders in the
research, development, and implementation process of HCAI at
workremainsanopenquestion.IthasbeenarguedthatHCAIand
human centeredness will beneﬁt from considering many diﬀerent
scientiﬁcperspectives./one.tnumFurthermore,intoday’sworld,disciplinary
boundaries are ﬂuid and increasingly blurred, or new disciplines
are formed that encompass various aspects of other classical
disciplines.Weareawareofthis,butduetoasimpliﬁeddiscussion,
we limit ourselves to a few disciplines and outline them, knowing
thattheseboundariesareartiﬁcial.
The results from the demonstrator and our collaborative
inquiryhaveshownthatthedisciplinescoveredinthisarticlehave
many similar (and some diﬀerent) concepts and methods in their
portfoliosthataremostlikelycriticalforsuccessfullyimplementing
HCAIatwork.However,abroaderinterdisciplinarydiscussionand
researchareneededforacompleteviewofthetopic.
Data availability statement
The original contributions presented in the study are included
in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be
directedtothecorrespondingauthors.
Author contributions
AM: Conceptualization, Writing—original draft, Writing—
review & editing, Funding acquisition, Supervision, Methodology,
Project administration, Validation, Visualization. CB-S:
Conceptualization, Writing—original draft, Writing—review
& editing, Methodology, Project administration, Validation,
Visualization. MB: Conceptualization, Writing—original draft,
Writing—review & editing, Methodology, Project administration,
Validation, Visualization. IP: Conceptualization, Writing—
original draft, Writing—review & editing, Methodology, Project
administration,Validation,Visualization.
/one.tnumhttps://www.frontiersin.org/research-topics//five.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/human-c entered-
ai-at-work-common-ground-in-theories-and-methods
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /one.tnum/four.tnum frontiersin.org