Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
as a state) and a communicative act itself (in the sense of
exchanging knowledge/being informed, as a process; Henrichs,
2014). Accordingly, information has a triadic structure consisting
ofthefollowing:
•Object,meaningoftheinformationorsemantics,
•Sign(s)/syntax ,signalsfororphysicalcarrierofknowledgeand
formal-syntacticrepresentationofsigns,and
•Interpretant ,user/usageofinformation,orpragmatics.
Thisstructureisdynamicalsinceformingtherelationsbetween
the parts always entails some sort of transmission. The structure
is also relational, which results in the need to consider all
three parts of the triangle simultaneously when referring to
information since they are linked inseparably. Information science
deals with all three aspects of information, leading to multi-
and interdisciplinary studies with, e.g., computer science (that
mostly focuses on the signal part, for example, when building
digital libraries) or linguistics (focusing on the object part,
for example when constructing ontologies or other knowledge
organization systems). The most fruitful — and therefore most
central — avenue for information science concerns, however,
the pragmatics of information, which focuses on the human
part of information processing and how humans make use
of information. In a nutshell, information science seeks to
understand how and for what reasons humans need, gather,
and use information. It primarily asks from the interpretant
point of view: What is information used for? Which actions are
possible with that information, and what do humans need to
actproperly?
This understanding of information diﬀers from the deﬁnition
used in, e.g., computer science or telematics that focuses on
the signal and disregards the meaning of the information
(Shannon, 2001 ). Information science considers knowledge as
the raw material for the creation of information — knowledge
is possible information ( Rauch, 1988 ), and information is a
manifestation or representation of knowledge ( Kuhlen, 2004 ).
Since (formless) knowledge, which exists independently from
signals, needs to be brought into a (physical) form to be
transmitted ( Stock and Stock, 2015 ), it can be argued that
“information is a thing — knowledge is not” ( Jones, 2010 ).
If humans use that potential information for further action,
information materializes. In general, information is used to
decrease the amount of uncertainty a human experiences ( Wersig,
1974).
Therefore, information depends on the context in which
humans perceive it, and it can be diﬀerent with diﬀerent
contexts and diﬀerent humans. Humans construct information by
decoding the signal — information does not just exist (whereas
knowledge exists even without signals; Stock and Stock, 2015 ).
This construction takes place in social environments and via
means of communication. The recent popularity of ChatGPT and
generative language models for AI, as well as how interaction (or
communication)withthosesystemshasbeendesigned,isreﬂective
of the relevance of communication in information processes and
forinformationbehavior./three.tnum./two.tnum. Information behavior and user
modeling: traces toward the human
perspective
Reﬂections on the concept of information and studies on
how humans engage with information have mutually inﬂuenced
each other, developing a shared understanding of the subject.
Information behavior research, as a sub-discipline of information
science, is concerned with how and why humans interact
with information in diﬀerent informational contexts, including
how they use, create, and seek information ( Bates, 2017 ),
actively or passively ( Wilson, 2000 ), individually, collectively, or
collaboratively ( Reddy and Jansen, 2008 ). Information non-use,
such as information avoidance ( Golmann et al., 2017 ), is also part
of the research agenda as well as information sharing, (personal)
information management, information practices, information
experiences,andinformationdiscovery( GreifenederandSchlebbe,
2023).
It is remarkable that, similarly to the triadic structure that
considers the human, the interpretant, an inseparable part of
information ,theconceptof HumanInformationBehavior wasnever
adopted by the research community ( Bates, 2017 ). Information
behavior research underwent several so-called conceptual and
methodological turns that are also reﬂective of the increasing
relevance and attention the human being has been attributed
over the years: from understanding which information sources
and systems humans use to gather information, learning about
the information need that motivates humans to interact with
information(cognitiveturn)andtheiremotionsinvolved(aﬀective
turn), to the role of socio-cultural contexts (socio-cognitive turn)
and habitualized information practices (social-constructionist
turn) (Hartel, 2019 ). Information behavior can only be exposed by
humans — manifesting their (for outsiders’ implicit) relevance for
informationscienceagain.
This also becomes apparent by one central activity of
information behavior, i.e., the humans’ engagement in looking
for information. Case and Given (2016) emphasize that from
birth onwards, humans are prompted to seek information to
meet their fundamental needs. Information needs are driven by
those fundamental needs, often because the human recognizes
a lack of information to meet the fundamental needs ( Stock
and Stock, 2015 ). Information seeking behavior is activated
by concrete information needs and is, therefore, active and
intentional ( Case and Given, 2016 ). If a computer or IT system
is used to look for information, then Wilson(1999) speaks of
InformationSearching.
Informationbehaviorresearchisnotagoalinitself—likeother
disciplines,itseekstoadvanceinformationsystemstotoolsthatcan
be easily and eﬃciently used, that automatically adapt to changing
situations, and that are adaptable to the needs of their users
(Elbeshausen, 2023 ;Lewandowski and Womser-Hacker, 2023 ).
As has been argued, understanding information and information
behavioralwaysrequiresknowledgeabouthumans,e.g.,usersofan
AI system. The complexity of information behavior often prevents
the use of quantitative or statistical methods, so that qualitative
methodsarethemainapproach.
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /zero.tnum/five.tnum frontiersin.org