Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
technical ﬁeld to an interdisciplinary profession, the same can
be expected for HCAI. Nevertheless, there are critical challenges
to overcome, like explainability, trustworthiness, or unrealistic
user expectations. However, technology acceptance models can
be used to build trust to accept AI systems and make them
morehuman-centric,thuskeepingexpectationsinline.Ultimately,
achievinganexplainableAIcontributestothemutualcollaboration
and interaction of humans and AI. For ethical reasons, AI’s
instrumental character must always be considered. Furthermore,
AI can be made more accessible to stakeholders by implementing
gamiﬁcation, which can increase stakeholder commitment to
increased engagement with human-centered AI, especially in the
workplace.Finally,thedemonstratoracknowledgestheimportance
of ethical concerns by utilizing the human-in-the-loop concept,
thusincreasingtrust.
It can be concluded that the transfer of human-centered
research results into practical application is supported
by an interdisciplinary approach that combines diﬀerent
ideas, knowledge, and work methods. By displaying the
interrelationships between the disciplines, this article reveals
in the following section further directions for research as
well as concepts and features a (future) theory of HCAI
shouldentail.
/six.tnum./three.tnum. Setting foundations for a
human-centered interdisciplinary AI
theory: synergistic human-AI symbiosis
theory (SHAST)
In order to advance the research ﬁeld regarding human-
centered AI, a conceptualization of a Synergistic Human-AI
Symbiosis Theory (SHAST) has been started. SHAST takes into
account that the optimal deployment of artiﬁcial intelligence in
the workplace needs the establishment of a symbiotic relationship
between humans and AI systems, drawing upon the expertise of
ﬁvedistinctdisciplines:humanfactorsengineering(HFE),human-
computer interaction (HCI), psychology, information science,
and adult education. Based on the present ﬁndings, all ﬁve
disciplines appear to be necessary to successfully implement
HCAI in the workplace. SHAST envisions a future where
AI systems and humans collaborate synergistically to achieve
unprecedented levels of productivity and wellbeing. The ﬁve
disciplines presented here are predestined to contribute to the
future of HCAI, as they incorporate fundamental components of
human centeredness and address important ﬁelds of action for its
creationandimplementation.
SHAST posits that AI should be designed to augment
humancapabilities,fosterseamlessinteractions,andensureethical
practices. HFE is the foundational pillar, advocating for AI
systems that enhance human potential while preserving human
autonomy, decision-making, and overall work performance. HCI,
another elementary bedrock, focuses on user-centric design,
creating seamless and intuitive interactions between humans and
AI, fostering realistic user expectations, and minimizing friction
in collaborating with AI technologies that intuitively adapt to
user needs and preferences. Psychology’s role in SHAST revolvesTABLE/two.tnum Frameworkwithminimumﬁeldsofactionforthedisciplines.
Discipline Minimum ﬁelds of action
HFE •Balancedworkload
•Enhancinghumancapabilities
•Humancontrol
•Socialandethicalresponsibility
Informationscience •Pragmaticsofinformation
•Considercontextsandinformationbehavior
•Informationliteracy
Adulteducation •Includelow-skilledworkersandworkers’unions
•Tailoredlearningandteachingincoursesandthe
workplace
HCIandPsychology •Technologyacceptanceandadoption
•Humanautonomyandcontrol
•Realisticuserexpectations
•ExplainableAI
•Trust
around cultivating user trust, achieved through transparent AI
design and explainable algorithms. Information science considers
the pragmatic side of information, ensuring that humans can
eﬀectively and eﬃciently use information systems, for example,
by increasing their information literacy. Finally, adult education
plays a critical part in SHAST by cultivating digital literacy
and ensuring that individuals possess the skills to navigate
AI-powered environments, fostering learning opportunities for
a workforce to engage with AI technologies for innovation
and productivity eﬀectively, minimizing disparities, and enabling
broadparticipation.
SHAST proposes that human-AI symbiosis can be achieved
through an interplay of these disciplines, resulting in AI
technologiesthatempowerindividuals,enhancecollaboration,and
create a sustainable and equitable future. In fact, SHAST is based
on a framework that is presented in Table2. The outcomes from
theoryandpracticeshowminimumﬁeldsofactionforasuccessful
HCAIimplementation.
If fundamental aspects from the framework of the ﬁve
disciplines are missing for the implementation and application of
HCAI, then this will result in severe consequences and challenges
(Stephanidis et al., 2019 ;Garibay et al., 2023 ;Xu et al., 2023 ).
More precisely, it is postulated that when a discipline is not
adequately considered, there may be a failure to comply with
the minimum ﬁelds of action, and implementation may not
besuccessful.
Itremainsopenfordiscussionandempiricalresearchonwhich
disciplines would further be needed to support the development
of a widely applicable theory of human-centered AI. The article
aims to convincingly present the normative, theoretical, and
methodological concepts from human factors and ergonomics
(HFE), psychology, human-computer interaction, information
science, and adult education and why they are considered critical
buildingblocksforHCAIandSHAST.
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /one.tnum/three.tnum frontiersin.org