Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
explicit or implicit components that guide action but cannot
beverbalized.
•“Innovation work” refers to problem-ﬁnding and problem-
solving work assignments in which the goal and the path to
achieving the goal are not predetermined. Innovation work
includes unplannable or poorly plannable, unpredictable
intellectual performances, prognostic intellectual
performances that do not have precisely deﬁned goals,
and diagnostic intellectual performances for which no
algorithms can exist because it is unclear what is being
searchedforintheﬁrstplace( Hacker,2018 ).
ThereisincreasedinteresttosubstituteknowledgeworkbyAI.
However, as expected, signiﬁcant aspects of innovation work will
remainwithhumansinthefuture( Hacker,2018 ).
/two.tnum./four.tnum. HFE design criteria for HCAI
HCAIencompassesindividualsafety,thetrustworthinessofAI
operation, an appropriate division of functions between humans
and machines, and conducive working conditions ( Huchler et al.,
2020). Insofar as AI applications contribute to the automation of
knowledge work, the design criteria of conduciveness to learning
andsocialcompatibilitytakeonincreasedimportance.
HCAI ties in with the human capabilities and places the
mutual reinforcement of humans and AI at the center of
their interaction. Such reinforcement will be reached through a
complementarydivisionoffunctionsbetweenhumansandAIthat
takes into account the diﬀerences between human capabilities and
technicalfunctionalities( Rammert,2009 ).Thecoreprincipleofthe
complementarydivisionoffunctionsstrivesforhigherproductivity
and adaptivity through a lower overall degree of automation with
increasing partial automation and systematic integration of the
capabilities of the working human ( Huchler, 2022 ). In order to
cope with the uncertainties of work systems, human options of
control are extended, e.g., by informal work actions and work-
integrated learning processes. Appropriate competencies are to be
maintainedbydesigningtheinteractionbetweenhumansandAIin
alearner-friendlyway( Groteetal.,2000 ).
Regarding the social responsibility of AI applications, ethical
aspects need to be clariﬁed. Ethics focuses on speciﬁcally moral
action, especially with regard to its justiﬁability and reﬂection
(Bostrom and Yudkowsky, 2013 ). In AI use, ethical questions are
concretized in the phenomena of uncertainty and social inequality
(BrynjolfssonandMcAfee,2012 ):
•Uncertainty: Purposes of the use of technology are not or
not exclusively achieved, i.e., the relationship between
means and ends is not always comprehensible; this
manifests in insuﬃcient transparency, comprehensibility,
and manageability, as well as the irreversibility of
decision-makingprocesses.
•Social inequality: The people who suﬀer harm are not the
beneﬁciaries; inequality aﬀects personal and informational
autonomy in the use of data, the possibility of personal
development, decision-making power, and the economic
exploitationofworkresults.WhendesigningHCAIsystems,ethicalrulesshouldensurethat
human autonomy of decision and action is preserved with moral
intent(Floridietal.,2018 ).Currently,AIisnotyetcomprehensively
capable of making moral decisions. Moral principles are instead
speciﬁed by humans and implemented in the form of algorithms
that can lead to morally grounded actions as a result. An essential
principleofhuman-centereddesignispreservingandappropriately
usingthesemoralmeansofcontrolandaccess( Bülchmann,2020 ).
Thisalsorelatestothehumaninﬂuenceofexitpoints,ifnecessary.
Bostrom and Yudkowsky (2013) recommend four ethical
design principles of HCAI: An HCAI functioning should be (1)
comprehensible and (2) its actions predictable in principle; there
should be suﬃcient time for users to react and veto control in the
event of a potential malfunction. HCAI should (3) not be easily
manipulated, and if a malfunction does occur, (4) responsibility
shouldbeclearlydeﬁned.
HFE traditionally incorporates a variety of perspectives on
humanwork.Inthischapter,manymethodsanddeﬁnitionsofHFE
were presented, which are also relevant to the other disciplines.
HFE has a pragmatic concept for the design of work systems,
processes, and tools, including AI, some of which are documented
in regulations and standards. Knowledge of these methods and
deﬁnitions is cross-disciplinary relevant, and not limited to HFE,
andadditionallynecessarytopreparetheimplementationofHCAI
atwork.
/three.tnum. Information is the key: HCAI in
information science
Thetopic“human-centeredAI”hasnotgainedmuchattention
in information science; even “human-centricity” is not a much-
discussed concept due to how information science’s central object
of study — information — is conceptualized and deﬁned. In
the following, it will be argued that there is no need to be
explicit about “human-centricity” because, for one, information
does not exist outside of human beings, and second, information
behavioriscentraltothedevelopmentandevolutionofhumans.If
human-centered AI systems are considered information systems,
then several implications can be deduced for their design and
handling from this argumentation. Overall, there are three ways
how information science can conceptually approach human-
centeredAI:
(1) The meta-level that discusses HCAI against the discipline’s
pragmaticunderstandingofinformation.
(2) The information behavior perspective, which is considered
central to human life and that leads to the creation of
usermodels.
(3) Theliteracyaspectthatreﬂectsontheskillshumansneedto
handleAIsuccessfully.
/three.tnum./one.tnum. The meta-level: what is information?
In the literature, information is often characterized by using
the Semiotic Triangle by Charles Sanders Peirce since it has
been argued that information is the basis for the communicative
action (in the sense of information as a message, information
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /zero.tnum/four.tnum frontiersin.org