Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
systems ( Höök, 2000 ). This consideration can be achieved by
putting in place veriﬁcation measures or regulating levels of
human-controlled autonomy to prevent unintended adaptations
or activities by intelligent systems ( Amershi et al., 2019 ;Xu
et al., 2023 ). In addition, AI-driven inﬂuence techniques like
psychological targeting or digital nudging have raised ethical
worries about undermining autonomy ( Bermúdez et al., 2023 ).
Moreover, a series of recent studies found that employees who
work with AI systems are more likely to suﬀer loneliness,
which can lead to sleeplessness and increased drinking after
work(Tangetal.,2023 ).
Nevertheless, in HCI, the understanding of human autonomy
remains ambiguous ( Bennett et al., 2023 ). This ambiguity might
be attributed to an old controversy if people and computers
being in the same category or if, as many HCAI sympathizers
believe, vast diﬀerences exist ( Shneiderman, 2022 , p. 25), with
Shneiderman supporting the latter ( Shneiderman, 2022 , p. 31).
However, AI and its impact on the workplace are said to
be disruptive, including chatbot-based communication systems
that can demonstrate empathy through an understanding of
human behavior and psychology, allowing the chatbot to
connect with customers emotionally to ensure their satisfaction
and thus support the adoption of AI systems ( Krishnan
et al., 2022 ). AI diﬀers from HCAI by two key human-
centered aspects in terms of performance and the product.
The human-centered process is based on user experience
design methods and continuous human performance evaluation.
Furthermore, the human-centered product is emphasized by
human control to enhance human performance by designing
super tools with a high level of automation ( Shneiderman, 2022 ,
p.9).
Still, HCI acknowledges the importance of AI by highlighting
it in almost all of the current HCI grand challenges, like
human-technology symbiosis and human-environment
interactions, to name a few ( Stephanidis et al., 2019 ). This
is accompanied by six grand challenges of human-centered
AI: human wellbeing, responsible design of AI, privacy
aspects, AI-related design and evaluation frameworks, the
role of government and independent oversight, and ﬁnally,
HCAI interaction in general ( Garibay et al., 2023 ). HCAI
interaction especially plays a vital role at work, as economic
challenges meet with ethical and organizational considerations
(Garibay et al., 2023 ). This collection of grand challenges
reﬂects the almost symbiotic relationship between HCI
andAI.
Finally, the transition to human interaction with AI systems
by moving on from siloed machine intelligence to human-
controlledhybridintelligencecanbeconsideredanewopportunity
for HCI professionals to enable HCAI ( Xu et al., 2023 ).
A potential goal of human-centered AI design is to create
human-controlled AI using human-machine hybrid intelligence,
which emphasizes the integration of humans and machines
as a system, aided by the introduction of human functions
and roles that ensure human control of the system ( Xu
et al., 2023 , p. 503). However, such integration of humans
and machines is not without obstacles and unrealistic user
expectations, and negative emotional responses are often a source
ofconcern./five.tnum./one.tnum. Unrealistic user expectations
Exaggerated and unrealistic user expectations about AI-
based applications and absent design solutions to support
human-centered work can lead to frustration and questioning
the “intelligence” of such applications ( Luger and Sellen, 2016 ).
For example, high eﬃciency of search functions should be
combinedwithcuratedcontentandmeaningfulrecommendations
even without the necessary meta-information. These demands
raise hopes that may neglect the actual software and hardware
capabilitiesofresearchprojects,whichmayonlybefeasibleforvery
large companies. In addition, it is requested to combine, match,
and recommend diﬀerent kinds of heterogeneous data, even on
the internet, without considering resources. Although AI makes
signiﬁcantimprovementsdaily,thesearestillquiteunrealisticuser
expectationstoday.
One possible way to overcome these challenges of unrealistic
user expectations is to divide the AI-based processes into diﬀerent
phases. For example, Amershi et al. (2019) oﬀer 18 AI design
guidelines separated into four phases: the initial phase when
beginning to work with an AI-based application, during general
interaction, when things go wrong, and aspects considering long-
term experiences. A vital aspect of these guidelines is providing
supportandmanagingexpectations.Suchaspectsarenotunknown
totechnologyacceptancemodels.
/five.tnum./two.tnum. Building on technology acceptance
and trust
Technology acceptance models, e.g., TAM ( Davis, 1989 ),
UTAUT ( Venkatesh et al., 2003 ), and their extensions in various
ﬁelds (Kao and Huang, 2023 ), oﬀer a promising domain for an
evaluation concerning human-centered AI. TAM is a conceptual
model used to account for technology usage behavior, which has
beenconﬁrmedtobevalidinvarioustechnologiesamongdiﬀerent
groupsofpeople( Venkateshetal.,2003 ;Choungetal.,2023 ).The
originalTAMmodelpostulatesthattheintentiontousetechnology
inthefutureisdeterminedbytwokeyfactors:perceivedusefulness
andperceivedeaseofuse( Davis,1989 ).
Choung et al. (2023) integrated trust as an additional variable
in their extended TAM model. Their two studies conﬁrm that
trust is vital for accepting technology. Therefore, AI technologies
should be designed and implemented in a human-centered way;
consequently, their implementation should be easy to use, useful,
and trusted. In general, empirical ﬁndings support the assumption
that technology acceptance models help to explain the acceptance
of AI technologies ( Sohn and Kwon, 2020 ), including the aspect
of trust ( Choung et al., 2023 ). However, nevertheless, there are
limitationstotheirusage,whicharediscussedby Bagozzi(2007).
Users’ low level of trust in how their data is handled and
processed must also be adequately considered psychologically. AI,
ingeneral,canpredictuserbehaviorinawiderangeofapplications
by following digital traces of usage. Besides legal and ethical
challenges, psychologists call this approach digital phenotyping
when using elaborated smart sensing techniques and when it is
successfully assisted and analyzed by data mining and machine
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /zero.tnum/nine.tnum frontiersin.org