Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
User modeling is an important activity in this regard,
which aims to describe individual users to enable, for example,
personalization of search results or groups of typical users that
share certain characteristics (e.g., novices and experts). Latter
is often realized via personas that represent typical users of a
system with very concrete properties (an approach sometimes
criticized for replicating stereotypes; Marsden and Haag, 2016 ). If
the information system targets a broad user base, user modeling
can be a tough challenge since there is not only a large, diverse
group of (possible) users, but user behavior is also dynamic and
can change while using the system for particular tasks or over
time.Humansadjustinformationalpractices,tactics,andbehavior
dynamically to match contexts and to maximize the amount of
information they can get, e.g., by changing search terms ( Pirolli
andCard,1999 ).Inadditiontotheinformationalenvironmentand
contexts,theinformationbehaviorofapersonisalsoconnectedto
their personality ( Lewandowski and Womser-Hacker, 2023 ). The
principleofleasteﬀort( Zipf,1949 )isalsoapplicabletoinformation
behavior: humans tend only to spend the minimum eﬀort to
accomplish tasks, often only resulting in only a satisfying (but not
thebest)result.
Interactive information systems that more dynamically react
to users’ information behavior and that serve a variety of tasks,
need to even better understand humans, their needs, and context
to be accepted and add value. Ingwersen and Järvelin (2005)
argue — similar to the pragmatic deﬁnition of information —
that information systems are never used in isolation but are
always embedded in personal, organizational, cultural, and more
contexts and therefore need to be designed and evaluated within
those contexts. Users should be given the opportunity to use
informationsystemspurposefullytofocusonthetasktobefulﬁlled
without being bothered by the challenges of handling the system
(Elbeshausen,2023 ,p.474).Foreconomicreasons,inthecorporate
context,itisofparamountimportancetoknowwhichinformation
types and information services are meaningful for employees and
which information needs arise ( Stock and Stock, 2015 ).Gust von
Loh(2008)distinguishesbetweenobjectiveinformationneedsfrom
workers and employees that arise from a certain job position (e.g.,
because of the company strategy) and that are independent of a
particular staﬀ member, and subjective information needs that are
articulatedbyaspeciﬁcjobholderandthatstemfromuserstudies.
Here, strong connections to the human-computer interaction
(HCI) ﬁeld become apparent. Information science and HCI share
their focus on humans interacting with information systems, their
cognitive and contextual embeddedness while doing so, and the
subjective and objective information needs a system has to satisfy
(Jetter, 2023 ). Both disciplines acknowledge that the design of
humane (or human-centered) information systems (empirically
proven via usability-and user experience methods) beneﬁts from
theenrichmentofinformationandcontextualization.
Technical information systems may be unable to ﬁt all the
information behavioral aspects of a broad user base but may
need to focus on a selection of tasks or user types. Furthermore,
informationbehavioralsotakesplaceoutsideoftechnicalordigital
environments.Then,educatingtheuserstowardacertainbehavior
and increasing their knowledge about the information system and
environmentcouldbeanadditionalapproach./three.tnum./three.tnum. Information literacy as a prerequisite to
deal with AI
Although information is central to human development and
life, dealing with information in a good and meaningful way
is a skill that has to be acquired and cultivated — especially
with regard to the ever-increasing complexity of today’s digital
information environments. To be able to eﬃciently and ethically
deal with information in a particular context, to understand how
information is produced, evaluated, and distributed, how it can be
eﬀectively searched for, and to assess the personal informational
and thinking competencies critically are skills that are subsumed
under the term “information literacy” ( Griesbaum, 2023 ). The
UNESCO (2013) considers media and information literacy as a
core competency for democratic societies that enables citizens
to successfully engage and participate in private, vocational, and
societalactivities.Informationliteracyis,however—andsimilarly
as the concept at its core: information — a relational concept.
Its characteristics change with the information environments and
contexts in which human beings have to deal with information
(Griesbaum,2023 ).Thisalsopresumesthataninformation-literate
person has a certain amount of knowledge about the topic or
circumstances they are dealing with — but this is not always the
case.Hence,themorethepersonlacksexpertiseandknowledge,the
moretrustthepersonneedstoputintotheinformationecosystem.
Informationliteracythentransfersfromthetopicorsituationitself
to the evaluation of other information sources or experts whose
recommendationshavetobetrusted( Griesbaum,2023 ).
Despite its stated relevance, often, information literacy is
not an integral part of school education but rather embedded
in higher education and services of university libraries ( ACRL,
2016).Inwork-relatedcontexts,informationliteracyissuesbecome
apparent in enterprises with structured knowledge management
approaches ( Travis, 2017 ). However, Lloyd(2013) has found that
information literacy at the workplace is mainly reduced to socio-
cultural practices for collaboration. Middleton et al. (2018) could
show that information literacy is strongly connected to innovative
workpractices.
This hints toward an increasing need for information literacy
in complex information contexts as induced by AI systems.
Consequently, AI literacy is an emerging ﬁeld in information
science, borrowing most of the central aspects already embedded
in information literacy but also highlighting further skills and
normative claims ( Touretzky et al., 2019 ).Ng et al. (2021a,b)
performed a literature search on AI literacy to derive aspects
this concept entails. They found that all selected articles consider
knowing the basic functions of AI and how to use AI applications
in everyday life ethically (know and understand AI), as well as
applying AI knowledge, concepts, and applications in diﬀerent
scenarios(applyAI),thecorecompetenciesofAI-literatehumans.
Two-thirds of the analyzed articles also mention critical higher-
orderthinkingskills(suchasevaluating,appraising,predicting,and
designing)aspartofAIliteracy(evaluateandcreateAI).
Furthermore, the literature states that AI literacy is central
to the future workforce, simultaneously preparing humans to
eﬃcientlyuseandcriticallyevaluateAIandsparkingcareerinterest
in this ﬁeld ( Chai et al., 2020 ). Interestingly, the study revealed
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /zero.tnum/six.tnum frontiersin.org