Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
that only 50% of the articles considered educating humans about
socially responsible behavior when using or designing AI as part
of AI literacy. Here the authors see room for improvement: “[...]
conceptualizing AI literacy with human-centered considerations
is crucial to building a future inclusive society” ( Ng et al., 2021a ,
p. 507). The evaluation of AI literacy itself is conducted via
knowledge tests, self-reporting, questionnaires, or observations
wheninteractingwithAI.
/four.tnum. Designing learning opportunities for
all: HCAI in adult education research
and adult learning
The core assumption of HFE is that human beings are able
andwillingtolearnandshapetheirworkinglives.Consideringthis
ﬁrst assumption, aspects of lifelong learning, adult and continuing
education, and adult learning at the workplace touch the core of
work design and human centeredness. At the same time, for many
years adult education policies and research have dealt with how
educational systems can eﬀectively provide knowledge and skills
for a technologically changing (working) society ( Merriam and
Bierema, 2013 ). The results of numerous research activities within
theadulteducationscientiﬁccommunitycontributetoshapingAI-
aﬀectedworkplacesinahuman-centeredway,whichfromanadult
educational perspective means a learning-centered way ( Harteis,
2022).
From the perspective of adult education research and policy,
it is a consensus that educational systems target fostering
the quality of educational processes and providing learning
opportunities equally ( UNESCO, 2019 ;BMAS and BMBF, 2021 ;
Council of the European Union, 2021 ;Autor:innengruppe
Bildungsberichterstattung,2022 ;OECD,2023 ).
Educational systems contribute to designing and establishing
learning opportunities . That means they contribute to channeling,
organizing, and monitoring informal, non-formal, and formal
(adult) learning processes. In democratic states, educational
systems aim to provide skills to individuals so that they can
actively participate in public and working life. At the same time,
quality learning processes within educational systems underlie
the expectancy to provide a qualiﬁed and employable workforce.
Scientiﬁc discourse treats these aspects using the two concepts of
individual self-regulation, on the one hand, and human resources,
on the other hand ( Autor:innengruppe Bildungsberichterstattung,
2022).
Work has a major role to play in education. First, work and
workinglifearesigniﬁcantﬁeldsofadultlearning.Humansubjects
acquire skills for and within their employment to stay employable.
Second, in Western-so-called working societies-work is a major
part of active participation in society, as it impacts, e.g., social
status and social and ﬁnancial resources as much as professional
and, therefore, social identity ( Kraus, 2008 ;Gericke, 2017 ). Third,
work in terms of work-based learning is a learning and teaching
methodology ( Bauer et al., 2004 ;Dehnbostel, 2022 ). Therefore, it
is an important quality criterion of professionally designed adult
and continuing education to take aspects of individuals’ (working)
lives,suchaspossiblerupturesin(working)biographiesandcareerdevelopment, as one starting point for developing and creating
learningopportunities.
Equality of opportunities in adult education refers to equal
accesstolearningopportunitiesasamajorchallengeforeducation
systems ( Käpplinger and Lichte, 2020 ;Council of the European
Union, 2021 ). It targets especially vulnerable and marginalized
groups such as migrants, low-qualiﬁed, unemployed, disabled, or
illiterate persons, who have diﬀerent learning needs regarding
content but also need diﬀerently structured learning opportunities
than high-skilled workers or middle-class citizens. Work has an
important role to play in the equality of learning opportunities.
According to the Adult Education Survey ( BMBF, 2022 ), for
years, more than 70 up to 75% of the adult learning activities
of the German population aged 16–65 have taken place during
daily working time or were ﬁnanced by the employer. A much
smaller and even decreasing part of adult learning activities was
work-related but based on individually generated ﬁnancial and
time resources (13% in 2012 – 8% in 2020), while the share of
individual non-work related learning activities is relatively stable
at about 17–18% ( BMBF, 2022 , p. 22). Major diﬀerences exist in
the participation rates of diﬀerent social groups. The employed
population shows a higher participation rate (46% in 2012 –
60% in 2020) than the unemployed population (13% in 2012
– 19% in 2020). The same applies when comparing the un-or
low-skilled population (30% in 2012 – 46% in 2020) with high-
qualiﬁed persons (about 70% in 2012 – 81% in 2020). Remarkably,
in the German adult population, learning activities are on the
rise in absolute numbers. At the same time, the diﬀerences
in share between certain social groups have not remarkably
diminished. These ﬁndings concerning the participation rates in
adultlearningvaryacrosscountries,stillthegapbetweenemployed
and unemployed, as much the high – and the low-skilled persons,
showstobeacentralchallengeinmoreorlessallOECDcountries
(EuropeanUnion,2021 ).
Against this background, an adult education research
perspective on human-centered AI implementation will
concentrate not only on how to provide quality learning
opportunities but it will focus as well on how to tailor these
quality opportunities for each social group. So, an adult education
research perspective contributes to human-centered AI, ﬁrst of
all, by analyzing if an educational system, an employer, or a single
workplace oﬀers learning opportunities for AI-based workplaces,
whomtheselearningopportunitiesaremadefor,andwhatkindof
learningopportunitiesareproposed.
/four.tnum./one.tnum. Designing learning: what skills should
we qualify for?
Regardingcontentsandneedsforskills,thereisconsensusthat
inadigitalizedandAI-basedworld,lifeandworktaskswillbecome
more complex. There are catalogs trying to capture and describe
important future skills. In the context of education and lifelong
learning, the European Commission’s Framework DigComp has
hadquiteanimpactintheﬁeldinGermany( JointResearchCenter
(JRC), 2022 ). Moreover, in higher education, the so-called twenty
ﬁrst-century skills play an important role ( Anandiadou and Claro,
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /zero.tnum/seven.tnum frontiersin.org