Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
with education: most younger people up to age 34 see AI as an
opportunity, as do individuals with a university degree ( Infratest
dimap,2023 ).Theresultsofprevioussurveysconductedworldwide
areconﬁrmed,althoughtheresultsdiﬀergreatlydependingonthe
economicdevelopmentineachcountry( Ipsos,2022 ).
More particularly, in the workplace, there is a risk of creating
a defeatist mentality among the employees when ignoring human
aspectsofAIimplementation.Similarexamplesexistfromthepast,
e.g., knowledge management faced the same challenges around
individual,organizational,andtechnologicalbarriers( Riege,2005 ).
Nevertheless, it is argued that high levels of human control and
automation are likely to simultaneously empower people and not
just emulate humans ( Shneiderman, 2020 ). The idea of human
centeredness in AI implementation binds these critical research
resultstogether.
Artiﬁcial intelligence is, by deﬁnition, a sequence of
mathematical models created by humans, which are executed
by computers. The OECD deﬁnes AI more precisely: “An AI
system is a machine-based system that can, for a given set of
human-deﬁnedobjectives,makepredictions,recommendations,or
decisions inﬂuencing real or virtual environments. [...] AI systems
are designed to operate with varying levels of autonomy” ( OECD.,
2019,p.23–24).Thisisareﬁnementofthedeﬁnitionof McCarthy
(2007, p. 2), in which AI is deﬁned as “[...] the science and
engineering of making intelligent machines, especially intelligent
computer programs. It is related to the similar task of using
computerstounderstandhumanintelligence,butAIdoesnothave
toconﬁneitselftomethodsthatarebiologicallyobservable.”
In general, Artiﬁcial Narrow Intelligence (ANI) and Artiﬁcial
General Intelligence (AGI) are distinguished. An AGI system
would be an autonomous agent that can learn unsupervised
(McLean et al., 2021 ). ANI has achieved enormous success in
determined situations with a low-dimensional phase space, such
as strategy games ( Lenzen, 2019 ). However, the methodology of
ANI performance can only be applied to a limited range of tasks
(LandgrebeandSmith,2022 ).
The organization of working processes may proﬁt from a
design approach that integrates human and technical intelligence.
Such an organization is achieved, among other things, when
humans and machines can use their speciﬁc skills and when
humans and machines mutually support each other in gaining
capabilities ( Braun, 2017 ). In this sense, human-centered AI
(HCAI) already consists of a set of standards, concepts, and
principles, like e.g., fairness, accountability, beneﬁcence, justice,
and explicability, to name a few ( Huchler et al., 2020 ). However,
these principles are not consistently implemented in practice
because of competing goals of productivity and cost-cutting,
which has been a traditional challenge of HFE ( Spitzley,
1980).
The present article aims at setting the foundations for
an interdisciplinary theory of human-centered AI. For this,
the article reﬂects in Section 6.2 on learnings from an
interdisciplinary research project, which is considered as
a demonstrator. This demonstrator combines normative,
theoretical, and methodological concepts from human factors
and ergonomics (HFE), psychology, human-computer interaction
(HCI), information science, and adult education to study AI
atwork.The article introduces each discipline’s perspective on human-
centricity and AI at work. It discusses the implications for
developing, transferring, and implementing AI at the workplace,
including disciplines not yet in the spotlight about HCAI at
work. By explaining the fruitful interplay of these disciplines
and how they contribute to human-centricity, we will ultimately
argue that a theory of human-centered AI will immensely beneﬁt
from incorporating critical concepts, norms, and theories from
the presented disciplines as well as from an interdisciplinary
approach.Thisarticle,therefore,shedslightondiﬀerentco-existing
perspectives on and criteria of human-centered AI and will show
how they can be meaningfully integrated to answer the research
question of what is critical for human-centered AI at work . So far,
thishasonlybeenconductedfor,e.g.,socialsciences( Miller,2019 )
and thus has not acknowledged or even included more diverse
disciplines.However,manyauthorshaveidentiﬁedanurgentneed
forcollaborationacrossdisciplinesforhumanstakeholders,e.g.,for
explainable AI ( Langer et al., 2021 ). This article contributes to this
research gap by introducing views from heterogeneous disciplines
witheitherafocusonindividuals,suchaspsychology,orafocuson
technology,suchasHCI.
Moreover, the article leverages insights from disciplines that
are either primarily concerned with a work context, such as HFE,
or disciplines that study the work context as one research object
amongst others, such as adult learning and information science.
Furthermore, it systematizes results from the diﬀerent disciplines
byusingtheﬁveperspectivesonhuman-centricityby Wilkensetal.
(2021).Inaddition,itidentiﬁesﬁeldsofactionforhuman-centered
AI implementation—such as supporting balanced workload,
information literacy, providing tailored learning opportunities
for low-skilled workers, enhancing technology acceptance, and
building trust. By that, it ﬁnally sets the foundation for a
synergistic human-AI symbiosis theory, which includes these
aspects of AI implementation. Overall, this article is written for an
interdisciplinary readership interested in human-centered AI. As
a result, this article has more of an explorative, descriptive, and
conceptualcharacter.
/two.tnum. Supporting balanced workload:
HCAI in human factors and
ergonomics
Humanfactorsandergonomics(HFE)hasdevelopedconcepts
and principles for work design, especially for human-technology
interaction. These concepts can be applied to AI systems in terms
of a division of functions between humans and AI. The principles
ofHFEinhibitamutuallyreinforcingrelationshipbetweenhumans
andAIbasedoncapabilitiesandethicaldesignprinciples.
/two.tnum./one.tnum. Deﬁning ergonomics and illustrating
the methodology
Ergonomics is the scientiﬁc discipline concerned with the
understanding of interactions among humans and other elements
of a system; ergonomics is also the profession that applies theory,
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /zero.tnum/two.tnum frontiersin.org