Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
/six.tnum. Discussion
This chapter presents conclusions from the previous chapters’
theory and practice and shows relations between them in
order to inform a synergistic human-centered AI theory. First
interdisciplinary human-centered AI perspectives are shown,
according to Wilkens et al. (2021), and how they relate to the
ﬁve disciplines. Then, interdisciplinary views of human-centricity
and their interrelations are matched with observations from a
demonstrator. These views have the goal of setting foundations
for an interdisciplinary synergistic theory of human-centered AI,
whichispresentedinSection6.3.
/six.tnum./one.tnum. Interdisciplinary perspectives on
human-centered AI
Wilkens et al. (2021) found ﬁve co-existing views in a
comprehensive literature review analyzing the signiﬁcance
of HCAI: a deﬁcit-oriented, a data reliability-oriented, a
protection-oriented, a potential-oriented, and a political-oriented
understandingofhowtoachievehuman-centricitywhiledeploying
AI in the workplace. These ﬁve perspectives reﬂect many aspects
of AI’s human-centricity, with varying levels of maturity along
each dimension. In order to put the results of this article into
context, the disciplines of information science, human-computer
interaction, psychology, and adult learning are related in Table1
to the ﬁve perspectives of Wilkens et al. (2021). HFE is inherent in
Wilkens et al. (2021) and would cover all ﬁve perspectives, so it is
notshownin Table1.
The perspectives of Wilkens et al. (2021) largely coincide with
the results of the demonstrator. Although all the perspectives
are covered, HFE is particularly concerned about the data
reliability-oriented understanding of HCAI and the potential-
orientedunderstanding .
Potential deﬁcits of data reliability aremainlyconsidered from
an ethical perspective since technical artifacts are not ascribed to
any moral competence; at best, they can imitate human moral
behavior.TakingintoaccounttheinstrumentalcharacterofAI,itis
rather necessary to consider fundamental conﬂicts of interest that
might favor immoral behavior. This, however, leaves the ﬁeld of
AIdesign.
Thepotential-orientedunderstanding promotesahybriddesign
approach corresponding to the “complementary division of
functions between humans and AI.” The mutual reinforcement of
humans and HCAI appears to be suitable for satisfactorily coping
with future, currently potentially unknown working requirements.
It emphasizes the evolutionary principle of humans, whose
behaviorisimitatedbyintelligentmachines,andthatwillultimately
bereﬂectedintheprecisionandreliabilityofmachineprocedures.
The information science perspective on human-centered AI
can be summarized mainly as protection-oriented ,potential-
oriented, andpolitical-oriented . It isprotection-oriented when it
studies how information systems should be designed so that
humans can easily and safely use them, and it is potential-oriented
sinceitconsidersinformationsystemssociotechnicalenvironments
in which humans co-construct information with the help oftechnology. In social settings, and especially at the workplace, the
political-oriented perspective is also part of information science’s
agenda,e.g.,intermsofinformationliteracy.
An adult education perspective, which in its tradition always
includes an advocacy perspective, can be contextualized as a
protection-oriented , apotential-oriented , and a policy-oriented
approach. It is protection-oriented when talking about qualifying
workers for correct decision-making in cooperation with AI
systems. It is potential-oriented when thinking about how to use
AI systems for quality learning opportunities, e.g., in learning
analytics. Finally, when reﬂecting on the advocacy tradition of
empowering social subjects, an adult education perspective is
politicallyoriented .
It is not surprising that from a HCI and psychology point
of view, most perspectives by Wilkens et al. (2021) are relevant,
as they touch technology and individual aspects at the same
time. Interestingly, the deﬁcit-oriented understanding and data
reliability-oriented understanding perspectives are more related
to HCI. So assisted tools that work through elaborated sensor
technologyarecommonto,e.g.,gamiﬁedandexplainableAI,which
areﬁeldsofHCI.
In contrast, the protection-oriented understanding and
potential-oriented understanding perspectives are closely related
to psychology. Unrealistic user expectations questioning the
“intelligence”ofAI,Inconnectionwithlossofautonomyandtrust,
are prevailing psychological aspects of human-centricity for these
two perspectives. Nevertheless, these areas can also be found in
HCI and, depending on the degree of technical implementation,
arelikelytobeassignedtoHCI.
It is clear from Table1that the disciplines do not cover all of
Wilkensetal. (2021)perspectives,buttherearediﬀerentemphases,
withanimbalanceexistingfortheﬁrsttwoperspectives.Thearticle
at hand shows that all disciplines are important for HCAI, with
HFEfunctioningasanumbrelladisciplineforHCAIatwork.This
makesthecallforaninterdisciplinaryviewobvious.Thefollowing
section will detail these views that are enriched by ﬁndings from
ademonstrator.
/six.tnum./two.tnum. Interdisciplinary views of
human-centered AI
This section presents the diﬀerent ﬁelds of action, the
relevant factors of human-centered AI from diﬀerent disciplines,
and the interdisciplinary views of HCAI, including possible
areas of collaboration. Adding insights from a demonstrator,
the foundations for a synergistic human-AI symbiosis theory
arerevealed.
ForHFE, human-centricity means involving humans in the
design of work systems, e.g., processes or tools. The design is
based on a comprehensive understanding of users, tasks, and
workenvironments.Human-centereddesignaimsatbalancedskill
and performance development as the basis of work productivity
and health. HFEcombines the human potential with technology.
From a HFE perspective, human-centered AI emphasizes that the
decision-making competence of humans and their intervention
in technical systems in doubt are weighted higher than that of
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /one.tnum/one.tnum frontiersin.org