Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
learning tools ( Baumeister et al., 2023 ). This is not an entirely
new topic, as, e.g., user behavior in an online environment relates
to their personality and can be used to tailor content, improve
search results, and increase the eﬀectiveness of online advertising
(Kosinski et al., 2014 ), which is backed by many empirical studies
and summarized by Baumeister et al. (2023). At the same time,
ethical challenges are addressed by the human-in-the-loop design,
where individuals are asked to make a ﬁnal decision or action
(Shneiderman, 2022 ;Garibay et al., 2023 ;Xu et al., 2023 ), which
canalsohelptoimprovethetrusttoHCAI.
This is in line with results from an experiment by Westphal
et al.(2023), in which they empower users to adjust the
recommendations of human-AI collaboration systems and oﬀer
explanations for the reasoning of the systems. The idea behind
this approach is to counter low trust and limited understanding
of users dealing with recommendations of an AI system, and
at the same time, to keep in mind to achieve an adequate or
calibrated trust, meaning that, e.g., not to over trust the AI system
(Leichtmann et al., 2023b ). However, interestingly, explanations
could backﬁre because they can increase or signal task complexity,
whereasenhanceddecisioncontrolleadstohigherusercompliance
withsystemrecommendations( Westphaletal.,2023 ).Theseresults
aﬃrm that well-explained support can be essential to accept and
facilitate HCAI at work, leading to HCAI systems that explain
themselves, so-called human-centered explainable AI, which can
be accompanied by educational oﬀers and measures for providing
human-centeredexplainableAI.
/five.tnum./three.tnum. A glimpse into the near future:
explainable, understandable, and gamiﬁed
AI
Such explainable AI, especially if it is human-centered,
can be considered crucial. However, from a socio-technical
standpoint, AI should also be understandable to stakeholders
beyondexplainability( Habayeb,2022 ).Thiscanbeachievedwhen
implementinguser-participatedexperimentalevaluationbecauseit
isnecessarytoovercometherelativelysimpleunilateralevaluation
methodsthatonlyevaluateAIsystems’performance.
One way to implement this is to use, e.g., a gamiﬁed
crowdsourcingframeworkforexplainability( Tocchettietal.,2022 ),
whichusesgamedesignelementsinanon-gamecontext( Deterding
et al., 2011 ). However, current research focuses primarily on
strategic and system issues related to AI system performance
(Raftopoulos and Hamari, 2023 ), which limits the view of AI.
Furthermore,HCIshouldpromotetheevaluationofAIsystemsas
human-machinesystemsbyincludingtheend-userperspective( Xu
etal.,2023 ,p.505).Nevertheless,thismakesitnecessaryforHCIto
enhance its current methods. Constraints like focusing on single
user-computing artifacts with a limited context of use, lab-based
studies, or static human-machine functions are prevalent. Instead,
“in-the-wild studies,” the application of distributed contexts of
use, and longitudinal study designs are encouraged to address the
identiﬁeduniqueissuesofAIsystemstoinﬂuencethedevelopment
of AI systems in a human-centered way ( Xu et al., 2023 , p. 509–
512).Additionally, incentives for using artiﬁcial intelligence, e.g.,
gamiﬁcation, are also emerging topics of interest for human-
centered AI ( Mazarakis, 2021 ). Gamiﬁcation tries to bring the
motivating eﬀect associated with games to non-game situations
with the help of elements like badges, leaderboards, and points
(Mazarakis, 2021 , p. 279, 283). First studies conducted with
intelligent user interfaces and voice user interfaces like Amazon
Alexa,whicharealsoconsideredsocialrobotsandactiveappliances
in artiﬁcial intelligence ( Shneiderman, 2022 ), show the potential
to focus on empirical research for the acceptance of these
interfaces ( Bräuer and Mazarakis, 2022a ,b;Haghighat et al., 2023 ).
Nevertheless, explainable AI is also, in this use-case, key to
counteracting suspicion regarding the trust of social robots and
active appliances in artiﬁcial intelligence. For example, to achieve
transparent and accountable conversational AI and to include
suchasysteminagamiﬁedenvironment,interpretability,inherent
capability to explain, independent data, interactive learning, and
inquisitiveness are necessary ( Wahde and Virgolin, 2023 , p. 1856).
Inquisitiveness is meant to be by the AI to show curiosity and not
toannoytheusertoachievehumancenteredness.Curiositymeans
just displaying inquisitiveness in speciﬁc contexts, such as during
learning, so as not to disturb the user ( Wahde and Virgolin, 2023 ,
p.1865).
A further step is taken by Tocchetti et al. (2022), which
propose a gamiﬁed crowdsourcing framework for explainability.
Their crowdsourcing framework engages users on diﬀerent levels
than other platforms, primarily relying on extrinsic rewards.
The provided user education, in particular, would raise users’
understanding of the types of information that an AI system
requires, learns, and produces, improving users’ eﬃciency and
developing the users’ mindsets ( Tocchetti et al., 2022 , p. 7).
Furthermore, their work shows that a symbiosis of HCAI,
gamiﬁcation,andexplainableAIisalsopossiblewithgreatereﬀort
andexertion.Consequently,thisalsoresultsinanincreasedhuman
centeredness. A ﬁrst eﬀort of studies in game-based environments
yields promising results for explainable AI ( Leichtmann et al.,
2023a).
Diﬀerent scenarios for using gamiﬁed AI and gamiﬁcation
in the context of AI, in general, are possible. For example, Tan
and Cheah (2021) describe a work in progress and prototype for
developinganAI-enabledonlinelearningapplicationforlecturing
at a university physics. However, this scenario can be switched to
a work-related setting without much eﬀort. As education is one
of the main application areas of gamiﬁcation ( Mazarakis, 2021 ), a
combination with AI is obvious and already taking place ( Kurni
et al., 2023 ). In this case, ﬁrst data is collected for AI processes,
e.g., through step-by-step scaﬀolding instructions and feedback
to students by studying students’ progress in answering quiz
questions. Then, it is possible to implement adaptive assessments
to more accurately identify the student’s level of mastery, adjust
the diﬃculty level and the number of questions at each level
of diﬃculty, and ﬁnally, step between each level of progression
based on the student’s answer. Thereby, individual feedback,
which can then be used for learning analytics to improve,
optimize, or redesign the curriculum to meet the needs of speciﬁc
student cohorts, can be provided ( Mazarakis, 2013 ;Tan and
Cheah, 2021 ), e.g., for employer-provided training in diﬀerent
workscenarios.
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /one.tnum/zero.tnum frontiersin.org