15
nor disadvantageous for the survival of individuals. It is t hen
reasonable to extrapolate that, if this is how evolution has
managed to produce the amazing complexity and adaptations
seen in nature, then neutrality should aid also EAs. However ,
whether neutrality helps or hinders the search in EAs is
ill-posed and cannot be answered in general: one can only
answer this question within the context of a speciﬁc class of
problems, (neutral) representation and set of operators [4 0],
[41], [42], [43], [44], [45], [111], [112]. We are not aware
of any works in neuroevolution in DNN on neutrality, but
there are some interesting encodings adopted by researcher s
including Suganuma’s work [136] (see Fig. 2) that allow the
measurement of the level of neutrality present in evolution ary
search and indicate whether its presence is beneﬁcial or not in
certain problems and DNNs. If neutrality is beneﬁcial, taki ng
into consideration speciﬁc class of problems, representat ions
and genetic operators, this can also have an immediate posit ive
impact in the training time needed because the evaluation of
potential EA candidate solutions will not be necessary.
C. Multi-objective Optimisation
The vast majority of works reviewed in this paper have
focused their attention in the direct or indirect optimisat ion of
one objective only. For example, when training a CNN in a
computer vision supervised classiﬁcation task, the classi ﬁca-
tion error is normally adopted as a metric of performance for
this type of network. Perhaps, one of the reasons why taking
into account one objective has been the norm in the specialis ed
literature is because the optimisation of one objective has
been enough to yield extraordinary results (for example in
the application domain of route optimisation [8]). Another
potential reason could be due to the fact that two or more
objectives can be conﬂicting with each other making the
(optimisation) task very difﬁcult to accomplished [21], [2 2],
[25].
Multi-objective optimisation (MO) is concerned with the
simultaneous optimisation of more than one objective funct ion.
When such functions are in conﬂict, a set of trade-off soluti ons
among the objectives is sought as no single global optimum
exists. The optimal trade-offs are those solutions for whic h no
objective can be further improved without degrading one of t he
others. This idea is captured in the Pareto dominance relati on:
a solution xin the search space is said to Pareto-dominate
another solution yifxis at least as good as yon all objectives
and strictly better on at least one objective. This is an impo rtant
aspect in EMO (Evolutionary MO) [21], [22], [25] because it
allows solutions to be ranked according to their performanc e
on all objectives with respect to all solutions in the popula tion.
EMO is one of the most active research areas in EAs. Yet it is
surprising to see that EMO approaches have been scarcely use d
for the automatic conﬁguration of artiﬁcial DNNs architect ures
or learning in DNNs. Often, the conﬁguration of these artiﬁc ial
DNNs require simultaneously satisfying multiple objectiv es
such as reducing the computational calculation of these on
the training dataset while attaining high accuracy. EMO off ers
an elegant and efﬁcient framework to handle these conﬂictin g
objectives. We are aware of only a few works in the area
e.g., [71], [92], [94], [151], as summarised in Section III.D. Fitness Landscape Analysis of DNNs and Well-posed Ge-
netic Operators
As we have seen throughout the paper, all of the works
in neuroevolution in DNNs have used core genetic operators
including selection and mutation. Crossover has also been u sed
in most of these works. The use of these operators are sum-
marised in Tables I and II. The use of crossover, sometimes
referred as recombination, can sometimes be difﬁcult to ado pt
depending on the encoding used and some variants have been
proposed such as in the study carried out in [140]. Other
studies have adopted standard crossover operators such as
those discussed in [71]. There are, however, no works carrie d
out in the area of neuroevolution in DNNs that have focused
their attention in explaining why the adoption of a particul ar
genetic operator is well-suited for that particular proble m.
The notion of ﬁtness landscape [146] has been with us for
several decades. It is a non-mathematical aid that has prove n
to be very powerful in understanding evolutionary search.
Viewing the search space, deﬁned by the set of all potential
solutions, as as landscape, a heuristic algorithm such as an
EA, can be thought of as navigating through it to ﬁnd the best
solution (essentially the highest peak in the landscape). T he
height of a point in this search space, represents in an abstr act
way, the ﬁtness of the solution associated with that point.
The landscape is therefore a knowledge interface between th e
problem and the heuristic-based EA. This can help researche rs
and practitioners to deﬁne well-behaved genetic operators , in-
cluding mutation and crossover, over the connectivity stru cture
of the landscape.
E. Standardised Scientiﬁc Neuroevolution Studies in DNNs
As described in Section II, multiple DNNs architectures
have been proposed in the specialised literature including
CNNs, DBNs, RBMs and AEs. Each of these DNNs considers
multiple elements such as the activation function, type of
learning, to mention a few examples. As indicated previousl y,
EAs are incredible ﬂexible allowing researchers to use ele-
ments from two or more different EAs methods. Moreover,
multiple variants from each of these elements exists such as
having multiple options from where to chose to exploit and
explore the search space. Many of the research works reviewe d
in this paper have compared their results with those yield by
neuroevolution-based state-of-the-art algorithms. Howe ver, it
is unclear why some techniques are better than others. Is it
because of the type of operators used? Is it because of the
representation adopted in these studies or is it because of t he
type of learning employed during training? Due to the lack of
standardised studies in neuroevolution on DNNs, it is difﬁc ult
to draw ﬁnal conclusions that help us to identify what elemen ts
are promising in DNNs.
F . Diversifying the use of benchmark problems and DNNs
There is little argument that the availability of new and
large datasets combined with ever increasingly powerful co m-
putational resources have allowed DNNs to tackle and solve
hard problems in domains such as image classiﬁcation, speec h