12
G. Final Comments
The use of evolution-based method in designing deep neural
networks is already a reality as discussed in this section. D if-
ferent EAs methods with different representations have bee n
used, ranging from landmark evolutionary methods includ-
ing Genetic Algorithms, Genetic Programming and Evolution
Strategies up to using hybrids combining, for example, the
use of Genetic Algorithms and Grammatical Evolution. In a
short period of time, we have observed both ingenious repre-
sentations and interesting approaches achieving extraord inary
results against human-based design networks [116] as well a s
state-of-the-art approaches, in some case employing hundr ed
of computers [117] to using just a few GPUs [140]. We have
also learnt that most of the neuroevolution studies has focu sed
their attention in designing deep CNNs. Other networks have
also been considered including AE, RBM, RNN, LSTM and
DBM, although there are just a few neuroevolution works
considering the use of these types of networks.
Table I contains extracted information from almost 30
selected papers in neuroevolution. We selected these paper s
in our own ad-hoc way in order to ﬁnd a selection of papers
which succinctly demonstrated the use of neuroevolution in
deep neural networks. The table is order in alphabetically
order of the lead-author surname and summarises: the EA
representation used, the representation of individuals, w hich
genetic operators are used, and the EA parameters. The table
also outlines the computational resources used in the corre -
sponding study by attempting to outline the number of GPUs
used. A calculation of the GPU days per run is approximated
in the same way as Sun et al. [139]. The table states which
benchmark datasets are used in the experimental analysis.
Finally, the table indicates if the neural network architec ture
has been evolved automatically or by using a semi-automated
approach whilst also indicating the target DNN architectur e.
Every selected paper does not report the same information
which some papers omitting details about the computation
resources used and others omitting information about the
number of runs performed. One of the very interesting output s
from this table is that there are numerous differences betwe en
the approaches used by all of the papers listed in the table.
We see crossover being omitted from several studies mostly
due to encoding adopted by various researchers. Population
size and selection strategies for the EAs change between
studies. While MNIST and CIFAR are clearly the most popular
benchmark datasets we can see many examples of studies
using benchmark datasets from speciﬁc application domains .
IV. T RAINING DEEPNEURAL NETWORKS THROUGH
EVOLUTIONARY ALGORITHMS
A. Motivation
Backpropagation has been one of the most successful and
dominant methods used in the training of ANNs over the past
number of decades [120]. This simple, effective and elegant
method applies Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) to the
weights of the ANN where the goal is to keep the overall
error as low as possible. However, as remarked by Morse
and Stanley [104] the widely held belief, up to around 2006,was that backpropagation would suffer loss of its gradient
within DNNs. This turned out to be a false assumption and
it has subsequently been proved that backpropagation and
SGD are effective at optimising DNNs even when there
are millions of connections. Both backpropagation and SGD
beneﬁt from the availability of sufﬁcient training data and the
availability of computational power. In a problem space wit h
so many dimensions the success of using SGD in DNNs is
still surprising. Practically speaking, SGD should be high ly
susceptible to local optima [104]. EAs perform very well in
the presence of saddle points as was discussed in Section II.
B. The critique
As there are no guarantees of convergence the solutions
computed using EAs are usually classiﬁed as near optimal.
Population-based EAs are in effect an approximation of
the gradient as this is estimated from the individuals in a
population and their corresponding objectives. On the othe r
hand, SGD computes the exact gradient. As a result some
researchers may consider EAs unsuitable for DL tasks for
this reason. However, it has been demonstrated that the exac t
approximation obtained by SGD is not absolutely critical in
the overall success of DNNs using this approach. Lillicrap
et al. [88] demonstrated that breaking the precision of the
gradient calculation has no negative or detrimental effect on
learning. Indeed, Morse and Stanley [104] speculated that t he
reason for the lack of research focus on using evolutionary
computation in DNNs was not entirely related to concerns
around the gradient. It more than likely resulted from the be lief
that new approaches to DNN could emerge from outside of
SGD.
C. Deep Learning Architecture: Convolutional Neural Net-
works
Such et al. [134] proposed a gradient-free method to evolve
the weights of convolutional DNNs by using a simple GA,
with a population of chromosomes of ﬁxed length. The pro-
posed mechanism successfully evolved networks with over
four million free parameters. Some key elements in the study
conducted by Such et al. to successfully evolve these large
neural networks include (i) the use of the selection and
mutation genetic operators only (excluding the use of the
crossover operator), (ii) the use of a novel method to store
large parameter vectors compactly by representing each of
these as an initialisation seed plus the list of the random
seeds that produces the series of mutations that produced ea ch
parameter vector, (iii) the use of a state-of-the-art compu ta-
tional setting, including one modern computer with 4 GPUs
and 48 CPU cores as well as 720 CPU cores across dozens
of computers. Instead of using a reward-based optimisation
techniques by means of a ﬁtness function, Such et al. used
novelty search [86] that rewards new behaviours of individu als.
The authors used reinforcement learning benchmark problem s
including atari 2600 [9], [101], hard maze [87] and humanoid
locomotion [15]. They demonstrated how their proposed ap-
proach is competitive with state-of-the-art algorithms in these