2
Previous literature reviews in the area include those con-
ducted by Floreano et al. [38] and Yao [149], carried out more
than one and two decades ago, respectively. More recent work s
include Stanley et al. [132] and Darwish et al. [23]. The form er
work explains the inﬂuence of modern computational power
at scale in allowing the grand ambitions of neuroevolution
and deep learning from many years ago to be achieved and
fulﬁlled. The latter work delivers a broader and high-level
introduction and overview of swarm intelligence and EAs
in the optimisation of the hyperparameters and architectur e
for neural networks in the data analytics domain. In contras t
to these works, our paper provides a new contribution to
complement these studies by concentrating on the details
of conﬁguration and design of neuroevolution approaches in
deep learning. We carefully consider how EAs approaches
are applied in deep learning and in particular their speciﬁc
conﬁguration for this purpose.
The goal of our paper is to provide a timely and comprehen-
sive review in neuroevolution in DNNs. The work is aimed at
those researchers and practitioners that are either workin g in
the area or are eager to start working in this exciting growin g
research area. The conﬁguration and design of artiﬁcial dee p
neural networks is error prone, time consuming and difﬁcult .
Our paper will highlight the strengths of EAs as a competitiv e
approach to architecture design. We expect this article wil l
attract the attention of researchers in the DL and EA commu-
nities to further investigate effective and efﬁcient appro aches
to addressing new challenges in neuroevolution in DNNs.
Given the speciﬁc nature of this paper, an extensive litera-
ture review was undertaken. This involved searches in many
online databases using a combination of search strategies i n
order for this review to be methodologically sound. This
literature review aims to outline the state-of-the-art and current
practice in the domain of neuroevolution by critically eval uat-
ing and integrating the ﬁndings of all relevant and high-qua lity
individual studies we have found in this area. To establish
the extent of existing research and to conduct an exhaustive
search representative of all studies that have been conduct ed
on our topic of interest is a major challenge. As the topic
of Neuroevolution in Deep Neural Networks straddles severa l
important areas of research in Computer Science: Neural
Networks, Machine Learning, and Evolutionary Algorithms
there is a need to search widely in order to capture works
which appear in one or more of these research areas. We
used searches of Google Scholar, IEEE Xplore, ACM Digital
Library, ScienceDirect, arXiv, Springer, Citeseer, the ar chive
of Proceedings of Neural Information Processing Systems,
and the archive of Proceedings of International Conference on
Machine Learning. We strongly believe our paper outlines ou r
estimation of the state-of-the-art in neuroevolution in DN Ns
at this point in time.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section II pro-
vides some background to DL and EAs. Section III discusses
how the architectures of DNNs can be evolved efﬁciently usin g
EA approaches. This moves onto a discussion in Section IV on
the training of DNNs with EAs. Section V sets out some of the
major challenges and fertile avenues for future work. Final ly,
the paper closes with some concluding remarks in Section VI.II. B ACKGROUND
A. Deep Neural Networks
The concept of deep learning originated from the study
on artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs). An ANN consists of
multiple, simple, connected units denominated neurons, ea ch
producing a sequence of real-valued activations and, by car e-
fully adjusting the weights, the ANNs can behave as desired.
Depending on the problems and the way the neurons are
connected, the process of training an ANN may require “long
casual chains of computational stages” [124]. Deep learnin g
emerged as a concept from works such as Hinton et al. [59]
and has subsequently became a very active research area [93] .
A deep learning algorithm is a class of machine learning
algorithms using multiple layers to progressively extract higher
level features from the raw data input. The term deep then
refers speciﬁcally to the number of layers through which the
raw data is transformed. In deep learning, each subsequent
level attempts to learn in order to transform input data into
a progressively more abstract and composite representatio n.
Neuroevolution in DNNs has been applied to the development
of a wide range of ANNs including, but not limited to,
Convolutional Neural networks, Autoencoders, Deep Belief
Networks and Recurrent Neural Networks. In the next section s,
we summarise these.
1) Deep Learning Architecture: Convolutional Neural Net-
works (CNNs): CNNs have shown impressive performance in
processing data with a grid-like topology. The deep network
consists of a set of layers each containing one or more planes .
Each unit in a plane receives input from a neighbourhood in
the planes of the previous layer. This idea of connecting uni ts
to receptive ﬁelds dates back to the 1960s with the perceptro n
and the animal visual cortex organisation discovered by Hub el
and Wiesel [63]. The input, such as an image, is convolved
with trainable kernels or ﬁlters at all offsets to produce fe ature
maps. These ﬁlters include a layer of connection weights.
Usually, four pixels in a feature map form a group and this
is passed through a function, such as sigmoid function or
hyperbolic tangent function. These pixels produce additio nal
feature maps in a layer. nplanes are normally used in each
layer so that nfeatures can be detected. These layers are
called convolutional layers. Once a feature is detected, it s exact
location is less important and convolutional layers are fol lowed
by another layer in charge of performing local averaging and
sub-sampling operation. Due to the high dimensionality of t he
inputs, a CNN classiﬁer may cause overﬁtting. This problem i s
addressed by using a pooling process, also called sub-sampl ing
or down-sampling, that reduces the overall size of the signa l.
Normally, the CNN is trained with the usual backpropagation
gradient-descent procedure proposed by Lecun et al. [84].
The learning attractive process of a CNN is determined
by three key elements: (i) sparse interaction that reduces t he
computational processing with kernels that are smaller tha n
the inputs, (ii) parameter sharing that refers to learn one s et
of parameters instead of learning one set at each location,
and ﬁnally, (iii) equivariance representation that means t hat
whenever the input changes, the output changes in the same
manner [51]. CNNs were the ﬁrst successful deep learning