4
neurons extract relevant features from the data observatio ns.
These features can then serve as input to another RBM. By
this so-called stacking of RBMs in this fashion way, a networ k
can learn features from features with the goal of arriving at a
high level representation [102].
LSTM: Long-short-term memory (LSTM) networks are a
special type of recurrent neural networks capable of learni ng
long-term dependencies. They work incredibly well on a larg e
variety of problems and are currently widely used. LSTMs
are speciﬁcally designed to avoid the problem of long-term
dependencies. The basic unit within the hidden layer of an
LSTM network is called a memory block containing one or
more memory cells and a pair of adaptive, multiplicative gat ing
units which gate input and output to all cells in the block [46 ].
In LSTM networks, it was possible to circumvent the problem
of the vanishing error gradients in the network training pro cess
by method of error back propagation. An LSTM network is
usually controlled by recurrent gates called forgetting ga tes.
Errors are propagated back in time through a potentially
unlimited number of virtual layers. In this way, learning ta kes
place in LSTM, while preserving the memory of thousands
and even millions of time intervals in the past. Network
topologies such as LSTM can be developed in accordance with
the speciﬁcs of the task. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
with long short-term memory (LSTM) have emerged as an
effective and scalable model for several learning problems
related to sequential data [53]. Gers and Schmidhuber [47]
showed that standard RNNs fail to learn in the presence
of time lags exceeding as few as ﬁve to ten discrete-time
steps between relevant input events and target signals. LST M
are not affected by this problem and are capable of dealing
with minimal time lags in excess of 1000 discrete-time steps .
In studies such as those by Gers and Schmidhuber [47],
LSTM clearly outperforms previous RNNs not only on regular
language benchmarks (according to previous research) but a lso
on context-free languages benchmarks.
B. Evolutionary Algorithms
Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) [5], [32] refer to a set
of stochastic optimisation bio-inspired algorithms that u se
evolutionary principles to build robust adaptive systems. The
ﬁeld has its origins in four landmark evolutionary methods:
Genetic Algorithms [60], [49], Evolution Strategies [119] ,
[125], Evolutionary Programming [39] and Genetic Program-
ming [76]. The key element of these algorithms is undoubtedl y
ﬂexibility allowing the practitioner to use elements from t wo
or more different EAs techniques. This is the reason why the
boundaries between these approaches are no longer distinct
allowing to have a more holistic EA framework [98] via [37].
EAs work with a population of µ-encoded potential solu-
tions to a particular problem. Each potential solution, com -
monly known as individual, represents a point in the search
space, where the optimum solution lies. The population is
evolved by means of genetic operators, over a number of
generations, to produce better results to the problem. Each
member of the population is evaluated using a ﬁtness functio n
to determine how good or bad the potential solution is inthe problem at hand. The ﬁtness value assigned to each
individual in the population probabilistically determine s how
successful the individual will be at propagating (part of) i ts
code to further generations. Better performing solutions w ill be
assigned higher values (for maximisation problems) or lowe r
values (for minimisation problems).
The evolutionary process is carried out by using genetic
operators. Most EAs include operators that select individu als
for reproduction, generate new individuals based on the se-
lected individuals and ultimately determine the compositi on
of the individuals in the population at the following gen-
eration. Selection, crossover and mutation are key genetic
operators used in most EAs paradigms. The selection operato r
is in charge of choosing one or more individuals from the
population based on their ﬁtness values. Multiple selectio n
operators have been proposed. One of the most popular
selection operators is tournament selection for its simpli city.
The idea is to select the best individual from a pool, normall y
of size =[2−7], from the population. The stochastic crossover,
also known as recombination, operator exchanges material
normally from two selected individuals. This operator is in
charge of exploiting the search space. The stochastic mutat ion
operator makes random changes to the genes of the individual .
This operator is in charge of exploring the search space. The
mutation operator is important to guarantee diversity in th e
population as well as recovering genetic material lost duri ng
evolution.
The evolutionary process explained before is repeated unti l a
condition is met. Normally, until a maximum number of gener-
ations has been executed. The population in the last generat ion
is the result of exploring and exploiting the search space ov er
a number of generations. It contains the best evolved potent ial
solutions to the problem and may also represent the global
optimum solution. Alg. 1 shows the general steps of a EA for
a deep CNN network design.
1) Evolutionary Algorithm: Genetic Algorithms (GAs):
This EA was introduced by Holland [60] in the 1970s and
highly popularised by Goldberg [49]. This was due to the
fact of achieving extraordinary results as well as reaching
multiple research communities including machine learning and
neural networks. GAs were frequently described as function
optimisers, but now the tendency is to consider GAs as search
algorithms able to ﬁnd near-optimal solutions. Multiple fo rms
of GAs have been proposed in the specialised literature.
The bitstring ﬁxed-length representation is one of the most
predominant encodings used in GAs. Crossover, as the main
genetic operator, and mutation as the secondary operator,
reproduce offspring over evolutionary search.
2) Evolutionary Algorithm: Genetic Programming (GP):
This EA is a subclass of GAs and was popularised by
Koza [76] in the 1990s. GP is a form of automated program-
ming. Individuals are randomly created by using functional
and terminal sets, that are required to solve the problem at
hand. Even though multiple types of GP have been proposed
in the specialised literature, the typical tree-like struc ture is
the predominant form of GP in EAs. Cartesian GP [100] is
another form of GP, which has been used in neuroevolution
in DNNs [135], [136].