8
Softmax
 Conv
(32,3) Pool
(max) Conv
(64,5) Conv
(64,3)Max
Pooling+Summation
13
246
Genotype
PhenotypeC0  0  21
P1  0  02
C3  1  23
2 2C2  2  14
1P1  2  25
 S   3  46
Out  67
2nd input node number
1st input node number
Function ID not expressed in the phenotype0
sum  conv
(32, 3)
  pool
(max)  conv
(64, 5)
  conv
(64, 3)  pool
(max)
output input1
23
45
67 0
sum(a) (c)
(b)CNN Architecture7
Fig. 2. (a)Genetic representation of a cartesian genetic programming individual encoding a CNN architecture. (b)The phenotypic representation. (c)The
CNN architecture deﬁned by (a). Notice that the Gene No. 5, co loured with a black background in the genotype (a) is not expr essed in the phenotype. The
summation node in (c), highlighted with a light yellow backg round, performs max pooling to the left-hand side of the inpu t (Node no. 3) to get the same
input tensor sizes. Redrawn from Suganuma et al. [136].
including selection, two forms of crossovers (one-point an d
bit-mask) and three types of mutations (add, replicate and
remove unit) in the outer GA-based layer. Furthermore, they
used three types of mutations in the inner GE-based layer.
To test their approach, the authors used multiple datasets
including CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, MNIST, Fashion-MNIST,
SVHN and Rectangles. Similarly to the works conducted by
Miikulainen et al. [99] and Suganuma et al. [136], Assunc ¸˜ a o
et al. performed only 10 epochs to train the DNNs due to the
high computational cost associated to this. The authors ran
10 runs and reported competitive results compared to state-
of-the-art algorithms including using other automatic CNN s
designing methods. It is interesting to note that when the
authors computed the average ﬁtness and the average number
of hidden layers across the entire population, they noticed that
these two trends were opposite. That is, as the ﬁtness increa ses
over time, the number of hidden layers decreases over time.
This would suggest that these two metrics are in conﬂict when
optimising CNNs architectures.
Sun et al. [141] proposed the use of a population-based
GA, of a ﬁxed-length encoding, to evolve, by means of
selection, crossover and mutation, unsupervised DNNs for
learning meaningful representations for computer vision t asks.
Their approach included two main parts (i) ﬁnding the optima l
architectures in DNNs, the desirable initialisation of wei ghts
as well as activation functions, and (ii) ﬁne-tuning all the
parameter values in connection weights from the desirable
initialisation. The ﬁrst was primarily achieved by using an
encoding, which was inspired by the work conducted by Zhang
et al. [153], who captured all of the elements described in (i ).
As one gene represents on average 1,000 parameters in this
encoding, the exploitation achieved by crossover is reduce d.To overcome this problem, Sun et al. used backpropagation in
Part (ii). By hand-crafting the various parts of their appro ach,
the authors demonstrated how the local search adopted in Par t
(i) was necessary in order to achieve promising results.
Recently, Sun et al. [140] proposed a GA, named Evolving
Deep CNNs, to automatically discover CNN architectures
and corresponding connection weight values. Inspired by th e
large computational resources reported in the work by Real
et al. [117] who used 250 high-end computers, Sun et al.
aimed to tackle the use of this resource intensive setting. T hey
proposed a cost-effective method to evaluate the ﬁtness of
the individuals in the population allowing them to execute 3 0
independent runs, as normally adopted by the EA community,
in each of the 9 datasets used in their experiments. Moreover ,
they also used the normal evolutionary operators from EAs,
including selection, mutation and crossover. The latter op erator
was not used in the studies carried out by Real et al. [117].
This was a limitation in Real’s work because crossover deals
with exploiting the search space. In Sun et al.’s approach
each variable-length chromosome encodes the convolutiona l
layer, the pooling layer and the full connection layer. Beca use
hundred of thousands connection weights may exist in one
convolutional or full connection layer these should not be
directly encoded into the chromosome. Thus, Sun et al. used
two statistical measures: the standard deviation and the av erage
value of the connection weights. By doing so, they were able
to efﬁciently evaluate each chromosome in the population.
They evaluated each individual by using the classiﬁcation
error as well the number of connection weights. To mitigate
the computational time required to evaluate the chromosome s
along with the normally CNN deep architectures the authors
restricted the training to a small number of epochs ( ≤10).