6
C. Deep Learning Architecture: Convolutional Neural Net-
works
Agapitos et al. [1] used a tree-based GP system to evolve
a hierarchical feature construction as well as a classiﬁcat ion
system with feedforward processing. Inspired by the work
carried out by Bengio et al. [10] where they empirically
demonstrated, using DBN, that greedy-unsupervised layer-
training strategy helps to optimise deep networks, Agapito s
et al. trained a new layer of CNN of image transformation
at the time with the goal to learn a stack of gradually better
representations. The authors attained good results using t he
MNIST dataset. Dufourq and Bassett [30] used a GA to evolve
CNN architectures. The encoding used by the authors also
allowed them to evolve the learning rate denoting the value
which is applied during the training optimisation. They use d
different operations and sizes of ﬁlters including one and t wo-
dimension convolution, one and two-dimension max pooling,
dropout, among others. They tested their approach in both
image classiﬁcation tasks as well as in sentiment analysis
tasks. Chromosomes using two-dimensional convolution wer e
penalised for a text sentiment problem. The authors used a
ﬁtness function with two aggregate elements, one denoting
the accuracy and the other the complexity of the solution
captured by the number of parameters used by a chromosome.
The authors reported competitive results compared to state -
of-the-art algorithms on the balanced-based and digit-bas ed
EMNIST dataset as well as in the Fashion dataset. Desell [28]
proposed an algorithm based on NEAT [133] to evolve CNN
architectures. Desell carried out some modiﬁcations to the
NEAT algorithm to evolve CNN architectures through selec-
tion, crossover and mutation. Whereas all operators played
an important role to produce well-behaved CNNs, it was
interesting to see how the use of mutation, involving 7 types
of operations, seemed to be crucial to the competitive resul ts
reported on the MNIST dataset.
Zoph et al. [157] proposed NASNet search space deﬁned
by a predetermined outer structure depicted in Fig. 1 with
the ultimate goal of enabling transferability. This struct ure is
composed of convolutional cells, called normal cell (colou red
in pink in Fig. 1 (a)) and reduction cell (coloured in grey),
repeated many times. The former type of cells returns a
feature map of the same dimensions whereas the latter return s
a feature map where its height and width is reduced by a
factor of two. All cells of the same type are constraint to
have the same architecture and it was found beneﬁcial that
architectures of normal cells were different to the archite ctures
of reduced cells. The goal of their architecture search proc ess
was to discover the architectures of these two types of cells ,
an example of this is denoted in Fig. 1 (b). In 2019, Real et
al. [116] proposed AmoebaNet-A to evolve an image classiﬁer
achieving superior accuracy over hand-designed methods fo r
the ﬁrst time. The authors used a population-based EA with
each ﬁxed length member encoding the architecture of CNNs.
To do so, they used the NASNet search space [157]. The goal
of their EA-based approach was to discover the architecture s
of the normal cells and the reductions cells as depicted in
Fig. 1 (a). Real et al. used a modiﬁed version of tournamentselection and two types of mutation as the two genetic op-
erators in charge of driving evolution. Tournament selecti on
(see Section II to read about how this works) was modiﬁed so
that the newest genotypes were chosen over older genotypes.
The mutation operator involved one of two operations taking
place once for each individual: the hidden state mutation an d
the op mutation. To execute any of these types of mutation,
ﬁrst a random cell is chosen, then a pairwise combination
is stochastically selected (see Fig. 1 (c)), and ﬁnally, one
of these two pairs is picked randomly. This hidden state is
replaced with another hidden state with the constraint that no
loop is formed. The op mutation differs only in modifying
the operation used within the selected hidden state. Fig. 1 ( d)
shows how these two mutation operations work. The authors
used the CIFAR-10 dataset to test their proposed AmoebaNet-
A and compared it against a reinforcement learning-based
method and random search, achieving better accuracy result s
as well as reducing the computational time required by their
algorithm compared to the other two methods. Moreover, the
authors used the ﬁttest chromosome found by their algorithm
and retrained it using the Imagenet dataset. With this, they also
reported encouraging accuracy results compared with other
architecture search methods.
In a different constraint setting, Xie et al. [148] proposed
Genetic CNN to automatically learn the structures of CNNs
with a limited number of layers as well as limited sizes and
operations of convolutional ﬁlters, to mention a few constr aints
adopted by them. The authors adopted a GA with binary ﬁxed-
length representation to represent parts of evolved networ k. In
their studies, each network is composed by various stages an d
each of these is composed of nodes that represent convolu-
tional operations. The binary encoding adopted by Xie et al.
represents the connection between a number of ordered nodes .
This representation allowed the authors to use crossover,
along with roulette selection and mutation. They deﬁned a
stage as the minimal unit to apply crossover and mutation.
This allowed them to maintain the ordered nodes deﬁned
in the genotype and produce valid potential solutions only.
Even with the restrictions adopted in their work, the author s
achieved competitive accuracy results using the CIFAR-10 a nd
MNIST datasets. They also demonstrated how their approach
can be generalised by using the learned architecture on the
ILSVRC2012 large-scale dataset. This was achieved because
their approach was able to produce chain-shaped networks
such as AlexNet [79], VGGNet [129], multiple-path networks
such as GoogLeNet [143] and highway networks such as Deep
ResNet [58], which have been reported to be beneﬁcial when
applied to computer vision problems.
Real et al. [117] used an EA to automatically optimise
CNN architectures. Individual architectures are encoded a s a
graph, where the vertices represent rank-3 tensors: two of t hese
represent the spatial coordinates of the image and the third is
the number of channels. Activation functions, such as batch -
normalisation [64] with rectiﬁed linear units (ReLus) or pl ain
linear units, are applied to the vertices. The authors prima rily
used 11 types of mutations falling into one of three differen t
categories including inserting layers, removing layers as well
as using a mutation to modify layers parameters. Although