3
architectures applied to face detection, handwriting recogni-
tion, image classiﬁcation, speech recognition, natural la nguage
processing and recommender systems.
The evolution of these CNN architectures has been slow
but remarkable. For example, LeNet [84] proposed in the late
1990s and AlexNet [79], proposed a decade later, are very
similar with two and ﬁve convolutional layers, respectivel y.
Moreover, they also used kernels with large receptive ﬁelds
in the layer close to the input and smaller ﬁlters closer to
the output. A major difference is that the latter used rectiﬁ ed
linear units as activation function, which became a standar d
in neuroevolution in designing CNNs. Since 2012, the use
of novel and deeper models took off. For example, in 2014,
Simonyan and Zisserman [129] won the Imagenet challenge
with their proposed 19-layer model known as VGG19. Other
networks have been proposed that not only are deeper but
use more complex building blocks. For example, in 2015,
Szegedy et al. [143] proposed GoogLeNet, also known as
Inception, which is a 22-layer network that used inception
blocks. In 2015, the ResNet architecture, consisting of the
so-called ResNet blocks, proposed by He et al. [58] won
the ImageNet challenge. Moreover, multiple CNNs variants
have been proposed such as combining convolutions with an
autoencoder [65], using RBMs in a CNN [29], to mention a
few examples. A description of the variants of this network
can be found in [93].
2) Deep Learning Architecture: Autoencoders (AEs):
Autoencoders are simple learning circuits which are design ed
to transform inputs into outputs with the minimum amount
of distortion. An autoencoder consists of a combination of a n
encoder function and a decoder function. The encoder functi on
converts the input data into a different representation and then
the decode function converts the new representation back to
the original form. AEs attempt to preserve as much infor-
mation as possible and they provide range-bounded outputs
which make them suitable for data pre-processing and iterat ive
architectures such as DNNs [80]. Despite this work appearin g
in2020 , the authors suggest that there is “still relatively little
work exploring the application (of evolutionary approache s to
neural architecture search) to autoencoders. In 2012 Baldi [7]
argued that while autoencoders “taken center stage in the
deep architecture approach” there was still very little the o-
retical understanding of autoencoders with deep architect ures
to date. Choosing an appropriate autoencoder architecture
in order to process a speciﬁc dataset will mean that the
autoencoder is capable of learning the optimal representat ion
of the data [18]. Encoding autoencoders within a chromosone
representation means that such an approach could be broad
enough to consider most autoencoder variations [18]. As an
unsupervised feature learning approach, autoencoders att empt
to learn a compact representation of the input data whilst
retaining the most important information of the representa tion.
This representation is expected to completely reconstruct the
original input. This makes initialisation of the autoencod er
critical [61]. Whilst autoencoders can induce very helpful and
useful representations of the input data they are only capab le
of handling a single sample and are not capable of modelling
the relationship between pairs of samples in the input data.3) Deep Learning Architecture: Deep Belief Networks
(DBNs): Deep Belief Networks can be implemented in a
number of ways including Restricted Boltzmann Machines
(see Section II-A4) and Autoencoders (see Section II-A2).
DBNs are well suited to the problem of feature extraction
and have drawn “tremendous attention recently” [152]. DBNs ,
like other traditional classiﬁers, have a very large number of
parameters and require a great deal of training time [19]. Wh en
Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs) are stacked together
they are considered to be a DBN. The fundamental building
blocks of a DBN are RBMs consisting of one visible layer
and one hidden layer. When DBNs are applied to classiﬁcation
problems the feature vectors from data samples are used to se t
the values of the states of the visible variables of the lower
layer of the DBN. Then the DBN is trained to generate a
probability distribution over all possible labels of the in put
data. They offer a good solution to learn hierarchical featu re
representations from data.
4) Deep Learning Architecture: Other network types:
In this subsection we introduce some of other popular and
well-studied network architectures namely: Recurrent Neu ral
Networks (RNNs), Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs),
and Long Short Term Memory (LSTM).
RNNs : In the case of CNNs input is a ﬁxed-length vector
and eventually produce a ﬁxed-length vector as output. The
number of layers in the CNN determine the amount of com-
putational steps required. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN s)
are more ﬂexible and they allow operation across a sequence
of vectors. The connections between the units in the network
form a directed cycle and this creates an internal state of
the network allowing to exhibit dynamic temporal behaviour .
This internal hidden state allows the RNN to store a lot of
information about the past efﬁciently. RNNs are well suited
to sequential data prediction and this has seen them being
applied to areas such as statistical language modelling and
time-series prediction. However, the computational power of
RNNs make them very difﬁcult to train. The principal reasons
for this difﬁculty are mainly due to the exploding and the
vanishing gradient problems [67]. In theory RNNs can make
use of information in arbitrarily long sequences but in real ity
they are limited to considering look-back at only a few steps .
RBMs: A Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) is a
network of symmetrically connected neuron like units which
are designed to make stochastic decisions about whether to b e
on or off. They are an energy-based neural network. In a RBM
there are no connections between the hidden units and multip le
hidden layers. Learning occurs by considering the hidden
activities of a single RBM as the data for training a higher-
level RBM [122]. There is no communication or connection
between layers and this is where the restriction is introduced
to a Boltzmann machine. The RBMs are probabilistic models
using a layer of hidden binary variables or units to model the
distribution of a visible layer of variables. RBMs have been
successfully applied to problems involving high dimension al
data such as images and text [82]. As outlined by Fischer
and Igel [36], RBMs have been the subject of recent research
after being proposed as building blocks of multi-layer lear n-
ing architectures or DBNs. The concept here is that hidden