9
It is in the last epoch where the ﬁtness is computed for each
of the chromosomes in the population. Crossover was applied
by using unit alignment, which basically groups parts of the
same type, cross them over, and ﬁnally, use a restoring phase
to put the units back in their corresponding positions in the
chromosome. The authors reported highly encouraging resul ts
with many cases achieving better results compared to state- of-
the-art algorithms in the datasets commonly used by the deep
learning community.
van Wyk and Bosman [144] described and evaluated their
proposed neural architecture search (NAS) method to automa te
the process of ﬁnding an optimal CNN architecture for the tas k
of arbitrary image restoration. Their work demonstrates th e po-
tential feasibility for performing NAS under signiﬁcant me m-
ory and computational time constraints. The ImageNet64x64
dataset was chosen for evaluation. The training set was used
for gradient-based optimisation of the NNs performance on
unseen data. The authors ﬁnd that the human-based conﬁgured
architecture was heavily overparameterised while this was not
the case with the evolved NN which performed the tasks
with a signiﬁcantly lower number of total parameters. Sun
et al. [139] proposed an encoding strategy built on the state -
of-the-art blocks namely ResNet and DenseNet. The authors
used a variable length GA that allowed them to automatically
evolve CNNs architectures of unrestricted depth. Sun et al.
used selection, crossover and mutation to evolve candidate so-
lutions. Given the nature of the variable length encoding us ed
in their approach, the authors employed a repair mechanism
that allowed them to produce valid CNNs. The authors used
the CIFAR-10 and the CIFAR-100 datasets and compared their
results against 9 manually designed methods, 4 semi-automa tic
methods and 5 automatic methods. Interestingly their resul ts
outperformed all hand-crafted methods as well as all semi-
automatic methods in terms of the classiﬁcation error rate.
Evolutionary Multi-objective Optimisation [21], [22], [2 5],
explained in Section V-C, has been hardly used in the au-
tomatic conﬁguration of DNNs networks as well as in the
optimisation of their hyperparameters. Works on the latter
include the recent approach proposed by Kim et al. [71],
where the authors used speed and accuracy as two conﬂicting
objectives to be optimised by means of EMO through the use
of the Nondominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II (NSGA-
II) [26]. The authors reported interesting results using th ree
classiﬁcation tasks, including the use of the MNIST, CIFAR-
10 and the Drowsy Behaviour Recognition datasets. Inspired
by the Kim et al. [71] study, Lu et al. [94] used the same
EMO with the same conﬂicting objectives. It is worth noting
that Lu et al. [94] empirically tested multiple computation al
complexity metrics to measure speed including number of
active nodes, number of active connections between nodes
and ﬂoating-point operations (FLOPs), to mention some. Lu
et al. indicated that the latter metric was more accurate and
used it as a second conﬂicting objective for optimisation.
Moreover, the authors used an ingenious bitstring encoding
in their genetic algorithm which allowed them to use com-
mon and robust genetic operators normally adopted in GAs,
including homogeneous crossover and bit-ﬂip mutation (at
most one change for each mutation operation). The authorstested their EMO approach with the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-
100 datasets achieving competitive results against state- of-
the-art algorithms, including reinforcement learning-ba sed ap-
proaches and human expert conﬁgurations.
Wang et al. [145] explored the ability of differential evo-
lution to automatically evolve the architecture and hyper-
parameters of deep CNNs. The method called DECNN uses
differential evolution where control of the evolution rate is
managed by the a differential value. The DECNN evolves
variable-length architectures for CNNs. An IP-based encod ing
strategy is implemented here to use a single IP address
to represent one layer of a DNN. This IP address is then
pushed into a sequence of interfaces corresponding to the sa me
order as the layers in DNNs. Six of the MNIST datasets are
used for benchmark testing and the DECNN performed very
competitively with 12 state-of-the-art competitors over t he six
benchmarks. Mart´ ın et al. [97] proposed EvoDeep which is
an EA designed to ﬁnd the best architecture and optimise the
necessary parameters to train a DNN. It uses a Finite-State
Machine model in order to determine the possible transition s
between different kind of layers, allowing EvoDeep to gener ate
valid sequences of layers, where the output of one layer ﬁts
the input requirements of the next layer. It is tested on the
benchmark MNIST datasets. The authors report that the high
commputational resources required to train the DNN means
that future work is needed to make the whole process more
computationally efﬁcient.
D. Deep Learning Architecture: AutoEncoders
Suganuma et al. [135] used Cartesian Genetic Program-
ming [100], adopting an ES (1+ λ) technique, and using
selection and mutation operators only, to optimise DNS arch i-
tectures for image restoration. To this end, the authors use d
convolutional autoencoders (CAEs) built upon convolution al
layers and skip connections. By optimising the network in
a conﬁned search space of symmetric CAEs, the authors
achieved competitive results against other methods withou t
the need of using adversarial training and sophisticated lo ss
functions, normally employed for image restoration tasks.
So et al. [130] evolved a transformer network to be used
in sequence-to-sequence language tasks. The encoding sear ch
space adopted by the authors was inspired by the NASNet
search space proposed by Zoph et al. [157], see Fig. 1 (a).
This was modiﬁed to express characteristics found in state- of-
the-art feed-forward seq2seq networks such as the transfor mer
network used in their work. The minimally tuned search
space helped them to seed the initial population using a
known transformer model. Because computing the ﬁtness of
the population, through the use of the negative log perplexi ty
of the validation set, is time consuming, So et al. proposed
Progressive Dynamic Hurdles. In essence, the latter allowe d
promising solutions to be trained using larger training dat asets
compared to poor potential solutions. The proposed mech-
anism, using selection and mutation operators only, yielde d
better results compared to transformer models in the langua ge
tasks used in their studies. Hajewski et al. [54] describe
an efﬁcient and scalable EA for neural network architecture