13
problems including DQN [101], policy-gradient methods [12 6]
and ES [123].
Pawelczyk et al. [109] focused their attention in encoding
CNNs with random weights using a GA, with the main goal to
let the EA to learn the number of gradient learning iteration s
necessary to achieve a high accuracy error using the MNIST
dataset. It was interesting to observe that their EA-based
approach reported the best results with around 450 gradient
learnt iterations compared to 400 constant iterations whic h
yielded the best overall results.
D. Deep Learning Architecture: Autoencoders
David and Greental [24] used a GA of ﬁxed length to evolve
the weight values of an autoencoder DNN. Each chromosome
was evaluated by using the root mean squared error for the
training samples. In their experiments, the authors used on ly
10 individuals with a 50% elitism-policy. The weights of
these individuals were updated using backpropagation and
the other half of the population were randomly generated in
each generation. They tested their approach with the well-
known CIFAR-10 dataset. They compared their approach vs.
the traditional autoencoder using SVM, reporting a better c las-
siﬁcation error when using their proposed GA-assisted meth od
for the autocoder DNN (1.44% vs.1.85%). In their studies, the
authors indicated that the reason why their method produced
better results was because gradient descent methods such as
backpropagation are highly susceptible to being trapped at
local optima and their GA method helped to prevent this.
Fernando et al. [35] introduced a differentiable version of
the Compositional Pattern Producing Network (CPPN) called
the Differentiable Pattern Producing Network (DPPN). The
DPPN approach attemps to combine the advantages and results
of gradient-based learning in NN with the optimisation capa -
bilities of evolutionary approaches. The DPPN has demon-
strated superior results for the benchmark dataset MNIST.
A generic evolutionary algorithm is used in the optimisatio n
algorithm of DPPN. The results indicate that the DPPNs
and their associated learning algorithms have the ability t o
dramatically reduce the number of parameters of larger neur al
networks. The authors argue that this integration of evolu-
tionary and gradient-based learning allows the optimisati on to
avoid becoming stuck in local optima points or saddle points .
E. Other Relevant Works
Morse and Stanley [104] proposed an approached called
limited evaluation evolutionary algorithm (LEEA), that ef -
fectively used a population-based GA of ﬁxed length rep-
resentation to evolve, by means of crossover and mutation,
1000 weights of a ﬁxed-architecture network. The authors
took inspiration from SGD that can compute an error gradient
from a single (or small batch of) instance of the training
set. Thus, instead of computing the ﬁtness of each individua l
in the population using the whole training set, the ﬁtness
is computed using a small fraction. This results in an EA
that computationally similar to SGD. However, using such
approach is also one of the weakness in LEAA because it
does not generalise to whole training sample. To mitigatethis, the authors proposed two approaches: (i) the use of a
small batch of instances and (ii) the use of a ﬁtness function
that consider both the performance on the current mini-batc h
and the performance of individuals’ ancestors against thei r
mini-batches. To test their idea, the authors used a functio n
approximation task, a time series prediction task and a hous e
price prediction task and compared the results yield by thei r
approach against SGD and RMSProp. They showed how their
LEEA approach was competitive against the other approaches .
Even when the authors do not use DNNs, but a small artiﬁcial
NN, it is interesting to note how this can be used in a DNN
setting.
Khadka and Tumer [70] remark that Deep Reinforcement
Learning methods are “notoriously sensitive to the choice
of their hyperparamaters and often have brittle convergenc e
properties”. These methods are also challenged by long time
horizons where there are sparse rewards. EAs can respond
very positively to these challenges where the use of ﬁtness
metrics allows EAs to tolerate the sparse reward distributi on
and endure long time horizons. However, EAs can struggle
to perform well when optimisation of a large number of pa-
rameters is required. The authors introduce their Evolutio nary
Reinforcement Learning (ERL) algorithm. The EA is used to
evolve diverse experiences to train an RL agent. These agent s
are then subjected to mutation and crossover operators to
create the next generation of agents. From the results outli ned
in the paper this ERL can be described as a “population-drive n
guide” that guides or biases exploration towards states wit h
higher and better long-term returns, promoting diversity o f
explored policies, and introduces redundancies for stabil ity.
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) (see Section II-A4)
incorporate memory into an NN by storing information from
the past within the hidden states network. In [69], Kahdka et
al. introduce a new memory-augmented network architecture
called the Modular Memory Unit (MMU). This MMU discon-
nects the memory and central computation operations withou t
requiring costly memory management strategies. Neuroevo-
lutionary methods are used to train the MMU architecture.
The performance of the MMU approach with both gradient
descent and neuroevolution are examined in the paper. The
authors ﬁnd that neuroevolution is more repeatable and gene r-
alizable across tasks. The MMU NN is designed to be highly
conﬁgurable and this characteristic is exploited by the the
neuroevolutionary algorithm to evolve the network. Popula tion
size is set to 100 with a fraction of elites set at 0.1. In
the fully differentiable version of the MMU gradient descen t
performs better for Sequence Recall tasks than neuroevolut ion.
However, neuroevolution performs signiﬁcantly better tha n
gradient descent in Sequence Classiﬁcation tasks.
F . Final Comments
In the early years of neuroevolution, it was thought that
evolution-based methods might exceed the capabilities of
backpropagation [149]. As ANNs, in general, and as DNNs, in
particular, increasingly adopted the use of stochastic gra dient
descent and backpropagation, the idea of using EAs for
training DNNs instead has been almost abandoned by the