10
search with application to the evolution of deep encoders.
Lander and Shang [80] introduce EvoAE an evolutionary
algorithm for training autoencoders for DNNs. This propose d
methodology is aimed at improving the training time of
autoencoders for constructing DNNs. The EvoAE approach
searches in the network weight and network structure space o f
the autoencoders simultaneously allowing for dual optimal ity
searching. Large datasets are decomposed into smaller batc hes
to improve performance. The good performance on large
datasets distributed in cloud-based systems could be a majo r
advantage of this approach as a population of high quality
autoencoders can be created efﬁciently.
Luo et al. [95] propose a novel semi-supervised autoencoder
called a discriminant autoencoder for application in fault
diagnosis. Here, the proposed discriminant autoencoder ha s
a different training process and loss function from traditi onal
autoencoders. In the case of the discriminant autoencoder i t is
capable of extracting better representations from the raw d ata
provided. A completely different loss function is used and
the representations extracted by the discriminant autoenc oder
can generate bigger differences between the sample classes .
The discriminant autoencoder makes full use of labels and
feature variables to obtain the optimal representations, b ased
on which the centers of the groups of samples that can be
separated as much as possible. Ashfahani et al. [2] propose
DEVDAN as a deep evolving denoising autoencoder for
application in data stream analytics. DEVDAN demonstrates
a proposal of a denoising autoencoder which is a variant
of the traditional autoencoder but focused on retrieving th e
original input information from a noise pertubation. DEVDA N
features an open structure where it is capable of initiating
its own structure from the beginning without the presence
of a pre-conﬁgured network structure. DEVDAN can ﬁnd
competitive network architecture compared with state-of- the-
art methods on the classiﬁcation task using ten prominent
datasets (including MNIST).
E. Deep Learning Architecture: Deep Belief Networks
In the work by Chen et al. [19] the authors use DBNs to
automatically extract features from images. They propose t he
EFACV (Evolutionary Function Array Classiﬁer V oter) which
classiﬁes features from images extracted by a DBN (composed
of stacked RBMs). An evolutionary strategy is used to train t he
EFACV and is mainly used for binary classiﬁcation problems.
For multi-class classiﬁcation problems it is necessary to h ave
multiple EFACV . The EFACV shows fast computational speed
and a reduction in overall training time. Experiments are
performed on the MNIST dataset. Liu et al. [92] describe
structure learning for DNNs based on multiobjective optimi sa-
tion. They propose a multiobjective optimisation evolutio nary
algorithm (MOEA). The DBN and its learning procedure use
an RBM to pretain the DN layer by layer. It is necessary to
remove unimportant or unncessary connections in DNN and
move toward discovering optimal DNN connection structure
which is as sparse as possible without lost of representatio n.
Experiments based on the MNIST and CIFAR-10 datasets with
different training samples indicate that the MOEA approach
is effective.Zhang et al. [151] use DBNs for a prognostic health man-
agement system in aircraft and aerospace design. DBNs offer a
promising solution as they can learn powerful hierarchical fea-
ture representations from the data provided. The authors pr o-
pose MODBNE (multiobjective deep belief networks ensem-
ble) which is a powerful multiobjective evolutionary algor ithm
named MOEA based on decomposition. This is integrated into
the training of DBNs to evolve multiple DBNs simultaneously
with accuracy and diversity as two conﬂicting objectives in the
problem. The DBN is composed of stacked RBMs which are
trained in an unsupervised manner. MODBNE is evaluated
and compared against a prominent diagnostics benchmarking
problem with the NASA turbofan engine degradation problem.
In the proposed approach the structural parameters of the
DBN are strongly dependent on the complexity of the problem
and the number of training samples available. The approach
worked outstandingly well in compassion to other existing
approaches. GPU-based implementations will be tested in
the future for MODBNE to investigate the acceleration of
computational processing speed. Zhang et al. [152] conside r
the problem of cost-sensitive learning methods. The idea of
cost-sensitive learning is to assign misclassiﬁcation cos ts for
each class appropriately. While the authors report that the re are
very few studies on cost-sensitive DBNs these networks have
drawn a lot of attention by researchers recently. Imbalance s
in the classes in input data is a problem. If there is a
disproportionate number of class instances this can affect
the quality of the applied learning algorithms. Zhang et al.
argue that DBNs are very well placed to handled these type
of imbalanced data problems. The ECS-DBN (Evolutionary
Cost-Sensitive Deep Belief Network) is proposed to deal wit h
such problems by assigning differential misclassiﬁcation costs
to the data classes. The ECS-DBN is evaluated on 58 pop-
ular Knowledge Extraction-based on Evolutionary Learning
(KEEL) benchmark datasets.
F . Other networks: LSTM, RRN, RBM
Shinozaki and Watanabe [127] proposes an optimisation
strategy for DNN structure and parameters using an EA and a
GA. The DNN structure is parameterised by a directed acyclic
graph. Experiments are carried out on phoneme recognition
and spoken digit detection. All of the experiments were con-
ducted upon a massively parallel computing platform where
the experiments were ran using 62 general-purpose computin g
on graphics processing units (GPGPUs). RBMs are used in the
training phase. Ororbia et al. [108] develop an evolutionar y
algorithm called EXAMM (Evolutionay eXploration of Aug-
menting Models) which is designed to devolve recurrent neur al
networks (RNNs) using a selection of memory structures.
RNNs are particularly well suited to the task of performing
prediction of large-scale real-world time series data. EXA MM
was design to select from a large number of memory cell
structures and this allowed the evolutionary approach to yi eld
the best performing RNN architecture.
In Peng et al. [110] the authors propose the LSTM (long
short-term memory) neural network which is capable of
analysing time series over long time spans in order to make