Algorithm Selection Using Deep Learning Without Feature Extraction GECCO ’19, July 13–17, 2019, Prague, Czech Republic
but the order that items are presented to the packing heuristics
is fixed and cannot change. There have been numerous studies
over the decades that have investigated the performance of simple
approximation algorithms for this variant of the BPP[ 2,11]. These
algorithms consider each instance as a fixed order sequence of items,
only making a decision as to which bin to place each item into.
We select 4 simple approximation algorithms from the literature
specifically designed for this variation of the BPP [6].
– First Fit (FF): Places each item into the first feasible bin that
will accommodate it.
– Best Fit (BF): Places each item into the feasible bin that
minimises the residual space.
– Worst Fit (WF): Places each item into the feasible bin with
the most available space.
– Next Fit (NF): Places each item into the current bin.
For all the algorithms listed, if no feasible bin is available to
accommodate the next item then it is placed into a newly opened
bin. NF is different to the other 3 algorithms in that it only ever
considers the most recently opened bin. If an item cannot fit in
the current bin that bin is closed and removed from the problem.
The performance of an algorithm αon instanceIis denoted by
A(I).OPT(I)is the optimal solution for that instance. The worst-
case performance ratio (WCPR) of an algorithm is defined as the
smallest real number r(A)>1such thatA(I)
OPT(I)≤r(A)for all
possible instances. The WCPR of NF is known to be 2 [ 2] and it was
recently concluded after many theoretical studies that the WCPR
of FF and BF is17
10[3].
bl=nÕ
j=1ωj÷c,bu=n (1)
There are many sets of benchmark problem instances available in
the literature. However, as noted in [ 30], while benchmark problems
are suitable for comparing different algorithms performances, they
are often unsuitable for investigating the ASP due to being similar in
structure and often tailored towards the abilities of specific solvers.
For illustration, consider the following: taking 5 well researched
data sets totalling 1370 instances from the literature [ 5,24] we
find that if the problems are treated in the order that they are
published, FF is the dominant heuristic solving 955 instances better
than any of the other heuristics. BF wins on 414 instances and WF
wins on 1. The success of FF is due to the fact that many of the
published benchmarks are ordered using the best known solution
and hence FF simply recreates that solution. If the item orders are
randomised (we do this once only for interest) then BF, as expected,
becomes the Single Best Solver winning on 926 instances. FF wins
on 381, WF 61 and NF 2. Clearly using these relatively small sets of
benchmark problems would lead to dramatically unbalanced data
sets and hinder an investigation into the ASP.
In order to address this problem and create balanced data sets for
our investigation, we use an Evolutionary Algorithm (EA) to gener-
ate 4 data sets, each with 4000 instances and using the bounds and
distributions shown in Table 1. Each set of 4000 problem instances
comprises of 4 sub-classes of 1000 instances that are uniquely solved
best (according to Equation 2) by one of the four algorithms un-
der investigation. Algorithm 1 describes how each sub-class ofinstances is generated. For each instance a population of candidate
sequences is initialised with nitems and weights randomly drawn
from the desired distribution. The EA then attempts to evolve the
order of items such that the performance of the target algorithm
αtarдetexceeds the performance of the other algorithms ∈A
Table 1: Data set Generation Parameters. Bin Capacity is
fixed at 150
Data set nitems LowerBound - UpperBound Distribution D
DS1 120 [40-60] Gaussian
DS2 120 [20-100] Uniform
DS3 250 [40-60] Gaussian
DS4 250 [20-100] Uniform
Unlike in [ 1], who used a binary representation and evolved the
weights of items, we use an integer representation: a chromosome is
simply the sequence of nitems defining that instance. Item weights
are randomly initialised at the start, then do not change. Only the
order of items is evolved, preserving the desired weight distribution
Algorithm 1 EA Pseudo Code
Require:A=:The set of algorithms
Require:αtarдet=:The target algorithm
Require:Dtarдet=:The target distribution
Require:I=∅:The set of instances being evolved
Require: ninstances =: The number of instances to generate
Require: nitems =: The number of items in each instance
1:repeat
2: population←initialise( popSize ,nitems ,Dtarдet)
3: fori←1,maxIter do
4: parent 1←select( population )
5: parent 2←select( population )
6: child←crossover( parent 1,parent 2)
7: child←mutate( child )
8: child f itness←evaluate( child )
9: population←replace( child )
10: end for
11: ifevaluate(population best)>0then
12:I←I +population best
13: end if
14:until|I|=ninstances
15:returnI
In the pseudo-code shown, the target algorithm αtarдetis the
algorithmα∈A that we are attempting to evolve instances for,
such that the solution fitness (defined by Equation 2) using αis
better than the solutions produced by all the other algorithms ∈A.
Dtarдetis the distribution from Table 1 that is used to initialise
thepopulation (line 2). When using a Gaussian distribution, item
weights are generated using a Gaussian distribution with standard
deviation(ub−lb)÷2and mean lb+(ub−lb)÷2. Items generated
with weight w<lborw>ubare discarded. The lower and upper
bounds on item weights are given in Table 1. For each data set we
run Algorithm 1 once for each αtarдet∈A using ninstances =1000