Algorithm Selection Using Deep Learning Without Feature
Extraction
Mohamad Alissa
Department of Computer Science,
Edinburgh Napier University
M.Alissa@napier.ac.ukKevin Sim
Department of Computer Science,
Edinburgh Napier University
K.Sim@napier.ac.ukEmma Hart
Department of Computer Science,
Edinburgh Napier University
E.Hart@napier.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
We propose a novel technique for algorithm-selection which adopts
a deep-learning approach, specifically a Recurrent-Neural Network
with Long-Short-Term-Memory (RNN-LSTM). In contrast to the
majority of work in algorithm-selection, the approach does not
need any features to be extracted from the data but instead relies
on the temporal data sequence as input. A large case-study in
the domain of 1-d bin packing is undertaken in which instances
can be solved by one of four heuristics. We first evolve a large
set of new problem instances that each have a clear "best solver"
in terms of the heuristics considered. An RNN-LSTM is trained
directly using the sequence data describing each instance to predict
the best-performing heuristic. Experiments conducted on small
and large problem instances with item sizes generated from two
different probability distributions are shown to achieve between 7%
to 11% improvement over the single best solver (SBS) (i.e. the single
heuristic that achieves the best performance over the instance set)
and 0% to 2% lower than the virtual best solver (VBS), i.e the perfect
mapping.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Theory of computation →Packing and covering problems ;
•Computing methodologies →Machine learning ;
KEYWORDS
Deep Learning, Recurrent Neural Network, Algorithm Selection.
ACM Reference Format:
Mohamad Alissa, Kevin Sim, and Emma Hart. 2019. Algorithm Selection Us-
ing Deep Learning Without Feature Extraction. In Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation Conference (GECCO ’19), July 13–17, 2019, Prague, Czech Re-
public. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 9 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3321707.
3321845
1 INTRODUCTION
Exploiting the complementary performance of different algorithms
on sets of diverse problem instances drives the goal of algorithm
selection. Determining the best performing algorithm for an unseen
instance has been shown to be a complex problem that has attracted
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
GECCO ’19, July 13–17, 2019, Prague, Czech Republic
©2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6111-8/19/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3321707.3321845much interest from researchers over the decades. Originally for-
mulated by Rice [ 22] the per-instance algorithm selection problem
(ASP) can be defined as:
"Given a set Iof instances of a problem P, a set A=A1, ...Anof
algorithms for Pand a metric m:A×I→Rthat measures the
performance of any algorithm Aj∈Aon instance set I, construct
a selector Sthat maps any problem instance i∈Ito an algorithm
S(i) ∈ Asuch that the overall performance of SonIis optimal
according to metric m. "[12]
A common approach to tackling the ASP is to treat it as a classifi-
cation problem where each instance is described in terms of a vector
of features and an instance’s class indicates the best performing
algorithm. Although there have been a number of successful studies
using this method, the task of identifying features that correlate to
algorithm performance is far from trivial, is time consuming and
not always intuitive.
In this paper we investigate the ASP without the need to define
features. Our novel approach relies solely on temporal patterns
explicitly encoded in the instances used. We train a Long Short
Term Memory Deep Learning model [ 8] to predict which of 4 simple
approximation algorithms will perform best on a subset of unseen
instances in the 1D-Bin Packing domain (BPP). Input to the model
is simply the ordered list of item-sizes that need to be packed, and
does not include any features derived a-priori from the data sets.
We test our approach on 4 large data sets, totalling 16,000 in-
stances, specifically evolved using an evolutionary algorithm for
the purpose of this study. Instances are evolved that elicit diverse
behaviour (in terms of performance) from four simple approxima-
tion algorithms, resulting in a set of instances that are disparate in
the performance space. Experimental results using our model are
extremely encouraging, achieving an accuracy of between 82.38%
and 95.75%on unseen instances. It should be noted that although
conducted on the 1D-BPP our method can easily be extended to any
discrete combinatorial problem where the sequence of items pre-
sented to the solver is fixed. Examples include packing, scheduling
and routing in industrial settings such as resource allocation.
The main contributions are summarised as follows:
■The creation of new, large data sets of instances for the 1-D
BPP domain via an evolutionary approach in which each
instance is solved best by exactly one of four heuristic; these
data sets are available for other researchers working in the
field of ASP to compare approaches1
■The development of a novel ASP approach using deep learn-
ing that is trained using only sequences of instance data and
does not require any features to be extracted from that data
1https://github.com/Kevin-Sim/BPP