GECCO ’19, July 13–17, 2019, Prague, Czech Republic Mohamad Alissa, Kevin Sim, and Emma Hart
Figure 1: Schematic of the Algorithm Selection Problem [22]
2 RELATED WORK
A schematic of the ASP is shown in Figure 1 [ 22]. In Rice’s definition:
■The problem space Prepresents a potentially infinite sized
set of instances for the problem domain
■The feature spaceFdescribes a set of characteristics derived
using feature extraction from P
■The algorithm space Ais the set of algorithms available for
the problem domain
■The performance space Ymaps each algorithm to a set of
performance metrics [28].
The objective is to identify a mapping between PandAthat
maximisesY. For a finite set of problem instances I, a fixed set
of heuristics Hand a single performance metric m, the Virtual
Best Solver (VBS) is defined as a perfect mapping between Iand
H. The Single best solver (SBS) is the heuristic ∈Hthat achieves
the best performance over I. A comprehensive review of different
approaches towards algorithm-selection can be found in a number
of survey papers in this active area of research [ 12,14,30]. Some
of the most relevant approaches are described here.
One of the most common approaches to ASP is to identify fea-
tures using expert knowledge, and then train machine-learning
methods to predict the best performing algorithm(s) for an instance
from its feature-profile [ 12]. However, identifying features that are
significant in determining performance is complex, usually requires
hand-crafting [ 10,19,20,29], and often is not intuitive. Often the
approach must also be combined with a feature-reduction method to
simplify learning, e.g Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [ 17,28],
and understand the correlations between features and algorithm
performance. An approach that tries to avoid having to hand-craft
good features was described in [ 25] who evolve the parameters
of a set of generic features of 1-d bin-packing problems that best
improve the performance of KNN classifier. A different type of ap-
proach was proposed by Ross et al . [23] that could be used for ASP
with constructive approaches to solution generation; rather than de-
riving features from the original description of an instance, features
were derived from the current instance state each time a heuristic
was applied. A learning classifier system XCS was used to map a
set of problem-states to specific heuristics. An ASP approach that
does not rely on explicit feature identification was proposed by Simet al. [26] . Here, a system continuously generates novel heuristics
which are maintained in an ensemble, and sample multiple problem
instances from the environment. Heuristics that "win" an instance
(perform best) are maintained. This was shown to rapidly produce
solutions and generalise over the problem space, but required a
greedy method of actually selecting between generated heuristics.
The majority of previous research just described uses classical
machine-learning algorithms such as K-Nearest Neighbour (KNN),
Wilson’s Learning Classifier System [ 32] (XCS) and Neural Net-
works (NN). Recently, deep-learning algorithms have gained some
traction in the ASP field due their ability to learn from extremely
large data sets in reasonable time. Mao et al . [18] proposed a heuris-
tics performance predictor using deep neural network trained on a
large set of instances of 1-d bin-packing problem using 16 features
as input. Their prediction system has achieved up to 72% validation
accuracy to select the best performing heuristic that can generate a
better quality bin packing solution. Although concerned with learn-
ing an optimisation method rather than algorithm-selection, Hu
et al. [9] used a deep reinforcement learning (a Pointer Network),
with 3D BPP to optimize the sequence of items to be packed into
the bin by choosing the sequence, orientation and empty maximal
space to pack cuboid shaped items. They claimed that their proposed
method has obtained about 5% improvement than well-designed
heuristic.
The approach proposed in this paper differs substantially from
the previous work just described in that it abandons the need to
derive features from a data set, circumventing the associated issues.
Furthermore, as far as we are aware, it provides the first example
of using a recurrent-neural network with long-short-term memory
as an algorithm-selection technique for data which has tempo-
ral characteristics. Although such networks have demonstrated
"ground-breaking performance on tasks as varied as image caption-
ing, language translation and handwriting recognition" [16], their
features have not been exploited within the ASP domain.
3 1-D BPP: HEURISTICS AND PROBLEM
INSTANCES
The objective of the one dimensional bin packing problem (BPP)
is to find a packing which minimises the number of containers, b,
of fixed capacity crequired to accommodate a set of nitems with
weightsωj:j∈{1. . .n}falling in the range 1≤ωj≤c,ωj∈Z
whilst enforcing the constraint that the sum of weights in any bin
does not exceed the bin capacity c. The lower and upper bounds on
b,(blandbu)respectively, are given by Equation 1. Any heuristic
that does not return empty bins will produce, for a given problem
instance, p, a solution using bpbins where bl≤bp≤bu.
In this study we are concerned with predicting the best heuristic
for a problem instance based only on temporal information encoded
in the sequence of items that are presented to the solver. By using a
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), we circumvent the requirement
to first identify features that are typically used to facilitate mapping
algorithm performance to problem instances. To allow us to achieve
this goal a set of heuristics with complimentary performances on
large instance sets is required.
It should be made clear that we address a specific variant of the
offline BPP. All items to be packed are known before packing starts