Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
One line of work proposes local SGD (Stich, 2019) based updates, wherein each participating device
performs a single local SGD step. The server then averages received models. In contrast to local
SGD, our method proposes to minimize a local penalized empirical loss.
FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) is a generalization of local SGD, which proposes a larger number of
local SGD steps per round. Still, FedAvg inexactly solves device side optimization. Identifying when
to stop minimizing so that one gets a good accuracy-communication trade-off is based on tuning the
number of epochs and the learning rate (McMahan et al., 2017; Li et al., 2020b). Despite the strong
empirical performance of FedAvg in IID settings, performance degrades in non-IID scenarios (Zhao
et al., 2018).
Several modiﬁcations of FedAvg have been proposed to handle non-IID settings. These variants in-
clude using a decreasing learning rate (Li et al., 2020b); modifying device empirical loss dynamically
(Li et al., 2020a); or modifying server side updates (Hsu et al., 2019; Reddi et al., 2020). Methods that
use a decreasing learning rate or customized server side updates still rely on local SGD updates within
devices. While these works do recognize the incompatibility of local and global stationary points,
their proposed ﬁx is based on inexact minimization. Additionally, in order to establish convergence
for non-IID situations, these works impose additional “bounded-non-IID” conditions.
FedProx (Li et al., 2020a) is related to our method. Like us they propose a dynamic regularizer,
which is modiﬁed based on server supplied models. This regularizer penalizes updates that are far
away from the server model. Nevertheless, the resulting regularizer does not result in aligning the
global and local stationary points, and as such inexact minimization is warranted, and they do so
by carefully choosing learning rates and epochs. Furthermore, tuning requires some knowledge of
statistical heterogeneity.
In a similar vein, there are works that augment updates with extra device variables that are also
transmitted along with the models (Karimireddy et al., 2019; Shamir et al., 2014). These works
prove convergence guarantees through adding device-dependent regularizers. Nevertheless, they
suffer additional communication costs and they are not extensively experimented with deep neural
networks. Among them, SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al., 2019) is a closely related work even though
it transmits extra variables and a more detailed comparison is given in Section 2.
Another line of distributed optimization methods (Kone ˇcn`y et al., 2016; Makhdoumi & Ozdaglar,
2017; Shamir et al., 2014; Yuan & Ma, 2020; Pathak & Wainwright, 2020; Liang et al., 2019; Li
et al., 2020c; Condat et al., 2020) could be considered in this setting. Moreover, there are works that
extend analysis of SGD type methods to FL settings (Gorbunov et al., 2020; Khaled et al., 2020b; Li
& Richt ´arik, 2020). However, these algorithms are proposed for full device participation case which
fails to satisfy one important aspect of FL. FedSVRG (Kone ˇcn`y et al., 2016) and DANE (Shamir et al.,
2014) need gradient information from all devices at each round and they are not directly applicable
to partial FL settings. For example, FedDANE (Li et al., 2019) is a version of DANE that works
in partial participation. However, FedDANE performs worse than FedAvg empirically with partial
participation (Li et al., 2019). Similar to these works, FedPD (Zhang et al., 2020) method is proposed
in distributed optimization with a different participation notion. FedPD activates either all devices or
no devices per round which again fails to satisfy partial participation in FL.
Lastly, another set of works aims to decrease communication costs by compressing the transmitted
models (Dutta et al., 2019; Mishchenko et al., 2019; Alistarh et al., 2017). They save communication
costs through decreasing bit-rate of the transmission. These ideas are complementary to our work
and they can be integrated to our proposed solution.
2 M ETHOD
We assume there is a cloud server which can transmit and receive messages from mclient devices.
Each device, k2[m]consists ofNktraining instances in the form of features, x2 X and
corresponding labels y2Y that are drawn IID from a device-indexed joint distribution, (x;y)Pk.
Our objective is to solve
argmin
2Rd2
4`(),1
mX
k2[m]Lk()3
5
3