Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
label distributions among devices for non-IID splits as in Yurochkin et al. (2019). For example, in
MNIST, 100device experiments, each device has about 5and3classes that consume 80% of local
data at Dirichlet parameter settings of 0:6and0:3respectively. To generate unbalanced data, we
sample the number of datapoints from a lognormal distribution. Controlling the variance of lognormal
distribution gives unbalanced data. For instance, in CIFAR-10, 100device experiments, balanced and
unbalanced data settings have standard deviation of device sample size of 0and0:3respectively.
Models. We use fully-connected neural network architectures for MNIST and EMNIST-L with 2
hidden layers. The number of neurons in the layers are 200 and 100; and the models achieve 98:4%
and95:0%test accuracy in MNIST and EMNIST-L respectively. The model used for MNIST is
the same as used in McMahan et al. (2017). For CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100, we use a CNN model,
similar to McMahan et al. (2017), consisting of 2convolutional layers with 64 55ﬁlters followed
by2fully connected layers with 394 and 192 neurons, and a softmax layer. The model achieves
85:2%and55:3%test accuracy for CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 respectively. For the next character
prediction task (Shakespeare), we use a stacked LSTM, similar to Li et al. (2020a). This architecture
achieves a test accuracy of 50:8%and51:2%in IID and non-IID settings respectively. Both IID and
non-IID performances are reported since splits are randomly regenerated from the entire Shakespeare
writing. Hence centralized data and the centralized model performance is different.
In passing, we note that while the accuracies reported are state-of-art for our chosen models, higher
capacity models can achieve higher performance on these datasets. As such, our aim is to compare
the relative performance of these models in FL using FedDyn and other strong baselines.
Comparison of Methods. We report the performance of FedDyn, SCAFFOLD, FedAvg and FedProx
on synthetic and real datasets. We also experimented with distributed SGD, where devices in each
round compute gradients on the server supplied model on local data, and communicate these gradients.
Its performance was not competitive relative to other methods. Therefore, we do not tabulate it here.
We cover synthetic data generation and its results in Appendix A.1.
The standard goal in FL is to minimize amount of bits transferred. For this reason, we adopt the
number of models transmitted to achieve a target accuracy as our metric in our comparisons. This
metric is different than comparing communication rounds since not all methods communicate the
same amount of information per round. FedDyn, FedAvg and FedProx transmit/receive the same
amount of models for a ﬁxed number of rounds whereas SCAFFOLD costs twice due to transmission
of states. We compare algorithms for two different accuracy levels which we pick them to be close
to performance obtained by centralizing data. Along with transmission costs of each method, we
report the communication savings of FedDyn compared to each baseline in parenthesis. For methods
that could not achieve aimed accuracy within the communication constraint, we append transmission
cost with +sign. We observe FedDyn results in communication savings compared to all baselines
to reach a target accuracy. We test FedDyn under the four characteristic properties of FL which are
partial participation, large number of devices, heterogeneous data, and unbalanced data.
Moderate vs. Large Number of Devices. FedDyn signiﬁcantly outperforms competing methods in
the practically relevant massively distributed scenario. We report the performance of FedDyn on
CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 with moderate and large number of devices in Table 1, while keeping
the participation level constant (10%) and the data amounts balanced. Speciﬁcally, the moderately
distributed setting has 100devices with 500images per device. The massively distributed setting has
1000 devices with 50images per device for CIFAR-10, as well as 500devices with 100images per
device for CIFAR-100. In each distributed setting, the data is partitioned in both IID and non-IID
(Dirichlet 0.3) fashion. FedDyn leads to substantial transmission reduction in each of the regimes.
First, the communication saving in the massive setting is signiﬁcantly larger relative to the moderate
setting. Compared to SCAFFOLD, FedDyn leads to 4:8and2:9gains respectively on CIFAR-10
IID setting. SCAFFOLD is not able to achieve 80% within 2000 rounds in the massive setting (shown
in Figure 4a), thus actual saving is more than 4:8. Similar trend is observed in the non-IID setting
of CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100. Second, all the methods require more communications to achieve
a reasonable accuracy in the massive setting as the dataset is more decentralized. For instance, it
takes FedDyn 637rounds to achieve 84:5%with100devices, while it takes 840rounds to achieve
80:0%with 1000 devices. Similar trend is observed for CIFAR-100 and other methods. FedDyn
always achieves the target accuracy with fewer rounds and thus leads to signiﬁcant saving. Third, a
higher target accuracy may result in a greater saving. For instance, the saving relative to SCAFFOLD
7