Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
FEDERATED LEARNING BASED ON
DYNAMIC REGULARIZATION
Durmus Alp Emre Acar
alpacar@bu.eduYue Zhaoy
yue.zhao@arm.comRamon Matas Navarroy
ramon.matas@arm.com
Matthew Mattinay
matthew.mattina@arm.comPaul N. Whatmoughy
paul.whatmough@arm.comVenkatesh Saligrama
srv@bu.edu
ABSTRACT
We propose a novel federated learning method for distributively training neural
network models, where the server orchestrates cooperation between a subset of
randomly chosen devices in each round. We view Federated Learning problem
primarily from a communication perspective and allow more device level computa-
tions to save transmission costs. We point out a fundamental dilemma, in that the
minima of the local-device level empirical loss are inconsistent with those of the
global empirical loss. Different from recent prior works, that either attempt inexact
minimization or utilize devices for parallelizing gradient computation, we propose
a dynamic regularizer for each device at each round, so that in the limit the global
and device solutions are aligned. We demonstrate both through empirical results on
real and synthetic data as well as analytical results that our scheme leads to efﬁcient
training, in both convex and non-convex settings, while being fully agnostic to
device heterogeneity and robust to large number of devices, partial participation
and unbalanced data.
1 I NTRODUCTION
In McMahan et al. (2017), the authors proposed federated learning (FL), a concept that leverages
data spread across many devices, to learn classiﬁcation tasks distributively without recourse to data
sharing. The authors identiﬁed four principle characteristics of FL based on several use cases. First,
thecommunication links between the server and devices are unreliable, and at any time, there may
only be a small subset of devices that are active. Second, data is massively distributed , namely
the number of devices are large, while amount of data per device is small. Third, device data is
heterogeneous , in that data in different devices are sampled from different parts of the sample space.
Finally, data is unbalanced , in that the amount of data per device is highly variable.
The basic FL problem can be cast as one of empirical minimization of a global loss objective, which
is decomposable as a sum of device-level empirical loss objectives. The number of communication
rounds, along with the amount of bits communicated per round, has emerged as a fundamental gold
standard for FL problems. Many mobile and IoT devices are bandwidth constrained, and wireless
transmission and reception is signiﬁcantly more power hungry than computation (Halgamuge et al.,
2009). As such schemes that reduce communication are warranted. While distributed SGD is a viable
method in this context, it is nevertheless communication inefﬁcient.
A Fundamental Dilemma. Motivated by these ideas, recent work has proposed to push optimization
burden onto the devices, in order to minimize amount of communications. Much of the work in
this context, propose to optimize the local risk objective based on running SGD over mini-batched
device data, analogous to what one would do in a centralized scenario. On the one hand, training
models on local data that minimize local empirical loss appears to be meaningful, but yet, doing so,
Boston University, Boston, MA
yArm ML Research Lab, Boston, MA
1arXiv:2111.04263v2  [cs.LG]  9 Nov 2021