1
Spatial-Temporal Transformer Networks for
Trafﬁc Flow Forecasting
Mingxing Xu, Wenrui Dai, Member, IEEE, Chunmiao Liu, Xing Gao, Weiyao Lin, Senior Member, IEEE,
Guo-Jun Qi, Senior Member, IEEE, and Hongkai Xiong, Senior Member, IEEE
F
Abstract —Trafﬁc forecasting has emerged as a core component of
intelligent transportation systems. However, it still remains an open
challenge for timely accurate trafﬁc forecasting, especially long-term
forecasting, due to the highly nonlinear and dynamical spatial-temporal
dependencies of trafﬁc ﬂows. In this paper, we propose a novel paradigm
of Spatial-Temporal Transformer Networks (STTNs) that jointly leverage
dynamical directed spatial dependencies and long-range temporal de-
pendencies to improve the accuracy of long-term trafﬁc ﬂow forecasting.
A new variant of graph neural networks, named spatial transformer, is
presented to dynamically model directed spatial dependencies with self-
attention mechanism to capture real-time conditions and directions of
trafﬁc ﬂows. Various patterns of spatial dependencies are jointly mod-
eled with multi-head attention mechanism to consider multiple factors,
including similarity, connectivity and covariance. Furthermore, temporal
transformer is developed to model long-range bidirectional temporal de-
pendencies across multiple time steps. In comparison to existing works,
STTNs enable efﬁcient and scalable training for long-range spatial-
temporal dependencies. Experimental results demonstrate that STTNs
are competitive with the state-of-the-arts, especially for long-term trafﬁc
ﬂow forecasting, on real-world PeMS-Bay and PeMSD7(M) datasets.
Index Terms —Trafﬁc ﬂow prediction, spatial-temporal dependency, dy-
namic graph neural networks, transformer.
1 I NTRODUCTION
WITHthe deployment of affordable trafﬁc sensor tech-
nologies, the exploding trafﬁc data are bringing us to
the era of transportation big data. Intelligent Transportation
System (ITS) [1] is thus developed to leverage transportation
big data for efﬁcient urban trafﬁc controlling and planning.
As a core component of ITS, accurate trafﬁc forecasting in a
timely fashion has attracted increasing attentions.
In trafﬁc forecasting, the future trafﬁc conditions (e.g.
speeds, volumes and density) of a node are predicted from
the historical trafﬁc data of itself and its neighboring nodes.
It is important for a forecasting model to effectively and
efﬁciently capture the spatial and temporal dependencies
within trafﬁc ﬂows. Trafﬁc forecasting is commonly classi-
ﬁed into two scales, i.e., short-term ( 30 minutes) and long-
term (30 minutes). Existing approaches like time-series
models [2] and Kalman ﬁltering [3] perform well on short-
term forecasting. However, the stationary assumption for
these models is not practical in long-term forecasting, as
trafﬁc ﬂows are highly dynamical in nature. Furthermore,
they fail to jointly exploit the spatial and temporal correla-
tions in the trafﬁc ﬂows to make long-term forecasting.
𝝉 𝝉-1 𝝉-𝟐 𝝉-𝟑
𝜏-3
𝜏-2
𝜏-1𝜏-2𝜏-3
𝜏-1…… …(a)
0 50 100 150 200
Sensors ID10203040506070Speed/(km/h)The evolution of traffic speeds spatial distribution
Baseline
30 mintues later
120 mintues later
(b)
Fig. 1. (a) Trafﬁc forecasting models with joint spatial temporal depen-
dencies where spatial dependencies are evolving with time. (b) Evolution
of the spatial distribution of real-time trafﬁc speeds.
Trafﬁc networks can be represented as graphs in which
the nodes represent trafﬁc sensors and the edges together
with their weights are determined by the connectivity as
well as Euclidean distances between sensors. Consequently,
trafﬁc ﬂows can be viewed as graph signals evolving with
time. Recently, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [4], [5], [6]
have emerged as a powerful tool for processing graph data.
Sequential models are improved by incorporating GNNs to
jointly capture spatio-temporal correlations for both short-
term and long-term forecasting. GNN-based trafﬁc forecast-
ing models are ﬁrst developed in [7] and [8] to improve the
prediction performance by introducing the inherent topol-
ogy of trafﬁc networks into sequential models. Spatial [4] or
spectral [5] Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) are inte-
grated with convolution-based sequence learning models [9]
or recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to jointly capture the
spatial and temporal dependencies. However, these models
are still restricted for trafﬁc forecasting, especially long-term
prediction, in the following two aspects:
Fixed Spatial Dependencies: In trafﬁc forecasting task,
spatial dependencies are highly dynamical due to roadarXiv:2001.02908v2  [eess.SP]  29 Mar 2021