because respecting people’s right to privacy should always be addressed. The EC highlights that privacy
should also address data governance, covering the quality and integrity of the used data [ 390]. It should
also include the deﬁnition of access protocols and the capability to process data in a way that ensures
privacy. The EC guide breaks down the privacy principle into three aspects:
Privacy and data protection: they should be guaranteed in AI systems throughout its entire lifecycle. It
includes both information provided by users and information generated about those users derived from
their interactions with the system. Since digital information about a user could be used in a negative
way against them (discrimination due to sensitive features, unfair treatment...), it is crucial to ensure
proper usage of all the data collected.
Quality and integrity of data: quality of data sets is fundamental to reach good performance with AI
systems that are fueled with data, like ML. However, sometimes the data collected contains socially
constructed biases, inaccuracies, errors and mistakes. This should be tackled before training any model
with the data collected. Additionally, the integrity of the data sets should be ensured.
Access to data: if there is individual personal data, there should always be data protocols for data
governance. These protocols should indicate who may access data and under which circumstances.
The aforementioned examples from the EC shows how data fusion is directly intertwined with privacy
and with fairness, regardless of the technique employed for it.
Notwithstanding this explicit concern from regulatory bodies, loss of privacy has been compromised
by DL methods in scenarios where no data fusion is performed. For instance, a few images are enough
to threaten users’ privacy even in the presence of image obfuscation [ 420], and the model parameters of
a DNN can be exposed by simply performing input queries on the model [ 356,357]. An approach to
explain loss of privacy is by using privacy loss andintent loss subjective scores. The former provides a
subjective measure of the severity of the privacy violation depending on the role of a face in the image,
while the latter captures the intent of the bystanders to appear in the picture. These kind of explanations
have motivated, for instance, secure matching cryptographic protocols for photographer and bystanders to
preserve privacy [ 356,421,422]. We deﬁnite advocate for more efforts invested in this direction, namely,
in ensuring that XAI methods do not pose a threat in regards to the privacy of the data used for training
the ML model under target.
When data fusion enters the picture, different implications arise with the context of explainability
covered in this survey. To begin with, classical techniques for fusion at the data level only deal with data
and have no connection to the ML model, so they have little to do with explainability. However, the
advent of DL models has blurred the distinction between information fusion and predictive modeling. The
ﬁrst layers of DL architectures are in charge of learning high-level features from raw data that possess
relevance for the task at hand. This learning process can be thought to aim at solving a data level fusion
problem, yet in a directed learning fashion that makes the fusion process tightly coupled to the task to be
solved.
In this context, many techniques in the ﬁeld of XAI have been proposed to deal with the analysis of
correlation between features. This paves the way to explaining how data sources are actually fused through
the DL model, which can yield interesting insights on how the predictive task at hand induces correlations
among the data sources over the spatial and/or time domain. Ultimately, this gained information on the
fusion could not only improve the usability of the model as a result of its enhanced understanding by the
user, but could also help identifying other data sources of potential interest that could be incorporated to
the model, or even contribute to a more efﬁcient data fusion in other contexts.
Unfortunately, this previously mentioned concept of fusion at data level contemplates data under
certain constraints of known form and source origin. As presented in [ 423], the Big Data era presents
an environment in which these premises cannot be taken for granted, and methods to board Big Data
fusion (as that illustrated in Figure 13.d) have to be thought. Conversely, a concern with model fusion
43