Sufﬁciency: it is accomplished when the target variable is independent of the sensitive feature given
the model output. Thus, the Positive Predictive Value is the same for all subgroups within the sensitive
feature. This criteria is also known as Predictive Rate Parity.
Although not all of the criteria can be fulﬁlled at the same time, they can be optimized together in
order to minimize the bias within the ML model.
There are two possible actions that could be used in order to achieve those criteria. On one hand,
evaluation includes measuring the amount of bias present within the model (regarding one of the criteria
aforementioned). There are many different metrics that can be used, depending on the criteria considered.
Regarding independence criterion, possible metrics are statistical parity difference ordisparate impact .
In case of the separation criterion, possible metrics are equal opportunity difference andaverage odds
difference [393]. Another possible metric is the Theil index [394], which measures inequality both in
terms of individual and group fairness.
On the other hand, mitigation refers to the process of ﬁxing some aspects in the model in order to
remove the effect of the bias in terms of one or several sensitive features. Several techniques exist within
the literature, classiﬁed in the following categories:
Pre-processing: these groups of techniques are applied before the ML model is trained, looking to
remove the bias at the ﬁrst step of the learning process. An example is Reweighing [ 395], which
modiﬁes the weights of the features in order to remove discrimination in sensitive attributes. Another
example is [ 396], which hinges on transforming the input data in order to ﬁnd a good representation
that obfuscates information about membership in sensitive features.
In-processing: these techniques are applied during the training process of the ML model. Normally,
they include Fairness optimization constraints along with cost functions of the ML model. An example
is Adversarial Debiasing, [ 397]. This technique optimizes jointly the ability of predicting the target
variable while minimizing the ability of predicting sensitive features using a GAN.
Post-processing: these techniques are applied after the ML model is trained. They are less intrusive
because they do not modify the input data or the ML model. An example is Equalized Odds [ 393]. This
techniques allows to adjust the thresholds in the classiﬁcation model in order to reduce the differences
between the TP rate and the FP rate for each sensitive subgroup.
Even though these references apparently address an AI principle that appears to be independent of
XAI, the literature shows that they are intertwined. For instance, the survey in [ 385] evinces that 26 out
of the 28 AI principles that deal with XAI, also talk about fairness explicitly. This fact elucidates that
organizations usually consider both aspects together when implementing Responsible AI.
The literature also exploses that XAI proposals can be used for bias detection. For example, [ 398]
proposes a framework to visually analyze the bias present in a model (both for individual and group
fairness). Thus, the fairness report is shown just like the visual summaries used within XAI. This
explainability approach eases the understanding and measurement of bias. The system must report that
there is bias, justify it quantitatively, indicate the degree of fairness, and explain why a user or group
would be treated unfairly with the available data. Similarly, XAI techniques such as SHAP [ 224] could be
used to generate counterfactual outcomes explaining the decisions of a ML model when fed with protected
and unprotected variables. By identifying implicit correlations between protected and unprotected features
through XAI techniques, the model designer may unveil hidden correlations between the input variables
amenable to cause discrimination.
Another example is [ 399], where the authors propose a fair-by-design approach in order to develop
ML models that jointly have less bias and include as explanations human comprehensible rules. The
proposal is based in self-learning locally generative models that use only a small part of the whole
dataset available (weak supervision). It ﬁrst ﬁnds recursively relevant prototypes within the dataset, and
39