3.3. K-Nearest Neighbors
Another method that falls within transparent models is that of K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN), which
deals with classiﬁcation problems in a methodologically simple way: it predicts the class of a test sample
by voting the classes of its K nearest neighbors (where the neighborhood relation is induced by a measure
of distance between samples). When used in the context of regression problems, the voting is replaced by
an aggregation (e.g. average) of the target values associated with the nearest neighbors.
In terms of model explainability, it is important to observe that predictions generated by KNN models
rely on the notion of distance and similarity between examples, which can be tailored depending on the
speciﬁc problem being tackled. Interestingly, this prediction approach resembles that of experience-based
human decision making, which decides upon the result of past similar cases. There lies the rationale
of why KNN has also been adopted widely in contexts in which model interpretability is a requirement
[186,187,188,189]. Furthermore, aside from being simple to explain, the ability to inspect the reasons
by which a new sample has been classiﬁed inside a group and to examine how these predictions evolve
when the number of neighbors K is increased or decreased empowers the interaction between the users
and the model.
One must keep in mind that as mentioned before, KNN’s class of transparency depends on the features,
the number of neighbors and the distance function used to measure the similarity between data instances.
A very high K impedes a full simulation of the model performance by a human user. Similarly, the usage
of complex features and/or distance functions would hinder the decomposability of the model, restricting
its interpretability solely to the transparency of its algorithmic operations.
3.4. Rule-based Learning
Rule-based learning refers to every model that generates rules to characterize the data it is intended to
learn from. Rules can take the form of simple conditional if-then rules or more complex combinations of
simple rules to form their knowledge. Also connected to this general family of models, fuzzy rule based
systems are designed for a broader scope of action, allowing for the deﬁnition of verbally formulated
rules over imprecise domains. Fuzzy systems improve two main axis relevant for this paper. First, they
empower more understandable models since they operate in linguistic terms. Second, they perform better
that classic rule systems in contexts with certain degrees of uncertainty. Rule based learners are clearly
transparent models that have been often used to explain complex models by generating rules that explain
their predictions [126, 127, 190, 191].
Rule learning approaches have been extensively used for knowledge representation in expert systems
[192]. However, a central problem with rule generation approaches is the coverage (amount) and the
speciﬁcity (length) of the rules generated. This problem relates directly to the intention for their use in
the ﬁrst place. When building a rule database, a typical design goal sought by the user is to be able to
analyze and understand the model. The amount of rules in a model will clearly improve the performance
of the model at the stake of compromising its intepretability. Similarly, the speciﬁcity of the rules plays
also against interpretability, since a rule with a high number of antecedents an/or consequences might
become difﬁcult to interpret. In this same line of reasoning, these two features of a rule based learner
play along with the classes of transparent models presented in Section 2. The greater the coverage or
the speciﬁcity is, the closer the model will be to being just algorithmically transparent . Sometimes, the
reason to transition from classical rules to fuzzy rules is to relax the constraints of rule sizes, since a
greater range can be covered with less stress on interpretability.
Rule based learners are great models in terms of interpretability across ﬁelds. Their natural and
seamless relation to human behaviour makes them very suitable to understand and explain other models.
If a certain threshold of coverage is acquired, a rule wrapper can be thought to contain enough information
about a model to explain its behavior to a non-expert user, without forfeiting the possibility of using the
generated rules as an standalone prediction model.
16