on Support Vector Regression models. They show the ability of the algorithm to visualize which of the
input variables are actually related with the associated output data. In [ 68] a visual way combines the
output of the SVM with heatmaps to guide the modiﬁcation of compounds in late stages of drug discovery.
They assign colors to atoms based on the weights of a trained linear SVM that allows for a much more
comprehensive way of debugging the process. In [ 116] the authors argue that many of the presented
studies for interpreting SVMs only account for the weight vectors, leaving the margin aside. In their study
they show how this margin is important, and they create an statistic that explicitly accounts for the SVM
margin. The authors show how this statistic is speciﬁc enough to explain the multivariate patterns shown
in neuroimaging.
Noteworthy is also the intersection between SVMs and Bayesian systems, the latter being adopted
as a post-hoc technique to explain decisions made by the SVM model. This is the case of [ 248] and
[247], which are studies where SVMs are interpreted as MAP (Maximum A Posteriori) solutions to
inference problems with Gaussian Process priors. This framework makes tuning the hyper-parameters
comprehensible and gives the capability of predicting class probabilities instead of the classical binary
classiﬁcation of SVMs. Interpretability of SVM models becomes even more involved when dealing
with non-CPD (Conditional Positive Deﬁnite) kernels that are usually harder to interpret due to missing
geometrical and theoretical understanding. The work in [ 102] revolves around this issue with a geometrical
interpretation of indeﬁnite kernel SVMs, showing that these do not classify by hyper-plane margin
optimization. Instead, they minimize the distance between convex hulls in pseudo-Euclidean spaces.
A difference might be appreciated between the post-hoc techniques applied to other models and those
noted for SVMs. In previous models, model simpliﬁcation in a broad sense was the prominent method
for post-hoc explainability. In SVMs, local explanations have started to take some weight among the
propositions. However, simpliﬁcation based methods are, on average, much older than local explanations.
As a ﬁnal remark, none of the reviewed methods treating SVM explainability are dated beyond 2017,
which might be due to the progressive proliferation of DL models in almost all disciplines. Another
plausible reason is that these models are already understood, so it is hard to improve upon what has
already been done.
4.3. Explainability in Deep Learning
Post-hoc local explanations andfeature relevance techniques are increasingly the most adopted
methods for explaining DNNs. This section reviews explainability studies proposed for the most used
DL models, namely multi-layer neural networks, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNN).
4.3.1. Multi-layer Neural Networks
From their inception, multi-layer neural networks (also known as multi-layer perceptrons) have been
warmly welcomed by the academic community due to their huge ability to infer complex relations among
variables. However, as stated in the introduction, developers and engineers in charge of deploying these
models in real-life production ﬁnd in their questionable explainability a common reason for reluctance.
That is why neural networks have been always considered as black-box models. The fact that explainability
is often a must for the model to be of practical value, forced the community to generate multiple
explainability techniques for multi-layer neural networks, including model simpliﬁcation approaches,
feature relevance estimators, text explanations ,local explanations and model visualizations .
Several model simpliﬁcation techniques have been proposed for neural networks with one single
hidden layer, however very few works have been presented for neural networks with multiple hidden
layers. One of these few works is DeepRED algorithm [ 257], which extends the decompositional approach
to rule extraction (splitting at neuron level) presented in [ 259] for multi-layer neural network by adding
more decision trees and rules.
Some other works use model simpliﬁcation as a post-hoc explainability approach. For instance, [ 56]
presents a simple distillation method called Interpretable Mimic Learning to extract an interpretable model
23