Redress: it includes mechanisms that ensure an adequate redress for situations when unforeseen unjust
adverse impacts take place. Guaranteeing a redress for those non-predicted scenarios is a key to ensure
trust. Special attention should be paid to vulnerable persons or groups.
These aspects addressed by the EC highlight different connections of XAI with accountability. First,
XAI contributes to auditability as it can help explaining AI systems for different proﬁles, including
regulatory ones. Also, since there is a connection between fairness and XAI as stated before, XAI can
also contribute to the minimization and report of negative impacts.
6.3. Privacy and Data Fusion
The ever-growing number of information sources that nowadays coexist in almost all domains of
activity calls for data fusion approaches aimed at exploiting them simultaneously toward solving a learning
task. By merging heterogeneous information, data fusion has been proven to improve the performance of
ML models in many applications, such as industrial prognosis [ 348], cyber-physical social systems [ 407]
or the Internet of Things [ 408], among others. This section speculates with the potential of data fusion
techniques to enrich the explainability of ML models, and to compromise the privacy of the data from
which ML models are learned. To this end, we brieﬂy overview different data fusion paradigms, and later
analyze them from the perspective of data privacy. As we will later, despite its relevance in the context of
Responsible AI, the conﬂuence between XAI and data fusion is an uncharted research area in the current
research mainstream.
6.3.1. Basic Levels of Data Fusion
We depart from the different levels of data fusion that have been identiﬁed in comprehensive surveys
on the matter [ 409,410,411,412]. In the context of this subsection, we will distinguish among fusion at
data level, fusion at model level and fusion at knowledge level. Furthermore, a parallel categorization can
be established depending on where such data is processed and fused, yielding centralized and distributed
methods for data fusion. In a centralized approach, nodes deliver their locally captured data to a centralized
processing system to merge them together. In contrast, in a distributed approach, each of the nodes merges
its locally captured information, eventually sharing the result of the local fusion with its counterparts.
Fusion through the information generation process has properties and peculiarities depending on
the level at which the fusion is performed. At the so-called data level , fusion deals with raw data. As
schematically shown in Figure 13, a fusion model at this stage receives raw data from different information
sources, and combines them to create a more coherent, compliant, robust or simply representative data
ﬂow. On the other hand, fusion at the model level aggregates models, each learned from a subset of the
data sets that were to be fused. Finally, at the knowledge level the fusion approach deals with knowledge in
the form of rules, ontologies or other knowledge representation techniques with the intention of merging
them to create new, better or more complete knowledge from what was originally provided. Structured
knowledge information is extracted from each data source and for every item in the data set using multiple
knowledge extractors (e.g. a reasoning engine operating on an open semantic database). All produced
information is then fused to further ensure the quality, correctness and manageability of the produced
knowledge about the items in the data set.
Other data fusion approaches exist beyonds the ones represented in Figure 13. As such, data-level
fusion can be performed either by a technique speciﬁcally devoted to this end (as depicted in Figure 13.b)
or, instead, performed along the learning process of the ML model (as done in e.g. DL models). Similarly,
model-level data fusion can be made by combining the decisions of different models (as done in tree
ensembles).
6.3.2. Emerging Data Fusion Approaches
In the next subsection we examine other data fusion approaches that have recently come into scene
due to their implications in terms of data privacy:
41