People should always know when they are communicating with a person, and when they are commu-
nicating with an AI system. People should also be aware if their personal information is being used
by the AI system and for what purpose. It is crucial to ensure a certain level of understanding about
the decisions taken by an AI system. This can be achieved through the usage of XAI techniques. It
is important that the generated explanations consider the proﬁle of the user that will receive those
explanations (the so-called audience as per the deﬁnition given in Subsection 2.2) in order to adjust the
transparency level, as indicated in [45]. This deﬁnes the principle of Transparent and Explainable AI .
AI products and services should always be aligned with the United Nation’s Sustainable Development
Goals [ 387] and contribute to them in a positive and tangible way. Thus, AI should always generate
a beneﬁt for humanity and the common good. This deﬁnes the principle of Human-centric AI (also
referred to as AI for Social Good [388]).
AI systems, specially when they are fed by data, should always consider privacy and security standards
during all of its life cycle. This principle is not exclusive of AI systems since it is shared with many
other software products. Thus, it can be inherited from processes that already exist within a company.
This deﬁnes the principle of Privacy and Security by Design , which was also identiﬁed as one of
the core ethical and societal challenges faced by Smart Information Systems under the Responsible
Research and Innovation paradigm (RRI, [ 389]). RRI refers to a package of methodological guidelines
and recommendations aimed at considering a wider context for scientiﬁc research, from the perspective
of the lab to global societal challenges such as sustainability, public engagement, ethics, science
education, gender equality, open access, and governance. Interestingly, RRI also requires openness and
transparency to be ensured in projects embracing its principles, which links directly to the principle of
Transparent and Explainable AI mentioned previously.
The authors emphasize that all these principles should always be extended to any third-party (providers,
consultants, partners...).
Going beyond the scope of these ﬁve AI principles, the European Commission (EC) has recently
published ethical guidelines for Trustworthy AI [ 390] through an assessment checklist that can be
completed by different proﬁles related to AI systems (namely, product managers, developers and other
roles). The assessment is based in a series of principles: 1) human agency and oversight; 2) technical
robustness and safety; 3) privacy and data governance; 4) transparency, diversity, non-discrimination and
fairness; 5) societal and environmental well-being; 6) accountability. These principles are aligned with
the ones detailed in this section, though the scope for the EC principles is more general, including any
type of organization involved in the development of AI.
It is worth mentioning that most of these AI principles guides directly approach XAI as a key aspect
to consider and include in AI systems. In fact, the overview for these principles introduced before [ 385],
indicates that 28 out of the 32 AI principles guides covered in the analysis, explicitly include XAI as a
crucial component. Thus, the work and scope of this article deals directly with one of the most important
aspects regarding AI at a worldwide level.
6.2. Fairness and Accountability
As mentioned in the previous section, there are many critical aspects, beyond XAI, included within
the different AI principles guidelines published during the last decade. However, those aspects are not
completely detached from XAI; in fact, they are intertwined. This section presents two key components
with a huge relevance within the AI principles guides, Fairness and Accountability. It also highlights how
they are connected to XAI.
37