When introducing the overview in Section 1 we already mentioned the existence of a tradeoff between
model interpretability and performance, in the sense that making a ML model more understandable
could eventually degrade the quality of its produced decisions. In Subsection 5.1 we will stress on the
potential of XAI developments to effectively achieve an optimal balance between the interpretability
and performance of ML models.
In Subsection 2.2 we stressed on the imperative need for reaching a consensus on what explainability
entails within the AI realm. Reasons for pursuing explainability are also assorted and, under our
own assessment of the literature so far, not unambiguously mentioned throughout related works. In
Subsection 5.2 we will further delve into this important issue.
Given its notable prevalence in the XAI literature, Subsections 4.3 and 4.4 revolved on the explainability
of Deep Learning models, examining advances reported so far around a speciﬁc bibliographic taxonomy.
We go in this same direction with Subsection 5.3, which exposes several challenges that hold in regards
to the explainability of this family of models.
Finally, we close up this prospective discussion with Subsections 5.4 to 5.8, which place on the table
several research niches that despite its connection to model explainability, remain insufﬁciently studied
by the community.
Before delving into these identiﬁed challenges, it is important to bear in mind that this prospective
section is complemented by Section 6, which enumerates research needs and open questions related to
XAI within a broader context: the need for responsible AI.
5.1. On the Tradeoff between Interpretability and Performance
The matter of interpretability versus performance is one that repeats itself through time, but as any
other big statement, has its surroundings ﬁlled with myths and misconceptions.
As perfectly stated in [ 347], it is not necessarily true that models that are more complex are inherently
more accurate. This statement is false in cases in which the data is well structured and features at our
disposal are of great quality and value. This case is somewhat common in some industry environments,
since features being analyzed are constrained within very controlled physical problems, in which all of
the features are highly correlated, and not much of the possible landscape of values can be explored in
the data [ 348]. What can be hold as true, is that more complex models enjoy much more ﬂexibility than
their simpler counterparts, allowing for more complex functions to be approximated. Now, returning to
the statement “models that are more complex are more accurate” , given the premise that the function
to be approximated entails certain complexity, that the data available for study is greatly widespread
among the world of suitable values for each variable and that there is enough data to harness a complex
model, the statement presents itself as a true statement. It is in this situation that the trade-off between
performance and interpretability can be observed. It should be noted that the attempt at solving problems
that do not respect the aforementioned premises will fall on the trap of attempting to solve a problem that
does not provide enough data diversity (variance). Hence, the added complexity of the model will only
ﬁght against the task of accurately solving the problem.
In this path toward performance, when the performance comes hand in hand with complexity, in-
terpretability encounters itself on a downwards slope that until now appeared unavoidable. However,
the apparition of more sophisticated methods for explainability could invert or at least cancel that slope.
Figure 12 shows a tentative representation inspired by previous works [ 7], in which XAI shows its
power to improve the common trade-off between model interpretability and performance. Another aspect
worth mentioning at this point due to its close link to model interpretability and performance is the
approximation dilemma : explanations made for a ML model must be made drastic and approximate
enough to match the requirements of the audience for which they are sought, ensuring that explanations
are representative of the studied model and do not oversimplify its essential features.
30