6.2.1. Fairness and Discrimination
It is in the identiﬁcation of implicit correlations between protected and unprotected features where
XAI techniques ﬁnd their place within discrimination-aware data mining methods. By analyzing how
the output of the model behaves with respect to the input feature, the model designer may unveil hidden
correlations between the input variables amenable to cause discrimination. XAI techniques such as SHAP
[224] could be used to generate counterfactual outcomes explaining the decisions of a ML model when
fed with protected and unprotected variables.
Recalling the Fair AI principle introduced in the previous section, [ 386] reminds that fairness is a
discipline that generally includes proposals for bias detection within datasets regarding sensitive data that
affect protected groups (through variables like gender, race...). Indeed, ethical concerns with black-box
models arise from their tendency to unintentionally create unfair decisions by considering sensitive factors
such as the individual’s race, age or gender [ 391]. Unfortunately, such unfair decisions can give rise to
discriminatory issues, either by explicitly considering sensitive attributes or implicitly by using factors
that correlate with sensitive data. In fact, an attribute may implicitly encode a protected factor, as occurs
with postal code in credit rating [ 392]. The aforementioned proposals centered on fairness aspects permit
to discover correlations between non-sensitive variables and sensitive ones, detect imbalanced outcomes
from the algorithms that penalize a speciﬁc subgroup of people ( discrimination ), and mitigate the effect
of bias on the model’s decisions. These approaches can deal with:
Individual fairness: here, fairness is analyzed by modeling the differences between each subject and the
rest of the population.
Group fairness: it deals with fairness from the perspective of all individuals.
Counterfactual fairness: it tries to interpret the causes of bias using, for example, causal graphs.
The sources for bias, as indicated in [392], can be traced to:
Skewed data: bias within the data acquisition process.
Tainted data: errors in the data modelling deﬁnition, wrong feature labelling, and other possible causes.
Limited features: using too few features could lead to an inference of false feature relationships that
can lead to bias.
Sample size disparities: when using sensitive features, disparities between different subgroups can
induce bias.
Proxy features: there may be correlated features with sensitive ones that can induce bias even when the
sensitive features are not present in the dataset.
The next question that can be asked is what criteria could be used to deﬁne when AI is not biased. For
supervised ML, [ 393] presents a framework that uses three criteria to evaluate group fairness when there
is a sensitive feature present within the dataset:
Independence: this criterion is fulﬁlled when the model predictions are independent of the sensitive
feature. Thus, the proportion of positive samples (namely, those ones belonging to the class of interest)
given by the model is the same for all the subgroups within the sensitive feature.
Separation: it is met when the model predictions are independent of the sensitive feature given the
target variable. For instance, in classiﬁcation models, the True Positive (TP) rate and the False Positive
(FP) rate are the same in all the subgroups within the sensitive feature. This criteria is also known as
Equalized Odds .
38