shallow ) learning models. The second taxonomy deals with XAI methods suited for the explanation of
Deep Learning models, using classiﬁcation criteria closely linked to this family of ML methods (e.g.
layerwise explanations, representation vectors, attention).
4. We enumerate a series of challenges of XAI that still remain insufﬁciently addressed to date. Speciﬁ-
cally, we identify research needs around the concepts and metrics to evaluate the explainability of ML
models, and outline research directions toward making Deep Learning models more understandable.
We further augment the scope of our prospects toward the implications of XAI techniques in regards
to conﬁdentiality, robustness in adversarial settings, data diversity, and other areas intersecting with
explainability.
5.After the previous prospective discussion, we arrive at the concept of Responsible Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
a manifold concept that imposes the systematic adoption of several AI principles for AI models to
be of practical use. In addition to explainability, the guidelines behind Responsible AI establish that
fairness, accountability and privacy should also be considered when implementing AI models in real
environments.
6.Since Responsible AI blends together model explainability and privacy/security by design, we call
for a profound reﬂection around the beneﬁts and risks of XAI techniques in scenarios dealing with
sensitive information and/or conﬁdential ML models. As we will later show, the regulatory push
toward data privacy, quality, integrity and governance demands more efforts to assess the role of XAI
in this arena. In this regard, we provide an insight on the implications of XAI in terms of privacy and
security under different data fusion paradigms.
The remainder of this overview is structured as follows: ﬁrst, Section 2 and subsections therein open a
discussion on the terminology and concepts revolving around explainability and interpretability in AI,
ending up with the aforementioned novel deﬁnition of interpretability (Subsections 2.1 and 2.2), and a
general criterion to categorize and analyze ML models from the XAI perspective. Sections 3 and 4 proceed
by reviewing recent ﬁndings on XAI for ML models (on transparent models and post-hoc techniques
respectively) that comprise the main division in the aforementioned taxonomy. We also include a review
on hybrid approaches among the two, to attain XAI. Beneﬁts and caveats of the synergies among the
families of methods are discussed in Section 5, where we present a prospect of general challenges and
some consequences to be cautious about. Finally, Section 6 elaborates on the concept of Responsible
Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Section 7 concludes the survey with an outlook aimed at engaging the community
around this vibrant research area, which has the potential to impact society, in particular those sectors that
have progressively embraced ML as a core technology of their activity.
2. Explainability: What, Why, What For and How?
Before proceeding with our literature study, it is convenient to ﬁrst establish a common point of
understanding on what the term explainability stands for in the context of AI and, more speciﬁcally,
ML. This is indeed the purpose of this section, namely, to pause at the numerous deﬁnitions that have
been done in regards to this concept (what?), to argue why explainability is an important issue in AI and
ML (why? what for?) and to introduce the general classiﬁcation of XAI approaches that will drive the
literature study thereafter (how?).
2.1. Terminology Clariﬁcation
One of the issues that hinders the establishment of common grounds is the interchangeable misuse of
interpretability and explainability in the literature. There are notable differences among these concepts.
To begin with, interpretability refers to a passive characteristic of a model referring to the level at which
a given model makes sense for a human observer. This feature is also expressed as transparency. By
4