support for medical diagnosis, insurance risk assessment and cyber-physical systems in manufacturing,
among others [ 369]. In all these scenarios erroneous model outputs can lead to harmful consequences,
which has yielded comprehensive regulatory efforts aimed at ensuring that no decision is made solely on
the basis of data processing [3].
In parallel, research has been conducted towards minimizing both risk and uncertainty of harms
derived from decisions made on the output of a ML model. As a result, many techniques have been
reported to reduce such a risk, among which we pause at the evaluation of the model’s output conﬁdence
to decide upon. In this case, the inspection of the share of epistemic uncertainty (namely, the uncertainty
due to lack of knowledge) of the input data and its correspondence with the model’s output conﬁdence
can inform the user and eventually trigger his/her rejection of the model’s output [ 370,371]. To this end,
explaining via XAI techniques which region of the input data the model is focused on when producing a
given output can discriminate possible sources of epistemic uncertainty within the input domain.
5.6. XAI, Rationale Explanation, and Critical Data Studies
When shifting the focus to the research practices seen in Data Science, it has been noted that
reproducibility is stringently subject not only to the mere sharing of data, models and results to the
community, but also to the availability of information about the full discourse around data collection,
understanding, assumptions held and insights drawn from model construction and results’ analyses [ 372].
In other words, in order to transform data into a valuable actionable asset, individuals must engage in
collaborative sense-making by sharing the context producing their ﬁndings, wherein context refers to sets
of narrative stories around how data were processed, cleaned, modeled and analyzed. In this discourse
we ﬁnd also an interesting space for the adoption of XAI techniques due to their powerful ability to
describe black-box models in an understandable, hence conveyable fashion towards colleagues from
Social Science, Politics, Humanities and Legal ﬁelds.
XAI can effectively ease the process of explaining the reasons why a model reached a decision in an
accessible way to non-expert users, i.e. the rationale explanation . This conﬂuence of multi-disciplinary
teams in projects related to Data Science and the search for methodologies to make them appraise the
ethical implications of their data-based choices has been lately coined as Critical Data studies [ 373]. It
is in this ﬁeld where XAI can signiﬁcantly boost the exchange of information among heterogeneous
audiences about the knowledge learned by models.
5.7. XAI and Theory-guided Data Science
We envision an exciting synergy between the XAI realm and Theory-guided Data Science , a paradigm
exposed in [ 374] that merges both Data Science and the classic theoretical principles underlying the
application/context where data are produced. The rationale behind this rising paradigm is the need for data-
based models to generate knowledge that is the prior knowledge brought by the ﬁeld in which it operates.
This means that the model type should be chosen according to the type of relations we intend to encounter.
The structure should also follow what is previously known. Similarly, the training approach should not
allow for the optimization process to enter regions that are not plausible. Accordingly, regularization
terms should stand the prior premises of the ﬁeld, avoiding the elimination of badly represented true
relations for spurious and deceptive false relations. Finally, the output of the model should inform about
everything the model has come to learn, allowing to reason and merge the new knowledge with what was
already known in the ﬁeld.
Many examples of the implementation of this approach are currently available with promising results.
The studies in [ 375]-[382] were carried out in diverse ﬁelds, showcasing the potential of this new paradigm
for data science. Above all, it is relevant to notice the resemblance that all concepts and requirements of
Theory-guided Data Science share with XAI. All the additions presented in [ 374] push toward techniques
that would eventually render a model explainable, and furthermore, knowledge consistent. The concept
ofknowledge from the beginning , central to Theory-guided Data Science, must also consider how
34