by means of gradient boosting trees. In the same direction, the authors in [ 135] propose a hierarchical
partitioning of the feature space that reveals the iterative rejection of unlikely class labels, until association
is predicted. In addition, several works addressed the distillation of knowledge from an ensemble of
models into a single model [80, 289, 290] .
Given the fact that the simpliﬁcation of multi-layer neural networks is more complex as the number of
layers increases, explaining these models by feature relevance methods has become progressively more
popular. One of the representative works in this area is [ 60], which presents a method to decompose the
network classiﬁcation decision into contributions of its input elements. They consider each neuron as an
object that can be decomposed and expanded then aggregate and back-propagate these decompositions
through the network, resulting in a deep Taylor decomposition. In the same direction, the authors in [ 110]
proposed DeepLIFT, an approach for computing importance scores in a multi-layer neural network. Their
method compares the activation of a neuron to the reference activation and assigns the score according to
the difference.
On the other hand, some works try to verify the theoretical soundness of current explainability methods.
For example, the authors in [ 262], bring up a fundamental problem of most feature relevance techniques,
designed for multi-layer networks. They showed that two axioms that such techniques ought to fulﬁll
namely, sensitivity andimplementation invariance , are violated in practice by most approaches. Following
these axioms, the authors of [ 262] created integrated gradients , a new feature relevance method proven
to meet the aforementioned axioms. Similarly, the authors in [ 61] analyzed the correctness of current
feature relevance explanation approaches designed for Deep Neural Networks, e,g., DeConvNet, Guided
BackProp and LRP, on simple linear neural networks. Their analysis showed that these methods do not
produce the theoretically correct explanation and presented two new explanation methods PatternNet and
PatternAttribution that are more theoretically sound for both, simple and deep neural networks.
4.3.2. Convolutional Neural Networks
Currently, CNNs constitute the state-of-art models in all fundamental computer vision tasks, from
image classiﬁcation and object detection to instance segmentation. Typically, these models are built as
a sequence of convolutional layers and pooling layers to automatically learn increasingly higher level
features. At the end of the sequence, one or multiple fully connected layers are used to map the output
features map into scores. This structure entails extremely complex internal relations that are very difﬁcult
to explain. Fortunately, the road to explainability for CNNs is easier than for other types of models, as the
human cognitive skills favors the understanding of visual data.
Existing works that aim at understanding what CNNs learn can be divided into two broad categories:
1) those that try to understand the decision process by mapping back the output in the input space to
see which parts of the input were discriminative for the output; and 2) those that try to delve inside the
network and interpret how the intermediate layers see the external world, not necessarily related to any
speciﬁc input, but in general.
One of the seminal works in the ﬁrst category was [ 291]. When an input image runs feed-forward
through a CNN, each layer outputs a number of feature maps with strong and soft activations. The authors
in [291] used Deconvnet, a network designed previously by the same authors [ 142] that, when fed with a
feature map from a selected layer, reconstructs the maximum activations. These reconstructions can give
an idea about the parts of the image that produced that effect. To visualize these strongest activations in
the input image, the same authors used the occlusion sensitivity method to generate a saliency map [ 136],
which consists of iteratively forwarding the same image through the network occluding a different region
at a time.
To improve the quality of the mapping on the input space, several subsequent papers proposed
simplifying both the CNN architecture and the visualization method. In particular, [ 96] included a global
average pooling layer between the last convolutional layer of the CNN and the fully-connected layer that
predicts the object class. With this simple architectural modiﬁcation of the CNN, the authors built a class
24