the knowledge captured by a model should be explained for assessing its compliance with theoretical
principles known beforehand. This, again, opens a magniﬁcent window of opportunity for XAI.
5.8. Guidelines for ensuring Interpretable AI Models
Recent surveys have emphasized on the multidisciplinary, inclusive nature of the process of making
an AI-based model interpretable. Along this process, it is of utmost importance to scrutinize and take into
proper account the interests, demands and requirements of all stakeholders interacting with the system to
be explained, from the designers of the system to the decision makers consuming its produced outputs
and users undergoing the consequences of decisions made therefrom.
Given the conﬂuence of multiple criteria and the need for having the human in the loop, some
attempts at establishing the procedural guidelines to implement and explain AI systems have been recently
contributed. Among them, we pause at the thorough study in [ 383], which suggests that the incorporation
and consideration of explainability in practical AI design and deployment workﬂows should comprise
four major methodological steps:
1.Contextual factors, potential impacts and domain-speciﬁc needs must be taken into account when
devising an approach to interpretability: These include a thorough understanding of the purpose for
which the AI model is built, the complexity of explanations that are required by the audience, and the
performance and interpretability levels of existing technology, models and methods. The latter pose a
reference point for the AI system to be deployed in lieu thereof.
2.Interpretable techniques should be preferred when possible: when considering explainability in the
development of an AI system, the decision of which XAI approach should be chosen should gauge
domain-speciﬁc risks and needs, the available data resources and existing domain knowledge, and the
suitability of the ML model to meet the requirements of the computational task to be addressed. It is in
the conﬂuence of these three design drivers where the guidelines postulated in [ 383] (and other studies
in this same line of thinking [ 384]) recommend ﬁrst the consideration of standard interpretable models
rather than sophisticated yet opaque modeling methods. In practice, the aforementioned aspects
(contextual factors, impacts and domain-speciﬁc needs) can make transparent models preferable
over complex modeling alternatives whose interpretability require the application of post-hoc XAI
techniques. By contrast, black-box models such as those reviewed in this work (namely, support
vector machines, ensemble methods and neural networks) should be selected only when their superior
modeling capabilities ﬁt best the characteristics of the problem at hand.
3.If a black-box model has been chosen, the third guideline establishes that ethics-, fairness- and safety-
related impacts should be weighed. Speciﬁcally, responsibility in the design and implementation of
the AI system should be ensured by checking whether such identiﬁed impacts can be mitigated and
counteracted by supplementing the system with XAI tools that provide the level of explainability
required by the domain in which it is deployed. To this end, the third guideline suggests 1) a detailed
articulation, examination and evaluation of the applicable explanatory strategies, 2) the analysis of
whether the coverage and scope of the available explanatory approaches match the requirements of
the domain and application context where the model is to be deployed; and 3) the formulation of
an interpretability action plan that sets forth the explanation delivery strategy, including a detailed
time frame for the execution of the plan, and a clearance of the roles and responsibilities of the team
involved in the workﬂow.
4.Finally, the fourth guideline encourages to rethink interpretability in terms of the cognitive skills,
capacities and limitations of the individual human. This is an important question on which studies
on measures of explainability are intensively revolving by considering human mental models, the
accessibility of the audience to vocabularies of explanatory outcomes, and other means to involve the
expertise of the audience into the decision of what explanations should provide.
35