A ﬁnal challenge XAI methods for DL need to address is providing explanations that are accessible
for society, policy makers and the law as a whole. In particular, conveying explanations that require
non-technical expertise will be paramount to both handle ambiguities, and to develop the social right to
the (not-yet available) right for explanation in the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [ 355].
5.4. Explanations for AI Security: XAI and Adversarial Machine Learning
Nothing has been said about conﬁdentiality concerns linked to XAI. One of the last surveys very
brieﬂy introduced the idea of algorithm property and trade secrets [ 14]. However, not much attention
has been payed to these concepts. If conﬁdential is the property that makes something secret , in the
AI context many aspects involved in a model may hold this property. For example, imagine a model
that some company has developed through many years of research in a speciﬁc ﬁeld. The knowledge
synthesized in the model built might be considered to be conﬁdential, and it may be compromised even
by providing only input and output access [ 356]. The latter shows that, under minimal assumptions,
data model functionality stealing is possible. An approach that has served to make DL models more
robust against intellectual property exposure based on a sequence of non accessible queries is in [ 357].
This recent work exposes the need for further research toward the development of XAI tools capable of
explaining ML models while keeping the model’s conﬁdentiality in mind.
Ideally, XAI should be able to explain the knowledge within an AI model and it should be able to
reason about what the model acts upon. However, the information revealed by XAI techniques can be used
both to generate more effective attacks in adversarial contexts aimed at confusing the model, at the same
time as to develop techniques to better protect against private content exposure by using such information.
Adversarial attacks [ 358] try to manipulate a ML algorithm after learning what is the speciﬁc information
that should be fed to the system so as to lead it to a speciﬁc output. For instance, regarding a supervised
ML classiﬁcation model, adversarial attacks try to discover the minimum changes that should be applied
to the input data in order to cause a different classiﬁcation. This has happened regarding computer vision
systems of autonomous vehicles; a minimal change in a stop signal, imperceptible to the human eye, led
vehicles to detect it as a 45 mph signal [ 359]. For the particular case of DL models, available solutions
such as Cleverhans [ 360] seek to detect adversarial vulnerabilities, and provide different approaches
to harden the model against them. Other examples include AlfaSVMLib [ 361] for SVM models, and
AdversarialLib [ 362] for evasion attacks. There are even available solutions for unsupervised ML, like
clustering algorithms [363].
While XAI techniques can be used to furnish more effective adversarial attacks or to reveal conﬁdential
aspects of the model itself, some recent contributions have capitalized on the possibilities of Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs [ 364]), Variational Autoencoders [ 365] and other generative models towards
explaining data-based decisions. Once trained, generative models can generate instances of what they
have learned based on a noise input vector that can be interpreted as a latent representation of the data at
hand. By manipulating this latent representation and examining its impact on the output of the generative
model, it is possible to draw insights and discover speciﬁc patterns related to the class to be predicted.
This generative framework has been adopted by several recent studies [ 366,367] mainly as an attribution
method to relate a particular output of a Deep Learning model to their input variables. Another interesting
research direction is the use of generative models for the creation of counterfactuals, i.e., modiﬁcations
to the input data that could eventually alter the original prediction of the model [ 368]. Counterfactual
prototypes help the user understand the performance boundaries of the model under consideration for
his/her improved trust and informed criticism. In light of this recent trend, we deﬁnitely believe that there
is road ahead for generative ML models to take their part in scenarios demanding understandable machine
decisions.
5.5. XAI and Output Conﬁdence
Safety issues have also been studied in regards to processes that depend on the output of AI models,
such as vehicular perception and self-driving in autonomous vehicles, automated surgery, data-based
33