To shed some light on this lack of consensus, it might be interesting to place the reference starting
point at the deﬁnition of the term Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI) given by D. Gunning in [7]:
“XAI will create a suite of machine learning techniques that enables human users to understand,
appropriately trust, and effectively manage the emerging generation of artiﬁcially intelligent partners”
This deﬁnition brings together two concepts (understanding and trust) that need to be addressed in
advance. However, it misses to consider other purposes motivating the need for interpretable AI models,
such as causality, transferability, informativeness, fairness and conﬁdence [ 5,24,25,26]. We will later
delve into these topics, mentioning them here as a supporting example of the incompleteness of the above
deﬁnition.
As exempliﬁed by the deﬁnition above, a thorough, complete deﬁnition of explainability in AI
still slips from our ﬁngers. A broader reformulation of this deﬁnition (e.g. “An explainable Artiﬁcial
Intelligence is one that produces explanations about its functioning” ) would fail to fully characterize the
term in question, leaving aside important aspects such as its purpose. To build upon the completeness, a
deﬁnition of explanation is ﬁrst required.
As extracted from the Cambridge Dictionary of English Language, an explanation is “the details or
reasons that someone gives to make something clear or easy to understand” [27]. In the context of an
ML model, this can be rephrased as: ”the details or reasons a model gives to make its functioning clear
or easy to understand” . It is at this point where opinions start to diverge. Inherently stemming from the
previous deﬁnitions, two ambiguities can be pointed out. First, the details or the reasons used to explain,
are completely dependent of the audience to which they are presented. Second, whether the explanation
has left the concept clear or easy to understand also depends completely on the audience. Therefore, the
deﬁnition must be rephrased to reﬂect explicitly the dependence of the explainability of the model on the
audience. To this end, a reworked deﬁnition could read as:
Given a certain audience, explainability refers to the details and reasons a model gives to make its
functioning clear or easy to understand.
Since explaining, as argumenting, may involve weighting, comparing or convincing an audience with
logic-based formalizations of (counter) arguments [ 28], explainability might convey us into the realm of
cognitive psychology and the psychology of explanations [7], since measuring whether something has
been understood or put clearly is a hard task to be gauged objectively. However, measuring to which
extent the internals of a model can be explained could be tackled objectively. Any means to reduce the
complexity of the model or to simplify its outputs should be considered as an XAI approach. How big
this leap is in terms of complexity or simplicity will correspond to how explainable the resulting model
is. An underlying problem that remains unsolved is that the interpretability gain provided by such XAI
approaches may not be straightforward to quantify: for instance, a model simpliﬁcation can be evaluated
based on the reduction of the number of architectural elements or number of parameters of the model
itself (as often made, for instance, for DNNs). On the contrary, the use of visualization methods or natural
language for the same purpose does not favor a clear quantiﬁcation of the improvements gained in terms
of interpretability. The derivation of general metrics to assess the quality of XAI approaches remain as
an open challenge that should be under the spotlight of the ﬁeld in forthcoming years. We will further
discuss on this research direction in Section 5.
Explainability is linked to post-hoc explainability since it covers the techniques used to convert a
non-interpretable model into a explainable one. In the remaining of this manuscript, explainability will be
considered as the main design objective, since it represents a broader concept. A model can be explained,
but the interpretability of the model is something that comes from the design of the model itself. Bearing
these observations in mind, explainable AI can be deﬁned as follows:
Given an audience, an explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence is one that produces details or reasons to
make its functioning clear or easy to understand.
6