3.5. General Additive Models
In statistics, a Generalized Additive Model (GAM) is a linear model in which the value of the
variable to be predicted is given by the aggregation of a number of unknown smooth functions deﬁned
for the predictor variables. The purpose of such model is to infer the smooth functions whose aggregate
composition approximates the predicted variable. This structure is easily interpretable, since it allows the
user to verify the importance of each variable, namely, how it affects (through its corresponding function)
the predicted output.
Similarly to every other transparent model, the literature is replete with case studies where GAMs
are in use, specially in ﬁelds related to risk assessment. When compared to other models, these are
understandable enough to make users feel conﬁdent on using them for practical applications in ﬁnance
[193,194,195], environmental studies [ 196], geology [ 197], healthcare [ 44], biology [ 198,199] and
energy [ 200]. Most of these contributions use visualization methods to further ease the interpretation of
the model. GAMs might be also considered as simulatable anddecomposable models if the properties
mentioned in its deﬁnitions are fulﬁlled, but to an extent that depends roughly on eventual modiﬁcations
to the baseline GAM model, such as the introduction of link functions to relate the aggregation with the
predicted output, or the consideration of interactions between predictors.
All in all, applications of GAMs like the ones exempliﬁed above share one common factor: under-
standability. The main driver for conducting these studies with GAMs is to understand the underlying
relationships that build up the cases for scrutiny. In those cases the research goal is not accuracy for its
own sake, but rather the need for understanding the problem behind and the relationship underneath the
variables involved in data. This is why GAMs have been accepted in certain communities as their de facto
modeling choice, despite their acknowledged misperforming behavior when compared to more complex
counterparts.
3.6. Bayesian Models
A Bayesian model usually takes the form of a probabilistic directed acyclic graphical model whose
links represent the conditional dependencies between a set of variables. For example, a Bayesian network
could represent the probabilistic relationships between diseases and symptoms. Given symptoms, the
network can be used to compute the probabilities of the presence of various diseases. Similar to GAMs,
these models also convey a clear representation of the relationships between features and the target, which
in this case are given explicitly by the connections linking variables to each other.
Once again, Bayesian models fall below the ceiling of Transparent models. Its categorization leaves
it under simulatable ,decomposable andalgorithmically transparent . However, it is worth noting that
under certain circumstances (overly complex or cumbersome variables), a model may loose these ﬁrst
two properties. Bayesian models have been shown to lead to great insights in assorted applications such
as cognitive modeling [ 201,202], ﬁshery [ 196,203], gaming [ 204], climate [ 205], econometrics [ 206] or
robotics [ 207]. Furthermore, they have also been utilized to explain other models, such as averaging tree
ensembles [208].
4. Post-hoc Explainability Techniques for Machile Learning Models: Taxonomy, Shallow Models
and Deep Learning
When ML models do not meet any of the criteria imposed to declare them transparent, a separate
method must be devised and applied to the model to explain its decisions. This is the purpose of post-hoc
explainability techniques (also referred to as post-modeling explainability), which aim at communicating
understandable information about how an already developed model produces its predictions for any given
input. In this section we categorize and review different algorithmic approaches for post-hoc explainability,
discriminating among 1) those that are designed for their application to ML models of any kind; and 2)
those that are designed for a speciﬁc ML model and thus, can not be directly extrapolated to any other
17