which the end users are of great importance, and their ability to tweak and interact with the models is
what ensures success.
Privacy awareness: almost forgotten in the reviewed literature, one of the byproducts enabled by ex-
plainability in ML models is its ability to assess privacy. ML models may have complex representations
of their learned patterns. Not being able to understand what has been captured by the model [ 4] and
stored in its internal representation may entail a privacy breach. Contrarily, the ability to explain the
inner relations of a trained model by non-authorized third parties may also compromise the differential
privacy of the data origin. Due to its criticality in sectors where XAI is foreseen to play a crucial role,
conﬁdentiality and privacy issues will be covered further in Subsections 5.4 and 6.3, respectively.
This subsection has reviewed the goals encountered among the broad scope of the reviewed papers.
All these goals are clearly under the surface of the concept of explainability introduced before in this
section. To round up this prior analysis on the concept of explainability, the last subsection deals with
different strategies followed by the community to address explainability in ML models.
2.5. How?
The literature makes a clear distinction among models that are interpretable by design, and those
that can be explained by means of external XAI techniques. This duality could also be regarded as the
difference between interpretable models and model interpretability techniques; a more widely accepted
classiﬁcation is that of transparent models and post-hoc explainability. This same duality also appears
in the paper presented in [ 17] in which the distinction its authors make refers to the methods to solve
the transparent box design problem against the problem of explaining the black-box problem. This
work, further extends the distinction made among transparent models including the different levels of
transparency considered.
Within transparency, three levels are contemplated: algorithmic transparency, decomposability and
simulatability1. Among post-hoc techniques we may distinguish among text explanations ,visualizations ,
local explanations ,explanations by example ,explanations by simpliﬁcation andfeature relevance . In this
context, there is a broader distinction proposed by [ 24] discerning between 1) opaque systems, where
the mappings from input to output are invisible to the user; 2) interpretable systems, in which users can
mathematically analyze the mappings; and 3) comprehensible systems, in which the models should output
symbols or rules along with their speciﬁc output to aid in the understanding process of the rationale
behind the mappings being made. This last classiﬁcation criterion could be considered included within
the one proposed earlier, hence this paper will attempt at following the more speciﬁc one.
2.5.1. Levels of Transparency in Machine Learning Models
Transparent models convey some degree of interpretability by themselves. Models belonging to
this category can be also approached in terms of the domain in which they are interpretable, namely,
algorithmic transparency, decomposability and simulatability. As we elaborate next in connection to
Figure 3, each of these classes contains its predecessors, e.g. a simulatable model is at the same time a
model that is decomposable and algorithmically transparent:
Simulatability denotes the ability of a model of being simulated or thought about strictly by a human,
hence complexity takes a dominant place in this class. This being said, simple but extensive (i.e., with
too large amount of rules) rule based systems fall out of this characteristic, whereas a single perceptron
neural network falls within. This aspect aligns with the claim that sparse linear models are more
interpretable than dense ones [ 170], and that an interpretable model is one that can be easily presented
1The alternative term simulability is also used in the literature to refer to the capacity of a system or process to be simulated.
However, we note that this term does not appear in current English dictionaries.
10