to a human by means of text and visualizations [32]. Again, endowing a decomposable model with
simulatability requires that the model has to be self-contained enough for a human to think and reason
about it as a whole.
Decomposability stands for the ability to explain each of the parts of a model (input, parameter and
calculation). It can be considered as intelligibility as stated in [ 171]. This characteristic might empower
the ability to understand, interpret or explain the behavior of a model. However, as occurs with
algorithmic transparency, not every model can fulﬁll this property. Decomposability requires every
input to be readily interpretable (e.g. cumbersome features will not ﬁt the premise). The added
constraint for an algorithmically transparent model to become decomposable is that every part of the
model must be understandable by a human without the need for additional tools.
Algorithmic Transparency can be seen in different ways. It deals with the ability of the user to
understand the process followed by the model to produce any given output from its input data. Put
it differently, a linear model is deemed transparent because its error surface can be understood and
reasoned about, allowing the user to understand how the model will act in every situation it may
face [ 163]. Contrarily, it is not possible to understand it in deep architectures as the loss landscape
might be opaque [ 172,173] since it cannot be fully observed and the solution has to be approximated
through heuristic optimization (e.g. through stochastic gradient descent). The main constraint for
algorithmically transparent models is that the model has to be fully explorable by means of mathematical
analysis and methods.
M'
x1
x2
x3
y
(b)
Ifx2>180 then y= 1
Else if x1+x3>150 then y= 1
Elsey= 0
M'
x1
x2
x3
y
(a)
Ifg(fA(x1); fB(x2))>5
then y= 1, else y= 0
fA(x1) = 1=x2
1,fB(x2) = log x2
g(f; g) = 1=(f+g)
x1: weight, x2: height, x3: age
M'
x1
x2
x3
y
(c)
(c)
95% of the positive training samples
have x2>1807!Rule 1
90% of the positive training samples
have x1+x3>1507!Rule 2
?
?
?
Figure 3: Conceptual diagram exemplifying the different levels of transparency characterizing a ML model M', with'denoting
the parameter set of the model at hand: (a) simulatability; (b) decomposability; (c) algorithmic transparency. Without loss of
generality, the example focuses on the ML model as the explanation target. However, other targets for explainability may include a
given example, the output classes or the dataset itself.
2.5.2. Post-hoc Explainability Techniques for Machine Learning Models
Post-hoc explainability targets models that are not readily interpretable by design by resorting to
diverse means to enhance their interpretability, such as text explanations ,visual explanations ,local
explanations ,explanations by example ,explanations by simpliﬁcation andfeature relevance explanations
techniques. Each of these techniques covers one of the most common ways humans explain systems and
processes by themselves.
Further along this river, actual techniques, or better put, actual group of techniques are speciﬁed
to ease the future work of any researcher that intends to look up for an speciﬁc technique that suits its
knowledge. Not ending there, the classiﬁcation also includes the type of data in which the techniques has
been applied. Note that many techniques might be suitable for many different types of data, although
the categorization only considers the type used by the authors that proposed such technique. Overall,
post-hoc explainability techniques are divided ﬁrst by the intention of the author (explanation technique
e.g. Explanation by simpliﬁcation), then, by the method utilized (actual technique e.g. sensitivity analysis)
and ﬁnally by the type of data in which it was applied (e.g. images).
11