application context, models and purposes.
5.3. Challenges to achieve Explainable Deep Learning
While many efforts are currently being made in the area of XAI, there are still many challenges to be
faced before being able to obtain explainability in DL models. First, as explained in Subsection 2.2, there
is a lack of agreement on the vocabulary and the different deﬁnitions surrounding XAI. As an example,
we often see the terms feature importance andfeature relevance referring to the same concept. This is
even more obvious for visualization methods, where there is absolutely no consistency behind what is
known as saliency maps, salient masks, heatmaps, neuron activations, attribution, and other approaches
alike. As XAI is a relatively young ﬁeld, the community does not have a standardized terminology yet.
As it has been commented in Subsection 5.1, there is a trade-off between interpretability and accuracy
[13], i.e., between the simplicity of the information given by the system on its internal functioning, and
the exhaustiveness of this description. Whether the observer is an expert in the ﬁeld, a policy-maker or a
user without machine learning knowledge, intelligibility does not have to be at the same level in order
to provide the audience an understanding [ 6]. This is one of the reasons why, as mentioned above, a
challenge in XAI is establishing objective metrics on what constitutes a good explanation. A possibility
to reduce this subjectivity is taking inspiration from experiments on human psychology, sociology or
cognitive sciences to create objectively convincing explanations. Relevant ﬁndings to be considered when
creating an explainable AI model are highlighted in [ 12]: First, explanations are better when constrictive ,
meaning that a prerequisite for a good explanation is that it does not only indicate why the model made a
decision X, but also why it made decision X rather than decision Y . It is also explained that probabilities
are not as important as causal links in order to provide a satisfying explanation. Considering that black box
models tend to process data in a quantitative manner, it would be necessary to translate the probabilistic
results into qualitative notions containing causal links. In addition, they state that explanations are
selective , meaning that focusing solely on the main causes of a decision-making process is sufﬁcient. It
was also shown that the use of counterfactual explanations can help the user to understand the decision of
a model [40, 42, 351].
Combining connectionist and symbolic paradigms seems a favourable way to address this challenge
[169,299,312,352,353]. On one hand, connectionist methods are more precise but opaque. On the other
hand, symbolic methods are popularly considered less efﬁcient, while they offer a greater explainability
thus respecting the conditions mentioned above:
The ability to refer to established reasoning rules allows symbolic methods to be constrictive.
The use of a KB formalized e.g. by an ontology can allow data to be processed directly in a qualitative
way.
Being selective is less straightforward for connectionist models than for symbolic ones.
Recalling that a good explanation needs to inﬂuence the mental model of the user, i.e. the repre-
sentation of the external reality using, among other things, symbols, it seems obvious that the use of
the symbolic learning paradigm is appropriate to produce an explanation. Therefore, neural-symbolic
interpretability could provide convincing explanations while keeping or improving generic performance
[297].
As stated in [ 24], a truly explainable model should not leave explanation generation to the users as
different explanations may be deduced depending on their background knowledge. Having a semantic
representation of the knowledge can help a model to have the ability to produce explanations (e.g., in
natural language [169]) combining common sense reasoning and human-understandable features.
Furthermore, until an objective metric has been adopted, it appears necessary to make an effort to
rigorously formalize evaluation methods. One way may be drawing inspiration from the social sciences,
e.g., by being consistent when choosing the evaluation questions and the population sample used [354].
32