to get a probability. A simple linear model learns on this data set, which is locally weighted. At the end of
the process, LIME presents the superpixels with highest positive weights as an explanation (see Figure 9).
A completely different explainability approach is proposed in adversarial detection. To understand
model failures in detecting adversarial examples, the authors in [ 264] apply the k-nearest neighbors
algorithm on the representations of the data learned by each layer of the CNN. A test input image is
considered as adversarial if its representations are far from the representations of the training images.
4.3.3. Recurrent Neural Networks
As occurs with CNNs in the visual domain, RNNs have lately been used extensively for predictive
problems deﬁned over inherently sequential data, with a notable presence in natural language processing
and time series analysis. These types of data exhibit long-term dependencies that are complex to be
captured by a ML model. RNNs are able to retrieve such time-dependent relationships by formulating the
retention of knowledge in the neuron as another parametric characteristic that can be learned from data.
Few contributions have been made for explaining RNN models. These studies can be divided into two
groups: 1) explainability by understanding what a RNN model has learned (mainly via feature relevance
methods); and 2) explainability by modifying RNN architectures to provide insights about the decisions
they make ( local explanations ).
In the ﬁrst group, the authors in [ 280] extend the usage of LRP to RNNs. They propose a speciﬁc
propagation rule that works with multiplicative connections as those in LSTMs (Long Short Term Memory)
units and GRUs (Gated Recurrent Units). The authors in [ 281] propose a visualization technique based on
ﬁnite horizon n-grams that discriminates interpretable cells within LSTM and GRU networks. Following
the premise of not altering the architecture, [ 296] extends the interpretable mimic learning distillation
method used for CNN models to LSTM networks, so that interpretable features are learned by ﬁtting
Gradient Boosting Trees to the trained LSTM network under focus.
Aside from the approaches that do not change the inner workings of the RNNs, [ 285] presents RETAIN
(REverse Time AttentIoN) model, which detects inﬂuential past patterns by means of a two-level neural
attention model. To create an interpretable RNN, the authors in [ 283] propose an RNN based on SISTA
(Sequential Iterative Soft-Thresholding Algorithm) that models a sequence of correlated observations
with a sequence of sparse latent vectors, making its weights interpretable as the parameters of a principled
statistical model. Finally, [ 284] constructs a combination of an HMM (Hidden Markov Model) and an
RNN, so that the overall model approach harnesses the interpretability of the HMM and the accuracy of
the RNN model.
4.3.4. Hybrid Transparent and Black-box Methods
The use of background knowledge in the form of logical statements or constraints in Knowledge
Bases (KBs) has shown to not only improve explainability but also performance with respect to purely
data-driven approaches [ 297,298,299]. A positive side effect shown is that this hybrid approach provides
robustness to the learning system when errors are present in the training data labels. Other approaches
have shown to be able to jointly learn and reason with both symbolic and sub-symbolic representations
and inference. The interesting aspect is that this blend allows for expressive probabilistic-logical reasoning
in an end-to-end fashion [ 300]. A successful use case is on dietary recommendations, where explanations
are extracted from the reasoning behind (non-deep but KB-based) models [301].
Future data fusion approaches may thus consider endowing DL models with explainability by external-
izing other domain information sources. Deep formulation of classical ML models has been done, e.g. in
Deep Kalman ﬁlters (DKFs) [ 302], Deep Variational Bayes Filters (DVBFs) [ 303], Structural Variational
Autoencoders (SV AE) [ 304], or conditional random ﬁelds as RNNs [ 305]. These approaches provide
deep models with the interpretability inherent to probabilistic graphical models. For instance, SV AE
combines probabilistic graphical models in the embedding space with neural networks to enhance the
interpretability of DKFs. A particular example of classical ML model enhanced with its DL counterpart is
27