relationships within the available data. Again, Table 1 reveals that causality is not among the most
important goals if we attend to the amount of papers that state it explicitly as their goal.
Transferability: models are always bounded by constraints that should allow for their seamless
transferability. This is the main reason why a training-testing approach is used when dealing with
ML problems [ 162,163]. Explainability is also an advocate for transferability, since it may ease the
task of elucidating the boundaries that might affect a model, allowing for a better understanding and
implementation. Similarly, the mere understanding of the inner relations taking place within a model
facilitates the ability of a user to reuse this knowledge in another problem. There are cases in which the
lack of a proper understanding of the model might drive the user toward incorrect assumptions and
fatal consequences [ 44,164]. Transferability should also fall between the resulting properties of an
explainable model, but again, not every transferable model should be considered as explainable. As
observed in Table 1, the amount of papers stating that the ability of rendering a model explainable is to
better understand the concepts needed to reuse it or to improve its performance is the second most used
reason for pursuing model explainability.
Informativeness: ML models are used with the ultimate intention of supporting decision making [ 92].
However, it should not be forgotten that the problem being solved by the model is not equal to that
being faced by its human counterpart. Hence, a great deal of information is needed in order to be able
to relate the user’s decision to the solution given by the model, and to avoid falling in misconception
pitfalls. For this purpose, explainable ML models should give information about the problem being
tackled. Most of the reasons found among the papers reviewed is that of extracting information about
the inner relations of a model. Almost all rule extraction techniques substantiate their approach on
the search for a simpler understanding of what the model internally does, stating that the knowledge
(information) can be expressed in these simpler proxies that they consider explaining the antecedent.
This is the most used argument found among the reviewed papers to back up what they expect from
reaching explainable models.
Conﬁdence: as a generalization of robustness and stability, conﬁdence should always be assessed
on a model in which reliability is expected. The methods to maintain conﬁdence under control are
different depending on the model. As stated in [ 165,166,167], stability is a must-have when drawing
interpretations from a certain model. Trustworthy interpretations should not be produced by models
that are not stable. Hence, an explainable model should contain information about the conﬁdence of its
working regime.
Fairness: from a social standpoint, explainability can be considered as the capacity to reach and
guarantee fairness in ML models. In a certain literature strand, an explainable ML model suggests a
clear visualization of the relations affecting a result, allowing for a fairness or ethical analysis of the
model at hand [ 3,100]. Likewise, a related objective of XAI is highlighting bias in the data a model
was exposed to [ 168,169]. The support of algorithms and models is growing fast in ﬁelds that involve
human lives, hence explainability should be considered as a bridge to avoid the unfair or unethical use
of algorithm’s outputs.
Accessibility: a minor subset of the reviewed contributions argues for explainability as the property
that allows end users to get more involved in the process of improving and developing a certain ML
model [ 37,86] . It seems clear that explainable models will ease the burden felt by non-technical or
non-expert users when having to deal with algorithms that seem incomprehensible at ﬁrst sight. This
concept is expressed as the third most considered goal among the surveyed literature.
Interactivity: some contributions [ 50,59] include the ability of a model to be interactive with the user
as one of the goals targeted by an explainable ML model. Once again, this goal is related to ﬁelds in
9