6.4. Implementing Responsible AI Principles in an Organization
While increasingly more organizations are publishing AI principles to declare that they care about
avoiding unintended negative consequences, there is much less experience on how to actually implement
the principles into an organization. Looking at several examples of principles declared by different
organizations [385], we can divide them into two groups:
AI-speciﬁc principles that focus on aspects that are speciﬁc to AI, such as explainability, fairness and
human agency.
End-to-end principles that cover all aspects involved in AI, including also privacy, security and safety.
The EC Guidelines for Trustworthy AI are an example of end-to-end principles [ 390], while those of
Telefonica (a large Spanish ICT company operating worldwide) are more AI-speciﬁc [ 386]. For example,
safety and security are relevant for any connected IT system, and therefore also for AI systems. The
same holds for privacy, but it is probably true that privacy in the context of AI systems is even more
important than for general IT systems, due to the fact that ML models need huge amounts of data and
most importantly, because XAI tools and data fusion techniques pose new challenges to preserve the
privacy of protected records.
When it comes to implement the AI Principles into an organization, it is important to operationalize
the AI-speciﬁc parts and, at the same time, leverage the processes already existing for the more generic
principles. Indeed, in many organizations there already exist norms and procedures for privacy, security
and safety. Implementing AI principles requires a methodology such as that presented in [ 386] that breaks
down the process into different parts. The ingredients of such a methodology should include, at least:
AI principles (already discussed earlier), which set the values and boundaries.
Awareness and training about the potential issues, both technical and non-technical.
A questionnaire that forces people to think about certain impacts of the AI system ( impact explanation ).
This questionnaire should give concrete guidance on what to do if certain undesired impacts are
detected.
Tools that help answering some of the questions, and help mitigating any problems identiﬁed. XAI
tools and fairness tools fall in this category, as well as other recent proposals such as model cards [426].
A governance model assigning responsibilities and accountabilities ( responsibility explanation ). There
are two philosophies for governance: 1) based on committees that review and approve AI developments,
and 2) based on the self-responsibility of the employees. While both are possible, given the fact
that agility is key for being successful in the digital world, it seems wiser to focus on awareness and
employee responsibility, and only use committees when there are speciﬁc, but important issues.
From the above elaborations, it is clear that the implementation of Responsible AI principles in
companies should balance between two requirements: 1) major cultural and organizational changes
needed to enforce such principles over processes endowed with AI functionalities; and 2) the feasibility
and compliance of the implementation of such principles with the IT assets, policies and resources already
available at the company. It is in the gradual process of rising corporate awareness around the principles
and values of Responsible AI where we envision that XAI will make its place and create huge impact.
7. Conclusions and Outlook
This overview has revolved around eXplainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI), which has been identiﬁed
in recent times as an utmost need for the adoption of ML methods in real-life applications. Our study
45