ways for visualizing the output of feature relevance techniques to ease the task of model’s interpretation.
By contrast, visualization techniques for other aspects of the trained model (e.g. its structure, operations,
etc) are tightly linked to the speciﬁc model to be explained.
4.2. Post-hoc Explainability in Shallow ML Models
Shallow ML covers a diversity of supervised learning models. Within these models, there are strictly
interpretable (transparent) approaches (e.g. KNN and Decision Trees, already discussed in Section 3).
However, other shallow ML models rely on more sophisticated learning algorithms that require additional
layers of explanation. Given their prominence and notable performance in predictive tasks, this section
concentrates on two popular shallow ML models (tree ensembles and Support Vector Machines, SVMs)
that require the adoption of post-hoc explainability techniques for explaining their decisions.
4.2.1. Tree Ensembles, Random Forests and Multiple Classiﬁer Systems
Tree ensembles are arguably among the most accurate ML models in use nowadays. Their advent
came as an efﬁcient means to improve the generalization capability of single decision trees, which are
usually prone to overﬁtting. To circumvent this issue, tree ensembles combine different trees to obtain an
aggregated prediction/regression. While it results to be effective against overﬁtting, the combination of
models makes the interpretation of the overall ensemble more complex than each of its compounding tree
learners, forcing the user to draw from post-hoc explainability techniques. For tree ensembles, techniques
found in the literature are explanation by simpliﬁcation and feature relevance techniques; we next examine
recent advances in these techniques.
To begin with, many contributions have been presented to simplify tree ensembles while maintaining
part of the accuracy accounted for the added complexity. The author from [ 119] poses the idea of training
a single albeit less complex model from a set of random samples from the data (ideally following the real
data distribution) labeled by the ensemble model. Another approach for simpliﬁcation is that in [ 118], in
which authors create a Simpliﬁed Tree Ensemble Learner (STEL). Likewise, [ 122] presents the usage
of two models (simple and complex) being the former the one in charge of interpretation and the latter
of prediction by means of Expectation-Maximization and Kullback-Leibler divergence. As opposed to
what was seen in model-agnostic techniques, not that many techniques to board explainability in tree
ensembles by means of model simpliﬁcation . It derives from this that either the proposed techniques are
good enough, or model-agnostic techniques do cover the scope of simpliﬁcation already.
Following simpliﬁcation procedures, feature relevance techniques are also used in the ﬁeld of tree
ensembles. Breiman [ 286] was the ﬁrst to analyze the variable importance within Random Forests. His
method is based on measuring MDA (Mean Decrease Accuracy) or MIE (Mean Increase Error) of the
forest when a certain variable is randomly permuted in the out-of-bag samples. Following this contribution
[241] shows, in an real setting, how the usage of variable importance reﬂects the underlying relationships
of a complex system modeled by a Random Forest. Finally, a crosswise technique among post-hoc
explainability, [ 240] proposes a framework that poses recommendations that, if taken, would convert
an example from one class to another. This idea attempts to disentangle the variables importance in a
way that is further descriptive. In the article, the authors show how these methods can be used to elevate
recommendations to improve malicious online ads to make them rank higher in paying rates.
Similar to the trend shown in model-agnostic techniques, for tree ensembles again, simpliﬁcation and
feature relevance techniques seem to be the most used schemes. However, contrarily to what was observed
before, most papers date back from 2017 and place their focus mostly on bagging ensembles. When
shifting the focus towards other ensemble strategies, scarce activity has been recently noted around the
explainability of boosting and stacking classiﬁers. Among the latter, it is worth highlighting the connection
between the reason why a compounding learner of the ensemble produces an speciﬁc prediction on a given
data, and its contribution to the output of the ensemble. The so-called Stacking With Auxiliary Features
(SWAF) approach proposed in [ 242] points in this direction by harnessing and integrating explanations in
21