This deﬁnition is posed here as a ﬁrst contribution of the present overview, implicitly assumes that the
ease of understanding and clarity targeted by XAI techniques for the model at hand reverts on different
application purposes, such as a better trustworthiness of the model’s output by the audience.
2.3. Why?
As stated in the introduction, explainability is one of the main barriers AI is facing nowadays in
regards to its practical implementation. The inability to explain or to fully understand the reasons by
which state-of-the-art ML algorithms perform as well as they do, is a problem that ﬁnd its roots in two
different causes, which are conceptually illustrated in Figure 2.
Without a doubt, the ﬁrst cause is the gap between the research community and business sectors,
impeding the full penetration of the newest ML models in sectors that have traditionally lagged behind
in the digital transformation of their processes, such as banking, ﬁnances, security and health, among
many others. In general this issue occurs in strictly regulated sectors with some reluctance to implement
techniques that may put at risk their assets.
The second axis is that of knowledge. AI has helped research across the world with the task of
inferring relations that were far beyond the human cognitive reach. Every ﬁeld dealing with huge amounts
of reliable data has largely beneﬁted from the adoption of AI and ML techniques. However, we are
entering an era in which results and performance metrics are the only interest shown up in research
studies. Although for certain disciplines this might be the fair case, science and society are far from being
concerned just by performance. The search for understanding is what opens the door for further model
improvement and its practical utility.
Target audience
in XAI
Who? Domain experts/users of the model (e.g. medical doctors, insurance agents)
Why? Trust the model itself, gain scientic knowledge
Who? Regulatory entities/agencies
Why? Certify model compliance with the
Who? Users aected by model decisions
Why? Understand their situation, verify
Who? Managers and executive board members
Why? Assess regulatory compliance, understand
Who? Data scientists, developers, product owners...
Why? Ensure/improve product eciency, research,
corporate AI applications...
new functionalities...
fair decisions...
legislation in force, audits, ...
?
?
< = >
?
$ $ $
?
?
?
Figure 2: Diagram showing the different purposes of explainability in ML models sought by different audience proﬁles. Two goals
occur to prevail across them: need for model understanding, and regulatory compliance. Image partly inspired by the one presented
in [29], used with permission from IBM.
The following section develops these ideas further by analyzing the goals motivating the search for
explainable AI models.
2.4. What for?
The research activity around XAI has so far exposed different goals to draw from the achievement
of an explainable model. Almost none of the papers reviewed completely agrees in the goals required
to describe what an explainable model should compel. However, all these different goals might help
discriminate the purpose for which a given exercise of ML explainability is performed. Unfortunately,
scarce contributions have attempted to deﬁne such goals from a conceptual perspective [ 5,13,24,30].
We now synthesize and enumerate deﬁnitions for these XAI goals, so as to settle a ﬁrst classiﬁcation
criteria for the full suit of papers covered in this review:
7