Model interpretability
Model
SVM
Ensembles
Bayesian Models
Decision Trees
Generalized
Models
Linear/Logistic
kNN
Additive
Regression
Rule-based
learning
Learning
Deep
Model accuracy
Post-hoc explainability techniques
Interpretability-driven model designs
Hybrid modelling approaches
New explainability-preserving modelling approaches
Interpretable feature engineering
XAI's future
research arena
Low
High
Low
HighFigure 12: Trade-off between model interpretability and performance, and a representation of the area of improvement where the
potential of XAI techniques and tools resides.
5.2. On the Concept and Metrics
The literature clearly asks for an uniﬁed concept of explainability. In order for the ﬁeld to thrive,
it is imperative to place a common ground upon which the community is enabled to contribute new
techniques and methods. A common concept must convey the needs expressed in the ﬁeld. It should
propose a common structure for every XAI system. This paper attempted a new proposition of a concept
of explainability that is built upon that from Gunning [ 7]. In that proposition and the following strokes to
complete it (Subsection 2.2), explainability is deﬁned as the ability a model has to make its functioning
clearer to an audience. To address it, post-hoc type methods exist. The concept portrayed in this survey
might not be complete but as it stands, allows for a ﬁrst common ground and reference point to sustain
a proﬁtable discussion in this matter. It is paramount that the ﬁeld of XAI reaches an agreement in this
respect combining the shattered efforts of a widespread ﬁeld behind the same banner.
Another key feature needed to relate a certain model to this concrete concept is the existence of a
metric. A metric, or group of them should allow for a meaningful comparison of how well a model ﬁts
the deﬁnition of explainable. Without such tool, any claim in this respect dilutes among the literature, not
providing a solid ground on which to stand. These metrics, as the classic ones (accuracy, F1, sensitivity...),
should express how well the model performs in a certain aspect of explainability. Some attempts have been
done recently around the measurement of XAI, as reviewed thoroughly in [ 349,350]. In general, XAI
measurements should evaluate the goodness, usefulness and satisfaction of explanations, the improvement
of the mental model of the audience induced by model explanations, and the impact of explanations on the
performance of the model and on the trust and reliance of the audience. Measurement techniques surveyed
in [349] and [ 350] (e.g., goodness checklist, explanation satisfaction scale, elicitation methods for mental
models, computational measures for explainer ﬁdelity, explanation trustworthiness and model reliability)
seem to be a good push in the direction of evaluating XAI techniques. Unfortunately, conclusions drawn
from these overviews are aligned with our prospects on the ﬁeld: more quantiﬁable, general XAI metrics
are really needed to support the existing measurement procedures and tools proposed by the community.
This survey does not tackle the problem of designing such a suite of metrics, since such a task should
be approached by the community as a whole prior acceptance of the broader concept of explainabil-
ity, which on the other hand, is one of the aims of the current work. Nevertheless, we advocate for
further efforts towards new proposals to evaluate the performance of XAI techniques, as well as compar-
ison methodologies among XAI approaches that allow contrasting them quantitatively under different
31