stacking ensembles to improve their generalization. This strategy allows not only relying on the output
of the compounding learners, but also on the origin of that output and its consensus across the entire
ensemble. Other interesting studies on the explainability of ensemble techniques include model-agnostic
schemes such as DeepSHAP [ 226], put into practice with stacking ensembles and multiple classiﬁer
systems in addition to Deep Learning models; the combination of explanation maps of multiple classiﬁers
to produce improved explanations of the ensemble to which they belong [ 243]; and recent insights dealing
with traditional and gradient boosting ensembles [287, 288].
4.2.2. Support Vector Machines
Another shallow ML model with historical presence in the literature is the SVM. SVM models are
more complex than tree ensembles, with a much opaquer structure. Many implementations of post-hoc
explainability techniques have been proposed to relate what is mathematically described internally in
these models, to what different authors considered explanations about the problem at hand. Technically,
an SVM constructs a hyper-plane or set of hyper-planes in a high or inﬁnite-dimensional space, which
can be used for classiﬁcation, regression, or other tasks such as outlier detection. Intuitively, a good
separation is achieved by the hyperplane that has the largest distance (so-called functional margin) to the
nearest training-data point of any class, since in general, the larger the margin, the lower the generalization
error of the classiﬁer. SVMs are among the most used ML models due to their excellent prediction
and generalization capabilities. From the techniques stated in Section 2, post-hoc explainability applied
to SVMs covers explanation by simpliﬁcation ,local explanations ,visualizations andexplanations by
example .
Among explanation by simpliﬁcation, four classes of simpliﬁcations are made. Each of them dif-
ferentiates from the other by how deep they go into the algorithm inner structure. First, some authors
propose techniques to build rule based models only from the support vectors of a trained model. This is
the approach of [ 93], which proposes a method that extracts rules directly from the support vectors of a
trained SVM using a modiﬁed sequential covering algorithm. In [ 57] the same authors propose eclectic
rule extraction, still considering only the support vectors of a trained model. The work in [94] generates
fuzzy rules instead of classical propositional rules. Here, the authors argue that long antecedents reduce
comprehensibility, hence, a fuzzy approach allows for a more linguistically understandable result. The
second class of simpliﬁcations can be exempliﬁed by [ 98], which proposed the addition of the SVM’s
hyperplane, along with the support vectors, to the components in charge of creating the rules. His method
relies on the creation of hyper-rectangles from the intersections between the support vectors and the
hyper-plane. In a third approach to model simpliﬁcation , another group of authors considered adding
the actual training data as a component for building the rules. In [ 126,244,246] the authors proposed a
clustering method to group prototype vectors for each class. By combining them with the support vectors,
it allowed deﬁning ellipsoids and hyper-rectangles in the input space. Similarly in [ 106], the authors
proposed the so-called Hyper-rectangle Rule Extraction, an algorithm based on SVC (Support Vector
Clustering) to ﬁnd prototype vectors for each class and then deﬁne small hyper-rectangles around. In
[105], the authors formulate the rule extraction problem as a multi-constrained optimization to create a
set of non-overlapping rules. Each rule conveys a non-empty hyper-cube with a shared edge with the
hyper-plane. In a similar study conducted in [ 245], extracting rules for gene expression data, the authors
presented a novel technique as a component of a multi-kernel SVM. This multi-kernel method consists
of feature selection, prediction modeling and rule extraction. Finally, the study in [ 134] makes use of a
growing SVC to give an interpretation to SVM decisions in terms of linear rules that deﬁne the space in
V oronoi sections from the extracted prototypes.
Leaving aside rule extraction, the literature has also contemplated some other techniques to contribute
to the interpretation of SVMs. Three of them (visualization techniques) are clearly used toward explaining
SVM models when used for concrete applications. For instance, [ 77] presents an innovative approach to
visualize trained SVM to extract the information content from the kernel matrix. They center the study
22