Text explanations deal with the problem of bringing explainability for a model by means of learning to
generate text explanations that help explaining the results from the model [ 169].Text explanations also
include every method generating symbols that represent the functioning of the model. These symbols
may portrait the rationale of the algorithm by means of a semantic mapping from model to symbols.
Visual explanation techniques for post-hoc explainability aim at visualizing the model’s behavior.
Many of the visualization methods existing in the literature come along with dimensionality reduction
techniques that allow for a human interpretable simple visualization. Visualizations may be coupled
with other techniques to improve their understanding, and are considered as the most suitable way to
introduce complex interactions within the variables involved in the model to users not acquainted to
ML modeling.
Local explanations tackle explainability by segmenting the solution space and giving explanations
to less complex solution subspaces that are relevant for the whole model. These explanations can be
formed by means of techniques with the differentiating property that these only explain part of the
whole system’s functioning.
Explanations by example consider the extraction of data examples that relate to the result generated by
a certain model, enabling to get a better understanding of the model itself. Similarly to how humans
behave when attempting to explain a given process, explanations by example are mainly centered in
extracting representative examples that grasp the inner relationships and correlations found by the
model being analyzed.
Explanations by simpliﬁcation collectively denote those techniques in which a whole new system is
rebuilt based on the trained model to be explained. This new, simpliﬁed model usually attempts at
optimizing its resemblance to its antecedent functioning, while reducing its complexity, and keeping a
similar performance score. An interesting byproduct of this family of post-hoc techniques is that the
simpliﬁed model is, in general, easier to be implemented due to its reduced complexity with respect to
the model it represents.
Finally, feature relevance explanation methods for post-hoc explainability clarify the inner functioning
of a model by computing a relevance score for its managed variables. These scores quantify the affection
(sensitivity) a feature has upon the output of the model. A comparison of the scores among different
variables unveils the importance granted by the model to each of such variables when producing its
output. Feature relevance methods can be thought to be an indirect method to explain a model.
The above classiﬁcation (portrayed graphically in Figure 4) will be used when reviewing spe-
ciﬁc/agnostic XAI techniques for ML models in the following sections (Table 2). For each ML model, a
distinction of the propositions to each of these categories is presented in order to pose an overall image of
the ﬁeld’s trends.
3. Transparent Machine Learning Models
The previous section introduced the concept of transparent models. A model is considered to be
transparent if by itself it is understandable. The models surveyed in this section are a suit of transparent
models that can fall in one or all of the levels of model transparency described previously (namely,
simulatability, decomposability and algorithmic transparency). In what follows we provide reasons for
this statement, with graphical support given in Figure 5.
12