has elaborated on this topic by ﬁrst clarifying different concepts underlying model explainability, as well
as by showing the diverse purposes that motivate the search for more interpretable ML methods. These
conceptual remarks have served as a solid baseline for a systematic review of recent literature dealing with
explainability, which has been approached from two different perspectives: 1) ML models that feature
some degree of transparency, thereby interpretable to an extent by themselves; and 2) post-hoc XAI
techniques devised to make ML models more interpretable. This literature analysis has yielded a global
taxonomy of different proposals reported by the community, classifying them under uniform criteria.
Given the prevalence of contributions dealing with the explainability of Deep Learning models, we have
inspected in depth the literature dealing with this family of models, giving rise to an alternative taxonomy
that connects more closely with the speciﬁc domains in which explainability can be realized for Deep
Learning models.
We have moved our discussions beyond what has been made so far in the XAI realm toward the concept
of Responsible AI, a paradigm that imposes a series of AI principles to be met when implementing AI
models in practice, including fairness, transparency, and privacy. We have also discussed the implications
of adopting XAI techniques in the context of data fusion, unveiling the potential of XAI to compromise
the privacy of protected data involved in the fusion process. Implications of XAI in fairness have also
been discussed in detail. This vision of XAI as a core concept to ensure the aforementioned principles for
Responsible AI is summarized graphically in Figure 14.
XAIInterpretability
versus 
Performance
XAI 
Concepts
and Metrics
Achieving
Explainability 
in Deep 
Learning
XAI & 
Security: 
Adversarial 
ML
Rationale
Explanation
& Critical
Data 
StudiesTheory
guided Data 
ScienceImplementation
& GuidelinesXAI and 
Output 
ConfidenceXAI & Data 
Fusion 
Fairness Privacy Accountability
Ethics TransparencySecurity & 
SafetyResponsible
AI
Figure 14: Summary of XAI challenges discussed in this overview and its impact on the principles for Responsible AI.
Our reﬂections about the future of XAI, conveyed in the discussions held throughout this work,
agree on the compelling need for a proper understanding of the potentiality and caveats opened up by
XAI techniques. It is our vision that model interpretability must be addressed jointly with requirements
and constraints related to data privacy, model conﬁdentiality, fairness and accountability. A responsible
implementation and use of AI methods in organizations and institutions worldwide will be only guaranteed
if all these AI principles are studied jointly.
Acknowledgments
Alejandro Barredo-Arrieta, Javier Del Ser and Sergio Gil-Lopez would like to thank the Basque
Government for the funding support received through the EMAITEK and ELKARTEK programs. Javier
Del Ser also acknowledges funding support from the Consolidated Research Group MATHMODE
(IT1294-19) granted by the Department of Education of the Basque Government. Siham Tabik, Salvador
Garcia, Daniel Molina and Francisco Herrera would like to thank the Spanish Government for its funding
support (SMART-DaSCI project, TIN2017-89517-P), as well as the BBV A Foundation through its Ayudas
46