Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI): Concepts, Taxonomies,
Opportunities and Challenges toward Responsible AI
Alejandro Barredo Arrietaa, Natalia D ´ıaz-Rodr ´ıguezb, Javier Del Sera,c,d, Adrien Bennetotb,e,f,
Siham Tabikg, Alberto Barbadoh, Salvador Garciag, Sergio Gil-Lopeza, Daniel Molinag,
Richard Benjaminsh, Raja Chatilaf, and Francisco Herrerag
aTECNALIA, 48160 Derio, Spain
bENSTA, Institute Polytechnique Paris and INRIA Flowers Team, Palaiseau, France
cUniversity of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), 48013 Bilbao, Spain
dBasque Center for Applied Mathematics (BCAM), 48009 Bilbao, Bizkaia, Spain
eSegula Technologies, Parc d’activit ´e de Pissaloup, Trappes, France
fInstitut des Syst `emes Intelligents et de Robotique, Sorbonne Universit `e, France
gDaSCI Andalusian Institute of Data Science and Computational Intelligence, University of Granada, 18071 Granada, Spain
hTelefonica, 28050 Madrid, Spain
Abstract
In the last few years, Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) has achieved a notable momentum that, if harnessed
appropriately, may deliver the best of expectations over many application sectors across the ﬁeld. For this
to occur shortly in Machine Learning, the entire community stands in front of the barrier of explainability,
an inherent problem of the latest techniques brought by sub-symbolism (e.g. ensembles or Deep Neural
Networks) that were not present in the last hype of AI (namely, expert systems and rule based models).
Paradigms underlying this problem fall within the so-called eXplainable AI (XAI) ﬁeld, which is widely
acknowledged as a crucial feature for the practical deployment of AI models. The overview presented in
this article examines the existing literature and contributions already done in the ﬁeld of XAI, including a
prospect toward what is yet to be reached. For this purpose we summarize previous efforts made to deﬁne
explainability in Machine Learning, establishing a novel deﬁnition of explainable Machine Learning that
covers such prior conceptual propositions with a major focus on the audience for which the explainability
is sought. Departing from this deﬁnition, we propose and discuss about a taxonomy of recent contributions
related to the explainability of different Machine Learning models, including those aimed at explaining
Deep Learning methods for which a second dedicated taxonomy is built and examined in detail. This
critical literature analysis serves as the motivating background for a series of challenges faced by XAI,
such as the interesting crossroads of data fusion and explainability. Our prospects lead toward the concept
ofResponsible Artiﬁcial Intelligence , namely, a methodology for the large-scale implementation of AI
methods in real organizations with fairness, model explainability and accountability at its core. Our
ultimate goal is to provide newcomers to the ﬁeld of XAI with a thorough taxonomy that can serve
as reference material in order to stimulate future research advances, but also to encourage experts and
professionals from other disciplines to embrace the beneﬁts of AI in their activity sectors, without any
prior bias for its lack of interpretability.
Keywords: Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Deep Learning, Data Fusion,
Interpretability, Comprehensibility, Transparency, Privacy, Fairness, Accountability, Responsible
Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Corresponding author. TECNALIA. P. Tecnologico, Ed. 700. 48170 Derio (Bizkaia), Spain. E-mail: javier.delser@tecnalia.com
Preprint submitted to Information Fusion December 30, 2019arXiv:1910.10045v2  [cs.AI]  26 Dec 2019