We foresee that the set of guidelines proposed in [ 383] and summarized above will be complemented
and enriched further by future methodological studies, ultimately heading to a more responsible use of AI.
Methodological principles ensure that the purpose for which explainability is pursued is met by bringing
the manifold of requirements of all participants into the process, along with other universal aspects of
equal relevance such as no discrimination, sustainability, privacy or accountability. A challenge remains
in harnessing the potential of XAI to realize a Responsible AI , as we discuss in the next section.
6. Toward Responsible AI: Principles of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Fairness, Privacy and Data Fusion
Over the years many organizations, both private and public, have published guidelines to indicate
how AI should be developed and used. These guidelines are commonly referred to as AI principles , and
they tackle issues related to potential AI threats to both individuals and to the society as a whole. This
section presents some of the most important and widely recognized principles in order to link XAI –
which normally appears inside its own principle – to all of them. Should a responsible implementation
and use of AI models be sought in practice, it is our ﬁrm claim that XAI does not sufﬁce on its own. Other
important principles of Artiﬁcial Intelligence such as privacy and fairness must be carefully addressed
in practice. In the following sections we elaborate on the concept of Responsible AI, along with the
implications of XAI and data fusion in the fulﬁllment of its postulated principles.
6.1. Principles of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
A recent review of some of the main AI principles published since 2016 appears in [ 385]. In this
work, the authors show a visual framework where different organizations are classiﬁed according to the
following parameters:
Nature, which could be private sector, government, inter-governmental organization, civil society or
multistakeholder.
Content of the principles: eight possible principles such as privacy, explainability, or fairness. They
also consider the coverage that the document grants for each of the considered principles.
Target audience: to whom the principles are aimed. They are normally for the organization that
developed them, but they could also be destined for another audience (see Figure 2).
Whether or not they are rooted on the International Human Rights, as well as whether they explicitly
talk about them.
For instance, [ 386] is an illustrative example of a document of AI principles for the purpose of
this overview, since it accounts for some of the most common principles, and deals explicitly with
explainability. Here, the authors propose ﬁve principles mainly to guide the development of AI within
their company, while also indicating that they could also be used within other organizations and businesses.
The authors of those principles aim to develop AI in a way that it directly reinforces inclusion, gives
equal opportunities for everyone, and contributes to the common good. To this end, the following aspects
should be considered:
The outputs after using AI systems should not lead to any kind of discrimination against individuals
or collectives in relation to race, religion, gender, sexual orientation, disability, ethnic, origin or any
other personal condition. Thus, a fundamental criteria to consider while optimizing the results of an AI
system is not only their outputs in terms of error optimization, but also how the system deals with those
groups. This deﬁnes the principle of Fair AI .
36