activation map that helps identify the image regions that were particularly important for a speciﬁc object
class by projecting back the weights of the output layer on the convolutional feature maps. Later, in [ 143],
the authors showed that max-pooling layers can be used to replace convolutional layers with a large stride
without loss in accuracy on several image recognition benchmarks. They obtained a cleaner visualization
than Deconvnet by using a guided backpropagation method.
To increase the interpretability of classical CNNs, the authors in [ 113] used a loss for each ﬁlter in
high level convolutional layers to force each ﬁlter to learn very speciﬁc object components. The obtained
activation patterns are much more interpretable for their exclusiveness with respect to the different labels
to be predicted. The authors in [ 72] proposed visualizing the contribution to the prediction of each single
pixel of the input image in the form of a heatmap. They used a Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (LRP)
technique, which relies on a Taylor series close to the prediction point rather than partial derivatives at
the prediction point itself. To further improve the quality of the visualization, attribution methods such
as heatmaps, saliency maps or class activation methods ( GradCAM [292]) are used (see Figure 7). In
particular, the authors in [ 292] proposed a Gradient-weighted Class Activation Mapping (Grad-CAM),
which uses the gradients of any target concept, ﬂowing into the ﬁnal convolutional layer to produce a
coarse localization map, highlighting the important regions in the image for predicting the concept.
(a) Heatmap [168] (b) Attribution [293] (c) Grad-CAM [292]
Figure 7: Examples of rendering for different XAI visualization techniques on images.
In addition to the aforementioned feature relevance andvisual explanation methods, some works
proposed generating text explanations of the visual content of the image. For example, the authors in [ 91]
combined a CNN feature extractor with an RNN attention model to automatically learn to describe the
content of images. In the same line, [ 278] presented a three-level attention model to perform a ﬁne-grained
classiﬁcation task. The general model is a pipeline that integrates three types of attention: the object
level attention model proposes candidate image regions or patches from the input image, the part-level
attention model ﬁlters out non-relevant patches to a certain object, and the last attention model localizes
discriminative patches. In the task of video captioning, the authors in [ 111] use a CNN model combined
with a bi-directional LSTM model as encoder to extract video features and then feed these features to an
LSTM decoder to generate textual descriptions.
One of the seminal works in the second category is [ 137]. In order to analyse the visual information
contained inside the CNN, the authors proposed a general framework that reconstruct an image from the
CNN internal representations and showed that several layers retain photographically accurate information
about the image, with different degrees of geometric and photometric invariance. To visualize the notion
of a class captured by a CNN, the same authors created an image that maximizes the class score based on
computing the gradient of the class score with respect to the input image [ 272]. In the same direction,
the authors in [ 268] introduced a Deep Generator Network (DGN) that generates the most representative
image for a given output neuron in a CNN.
For quantifying the interpretability of the latent representations of CNNs, the authors in [ 125] used a
different approach called network dissection. They run a large number of images through a CNN and then
analyze the top activated images by considering each unit as a concept detector to further evaluate each
25