2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
(December 10th)
Year0255075100125150175200# of contributed works in the literatureInterpretable Articial Intelligence
XAI
Explainable Articial IntelligenceFigure 1: Evolution of the number of total publications whose title, abstract and/or keywords refer to the ﬁeld of XAI during
the last years. Data retrieved from ScopusR
(December 10th, 2019) by using the search terms indicated in the legend when
querying this database. It is interesting to note the latent need for interpretable AI models over time (which conforms to intuition, as
interpretability is a requirement in many scenarios), yet it has not been until 2017 when the interest in techniques to explain AI
models has permeated throughout the research community.
Figure 1 displays the rising trend of contributions on XAI and related concepts. This literature
outbreak shares its rationale with the research agendas of national governments and agencies. Although
some recent surveys [ 8,13,10,14,15,16,17] summarize the upsurge of activity in XAI across sectors
and disciplines, this overview aims to cover the creation of a complete uniﬁed framework of categories
and concepts that allow for scrutiny and understanding of the ﬁeld of XAI methods. Furthermore, we pose
intriguing thoughts around the explainability of AI models in data fusion contexts with regards to data
privacy and model conﬁdentiality. This, along with other research opportunities and challenges identiﬁed
throughout our study, serve as the pull factor toward Responsible Artiﬁcial Intelligence, term by which
we refer to a series of AI principles to be necessarily met when deploying AI in real applications. As we
will later show in detail, model explainability is among the most crucial aspects to be ensured within this
methodological framework. All in all, the novel contributions of this overview can be summarized as
follows:
1.Grounded on a ﬁrst elaboration of concepts and terms used in XAI-related research, we propose a
novel deﬁnition of explainability that places audience (Figure 2) as a key aspect to be considered when
explaining a ML model. We also elaborate on the diverse purposes sought when using XAI techniques,
from trustworthiness to privacy awareness, which round up the claimed importance of purpose and
targeted audience in model explainability.
2.We deﬁne and examine the different levels of transparency that a ML model can feature by itself, as
well as the diverse approaches to post-hoc explainability, namely, the explanation of ML models that
are not transparent by design.
3.We thoroughly analyze the literature on XAI and related concepts published to date, covering ap-
proximately 400 contributions arranged into two different taxonomies. The ﬁrst taxonomy addresses
the explainability of ML models using the previously made distinction between transparency and
post-hoc explainability, including models that are transparent by themselves, Deep and non-Deep (i.e.,
3