extracts the empirical distribution and density of the points around them. Then it generates rules in an
IF/THEN format that explain that a data point is classiﬁed within a speciﬁc category because it is similar
to some prototypes. The proposal then includes an algorithm that both generates explanations and reduces
bias, as it is demonstrated for the use case of recidivism using the Correctional Offender Management
Proﬁling for Alternative Sanctions (COMPAS) dataset [ 400]. The same goal has been recently pursued in
[401], showing that post-hoc XAI techniques can forge fairer explanations from truly unfair black-box
models. Finally, CERTIFAI (Counterfactual Explanations for Robustness, Transparency, Interpretability,
and Fairness of Artiﬁcial Intelligence models) [ 402] uses a customized genetic algorithm to generate
counterfactuals that can help to see the robustness of a ML model, generate explanations, and examine
fairness (both at the individual level and at the group level) at the same time.
Strongly linked to the concept of fairness, much attention has been lately devoted to the concept of
data diversity , which essentially refers to the capability of an algorithmic model to ensure that all different
types of objects are represented in its output [ 403]. Therefore, diversity can be thought to be an indicator
of the quality of a collection of items that, when taking the form of a model’s output, can quantify the
proneness of the model to produce diverse results rather than highly accurate predictions. Diversity comes
into play in human-centered applications with ethical restrictions that permeate to the AI modeling phase
[404]. Likewise, certain AI problems (such as content recommendation or information retrieval) also
aim at producing diverse recommendations rather than highly-scoring yet similar results [ 405,406]. In
these scenarios, dissecting the internals of a black-box model via XAI techniques can help identifying the
capability of the model to maintain the input data diversity at its output. Learning strategies to endow a
model with diversity keeping capabilities could be complemented with XAI techniques in order to shed
transparency over the model internals, and assess the effectiveness of such strategies with respect to the
diversity of the data from which the model was trained. Conversely, XAI could help to discriminate which
parts of the model are compromising its overall ability to preserve diversity.
6.2.2. Accountability
Regarding accountability, the EC [390] deﬁnes the following aspects to consider:
Auditability: it includes the assessment of algorithms, data and design processes, but preserving the
intellectual property related to the AI systems. Performing the assessment by both internal and external
auditors, and making the reports available, could contribute to the trustworthiness of the technology.
When the AI system affects fundamental rights, including safety-critical applications, it should always
be audited by an external third party.
Minimization and reporting of negative impacts: it consists of reporting actions or decisions that yield
a certain outcome by the system. It also comprises the assessment of those outcomes and how to
respond to them. To address that, the development of AI systems should also consider the identiﬁcation,
assessment, documentation and minimization of their potential negative impacts. In order to minimize
the potential negative impact, impact assessments should be carried out both prior to and during the
development, deployment and use of AI systems. It is also important to guarantee protection for anyone
who raises concerns about an AI system (e.g., whistle-blowers ). All assessments must be proportionate
to the risk that the AI systems pose.
Trade-offs: in case any tension arises due to the implementation of the above requirements, trade-offs
could be considered but only if they are ethically acceptable. Such trade-offs should be reasoned,
explicitly acknowledged and documented, and they must be evaluated in terms of their risk to ethical
principles. The decision maker must be accountable for the manner in which the appropriate trade-off
is being made, and the trade-off decided should be continually reviewed to ensure the appropriateness
of the decision. If there is no ethically acceptable trade-off, the development, deployment and use of
the AI system should not proceed in that form.
40