ranking or measuring the inﬂuence, relevance or importance each feature has in the prediction output by
the model to be explained. An amalgam of propositions are found within this category, each resorting
to different algorithmic approaches with the same targeted goal. One fruitful contribution to this path
is that of [ 224] called SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations). Its authors presented a method to
calculate an additive feature importance score for each particular prediction with a set of desirable
properties (local accuracy, missingness and consistency) that its antecedents lacked. Another approach
to tackle the contribution of each feature to predictions has been coalitional Game Theory [ 225] and
local gradients [ 234]. Similarly, by means of local gradients [ 230] test the changes needed in each
feature to produce a change in the output of the model. In [ 228] the authors analyze the relations and
dependencies found in the model by grouping features, that combined, bring insights about the data.
The work in [ 173] presents a broad variety of measures to tackle the quantiﬁcation of the degree of
inﬂuence of inputs on outputs of systems. Their QII (Quantitative Input Inﬂuence) measures account
for correlated inputs while measuring inﬂuence. In contrast, in [ 222] the authors build upon the existing
SA (Sensitivity Analysis) to construct a Global SA which extends the applicability of the existing
methods. In [ 227] a real-time image saliency method is proposed, which is applicable to differentiable
image classiﬁers. The study in [ 123] presents the so-called Automatic STRucture IDentiﬁcation method
(ASTRID) to inspect which attributes are exploited by a classiﬁer to generate a prediction. This method
ﬁnds the largest subset of features such that the accuracy of a classiﬁer trained with this subset of
features cannot be distinguished in terms of accuracy from a classiﬁer built on the original feature set.
In [221] the authors use inﬂuence functions to trace a model’s prediction back to the training data, by
only requiring an oracle version of the model with access to gradients and Hessian-vector products.
Heuristics for creating counterfactual examples by modifying the input of the model have been also
found to contribute to its explainability [ 236,237]. Compared to those attempting explanations by
simpliﬁcation, a similar amount of publications were found tackling explainability by means of feature
relevance techniques. Many of the contributions date from 2017 and some from 2018, implying that as
with model simpliﬁcation techniques, feature relevance has also become a vibrant subject study in the
current XAI landscape.
Visual explanation techniques are a vehicle to achieve model-agnostic explanations. Representative
works in this area can be found in [ 222], which present a portfolio of visualization techniques to help in
the explanation of a black-box ML model built upon the set of extended techniques mentioned earlier
(Global SA). Another set of visualization techniques is presented in [ 223]. The authors present three
novel SA methods (data based SA, Monte-Carlo SA, cluster-based SA) and one novel input importance
measure (Average Absolute Deviation). Finally, [ 238] presents ICE (Individual Conditional Expecta-
tion) plots as a tool for visualizing the model estimated by any supervised learning algorithm. Visual
explanations are less common in the ﬁeld of model-agnostic techniques for post-hoc explainability.
Since the design of these methods must ensure that they can be seamlessly applied to any ML model
disregarding its inner structure, creating visualizations from just inputs and outputs from an opaque
model is a complex task. This is why almost all visualization methods falling in this category work
along with feature relevance techniques, which provide the information that is eventually displayed to
the end user.
Several trends emerge from our literature analysis. To begin with, rule extraction techniques prevail
in model-agnostic contributions under the umbrella of post-hoc explainability. This could have been
intuitively expected if we bear in mind the wide use of rule based learning as explainability wrappers
anticipated in Section 3.4, and the complexity imposed by not being able to get into the model itself.
Similarly, another large group of contributions deals with feature relevance . Lately these techniques are
gathering much attention by the community when dealing with DL models, with hybrid approaches that
utilize particular aspects of this class of models and therefore, compromise the independence of the feature
relevance method on the model being explained. Finally, visualization techniques propose interesting
20