learner. We now elaborate on the trends identiﬁed around post-hoc explainability for different ML models,
which are illustrated in Figure 6 in the form of hierarchical bibliographic categories and summarized next:
Model-agnostic techniques for post-hoc explainability (Subsection 4.1), which can be applied seam-
lessly to any ML model disregarding its inner processing or internal representations.
Post-hoc explainability that are tailored or speciﬁcally designed to explain certain ML models. We
divide our literature analysis into two main branches: contributions dealing with post-hoc explainability
ofshallow ML models, which collectively refers to all ML models that do not hinge on layered
structures of neural processing units (Subsection 4.2); and techniques devised for deep learning models,
which correspondingly denote the family of neural networks and related variants, such as convolutional
neural networks, recurrent neural networks (Subsection 4.3) and hybrid schemes encompassing deep
neural networks and transparent models. For each model we perform a thorough review of the latest
post-hoc methods proposed by the research community, along with a identiﬁcation of trends followed
by such contributions.
We end our literature analysis with Subsection 4.4, where we present a second taxonomy that com-
plements the more general one in Figure 6 by classifying contributions dealing with the post-hoc
explanation of Deep Learning models. To this end we focus on particular aspects related to this family
of black-box ML methods, and expose how they link to the classiﬁcation criteria used in the ﬁrst
taxonomy.
4.1. Model-agnostic Techniques for Post-hoc Explainability
Model-agnostic techniques for post-hoc explainability are designed to be plugged to any model
with the intent of extracting some information from its prediction procedure. Sometimes, simpliﬁcation
techniques are used to generate proxies that mimic their antecedents with the purpose of having something
tractable and of reduced complexity. Other times, the intent focuses on extracting knowledge directly
from the models or simply visualizing them to ease the interpretation of their behavior. Following the
taxonomy introduced in Section 2, model-agnostic techniques may rely on model simpliﬁcation ,feature
relevance estimation and visualization techniques:
Explanation by simpliﬁcation . They are arguably the broadest technique under the category of model
agnostic post-hoc methods. Local explanations are also present within this category, since sometimes,
simpliﬁed models are only representative of certain sections of a model. Almost all techniques taking
this path for model simpliﬁcation are based on rule extraction techniques. Among the most known
contributions to this approach we encounter the technique of Local Interpretable Model-Agnostic
Explanations (LIME) [ 32] and all its variations [ 214,216]. LIME builds locally linear models around
the predictions of an opaque model to explain it. These contributions fall under explanations by
simpliﬁcation as well as under local explanations . Besides LIME and related ﬂavors, another approach
to rule extraction is G-REX [ 212]. Although it was not originally intended for extracting rules from
opaque models, the generic proposition of G-REX has been extended to also account for model
explainability purposes [ 190,211]. In line with rule extraction methods, the work in [ 215] presents a
novel approach to learn rules in CNF (Conjunctive Normal Form) or DNF (Disjunctive Normal Form)
to bridge from a complex model to a human-interpretable model. Another contribution that falls off the
same branch is that in [ 218], where the authors formulate model simpliﬁcation as a model extraction
process by approximating a transparent model to the complex one. Simpliﬁcation is approached from a
different perspective in [ 120], where an approach to distill and audit black box models is presented. In
it, two main ideas are exposed: a method for model distillation and comparison to audit black-box risk
scoring models; and an statistical test to check if the auditing data is missing key features it was trained
with. The popularity of model simpliﬁcation is evident, given it temporally coincides with the most
18