unit for semantic segmentation. This paper also examines the effects of classical training techniques on
the interpretability of the learned model.
Although many of the techniques examined above utilize local explanations to achieve an overall
explanation of a CNN model, others explicitly focus on building global explanations based on locally found
prototypes. In [ 263,294], the authors empirically showed how local explanations in deep networks are
strongly dominated by their lower level features. They demonstrated that deep architectures provide strong
priors that prevent the altering of how these low-level representations are captured. All in all, visualization
mixed with feature relevance methods are arguably the most adopted approach to explainability in CNNs.
Instead of using one single interpretability technique, the framework proposed in [ 295] combines
several methods to provide much more information about the network. For example, combining feature
visualization ( what is a neuron looking for? ) with attribution ( how does it affect the output? ) allows
exploring how the network decides between labels. This visual interpretability interface displays different
blocks such as feature visualization and attribution depending on the visualization goal. This interface
can be thought of as a union of individual elements that belong to layers (input, hidden, output), atoms (a
neuron, channel, spatial or neuron group), content (activations – the amount a neuron ﬁres, attribution –
which classes a spatial position most contributes to, which tends to be more meaningful in later layers), and
presentation (information visualization, feature visualization). Figure 8 shows some examples. Attribution
methods normally rely on pixel association, displaying what part of an input example is responsible for
the network activating in a particular way [293].
(a) Neuron (b) Channel (c) Layer
Figure 8: Feature visualization at different levels of a certain network [293].
(a) Original image (b) Explaining electric guitar (c) Explaining acoustic guitar
Figure 9: Examples of explanation when using LIME on images [71].
A much simpler approach to all the previously cited methods was proposed in LIME framework
[71], as was described in Subsection 4.1 LIME perturbs the input and sees how the predictions change.
In image classiﬁcation, LIME creates a set of perturbed instances by dividing the input image into
interpretable components (contiguous superpixels ), and runs each perturbed instance through the model
26