contrast, explainability can be viewed as an active characteristic of a model, denoting any action or
procedure taken by a model with the intent of clarifying or detailing its internal functions.
To summarize the most commonly used nomenclature, in this section we clarify the distinction and
similarities among terms often used in the ethical AI and XAI communities.
Understandability (or equivalently, intelligibility ) denotes the characteristic of a model to make a
human understand its function – how the model works – without any need for explaining its internal
structure or the algorithmic means by which the model processes data internally [18].
Comprehensibility : when conceived for ML models, comprehensibility refers to the ability of a
learning algorithm to represent its learned knowledge in a human understandable fashion [ 19,20,21].
This notion of model comprehensibility stems from the postulates of Michalski [ 22], which stated that
“the results of computer induction should be symbolic descriptions of given entities, semantically and
structurally similar to those a human expert might produce observing the same entities. Components of
these descriptions should be comprehensible as single ‘chunks’ of information, directly interpretable in
natural language, and should relate quantitative and qualitative concepts in an integrated fashion” .
Given its difﬁcult quantiﬁcation, comprehensibility is normally tied to the evaluation of the model
complexity [17].
Interpretability : it is deﬁned as the ability to explain or to provide the meaning in understandable
terms to a human.
Explainability : explainability is associated with the notion of explanation as an interface between
humans and a decision maker that is, at the same time, both an accurate proxy of the decision maker
and comprehensible to humans [17].
Transparency : a model is considered to be transparent if by itself it is understandable. Since a model
can feature different degrees of understandability, transparent models in Section 3 are divided into three
categories: simulatable models, decomposable models and algorithmically transparent models [5].
In all the above deﬁnitions, understandability emerges as the most essential concept in XAI. Both
transparency and interpretability are strongly tied to this concept: while transparency refers to the
characteristic of a model to be, on its own, understandable for a human, understandability measures the
degree to which a human can understand a decision made by a model. Comprehensibility is also connected
to understandability in that it relies on the capability of the audience to understand the knowledge contained
in the model. All in all, understandability is a two-sided matter: model understandability and human
understandability. This is the reason why the deﬁnition of XAI given in Section 2.2 refers to the concept
ofaudience , as the cognitive skills and pursued goal of the users of the model have to be taken into
account jointly with the intelligibility and comprehensibility of the model in use. This prominent role
taken by understandability makes the concept of audience the cornerstone of XAI, as we next elaborate in
further detail.
2.2. What?
Although it might be considered to be beyond the scope of this paper, it is worth noting the discussion
held around general theories of explanation in the realm of philosophy [ 23]. Many proposals have been
done in this regard, suggesting the need for a general, uniﬁed theory that approximates the structure and
intent of an explanation. However, nobody has stood the critique when presenting such a general theory.
For the time being, the most agreed-upon thought blends together different approaches to explanation
drawn from diverse knowledge disciplines. A similar problem is found when addressing interpretability
in AI. It appears from the literature that there is not yet a common point of understanding on what
interpretability or explainability are. However, many contributions claim the achievement of interpretable
models and techniques that empower explainability.
5