context emerges in the possibility that XAI techniques could be explanatory enough to compromise the
conﬁdentiality of private data. This could eventually occur if sensitive information (e.g. ownership) could
be inferred from the explained fusion among protected and unprotected features.
When turning our prospects to data fusion at model level, we have already argued that the fusion of the
outputs of several transparent models (as in tree ensembles) could make the overall model opaque, thereby
making it necessary to resort to post-hoc explainability solutions. However, model fusion may entail other
drawbacks when endowed with powerful post-hoc XAI techniques. Let us imagine that relationships of
a model’s input features have been discovered by means of a post-hoc technique) and that one of those
features is hidden or unknown. Will it be possible to infer another model’s features if that previous feature
was known to be used in that model? Would this possibility uncover a problem as privacy breaches in
cases in which related protected input variables are not even shared in the ﬁrst place?
To get the example clearer, in [ 424] a multiview perspective is utilized in which different single views
(representing the sources they attend to) models are fused. These models contain among others, cell-phone
data, transportation data, etc. which might introduce the problem that information that is not even shared
can be discovered through other sources that are actually shared. In the example above, what if instead of
features, a model shares with another a layer or part of its architecture as in Federated Learning? Would
this sharing make possible to infer information from that exchanged part of its model, to the extent of
allowing for the design of adversarial attacks with better success rate upon the antecedent model?
If focused at knowledge level fusion, a similar reasoning holds: XAI comprises techniques that extract
knowledge from ML model(s). This ability to explain models could have an impact on the necessity of
discovering new knowledge through the complex interactions formed within ML models. If so, XAI might
enrich knowledge fusion paradigms, bringing the possibility of discovering new knowledge extractors
of relevance for the task at hand. For this purpose, it is of paramount importance that the knowledge
extracted from a model by means of XAI techniques can be understood and extrapolated to the domain
in which knowledge extractors operate. The concept matches with ease with that of transfer learning
portrayed in [ 425]. Although XAI is not contemplated in the surveyed processes of extracting knowledge
from models trained in certain feature spaces and distributions, to then be utilized in environments where
previous conditions do not hold, when deployed, XAI can pose a threat if the explanations given about the
model can be reversely engineered through the knowledge fusion paradigm to eventually compromise, for
instance, the differential privacy of the overall model.
The distinction between centralized and distributed data fusion also spurs further challenges in
regards to privacy and explainability. The centralized approach does not bring any further concerns
that those presented above. However, distributed fusion does arise new problems. Distributed fusion
might be applied for different reasons, mainly due to environmental constraints or due to security or
privacy issues. The latter context may indulge some dangers. Among other goals (e.g. computational
efﬁciency), model-level data fusion is performed in a distributed fashion to ensure that no actual data is
actually shared, but rather parts of an ML model trained on local data. This rationale lies at the heart
of Federated Learning, where models exchange locally learned information among nodes. Since data
do not leave the local device, only the transmission of model updates is required across distributed
devices. This lightens the training process for network-compromised settings and guarantees data privacy
[416]. Upon the use of post-hoc explainability techniques, a node could disguise sensitive information
about the local context in which the received ML model part was trained. In fact, it was shown that a
black-box model based on a DNN from which an input/output query interface is given can be used to
accurately predict every single hyperparameter value used for training, allowing for potential privacy-
related consequences [ 357,420,421]. This relates to studies showing that blurring images does not
guarantee privacy preservation.
Data fusion, privacy and model explainability are concepts that have not been analysed together so far.
From the above discussion it is clear that there are unsolved concerns and caveats that demand further
study by the community in forthcoming times.
44