876 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
not been extensively explored to select reﬁned SVM training sets so far (Kawulok 2007 ).
Nishida and Kurita ( 2008 ) proposed a hybrid algorithm (RANSAC–SVM) which couples
random sampling, consensus approach (Fischler and Bolles 1981 ) and a simple evolutionary
technique to retrieve T/prime’s. In their approach, several reﬁned training sets of a small size are
randomly drawn at ﬁrst. Then—based on the classiﬁcation scores of SVMs learned usingthe corresponding reﬁned sets—the best T
/primeis determined (by means of the best consensus).
Additionally, the authors employed a simple GA with a multi-point crossover to furtherimprove the reﬁned sets (pairs of these reﬁned sets are crossed over to form child solutionswhich inherit random training set vectors from both parents). The entire procedure (includingrandom selection of SVM training sets and their evolution) is repeated multiple times, hencenumerous potentially uncorrelated populations are processed.
In the genetic algorithm (GASVM) proposed by Kawulok and Nalepa ( 2012 ), a population
of individuals (chromosomes), representing reﬁned training sets of a given size, evolvesin time. This evolution encompasses standard genetic operators—selection, crossover, andmutation. The ﬁtness of each individual is the area under receiver operating characteristiccurve (or the classiﬁcation accuracy) retrieved for T. Although this algorithm appeared very
effective, and outperformed random sampling techniques, it was unclear how to select thesize of individuals (which could not be changed later). This issue was tackled in the adaptivegenetic algorithm (AGA) suggested by the same authors (Nalepa and Kawulok 2014a )—
the size of individuals, along with the population size and the selection scheme, have beenadapted on the ﬂy to respond to the evolution progress as best as possible. This adaptation wassteered by the parameters set ap r i o r i . Hence, improperly tuned parameter values could easily
jeopardize the search (e.g., exploiting smaller reﬁned sets and exploring larger ones couldhave been not balanced). The dynamically adaptive genetic algorithm (DAGA) (Kawulok andNalepa 2014a ) introduced the adaptation scheme which can be updated during the evolution,
based on the characteristics of best individuals (i.e., the expected ratio of SVs within thereﬁned sets). The expected ratio has to be determined beforehand, which is non-trivial.
Memetic algorithms (MA) combine EAs with reﬁnement procedures to boost the solu-
tions already found. They can exploit the knowledge attained during the evolution or extractedbeforehand. Such techniques have been shown extremely effective in solving numerous chal-lenging problems (Nalepa and Blocho 2016 ). Nalepa and Kawulok ( 2014b ) proposed the ﬁrst
MA (termed MASVM) for selecting reﬁned SVM training sets. The pool of important vectors(which were selected as SVs during the evolution) is maintained and used to educate the pop-ulation, and to introduce super individuals —reﬁned sets composed of SVs only. Hence, the
knowledge gained dynamically is exploited in MASVM. This algorithm was utilized in theparameter-less SVMs proposed by Nalepa et al. ( 2015b ). In the above-mentioned algorithms,
initial populations were sampled randomly from T.
In the adaptive MA (PCA
2MA), Nalepa and Kawulok ( 2016a ,b) introduced a pre-
processing step, in which the geometry of Tis analyzed in search of potentially valuable
vectors (before the evolution). This set of candidate vectors is used not only to create the
initial population (it helps generate higher-quality reﬁned sets which later undergo the evolu-tion), but also to compensate children (if they contain less vectors than expected—in Fig. 9,
the process of generating a child for a pair of chromosomes (p
a,pb), representing reﬁned
sets, is presented), and to create new chromosomes during the execution (to diversify thesearch). Also, the pool of SVs is used in PCA
2MA. Hence, PCA2MA exploits the knowl-
edge attained during the evolution, and extracted beforehand. Moreover, the parameter-lessadaptation scheme was introduced, which does not require any parameters to be given ap r i -
ori. The experimental study performed on various types of data revealed that EAs (especially
123