Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 879
life circumstances (when the size of the desired reﬁned sets can be estimated), and they
are not dependent on the cardinality of T. However, they can easily misbehave for very
large and noisy datasets, since removing mislabeled vectors from T/prime’s (affecting the SVM
performance) is often quite time-consuming (Nalepa and Kawulok 2016a ).
A simple approach to reduce tis to sample t/primevectors from Trandomly (Balcázar et al.
2001 ). In this sampling algorithm, a random subset of Tis drawn according to the weights
assigned to the training set vectors4(the higher the weight, the larger the probability of
including the corresponding vector in T/prime). Then, an SVM classiﬁer is trained using this
subset, and Tis analyzed to verify which vectors were correctly classiﬁed using the resulting
decision hyperplane. The weights of those vectors which were misclassiﬁed are doubled sothat they are more likely to be selected and included in T
/primein the next sampling round. If the
number of rounds is sufﬁciently large, then the important vectors (hopefully including SVs)will have higher weights than the other vectors, and a reﬁned set will be composed of theseSVs. The “optimal” size of T
/primeis not known beforehand, thus the number of sampled vectors
should be determined carefully (usually in a time-consuming trial-and-error fashion). Thisbecomes a signiﬁcant drawback of this algorithm especially in the case of massively largedatasets. Also, random sampling approaches may ignore important (and useful) relationswhich occur within the dataset—if these training set features were exploited during theexecution, the convergence time of such techniques could be greatly reduced (e.g., only thevectors lying near the boundary of one-class vector groups could be sampled because theywould likely inﬂuence the position of the SVM hyperplane).
3.6 Summary of the SVM training set reduction methods
Table 3summarizes the algorithms for reducing the size of the SVM training sets. They
have been split into several categories, based on the optimization strategies. Additionally, wereport the most important characteristics of the approaches discussed at length in the previoussections. These features include:
–Type —indicates whether the method is one-pass oriterative . In the iterative approaches,
the initial reﬁned training set is gradually improved in order to include better vectorsfrom T. Such methods encompass algorithms which (i) keep enhancing the reﬁned sets
of a given (constant) size, and those which (ii) decrease or (iii) increase reﬁned sets toboost their quality.
–Source —being the underlying source of information concerning a training set. The
knowledge extracted from this source is then used for generating reﬁned sets during theoptimization process. We distinguish ﬁve possible sources of information which can beutilized for this purpose—they are summarized in Table 1. Note that there exist methods
which exploit several sources of information.
–Randomized —shows whether the algorithm is randomized ordeterministic .
–Dependent on t —shows whether the algorithm is dependent on the cardinality of T.I fs o ,
it may require analyzing the entire training set which is often not possible in massivelylarge real-life datasets. Hence, the techniques which are independent from tshould be
preferred in practical applications.
–Data —indicates which types of datasets were used to validate the corresponding algo-
rithm (A—artiﬁcially generated, B—benchmark, R—real-life datasets).
–Maximum t —indicates (roughly) the maximum size of the dataset for which the method
was tested in the referenced paper. As mentioned in Sect. 1,t h et e r m large dataset is
4All Tvectors have the same weight at the beginning of the algorithm execution.
123