858 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
engineering domains, including, among others, medical imaging, text categorization, com-
putational biology, genomics and banking. Although it may appear quite beneﬁcial at theﬁrst glance—more data could mean more possibilities of extracting and revealing usefulunderlying knowledge—training SVMs from extremely large and difﬁcult datasets becamea pivotal issue due to the high time and memory complexity of the SVM training (Liu et al.2016 ; Qiu et al. 2016 ).
SVM training consists in determining a hyperplane to separate the training data belonging
to two classes. Its position is deﬁned with a (usually small) subset of vectors from thetraining set ( T), called support vectors (SVs). Knowing which vectors are selected as SVs
increases the interpretability of the SVM decisions. Though the hyperplane separates the datalinearly, SVMs are applicable to non-linear problems, thanks to mapping the data into higher-dimensional spaces, in which they are linearly separable—this mapping is achieved usingkernel functions . A crucial drawback of SVMs lies in their high O(t
3)time and O(t2)memory
training complexities, where tis the cardinality of T. This problem has attracted signiﬁcant
attention from the researchers—developed techniques are aimed either at improving thetraining phase, or at extracting reduced (signiﬁcantly smaller) SVM training sets from whichSVs are likely to be determined. This review summarizes the achievements in this ﬁeld. Tothe best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst review of methods devoted to selecting the SVMtraining sets reported in the literature so far.
1.1 Broader context
To better contextualize this review in the literature, we highlight the main problems relatedto SVMs which are actively being tackled and should be inevitably resolved—they reachfar beyond dealing with large datasets. These problems concern selecting the SVM hyper-parameters (Sect. 1.1.1 ) and learning SVMs from data of questionable quality (Sect. 1.1.2 ).
Both issues, along with selecting SVM training data from large datasets, signiﬁcantly affectthe applicability of the SVM classiﬁer in practice. Addressing them successfully will helpexploit this classiﬁer in emerging big data scenarios.
1.1.1 Model selection for SVMs
Model selection for SVMs—being a problem of determining the SVM hyperparameters,including a kernel function and its parameters—is a pivotal, yet computationally expensivetask (Gold and Sollich 2003 ; Ding et al. 2015 ). Automatic model selection is a crucial issue,
since improperly tuned parameters can affect the SVM performance. Although there existtechniques tailored to tune pre-deﬁned kernels (Tang et al. 2009 ), the research effort is put
into designing algorithms which determine the desired kernels.
Friedrichs and Igel ( 2005 ) proposed the covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy
to determine a kernel from a parameterized kernel space. Their experimental study showedthat this strategy easily outperforms a standard grid-search approach for selecting thesehyperparameters (which is obviously not scalable for large numbers of parameters). Lessmannet al. ( 2006 ) incorporated the model selection criterion into the ﬁtness function of their genetic
technique. In the hybrid genetic algorithm (GA), the evolutionary optimization was combinedwith the gradient descent method (Zhou and Xu 2009 ). GAs were recently used for the
smooth twin parametric-margin SVMs (Wang et al. 2013b ). In the latest algorithm by Chou
et al. ( 2014 ), the SVM parameters were optimized using a fast messy Ali and Smith-Miles
(2006 ) explored the possibility of applying rule-based classiﬁers to generate SVM models.
Other interesting approaches include tabu searches (Lebrun et al. 2008 ), compression-based
123