Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 887
procedure in the machine learning ﬁeld. A standard null hypothesis saying that applying
the algorithm A leads to obtaining the results of the same quality as those elaborated bythe algorithm B is often veriﬁed with the two-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank tests (Woolson
2007 )( S h i na n dC h o( 2007 ) exploited the McNemar’s test for this purpose). In experiments
encompassing multiple datasets, the Friedman test is executed to check which algorithmoutperforms other techniques taking into account all investigated datasets (Friedman 1937 ).
3.7.3 Datasets and practical applications
The effectiveness of emerging training set selection algorithms is commonly tested using
three kinds of datasets:
–Artiﬁcially generated datasets Vectors in artiﬁcial datasets are usually generated to follow
a known distribution (e.g., the Gaussian distribution). Therefore, the underlying datacharacteristics are known (which is not always achievable in the case of benchmarkand real-life sets). Additionally, artiﬁcially generated sets are often straight-forward tovisualize. Such datasets are used to understand the behavior of new training set selectionalgorithms (e.g., whether the vectors in the reﬁned sets are positioned near the decisionhyperplane or whether there are any vectors that could be removed from the reﬁned setsas they are not selected as SVs). Several artiﬁcially generated datasets are available athttp://sun.aei.polsl.pl/~jnalepa/SVM/ (see example datasets in Fig. 10—white and black
pixels visualize vectors from the positive T
+and negative T−classes; training set vectors
are grouped into clusters in the αversions of these 2D sets).
–Benchmark datasets Such datasets (of different characteristics) are exploited to compare
the performance of training set selection algorithms (benchmark sets were used in morethan 70% of papers presented in this review). These datasets can be downloaded fromthe following repositories:
–UC Irvine (UCI) machine learning repository https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/index.
php
5.
–Knowledge Extraction based on Evolutionary Learning (KEEL) repository :http://
www.keel.es/ .
–LibSVM repository :https://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvmtools/datasets/ .
In Table 4, we gather the characteristics of ten most frequently used (in the analyzed
papers) benchmark sets alongside the repository name (the same dataset can be oftendownloaded from more than one repository). For multi-class sets (e.g., Yeast ), pairwise
coupling is performed—the multi-class classiﬁcation problem is decomposed into two-class problems and the majority voting principle is used (a number of binary SVMs votefor the ﬁnal class label for an incoming vector). Although the sizes of these benchmarkdatasets are not very large, they are widely used in the literature to compare training setselection algorithms (also thanks to a well-deﬁned experimental protocol which is oftenpresented at a repository website—it makes the comparisons much easier).
–Practical applications and real-life datasets Although the amount of generated data
is steadily growing nowadays and the size of training sets became a real obstacle inexploiting SVMs in practice, only less than 45% of all investigated training set selection
5All repositories and datasets discussed in this section were accessed on July 7th, 2017.
123