870 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
(a) (b) (c) ( d)
Fig. 6 Example of the Tvectors selection to the reﬁned set: aone-class cluster of vectors, bthe convex hull
determined for this cluster, cthe concave hull determined for this cluster for a given value of k,dthe vectors
which are rejected from T/primea r er e n d e r e di ng r a y
training set is interpreted as a color image (there are two distinct colors for binary classiﬁcation
denoting two classes). Relying on image processing techniques, a pixel’s neighborhood isscanned to detect strong changes of brightness and color which may correspond to edges.In the edge detection exploited by Li et al. ( 2009 ), vectors from Tare analyzed—if at least
one neighboring vector is of a different class than the investigated one ( a), then asurvives in
T
/prime(the neighboring vectors are rejected). This process is complemented with the k-means
clustering which aims at ﬁnding the centroids from T, which are also appended to the reﬁned
training set.
Chau et al. ( 2013 ) proposed the convex-concave hull analysis algorithm to select T/prime
(referred to as CCHSVM). The authors pointed out that in the linearly non-separable case,
convex hulls which encompass two classes in a training set will overlap thus it is necessaryto “shrink” convex hulls (CHs) to avoid the overlapping. In the proposed algorithm, a CHgenerated for each class independently is not modiﬁed, however the concave hull is utilizedto extract vectors which are closest to the exterior boundary of the CH (all vectors lie onthe same side of the CH edge). Since the “closeness” to the CH may be varying acrossdifferent Tvectors, the authors search for knearest points for the edge deﬁned using two
adjacent reference points on the CH. It is worth noting that various values of kmay affect
the shape of the ﬁnal convex-concave hull (Lopez-Chau et al. 2012 ). Also, the set of CH
points is a subset of the convex-concave hull which implies that the algorithm will performwell in the linearly separable cases. The authors pointed out that the method will performwell for uniformly distributed data. The distribution is usually not known beforehand, thusthey perform the Tpre-processing in which Tis partitioned using the grid-based clustering.
In the higher-dimensional cases, principal component analysis (PCA) is used to reduce thenumber of dimensions. Then, the convex-concave analysis is applied to data partitions, andthe boundary convex-concave vectors are included in T
/prime. An example is presented in Fig. 6.
The analysis of convex hulls have been applied in numerous other algorithms for select-
ing reﬁned training sets (also for e.g., artiﬁcial neural networks) (Wang et al. 2007 ). These
approaches include interesting analyses of CHs exploited for the online classiﬁer train-ing (Khosravani et al. 2013 ;W a n ge ta l . 2013a ). In these techniques, SVMs are updated
dynamically when new vectors arrive to the system (based on the skeleton samples—beingthe vertices of convex hulls—extracted either ofﬂine or online, when new vectors appear).The authors indicated that the algorithm may not be applicable in the case of noisy datasets,and they suggest to incorporate de-noising methods before the ofﬂine selection of the T
/prime
vectors (removing noisy vectors in the online update step still requires investigation).
In a recent redundant data reduction algorithm, Shen et al. ( 2016 ) proposed to remove
unnecessary training set vectors via the analysis of cluster boundaries complemented with theinvestigation of other inter-cluster relations. For each cluster ( k-means clustering is exploited
123