892 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
24 training attack types are given). Yu et al. ( 2003 ) showed that their clustering-
based training set selection technique can easily outperform random sampling in thisscenario.
–Text classiﬁcation Text classiﬁcation, being the problem of determining to which topic
a given text document belongs (it may be in one, multiple or no category becauseof the overlaps across these categories), is an important research topic which hasbeen accelerated by the rapid growth of online information. Its applications includespam ﬁltering, language identiﬁcation, e-mail routing, readability assessment andmore. Schohn and Cohn ( 2000 ) and Tong and Koller ( 2002 ) tackled this problem
to verify the capabilities of their active-learning SVM approaches. They exploitedthe Reuters-21578 dataset ( http://www.daviddlewis.com/resources/testcollections/
reuters21578/ )i nt h e ModApte data split conﬁguration (there are several pre-deﬁned
training-test splits provided by the authors of this dataset) with almost 1 .3×10
4
articles (about 104features each) and considered 10 most frequently occurring cat-
egories. Another commonly used text-classiﬁcation dataset is Newsweeder (Lang
1995 ), also investigated in these papers.
–Credit screening Lyhyaoui et al. ( 1999 ) tested their SVM training set selection using a
dataset of 690 examples (15 features, 2 classes) reﬂecting customer creditworthiness.Although this dataset is known to be noisy (Quinlan 1999 ), the authors were able
to surpass 90% of the classiﬁcation accuracy with the use of their clustering-basedtechnique.
4 Conclusions and outlook
The amount of data produced every day grows tremendously in most real-life domains, includ-ing medical imaging, genomics, text categorization, computational biology, and many others.Although it appears beneﬁcial at the ﬁrst glance (more data could mean more possibilitiesof extracting and revealing useful underlying knowledge), handling massively large datasetsbecame a challenging issue and attracts attention of researchers from multiple ﬁelds, espe-cially in the era of big data. This big data revolution affected many research ﬁelds, includingstatistics, machine learning, parallel computing, and computer systems in general (Haykinet al. 2016 ). Albeit SVMs have proved extremely effective in solving a variety of pattern
recognition tasks, their main drawback lies in huge time and memory complexities, depend-ing on the training set size cardinality. This is a severe shortcoming (it may be even impossibleto train the classiﬁer using a dataset encompassing a very large number of vectors), and itmay prevent users from using SVMs in real-life scenarios which often require processingmassively large datasets. Finally, the classiﬁcation time grows linearly with the number ofSVs, which indirectly depends on the training set size (as already mentioned, the number ofSVs is notably smaller for reduced sets, hence the classiﬁcation is much faster).
In this review, we analyzed the current advances in selecting the SVM training data from
large datasets. We divided all the methods into several classes, comprising algorithms utilizingsimilar approaches (e.g., for extracting information about SV candidates) in their core, as wellas exposing similar characteristics. We believe that this taxonomy can be effectively usedfor emerging techniques, and will help highlight and understand their potential strengths andweaknesses. We presented the main sources of information concerning training set vectors,which are commonly used to assess the importance of these vectors (only important vectorsshould be assembled into reﬁned sets, because they are likely to be selected as SVs). As
123