Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 859
techniques (Luxburg et al. 2004 ), and genetic-programming-based systems (Sullivan and
Luke 2007 ). Zhang and Song ( 2015 ) noticed that various kernels may perform equally well
for a certain dataset, and proposed a multi-label kernel recommendation method built on thedata characteristics. An interesting model adaptation, which combines the swarm intelligencewith a grid search, was proposed by Kapp et al. ( 2012 ).
To speed up the process of model selection for SVMs, a number of parallel algorithms
have been proposed (Devos et al. 2014 ). However, their underpinning approaches are often
very simple (Shi and Liu 2012 ;R i p e p ie ta l . 2015 ). A promising research direction includes
algorithms to construct new kernels tailored for a problem at hand (Lessmann et al. 2006 ).
Such approaches include neuro-fuzzy systems which construct kernels from scratch (Simi´ nski
2014 ). This algorithm was used in the preliminary research on parameter-less SVMs (Nalepa
et al. 2015b ). It is worth mentioning that determining the desired SVM model should be
coupled with techniques for training SVMs from large datasets (especially for reducing thecardinality of SVM training sets), because the best-performing kernel may be dependenton the outcome of a training set selection algorithm. This research direction has not beenexploited so far, and we believe it will signiﬁcantly change in the nearest future.
1.1.2 Learning from weakly-labeled, noisy, and poor-quality data
Retrieving correctly labeled datasets is an expensive and challenging task, because it mayinvolve repeating experiments or performing time-consuming annotation procedures (e.g., inthe ﬁeld of medical imaging). Therefore, learning from weakly-labeled data became an
important issue. All weak-label problems are divided into several groups, based on the labelcharacteristics. They include problems with (i) partially-known labels (most of the train-ing set vectors are unlabeled and only some of them are labeled), (ii) implicitly-knownlabels (training vectors are grouped into bags for which the labels are known
1—the labels
of the training set vectors are implicit and they are based on their bag membership), and
(iii) unknown labels (Li et al. 2013 ). Other potential issues concerned with the data quality
relate to the label and/or feature noise, which can adversely impact the classiﬁer performance.It is especially visible in practical medical applications, in which a majority of diagnostictests are not 100% accurate, and cannot be considered a gold standard (Frenay and Verleysen2014 ) (e.g., there may be discrepancies between the segmentation of the same medical image
analyzed by two independent radiology experts). The consequences of the label noise onthe behavior of a classiﬁer can be very severe. First, its performance may be signiﬁcantlydeteriorated, the learning requirements can be easily affected (e.g., an appropriate cardinalityof the training set can notably increase to compensate mislabeled or noisy data points), theﬁnal model can be much more complex than it should be, and the other algorithms (e.g., forfeature selection) may be polluted as well. Frenay and Verleysen ( 2014 ) indicate that the
label noise affects the observed frequencies of medical test results, hence leads to incorrectconclusions on population characteristics.
There exist three main groups of approaches for dealing with noisy sets (manual analysis
should not be considered, because it is unacceptably time-consuming and infeasible for real-life data). First, there are classiﬁers that are said to be robust against the noise (however, theunderlying nature and model of such noise is not considered in these techniques at all) (Duanand Wu 2017 ). Alternatively, it is possible to build a noise model (typically, it is retrieved
1In most applications, a bag is labeled positive if it contains at least one positive-class vector—it is negative
otherwise. Therefore, the implicit labels of all negative-class vectors belonging to a positive-class bag are infact incorrect (Li et al. 2013 ).
123