Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 881
Table 2 Predicted versus real
conditions—bold text shows theerroneous classiﬁcationPredicted
Positive Negative
Real Positive True positive False negative
Negative False positive True negative
The derived ratios include, among others, the true positive rate:
TPR=TP
TP+FN(45)
and the false positive rate:
FPR=FP
FP+TN.(46)
TPR and FPR are often presented in a form of receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curves (Fawcett 2006 ). Each point in this curve is the performance of an SVM for a given
decision threshold (Yu et al. 2015 ). Calculating the area under this curve (AUC) reduces
a ROC curve into a single scalar value representing the classiﬁer performance (the higherthe AUC values, the better, and 0 ≤AUC≤1). The area under the ROC curve and the
accuracy (ACC):
ACC=TP+TN
TP+TN+FP+FN(47)
are the most widely used measures exploited to quantify the performance of training set
selection algorithms (the classiﬁcation performance of an SVM trained using a reﬁnedset should be maximized). Other common measures include precision, recall and theF-measure (Khosravani et al. 2013 ).
–Size of the reﬁned training set (↓) The main objective of training set selection algorithms
is to minimize the cardinality of the training set (ideally without decaying the SVMclassiﬁcation performance). Hence, the number of vectors in the reﬁned sets elaboratedusing such approaches is almost always investigated. To make this measure easier tointerpret for datasets of different sizes, it is very often presented as the reduction rate
(
R):
R=t
t/prime, (48)
where t/primeis the cardinality of the reﬁned training set, and tis the size of the original
dataset. This reduction rate should be maximized.
–The number of support vectors (↓) As already mentioned, the number of SVs inﬂuences
(linearly) the SVM classiﬁcation time. Therefore, it should be minimized to speed up theoperation of a trained classiﬁer.
–The percentage of vectors in a reﬁned training set selected as support vectors (↑Deter-
mining the desired cardinality of reﬁned sets is often a critical step in training set selectionalgorithms. Such reﬁned sets should be small and should include important vectors which
are likely to be selected as SVs during the SVM training. In several works, the percent-age of vectors in reﬁned training sets selected as SVs has been investigated (Nalepa andKawulok 2016a ; Verbiest et al. 2016 ). This percentage should be maximized to keep the
number of “useless” vectors in a reﬁned set as small as possible. However, this measurecan easily become misleading—selecting all training set vectors as SVs can be a sign ofoverﬁtting and lack of generalization capabilities.
123