Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 873
T/prime. Although the algorithm is quite simple, it proved to be efﬁcient and retrieves high-quality
reﬁned training sets.
3.2 Neighborhood analysis methods
A signiﬁcant research effort has been put into proposing techniques which exploit statisticalproperties of the training set vectors (or their neighborhoods) in search of high-quality reﬁnedtraining sets. Shin and Cho ( 2002 ) proposed a k-nearest neighbors ( k-NN) based pattern
selection algorithm which aims at selecting correctly-labeled patterns near the SVM decisionhyperplane. The authors introduced two notions: the proximity andcorrectness . Vectors that
are close to the boundary will likely have mixed-class neighbors, and their proximity maybe estimated using entropy of their k-nearest neighbors. The entropy calculated for a vector
afor its k-nearest neighbors is
E(a,k)=−/summationdisplay
i∈{C+,C−}Pi·log Pi, (41)
where
Pi=ki
k(42)
and kidenotes the number of neighboring vectors belonging to the i-th class. Vectors with
positive proximity ( E>0) tend to lay near the hyperplane and are processed. Only the
correctly labeled vectors from the set extracted in the previous step are included in T/prime.T h e
correctness is deﬁned as the k-NN voting probability of the neighboring vectors. If this
probability is larger than a threshold, then the corresponding vector survives in a reﬁned set.
The k-NN analysis may become quite computationally intensive. The same authors
improved this technique to speed up the computation (Shin and Cho 2003 ). The improved
algorithm is based on a simple observation, that the neighbors of a vector which is positionednear the hyperplane are also situated in its vicinity. This observation has been used to reducethe search space—a signiﬁcant number of Tvectors can be pruned once some of vectors
positioned near the hyperplane are found. The kvalue notably affects the performance of this
technique, therefore it should be carefully tuned (Shin and Cho 2007 ).
Guo et al. ( 2010 ) exploited ensemble classiﬁers in their training set selection algorithm.
Using a standard margin deﬁnition (Schapire et al. 1998 ) for the binary classiﬁcation, the
margin ( φ
M) of a positive-class vector ais given as
φM(a)=vC+−vC−
vC++vC−, (43)
where vC+denotes the number of votes (of the base classiﬁers) for the true class C+,vC−is
the number of votes for the opposite class, and −1≤φM(a)≤1. IfφM(a)is positive, then it
means that ahas been correctly classiﬁed (it is annotated with an incorrect class otherwise).
Also, a large value of φM(a)indicates that the majority of the base classiﬁers have classiﬁed
this vector correctly, therefore it is most likely positioned in the center of the positive classdistribution (and perhaps surrounded by the same-class vectors). On the other hand, if thevalue of φ
M(a)is large negative, then ais probably an outlier (or a noisy vector). Finally,
ifφM(a)≈0, then ais positioned near the decision boundary, since a similar number of
base classiﬁers classiﬁed this vector to two opposite classes. Guo et al. modiﬁed the originalmargin concept and introduced a new one in which the information about the correct classof a sample ais omitted:
123