878 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
values) may be optimal for different training sets. In ALGA, two independent populations
(one representing reﬁned training sets, and the other the SVM models) are alternately evolvedto solve two optimization problems having a common ﬁtness function (classiﬁcation accuracyover the validation set obtained using an SVM trained with the best reﬁned training set andkernel function). The alternating process continues as long as at least one of these twosubsequent optimization phases manages to improve the average population ﬁtness. Theexperiments performed for both artiﬁcially generated and benchmark datasets revealed thatALGA can effectively select an SVM training set without the necessity to tune the SVMhyper-parameters beforehand. Although the authors focused on the radial-basis function(RBF) kernel, this method can be easily tailored to any other kernel function. An interestingresearch direction would be to enhance ALGA with an additional step of selecting featuresfor high-dimensional datasets.
3.4 Active learning methods
In active learning models, vectors are initially not labeled, and the goal of an active learner isto infer a predictor of labels from the input data. It is accomplished in an interactive manner, inwhich the learner may request a label of a particular vector (this operation is associated withan appropriate cost). Hence, active learning may be interpreted as the process of obtaininglabels for unlabeled data, and it can be applied for the entirely unlabeled datasets, as well asfor those sets which encompass vectors with missing labels.
An active learning technique for selecting reﬁned sets was proposed by Schohn and Cohn
(2000 )—they utilized a computationally efﬁcient heuristics to label vectors lying near the
SVM decision hyperplane. The authors exploit the selective sampling approach (being a form
of active learning), in which learners are presented with a large unlabeled dataset, and aregiven the opportunity of labeling these vectors themselves (labeling of each vector “costs”some artiﬁcial fee). The learners attempt to minimize the error on the data which will appearin the system in the future. In the heuristic algorithm suggested by Schohn and Cohn ( 2000 ),
one active learning criterion is to search for vectors which are orthogonal to the space spannedby the current reﬁned training set. Additionally, the information about the already known datadimensions is boosted by narrowing the existing margin—only those vectors which are closeto the decision hyperplane are effectively retrieved.
SVMs enhanced with active learning algorithms have been successfully applied in many
real-life applications (Tong and Koller 2002 ). Tong and Chang ( 2001 ) exploited such tech-
niques in their system to conduct effective relevance feedback
3for image retrieval, and
proposed the pool-based active learning approach. A pool contains unlabeled Tvectors
which are analyzed and appended to T/primeif necessary. The classiﬁer is trained using a labeled
set (if it is the ﬁrst feedback round, then the user is asked to label a number of randomly drawnvectors; otherwise, the user labels some pool images which are the closest to the decisionboundary).
3.5 Random sampling methods
In random sampling techniques for selecting reﬁned SVM training sets, the Tvectors are
drawn randomly, and—based on additional heuristics—are appended to T/prime’s or not. The
simplicity of such methods makes them straightforward to implement and becomes theirbiggest advantage in practical scenarios. Also, they appear sufﬁcient in a number of real-
3This process interactively extracts the desired content for a user based on the user feedback—the user decides
whether the presented data are relevant or not.
123