874 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
φ/prime
M(a)=vC1−vC2
vC1+vC2, (44)
where C1is the more voted class (not necessarily the correct one). Therefore, 0 ≤φ/prime
M(a)≤1,
and the smaller values of φ/prime
M(a)indicate that the vector is close to the hyperplane. Based on
that, the authors build an ensemble classiﬁer with all Tvectors, calculate the margin of each
vector, sort them according to the margin values and select vectors with the smallest φ/prime
M(a)’s
as SV candidates to form a reﬁned training set. The base classiﬁers were the classiﬁcationand regression trees (Loh 2011 ) (bagging was used to create an ensemble). This approach is
suitable also for imbalanced datasets.
A simple yet effective neighborhood analysis of each Tvector was proposed by Wang
et al. ( 2005 ). For each training vector, the largest sphere which contains only vectors of the
same class is determined, and the number of vectors encompassed by this sphere is veriﬁed(N
afor each a). Then, all Tvectors are sorted ascendingly according to the Navalues— t/prime/2
vectors with the lowest Na’s (for each class) are appended to a reﬁned set, since vectors
surrounded by the same-class vectors will most likely not be SVs and can be safely removedfrom T
/prime. The rejected Tvectors are thus characterized by large Navalues. This approach
slightly resembles the MEB-based techniques.
In a recent paper, Guo and Boukir ( 2015 ) extended their ensemble margin-based
algorithm—they pointed out that classic bagging trees are not effective in the case of largetraining sets and the large dimensionality of the input data. They proposed to exploit morepowerful ensemble methods including random forests and a very small ensemble referredto as the small votes instance selection (SVIS). In SVIS, the authors decreased the size of
the classiﬁer committee. Ensemble classiﬁers were utilized in other algorithms to tacklereal-world problems, e.g., selecting reﬁned training sets from biomedical data (Oh et al.2011 ).
Li (2011 ) proposed a technique for selecting training sets for one-class SVMs, which can
be adapted for two-class SVMs. In this algorithm, vectors belonging to a single class clusterare contained in a surface—this surface may consist of convex and concave shapes, and itis so “tight” that it passes through all extreme datapoints of the cluster. An example of acluster is visualized in Fig. 8. Depending on the shape curvature, all neighboring vectors of
the extreme vectors will be positioned on the same side of the tangent plane (rendered as thedotted line for the extreme points P
1and P2in Fig. 8), or the majority of neighbors will be
positioned on the same side of this plane. The authors proposed an approximation algorithmwhich analyzes the neighboring vectors of a given one (say a) in search of the normal vector
of the tangent plane at a. When all of the extreme vectors are found, they should survive in
a reﬁned set.
Li and Maguire ( 2011 ) proposed a method for selecting critical patterns from the input
dataset which combines various techniques. First, the surface which passes through allextreme points and encompassing one-class vectors is created, and then the hyperplane is
Fig. 8 One-class cluster
contained in a surface built withconvex and concave shapes (a),
andbtwo tangent planes at
points P
1and P2. The extreme
vectors are rendered in black(a) (b)
P1P2
123