Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 877
Fig. 9 Creating a child in PCA2MA. This ﬁgure was inspired by Nalepa and Kawulok ( 2016a )
PCA2MA) outperform other state-of-the-art techniques, and reﬁned sets obtained using these
algorithms allow for training well-performing SVMs (with smaller numbers of SVs).
Other works on EAs for this task have been reported recently. Fernandes et al. ( 2015 )
applied a multi-objective evolutionary technique in order to evolve balanced reﬁned train-ing sets extracted from imbalanced datasets. The objectives were to elaborate diverse andwell-performing classiﬁers, and to combine them into the classiﬁer ensemble. The experi-ments performed for several benchmark sets showed that the evolutionary approach is able tooutperform other state-of-the-art techniques for dealing with large and imbalanced datasets.
Pighetti et al. ( 2015 ) enhanced a genetic evolution with the locality sensitive hashing (to
ﬁnd the nearest vector in Tfor any generated vector during the optimization) (Gorisse et al.
2010 ), and used it for tackling multi-class classiﬁcation problems (one-versus-all strategy was
exploited). Although the approach is promising, it is unclear when to stop the optimizationfor multi-class tasks (the authors terminated the evolution once 60 vectors from each categoryhave been retrieved).
Verbiest et al. ( 2016 ) recently investigated the performance of different evolutionary tech-
niques for selection of SVM training sets: (i) a standard genetic algorithm, (ii) the adaptivegenetic algorithm, which dynamically updates the crossover threshold [only notably differentparents can be crossed over (Eshelman 1991 )], and (iii) the steady state genetic algorithm
[two parents are selected to generate offspring (Cano et al. 2003 )]. Interestingly, the ﬁtness
involved not only the classiﬁcation accuracy of the SVM classiﬁer, but also the reductionratio, indicating how much the input Thas been shrunk. These wrapper techniques were ini-
tially used for the k-NN classiﬁcation, and the extensive experimental study clearly proved
that they can be easily tailored for SVMs as well.
In their recent paper, Kawulok and Nalepa ( 2015 ) showed that evolving both training
vectors and labels can be effectively used to handle learning SVMs from weakly-labeledtraining sets. In their memetic approach, the best individual in a population is an expert ,
a n di ti su s e di nt h e tuition operation. The training set is relabeled if necessary, and the
other individuals are reﬁned (the vectors which changed the label during the tuition arereplaced). Albeit the algorithm performed very well for mislabeled datasets, its performancedeteriorated for correctly labeled T’s—this issue requires further investigation.
An interesting alternating genetic algorithm (abbreviated as ALGA) for optimizing the
SVM model alongside SVM training sets has been proposed by Kawulok et al. ( 2017 ). The
authors observed that different SVM models (i.e., kernel functions and their hyper-parameter
123