Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 871
(b) (a)
Fig. 7 Removal of unnecessary training set vectors from aone-class cluster— bthe rejected vectors are
annotated in gray
to cluster the entire T), the distance density set is calculated (the distance density counts the
number of vectors which fall into a circle centered in the cluster centroid and having theradius equal to the distance between the centroid and a given Tvector). It is assumed that
vectors situated near the centroid are “dense”, whereas those positioned far from the centroidare sparse. Finally, the Fisher’s discriminant analysis is utilized to ﬁnd the boundary betweenthe dense and the sparse parts of each cluster (Makris et al. 2011 )—only the sparse vectors
are included in T
/prime. A removal of the internal cluster vectors is shown in Fig. 7.
An additional technique introduced by Shen et al. ( 2016 ) concerns removing redundant
clusters. The initial clusters retrieved using k-means clustering are further divided into one-
class and heterogeneous clusters. The latter ones are then sub-clustered to distinguish one-class inner clusters. The authors point out that SVs will be derived from the heterogeneousclusters with a higher probability, and some Tvectors can be safely deleted from one-
class clusters. Redundant one-class clusters are removed using the max-min cluster distancealgorithm, and the vectors belonging to these clusters are rejected from T
/prime.
Since clustering techniques may become quite time-consuming, there appeared approaches
which utilize various parallel architectures (e.g., graphics processing units) in order to speedup the T
/primeselection process (Yuan et al. 2015 ), and they were applied to real-life problems.
Another important issue of these methods which needs to be addressed is a proper selectionof their crucial parameters, which can easily affect reﬁned training sets. Finally, in manycases it is still necessary to analyze the entire Tto extract useful information.
3.1.2 Non-clustering methods
Apart from clustering-based methods, there are a number of approaches which exploit the
geometrical information about a training set without grouping the data. Abe and Inoue ( 2001 )
estimate which Tvectors are positioned near the SVM decision boundary using a classiﬁer
based on the Mahalanobis distance. This approach is especially suitable for polynomial kernelfunctions, since the decision boundaries are expressed by polynomials when the Mahalanobisdistance (which is invariant for linear transformations of the input variables) is applied.First, the centers and the covariance matrices are found for all Tvectors (for both classes
independently). Then, for each vector, the relative difference of distances (r
MD) is calculated.
For a positive-class vector, it becomes
rMD(a)=MD−(a)−MD+(a)
MD+(a)≤ηMD, (35)
123