866 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
Fig. 3 Flowchart of a basic clustering-based method to select reﬁned training sets. The dashed line annotates
the step which may be omitted in algorithms which analyze all clusters
This section gathers the algorithms which extract reﬁned SVM training sets in order to
reduce the computational and storage burden of the training. We divide these techniques intoﬁve main categories: (i) data geometry analysis algorithms (investigating the geometry of T
in search of candidate vectors that should be included into the reﬁned sets T
/prime’s), (ii) neigh-
borhood analysis methods (exploiting the statistical properties of Tand investigating the
local neighborhoods of Tvectors), (iii) evolutionary techniques (evolving reﬁned training
sets), (iv) active learning, and (v) random sampling techniques.
3.1 Data geometry analysis methods
The following section discusses approaches which exploit the information about the trainingset structure to extract SV candidates (i.e., such vectors, which are likely to be selected asSVs in the training process). These vectors are then used to form reﬁned training sets ofsigniﬁcantly smaller sizes than the original dataset. All approaches can be divided into twogroups—the ﬁrst encompasses clustering-based techniques, whereas the second contains theremaining geometry-based algorithms.
3.1.1 Clustering-based methods
Clustering-based algorithms have been intensively studied for selecting reﬁned training sets.Lyhyaoui et al. ( 1999 ) indicate their theoretical advantages: (i) clustering-based techniques
can always eliminate the useless vectors from T, (ii) they are applicable to multi-class prob-
lems, (iii) their cost objectives may be freely established for a given problem. However,these methods suffer from a difﬁcult problem of determining a potentially large number ofparameters (the clustering parameters, and the number of vectors annotated as important foreach cluster are the most important parameters).
A ﬂowchart visualizing a standard training set selection algorithm which utilizes clustering
is given in Fig. 3. After setting the algorithm parameters, vectors from Tare clustered using
a given clustering technique
2. Then, the clusters to be further analyzed are selected (this
step may be omitted for algorithms investigating all clusters, thus it is annotated with thedashed line in the ﬂowchart), and the SV candidates are ﬁnally included in a reﬁned set. Thisprocedure is most often performed for each class in Tindependently.
Lyhyaoui et al. ( 1999 ) applied the frequency-sensitive competitive learning to cluster
training set vectors (Scheunders and Backer 1999 ), with various numbers of centroids for
each class. Once centroids are determined, they are further analyzed to extract the mostimportant (critical) centroids. First, each of them is visited and the nearest opposite-classcentroid is found. If two centroids (denoted as the centroids A and B) are the nearest toone another in both senses (thus when the centroid A is the closest centroid for B and viceversa), then they are put into the pool of critical centroids. Finally, the already selected
2It was shown that the choice of the clustering technique does not inﬂuence the next T/primeselection steps
signiﬁcantly (Lyhyaoui et al. 1999 ).
123