Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 893
presented in Sect. 3.6, the number of algorithms for selection of reﬁned sets is quite large,
but their underpinning strategies for extracting such information can be classiﬁed into just ﬁvecategories. Although some methods combine different information sources (see Table 1), they
are in the minority, and this approach has not been intensively investigated in the literatureso far.
Training SVMs from large datasets remains an open research problem. A plethora of meth-
ods for tackling the SVM training from such datasets are an excellent point of departure forfurther research. We believe that emerging metaheuristics (especially population-based ones),combined with reﬁnement procedures should be intensively investigated towards parameter-less SVMs. Such engines would be extremely useful, since determining appropriate parametervalues of an algorithm at hand is very time-consuming for massive sets, especially if the trial-and-error approach is exploited. It will be beneﬁcial to construct hybrid algorithms, whichcouple methods for selecting reﬁned training sets, and for enhancing the SVM training. It hasnot been explored in the literature—we believe that it could become an immediate answerto some of the big data problems, where the data veracity, velocity, volume, and variety playthe pivotal role and should be treated comprehensively.
An important research direction encompasses creating algorithms, which utilize various
information sources in search of important training set vectors. We believe that such tech-niques (ideally independent from the cardinality of T) will be the main stream of development
soon, since they allow for extracting various bits of information about the dataset, and forcombining them into the solid knowledge about the Tvectors. On the other hand, incorporat-
ing those methods which beneﬁt from the same source of information into hybrid approacheswill most likely not result in boosting the quality of the reﬁned sets. Due to the wide avail-ability of a variety of parallel architectures, it will be beneﬁcial to develop algorithms whichanalyze datasets in the complementary ways in parallel. Then, the results could be merged inthe ﬁnal decision engine, used for assessing the Tvectors. Finally, algorithms which target
learning SVMs from imbalanced and weakly-labeled datasets are becoming crucial due tothe nature of the available data (Sáez et al. 2016 ).
Finally, the research summarized in this survey needs to be confronted with deep
learning—a very powerful classiﬁcation tool for a variety of pattern recognition tasks (LeCunet al. 2016 ). However, it has also been criticized for being difﬁcult to tune and easy to fool,
domain-agnostic, and hard to interpret (Nguyen et al. 2015 ). A very interesting research direc-
tion includes coupling deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with SVMs (alongsidetraining set selection algorithms) in a comprehensive classiﬁcation engine. Convolutionallayers of CNNs are in fact feature extractors—features automatically elaborated in suchlayers could be classiﬁed using SVMs. This would allow for omitting a tedious process ofpreparing hand-engineered features (which is particularly important in the case of image andvideo data).
Acknowledgements JN and MK were supported by the National Science Centre, Poland, under Research
Grant No. DEC-2017/25/B/ST6/00474, and JN was supported by the Silesian University of Technology under
the Grant for young researchers (BKM-509/RAu2/2017). The authors are grateful to the anonymous Reviewers
for their constructive and valuable comments that helped improve the paper.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.
Ethical approval This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by
any of the authors.
123