Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 875
positioned at the tangent to this surface. The position of the vectors will depend on the curva-
ture of the surface (if it is convex, then all vectors will appear on the same size of the plane).To deal with the overlapping patterns in the input space, the authors enhanced the algorithmwith a remedy which removes the class overlap in the set. This strategy is based on the Bayesposterior probability of a vector abelonging to a class
C, denoted as P(C,a). For two-class
sets, both P(C+,a)and P(C−,a)are estimated. If the larger probability is obtained for the
class which adoes not belong to, then this vector is removed from the training set. Finally,
any duplicated patterns from Tare removed from the dataset during the pre-processing. The
authors showed that their algorithm is competitive to four state-of-the-art techniques and isapplicable to other classiﬁers.
In a recent paper, Cervantes et al. ( 2015 ) incorporated an induction tree to reduce the size
of SVM training sets. The main idea behind the proposed technique is to train SVMs usingsigniﬁcantly smaller reﬁned training sets, and then to label vectors from Tas those which are
close or far from the decision hyperplane. A decision tree is utilized to identify vectors whichhave similar characteristics to those annotated as SVs. The initial selection of a small subsetofTis accomplished with a very simple heuristics in which the level of dataset imbalance is
investigated. The authors classify the incoming dataset (based on two pre-deﬁned thresholds,
τ
u=0.1a n d τb=0.25, and the imbalance ratio Iof the dataset, given as I=min{t+,t−}
t,
where t+andt−denote the numbers of vectors from each class in T) to one out of the following
classes: (i) balanced, (ii) slightly imbalanced (if τb≤I≤0.5), (iii) moderately imbalanced
(τu≤I<τ b), or (iv) highly imbalanced ( I<τ u). If a dataset is balanced, then the initial
subset is retrieved using random sampling. Otherwise, if a dataset is slightly or moderatelyimbalanced, the inverse probability proportional to the dataset cardinality is applied (e.g., if80% of vectors come from the negative class, hence
I=0.2, then random sampling draws
80% of positive-class vectors). If a dataset is highly imbalanced, then all vectors from theless numerous class survive in T
/prime. Based on the decision hyperplane obtained using T/prime,a
decision tree is induced to model the distribution of SVs. This tree is used to retrieve thosevectors which were not annotated as SVs, but follow a similar distribution—they are includedinT
/prime.
He et al. ( 2011 ) introduced a neighborhood-based rough set model (FARNeM) to search
for boundary vectors in T. This model is used to divide the vectors into three regions: (i) the
positive region, (ii) the noisy region, and (iii) the boundary region. Additionally, all inputdata features are partitioned into: (i) strongly relevant features, (ii) weakly relevant andindispensable features, (iii) weakly relevant and redundant features, and (iv) irrelevant ones.The authors ﬁnd a feature space based on these feature groups, and then look for important
Tvectors which should be added to T
/prime. The aim of the feature selection algorithm is to
retrieve the minimum number of attributes which characterize the input data as good as allattributes, thus it incrementally increases the subset of attributes until the dependence is notboosted. FARNeM proceeds with the analysis of training set vectors to distinguish betweenSV candidates (those vectors positioned in the boundary region are probable SVs), uselessvectors and noisy ones based on the neighborhood rough set model. The authors use twoimportant thresholds which affect the performance of FARNeM—they should be tuned withcare since their improper selection can quite easily jeopardize the algorithm performance.
3.3 Evolutionary methods
Although evolutionary algorithms (EAs) have been shown very effective in solving a widerange of pattern recognition and optimization tasks (Pietruszkiewicz and Imada 2013 ;L ie ta l .
2007 ; Wrona and Pawełczyk 2013 ; Acampora et al. 2015 ; Nalepa et al. 2015a ), they have
123