864 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
2.2 Non-linear SVMs
Many real-life recognition problems are not linearly solvable and require a non-linear decision
function. The kernel trick was introduced to obtain a non-linear hyperplane in SVMs (Boser
et al. 1992 ). It consists in deﬁning a kernel function [which must satisfy the conditions
presented by Mercer ( 1909 )] that computes the inner product of two feature vectors in a
derived non-linear feature space:
K(a,a/prime)=φ(a)Tφ(a/prime), (28)
where φ:RD→ Fis a mapping of a vector afrom the input into a non-linear (possibly
inﬁnitely dimensional) feature space F, in which vectors are linearly separable, and K:
RD×RD→ R. The kernel does not require calculating the φmapping explicitly (note that
the kernel matrix which contains all of the kernel values computed between every pair of t
vectors, is of a t×tsize). The non-linear decision function is
f(a)=sgn/parenleftBiggt/summationdisplay
i=1αiyiK(xT
ia)+b/parenrightBigg
, (29)
where αiis a Lagrange multiplier (Tayal et al. 2014 ). To determine the SVM response in a
non-linear kernel space, it is not necessary to calculate the mapping φof any vector given
the kernel function K.
An example of mapping a dataset from (a) a two-dimensional space into a (b) higher-
dimensional one is rendered in Fig. 1. In the original input space, feature vectors belonging
to two classes (visualized as red and blue dots) are not linearly separable. However, whenthese vectors are mapped into a three-dimensional space, then it is possible to determine ahyperplane (shown in yellow) which separates vectors, and it is used for classiﬁcation.
Determining the SVM decision hyperplane is a constrained QP optimization problem—
s e eE q s .( 21)a n d( 22). This QP problem can be solved in O(t
3)time with O(t2)
memory, where tis the cardinality of T, using a standard QP solver (Zeng et al.
(b) (a)
x1x2
Fig. 1 Example of determining the decision hyperplane for a non-linear case— ablue and red dots visualize
vectors belonging to two classes, bvectors are mapped into a higher-dimensional space, where they can be
separated using an SVM hyperplane (in yellow). (Color ﬁgure online)
123