868 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
cluster, therefore there is at least one centroid) of both trees. If there are too few vectors in this
set, then the second level entries of the trees are included in a reﬁned set. Then, the entriespositioned near the hyperplane (so-called the low margin clusters ) are de-clustered, and the
child entries de-clustered from the parents are added to T
/primealong with the non-de-clustered
parents. Another SVM is ﬁnally trained using the centroids of T/primeentries—this process is
continued until there are no entries to be de-clustered. Although the method appeared to bewell-scalable for large datasets, the authors pointed out that it is currently limited to linearkernels since the hierarchical micro-clusters will not be isomorphic to high-dimensionalfeature spaces. Also, the algorithm parameters ( b
CFandtCF) should be selected with care for
an analyzed dataset.
Koggalage and Halgamuge ( 2004 ) proposed a very interesting approach similar to SVM-
KM—ﬁrst, the k-means clustering is applied to ﬁnd the initial clusters, then the crisp clusters
are determined (i.e., those clusters containing one-class vectors), and ﬁnally vectors to berejected from Tare determined. The authors showed that some vectors from the crisp clusters
may be annotated as SVs, thus they should not be automatically removed from reﬁned sets.Therefore, for each crisp cluster, there is a safety region deﬁned which contains its crucialvectors (positioned near the cluster border). The process of rejecting internal vectors from acrisp cluster is visualized in Fig. 4. The width of the safety region (in yellow) is determined
based on the number of vectors in a cluster and the radius of the cluster, therefore it is variablefor different clusters.
Wang and Xu ( 2004 ) proposed a heuristic SVM (HSVM), in which the vector similarity
measure ( s
HSVM ) is deﬁned at ﬁrst, and then vectors are grouped into kHSVM groups. The
similarity function is given as
sHSVM =f/parenleftBigg
1/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleai−aj/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
2/parenrightBigg
, (33)
where ai/negationslash=aj,a n d f(x)=x—the larger the value of the similarity measure, the closer
(geometrically) the corresponding vectors are. For each group, the average vector is foundand used to remove other training vectors, if their s
HSVM values (with respect to the average
vector) are larger than the assumed threshold. As in other methods which exploit somepre-deﬁned thresholds, this threshold must be selected very carefully (sensitivity to thesethreshold values is a disadvantage of such techniques).
In the algorithm proposed by Cervantes et al. ( 2008 ), the concept of the minimum enclosing
ball (MEB) clustering has been introduced. The MEB of a given set S
MEB is the smallest
ball enclosing all balls and vectors in SMEB. The ball is denoted as B(cB,rB),w h e r e cBand
rBare the center and the radius of B. Since ﬁnding an optimal ball for a given set is very
challenging, the authors proposed to use the (1+/epsilon1)—approximation of MEBs. After the
Fig. 4 Removing the internal
vectors from a crisp cluster (a),
based on the safety region(annotated with yellow) (b).T h e
removed vectors are grayed.(Color ﬁgure online)(a) (b)
123