880 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
Table 1 Sources of information used for generating SVM reﬁned training sets
Source Description
Local The local neighborhood of a training vector is analyzed, and based on the outcome of this
analysis, this vector may be classiﬁed as important (i.e., likely to be selected as a SV), or
useless . The latter vectors are usually not appended to the reﬁned sets
Global The global layout and characteristics of a training set are investigated in search of important
vectors which should be included in the reﬁned set
Wrapper In this approach, the SVM classiﬁer is trained using a retrieved reﬁned set (or sets, in the case
of population-based algorithms), and the quality of this reﬁned set is quantiﬁed using theclassiﬁcation performance of the learned SVM—see Sect. 3.7for details (commonly, all
vectors from T, or a subset of Tvectors are classiﬁed to verify the SVM performance—in
the latter case, wrapper techniques may be independent from the cardinality of the entiretraining set). The classiﬁer is often treated as a “black box” in these wrapper techniques
SVM As in wrapper techniques, the SVM classiﬁer is learned using the reﬁned training set at ﬁrst.
However, the Tvectors are assessed based on the speciﬁc features of the trained SVM
(e.g., the vectors selected as SVs in the training process are considered important)
Theory The theory behind the SVM classiﬁer or the desired training data characteristics are used to
estimate the importance of a given training vector. Contrary to the “SVM” informationsource, the classiﬁer is nottrained before the training set vectors can be assessed in this case
quite ambiguous in the literature (the cardinality of large sets may vary from hundreds
to millions of Tvectors).
3.7 Assessing SVM training set selection algorithms
Assessing the quality of emerging SVM training set selection algorithms is a difﬁcult and
multi-fold task. These techniques can be investigated both quantitatively and qualitatively
(e.g., by visualizing the extracted reﬁned sets together with SVs and verifying whether theyform any speciﬁc geometrical patterns). In this section, we discuss the quantitative measureswhich are used to assess new and existing training set selection algorithms alongside thestandard experimental setup and datasets (together with their characteristics) that are usuallyadopted in the experiments. Finally, we present several practical applications in which variousalgorithms for selecting reﬁned SVM training sets have been utilized.
3.7.1 Quantitative measures
The following quantitative measures have been widely adopted in the literature to assess theperformance of new training set selection techniques—for each measure we indicate whetherits value is to be maximized ( ↑) or minimized ( ↓):
–Classiﬁcation performance of an SVM trained using a reﬁned set (↑) The performance
of classiﬁers (including SVMs) is assessed based on ratios derived from the number of(a) correctly classiﬁed positive-class vectors— true positives (TP), (b) correctly classi-
ﬁed negative-class vectors— true negatives (TN), (c) incorrectly classiﬁed negative-class
vectors— false positives (FP), and (d) incorrectly classiﬁed positive-class vectors— false
negatives (FN) obtained for a test set which was not used during the training (see Table 2).
Utilizing the unseen dataset allows for verifying the generalization capabilities of a clas-siﬁer.
123