Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 867
critical centroids are utilized to classify the remaining ones using the 1-nearest neighbor
algorithm, and the wrongly classiﬁed centroids are considered important and annotated ascritical (they will most likely lay near the decision hyperplane). The authors developed fourdifferent sample selection mechanisms to extract the ﬁnal vectors which are to be included inthe reﬁned training set. These approaches are based on: (i) analysis of the dispersion of thevectors, (ii) the vector’s neighborhood analysis (i.e., the nearest opposite-class vector of theone added to T
/primeis added to T/primeas well), (iii) the combination of (i) and (ii), and (iv) analysis
of the relations between vectors and centroids. The authors concluded that applying differentselection algorithms does not drastically inﬂuence the classiﬁcation score (however, the two-class training set used in the experiments was very small).
Thek-means clustering has been utilized by Barros de Almeida et al. ( 2000 )i nt h e i rr e ﬁ n e d
training set selection algorithm referred to as SVM-KM. In SVM-KM, kclusters (where kis
a user-deﬁned input parameter of the algorithm) are formed for the entire training set ( notfor
vectors belonging to different classes independently). Then, the one-class clusters (i.e., thosecontaining vectors belonging to a single class) are disregarded and only their centroids survivein a reﬁned set, whereas all vectors from the heterogeneous clusters (containing vectorsfrom different classes) are appended to T
/prime. It is worth noting that the data distribution may
signiﬁcantly affect the performance of SVM-KM (it is suitable for dense datasets and maymisbehave for the sparse ones). Also, the value of kshould be set with care, since it can
easily jeopardize the algorithm behavior.
In the clustering-based SVMs (abbreviated as CB-SVMs), Yu et al. ( 2003 ) applied a
hierarchical micro-clustering (Zhang et al. 1996 ), which scans a training set in search of
valuable vectors. CB-SVM builds a micro-cluster tree (referred to as the clustering feature
[CF] tree) by adding the incoming Tvectors to clusters. It does not allow for backtracking,
thus the data distribution may inﬂuence its capabilities, but the CF trees can still extract maindata distribution patterns. A clustering feature (for a given cluster c
i) is given as the following
triple:
CF=(ti,LS,SS), (30)
where tidenotes the number of vectors in this cluster, LS and SS are the linear and the square
sums of tivectors in cigiven as
LS=ti/summationdisplay
j=ixj (31)
and
SS=ti/summationdisplay
j=ix2
j, (32)
respectively. A CF tree is a height-balanced tree characterized by two parameters: the branch-
ing factor ( bCF), and the threshold ( tCF). Each non-leaf node encompasses at most bCFentries
of the form (CFj,child j),w h e r e j=1,2,..., bCF, whereas the leaf nodes do not have chil-
dren. Thus, each non-leaf node may be interpreted as a cluster composed of the subclustersrepresented by its children. The threshold t
CFis the maximal cluster radius in any leaf node.
The CF trees are built following procedures resembling those applied in the B +− trees. A
noteworthy feature and the advantage of this clustering is a possibility of handling outliersand noisy vectors—those leaf entries which contain signiﬁcantly smaller number of vectorsthan the other ones are considered as outliers.
In CB-SVM, the CF trees are constructed for both classes separately, and SVMs are trained
using centroids of the root entries (there is at least one entry in the root, each entry being a
123