Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 889
–Hand-written digits classiﬁcation In several works (Shin and Cho 2003 ,2007 ;
Nishida and Kurita 2008 ), the authors tackled the multi-class hand-written digits clas-
siﬁcation problem and exploited the MNIST dataset ( http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/
mnist/ ). They applied SVM training set selection algorithms to retrieve useful data
from 6 ×105training images (hand-written digits belonging to 10 classes, see Fig. 11).
Important applications of the automated analysis of the digitalized hand-written textinclude bank check processing, postal address identiﬁcation, analysis of historicaldocuments or biometric authentication.
–Skin detection and segmentation Detecting pixels representing human skin in color
images (which is a preliminary step of the skin region segmentation process whoseaim is to determine the boundaries of skin regions) is a difﬁcult and important patternrecognition task. Its applications include content ﬁltering, hand and face detectionand tracking, human-computer interaction and many more (Kawulok et al. 2014 ).
Kawulok and Nalepa ( 2012 ) generated the Skin dataset of skin and non-skin pixels
(in the YC
bCrcolor space; 4 ×106pixels in total)—they exploited images from
the ECU face and skin detection database elaborated by Phung et al. ( 2005 )( s e e
example images in Fig. 12—note that skin pixels expose different color and intensity
characteristics), and used this set to test their several SVM training set selection algo-rithms (Nalepa and Kawulok 2014a ,b,2016a ; Kawulok and Nalepa 2014a ; Nalepa
2016 ).
–Hand pose estimation Kawulok and Nalepa ( 2014b ) applied SVMs to recognize hand
poses based on the shape context descriptors (Belongie et al. 2002 ). In their approach,
vectors of differences between two hand shapes are classiﬁed to determine whetherthey represent the same pose (hence, the class decision is indirect). The authorsshowed that training sets can become very large even for a relatively small numberof gestures (i.e., for ngestures,
n!
2·(n−2)!feature vectors are obtained). To make SVMs
applicable in this scenario, a genetic technique was utilized for selecting reﬁned SVMtraining sets (Kawulok and Nalepa 2012 ).
–Face detection Kawulok ( 2007 ) and Wang et al. ( 2013a ) veriﬁed their SVM training
set selection algorithms in the face detection problem—Wang et al. ( 2013a ) exploited
a dataset with almost 3500 images, whereas Kawulok ( 2007 ) used 1000 images
from the famous Feret database presented by Phillips et al. ( 1998 ). Face detection
is a pattern recognition task aimed at determining whether or not an input imagecontains a human face. Face detection algorithms are being exploited in surveillancesystems, human–computer interaction and entertainment applications, human gaitcharacterization, gender classiﬁcation and many more (Paul and Haque 2013 ).
–Detection of deceptive facial expressions Facial image analysis is an active topic—
new research directions focus on facial dynamics recognition and understanding fordeception detection, behavioral analysis and diagnosis of psychological disorders.Kawulok et al. ( 2016 ) used fast smile intensity detectors to elaborate textural facial
features that are fed into the SVM classiﬁcation pipeline to distinguish between posedand spontaneous expressions in video sequences from the UvA-NEMO databasecontaining 1240 sequences, including 643 posed and 597 spontaneous smiles (Dibek-lio˘glu et al. 2012 )—see examples in Fig. 13. Since these features are extracted for
each frame (also those which are neutral , without any features exposing the smile
characteristics), SVM training sets may become very large and often contain “use-less” vectors. To deal with these issues, the authors utilized their memetic trainingset selection algorithm (Nalepa and Kawulok 2016a ).
123