Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 869
(b) (a)
Fig. 5 Creating the reﬁned set using SR-DSA: athe entire T(two colors indicate two classes), bvectors are
grouped into clusters—the interior vectors and the exterior vectors are rejected (they are rendered in gray andblack, respectively). This ﬁgure is inspired by Wang and Shi ( 2008 ). (Color ﬁgure online)
MEB clustering, a reﬁned set contains all the vectors from mixed-class clusters, along with
centroids of one-class clusters. After the SVM training, an additional de-clustering is appliedto recover other potentially valuable Tvectors which lay near the decision hyperplane and
to append them to T
/prime.
A similar approach (named SebSVM) was proposed by Zeng et al. ( 2008 ). Here, the
convex hull vectors are selected to form reﬁned training sets in the feature space. This isperformed by solving the MEB problem in the feature space: at ﬁrst, data are mapped into ahigher-dimensional kernel space, and two MEBs are created (for both classes independently).Based on those MEBs, the convex hull vectors from Tare extracted. Similar to Koggalage
and Halgamuge ( 2004 ), the safety region is utilized in SebSVM to avoid removing useful
vectors from T
/prime.
Wang and Shi ( 2008 ) proposed an algorithm for reducing the size of training sets by data
structure analysis (abbreviated as SR-DSA). In their approach, the authors used the Ward-linkage clustering (Ward 1963 ), which enables obtaining ellipsoidal clusters. The Ward’s
linkage for two clusters ( c
1andc2) is given as
W(c1,c2)=|c1|·|c2|
|c1|+|c2|·||µ1−µ2||2, (34)
where µ1and µ2are the average vectors. Initially, each vector is a separate cluster, and
these clusters are subsequently merged. The value of the Ward’s linkage increases once thenumber of clusters is decreased during the clustering process. This may be visualized in themerge distance curve which is usually used to ﬁnd the knee point (utilized to determine thedesired number of clusters). After this procedure, a reﬁned training set is elaborated—theinterior vectors from each cluster are removed along with those vectors which are distantfrom other-class clusters based on the Mahalanobis metric. Each class is processed separatelyusing SR-DSA. A visualization of this process is shown in Fig. 5. The main disadvantage of
this method is the necessity of selecting its various parameters (the ﬁnal number of clusters orthe number of internal vectors removed from each cluster being the most important). Thesevalues should be investigated independently for each incoming training set.
An interesting technique which combines the k-means clustering with edge detection
within the entire training set has been proposed by Li et al. ( 2009 ). In this algorithm, the
123