Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 865
2008b ). It quickly becomes infeasible for massively large, real-life datasets. Although there
exist techniques aimed at accelerating the SVM training which include—among others—decomposition-based (Joachims 1999 ), parallel (Li et al. 2011 ; Ferragut and Laska 2012 )
and approximation (Le et al. 2014 ) approaches, many of them introduce additional memory
burden during the optimization (Alamdar et al. 2016 ). Hence, algorithms for reducing the size
of SVM training sets are considered an immediate remedy to the problem of learning SVMsfrom large datasets. Also, the SVM classiﬁcation time is linearly dependent on the numberof SVs [see Eqs. ( 17)a n d( 29)—only those vectors for which the Lagrange multipliers are
greater than zero contribute to the decision]. Therefore, the number of SVs should be keptlow to speed up the classiﬁcation of incoming (unseen) vectors. The number of SVs indirectlydepends on the cardinality of a training set—the smaller the number of vectors in T,t h el e s s
SVs are determined in the training process. A more extensive background information onSVMs, complemented with numerous examples and analogies which further illustrate theconcepts behind SVMs are explained in an excellent tutorial by Burges ( 1998 ).
3 Selecting SVM training sets
All algorithms for dealing with training SVMs from large datasets can be divided into two
main categories including techniques which (i) speed up the SVM training , and (ii) reduce
the size of training sets by selecting candidate vectors (i.e., those vectors which are likely to
be annotated as SVs). In the ﬁrst case, existing techniques are applied to either reduce thecomplexity of the underlying optimization problem, or to handle the optimization processmore efﬁciently. However, this approach still induces the problem of high memory com-plexity of the SVM training process which is challenging and has to be endured in big dataproblems (Guo and Boukir 2015 ;W a n ga n dX u 2004 ). The algorithms from the second cat-
egory select vectors from Tto form signiﬁcantly smaller training sets—in this review, we
focus on approaches for selecting SVM training sets from large datasets.
There are a number of various techniques to reduce the cardinality of a training set which
may be classiﬁed into several categories, based on the underpinning optimization strategy. Ahigh-level classiﬁcation of the algorithms for selecting SVM training sets is given in Fig. 2.
Selecting SVM training sets
Data
geometry
analysis
methods
(Sect. 3.1)Neighborhood
analysis
methods
(Sect. 3.2)Evolutionary
methods
(Sect. 3.3)Active
learning
methods
(Sect. 3.4)Random
sampling
methods
(Sect. 3.5)
Clustering-
based
methods
(Sect. 3.1.1)Non-
clustering
methods
(Sect. 3.1.2)
Fig. 2 General categories of approaches for selecting SVM training sets
123