882 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
–Training set selection, SVM training and classiﬁcation times (↓) In all state-of-the-art
approaches, the execution time of a training set selection algorithm should be minimized.Also, the SVM training and classiﬁcation times are to be minimized (these times arecorrelated with the size of a reﬁned training set and the number of determined SVs).
–Combined quality measure (↑) Although the above-mentioned measures are usually
investigated separately, this approach becomes infeasible in several practical scenarios,e.g., in real-time systems in which a trained SVM should work extremely fast evenif it delivers slightly worse results (i.e., minimizing the number of SVs may be moreimportant than maximizing the classiﬁcation accuracy). In such cases, the problem ofselecting SVM training sets can be considered as a two- (or multi-) objective optimizationproblem: the ﬁrst objective is to maximize the classiﬁcation accuracy of an SVM trainedwith a reﬁned set, and the second is to minimize the number of SVs. Nalepa ( 2016 )
transformed these two objectives into a single quality function
Q(AUC,s)=q·AUC
AUCB+(1−q)·sB
s, (49)
where AUCBdenotes the best (the largest) AUC obtained for the test set (note that AUC
can be replaced by any other classiﬁcation performance measure in this formula), sB
is the best (the lowest) number of determined SVs across the investigated training set
selection algorithms, and qdenotes the importance of the ﬁrst objective (0 <q≤1).
The largest Qvalue is retrieved for the best training set selection algorithm.
3.7.2 Standard experimental setup
In a standard experimental setup, each new training set selection algorithm is compared
with (i) a number of existing selection techniques, and (ii) SVMs trained using the entiretraining set (it may be impossible for extremely large datasets). Randomized approaches (seeTable 3) are often executed multiple times (usually at least 30 ×) and then the quantitative
results are averaged. To deeply investigate the generalization abilities of the algorithms, theexperiments are almost always performed following the k-fold cross-validation strategy (a
dataset is divided into a training and a test set ktimes without any overlaps—a training set
includes (k−1)data chunks, whereas a test set only one chunk; then, the results obtained
for each fold are averaged). The experiments are divided into two groups:
–Sensitivity analysis The impact of the most important components of a new algorithm
on its overall performance is veriﬁed in the sensitivity analysis. Usually, one (or more)components are enabled (the other components are disabled), and the experiments arerepeated for each conﬁguration.
–Comparison with other training set selection algorithms and SVMs trained using the
entire set The comparison with the state of the art is always crucial for new training set
selection algorithms. Also, they are commonly compared qualitatively and quantitatively(using the measures discussed in the previous section) with SVMs trained using the entireset—without any training set selection applied (however, it may be impossible due to thecardinality of this set) and other techniques from the literature (very often from differentcategories).
Since the number of algorithms that are being compared is usually large and each of them
can perform differently for different datasets, executing appropriate (non-parametric) statis-tical tests to investigate the statistical importance of the obtained results became a standard
123