860 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
in parallel with the learned classiﬁer, and they are ﬁnally coupled for the higher-quality
classiﬁcation). Such embedded data cleansing was used for SVMs (Xu et al. 2006 ), also
for adversarial label noise (Xiao et al. 2015 ). The last group encompasses algorithms which
ﬁlter noisy and/or mislabeled vectors from the input set. Although it appears quite tempting(and natural), since it resembles removing outliers and anomalies from the data, it is nottrivial. These ﬁltering algorithms include various graph- and ensemble-based methods, andthose which detect mislabeled vectors by analyzing their impact on the learning procedure.There are works indicating that evolutionary techniques can effectively detect and remove(or just identify) the noise (Ghoggali and Melgani 2009 ; Han and Chang 2013 ). A generic
solution for learning SVMs from weak labels was introduced by Li et al. ( 2013 )—labels
are subject to the optimization. This is effective, if vectors belonging to the opposite classesform well-separated clusters in the kernel space, but this assumption may not hold in manyscenarios (Cour et al. 2009 ; Tapaswi et al. 2015 ).
Handling poor quality data attracts more and more research attention nowadays (Zhu et al.
2014 ). It concerns not only dealing with noisy and weakly-labeled sets, but also with detecting
ambiguous or duplicated data (with overlapping feature values), and outliers (Tsyurmastoet al. 2014 ; Kourou et al. 2015 ). As mentioned by Frenay and Verleysen ( 2014 ), most of
the algorithms make assumptions concerning the data, and are characterized by difﬁcult-to-tune parameters. These approaches should be validated using a larger number of real-lifescenarios to ﬁnd the real noise characteristics. Evolving labels can signiﬁcantly improvethe SVM performance for weakly-labeled sets, as shown by Kawulok and Nalepa ( 2015 ).
An interesting research direction involves algorithms which evolve both labels and reducedtraining sets. Such methods could address the problems of training SVMs from large datasetsand coping with low-quality data comprehensively.
1.2 Motivation and goals
The problem of training SVMs from large datasets is becoming increasingly important sincethe amount of data grows extremely rapidly (note that the term large dataset is very ambigu-
ous in the literature—sizes of such datasets range from hundreds to millions of trainingvectors). There exist generic training set selection techniques [also referred to as instance
selection algorithms in the literature (Olvera-López et al. 2010 )], and those designed for
other classiﬁers [ k-nearest neighbors (Angiulli 2005 ), neural networks (Reeves and Taylor
1998 ), and many other (Hernandez-Leal et al. 2013 ; Wenyuan et al. 2013 )], but—due to the
speciﬁc characteristics of the SVM training process and operation—the majority of SVMtraining set selection algorithms are crafted for this classiﬁer. In this review, we summarizethe state-of-the-art algorithms for selecting SVM training data from large datasets.
The purpose of this review is twofold:
– We present an extensive review of the state-of-the-art methods for selecting SVM training
sets. Not only do we report these methods, but we also discuss their potential weaknesses,strengths, and ideas behind them. This will allow for better understanding (i) how to copewith massive real-life sets, and (ii) how to select an appropriate method for a problem athand.
– We believe that this review will notably help in developing new approaches for select-
ing SVM training sets. The presented taxonomy should be useful in identifying thepotential pitfalls of emerging training set selection algorithms, and in determining whichtechniques could be successfully combined into hybrid algorithms to further boost allavailable knowledge concerning the Tvectors (e.g., those methods which utilize com-
plementary sources of information in search of valuable training vectors). The literature
123