Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 891
(a)
Frame no.: 8 17 22 74 188
(b)
Frame no.: 22 32 120 157 271
Fig. 13 Examples of aposed and bspontaneous smiles (selected frames). This ﬁgure is inspired by Kawulok
et al. ( 2016 )
with the state of the art for such large-scale data. Wang et al. ( 2013a ) tested their
training set selection algorithm on an interesting problem of deciding whether theincoming vector represents RNA of cod ﬁsh (the entire training set encompassedmore than 3 ×10
5vectors with 8 features).
•Diseases classiﬁcation (e.g., leukemia, diabetes, Parkinson’s disease, hepatitis)
There are a bunch of approaches that have been tested on various disease classi-ﬁcation tasks. In a standard medical image analysis scenario, the cardinality ofa training set is not very large, but such datasets are highly imbalanced (usually,there are much more healthy examples compared with the pathological ones).
Therefore, applying an appropriate approach for selecting desired training setsis inevitable. Oh et al. ( 2011 ) investigated their SVM training set selection using
such imbalanced sets for various diseases (leukemia, diabetes, Parkinson’s dis-ease, hepatitis, breast cancer and cardiac diseases). These datasets included upto 800 vectors ( Diabetes dataset), and the number of features was up to almost
7200 in the Leukemia dataset.
–Network intrusion detection Yu et al. ( 2003 ) focused on an important network intru-
sion detection problem. Its aim is to build a classiﬁer which is able to distinguishbetween “bad” connections (intrusions and/or attacks) and normal connections. Totest their approaches, the authors exploited a dataset containing a variety of intru-sions simulated in a military network environment (42 features, 4 ×10
6vectors). This
dataset is available at http://kdd.ics.uci.edu/databases/kddcup99/kddcup99.html ,a n d
it was used as a benchmark at the Third International Knowledge Discovery andData Mining Tools Competition, which was held in conjunction with The FifthInternational Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD-99).Interestingly, the test data does not follow the same probability distribution as thetraining data (it includes 14 speciﬁc attack types that are not present in Tin which
123