the hyperbolic tangent. Then the resulting system, obtained by substituting Equations 5 – 8 into Equation 4 and inserting into
Equation 1, becomes:
d⃗ s(t)
dt=Ks−1X
k=0⃗ ak(⃗ s(t−τs(k))) +Kr−1X
k=0⃗bk(⃗ r(t−τr(k))) +Kx−1X
k=0⃗ ck(⃗ x(t−τx(k))) + ⃗ϕ (9)
⃗ r(t−τr(k)) =G(⃗ s(t−τr(k))) (10)
Equation 9 is a nonlinear ordinary delay differential equation (DDE) with discrete delays. Delay is a common feature of
many processes in biology, chemistry, mechanics, physics, ecology, and physiology, among others, whereby the nature of the
processes dictates the use of delay equations as the only appropriate means of modeling. In engineering, time delays often
arise in feedback loops involving sensors and actuators [28].
Hence, the time rate of change of the state signal in Equation 9 depends on three main components plus the constant (“bias”)
term, ⃗ϕ. The first (“analog”) component,PKs−1
k=0⃗ ak(⃗ s(t−τs(k))), is the combination of up to Kstime-shifted (by the delay
time constants, τs(k)) functions, ⃗ ak(⃗ s(t)), where the term “analog” underscores the fact that each ⃗ ak(⃗ s(t))is a function of
the (possibly time-shifted) state signal itself (i.e., not the readout signal, which is the warped version of the state signal). The
second component,PKr−1
k=0⃗bk(⃗ r(t−τr(k))), is the combination of up to Krtime-shifted (by the delay time constants, τr(k))
functions, ⃗bk(⃗ r(t)), of the readout signal, given by Equation 10, the warped (binary-valued in the extreme) version of the state
signal. The third component,PKx−1
k=0⃗ ck(⃗ x(t−τx(k))), representing the external input, is composed of the combination of up
toKxtime-shifted (by the delay time constants, τx(k)) functions, ⃗ ck(⃗ x(t)), of the input signal3.
The rationale behind choosing a form of the hyperbolic tangent as the warping function is that the hyperbolic tangent possesses
certain useful properties. On one hand, it is monotonic and negative-symmetric with a quasi-linear region, whose slope can
be regulated [38]. On the other hand, it is bipolarly-saturating (i.e., bounded at both the negative and the positive limits of its
domain). The quasi-linear mode aides in the design of the system’s parameters and in interpreting its behavior in the “small
signal” regime (i.e., when ∥⃗ s(t)∥ ≪ 1). The bipolarly-saturating (“squashing”) aspect, along with the proper design of the
internal parameters of the functions ⃗ ak(⃗ s(t))and⃗bk(⃗ r(t)), helps to keep the state of the system (and, hence, its output) bounded.
The dynamic range of the state signals is generally unrestricted, but the readout signals are guaranteed to be bounded, while
still carrying the state information with low distortion in the quasi-linear mode of the warping function (the “small signal”
regime). If the system, described by Equation 9 and Equation 10, is stable, then the state signals are bounded as well [64].
The time delay terms on the right hand side of Equation 9 comprise the “memory” aspects of the system. They enable the
quantity holding the instantaneous time rate of change of the state signal,d⃗ s(t)
dt, to incorporate contributions from the state, the
readout, and the input signal values, measured at different points in time, relative to the current time, t. Qualitatively, these
temporal elements enrich the expressive power of the model by capturing causal and/or contextual information.
In neural networks, the time delay is an intrinsic part of the system and also one of the key factors that determines the
dynamics4. Much of the pioneering research in recurrent networks during the 1970s and the 1980s was founded on the premise
that neuron processes and interactions could be expressed as systems of coupled DDEs [18, 23]. Far from the actual operation
of the human brain, based on what was already known at the time, these “neurally inspired” mathematical models have
been shown to exhibit sufficiently interesting emerging behaviors for both, advancing the knowledge and solving real-world
problems in various practical applications. While the major thrust of research efforts was concerned primarily with continuous-
time networks, it was well understood that the learning procedures could be readily adapted to discrete systems, obtained
from the original differential equations through sampling. We will also follow the path of sampling and discretization for
deriving the RNN equations [60]. Over the span of these two decades, pivotal and lasting contributions were made in the
area of training networks containing interneurons5with “Error Back Propagation” (or “Back Propagation of Error”, or “Back
Propagation” for short), a special case of a more general error gradient computation procedure. To accommodate recurrent
networks, both continuous-time and discrete-time versions of “Back Propagation Through Time” have been developed on the
foundation of Back Propagation and used to train the weights and time delays of these networks to perform a wide variety of
tasks [11, 25, 45, 46, 47, 48]. We will rely on Back Propagation Through Time for training the systems analyzed in this paper.
3The entire input signal, ⃗ c(t), in Equation 8 is sometimes referred to as the “external driving force” (or, simply, the “driving force”) in physics.
4In neural networks, time delay occurs in the interaction between neurons; it is induced by the finite switching speed of the neuron and the communication
time between neurons [28, 41].
5This term from neuroanatomy provides a biological motivation for considering networks containing multiple “hidden” layers, essentially what is dubbed
“deep networks” and “deep learning” today.
4