Fig. 5. The “control readout” gate, ⃗ gcr[n], determines the fractional amount of the readout signal that becomes the cell’s observable value signal at the
current step.
which is a core constituent of the set of formulas defining the cell of the Vanilla LSTM network. According to Equation 108,
the state signal of the cell at the current step is a weighted combination of the state signal of the cell at the previous step and
the aggregation of historical and novel update information available at the present step. The complete data path of the Vanilla
LSTM cell, culminating from fortifying the canonical RNN system with gating controls and signal containment, is illustrated
in Figure 6.
Example 2. For an idealized illustration of the ability of the LSTM cell to propagate the error gradient unattenuated, set ⃗ gcs[n]
to⃗1and both, ⃗ gcu[n]and⃗ gcr[n], to⃗0for all steps in the segment. Then ⃗ s[n] =⃗ s[n−1]and⃗ψ[n] =⃗ψ[n+ 1] for all steps in
the segment. The inventors of the LSTM network named this mode the “Constant Error Carousel” (CEC) to underscore that
the error gradient is recirculated and the state signal of the cell is refreshed on every step20. Essentially, the multiplicative gate
units open and close access to constant error gradient flow through CEC as part of the operation of the LSTM cell21[12, 21].
In Section IV, we saw that the error gradient determines the parameter updates for training the standard RNN by Gradient
Descent. It will become apparent in Section VI-I that the same relationship holds for the Vanilla LSTM network as well.
The difference is that because of the gates, the function for the error gradient of the LSTM network accommodates Gradient
Descent better than that of the standard RNN does. As will be shown in Section VI-J, under certain provisions regarding
the model parameters, the unrolled Vanilla LSTM cell operates in the CEC mode. If such a parameter combination emerges
during training, then the parameter update information, embedded in the error gradient signal, will be back-propagated over a
large number of steps of a training subsequence, imparting sensitivity to the long-range dependencies to the model parameters
through the parameter update step of Gradient Descent. If the training process steers the model parameters toward causing
∥⃗ gcs[n]∥= 1 (as in Example 2), then the LSTM network circumvents the vanishing gradient problem in this asymptotic case.
20However, the design of the LSTM network does not address explicitly the exploding gradients problem. During training, the derivatives can still become
excessively large, leading to numerical problems. To prevent this, all derivatives of the objective function with respect to the state signal are renormalized to
lie within a predefined range [15, 16, 44].
21Because of the access control functionality provided by the gates, the LSTM cell is sometimes interpreted as a differentiable version of the digital static
random access memory cell [15].
21