lacking. The present work is motivated by the conviction that a unifying reference, conveying the basic theory underlying the
RNN and the LSTM network, will benefit the Machine Learning (ML) community.
The present article is an attempt to fill in this gap, aiming to serve as the introductory text that the future students and
practitioners of RNN and LSTM network can rely upon for learning all the basics pertaining to this rich system. With the
emphasis on using a consistent and meaningful notation to explain the facts and the fundamentals (while removing mystery
and dispelling the myths), this backgrounder is for those inquisitive researchers and practitioners who not only want to know
“how”, but also to understand “why”.
We focus on the RNN first, because the LSTM network is a type of an RNN, and since the RNN is a simpler system, the
intuition gained by analyzing the RNN applies to the LSTM network as well. Importantly, the canonical RNN equations, which
we derive from differential equations, serve as the starting model that stipulates a perspicuous logical path toward ultimately
arriving at the LSTM system architecture.
The reason for taking the path of deriving the canonical RNN equations from differential equations is that even though
RNNs are expressed as difference equations, differential equations have been indispensable for modeling neural networks and
continue making a profound impact on solving practical data processing tasks with machine learning methods. On one hand,
leveraging the established mathematical theories from differential equations in the continuous-time domain has historically led
to a better understanding of the evolution of the related difference equations, since the difference equations are obtained from
the corresponding original differential equations through discretization of the differential operators acting on the underlying
functions [20, 30, 33, 54, 57, 59, 60, 61]. On the other hand, considering the existing deep neurally-inspired architectures
as the numerical methods for solving their respective differential equations aided by the recent advances in memory-efficient
implementations has helped to successfully stabilize very large models at lower computational costs compared to their original
versions [3, 4, 9]. Moreover, differential equations defined on the continuous time domain are a more natural fit for modeling
certain real-life scenarios than the difference equations defined over the domain of evenly-discretized time intervals [6, 51].
Our primary aspiration for this document, particularly for the sections devoted to the Vanilla LSTM system and its extensions,
is to fulfill all of the following requirements:
1) Intuitive – the notation and semantics of variables must be descriptive, explicitly and unambiguously mapping to their
respective purposes in the system.
2) Complete – the explanations and derivations must include both the inference equations (“forward pass” or “normal
operation”) and the training equations (“backward pass”), and account for all components of the system.
3) General – the treatment must concern the most inclusive form of the LSTM system (i.e., the “Vanilla LSTM”), specifically
including the influence of the cell’s state on control nodes (“pinhole connections”).
4) Illustrative – the description must include a complete and clearly labeled cell diagram as well as the sequence diagram,
leaving nothing to imagination or guessing (i.e., the imperative is: strive to minimize cognitive strain, do not leave
anything as an “exercise for the reader” – everything should be explained and made explicit).
5) Modular – the system must be described in such a way that the LSTM cell can be readily included as part of a pluggable
architecture, both horizontally (“deep sequence”) and vertically (“deep representation”).
6) Vector notation – the equations should be expressed in the matrix and vector form; it should be straightforward to plug
the equations into a matrix software library (such as numpy ) as written, instead of having to iterate through indices.
In all sources to date, one or more of the elements in the above list is not addressed2[5, 13, 14, 15, 16, 24, 26, 27, 32, 34,
35, 36, 40, 42, 50, 55, 56, 66, 68, 69, 78]. Hence, to serve as a comprehensive introduction, the present tutorial captures all
the essential details. The practice of using a succinct vector notation and meaningful variable names as well as including the
intermediate steps in formulas is designed to build intuition and make derivations easy to follow.
The rest of this document is organized as follows. Section II gives a principled background behind RNN systems. Then
Section III formally arrives at RNN unrolling by proving a precise statement concerning approximating long sequences by
a series of shorter, independent sub-sequences (segments). Section IV presents the RNN training mechanism based on the
technique, known as “Back Propagation Through Time”, and explores the numerical difficulties, which occur when training on
long sequences. To remedy these problems, Section V methodically constructs the Vanilla LSTM cell from the canonical RNN
system (derived in Section II) by reasoning through the ways of making RNN more robust. Section VI provides a detailed
explanation of all aspects of the Vanilla LSTM cell. Even though this section is intended to be self-contained, familiarity
with the material covered in the preceding sections will be beneficial. The Augmented LSTM system, which embellishes the
Vanilla LSTM system with the new computational components, identified as part of the exercise of transforming the RNN to
the LSTM network, is presented in Section VII. Section VIII summarizes the covered topics and proposes future projects.
2An article co-authored by one of the LSTM inventors provides a self-contained summary of the embodiment of an RNN, though not at an introductory
level [17].
2