Remark 1.Proposition 1 and its proof do not formally address advanced RNN architectures, such as Gated Recurrent Unit
(GRU), Attention Networks, and complex models comprised of multiple LSTM networks.
Remark 2.While the segment-level state signal subsequences, ⃗˜sm[n]⌋0≤n≤Km−1, are independent, there is no independence
requirement on the input signal subsequences, ⃗˜xm[n], belonging to the different segments. It has been shown that dependencies
in the input signal can be de-correlated by appropriately trained hidden layer weights, Wx, thus maintaining the independence
of⃗˜sm[n]⌋0≤n≤Km−1[57, 63].
Remark 3.It is important to emphasize that no IIR-to-FIR conversion method is optimal in the absolute sense. Finding an
optimal FIR approximation to an IIR system can only be done with respect to a certain measure of fidelity and performance.
In practice, one must settle for an approximation to the ideal form of the output signal. The success of an approximation
technique depends on the degree to which the resulting FIR system can be adapted to fit the specific data distribution and
achieve acceptable quality metrics for the given application’s requirements.
Unrolling (or unfolding) for a finite number of steps is a standard, straightforward technique for approximating RNNs by
FIR sequences. However, due to the truncation inherent in limiting the number of steps, the resulting unfolded RNN model
introduces artificial discontinuities in the approximated version of the target output sequence. In general, the more steps are
included in the unrolled RNN subsequence, the closer it can get to the desired output samples, but the less efficient the system
becomes, due to the increased number of computations. Nevertheless, if the underlying distribution governing the application
generates the sequence under consideration as a series of independent segments (subsequences), then by Proposition 1, an
unfolded RNN model aligned with each segment can be trained to reproduce outputs from inputs in a way that aims to satisfy
the appropriate criteria of merit faithfully. In this sense, Proposition 1 for RNNs loosely resembles in spirit the Sampling
Theorem in the field of Discrete-Time Signal Processing [1]. The method of unrolling is also applicable to the scenarios where
attention can be restricted to those “present” sections of the output that are influenced to an arbitrarily small extent by the
portions of the “past” or the “future” of the input beyond some arbitrarily large but finite step [2]. As a matter of fact, in certain
situations, the raw data set may be amenable to pre-processing, without losing much of the essential information. Suppose that
after a suitable cleanup, treating the overall sequence as a collection of independent segments becomes a reasonable assumption.
Then by Proposition 1, the adverse effects of truncation can be reduced by adjusting the number of samples comprising the
window of the unrolled RNN system. Moreover, whenever Proposition 1 applies, the segments can be processed by the unrolled
RNN system in any order (because they are assumed to be independent). This flexibility is utilized by the modules that split
the original data set into segments and feed the batches of segmented training samples to the computational core of system.
Conversely, if the assumptions of Proposition 1 are violated, then truncating the unrolling will prevent the model from adequately
fitting the ground truth output. To illustrate this point, suppose that an RNN system, unrolled for a relatively few steps, is
being used to fit the target sequence that exhibits extremely long-range dependencies. The unrolled RNN subsequence will be
trained under the erroneous assumptions, expecting the ground truth to be a series of short independent subsequences. However,
because of its relatively narrow window, this RNN subsequence will not be able to encompass enough samples to capture the
dependencies present in the actual data. Under-sampling the distribution will limit the flow of information from the training
samples to the parameters of the model, leaving it in the constant state of making poor predictions. As a symptom, the model
will repeatedly encounter unexpected variations during training, causing the objective function to oscillate, never converging
to an adequate optimum. During inference, the generated sequence will suffer from severe jitter and distortion when compared
to the expected output.
Remark 4.According to Proposition 1, the RNN unrolling technique is justified by partitioning a single output sequence into
multiple independent subsequences and placing restrictions on the initialization of the state between subsequences. However,
adhering to these conditions may be problematic in terms of modeling sequences in practical applications. Oftentimes, the
output subsequences exhibit some inter-dependence and/or the initial state of one subsequence is influenced by the final state
of another subsequence. In practice, if the choice for the initial conditions of the state of subsequences is consistent with
the process by which the application generates the samples of the input sequence, then a favorable subdivision of the output
sequence into acceptably independent subsequences can be found empirically through experimentation and statistical analysis.
15