Unsupervised Data Augmentation
for Consistency Training
Qizhe Xie1,2, Zihang Dai1,2, Eduard Hovy2, Minh-Thang Luong1, Quoc V . Le1
1Google Research, Brain Team,2Carnegie Mellon University
{qizhex, dzihang, hovy}@cs.cmu.edu, {thangluong, qvl}@google.com
Abstract
Semi-supervised learning lately has shown much promise in improving deep learn-
ing models when labeled data is scarce. Common among recent approaches is
the use of consistency training on a large amount of unlabeled data to constrain
model predictions to be invariant to input noise. In this work, we present a new
perspective on how to effectively noise unlabeled examples and argue that the
quality of noising, speciﬁcally those produced by advanced data augmentation
methods, plays a crucial role in semi-supervised learning. By substituting simple
noising operations with advanced data augmentation methods such as RandAug-
ment and back-translation, our method brings substantial improvements across six
language and three vision tasks under the same consistency training framework.
On the IMDb text classiﬁcation dataset, with only 20 labeled examples, our method
achieves an error rate of 4.20, outperforming the state-of-the-art model trained
on 25,000 labeled examples. On a standard semi-supervised learning benchmark,
CIFAR-10, our method outperforms all previous approaches and achieves an error
rate of 5.43 with only 250 examples. Our method also combines well with transfer
learning, e.g., when ﬁnetuning from BERT, and yields improvements in high-data
regime, such as ImageNet, whether when there is only 10% labeled data or when a
full labeled set with 1.3M extra unlabeled examples is used.1
1 Introduction
A fundamental weakness of deep learning is that it typically requires a lot of labeled data to work
well. Semi-supervised learning (SSL) [ 1] is one of the most promising paradigms of leveraging
unlabeled data to address this weakness. The recent works in SSL are diverse but those that are based
on consistency training [2, 3, 4, 5] have shown to work well on many benchmarks.
In a nutshell, consistency training methods simply regularize model predictions to be invariant to
small noise applied to either input examples [ 6,7,8] or hidden states [ 2,4]. This framework makes
sense intuitively because a good model should be robust to any small change in an input example
or hidden states. Under this framework, different methods in this category differ mostly in how and
where the noise injection is applied. Typical noise injection methods are additive Gaussian noise,
dropout noise or adversarial noise.
In this work, we investigate the role of noise injection in consistency training and observe that
advanced data augmentation methods, speciﬁcally those work best in supervised learning [ 9,10,11,
12], also perform well in semi-supervised learning. There is indeed a strong correlation between
the performance of data augmentation operations in supervised learning and their performance in
consistency training. We, hence, propose to substitute the traditional noise injection methods with
high quality data augmentation methods in order to improve consistency training. To emphasize the
1Code is available at https://github.com/google-research/uda .
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.