use of better data augmentation in consistency training, we name our method Unsupervised Data
Augmentation or UDA.
We evaluate UDA on a wide variety of language and vision tasks. On six text classiﬁcation tasks, our
method achieves signiﬁcant improvements over state-of-the-art models. Notably, on IMDb, UDA
with 20 labeled examples outperforms the state-of-the-art model trained on 1250x more labeled data.
On standard semi-supervised learning benchmarks CIFAR-10 and SVHN, UDA outperforms all
existing semi-supervised learning methods by signiﬁcant margins and achieves an error rate of 5.43
and 2.72 with 250 labeled examples respectively. Finally, we also ﬁnd UDA to be beneﬁcial when
there is a large amount of supervised data. For instance, on ImageNet, UDA leads to improvements
of top-1 accuracy from 58.84to68.78with 10% of the labeled set and from 78.43to79.05when we
use the full labeled set and an external dataset with 1.3M unlabeled examples.
Our key contributions and ﬁndings can be summarized as follows:
•First, we show that state-of-the-art data augmentations found in supervised learning can also serve
as a superior source of noise under the consistency enforcing semi-supervised framework. See
results in Table 1 and Table 2.
•Second, we show that UDA can match and even outperform purely supervised learning that uses
orders of magnitude more labeled data. See results in Table 4 and Figure 4.
State-of-the-art results for both vision and language tasks are reported in Table 3 and 4. The
effectiveness of UDA across different training data sizes are highlighted in Figure 4 and 7.
•Third, we show that UDA combines well with transfer learning, e.g., when ﬁne-tuning from BERT
(see Table 4 ), and is effective at high-data regime, e.g. on ImageNet ( see Table 5 ).
•Lastly, we also provide a theoretical analysis of how UDA improves the classiﬁcation performance
and the corresponding role of the state-of-the-art augmentation in Section 3.
2 Unsupervised Data Augmentation (UDA)
In this section, we ﬁrst formulate our task and then present the key method and insights behind UDA.
Throughout this paper, we focus on classiﬁcation problems and will use xto denote the input and
y⇤to denote its ground-truth prediction target. We are interested in learning a model p✓(y|x)to
predict y⇤based on the input x, where ✓denotes the model parameters. Finally, we will use pL(x)
andpU(x)to denote the distributions of labeled and unlabeled examples respectively and use f⇤to
denote the perfect classiﬁer that we hope to learn.
2.1 Background: Supervised Data Augmentation
Data augmentation aims at creating novel and realistic-looking training data by applying a trans-
formation to an example, without changing its label. Formally, let q(ˆx|x)be the augmentation
transformation from which one can draw augmented examples ˆxbased on an original example x. For
an augmentation transformation to be valid, it is required that any example ˆx⇠q(ˆx|x)drawn from
the distribution shares the same ground-truth label as x. Given a valid augmentation transformation,
we can simply minimize the negative log-likelihood on augmented examples.
Supervised data augmentation can be equivalently seen as constructing an augmented labeled set
from the original supervised set and then training the model on the augmented set. Therefore, the
augmented set needs to provide additional inductive biases to be more effective. How to design the
augmentation transformation has, thus, become critical.
In recent years, there have been signiﬁcant advancements on the design of data augmentations for
NLP [ 12], vision [ 10,11] and speech [ 13,14] in supervised settings. Despite the promising results,
data augmentation is mostly regarded as the “cherry on the cake” which provides a steady but limited
performance boost because these augmentations has so far only been applied to a set of labeled
examples which is usually of a small size. Motivated by this limitation, via the consistency training
framework, we extend the advancement in supervised data augmentation to semi-supervised learning
where abundant unlabeled data is available.
2.2 Unsupervised Data Augmentation
As discussed in the introduction, a recent line of work in semi-supervised learning has been utilizing
unlabeled examples to enforce smoothness of the model. The general form of these works can be
summarized as follows:
2