Augmentation Sup Semi-Sup
(# Sup examples) (50k) (4k)
Crop & ﬂip 5.36 10.94
Cutout 4.42 5.43
RandAugment 4.23 4.32
Table 1: Error rates on CIFAR-10.Augmentation Sup Semi-sup
(# Sup examples) (650k) (2.5k)
7 38.36 50.80
Switchout 37.24 43.38
Back-translation 36.71 41.35
Table 2: Error rate on Yelp-5.
token uniformly sampled from the vocabulary. For CIFAR-10, we compare RandAugment with two
simpler methods: (1) cropping & ﬂipping augmentation and (2) Cutout.
Based on this setting, Table 1 and Table 2 exhibit a strong correlation of an augmentation’s effec-
tiveness between supervised and semi-supervised settings. This validates our idea of stronger data
augmentations found in supervised learning can always lead to more gains when applied to the
semi-supervised learning settings.
4.2 Algorithm Comparison on Vision Semi-supervised Learning Benchmarks
With the correlation established above, the next question we ask is how well UDA performs compared
to existing semi-supervised learning algorithms. To answer the question, we focus on the most
commonly used semi-supervised learning benchmarks CIFAR-10 and SVHN.
Vary the size of labeled data. Firstly, we follow the settings in [ 19] and employ Wide-ResNet-28-
2[26,27] as the backbone model and evaluate UDA with varied supervised data sizes. Speciﬁcally,
we compare UDA with two highly competitive baselines: (1) Virtual adversarial training (V AT) [ 6],
an algorithm that generates adversarial Gaussian noise on input, and (2) MixMatch [ 28], a parallel
work that combines previous advancements in semi-supervised learning. The comparison is shown in
Figure 4 with two key observations.
•First, UDA consistently outperforms the two baselines given different sizes of labeled data.
•Moreover, the performance difference between UDA and V AT shows the superiority of data
augmentation based noise. The difference of UDA and V AT is essentially the noise process. While
the noise produced by V AT often contain high-frequency artifacts that do not exist in real images,
data augmentation mostly generates diverse and realistic images.
(a) CIFAR-10
(b) SVHN
Figure 4: Comparison with two semi-supervised learning methods on CIFAR-10 and SVHN with
varied number of labeled examples.
Vary model architecture. Next, we directly compare UDA with previously published results under
different model architectures. Following previous work, 4k and 1k labeled examples are used
for CIFAR-10 and SVHN respectively. As shown in Table 3, given the same architecture, UDA
outperforms all published results by signiﬁcant margins and nearly matches the fully supervised
performance, which uses 10x more labeled examples. This shows the huge potential of state-of-the-art
data augmentations under the consistency training framework in the vision domain.
4.3 Evaluation on Text Classiﬁcation Datasets
Next, we further evaluate UDA in the language domain. Moreover, in order to test whether UDA can
be combined with the success of unsupervised representation learning, such as BERT [ 34], we further
consider four initialization schemes: (a) random Transformer; (b) BERT BASE; (c) BERT LARGE ; (d)
7