1
Comprehensive Study on Performance Evaluation
and Optimization of Model Compression: Bridging
Traditional Deep Learning and Large Language
Models
Aayush Saxena†, Arit Kumar Bishwas†∗, Ayush Ashok Mishra, and Ryan Armstrong
Innovation Hub, PricewaterhouseCoopers USA
Abstract —Deep learning models have achieved tremendous
success in most of the industries in recent years. The evolution
of these models has also led to an increase in the model
size and energy requirement, making it difficult to deploy in
production on low compute devices. An increase in the number
of connected devices around the world warrants compressed
models that can be easily deployed at the local devices with
low compute capacity and power accessibility. A wide range of
solutions have been proposed by different researchers to reduce
the size and complexity of such models, prominent among them
are, Weight Quantization, Parameter Pruning, Network Pruning,
low-rank representation, weights sharing, neural architecture
search, knowledge distillation etc. In this research work, we
investigate the performance impacts on various trained deep
learning models, compressed using quantization and pruning
techniques. We implemented both, quantization and pruning,
compression techniques on popular deep learning models used
in the image classification, object detection, language models and
generative models-based problem statements. We also explored
performance of various large language models (LLMs) after
quantization and low rank adaptation. We used the standard
evaluation metrics (model’s size, accuracy, and inference time)
for all the related problem statements and concluded this paper
by discussing the challenges and future work.
Index Terms —Deep Learning, LLMs, Model Quantization,
Network Pruning, Edge Computing, TensorFlow, PyTorch.
I. I NTRODUCTION
DEEP learning based solutions have achieved great suc-
cess to the problems in almost every domain. This
success has been achieved at the cost of high memory and
compute requirements which makes deployment of Deep Neu-
ral Network based models on edge devices a difficult task.
There has been a drastic increase in the model size and data
that is being used to build these SOTA solutions. For example,
the natural language processing models have gone from a
few billion parameters trained on tens of billions of token
data to hundreds of billions or trillions of parameters trained
on trillions of token data [1]. The commonly used models
for computer vision tasks also have around a few billion
FLOPS along with several million parameters [2]. Training
a neural network on a specific dataset requires capturing as
†Equal Contributors.
*Corresponding Author .much information as it can to perform well on the given
task. For this purpose, the weights and activations of a neural
network are initialized using single-precision floating point
format i.e., float32 values which require 32 bits of memory
to store the value as defined by the IEEE 754-2008 standard
[3]. While inference, these parameters are loaded into the
local memory and operations are performed on float32 data
by the processor. During this time, it may not be essential
to capture all the information precisely to perform the given
task and lower precision value might also give similar results.
Hence, these model parameters can be quantized to different
values to reduce the size of the model and decrease the
inference time. Quantization is the process of mapping values
from a large set to a smaller set of values while having
minimum loss of information. In deep learning, models can
be quantized from float32 values to int8 values by using
different quantization algorithms. Deep learning frameworks
like TensorFlow [4], PyTorch [5] and Caffe [6] provide a
framework to optimize models using quantization techniques.
In all the frameworks, quantization methods can broadly be
divided into two: Quantization Aware Training and Post-
Training Quantization. In post training quantization using
TensorFlow, the models can be optimized for latency and size
using Dynamic Range Quantization, Float16 Quantization and
Int8 optimization by converting it to tf-lite architecture [4]. TF-
lite is Google’s open-source machine learning framework that
converts a pretrained model in TensorFlow to a special format
that can be optimized for speed and storage and can directly
be deployed on devices such as mobiles (android and iOS),
desktop and edge devices. However, the quantized version
of a model might not always result in a desirable output
and may considerably lower the performance as compared
to the original. Also, the billions of parameters in a pre-
trained model do not contribute equally to the performance
of the model and some of the neurons or layers can be
eliminated to increase the sparsity while least affecting the
original performance. This is called pruning of the Neural
Network, where we eliminate the least contributing layers or
neurons or channels in a pre- trained model. There are many
different types of pruning but prominent among them are
structured pruning and unstructured pruning. The structured
pruning involves selective removal of larger parts of thearXiv:2407.15904v1  [cs.LG]  22 Jul 2024