9
was 6.65ms. for a batch of 8 images while inference time for
the pruned network was 5.59 ms. for the same batch size.
VI. OBSERVATIONS
With the experimental method for quantization and pruning
mentioned in section [2.2], we observed that:
A. Quantization
• Upon optimizing a Tensorflow based DNN model
using Dynamic range quantization, the model size is
reduced by almost a quarter of its original size.
• Upon optimizing a Tensorflow based DNN model
using Float16 quantization, the model size is reduced
to almost half of its original size.
• The latency of quantized models is much higher
than the original. Although the int8 quantized model
should have the lowest latency as it performs op-
erations on 8-bit integer values, this is not observed
while inference on the intel’s i-9 processor. For some
models, latency for the int8 quantized version was
more than 450 times the latency of the original
Table VI. This abnormality can be explained by
the Instruction Set Extensions [40] that each pro-
cessor follows. Instruction Set Extensions are addi-
tional instructions which can increase performance
when the same operations are performed on mul-
tiple data objects. Intel’s i9-988oH follows Intel®
SSE4.1, Intel® SSE4.2, Intel® A VX2 extensions
[35] whereas TensorflowLite utilizes CPU kernels
that are optimized for ARM Neon Architecture [41]
[42]. TensorFlow Lite’s Delegate API acts as a bridge
between the TFLite runtime and the lower-level APIs
to handle the heavy arithmetic that is typically found
in Machine Learning models. Delegates [42] enable
hardware acceleration of TensorFlow Lite models
by leveraging on-device accelerators such as the
GPU and Digital Signal Processor. Hence, due to
these incompatibilities, the quantized models have
relatively higher latency than the original models on
intel’s i9-988oh processor.
• While quantizing pre-trained models, using different
Tensorflow versions affected the size of compressed
models by a few MBs. Also, quantized models from
one version of Tensorflow might not be compatible
with another version.
• Despite the standardization of the quantization
method from the Tensorflow, not all operations of
a neural network can be quantized as TensorflowLite
only follows a subset of operations by Tensorflow
and with some limitations [43].
• For some models, the input and output shape as well
as sequence of the converted tflite model might not
be the same as the original one and the expected
parameters need to be provided at the time of quan-
tization [44].B. Pruning
• A lot of overparameterized pre-trained deep learning
models can be significantly pruned to increase the
sparsity and reduce the number of parameters while
having the least effect on the performance.
• The pruned model when retrained with the original
data may increase the performance as compared to
the original Table VIII and Table IX.
• There is a threshold till which the models can be
pruned efficiently without any significant effect on
the performance Table XI. Pruning models beyond
this threshold may lead to irreversible change in the
performance i.e., the model would not have enough
parameters to infer correctly from the data.
• Unstructured pruning of a deep learning model alone
does not necessarily reduce the size of the model
as the weights that are reduced to zero still occupy
32 bit of float value which can be either eliminated
or quantized to lower the memory requirement for
execution.
• Structured pruning removes entire neurons and the
associated output connections and hence a reduction
in size of the model is observed wherever this method
is applied.
• Pruning does not guarantee any decrease in the
latency, and neither is observed in our experiments.
Both the frameworks i.e. TensorFlow [17] and Py-
Torch have only mentioned about the reduction in
model’s performance with respect to the increase in
sparsity only. In one of the technical forums [45]
PyTorch developers does mention that the pruning
features are experimental and do not necessarily
guarantee inference time speed up or reduced mem-
ory requirements and similar response is seen for
Tensorflow [46].
• The Tensorflow currently supports only the func-
tional and sequential keras models [47]; a broader set
of models is anticipated to be supported in upcoming
versions of Tensorflow i.e. TF >2.9a.
C. Recommendation
• Quantization method is best suited for edge de-
ployment use cases where the microprocessors or
microcontrollers are optimized to perform integer-
based calculations.
• For pre-trained deep learning models, we can expect
the size to reduce to half and to its quarter while
quantizing it to float16 and int8, respectively, using
Tensorflow model optimization toolkit.
• Resnet, MobileNet and VGG16 based networks can
be quantized or pruned effectively using Tensorflow.
• A little drop in performance can be expected if quan-
tized the model, however, pruning may drastically
reduce the performance of a network.
• Pruning is a subjective process, and its efficiency is
directly related to the number of insignificant weights
in the model. Suppose we have a neural network