3
TABLE I
QUANTIZATION METHOD COMPARISON
Techniques Benefit Hardware
Dynamic Range Quantization 4x smaller, 2x-3x speed CPU
Float16 Quantization 2x smaller, GPU acceleration CPU, GPU
Full Integer Quantization 4x smaller, 3x+ speed CPU, Edge TPU, Microcontrollers
Fig. 3. Weight Distribution in a Conv. Layer Before Pruning
net to deploy those models. Pruning methods can be of
different forms depending upon the desired output but are
generally classified into structured and unstructured pruning
[16]. In unstructured pruning, parameters which are least
important in the network are removed which makes the model
sparse and this sparse model is again retrained, and this
iterative process continues until we reach the desired level of
pruning. TensorFlow [17] provides magnitude based weight
pruning that gradually reduces the insignificant weights of a
model to zero and increases the sparsity. Sparse models can be
compressed easily and zero weights can be eliminated during
inference to reduce the latency of the model. The structured
pruning works at filter/channel level in convolutional neural
networks. The complete channels are removed as per the
ranking of importance score calculated with respect to loss
function. For pruning image classification and object detection
models we used the tensorflow pruning api [17] whereas
for pruning language models i.e. XLM -Roberta and Bert-
small we used strucutured pruning method proposed by Yang
et al. [18]. For cyclegan compression we used pruning and
knowledge transfer based technique proposed by Wang et al.
[19].
C. Choosing the models and dataset to test quantization and
pruning
To test the effects of pruning or post training quantization on
model’s performance we chose seven different pretrained mod-
els with four different problem statements. For the image clas-
sification task, we used pretrained ResNet50, MobileNet v2
and Inception v3(quantization only) models, all pre- trained
on ImageNet [20] dataset and taken from keras library [21].
While the motivation behind creating the Inception network
was to reduce the computational cost, ResNet focused more on
computational accuracy and MobileNet was designed to solve
computer vision problems on the computationally limited
Fig. 4. Weight Distribution in a Conv. Layer After Pruning
Fig. 5. Metrics Monitored During Experiments
Fig. 6. Image Classification - Model Accuracy Comparison in Percentage
platforms. These factors made them ideal for comparing the
effects of post training quantization on pretrained models.
For object detection tasks, we tested YOLO v4 [22] and
FRCNN [23] (for quantization only) with ResNet50 backed
models, both pre-trained on COCO dataset [24]. Although
both these models use an anchor box-based network structure,
YOLO differs from FRCNN in that it makes classification and
bounding box regression at the same time. Faster RCNN on the
other hand detects small objects well since it has nine anchors
in a single grid, however it fails to do real-time detection with
its two-step architecture [25]. For quantizing language models,
we used DistilBert Base Uncased [26] which is a smaller,
faster and distilled version of BERT and has half the number