8
Fig. 15. General flow of CycleGAN
Fig. 16. Generator Network
maximize with respect to discriminator D.
min
Gmax
DLGAN =Ev∈V[log(D(v)]+Eu∈U[log(1−D(G(u)))]
(1)
Where D is discriminator jointly trained with efficient
generator G where G converts images from domain U to
domain V and u and v represents images from domain U and
V respectively. E(x)represents expected value of the random
variable x.
Ldistill =Eu∈U[d(G(u), G0(u))] (2)
Another distillation loss Ldistill is used to enforce the
compressed generator G to mimic G0, the original generator as
given by (2) where d(x, y)is some distance metric to compute
distance between data points x and y.
Ldistill (W, ϕ) +δLc(ϕ) =E[d((G(u;W, ϕ), G0(u))] +δ∥ϕ∥1
(3)
The idea is to get the architecture of G from G0through
channel pruning which is done using L1 norm on the trainable
scale parameter ϕin the normalization layers as given in (3)
where Lc(ϕ)represents L1norm of ϕandδis the trade-off
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Fig. 17. Comparison of results for CycleGan Compression. (a) Original
Images (b) Generated Images from Original CycleGan (c) Generated Images
from Pruned CycleGan
Fig. 18. Number of Remaining Generator Channels vs. Epochs
Fig. 19. Total Generator loss vs. Epochs
parameter controlling the network sparsity level. W represents
trainable weight parameters in generator G.
L(W, ϕ, α ) =LGAN(W, ϕ, α )+ϵLdistill (W, ϕ)+δLc(ϕ)(4)
Equation (4) represents the total GAN loss L where αrepre-
sents parameters in discriminator D and ϵis a hyperparameter
which controls the weightage to the distillation process in the
algorithm.
CycleGan model with 9 residual blocks has been com-
pressed using channel pruning and simultaneous knowledge
updation from the original trained network and results have
been observed on horse - zebra dataset. Original model size
was 44 Mb and it was compressed up to 7.7Mb while FID
(Fr´echet Inception Distance) score calculated for pruned net-
work was 122.29 while for the original network it was 74.04.
Inference time measured for the original network was 6.81
ms. for a batch of 8 images while inference time for pruned
network was 5.8 ms. Fig. 17 represents a comparison between
original cyclegan output vs. compressed cyclegan network
whereas Fig. 18 and Fig. 19 represents no. of channels remain-
ing in generator network after iterative pruning vs. epochs and
total generator loss vs. number of epochs during compression
phase and respectively. Extending this experiment further,
pruning with knowledge transfer and quantization(8bit) was
also explored as a single joint optimization problem rather
than performing quantization post training which generally
results in poor performance. While performing all the three
optimizations jointly, original model size was 44 Mb and it
was compressed up to 4 Mb while FID score calculated for
pruned network was 153.98 while for the original network it
was 74.04. Inference time measured for the original network