6
TABLE X
PRUNING RESULTS OF OBJECT DETECTION MODEL
Pruning Percentage MAP@0.25 Size Inference Time FPS
0% 0.628 259 Mb 554 ms. 1.8
60% 0.15 259 Mb 638 ms. 1.56
80% 0.14 259 Mb 623 ms. 1.6
Fig. 12. Transformer Architecture
Fig. 13. Inside the Attention Head
on COCO’17 dataset. The author of the original yolov4 paper
had used different training and data augmentation techniques,
however while retraining the model to achieve the desired
sparsity we ran the whole dataset in coco’17 train folder
for two epochs without following any data augmentation or
any warm-up steps. In the results, we saw a sharp drop
in the performance of the model and a slight increase in
the inference time. The model size remained the same even
after introducing sparsity as the unstructured pruning does not
specifically remove the neuron or make any changes to the
structure of the network.
C. Language Models
We have worked on XLM Roberta [30] (XLM-R) and
BERT-small to analyze effects of structured pruning. Gener-
ally, transformers contain a stack of encoders followed by a
stack of decoders. These encoders and decoders contain multi-
head attention modules as well as feed forward networks. From
a compression point of view, we can reduce the number of
attention heads as well as optimize feed forward network using
Fig. 14. Pipeline for Transformer Pruning
structured pruning. Fig. 12 represents the detailed architecture
of Transformer network and Fig. 13 represents the building
blocks of attention heads.
Most of the studies on transformers have shown that not
all attention heads are equally important in the transformers,
and some of the attention heads can be pruned without
performance loss. Thus, Identifying and removing the least
important attention heads can reduce the model size and have
a small impact on performance. Along with the attention heads
we also prune the feed forward network to achieve better
compression results. So, the criterion for pruning is to calculate
importance score of attention heads and feed forward networks
neuron with respect to loss function calculated on the training
data and remove those entities having lower importance score.
Fig. 14 presents the pipeline that has been followed to prune
the transformer network.
For XLM-Roberta, PAWS-X, Cross lingual dataset [37] has
been used in sequence classification setting. Results of XLM-
Roberta pruning have been discussed in Table XI. (N, H) in
Network Architecture represents the number of neurons in
hidden layers of feed forward unit and number of attention
heads in the architecture. Original XLM-R network has 3072
neurons in feed forward network and 12 attention heads.
Pruned network with N = 2048 and H = 8 has almost similar
accuracy to the original network but improved inference time
than the original one. Further pruning of the network impacts
the accuracy significantly. Bert-small model has been trained
on disaster tweets dataset [32] and has also been pruned in
structured manner. Original network has 512 neurons in FFN
and 4 attention heads. Results of BERT-small pruning have
been discussed in the Table XII.
We also worked on compression of GPT-2 small [33] fine-
tuned on E2E NLG [34] challenge and used parameter aware
sparse training method proposed by Li et al. [38] to prune the
GPT-2 small model which uses both data free as well as well
as data driven weight importance score calculation approaches
to induce sparsity in the network. We evaluate performance of