2
Fig. 1. Model format supported for TFLite converter
network such as a layer or a channel while the unstructured
pruning can be understood as finding and removing the less
salient connections in the model. Deep learning frameworks
like Tensorflow and PyTorch provide pruning features to make
the model smaller.
II. R ELATED WORK
A wide range of researchers are actively working on solving
the problem of deploying DNN based models on devices with
limited compute capacity. Reducing the size of the model in
order to minimize the daunting computational cost by using
integer-only arithmetic operations while inference on mobile
devices has been explored by Jacob et al. [7]. Quantizing con-
volutional neural networks for inference with integer weights
and activations has been presented by Krishnamoorthi et al.
[8], which demonstrates per-channel quantization of weights
and per-layer quantization of activations to 8-bits of precision
post-training produces classification accuracies within 2% of
floating-point networks for a wide variety of CNN architec-
tures. For benchmarking the performance of these methods,
Dubhir et al. [9] have evaluated the various features of the
quantization process supported in Pytorch and Tensorflow on
CNN and GNN based Recommendation models. To compare
and rank the AI capabilities of the devices, Luo et al. [10]
proposed two unified metrics as AI score: Valid Images per
Seconds (VIPS) and Valid FLOPs per second (VOPs). Apart
from these, TFLite also provides a benchmarking tool that
currently measures and computes statistics for initialization
time, inference time of warm-up state, inference time of steady
state, memory usage during initialization time and overall
memory usage [11]. However, these benchmark tools are
available as benchmark apps for Android and iOS and as
native command line libraries while sharing the same core
performance measurement logic [11]. In their paper, ”What is
the state of the Neural Network Pruning?”, Blalock et al. [12]
aggregate the results of 81 research papers and conclude that
the community suffers from a lack of standardized benchmarks
and metrics. To address the issue of benefits of pruning across
different architectures, they plotted the reported accuracies and
compression/speedup levels of pruned models on ImageNet
alongside the same metrics. It concludes that pruning can
improve the time or space vs accuracy tradeoff of a given
architecture, sometimes even increasing the accuracy. In Data-
free Parameter Pruning for Deep Neural Network, Srinivas
et al. [13] proposes removing one neuron at a time rather
than removing individual weights. Using systematic removal
of redundant neurons, they achieve upto 35% of sparsity on
the Alexnet without significantly affecting the performance.
Fig. 2. Quantization Method Comparison
III. M ETHODS
A. Quantizing tensorflow models
Post-training quantization is a conversion technique that can
reduce model size while also improving CPU and hardware
accelerator latency, with little degradation in model accuracy.
The pre-trained TensorFlow model can be converted into
TensorFlow Lite format using the TensorFlow Lite Converter
which generates an optimized FlatBuffer [14] format identified
by .tflite extension [4]. In addition to creating FlatBuffers,
TFLite converter can also apply optimizations to the model
which reduces the size of the model or inference time or
both. Quantization is one of the optimization methods that
can be applied to the TFLite Flatbuffer. In the dynamic range
quantization, the weights of the model are statically converted
from a floating-point number to an integer value which reduces
the models size by approximately x4 times. At inference,
weights are converted from 8-bits of precision to floating
point and computed using floating-point kernels while the
activations are converted to integer values. This conversion is
done once and cached to reduce memory. With this optimized
model we can only use CPU for inference and GPU or TPU
cannot be used. In float16 quantization, the size of a model is
reduced from float32 value to float16 as defined by the IEEE
standard for 16-bit floating point number [15]. As this uses
the maximum number of bits for representing as compared to
the other two quantization methods, it causes minimal loss to
the accuracy. It supports delegates that can utilize GPUs and
hence it performs faster as compared to the float32 model.
The int8 quantization converts all of the operations of the
model to int8 value. It requires a set of sample data points
to calibrate or estimate the range of all the floating-point
tensors in the given model. In our experiments we have used
100 data points from the training data as the representative
dataset while optimizing the model for int8 quantization. This
type of optimization is preferred for deploying models on
microcontrollers, Edge TPU or CPU, as they require integer
operations to accelerate the performance. Table I shows the
benefits of using each of these quantization techniques along
with hardware that supports them.
B. Pruning Deep Learning models
Deep neural networks are dense and overparameterized
which leads to higher memory footprint and power requirem-