“traces ”, such as traces of people, logistics and vehicles
that can be observed in the physical city, can be
searched in the virtual city once they are generated. Soft-
ware definition means that the twin cities establish a
corresponding virtual model based on the physical city,
and simulate the behavior of urban people, events and
objects in the virtual space by means of software plat-
forms. Intelligent feedback refers to the intelligent early
warning of possible adverse effects, conflicts and poten-
tial dangers of the city through planning and design,
simulation, etc. on the digital twin city, and the function
of providing reasonable and feasible countermeasures.
On the basis of the digital twin city, the integration of
the IoT, cloud computing, big data, AI and other new-
generation IT technologies can guide and optimize the
planning and management of physical cities, which will
improve the supply of citizens ’services and assist more
in the construction of smart cities. Hereinafter, we will
use five typical applications to introduce how smart cit-
ies based on digital twins serve the actual operation of
cities.
3 Applications of smart cities based on digital
twins
3.1 Smart city operation brain
Based on the digital twin city, a Smart City Operation
Brain (SCOB) can be established, and the city officials
will take the lead to establish a Smart City Operation
Center (SCOC) and appoint a Chief Operating Officer
(COO) to take the charge. Figure 1shows the complete
management structure of the SCOB based on the digital
twin city. The SCOC is under the jurisdiction of the
COO, and between them the Chief Information Officer(CIO) Joint Conference Committee is responsible for co-
ordination and management. SCOC manages four major
sectors for the urban information, including Urban IT
Operation and Maintenance Center, Big Data Center,
Urban Operation Monitoring and Command Center,
and Smart Service Center (including open data plat-
forms, data marts, and other companies). The main
functions of SCOB include (1) Participating in and
reviewing the top-level design of the city; (2) Planning
and reviewing the overall goals, frameworks, tasks, oper-
ation and management mechanisms of the informatiza-
tion development of various industries; (3) Formulating
relevant policies, regulations and standards; (4) Respon-
sible for the integration and sharing of urban informa-
tion resources; (5) Monitoring city operation, multi-
departmental coordination and command; (6) Promoting
the formation of the system of social-oriented big data
open applications, services and transactions.
The Public Information Cloud Service Platform is the
infrastructure part of the SCOB. Once the Public Infor-
mation Cloud Service Platform is established can the of-
fice of SCOB start to operate, and the officials can just
use the “applications ”of the platform to take the charge
of management of the smart city. Figure 2shows the
structure of the Public Information Cloud Service Plat-
form. The platform is composed of infrastructure layer,
software development and operation platform layer, and
application layer. The platform uses infrastructure such
as servers, networks, and sensor equipment to acquire
data, and uses cloud infrastructure, data, platforms and
software as services, and finally achieves the applications
of cloud service platforms in various fields such as smart
urban management, smart public security, and smart
Fig. 1 Smart city operation brain management architecture based on digital twinDeren et al. Computational Urban Science             (2021) 1:4 Page 3 of 11