grid inspections (Fig. 5). Modern power grids urgently
need to establish a safe, efficient and intelligent inspec-
tion mode.
Based on the digital twin smart grid technology, we
can develop a technique of on-line, real-time detection
of insulator damage and AI on-line calculation of tree
barrier safety distance (Fig. 6). This technique can realize
real-time inspection, fault interpretation, and report the
output, thereby greatly reducing labor intensity. In
addition, relying on this technique, a software and hard-
ware integrated system based on power corridor multi-
element precise positioning, identification and modeling,
and 3D spatial relationship calculation model can also
be established, which can be used to solve the problems
of power corridor security risk positioning and its early
warning. At present, the technique has reached 15 prov-
inces, cities and regions in China, with an inspection line
of about 20,000 km and an inspection mileage of more
than 50,000 km, bringing economic benefits of more
than 200 million yuan.
3.3 Smart city traffic brain
The Smart City Traffic Brain is another application of
smart city based on digital twin. Hundreds of millions of
big data on travel trajectory are generated in cities every
day from mobile phones, surveillance camera videos,
taxies, indoor positioning systems, buses and subways,
and also mobile apps. Relying on technologies such as
holographic perception, time-space analysis, and data
mining, the Wuhan Road Traffic Smart Emergency Sys-
tem (Fig. 7) is developed, which is an important part of
Wuhan Smart City Traffic Brain. The system is designed
to deeply integrate multi-network resources and real-
time dynamic traffic information, while connecting vari-
ous emergency platform resources such as city alarm
system, the police, road condition system, accidentemergency system and traffic video system, and display-
ing them on the same interface. The Wuhan Road
Traffic Smart Emergency System realizes traffic big data
management based on real-time traffic data flow. It de-
veloped an congestion index evaluation algorithm which
combines historical congestion data, traffic data, vehicle
speed data and other information to realize functions
such as (a) accurate evaluation of road congestion levels;
(b)real-time ranking of road congestion; (c) comparative
analysis between historical congestion and real-time
congestion. The system also provides functions such as
video verification, major event security, real-time sched-
uling and navigation, and congestion event playback. All
these functions provide a decision-making mechanism
to help traffic departments to relieve and clear traffic
congestion with the benefit of smart traffic cloud and
GIS computation.
3.4 Smart city public epidemic services
A Smart City Public Epidemic Service System can be
built based on components of the data cloud platform,
analysis system, response system and user terminals (Li
et al. 2020 ) (Fig. 8). The patient spatiotemporal data is
formed by fusion of the patient information provided by
the hospital information system of major hospitals and
the patient ’s spatiotemporal trajectory data provided by
the communication operator, which is stored in the pa-
tient spatiotemporal database. This database can be con-
nected to the spatiotemporal data cloud platform and
connected to the epidemic big data analysis system. The
analysis system uses spatiotemporal proximity analysis,
AI analysis and other technologies to determine the oc-
currence of the epidemic and determine the people in
close contact, and the results will be transmitted to the
response system. The response system connects with
government departments, employers and individual
Fig. 5 Staffing situation of State Grid Branch in 100 kmDeren et al. Computational Urban Science             (2021) 1:4 Page 6 of 11