basis for the disease control management depart-
ment to accurately determine the risk population
and improve the efficiency of disease control (con-
tact early warning).
3. Global integrated management of “Grid
Prevention and Control ”. The system displays the
heat map of confirmed cases of the epidemic
from different levels such as the country,
provinces, cities, districts, streets and
communities, and displays the spread of the
epidemic nationwide. The system flexibly
configures dynamic data, and analyzes the flow of
key populations in various provinces, cities, and
districts through multip le-dimensional charts to
achieve real-time monitoring of real-time epi-
demic situation.
4. “Resumption of work and production ”approval
control. The system establishes a company ’s
return to work declaration and review process,
which is used to fill in the employees ’health
status data and supervise the implementation of
the company ’s epidemic prevention measures. At
the same time, the system can intelligently
analyze the abnormal situation of the enterprise
and provide real-time early warning services to
assist the integration of resumption of work and
epidemic prevention management.3.5 Flood monitoring and flood situation services
In the full life cycle of flood disaster ’s normalized moni-
toring and forecasting before disasters, dynamic moni-
toring and analysis during disasters, and assessment and
reconstruction after disasters, an application scenario for
real-time urban flood simulation and think tank research
and judgment services can be established using digital
twin technology, which thereby adding service functions
to the construction of smart cities (Fig. 10). The smart
city flood monitoring and service system based on the
digital twin mainly covers three parts, namely, the nor-
malized and dynamic big data monitoring of flood, the
flood knowledge map and the flood service application.
Flood big data monitoring refers to the monitoring
method of real-time collection of flood disasters and
flood big data from the urban and watershed scales in
the context of the IoT, combined with the real-time
monitoring technology of the integration of space, air
and earth. The main point is to collect water conditions
in rivers and lakes, rain conditions in urban meteoro-
logical stations and dynamic trajectories of people and
vehicles from monitoring and collection equipment such
as ground sensors. This can be realized based on satellite
remote sensing technology in large-scale air and sky sce-
narios to monitor cloud and rain water volume, lake
water volume and water level changes of rivers and res-
ervoirs in the upper and lower basins. Figure 11shows
Fig. 10 Schematic diagram of smart city flood monitoring and flood service platformDeren et al. Computational Urban Science             (2021) 1:4 Page 9 of 11