as an example, which used the Gaofen-3 satellite image
on July 13, 20, and 21, 2020 and the Radarsat2 image on
July 24, 2020 to monitor the Wangjiaba and nearby wa-
ters before and after the gate was opened. It can be seen
that on July 13, the water area of the Mengwa flood stor-
age area before the background flood storage was about
10.19% (the blue area); On July 20, about 6:30 pm (about
10 h after the gate was opened), the Mengwa flood stor-
age water area of the district increased to 30.68%, and
the newly added water body was an orange area; On July
21, at about 5:30 pm (about 33 h after the gate was
opened), the flooded area increased to 59.19%, and the
new water body was a red area; As of 09:54 on July 24 (4
days after the gate was opened), the submerged area in-
creased to 80.31%, and the newly added water body was
a deep red area. At the same time, a system based on
the service also regularly captures public opinion infor-
mation. Figure 12is an example, which shows the results
of sentiment tendency analysis. It can be seen that the
public is positive about flood control, and the positive
emotions marked with warm colors are obviously more
than the negative emotions marked with cool colors..
The construction of a flood knowledge map is to es-
tablish a flood big data knowledge map through big data
analysis and AI technology, which will help infer know-
ledge and discover knowledge based on dynamic moni-
toring of flood disasters and flood big data. Based on
normalized and dynamic flood monitoring and flood
knowledge map, a smart city flood service application
can be provided, which includes real-time simulation of
flood monitoring big data in urban scenes. Combiningflood knowledge analysis, knowledge mining, modelling,
and flood disaster prediction technologies, flood-related
knowledge can be visualized in the entire life cycle of
urban flood disasters, which will then help to provide
services for urban flood control management.
4 Conclusions
A smart city is based on the integration of the real world
and the digital world established by the digital city, the
IoT and cloud computing to realize the perception, con-
trol and intelligent services of people and things, while
the digital twin city is undoubtedly a new starting point
for the construction of modern smart cities. Smart cities
based on digital twins have broad prospects for eco-
nomic transformation, urban smart management and
public smart services, so that man and nature can de-
velop more coordinately. The realization of smart cities
requires the construction of more complete spatial infor-
mation infrastructure to ensure that various smart city
applications can be used well and affordable. The big
data problem of smart cities brings new opportunities
and challenges. It is necessary to do a good job in
technological innovation and research in order to pro-
mote the development of the digital service industry,
better realize the various smart applications of Internet
+ smart city, and develop the digital economy. The con-
struction of smart city is a leading project. It is necessary
to do a top-level design and overall planning according
to the characteristics of each city, and establish a smart
city operation center and operation brain to make the
city smart. Only by doing a good job in the design,
Fig. 11 Remote sensing monitoring map of Wangjiaba Mengwa flood storage area (as of July 24, 2020)Deren et al. Computational Urban Science             (2021) 1:4 Page 10 of 11