match the physical city to the corresponded “twin city ”,
forming a pattern of coexistence of both and integration
of physical cities in the physical dimension and digital
cities in the information dimension. The construction of
a digital twin city requires a data foundation and a tech-
nical foundation. The data foundation refers to the
massive urban big data that is continuously generated
every day from various sensors and cameras everywhere
in the city, as well as the digital subsystems successively
built by the municipal management departments. Tech-
nical foundation refers to relevant technologies such as
the IoT, cloud computing, big data, and AI, including
5G (Li et al. 2017 ). In a digital twin city, the data of op-
erating status of infrastructure, the deployment of muni-
cipal resources, and the flow of people, logistics and
vehicles will be collected through sensors, cameras, and
various digital subsystems. With technologies including
5G delivering them to the cloud and the city govern-
ment, the city will be more efficient.
The construction of digital twin cities will trigger great
innovations in urban intelligent planning, management
and services, and become a “new starting point ”for the
construction of smart cities. This will help achieve the
goal of visualization of all-element information of the
city and the intelligentization of city planning, manage-
ment and services. The digital twin city is not only the
goal of a digital city, but also a key element of a smart
city. It is an important facility and basic capability that
enable the city to realize smartness. It is also a milestone
in the transformation of urban informatization from
qualitative change to quantitative change driven by tech-
nology, which provides the construction of smart cities
more room for innovation.2 Characteristics of smart cities based on digital
twins
From different perspectives, there are different under-
standings of the concept of digital twin. Tao et al. (Fei
et al., 2020 ) starts from different dimensions, summa-
rizes and analyzes the current several understandings of
digital twin, and proposes the ideal characteristics of
digital twins in the model dimension, data dimension,
connection dimension, service/function dimension and
physical dimension (as shown in Table 1), , which is the
“five-dimensional model ”of digital twin. Tao et al.
pointed out that because digital twins at different stages
exhibit different characteristics, the understanding and
practice of digital twins cannot be separated from spe-
cific objects, specific applications and specific needs.
Therefore, the actual application does not necessarily re-
quire the established “digital twin ”to have all the ideal
characteristics, and it is acceptable for it to meet the
specific needs of users (Tao et al. 2020 ). As an extension
of the digital twin concept in the urban field, the digital
twin city also exhibits specific characteristics based on
the ideal characteristics of the digital twin.
Combined with the existing discussion, digital twin cit-
ies have four major characteristics: Accurate Mapping,
Virtual-real Interaction, Software Definition, and Intelli-
gent Feedback. Accurate mapping means that the digital
twin city realizes comprehensive digital modeling of
urban roads, bridges, manhole covers, lamp covers,
buildings and other infrastructures by arranging sensors
on the air, ground, underground, and river levels in the
physical city, so as to fully perceive and dynamically
monitor the city ’s operating status, and finally form the
accurate information expression and mapping of the vir-
tual city to the physical city in the information dimen-
sion. Virtual-real interaction means that all kinds of
Table 1 Different understandings of “digital twin ”
Part of Understanding Ideal Characteristics Digital Twin
CitiesDimensions
1 a. Digital twins are 3D models
b. Digital twins are copies of physical entities
c. Digital twins are virtual prototypesMulti-dimensional/multi-space-time/multiscale
Dynamic/evolutive/interactive
High fidelity/ Highly reliable/high-precisionAccurate
MappingModel
2 a. Digital twins are data/big data
b. Digital twins are PLM (Product Lifecycle
Management)
c. Digital twins are digital thread
d. Digital twins are digital shadowTotal factor/all-service/ complete flow scheme/full life circle
Virtual-real fusion/ multi-source fusion/heterogeneous integration
Real-time update/real-time interact/real-time respondData
3 a. Digital twins are Physical union platform
b. Digital twins are industrial Internet
platformsBi-directional connection/interaction/driving
Cross-agreement/interface/platformVirtual-real
InteractionConnection
4 a. Digital twins are simulation
b. Digital twins are virtual verification
c. Digital twins are visualizationModel driven + Data driven
Simulation verification/visualization/control/predict/optimizeSoftware
DefinitionServices/
Functions
5 a. Digital twins are pure digital
representation or virtual bodies
b. Digital twins are irrelevant to entitiesmodels vary from object to object/data vary by feature/services and
functions vary according to needsIntelligent
FeedbackPhysicalDeren et al. Computational Urban Science             (2021) 1:4 Page 2 of 11