These system-level characteristics dramatically exacerbate challenges such as straggler mitigation and fault
tolerance. Federated learning methods that are developed and analyzed must therefore: (i) anticipate a low
amount of participation, (ii) tolerate heterogeneous hardware, and (iii) be robust to dropped devices in the
network.
Challenge 3: Statistical Heterogeneity. Devices frequently generate and collect data in a non-identically
distributed manner across the network, e.g., mobile phone users have varied use of language in the context
of a next word prediction task. Moreover, the number of data points across devices may vary signiﬁcantly,
and there may be an underlying structure present that captures the relationship amongst devices and
their associated distributions. This data generation paradigm violates frequently-used independent and
identically distributed (I.I.D.) assumptions in distributed optimization, increases the likelihood of stragglers,
and may add complexity in terms of modeling, analysis, and evaluation. Indeed, although the canonical
federated learning problem of (1)aims to learn a single global model, there exist other alternatives such as
simultaneously learning distinct local models via multi-task learning frameworks [cf. 106]. There is also a
close connection in this regard between leading approaches for federated learning and meta-learning [ 64].
Both the multi-task and meta-learning perspectives enable personalized ordevice-speciﬁc modeling, which is
often a more natural approach to handle the statistical heterogeneity of the data.
Challenge 4: Privacy Concerns. Finally, privacy is often a major concern in federated learning applications.
Federated learning makes a step towards protecting data generated on each device by sharing model
updates, e.g., gradient information, instead of the raw data [ 17,31,33]. However, communicating model
updates throughout the training process can nonetheless reveal sensitive information, either to a third-party,
or to the central server [ 76]. While recent methods aim to enhance the privacy of federated learning
using tools such as secure multiparty computation or differential privacy, these approaches often provide
privacy at the cost of reduced model performance or system efﬁciency. Understanding and balancing these
trade-offs, both theoretically and empirically, is a considerable challenge in realizing private federated
learning systems.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce previous and current works
that aim to address the four discussed challenges of federated learning. In Section 3, we outline several
promising directions of future research.
2 Survey of Related and Current Work
The challenges in federated learning at ﬁrst glance resemble classical problems in areas such as privacy,
large-scale machine learning, and distributed optimization. For instance, numerous methods have been
proposed to tackle expensive communication in the machine learning, optimization, and signal processing
communities. However, these methods are typically unable to fully handle the scale of federated networks,
much less the challenges of systems and statistical heterogeneity. Similarly, while privacy is an important
aspect for many machine learning applications, privacy-preserving methods for federated learning can be
challenging to rigorously assert due to the statistical variation in the data, and may be even more difﬁcult
to implement due to systems constraints on each device and across the potentially massive network. In this
section, we explore in more detail the challenges presented in Section 1, including a discussion of classical
results as well as more recent work focused speciﬁcally on federated learning.
4