(a) Learn personalized
models for each device; do
not learn from peers.
(b) Learn a global model;
learn from peers.
(c) Learn personalized
models for each device;
learn from peers.
Figure 5: Different modeling approaches in federated networks. Depending on properties of the data,
network, and application of interest, one may choose to (a) learn separate models for each device, (b) ﬁt a
single global model to all devices, or (c) learn related but distinct models in the network.
scale to massive networks and is restricted to convex objectives. Another approach [ 26] models the star
topology as a Bayesian network and performs variational inference during learning. Although this method
can handle non-convex models, it is expensive to generalize to large federated networks. Khodak et al. [58]
provably meta-learn a within-task learning rate using multi-task information (where each task corresponds
to a device) and have demonstrated improved empirical performance over vanilla FedAvg . Eichner et al.
[35] investigate a pluralistic solution (adaptively choosing between a global model and device-speciﬁc
models) to address the cyclic patterns in data samples during federated training. Zhao et al. [138] explore
transfer learning for personalization by running FedAvg after training a global model centrally on some
shared proxy data. Despite these recent advances, key challenges still remain in making methods for
heterogeneous modeling that are robust, scalable, and automated in federated settings.
When modeling federated data, it may also be important to consider issues beyond accuracy, such as
fairness . In particular, naively solving an aggregate loss function such as in (1)may implicitly advantage
or disadvantage some of the devices, as the learned model may become biased towards devices with
larger amounts of data, or (if weighting devices equally), to commonly occurring groups of devices.
Recent works have proposed modiﬁed modeling approaches that aim to reduce the variance of the model
performance across devices. Some heuristics simply perform a varied number of local updates based
on local loss [ 52]. Other more principled approaches include Agnostic Federated Learning [ 80], which
optimizes the centralized model for any target distribution formed by a mixture of the client distributions
via a minimax optimization scheme. Another more general approach is taken by Li et al. [66], which
proposes an objective called q-FFL in which devices with higher loss are given higher relative weight to
encourage less variance in the ﬁnal accuracy distribution. Beyond issues of fairness, we note that aspects
such as accountability and interpretability in federated learning are additionally worth exploring, but may
be challenging due to the scale and heterogeneity of the network.
2.3.2 Convergence Guarantees for Non-IID Data
Statistical heterogeneity also presents novel challenges in terms of analyzing the convergence behavior
in federated settings—even when learning a single global model. Indeed, when data is not identically
distributed across devices in the network, methods such as FedAvg have been shown to diverge in
practice [ 65,75]. Parallel SGD and related variants, which make local updates similar to FedAvg , have been
9