mini-batch datacomputation
communication
apply updates locallyFigure 2: Left: Distributed (mini-batch) SGD. Each device, k, locally computes gradients from a mini-batch
of data points to approximate rFk(w), and the aggregated mini-batch updates are applied on the server.
Right: Local updating schemes. Each device immediately applies local updates, e.g., gradients, after they
are computed and a server performs a global aggregation after a variable number of local updates.
Local-updating schemes can reduce communication by performing additional work locally.
2.1 Communication-efﬁciency
Communication is a key bottleneck to consider when developing methods for federated networks. While it
is beyond the scope of this article to provide a self-contained review of communication-efﬁcient distributed
learning methods, we point out several general directions, which we group into (1) local updating methods,
(2) compression schemes, and (3) decentralized training.
2.1.1 Local Updating
Mini-batch optimization methods, which involve extending classical stochastic methods to process multiple
data points at a time, have emerged as a popular paradigm for distributed machine learning in data center
environments [ 28,88,96,102,103]. In practice, however, they have been shown to have limited ﬂexibility to
adapt to communication-computation trade-offs that would maximally leverage distributed data process-
ing [ 107,108]. In response, several recent methods have been proposed to improve communication-efﬁciency
in distributed settings by allowing for a variable number of local updates to be applied on each machine
in parallel at each communication round, making the amount of computation versus communication
substantially more ﬂexible. For convex objectives, distributed local-updating primal-dual methods have
emerged as a popular way to tackle such a problem [ 54,62,72,107,128]. These approaches leverage
duality structure to effectively decompose the global objective into subproblems that can be solved in
parallel at each communication round. Several distributed local-updating primal methods have also been
proposed, which have the added beneﬁt of being applicable to non-convex objectives [ 93,136]. These
methods drastically improve performance in practice, and have been shown to achieve orders-of-magnitude
speedups over traditional mini-batch methods or distributed approaches like ADMM [ 14] in real-world
data center environments. We provide an intuitive illustration of local updating methods in Figure 2.
In federated settings, optimization methods that allow for ﬂexible local updating and low client participation
have become the de facto solvers [ 65,75,106]. The most commonly used method for federated learning
is Federated Averaging ( FedAvg ) [75], a method based on averaging local stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) updates for the primal problem. FedAvg has been shown to work well empirically, particularly for
non-convex problems, but comes without convergence guarantees and can diverge in practical settings
when data are heterogeneous [ 65]. We discuss methods to handle such statistical heterogeneity in more
detail in Section 2.3.2.
5