Figure 3: Centralized vs. decentralized topologies. In the typical federated learning setting and as a focus of
this article, we assume a star network (left) where a server connects with all remote devices. Decentralized
topologies (right) are a potential alternative when communication to the server becomes a bottleneck.
2.1.2 Compression Schemes
While local updating methods can reduce the total number of communication rounds , model compression
schemes such as sparsiﬁcation, subsampling, and quantization can signiﬁcantly reduce the size of messages
communicated at each round. These methods have been extensively studied, both empirically and
theoretically, in previous literature for distributed training in data center environments; we defer the
readers to [ 119,135] for a more complete review. In federated environments, the low participation of
devices, non-identically distributed local data, and local updating schemes pose novel challenges to
these model compression approaches. For instance, the commonly-used error compensation techniques
in classical distributed learning [ 101] cannot be directly extended to federated settings as the errors
accumulated locally may be stale if the devices are not frequently sampled. Nevertheless, several works
have provided practical strategies in federated settings, such as forcing the updating models to be sparse
and low-rank; performing quantization with structured random rotations [ 59]; using lossy compression
and dropout to reduce server-to-device communication [ 15]; and applying Golomb lossless encoding [ 99].
From a theoretical perspective, while prior work has explored convergence guarantees with low-precision
training in the presence of non-identically distributed data [e.g., 111], the assumptions made do not take
into consideration common characteristics of the federated setting, such as low device participation or
locally-updating optimization methods.
2.1.3 Decentralized Training
In federated learning, a star network (where a central server is connected to a network of devices, as
in the left panel of Figure 3) is the predominant communication topology; we therefore focus on the
star-network setting in this article. However, we brieﬂy discuss decentralized topologies (where devices
only communicate with their neighbors, e.g., the right panel of Figure 3) as a potential alternative. In data
center environments, decentralized training has been demonstrated to be faster than centralized training
when operating on networks with low bandwidth or high latency; we defer readers to [ 47,67] for a more
comprehensive review. Similarly, in federated learning, decentralized algorithms can in theory reduce the
high communication cost on the central server. Some recent works [ 47,61] have investigated decentralized
training over heterogeneous data with local updating schemes. However, they are either restricted to linear
models [ 47] or assume full device participation [ 61]. Finally, hierarchical communication patterns have also
been proposed [ 68,70] to further ease the burden on the central server, by ﬁrst leveraging edge servers to
aggregate the updates from edge devices and then relying on a cloud server to aggregate updates from edge
servers. While this is a promising approach to reduce communication, it is not applicable to all networks,
as this type of physical hierarchy may not exist or be known a priori.
6