serverdevices(a) Federated learning with-
out additional privacy protection
mechanisms.
serverdevices
(b) Global privacy, where a trusted
server is assumed.
serverdevices
(c) Local privacy, where the central server
might be malicious.
Figure 6: An illustration of different privacy-enhancing mechanisms in one round of federated learning. M
denotes a randomized mechanism used to privatize the data. With global privacy (b), the model updates
are private to all third parties other than a single trusted party (the central server). With local privacy (c),
the individual model updates are also private to the server.
Beyond differential privacy, homomorphic encryption can be used to secure the learning process by
computing on encrypted data, although it has currently been applied in limited settings, e.g., training
linear models [ 82] or involving only a few entities [ 133]. When the sensitive datasets are distributed
across different data owners, another natural option is to perform privacy-preserving learning via secure
function evaluation (SFE) or secure multiparty computation (SMC). The resulting protocols can enable
multiple parties to collaboratively compute an agreed-upon function without leaking input information
from any party except for what can be inferred from the output [e.g., 23,43,95]. Thus, while SMC cannot
guarantee protection from information leakage, it can be combined with differential privacy to achieve
stronger privacy guarantees. However, approaches along these lines may not be applicable to large-scale
machine learning scenarios as they incur substantial additional communication and computation costs.
Moreover, SMC protocols need to be carefully designed and implemented for each operation in the targeted
learning algorithm [ 25,79]. We defer interested readers to [ 13,97] for a more comprehensive review of the
approaches based on homomorphic encryption and SMC.
2.4.2 Privacy in Federated Learning
The federated setting poses novel challenges to existing privacy-preserving algorithms. Beyond pro-
viding rigorous privacy guarantees, it is necessary to develop methods that are computationally cheap,
communication-efﬁcient, and tolerant to dropped devices—all without overly compromising accuracy.
Although there are a variety of privacy deﬁnitions in federated learning [ 8,17,41,64,76,113], typically
they can be classiﬁed into two categories: global privacy and local privacy . As demonstrated in Figure 6,
global privacy requires that the model updates generated at each round are private to all untrusted third
parties other than the central server, while local privacy further requires that the updates are also private to
the server.
Current works that aim to improve the privacy of federated learning typically build upon previous classical
cryptographic protocols such as SMC [ 10,42] and differential privacy [ 3,8,41,76]. Bonawitz et al. [10]
introduce an SMC protocol to protect individual model updates. The central server is not able to see any
local updates, but can still observe the exact aggregated results at each round. SMC is a lossless method, and
can retain the original accuracy with a very high privacy guarantee. However, the resulting method incurs
signiﬁcant extra communication cost. Other works [ 41,76] apply differential privacy to federated learning
11