local updateslocal updatesnew globalmodel
local datalocal datalocal datalocal datalocal datalocal datalocal data
local data
learnt model:next-word prediction
Figure 1: An example application of federated learning for the task of next-word prediction on mobile
phones. To preserve the privacy of the text data and to reduce strain on the network, we seek to train a
predictor in a distributed fashion, rather than sending the raw data to a central server. In this setup, remote
devices communicate with a central server periodically to learn a global model. At each communication
round, a subset of selected phones performs local training on their non-identically-distributed user data,
and sends these local updates to the server. After incorporating the updates, the server then sends back the
new global model to another subset of devices. This iterative training process continues across the network
until convergence is reached or some stopping criterion is met.
fundamental advances in areas such as privacy, large-scale machine learning, and distributed optimization,
and raising new questions at the intersection of diverse ﬁelds, such as machine learning and systems [ 91].
Federated learning methods have been deployed by major service providers [ 11,124], and play a critical
role in supporting privacy-sensitive applications where the training data are distributed at the edge [e.g.,
5,46,51,89,105,127,139]. Examples of potential applications include: learning sentiment, semantic
location, or activities of mobile phone users; adapting to pedestrian behavior in autonomous vehicles;
and predicting health events like heart attack risk from wearable devices [ 6,52,84]. We discuss several
canonical applications of federated learning below:
Smart phones. By jointly learning user behavior across a large pool of mobile phones, statistical models
can power applications such as next-word prediction, face detection, and voice recognition [ 46,89].
However, users may not be willing to share their data in order to protect their personal privacy or
to save the limited bandwidth/battery power of their phone. Federated learning has the potential
to enable predictive features on smart phones without diminishing the user experience or leaking
private information. Figure 1 depicts one such application in which we aim to learn a next-word
predictor in a large-scale mobile phone network based on users’ historical text data [46].
Organizations. Organizations or institutions can also be viewed as ‘devices’ in the context of federated
learning. For example, hospitals are organizations that contain a multitude of patient data for
predictive healthcare. However, hospitals operate under strict privacy practices, and may face legal,
administrative, or ethical constraints that require data to remain local. Federated learning is a
promising solution for these applications [ 52], as it can reduce strain on the network and enable
private learning between various devices/organizations.
Internet of things. Modern IoT networks, such as wearable devices, autonomous vehicles, or smart
homes, may contain numerous sensors that allow them to collect, react, and adapt to incoming data
in real-time. For example, a ﬂeet of autonomous vehicles may require an up-to-date model of trafﬁc,
2