construction, or pedestrian behavior to safely operate. However, building aggregate models in these
scenarios may be difﬁcult due to the private nature of the data and the limited connectivity of each
device. Federated learning methods can help to train models that efﬁciently adapt to changes in these
systems while maintaining user privacy [84, 98].
1.1 Problem Formulation
The canonical federated learning problem involves learning a single, global statistical model from data stored
on tens to potentially millions of remote devices. We aim to learn this model under the constraint that
device-generated data is stored and processed locally, with only intermediate updates being communicated
periodically with a central server. In particular, the goal is typically to minimize the following objective
function:
minwF(w), where F(w):=m
å
k=1pkFk(w). (1)
Here, mis the total number of devices, pk0andåkpk=1, and Fkis the local objective function for
thekth device. The local objective function is often deﬁned as the empirical risk over local data, i.e.,
Fk(w) =1
nkånk
jk=1fjk(w;xjk,yjk), where nkis the number of samples available locally. The user-deﬁned term
pkspeciﬁes the relative impact of each device, with two natural settings being pk=1
norpk=nk
n, where
n=åknkis the total number of samples. We will reference problem (1)throughout the article, but, as
discussed below, we note that other objectives or modeling approaches may be appropriate depending on
the application of interest.
1.2 Core Challenges
We next describe four of the core challenges associated with solving the distributed optimization problem
posed in (1). These challenges make the federated setting distinct from other classical problems, such as
distributed learning in data center settings or traditional private data analyses.
Challenge 1: Expensive Communication. Communication is a critical bottleneck in federated networks,
which, coupled with privacy concerns over sending raw data, necessitates that data generated on each
device remain local. Indeed, federated networks are potentially comprised of a massive number of devices,
e.g., millions of smart phones, and communication in the network can be slower than local computation by
many orders of magnitude [ 50,115]. In order to ﬁt a model to data generated by the devices in the federated
network, it is therefore necessary to develop communication-efﬁcient methods that iteratively send small
messages or model updates as part of the training process, as opposed to sending the entire dataset over the
network. To further reduce communication in such a setting, two key aspects to consider are: (i) reducing
the total number of communication rounds, or (ii) reducing the size of transmitted messages at each round.
Challenge 2: Systems Heterogeneity. The storage, computational, and communication capabilities of
each device in federated networks may differ due to variability in hardware (CPU, memory), network
connectivity (3G, 4G, 5G, wiﬁ), and power (battery level). Additionally, the network size and systems-related
constraints on each device typically result in only a small fraction of the devices being active at once, e.g.,
hundreds of active devices in a million-device network [ 11]. Each device may also be unreliable, and it is
not uncommon for an active device to drop out at a given iteration due to connectivity or energy constraints.
3