Federated Learning:
Challenges, Methods, and Future Directions
Tian Li Anit Kumar Sahu
Carnegie Mellon University Bosch Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
tianli@cmu.edu anit.sahu@gmail.com
Ameet Talwalkar Virginia Smith
Carnegie Mellon University & Determined AI Carnegie Mellon University
talwalkar@cmu.edu smithv@cmu.edu
Abstract
Federated learning involves training statistical models over remote devices or siloed data centers, such
as mobile phones or hospitals, while keeping data localized. Training in heterogeneous and potentially
massive networks introduces novel challenges that require a fundamental departure from standard
approaches for large-scale machine learning, distributed optimization, and privacy-preserving data
analysis. In this article, we discuss the unique characteristics and challenges of federated learning, provide
a broad overview of current approaches, and outline several directions of future work that are relevant to
a wide range of research communities.
1 Introduction
Mobile phones, wearable devices, and autonomous vehicles are just a few of the modern distributed
networks generating a wealth of data each day. Due to the growing computational power of these devices—
coupled with concerns over transmitting private information—it is increasingly attractive to store data
locally and push network computation to the edge.
The concept of edge computing is not a new one. Indeed, computing simple queries across distributed,
low-powered devices is a decades-long area of research that has been explored under the purview of query
processing in sensor networks, computing at the edge, and fog computing [ 12,29,40,49,74]. Recent works
have also considered training machine learning models centrally but serving and storing them locally; for
example, this is a common approach in mobile user modeling and personalization [60, 90].
However, as the storage and computational capabilities of the devices within distributed networks grow, it is
possible to leverage enhanced local resources on each device. This has led to a growing interest in federated
learning [75], which explores training statistical models directly on remote devices1. As we discuss in this
article, learning in such a setting differs signiﬁcantly from traditional distributed environments—requiring
1We use the term ‘device’ throughout the article to describe entities in the network, such as nodes, clients, sensors, or organizations.
1arXiv:1908.07873v1  [cs.LG]  21 Aug 2019