and offer global differential privacy. These approaches have a number of hyperparameters that affect
communication and accuracy that must be carefully chosen, though follow up work [ 113] proposes adaptive
gradient clipping strategies to help alleviate this issue. In the case where stronger privacy guarantees are
required, Bhowmick et al. [8]introduce a relaxed version of local privacy by limiting the power of potential
adversaries. It affords stronger privacy guarantees than global privacy, and has better model performance
than strict local privacy. Li et al. [64] propose locally differentially-private algorithms in the context of
meta-learning, which can be applied to federated learning with personalization, while also providing
provable learning guarantees in convex settings. In addition, differential privacy can be combined with
model compression techniques to reduce communication and obtain privacy beneﬁts simultaneously [3].
3 Future Directions
Federated learning is an active and ongoing area of research. Although recent work has begun to
address the challenges discussed in Section 2, there are a number of critical open directions yet to be
explored. In this section, we brieﬂy outline a few promising research directions surrounding the previously
discussed challenges (expensive communication, systems heterogeneity, statistical heterogeneity, and
privacy concerns), and introduce additional challenges regarding issues such as productionizing and
benchmarking in federated settings.
Extreme communication schemes. It remains to be seen how much communication is necessary
in federated learning. Indeed, it is well-known that optimization methods for machine learning
can tolerate a lack of precision; this error can in fact help with generalization [ 129]. While one-
shot or divide-and-conquer communication schemes have been explored in traditional data center
settings [ 73,137], the behavior of these methods is not well-understood in massive or statistical
heterogeneous networks. Similarly, one-shot/few-shot heuristics [ 44,45,134] have recently been
proposed for the federated setting, but have yet to be theoretically analyzed or evaluated at scale.
Communication reduction and the Pareto frontier. We discussed several ways to reduce commu-
nication in federated training, such as local updating and model compression. In order to create a
realistic system for federated learning, it is important to understand how these techniques compose
with one another, and to systematically analyze the trade-off between accuracy and communication for
each approach. In particular, the most useful techniques will demonstrate improvements at the Pareto
frontier—achieving an accuracy greater than any other approach under the same communication
budget, and ideally, across a wide range of communication/accuracy proﬁles. Similar comprehensive
analyses have been performed for efﬁcient neural network inference [e.g., 9], and are necessary in
order to compare communication-reduction techniques for federated learning in a meaningful way.
Novel models of asynchrony. As discussed in Section 2.2.1, two communication schemes most
commonly studied in distributed optimization are bulk synchronous approaches and asynchronous
approaches (where it is assumed that the delay is bounded). These schemes are more realistic in data
center settings—where worker nodes are typically dedicated to the workload, i.e., they are ready to
‘pull’ their next job from the central node immediately after they ‘push’ the results of their previous
job. In contrast, in federated networks, each device is often undedicated to the task at hand and most
devices are not active on any given iteration. Therefore, it is worth studying the effects of this more
realistic device-centric communication scheme—in which each device can decide when to ‘wake up’
and interact with the central server in an event-triggered manner.
12