4Gtrainingtrainingsubsample devicessubsample devicestrainingtrainingsend theglobal modelsend the global modelsend modelupdatesdevice failure
Figure 4: Systems heterogeneity in federated learning. Devices may vary in terms of network connection,
power, and hardware. Moreover, some of the devices may drop at any time during training. Therefore,
federated training methods must tolerate heterogeneous systems environments and low participation of
devices, i.e., they must allow for only a small subset of devices to be active at each round.
2.2 Systems Heterogeneity
In federated settings, there is signiﬁcant variability in the systems characteristics across the network, as
devices may differ in terms of hardware, network connectivity, and battery power. As depicted in Figure 4,
these systems characteristics make issues such as stragglers signiﬁcantly more prevalent than in typical
data center environments. We roughly group several key directions to handle systems heterogeneity into:
(i) asynchronous communication, (ii) active device sampling, and (ii) fault tolerance. As mentioned in
Section 2.1.3, we assume a star topology in our following discussions.
2.2.1 Asynchronous Communication
In traditional data center settings, synchronous and asynchronous schemes are both commonly used to
parallelize iterative optimization algorithms, with each approach having pros and cons. Synchronous
schemes are simple and guarantee a serial-equivalent computational model, but they are also more
susceptible to stragglers in the face of device variability. Asynchronous schemes are an attractive approach
to mitigate stragglers in heterogeneous environments, particularly in shared-memory systems [ 27,30,48,92,
141]. However, they typically rely on bounded-delay assumptions to control the degree of staleness, which
for device kdepends on the number of other devices that have updated since device kpulled from the
central server. While asynchronous parameter servers have been successful in distributed data centers [e.g.,
27,48,141], classical bounded-delay assumptions can be unrealistic in federated settings, where the delay
may be on the order of hours to days, or completely unbounded.
2.2.2 Active Sampling
In federated networks, typically only a small subset of devices participate at each round of training.
However, the vast majority of federated methods, e.g. those described in [ 11,47,65,75,106], are passive
in that they do not aim to inﬂuence which devices participate. An alternative approach involves actively
selecting participating devices at each round. For example, Nishio and Yonetani [83] explore novel device
sampling policies based on systems resources, with the aim being for the server to aggregate as many
device updates as possible within a pre-deﬁned time window. Similarly, Kang et al. [57] take into account
7