Heterogeneity diagnostics. Recent works have aimed to quantify statistical heterogeneity through
metrics such as local dissimilarity (as deﬁned in the context of federated learning in [ 65] and used for
other purposes in works such as [ 100,116,130]) and earth mover’s distance [ 138]. However, these
metrics cannot be easily calculated over the federated network before training occurs. The importance
of these metrics motivates the following open questions: (i) Do simple diagnostics exist to quickly
determine the level of heterogeneity in federated networks a priori ? (ii) Can analogous diagnostics be
developed to quantify the amount of systems-related heterogeneity? (iii) Can current or new deﬁnitions
of heterogeneity be exploited to further improve the convergence of federated optimization methods?
Granular privacy constraints. The deﬁnitions of privacy outlined in Section 2.4.2 cover privacy
at a local or global level with respect to all devices in the network. However, in practice, it may
be necessary to deﬁne privacy on a more granular level, as privacy constraints may differ across
devices or even across data points on a single device. For instance, Li et al. [64] recently proposed
sample-speciﬁc (as opposed to user-speciﬁc) privacy guarantees, thus providing a weaker form of
privacy in exchange for more accurate models. Developing methods to handle mixed (device-speciﬁc
or sample-speciﬁc) privacy restrictions is an interesting and ongoing direction of future work.
Beyond supervised learning. It is important to note that the methods discussed thus far have been
developed with the task of supervised learning in mind, i.e., they assume that labels exist for all of
the data in the federated network. In practice, much of the data generated in realistic federated
networks may be unlabeled or weakly labeled. Furthermore, the problem at hand may not be to ﬁt a
model to data as presented in (1), but instead to perform some exploratory data analysis, determine
aggregate statistics, or run a more complex task such as reinforcement learning. Tackling problems
beyond supervised learning in federated networks will likely require addressing similar challenges of
scalability, heterogeneity, and privacy.
Productionizing federated learning. Beyond the major challenges discussed in this article, there
are a number of practical concerns that arise when running federated learning in production. In
particular, issues such as concept drift (when the underlying data-generation model changes over
time); diurnal variations (when the devices exhibit different behavior at different times of the day or
week) [ 35]; and cold start problems (when new devices enter the network) must be handled with care.
We defer the readers to [ 11], which discusses some of the practical systems-related issues that exist in
production federated learning systems.
Benchmarks. Finally, as federated learning is a nascent ﬁeld, we are at a pivotal time to shape
the developments made in this area and ensure that they are grounded in real-world settings,
assumptions, and datasets. It is critical for the broader research communities to further build upon
existing implementations and benchmarking tools, such as LEAF [ 16] and TensorFlow Federated [ 1],
to facilitate both the reproducibility of empirical results and the dissemination of new solutions for
federated learning.
4 Conclusion
In this article, we have provided an overview of federated learning, a learning paradigm where statistical
models are trained at the edge in distributed networks. We have discussed the unique properties and
associated challenges of federated learning compared with traditional distributed data center computing
and classical privacy-preserving learning. We provided an extensive survey on classical results as well as
more recent work speciﬁcally focused on federated settings. Finally, we have outlined out a handful of open
13