systems overheads incurred on each device when designing incentive mechanisms to encourage devices
with higher-quality data to participate in the learning process. However, these methods assume a static
model of the systems characteristics of the network; it remains open how to extend these approaches to
handle real-time , device-speciﬁc ﬂuctuations in computation and communication delays. Moreover, while
these methods primarily focus on systems variability to perform active sampling, we note that it is also
worth considering actively sampling a set of small but sufﬁciently representative devices based on the
underlying statistical structure.
2.2.3 Fault Tolerance
Fault tolerance has been extensively studied in the systems community and is a fundamental consideration
of classical distributed systems [ 19,71,110]. Recent works have also investigated fault tolerance speciﬁcally
for machine learning workloads in data center environments [e.g., 87,112]. When learning over remote
devices, however, fault tolerance becomes more critical as it is common for some participating devices to
drop out at some point before the completion of the given training iteration [ 11]. One practical strategy is
to simply ignore such device failure [ 11], which may introduce bias into the device sampling scheme if the
failed devices have speciﬁc data characteristics. For instance, devices from remote areas may be more likely
to drop due to poor network connections and thus the trained federated model will be biased towards
devices with favorable network conditions. Theoretically, while several recent works have investigated
convergence guarantees of variants of federated learning methods [ 56,123,131,132], few analyses allow
for low participation [e.g., 65, 106], or study directly the effect of dropped devices.
Coded computation is another option to tolerate device failures by introducing algorithmic redundancy. Recent
works have explored using codes to speed up distributed machine learning training [e.g., 20,21,63,94,109].
For instance, in the presence of stragglers, gradient coding and its variants [ 20,21,109] carefully replicate
data blocks (as well as the gradient computation on those data blocks) across computing nodes to obtain
either exact or inexact recovery of the true gradients. While this is a seemingly promising approach
for the federated setting, these methods face fundamental challenges in federated networks as sharing
data/replication across devices is often infeasible due to privacy constraints and the scale of the network.
2.3 Statistical Heterogeneity
Challenges arise when training federated models from data that is not identically distributed across devices,
both in terms of modeling the data (as depicted in Figure 5), and in terms of analyzing the convergence
behavior of associated training procedures. We discuss related work in these directions below.
2.3.1 Modeling Heterogeneous Data
There exists a large body of literature in machine learning that has modeled statistical heterogeneity
via methods such as meta-learning [ 114] and multi-task learning [ 18,37]; these ideas have been recently
extended to the federated setting [ 24,26,35,58,106,138]. For instance, MOCHA [106], an optimization
framework designed for the federated setting, can allow for personalization by learning separate but related
models for each device while leveraging a shared representation via multi-task learning. This method has
provable theoretical convergence guarantees for the considered objectives, but is limited in its ability to
8