114 T. Hagendorff  
1 3
of “add-on” to technical concerns, as unbinding framework that is imposed from 
institutions “outside” of the technical community. Distributed responsibility in con-junction with a lack of knowledge about long-term or broader societal technologi-cal consequences causes software developers to lack a feeling of accountability or a view of the moral significance of their work. Especially economic incentives are easily overriding commitment to ethical principles and values. This implies that the purposes for which AI systems are developed and applied are not in accordance with societal values or fundamental rights such as beneficence, non-maleficence, justice, and explicability (Taddeo and Floridi 2018; Pekka et al. 2018).
Nevertheless, in several areas ethically motivated efforts are undertaken to 
improve AI systems. This is particularly the case in fields where technical “fixes” can be found for specific problems, such as accountability, privacy protection, anti-discrimination, safety, or explainability. However, there is also a wide range of ethi-cal aspects that are significantly related to the research, development and applica-tion of AI systems, but are not or very seldomly mentioned in the guidelines. Those omissions range from aspects like the danger of a malevolent artificial general intel-ligence, machine consciousness, the reduction of social cohesion by AI ranking and filtering systems on social networking sites, the political abuse of AI systems, a lack of diversity in the AI community, links to robot ethics, the dealing with trol-ley problems, the weighting between algorithmic or human decision routines, “hid-den” social and ecological costs of AI, to the problem of public–private-partnerships and industry-funded research. Again, as mentioned earlier, the list of omissions is not exhaustive and not all omissions can be justified equally. Some omissions, like deliberations on artificial general intelligence, can be justified by pointing at their purely speculative nature, while other omissions are less valid and should be a rea-son to update or improve existing and upcoming guidelines.
Checkbox guidelines must not be the only “instruments” of AI ethics. A transition 
is required from a more deontologically oriented, action-restricting ethic based on universal abidance of principles and rules, to a situation-sensitive ethical approach based on virtues and personality dispositions, knowledge expansions, responsible autonomy and freedom of action. Such an AI ethics does not seek to subsume as many cases as possible under individual principles in an overgeneralizing way, but behaves sensitively towards individual situations and specific technical assemblages. Further, AI ethics should not try to discipline moral actors to adhere to normative principles, but emancipate them from potential inabilities to act self-responsibly on the basis of comprehensive knowledge, as well as empathy in situations where mor -
ally relevant decisions have to be made.
These considerations have two consequences for AI ethics. On the one hand, a 
stronger focus on technological details of the various methods and technologies in the field of AI and machine learning is required. This should ultimately serve to close the gap between ethics and technical discourses. It is necessary to build tangi-ble bridges between abstract values and technical implementations, as long as these bridges can be reasonably constructed. On the other hand, however, the consequence of the presented considerations is that AI ethics, conversely, turns away from the description of purely technological phenomena in order to focus more strongly on genuinely social and personality-related aspects. AI ethics then deals less with AI