104 T. Hagendorff  
1 3
(Crawford and Joler 2018), corresponding most closely with the ideas and tenets 
of an ethics of care (Held 2013).
What are further insights from my analysis of the ethics guidelines, as summa-
rized in Table  1? On the one hand, it is noticeable that guidelines from industrial 
contexts name on average 9.1 distinctly separated ethical aspects, whereas the aver -
age for ethics codes from science is 10.8. The principles of Microsoft’s AI ethics are the most brief and minimalistic (Microsoft Corporation 2019). The OpenAI Charta names only four points and is thus situated at the bottom of the list (OpenAI 2018). 
Conversely, the IEEE guideline contains the largest volume with more than 100.000 words (The IEEE Global Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligent Sys-tems 2019). Finally, yet importantly, it is noteworthy that almost all guidelines sug-
gest that technical solutions exist for many of the problems described. Neverthe-less, there are only two guidelines which contain genuinely technical explanations at all—albeit only very sparsely. The authors of the guideline on the “Malicious Use of AI” provide the most extensive commentary here (Brundage et al. 2018).
2.3  Omissions
Despite the fact that the guidelines contain various parallels and several recurring 
topics, what are issues the guidelines do not discuss at all or only very occasion-
ally? Here, I want to give a (non-exhaustive) overview of issues that are missing. 
Two things should be considered in this context. First, the sampling method used to select the AI ethics guidelines has an effect on the list of issues and omissions. When deliberately excluding for instance robot ethics guidelines, this has the effect that the list of entries lacks issues that are connected with robotics. Second, not all omissions can be treated equally. There are omissions which are missing or severely underrepresented without any good reason—for instance the aspect of politi-cal abuse or “hidden” social and ecological costs of AI systems—, and omissions that can be justified—for instance deliberations on artificial general intelligence or machine consciousness, since those technologies are purely speculative.
Nevertheless, in view of the fact that significant parts of the AI community 
see the emergence of artificial general intelligence as well as associated dangers for humanity or existential threats as a likely scenario (Müller and Bostrom 2016; Bostrom 2014; Tegmark 2017; Omohundro 2014), one could argue that those top-
ics could be discussed in ethics guidelines under the umbrella of potential prohibi-tions to pursue certain research strands in this area (Hagendorff 2019). The fact that artificial general intelligence is not discussed in the guidelines may be due to the fact that most of the guidelines are not written by research groups from philosophy or other speculative disciplines, but by researchers with a background directly in computer science or its application. In this context, it is noteworthy that the fear of the emergence of superintelligence is more frequently expressed by people who lack technical experience in the field of AI—one just has to think of people like 
Stephen Hawking, Elon Musk or Bill Gates—while “real” experts generally regard 
the idea of a strong AI as rather absurd (Calo 2017, 26). Perhaps the same holds true for the question of machine consciousness and the ethical problems associated with