Vol.:(0123456789)Minds and Machines (2020) 30:99–120
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023-020-09517-8
1 3
The Ethics of AI Ethics: An Evaluation of Guidelines
Thilo Hagendorff1 
Received: 1 October 2019 / Accepted: 21 January 2020 / Published online: 1 February 2020 © The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
Current advances in research, development and application of artificial intelligence (AI) systems have yielded a far-reaching discourse on AI ethics. In consequence, a number of ethics guidelines have been released in recent years. These guidelines comprise normative principles and recommendations aimed to harness the “disrup-tive” potentials of new AI technologies. Designed as a semi-systematic evaluation, this paper analyzes and compares 22 guidelines, highlighting overlaps but also omis-sions. As a result, I give a detailed overview of the field of AI ethics. Finally, I also examine to what extent the respective ethical principles and values are implemented in the practice of research, development and application of AI systems—and how the effectiveness in the demands of AI ethics can be improved.
Keywords Artificial intelligence · Machine learning · Ethics · Guidelines · 
Implementation
1 Introduction
The current AI boom is accompanied by constant calls for applied ethics, which are 
meant to harness the “disruptive” potentials of new AI technologies. As a result, a whole body of ethical guidelines has been developed in recent years collecting prin-ciples, which technology developers should adhere to as far as possible. However, the critical question arises: Do those ethical guidelines have an actual impact on human decision-making in the field of AI and machine learning? The short answer is: No, most often not. This paper analyzes 22 of the major AI ethics guidelines and issues recommendations on how to overcome the relative ineffectiveness of these guidelines.
AI ethics—or ethics in general—lacks mechanisms to reinforce its own nor -
mative claims. Of course, the enforcement of ethical principles may involve 
 * Thilo Hagendorff 
 thilo.hagendorff@uni-tuebingen.de
1 Cluster of Excellence “Machine Learning: New Perspectives for Science”, University 
of Tuebingen, Tübingen, Germany