101
1 3 The Ethics of AI Ethics: An Evaluation of Guidelines  
Anderson 2015; Etzioni and Etzioni 2017; Yu et al. 2018) over meta-studies about 
AI ethics (Vakkuri and Abrahamsson 2018; Prates et  al. 2018; Boddington 2017; 
Greene et al. 2019; Goldsmith and Burton 2017) or the empirical analysis on how trolley problems are solved (Awad et al. 2018) to reflections on specific problems (Eckersley 2018) and comprehensive AI guidelines (The IEEE Global Initiative 
on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligent Systems 2019). This paper mainly deals with the latter issue. The list of ethics guidelines considered in this article therefore includes compilations that cover the field of AI ethics as comprehensively as pos-sible. To the best of my knowledge, a few preprints and papers are currently avail-able, which also deal with the comparison of different ethical guidelines (Zeng et al. 2018; Fjeld et al. 2019; Jobin et al. 2019). While especially the paper from Jobin et al. (2019) is a systematic scoping review of all the existing literature on AI eth-ics, this paper does not aim at a full analysis of every available soft-law or non-legal norm document on AI, algorithm, robot, or data ethics, but rather a semi-systematic overview of issues and normative stances in the field, demonstrating how the details of AI ethics relate to a bigger picture.
The selection and compilation of 22 major ethical guidelines were based on a 
literature analysis. This selection was undertaken in two phases. In the first phase, I searched different databases, namely Google, Google Scholar, Web of Science, ACM Digital Library, arXiv, and SSRN for hits or articles on “AI ethics”, “arti-ficial intelligence ethics”, “AI principles”, “artificial intelligence principles”, “AI guidelines”, and “artificial intelligence guidelines, following every link in the first 25 search results, while at the same time ignoring duplicates in the search process. During the analysis of the search results, I also sifted through the references in order to manually find further relevant guidelines. Furthermore, I used Algorithm Watch’s AI Ethics Guidelines Global Inventory, a crowdsourced, comprehensive list of ethics guidelines, to check whether I missed relevant guidelines. Via the list, I found three further guidelines that meet the criteria for the selection. In this context, a shortcom-ing one has to consider is that my selection is biased towards documents which are western/northern in nature, excluding guidelines which are not written in English.
I rejected all documents older than 5  years in order to only take guidelines 
into account that are relatively new. Documents that only refer to a national con-text—such as for instance position papers of national interest groups (Smart Dubai Smart Dubai 2018), the report of the British House of Lords (Bakewell 
et al. 2018), or the Nordic engineers’ stand on Artificial Intelligence and Ethics 
(Podgaiska and Shklovski)—were excluded from the compilation. Nevertheless, I included the European Commission’s “Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI” (Pekka et al. 2018), the Obama administration’s “Report on the Future of Artifi-cial Intelligence” (Holdren et al. 2016), and the “Beijing AI Principles” (Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence 2019), which are backed by the Chinese Min-istry of Science and Technology. I have included these three guidelines because they represent the three largest AI “superpowers”. Furthermore, I included the “OECD Principles on AI” (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Devel-opment 2019) due to their supranational character. Scientific papers or texts that 
fall into the category of AI ethics but focus on one or more specific aspects of the topic were not considered either. The same applies to guidelines or toolkits,