100 T. Hagendorff  
1 3
reputational losses in the case of misconduct, or restrictions on memberships in 
certain professional bodies. Yet altogether, these mechanisms are rather weak and pose no eminent threat. Researchers, politicians, consultants, managers and activ -
ists have to deal with this essential weakness of ethics. However, it is also a reason why ethics is so appealing to many AI companies and institutions. When companies or research institutes formulate their own ethical guidelines, regularly incorporate ethical considerations into their public relations work, or adopt ethically motivated “self-commitments”, efforts to create a truly binding legal framework are continu-ously discouraged. Ethics guidelines of the AI industry serve to suggest to legisla-tors that internal self-governance in science and industry is sufficient, and that no specific laws are necessary to mitigate possible technological risks and to eliminate scenarios of abuse (Calo 2017). And even when more concrete laws concerning AI systems are demanded, as recently done by Google (2019), these demands remain relatively vague and superficial.
Science- or industry-led ethics guidelines, as well as other concepts of self-gov -
ernance, may serve to pretend that accountability can be devolved from state author -
ities and democratic institutions upon the respective sectors of science or industry. Moreover, ethics can also simply serve the purpose of calming critical voices from the public, while simultaneously the criticized practices are maintained within the organization. The association “Partnership on AI” (2018) which brings together companies such as Amazon, Apple, Baidu, Facebook, Google, IBM and Intel is exemplary in this context. Companies can highlight their membership in such asso-ciations whenever the notion of serious commitment to legal regulation of business activities needs to be stifled.
This prompts the question as to what extent ethical objectives are actually imple-
mented and embedded in the development and application of AI, or whether merely good intentions are deployed. So far, some papers have been published on the sub-ject of teaching ethics to data scientists (Garzcarek and Steuer 2019; Burton et al. 2017; Goldsmith and Burton 2017; Johnson 2017) but by and large very little to nothing has been written about the tangible implementation of ethical goals and val-ues. In this paper, I address this question from a theoretical perspective. In a first step, 22 of the major guidelines of AI ethics will be analyzed and compared. I will also describe which issues they omit to mention. In a second step, I compare the principles formulated in the guidelines with the concrete practice of research and development of AI systems. In particular, I critically examine to what extent the principles have an effect. In a third and final step, I will work out ideas on how AI ethics can be transformed from a merely discursive phenomenon into concrete direc-tions for action.
2  Guidelines in AI Ethics
2.1  Method
Research in the field of AI ethics ranges from reflections on how ethical principles 
can be implemented in decision routines of autonomous machines (Anderson and