111
1 3 The Ethics of AI Ethics: An Evaluation of Guidelines  
4  Advances in AI Ethics
4.1  Technical Instructions
Given the relative lack of tangible impact of the normative objectives set out in 
the guidelines, the question arises as to how the guidelines could be improved to make them more effective. At first glance, the most obvious potential for improve-ment of the guidelines is probably to supplement them with more detailed tech-nical explanations—if such explanations can be found. Ultimately, it is a major problem to deduce concrete technological implementations from the very abstract ethical values and principles. What does it mean to implement justice or trans-parency in AI-systems? What does a “human-centered” AI look like? How can human oversight be obtained? The list of questions could easily be continued.
The ethics guidelines examined refer exclusively to the term “AI”. They never or 
very seldom use more specific terminology. However, “AI” is just a collective term for a wide range of technologies or an abstract large-scale phenomenon. The fact that not a single prominent ethical guideline goes into greater technical detail shows how deep the gap is between concrete contexts of research, development, and application on the one side, and ethical thinking on the other. Ethicists must partly be capable of grasping technical details with their intellectual framework. That means reflecting on the ways data are generated, recorded, curated, processed, disseminated, shared, and used (Bruin and Floridi 2017), on the ways of designing algorithms and code, respectively (Kitchin 2017; Kitchin and Dodge 2011), or on the ways training data sets are selected (Gebru et al. 2018). In order to analyze all this in sufficient depth, 
ethics has to partially transform to “microethics”. This means that at certain points, a substantial change in the level of abstraction has to happen insofar as ethics aims to have a certain impact and influence in the technical disciplines and the practice of research and development of artificial intelligence (Morley et al. 2019). On the way from ethics to “microethics”, a transformation from ethics to technology ethics, to machine ethics, to computer ethics, to information ethics, to data ethics has to take place. As long as ethicists refrain from doing so, they will remain visible in a gen-eral public, but not in professional communities.
A good example of such a microethical work which can be implemented eas-
ily and concretely in practice is the paper by Gebru et al. (2018). The research-ers propose the introduction of standardized datasheets listing the properties of different training data sets, so that machine learning-practitioners can check to what extent certain data sets are best suitable for their purposes, what the origi-nal intention was when the data set was created, what data the data set is com-posed of, how the data was collected and pre-processed, etc. The paper by Gebru et al. makes it possible for practitioners to obtain a more informed decision on the selection of certain training data sets, so that supervised machine learning ulti-mately becomes fairer, and more transparent, and avoids cases of algorithmic dis-crimination (Buolamwini and Gebru 2018). Such work is, however, an exception.
In general, ethical guidelines postulate very broad, overarching princi-
ples which are then supposed to be implemented in a widely diversified set of