108 T. Hagendorff  
1 3
to devaluation, are perceived de-individualized and in the worst case can become 
victims of violence simply because of their status as “others” (Mullen and Hu 1989; Vaes et al. 2014). I argue that only by abandoning such thinking in- and outgroups may the AI race be reframed into a global cooperation for beneficial and safe AI.
3.3  Ethics in Practice
Do ethical guidelines bring about a change in individual decision-making regard-
less of the larger social context? In a recent controlled study, researchers critically reviewed the idea that ethical guidelines serve as a basis for ethical decision-making for software engineers (McNamara et al. 2018). In brief, their main finding was that the effectiveness of guidelines or ethical codes is almost zero and that they do not change the behavior of professionals from the tech community. In the survey, 63 software engineering students and 105 professional software developers were scruti-nized. They were presented with eleven software-related ethical decision scenarios, testing whether the influence of the ethics guideline of the Association for Comput-ing Machinery (ACM) (Gotterbarn et al. 2018) in fact influences ethical decision-making in six vignettes, ranging from responsibility to report, user data collection, intellectual property, code quality, honesty to customer to time and personnel man-agement. The results are disillusioning: “No statistically significant difference in the 
responses for any vignette were found across individuals who did and did not see the 
code of ethics, either for students or for professionals.” (McNamara et al. 2018, 4).
Irrespective of such considerations on the microsociological level, the rela-
tive ineffectiveness of ethics can also be explained at the macrosociological level. Countless companies are eager to monetize AI in a huge variety of applications. This strive for a profitable use of machine learning systems is not primarily framed by value- or principle-based ethics, but obviously by an economic logic. Engineers and developers are neither systematically educated about ethical issues, nor are they empowered, for example by organizational structures, to raise ethical concerns. In business contexts, speed is everything in many cases and skipping ethical considera-tions is equivalent to the path of least resistance. Thus, the practice of development, implementation and use of AI applications has very often little to do with the values and principles postulated by ethics. The German sociologist Ulrich Beck once stated that ethics nowadays “plays the role of a bicycle brake on an intercontinental air -
plane” (Beck 1988, 194). This metaphor proves to be particularly true in the context of AI, where huge sums of money are invested in the development and commercial utilization of systems based on machine learning (Rosenberg 2017), while ethical considerations are mainly used for public relations purposes (Boddington 2017, 56).
In their AI Now 2017 Report, Kate Crawford and her team state that ethics and 
forms of soft governance “face real challenges” (Campolo et al. 2017, 5). This is mainly due to the fact that ethics has no enforcement mechanisms reaching beyond a voluntary and non-binding cooperation between ethicists and individuals working in research and 
industry. So what happens is that AI research and development takes place in “closed-
door industry settings”, where “user consent, privacy and transparency are often over -
looked in favor of frictionless functionality that supports profit-driven business models”