105
1 3 The Ethics of AI Ethics: An Evaluation of Guidelines  
it (Lyons 2018), as this topic is also omitted from all examined ethical guidelines. 
What is also striking is the fact that only the Montréal Declaration for Responsible Development of Artificial Intelligence (2018) as well as the AI Now 2019 Report (2019) explicitly addresses the aspect of democratic control, governance and politi-cal deliberation of AI systems. The mentioned documents are also the only guide-lines that explicitly prohibits imposing certain lifestyles or concepts of “good living” on people by AI systems, as it is for example demonstrated in the Chinese scoring system (Engelmann et al. 2019). The former document further criticizes the appli-cation of AI systems for the reduction of social cohesion, for example by isolating people in echo chambers (Flaxman et al. 2016). In addition, hardly any guideline discusses the possibility for political abuse of AI systems in the context of automated propaganda, bots, fake news, deepfakes, micro targeting, election fraud, and the like. What is also largely absent from most guidelines is the issue of a lack in diversity within the AI community. This lack of diversity is prevailing in the field of artificial intelligence research and development, as well as in the workplace cultures shaping the technology industry. In the end, a relatively small group of predominantly white men determines how AI systems are designed, for what purposes they are optimized, what is attempted to realize technically, etc. The famous AI startup “nnaisense” run by Jürgen Schmidhuber, which aims at generating an artificial general intelligence, to name just one example, employs only two women—one scientist and one office manager—in its team, but 21 men. Another matter, which is not covered at all or only very rarely mentioned in the guidelines, are aspects of robot ethics. As men-tioned in the methods chapter, specific guidelines for robot ethics exist, most prom-inently represented by Asimov’s three laws of robotics (Asimov 2004), but those guidelines were intentionally excluded from the analysis. Nonetheless, advances in AI research contribute, for instance, to increasingly anthropomorphized techni-cal devices. The ethical question that arises in this context echoes Immanuel Kant’s “brutalization argument” and states that the abuse of anthropomorphized agents—as, for example, is the case with language assistants (Brahnam 2006)—also pro-motes the likelihood of violent actions between people (Darling 2016). Apart from that, the examined ethics guidelines pay little attention to the rather popular trolley problems (Awad et al. 2018) and their alleged relation to ethical questions surround-ing self-driving cars or other autonomous vehicles. In connection to this, no guide-line deals in detail with the obvious question where systems of algorithmic deci-sion making are superior or inferior, respectively, to human decision routines. And finally, virtually no guideline deals with the “hidden” social and ecological costs of AI systems. At several points in the guidelines, the importance of AI systems for approaching a sustainable society is emphasized (Rolnick et al. 2019). However, it is omitted—with the exception of the AI Now 2019 Report (2019)—that producer and consumer practices in the context of AI technologies may in themselves contra-dict sustainability goals. Issues such as lithium mining, e-waste, the one-way use of rare earth minerals, energy consumption, low-wage “clickworkers” creating labels for data sets or doing content moderation are of relevance here (Crawford and Joler 2018; Irani 2016; Veglis 2014; Fang 2019; Casilli 2017). Although “clickwork” is a 
necessary prerequisite for the application of methods of supervised machine learn-ing, it is associated with numerous social problems (Silberman et  al. 2018; Irani