113
1 3 The Ethics of AI Ethics: An Evaluation of Guidelines  
the scope of action, uncovering blind spots, promoting autonomy and freedom, and 
fostering self-responsibility.
In view of AI ethics, approaches that focus on virtues aim at cultivating a moral 
character, expressing technomoral virtues such as honesty, justice, courage, empa-thy, care, civility, or magnanimity, to name just a few (Vallor 2016). Those virtues are supposed to raise the likelihood of ethical decision-making practices in organi-zations that develop and deploy AI applications. Cultivating a moral character, in terms of virtue ethics, means to educate virtues in families, schools, communities, as well as companies. At best, every individual, every member of a society should encourage this cultivation, by generating the motivation to adopt and habituate prac-tices that influence technology development and use in a positive manner. Especially the subject of responsibility diffusion can only be circumvented when virtue ethics is adopted on a broad and collective level in communities of tech professionals. Simply every person involved in data science, data engineering and data economies related to applications of AI has to take at least some responsibility for the implications of their actions (Leonelli 2016). This is why researchers such as Floridi argue that every actor who is causally relevant for bringing about the collective consequence or impacts in question, has to be held accountable (Floridi 2016). Interestingly, Floridi uses the backpropagation method known from Deep Learning to describe the way in which responsibilities can be assigned, except that here backpropagation is used in networks of distributed responsibility. When working in groups, actions that are on first glance allegedly morally neutral can nevertheless have consequences or impacts—intended or non-intended—that are morally wrong. This means that prac-titioners from AI communities always need to discern the overarching, short- and long-term consequences of the technical artefacts they are building or maintaining, as well as to explore alternative ways of developing software or using data, includ-ing the option of completely refraining from carrying out particular tasks, which are considered unethical.
In addition to the endorsement of virtue ethics in tech communities, several insti-
tutional changes should take place. They include the adoption of legal framework conditions, the establishment of mechanisms for an independent auditing of tech-nologies, the establishment of institutions for complaints, which also compensate for harms caused by AI systems, and the expansion of university curricula in particu-lar through content from ethics of technology, media, and information (Floridi et al. 2018; Cowls and Floridi 2018; Eaton et al. 2017; Goldsmith and Burton 2017). So far, however, hardly any of these demands have been met.
5  Conclusion
Currently, AI ethics is failing in many cases. Ethics lacks a reinforcement mech-anism. Deviations from the various codes of ethics have no consequences. And in cases where ethics is integrated into institutions, it mainly serves as a market-ing strategy. Furthermore, empirical experiments show that reading ethics guide-lines has no significant influence on the decision-making of software developers. In practice, AI ethics is often considered as extraneous, as surplus or some kind