103
1 3 The Ethics of AI Ethics: An Evaluation of Guidelines  
2.2  Multiple Entries
As shown in Table  1, several issues are unsurprisingly recurring across vari-
ous guidelines. Especially the aspects of accountability, privacy or fairness  
appear altogether in about 80% of all guidelines and seem to provide the mini-
mal requirements for building and using an “ethically sound” AI system. What is striking here is the fact that the most frequently mentioned aspects are those for which technical fixes can be or have already been developed. Enormous technical efforts are undertaken to meet ethical targets in the fields of accountability and explainable AI (Mittelstadt et al. 2019), fairness and discrimination aware data 
mining (Gebru et al. 2018), as well as privacy (Baron and Musolesi 2017). Many of those endeavors are unified under the FAT ML or XAI community (Veale and Binns 2017; Selbst et  al. 2018). Several tech-companies already offer tools for 
bias mitigation and fairness in machine learning. In this context, Google, Micro-soft and Facebook have issued the “AI Fairness 360” tool kit, the “What-If Tool”, “Facets”, “fairlern.py” and “Fairness Flow”, respectively (Whittaker et al. 2018).
Accountability, explainability, privacy, justice, but also other values such as 
robustness or safety are most easily operationalized mathematically and thus tend to be implemented in terms of technical solutions. With reference to the find-ings of psychologist Carol Gilligan, one could argue at this point that the way AI ethics is performed and structured constitutes a typical instantiation of a male-dominated justice ethics (Gilligan 1982). In the 1980s, Gilligan demonstrated in empirical studies that women do not, as men typically do, address moral problems primarily through a “calculating”, “rational”, “logic-oriented” ethics of justice, but rather interpret them within a wider framework of an “empathic”, “emotion-oriented” ethics of care. In fact, no different from other parts of AI research, the discourse on AI ethics is also primarily shaped by men. My analysis of the distri-bution of female and male authors of the guidelines, as far as authors were indi-cated in the documents, showed that the proportion of women was 41.7%. This ratio appears to be close to balance. However, it should be considered that the ratio of female to male authors is reduced to a less balanced 31.3% if the four AI Now Reports are discarded, which come from an organization that is deliberately led by women. The proportion of women is lowest at 7.7% in the FAT ML com-munity’s guidelines which are focused predominantly on technical solutions (Dia-kopoulos et al.). Accordingly, the “male way” of thinking about ethical problems is reflected in almost all ethical guidelines by way of mentioning aspects such as accountability, privacy or fairness. In contrast, almost no guideline talks about 
AI in contexts of care, nurture, help, welfare, social responsibility or ecological networks. In AI ethics, technical artefacts are primarily seen as isolated entities that can be optimized by experts so as to find technical solutions for technical problems. What is often lacking is a consideration of the wider contexts and the comprehensive relationship networks in which technical systems are embedded. In accordance with that, it turns out that precisely the reports of AI Now (Craw -
ford et al. 2016, 2019; Whittaker et al. 2018; Campolo et al. 2017), an organiza-
tion primarily led by women, do not conceive AI applications in isolation, but within a larger network of social and ecological dependencies and relationships