112 T. Hagendorff  
1 3
scientific, technical and economic practices, and in sometimes geographically 
dispersed groups of researchers and developers with different priorities, tasks and fragmental responsibilities. Ethics thus operates at a maximum distance from the practices it actually seeks to govern. Of course, this does not remain unnoticed among technology developers. In consequence, the generality and superficiality of ethical guidelines in many cases not only prevents actors from bringing their own practice into line with them, but rather encourages the devolution of ethical responsibility to others.
4.2  Virtue Ethics
Regardless of the fact that normative guidelines should be accompanied by in-depth 
technical instructions—as far as they can reasonably be identified—, the question still arises how the precarious situation regarding the application and fulfillment of AI ethics guidelines can be improved. To address this question, one needs to take a step back and look at ethical theories in general. In ethics, several major strands of theories were created and shaped by various philosophical traditions. Those theories range from deontological to contractualistic, utilitarian, or virtue ethical approaches (Kant 1827; Rawls 1975; Bentham 1838; Hursthouse 2001). In the following, two of 
these approaches—deontology and virtue ethics—will be selected to illustrate dif-ferent approaches in AI ethics. The deontological approach is based on strict rules, duties or imperatives. The virtue ethics approach, on the other hand, is based on character dispositions, moral intuitions or virtues—especially “technomoral virtues” (Vallor 2016). In the light of these two approaches, the traditional type of AI ethics 
can be assigned to the deontological concept (Mittelstadt 2019). Ethics guidelines postulate a fixed set of universal principles and maxims which technology devel-opers should adhere to (Ananny 2016). The virtue ethics approach, on the other hand, focuses more on “deeper-lying” structures and situation-specific deliberations, on addressing personality traits and behavioral dispositions on the part of technol-ogy developers (Leonelli 2016). Virtue ethics does not define codes of conduct but 
focusses on the individual level. The technologists or software engineers and their social context are the primary addressees of such an ethics (Ananny 2016), not tech-nology itself.
I argue that the prevalent approach of deontological AI ethics should be aug-
mented with an approach oriented towards virtue ethics aiming at values and char -
acter dispositions. Ethics is then no longer understood as a deontologically inspired tick-box exercise, but as a project of advancing personalities, changing attitudes, strengthen responsibilities and gaining courage to refrain from certain actions, which are deemed unethical. When following the path of virtue ethics, ethics as a scientific discipline must refrain from wanting to limit, control, or steer (Luke 1995). Very often, ethics or ethical guidelines are perceived as something whose purpose is to stop or prohibit activity, to hamper valuable research and economic endeavors (Boddington 2017, 8). I want to resign this negative notion of ethics. It should not be 
the objective of ethics to stifle activity, but to do the exact opposite, i.e. broadening