106 T. Hagendorff  
1 3
2015; Graham et al. 2017), such as low wages, work conditions and psychological 
work consequences, which tend to be ignored by the AI community. Finally, yet importantly, not a single guideline raises the issue of public–private partnerships and industry-funded research in the field of AI. Despite the massive lack of trans-
parency regarding the allocation of research funds, it is no secret that large parts of university AI research are financed by corporate partners. In light of this, it remains questionable to what extent the ideal of freedom of research can be upheld—or whether there will be a gradual “buyout” of research institutes.
3  AI in Practice
3.1  Business Versus Ethics
The close link between business and science is not only revealed by the fact that all 
of the major AI conferences are sponsored by industry partners. The link between business and science is also well illustrated by the AI Index 2018 (Shoham et al. 2018). Statistics show that, for example, the number of corporate-affiliated AI papers has grown significantly in recent years. Furthermore, there is a huge growth in the number of active AI startups, each supported by huge amounts of annual funding from Venture Capital firms. Tens of thousands of AI-related patents are registered each year. Different industries are incorporating AI applications in a broad variety of fields, ranging from manufacturing, supply-chain management, and service develop-ment, to marketing and risk assessment. All in all, the global AI market comprises more than 7 billion dollars (Wiggers 2019).
A critical look at this global AI market and the use of AI systems in the econ-
omy and other social systems sheds light primarily on unwanted side effects of the use of AI, as well as on directly malevolent contexts of use. These occur in various areas (Pistono and Yampolskiy 2016; Amodei et al. 2017). Leading, of course, is the military use of AI in cyber warfare or regarding weaponized unmanned vehicles or drones (Ernest and Carroll 2016; Anderson and Waxman 2013). According to media reports, the US government alone intends to invest two billion dollars in mili-tary AI projects over the next 5 years (Fryer-Biggs 2018). Moreover, governments can use AI applications for automated propaganda and disinformation campaigns (Lazer et  al. 2018), social control (Engelmann et  al. 2019), surveillance (Helbing 2019), face recognition or sentiment analysis (Introna and Wood 2004), social sort-ing (Lyon 2003), or improved interrogation techniques (McAllister 2017). Notwith-standing the above, companies can cause massive job losses due to AI implementa-tion (Frey and Osborne 2013), conduct unmonitored forms of AI experiments on society without informed consent (Kramer et al. 2014), suffer from data breaches (Schneier 2018), use unfair, biased algorithms (Eubanks 2018), provide unsafe AI 
products (Sitawarin et al. 2018), use trade secrets to disguise harmful or flawed AI functionalities (Whittaker et al. 2018), rush to integrate and put immature AI appli-cations on the market and many more. Furthermore, criminal or black-hat hackers can use AI to tailor cyberattacks, steal information, attack IT infrastructures, rig elections, spread misinformation for example through deepfakes, use voice synthesis