109
1 3 The Ethics of AI Ethics: An Evaluation of Guidelines  
(Campolo et al. 2017, 31 f.). Despite this dispensation of ethical principles, AI systems 
are used in areas of high societal significance such as health, police, mobility or edu-cation. Thus, in the AI Now Report 2018, it is repeated that the AI industry “urgently needs new approaches to governance”, since, “internal governance structures at most technology companies are failing to ensure accountability for AI systems” (Whittaker et al. 2018, 4). Thus, ethics guidelines often fall into the category of a “’trust us’ form 
of [non-binding] corporate self-governance” (Whittaker et  al. 2018, 30) and people should “be wary of relying on companies to implement ethical practices voluntarily” (Whittaker et al. 2018, 32).
The tension between ethical principles and wider societal interests on the one hand, 
and research, industry, and business objectives on the other can be explained with recourse to sociological theories. Especially on the basis of system theory it can be shown that modern societies differ in their social systems, each working with their own codes and communication media (Luhmann 1984, 1997, 1988). Structural couplings 
can lead decisions in one social system to influence other social systems. Such cou-plings, however, are limited and do not change the overall autonomy of social systems. This autonomy, which must be understood as an exclusive, functionalist orientation towards the system’s own codes is also manifested in the AI industry, business and sci-ence. All these systems have their own codes, their own target values, and their own types of economic or symbolic capital via which they are structured and based upon which decisions are made (Bourdieu 1984). Ethical intervention in those systems is only possible to a very limited extent (Hagendorff 2016). A certain hesitance exists towards every kind of intervention as long as these lie beyond the functional laws of the respective systems. Despite that, unethical behavior or unethical intentions are not solely caused by economic incentives. Rather, individual character traits like cognitive moral development, idealism, or job satisfaction play a role, let alone organizational environment characteristics like an egoistic work climate or (non-existent) mechanisms for the enforcement of ethical codes (Kish-Gephart et al. 2010). Nevertheless, many of these factors are heavily influenced by the overall economic system logic. Ethics is then, so to speak, “operationally effectless” (Luhmann 2008).
And yet, such system-theoretical considerations apply only on a macro level of 
observation and must not be generalized. Deviations from purely economic behavioral logics in the tech industry occur as well, for example when Google withdrew from the military project “Maven” after protests from employees (Statt 2018) or when people at 
Microsoft protested against the company’s cooperation with Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) (Lecher 2018). Nevertheless, it must also be kept in mind here that, in addition to genuine ethical motives, the significance of economically relevant reputa-tion losses should not be underestimated. Hence, the protest against unethical AI pro-jects can in turn be interpreted in an economic logic, too.
3.4  Loyalty to Guidelines
As indicated in the previous sections, the practice of using AI systems is poor in terms 
of compliance with the principles set out in the various ethical guidelines. Great pro-gress has been made in the areas of privacy, fairness or explainability. For example,