107
1 3 The Ethics of AI Ethics: An Evaluation of Guidelines  
technologies for fraud or social engineering (Bendel 2017), or disclose personal 
traits that are actually secret or private via machine learning applications (Kosinski and Wang 2018; Kosinski et al. 2013, 2015). All in all, only a very small number of 
papers is published about the misuse of AI systems, even though they impressively show what massive damage can be done with those systems (Brundage et al. 2018; King et al. 2019; O’Neil 2016).
3.2  AI Race
While the United States currently has the largest number of start-ups, China claims 
to be the “world leader in AI” in 2030 (Abacus 2018). This claim is supported by the sheer amount of data that China has at its disposal to train its own AI systems, as well as by the large label companies that take over the manual preparation of data sets for supervised machine learning (Yuan 2018). Conversely, China is seen 
to have a weakness vis-à-vis the USA in that the investments of the market lead-ers Baidu, Alibaba and Tencent are too application-oriented comprising areas such as autonomous driving, finance or home appliances, while important basic research on algorithm development, chip production or sensor technology is neglected (Hao 2019). The constant comparison between China, the USA and Europe renders the fear of being inferior to each other an essential motive for efforts in the research and development of artificial intelligence.
Another justification for competitive thinking is provided by the military context. 
If the own “team”, framed in a nationalist way, does not keep pace, so the consid-eration, it will simply be overrun by the opposing “team” with superior AI military technology. In fact, potential risks emerge from the AI race narrative, as well as from an actual competitive race to develop AI systems for technological superior -
ity (Cave and ÓhÉigeartaigh 2018). One risk of this rhetoric is that “impediments” 
in the form of ethical considerations will be eliminated completely from research, development and implementation. AI research is not framed as a cooperative global project, but as a fierce competition. This competition affects the actions of individu-als and promotes a climate of recklessness, repression, and thinking in hierarchies, victory and defeat. The race for the best AI, whether a mere narrative or a harsh reality, reduces the likelihood of the establishment of technical precaution measures as well as of the development of benevolent AI systems, cooperation, and dialogue between research groups and companies. Thus, the AI race stands in stark contrast to the idea of developing an “AI4people” (Floridi et al. 2018). The same holds true for the idea of an “AI for Global Good”, as was proposed at the 2017’s ITU summit, or the large number of leading AI researchers who signed the open letter of the “Future of Life Institute”, embracing the norm that AI should be used for prosocial purposes.
Despite the downsides, in less public discourses and in concrete practice, an AI 
race has long since established itself. Along with that development, in- and out-group-thinking has intensified. Competitors are seen more or less as enemies or at least as threats against which one has to defend oneself. Ethics, on the other hand, in its considerations and theories always stresses the danger of an artificial differentia-tion between in- and outgroups (Derrida 1997). Constructed outgroups are subject