Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 11 of 41
Wave or IBM, which are the giants of quantum computers building, the calculation is
repeated at least 1024 times in the quantum computer;
• Quantum chipset includes quantum registers, quantum gates and measurement de-
vices when it comes to superconducting qubits. Current chipsets are not very large.
They are the size of a full-frame photo sensor or double size for the largest of them.
The size of the latest powerful quantum chip called the 433-qubit Osprey, around the
size of a quarter;
• Refrigerated enclosure generally holds the inside of the computer at temperatures near
absolute zero. It contains part of the control electronics and the quantum chipset to
avoid generating disturbances that prevent the qubits from working, especially at the
level of their entanglement and coherence, and to reduce the noise of their operation;
• Electronic writing and reading in the refrigerated enclosure, control the physical
devices needed to initialize, update, and read the state of qubits.
Figure 6. The quantum computer’s architecture.
Quantum computers today are built based on atoms (e.g., cold atoms, trapped ions
and nuclear magnetic resonance), electrons (e.g., superconducting, silicon and topological),
or photon (e.g., linear optics). D-Wave, IBM and Google have all shown signiﬁcant quantum
computer development progress. The D-Wave model is built using the quantum adiabatic
technique, which handles issues involving optimization or probabilistic sampling, whereas
the IBM model is mostly dealing with non-adiabatic models. Most of those companies
provide a quantum computer simulator that runs on a classical computer to test code
before executing it on a quantum device. It is possible to use this simulator in either a local
environment or the cloud. It cannot handle true quantum states because it is operating on a
classical computer, but it is useful for testing code syntax and ﬂow.
2.8. Quantum Algorithms
The creation of quantum algorithms necessitates a higher level of expertise than
traditional algorithms and programs. Quantum computers will need the development
of a new generation of mathematicians and developers capable of reasoning with the