Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 14 of 41
and whether the computer that processes data are classical (C) or quantum (Q),(as shown
in Figure 7).
Figure 7. Four different ways to combine quantum computing with machine learning. Reprinted
with permission from Ref. [47]. 2017, Maria Schuld.
The scenario CC refers to data that is treated traditionally. This is the traditional
technique of machine learning; however, in this case, it refers to machine learning using
quantum information research-derived approaches. Tensor networks that are designed
addressing to quantum many-body processes, have been employed in training neural net-
works [ 48]. In addition, there are various ’quantum-inspired’ machine learning algorithms
with varied degrees of quantum theoretical background.
The scenario QC examines how machine learning might aid quantum computing.
For instance, if we wish to obtain a complete explanation of the state of a computing device
by taking a few measurements, we may analyze the measurement data using machine
learning [ 49]. There are several applications for machine learning to distinguish either
quantum states generated by a quantum source or manipulations carried out by a quantum
experiment [50,51].
The scenario CQ uses quantum computing to examine conventional datasets. Observa-
tions from classical computers, which include images and text, are supplied to a quantum
device for evaluation. The primary objective of the CQ methodology is the development
of quantum algorithms to be used in data mining, for which the community has offered a
variety of solutions. They might be adaptations of traditional machine learning models to
function with quantum algorithms, or they can be entirely novel creations inspired by the
characteristics of quantum computing.
The last scenario QQ examines the processing of “quantum data” by a quantum device.
There are two possible interpretations of this. The information may be obtained through
a quantum experiment involving a quantum system and the subsequent input of those
experimental measurements into a different quantum computer. In a second interpretation,
a quantum computer simulates the behavior of the quantum system and then uses the state
of this system as such an input of a QML algorithm performed on the same computer.
Nowadays, Quantum Machine Learning (QML) algorithms are separated into three
distinct strategies. Quantum machine learning algorithms, which are quantum versions
of classical machine learning, in addition to algorithms that are implemented on a real
quantum computer, including QSVM [ 4], Quantum Neural Network [ 52] and Quantum
Linear Regression [ 8]. The second strategy is quantum-inspired machine learning, which