Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 2 of 41
may provide an exponential speedup in solving the traditionally difﬁcult problem of big
integer factorization. These algorithms are anticipated to include some key characteris-
tics of quantum computation, including quantum superposition, quantum measurement,
and quantum entanglement.
While machine learning is being limited by a lack of computing power, researchers are
exploring the prospects of combining quantum computing and machine learning to handle
classical data using machine learning algorithms. This combination of machine learning
theory with the characteristics of quantum computing is a new research sub-discipline
called Quantum Machine Learning (QML). Therefore, QML aims to build quantum appli-
cations for diverse machine learning algorithms, using the processing power of quantum
computers and the scalability and learning capacity of machine learning algorithms.
Quantum variants of several popular algorithms for machine learning are already
developed. Quantum Neural Network (QNN) described by Narayanan and Menneer [ 3],
in which they presented the theoretical design of a QNN architecture and how the system’s
components might perform relative to their traditional counterparts. Quantum Support
Vector Machines (QSVM) was proposed by Rebentrost et al. [ 4] for solving least-squares
SVM using the HHL algorithm [ 5] for matrix inversion in order to generate the hyperplane.
In 2014, Wiebe et al. [ 6] provided a quantum version of k-nearest neighbors for comput-
ing the nearest neighbors relying on the Euclidean distance between the data locations,
in addition to amplitude estimation which eliminates the requirement for measurement.
In 2018, Dang et al. [ 7] also introduced an image classiﬁcation model based on quantum
k-nearest neighbors and parallel computing. Their model improved categorization preci-
sion and productivity. Schuld et al. [ 8] proposed quantum linear regression as a version of
classical linear regression, and it operates in an exponential runtime with Ndimensions of
features, using quantum data, which is presented as quantum information. The quantum
decision tree classiﬁer developed by Lu et al. [ 9] employs quantum ﬁdelity measurement
and quantum entropy impurity.
Lloyd et al. [ 10] described several quantum machine learning techniques for cluster
detection and cluster assignment. A quantization version of Lloyd’s method [ 11] is provided
as a part of their k-means clustering algorithm. Furthermore, Kerenidis et al. [ 12] have
suggested Q-means, a quantized form of the k-means method with similar results and
convergence to the traditional k-means algorithm. Aïmeur et al. [ 13] introduced quantum
K-medians clustering, which uses Grover’s search algorithm for locating the cluster’s
median. In 2014, Lloyd et al. [ 14] developed Quantum Principal Component Analysis
(QPCA), which identiﬁes the eigenvectors relating to the unknown state’s huge eigenvalues
exponentially faster than any other solution.
Inside Machine Learning, there is a more advanced ﬁeld known as Reinforcement
Learning. It is built on continuous learning through exploration of the environment. There
exist few quantum variants of conventional Reinforcement Learning algorithms including
Quantum Reinforcement Learning introduced by Dong et al. [ 15], which makes use of
the quantum parallelism and superposition principle. They discovered that probability
amplitude and quantum parallelism may aid in learning speed. For solving Dynamic
Programming problems, which are deterministic forms of Markov decision problems
that are studied in reinforcement learning, in [ 16], they have suggested various quantum
algorithms as solutions. McKiernan et al. [ 17] developed a general algorithm to improve
hybrid quantum-classical computing using reinforcement learning.
Deep Learning is a new machine learning sub-discipline. Deep Learning techniques,
which demand a signiﬁcant amount of storage and time consumption, are now being im-
plemented on quantum computers. These algorithms are shown by Quantum Generative
Adversarial Networks (Quantum GAN) [ 18–20] with its implementation in [ 21], which uses
a superconducting quantum processor to learn and generate real-world handwritten digit
pictures, Quantum Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Networks (Quantum WGAN) [ 22],
which improves the scalability and stability of quantum generative adversarial model
training on quantum machines, Quantum Boltzmann Machines [ 23,24], Quantum Autoen-