Citation: Zeguendry, A.; Jarir, Z.;
Quafafou, M. Quantum Machine
Learning: A Review and Case
Studies. Entropy 2023 ,25, 287.
https://doi.org/10.3390/e25020287
Academic Editor: Andreas Wichert
Received: 30 December 2022
Revised: 31 January 2023
Accepted: 1 February 2023
Published: 3 February 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
entropy
Review
Quantum Machine Learning: A Review and Case Studies
Amine Zeguendry1,*
, Zahi Jarir1,*
and Mohamed Quafafou2
1Laboratoire d’Ingénierie des Systèmes d’Information, Faculty of Sciences, Cadi Ayyad University,
Marrakech 40000, Morocco
2Laboratoire des Sciences de l’Information et des Systèmes, Unité Mixte de Recherche 7296, Aix-Marseille
University, 13007 Marseille, France
*Correspondence: amine.zeguendry@ced.uca.ma (A.Z.); jarir@uca.ma (Z.J.)
Abstract: Despite its undeniable success, classical machine learning remains a resource-intensive
process. Practical computational efforts for training state-of-the-art models can now only be handled
by high speed computer hardware. As this trend is expected to continue, it should come as no surprise
that an increasing number of machine learning researchers are investigating the possible advantages
of quantum computing. The scientiﬁc literature on Quantum Machine Learning is now enormous,
and a review of its current state that can be comprehended without a physics background is necessary.
The objective of this study is to present a review of Quantum Machine Learning from the perspective
of conventional techniques. Departing from giving a research path from fundamental quantum theory
through Quantum Machine Learning algorithms from a computer scientist’s perspective, we discuss
a set of basic algorithms for Quantum Machine Learning, which are the fundamental components
for Quantum Machine Learning algorithms. We implement the Quanvolutional Neural Networks
(QNNs) on a quantum computer to recognize handwritten digits, and compare its performance
to that of its classical counterpart, the Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). Additionally, we
implement the QSVM on the breast cancer dataset and compare it to the classical SVM. Finally, we
implement the Variational Quantum Classiﬁer (VQC) and many classical classiﬁers on the Iris dataset
to compare their accuracies.
Keywords: quantum computing; quantum algorithms; Quantum Machine Learning (QML); quantum
classiﬁcation; Variational Quantum Circuit (VQC); QSVM; Quanvolutional Neural Network (QNN);
Variational Quantum Classiﬁer (VQC); quantum encoding
1. Introduction
Machine Learning is a subset of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) that aims to create mod-
els that learn from previous experience without being explicitly formulated, and it has
been used extensively in several scientiﬁc and technical ﬁelds, including natural language
processing, medical diagnostics, computer vision, and data mining, and so on. Many
machine learning problems require the use of linear algebra to execute matrix operations
since data are described as matrices. On the other hand, performing these operations on
traditional computers requires a signiﬁcant amount of time and computational resources.
Quantum Computing is an ambitious new ﬁeld that combines computer science, math-
ematics, and physics. This ﬁeld investigates ways to use some of the special properties
of quantum physics to build quantum computers that take advantage of quantum bits
(qubits) that can contain 0 and 1 combinations in superposition at the same time. As a
result, quantum computers can handle and process large matrices, as well as accelerate
various linear algebra operations, signiﬁcantly improving traditional machine learning
applications. Theoretically, it should solve problems that belong to classes of complexity
that traditional computers, even large giant supercomputers, will never be able to solve.
Grover’s algorithm, for instance, has demonstrated a quadratic speedup for exploring
unstructured databases [ 1], while Shor’s technique [ 2] illustrates that quantum computing
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287. https://doi.org/10.3390/e25020287 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/entropy