Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 30 of 41
classic SVM algorithms that perform on classical computers with GPUs or CPUs. The initial
procedure QSVM is to encode the conventional data which contains speciﬁc categories
(class, features, dimension, etc.) giving the information about the data we wish to classify.
Current quantum hardware functions are yet to achieve full capability as there is a limited
number of qubits accessible. Therefore, we need to decrease the features of the data to
render it compatible with the available qubits. The principal component analysis (PCA) is
typically employed in machine learning for this kind of procedure. Next, the classical data
are required to be mapped towards quantum input in order to be treated by the quantum
computer. These mapped data are called a feature map which operates as a quantum feature
for classical data. Finally, the proper machine learning algorithm needs to implemented to
attain the best classiﬁcation result. This implementation covers many processes including
dividing the data into training and testing sets, determining the amount of qubits to be
employed, deﬁning the classes of data. Additionally, we need to deﬁne the algorithm as
well as parameters for how many iterations this should be carried out with the depth of
the circuit.
4.2.1. Implementation
The objective of this implementation is to compare the performances of the classical
SVM and the QSVM which is implemented on a dataset that represents the real world
using a quantum computer.
• Breast cancer dataset: The Wisconsin Diagnostic Breast Cancer dataset (WDBC) of
UCI machine learning repository is a classiﬁcation dataset that includes breast cancer
case metrics. There are two categories: benign and malignant. This dataset contains
information on 31 characteristics that deﬁne a tumor, among which are: average
radius, mean perimeter, mean texture, etc., and a total of 569 records and 31 features;
• Principal Component Analysis: The existing quantum computers are yet to attain full
potential as their functions are constrained by the limited number of accessible qubits,
noise, and decoherence. Thereby, a dataset with exceptionally big dimensionality is
difﬁcult to be implemented. In addition, this is where Principal Component Analysis
(PCA) comes to help. As mentioned above, PCA is the technique that reduces the
huge dimension into smaller-scaled dimensions keeping the correlation given in the
dataset. The principal components are orthogonal since they are the eigenvectors of
the covariance matrix. Generally, we can assume that the data summarized can be
processed by a quantum computer. Using PCA offers us the ﬂexibility to leave out
some of the components without losing much information and therefore minimizing
the complexity of the problem as illustrated in Figure 15, where we reduced our
dataset in order to handle it with a quantum computer;
• Quantum Feature Map: As we discussed earlier, the Kernel techniques are the set of
algorithms for pattern analysis or recognition of the data points. Kernel techniques
map data to higher dimensional spaces in order to ease data structure and separability.
The data may be translated not only to higher-level space but to an endless dimension.
Kernel “trick” is the technique of replacing the inner products of two vectors in
our algorithm with the kernel function. In other hand, we have Quantum Kernel
techniques which is a method for identifying a hyperplane that is performing a
nonlinear transformation to the data, This is termed as a “feature map”. We may either
apply available Qiskit (an open-source quantum computing framework created by
IBM.) feature maps including ZZ feature map, Z feature map, or a Pauli feature map
that has Pauli (X, Y, Z) gates, or create a custom feature map based on the dataset
compatibility. The quantum feature map can be built by using Hadamard gates with
entangling unitary gates between them. In our case, we used the ZZ feature map.
The needed number of qubits is proportional to the data dimensionality. By altering
the angle of unitary gates to a certain value, data are encoded. QSVM uses a Quan-
tum processor to estimate the kernel in the feature space. During the training step,
the kernel is estimated or computed, and support vectors are obtained. However, in