Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 29 of 41
only recover a limited amount of information from a quantum measurement. Notice
that the number of qubits is equal to the amount of results;
• Post-process: Finally, the results were post-processed including a learnable bias pa-
rameter and a step function to translate the result to the outcome 0 or 1.
4.1.1. Implementation
The architecture that we have implemented is inspired from [77], as we have already
mentioned. The goal is to encode the real vectors as amplitude vectors (amplitude encoding)
and training the model to detect the ﬁrst two classes of the Iris dataset.
• Dataset: Our classiﬁcation data sets made up of three sorts of irises (Setosa, Versicolour,
and Virginica), and containing four features that are Sepal Length, Sepal Width, Petal
Length and Petal Width. In our implementation, we used the two ﬁrst classes:
• Implemented models:
– VQC: The Variational Quantum Classiﬁers commonly deﬁne a “layer”, whose
fundamental circuit design is replicated to create the variational circuit. Our
circuit layer is composed of a random rotation upon each qubit, and also a CNOT
gate that entangles each qubit with its neighbor. The classical data were encoded
to amplitude vectors via amplitude encoding;
– SVC: A support vector classiﬁer (SVC) implemented by the sklearn Python library;
– Decision Tree: Is a non-parametric learning algorithm which anticipates the target
variable through learning decision rules;
– Naive Bayes: Naive Bayes classiﬁers utilize Bayes theory with the assumption of
conditional independence in between each pair of features;
• Experimental Environment: We use the Jupyter Notebook and PennyLane [ 80] (A
cross-platform Python framework for discrete programming of quantum computing)
for developing all the codes and executing them on IBM Quantum simulators [ 81].
We implemented three classical Scikitlearn [ 82] algorithms to accomplish the same
classiﬁcation task on a conventional computer in order to compare their performance
with that of the VQC. We also used the end value of the cost function and the test
accuracy as metrics for evaluating the implemented algorithms.
4.1.2. Results
As it can be plainly observed from the Table 4, our VQC works slightly better than
the best result obtained with the SVC in both terms of accuracy and cost function value.
The probability of a model guessing the correct class in the classical example is less than 0.96,
but the probability of the quantum classiﬁer is 1 with the value of the cost function equal to
0.23, which shows that the quantum classiﬁer made small errors in the data compared to
SVC and Decision Tree.
Table 4. Result of the classiﬁcation algorithms for the Iris dataset.
Metric VQC SVC Decision Tree Naive Bayes
Accuracy 1 0.96 0.96 0.96
Cost 0.2351166 0.0873071 0.0906691 1.381551
One may assume that the effort required to employ quantum algorithms is exaggerated.
However, we have to look at the whole process, in which we reduced the dimension of the
data set in order to handle it by only two qubits in order to use a smaller circuit depth to
prepare quantum states. Despite this, the results are promising.
4.2. SVM vs. QSVM
Quantum Support Vector Machine (QSVM) is a quantum variant of the standard SVM
algorithm that uses quantum principles to perform computations. QSVM employs the
advantages of quantum hardware and quantum software to enhance the performance of