Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 13 of 41
quantum algorithms to estimate functions using qubits), which we know in advance that it
will return for all its inputs, either always the same value, 0 or 1, or the values 0 and 1 in
equal parts. The algorithm thus makes it possible to know if the function has a balanced
output. It is implemented on a set of qubits n, all of the input qubits are set to zero,
except one which is initialized to 1, then they are each put in superposition between 0
and 1 using Hadamard gates. The qubits thus have simultaneously all the possible values
with 2n+1combinations of values. It is easy to understand why this quantum algorithm is
much more efﬁcient than its conventional counterpart. In conventional computation, more
than half of the possible input values would have to be sequentially scanned, whereas,
in the quantum version, they are all scanned at the same time. This is an example of a
strong algorithm that has no known practical use. Moreover, there are classical probabilistic
algorithms algorithms that erase a good part of the quantum power gain of the Deutsch–
Jozsa algorithm.
Grover’s algorithm is the other popular algorithm [ 1], created in 1996. It allows for a
fast quantum search in a database. A bit like the Deutsch–Jorza algorithm, it scans a list
of elements to ﬁnd those that verify a speciﬁc condition. It also uses the superposition
of qubit states to speed up the processing compared to a traditional sequential search.
The improvement in performance is signiﬁcant compared to an unsorted database. Grover’s
algorithm also uses an “oracle” or “black box” function that will indicate whether a set of
input qubits veriﬁes a search condition or not, such as verifying that a given phone number
has been found in a list of phone numbers. In such a case, the function compares the phone
number searched and the one submitted to it, to answer one if they are identical and zero
otherwise. The black box is a quantum box and will evaluate this function for 2Nregisters
of qubits at the same time. It will therefore output a one once and zeros elsewhere. The
computing time is determined by the square root of the list size, while a classical approach
has a computation time proportional to the size of the list. Therefore, going from a time
Ntop
Nis an interesting gain. This algorithm can then be used to be integrated in other
algorithms such as those which allow for discovering the optimal path in a graph or the
minimal or maximal number of a series of Nnumbers.
The quantum Fourier transform (QFT) was invented by Don Coppersmith in 1994 [ 40].
It is used in various other algorithms and in particular in Shor’s algorithm, which is a
factoring algorithm for integers. The QFT could compute the prime factorization of an N-bit
integer in log2(N)time, whereas the most well-known basic Fourier transform requires
Nlog(N)time. IBM performed one of the initial implementations of Shor’s technique in
2001 using an experimental quantum computer with seven qubits to factor the integer 15.
In 2012, Nanyang et al. [ 41] claimed factorization of 143 using an NMR adiabatic quantum
computer at ambient temperature (300 K). Using a D-Wave 2X quantum computer, the 18-
bit number 200 099 successfully factored in April 2016 utilizing quantum annealing [ 42].
Late in 2019, an industry collaboration determined that 1,099,551,473,989 equals 1,048,589
times 1,048,601 [ 43]. Note that Shor’s algorithm also allows for breaking cryptography
using elliptic curves [ 44], which compete with RSA cryptography. Incidentally, a part of the
cryptography used in the Bitcoin protocol would also pass through the Shor algorithm [ 45].
In addition to the purely quantum algorithms (based only on quantum gates), we must
indeed add: hybrid algorithms, combining traditional algorithms and quantum algorithms
or algorithms based on quantum-classical gates. This is notably the situation involving
the Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE) [ 46], which allows the solution of chemical
simulation problems as well as neural network training; and quantum inspired algorithms,
which are algorithms for classical computers inspired by quantum algorithms for solving
complex problems.
3. Quantum Machine Learning
There are four strategies of how to combine machine learning and quantum computing,
based on if one considers the data was created by a classical (C) or quantum (Q) system,