Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 38 of 41
the amount of qubits in the device, most of the used algorithms, such as image classiﬁcation
using QCNN, are constrained by the number of qubits. We may also ﬁnd a vast selection of
quantum simulators on many platforms, which enable the testing of quantum computers
as if they were real and even imitate their noise.
6. Conclusions and Perspectives
This article reviews a selection of the most recent research on QML algorithms for
a variety of issues which are more accurate and effective than classical algorithms in
classical computing, especially focusing on the quantum variant of certain supervised
machine learning algorithms that rely on the VQC. In addition, we discuss numerous
ways for mapping data into quantum computers. We covered approaches of quantum
machine learning such as quantum sub-processes. In addition, then, we compared the
performance of various QML algorithms such as QSVM, VQC, and QNN with that of its
classical counterparts.
The QSVM algorithm exceeded the classical SVM in performance and speed up,
but when it performed on a small subset of the dataset. Most quantum machine learning
techniques are at some point restricted by the absence of an appropriate quantum RAM
(QRAM) which facilitates the mapping of classical input to a quantum computer. The num-
ber of practical machine learning algorithms in the area of QML is expected to rise as
QRAM implementations reach a stable state.
The VQC obtains a greater advantage over certain classical classiﬁers when imple-
mented on a quantum computer with a smaller circuit depth, employing only two qubits to
encode a subset of the dataset. Furthermore, we aim for a similar result on a large dataset
with the existence of large number of qubits.
The result produced by the QNN demonstrated that the model can be a solution in
several classiﬁcation tasks, and it is a more efﬁcient and effective learning model when
employed with a classical CNN model. Moreover, the QNN model may also predict
highly efﬁcient results in much more sophisticated and large-scale training using quantum
computers of the NISQ (Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum) era.
In conclusion, comprehensive benchmarks on large datasets are needed to systemati-
cally examine the inﬂuence of growing input data. In addition, in the near-term, the quan-
tum encoding (feature maps) approach is a strong and theoretically interesting approach to
think about in order to successfully implement quantum machine learning algorithms.
As a future work, we are currently developing new quantum machine learning al-
gorithms that are able to handle a large actual world datasets which can be handled on
currently quantum computers. Our next objective is to examine the implementation of
classical machine learning models on quantum computers.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The notebooks used during this study can be provided after contacting
the authors.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Grover, L.K. Quantum Mechanics Helps in Searching for a Needle in a Haystack. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1997 ,79, 325–328. [CrossRef]
2. Shor, P .W. Algorithms for Quantum Computation: Discrete Logarithms and Factoring. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual
Symposium on Foundation of Computer Science, Washington, DC, USA, 20–22 November 1994; pp. 124–134.
3. Menneer, T.; Narayanan, A. Quantum-inspired neural networks. In Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems 95,
Denver, CO, USA, 27–30 November 1995.
4. Rebentrost, P .; Mohseni, M.; Lloyd, S. Quantum Support Vector Machine for Big Data Classiﬁcation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014 ,
113, 130503. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Harrow, A.W.; Hassidim, A.; Lloyd, S. Quantum Algorithm for Linear Systems of Equations. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009 ,103, 150502.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]