Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 12 of 41
mathematical formalization of quantum programming. Furthermore, these algorithms
must be more efﬁcient than those designed for traditional computers or supercomputers.
Given that quantum computing employs a distinct method of computation, it is only
reasonable to ask what kinds of problems may now be solved in this new environment,
even if they were not expected to be solved in a traditional computer. To do this, we must
review the theory of complexity.
The complexity theory focuses on the scalability and computational cost of algorithms
in general and for speciﬁc problems. Scalability refers to the time and/or space necessary
to increase the volume or complexity of a computation’s goal. Using the Big-O notation,
an algorithm that is O(n3)is considered to be “harder” than one that is O(n2), since the
former will often affect more operations than the latter, regardless of the time at which
these operations are executed. A speciﬁc complexity class is composed of problems that
share similar characteristics of difﬁculty. The most signiﬁcant categories of complexity are
discussed below:
• Polynomial time (P): Are issues solvable in a polynomial amount of time. In other
terms, a traditional computer is capable of resolving the issue in a reasonable time;
• Non-deterministic Polynomial time (NP): Is a collection of decision issues that a
nondeterministic Turing machine might solve in polynomial time. P is an NP subset;
• NP-Complete: X is considered to be NP-Complete only if the requirements here are
met: (i)X is in NP , and (ii)in polynomial time, all NP problems are reducible to X.
We assert that X is NP-hard if only (ii)is true and not necessarily (i);
• Polynomial Space (PSPACE): This category is concerned with memory resources
instead of time. PSPACE is a category of decision issues that can be solved by an
algorithm whose total space utilization is always polynomially restricted by the
instance size;
• Bounded-error Probabilistic Polynomial time (BPP): Is a collection of decision issues
which may be handled in polynomial time using a probabilistic Turing computer with
such a maximum error probability equal to 1/3;
• Bounded-error Quantum Polynomial time (BQP): A decision issue is BQP , if it has
a polynomial time solution and has a high accuracy probability. BQP is the basic
complexity category of problems which quantum computers may effectively solve. It
corresponds to the classical BPP class on the quantum level;
• Exact Quantum Polynomial time (EQP or QP): Is a type of decision issue that a
quantum computer can handle in polynomial time with probability 1. This is the
quantum counterpart of the P complexity class.
The potential uses of quantum computing vary from decrypting cryptography systems
to the creation of novel medications. These applications use quantum algorithms, which
are programs that exploit quantum gates on a quantum computer in order to obtain a
speedup or even other advantages over traditional algorithms. An important consideration
in the creation of quantum algorithms is to ensure that they are more efﬁcient than their
counterparts optimized for traditional computers. Theories exist to verify this by evaluating
the exponential, polynomial, logarithmic, or linear scaling of the computation time as a
measure of the task’s complexity, or a combination of all four. Currently, there are four pri-
mary classes of quantum algorithms: search algorithms based on those of Deutsch Jozsa [ 39]
and Grover [ 1];algorithms based on Quantum Fourier Trans f orms (QFT) such as Shor’s
algorithm [ 2], which is used to factor integers; quantum annealing algorithms , algorithms
that search for an equilibrium point of a complex system as in neural network training, op-
timal path search in networks or process optimization; and quantum simulation algorithms ,
which are used to simulate the interactions between atoms in various molecular structures.
Quantum chemistry, which simulates the impact of chemical stimulation on a huge amount
of atomic particles, is one particularly exciting topic in quantum simulation.
One of the ﬁrst quantum algorithms invented is that of David Deutsch, called Deutsch
Jozsa algorithm [ 39], co-invented with Richard Jozsa. This algorithm allows for identifying
the function of a “black box” called an “oracle” (a black box that is frequently used in