Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 34 of 41
• Quanvolutional Neural Networks
The Quanvolutional Neural Networks (QNNs) are essentially a variant of classical
convolutional neural networks with an extra transformation layer known as the
quanvolutional layer, or quantum convolution that is composed of quanvolutional
ﬁlters [ 29]. When applied, the latter ﬁlters to a data input tensor; then, this will indi-
vidually generate a feature map by changing spatially local subsections of this input.
However, unlike the basic handling data element by element in matrix multiplication
performed by a traditional convolutional ﬁlter, a quanvolutional ﬁlter transforms input
data using a quantum circuit that may be structured or arbitrary. In our implemen-
tation, we employ random quantum circuits as proposed in [ 29] for quanvolutional
ﬁlters rather than circuits with a speciﬁc form, for simplicity and to create a baseline.
This technique for converting classical data using quanvolutional ﬁlters can be formal-
ized as follows and illustrated in Figure 19:
1. Let us simply begin with a basic quanvolutional ﬁlter. The latter ﬁlter employs
the arbitrary quantum circuit qthat accepts as inputs subsections of images
of dataset a u. Each input is denoted by the letter ux, with each uxbeing a
two-dimensional matrix of length n-by-n, where nis greater than 1;
Figure 19. (A) represents a quanvolutional layer inside a network architecture. The quanvolutional
layer has a series of quanvolutional ﬁlters (three in this case) that transform the entered data to
various outcome feature maps. ( B) represents the transformation of conventional data input and
output of an arbitrary quantum circuit within the quanvolutional ﬁlter [29].
2. Despite the fact that there are a variety of methods for “encoding” uxas an
initial state of q, we chose one encoding method efor every quanvolutional ﬁlter,
and we deﬁne the resulting state of this encoding with ix=e(ux);
3. Thereafter, the application of the quantum circuit qto the beginning state ix,
and the outcome of the quantum computing was indeed the quantum state ox,
as deﬁned by the relation ox=q(ix)that also equals q(e(ux));
4. In order to decode the quantum state ox, we use dwhich is our decoding method
that converts the quantum output into classical output using a set of measure-
ments, which guarantees that the output of the quanvolutional ﬁlter is equivalent
to the output of a simple classical convolution. The decoded state is described by
fx=d(ox)with d(q(e(ux)))in which fxrepresents a scale value;