Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 28 of 41
4.1. Variational Quantum Classiﬁer
The Variational Quantum Classiﬁer (VQC) is based on the use of a function f(x,q) =y
which can be implemented in a quantum computer using a circuit denoted as Sxin order
to encode the input data xtoward a quantum state and especially as amplitudes of the
state, then a quantum circuit denoted as Uq, ﬁnally a one simple qubit measurement. This
latter measurement yields the likelihood of the VQC predicting ’0’ or ’1’, which may be
used to determine the prediction of a binary classiﬁcation. The circuit parameters ( q) of this
classiﬁcation are also trainable, and a variational technique may be employed to train these
parameters [77]. The four steps of VQC are shown in Figure 14 and explained below.
Figure 14. The classiﬁcation with the quantum classiﬁer consists of four phases, each represented
by a distinct color, and can be examined from three different perspectives: a formal mathematical
diagram, a quantum circuit diagram, and a graphical neural network diagram [77].
• State preparation: To be able to encode classical data into quantum states, we use
particular operations to help us work with data in a quantum circuit. As mentioned
earlier, quantum encoding is one these methods that consists of representing classical
data in the form of a quantum state in Hilbert space employing a quantum feature
map. Recall that a feature map is a mathematical mapping that allows us to integrate
our data into higher dimensional spaces, such as quantum states in our case. It is
similar to a variational circuit in which the parameters are determined by the input
data. It is essential to emphasize that a variational circuit depends on parameters that
can be optimized using classical methods;
• The model circuit: The next step is the model circuit, or the classiﬁer in precise terms.
j0is generated using a parameterized unitary operator Uqapplied to the feature vector
noted as j(x)which became a vector of a quantum state in an n-qubit system (in the
Hilbert space ). The model uses a circuit that is composed of gates which change the
state of the input and are built on unitary processes, and they depend on external
factors that can be adjusted. Uqtranslates j(x)into another vector j0with a prepared
statejj(x)iin the model circuit. Uqis comprised of a series of unitary gates;
• Measurement: We take measurements in order to obtain information from a quantum
system. Although a quantum system has an inﬁnite number of potential states, we can