Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 32 of 41
Figure 17. Kernel matrix of SVM, with an accuracy of around 85%.
4.3. CNN vs. QCNN
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are a prominent model in computer vision
that has gained a ton of potential for different machine learning tasks notably in the area of
image recognition. The capacity of such networks to retrieve features from input in a typical
hierarchical structure provides the majority of their advantages. Several transformation
layers, mainly the convolutional layer that provides its name to the model, are employed to
retrieve these features. To perform the CNN model on a quantum computer, we implement
another kind of transformation layer named quanvolutional layer or quantum convolution
utilized in Quanvolutional Neural Networks model (QNNs), which is introduced by
Henderson et. al. [ 29]. Quanvolutional layers perform on data input by encoding it through
a series of arbitrary quantum circuits, in a manner that is equivalent to the task of the
aleatory convolutional ﬁlter layers. In this subsection, we brieﬂy review the architectural
design of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and then the architectural design of
Quanvolutional Neural Networks (QNNs) that are also known as Quantum Convolutional
Neural Networks (QCNNs). Then, we evaluated the performance advantage of quantum
transformations by making a comparison between the CNN and QNN models based on
the MNIST dataset.
• Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are a specialized sort of neural networks,
built primarily for time series or image processing. They become presently the most
frequently used models for image recognition applications. Their abilities have indeed
been applied in several sectors such as gravitational wave detection or autonomous
vision. Despite these advances, CNNs struggle from a computational limitation which
renders deep CNNs extremely pricey in reality. As Figure 18 illustrates, a convolutional
neural network generally consists of three components even though the architectural
implementation varies considerably:
1. Input: The most popular input is an image, although signiﬁcant work has also
been carried out on so-called 3D convolutional neural networks which can han-
dle either volumetric data (three spatial dimensions) or videos (two spatial
dimensions + one temporal dimension). For the majority of the implementations,
the input needs to be adjusted to correspond to the speciﬁcs of the CNN used.
These include cropping, lowering the size of the image, identifying a particular
region of interest, and also normalizing pixel values to speciﬁed regions. Im-
ages, and even more widely layers of a network, may be represented as tensors.
The tensor is a generalization of a matrix into extra dimensionality. For example,