Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 35 of 41
5. Lastly, we denote the full transformation achieved by the ’quanvolutional ﬁl-
ter transformation’ [ 29] by Qof a data point ux, which is also described as
fx=Q(ux,e,q,d). Figure 19B represents one basic quanvolutional ﬁlter, show-
ing the encoding, the applying circuit and the decoding process.
4.3.1. Implementation
The aim of this implementation is to demonstrate the practicality of quanvolutional
layers included in a classical CNN model, the feasibility to employ this quanvolutional
technique using actual world data sets, and the possibility of using features created by the
quanvolutional transformation.
• Dataset: We used a subset of the MNIST (Modiﬁed or Mixed National Institute of
Standards and Technology) dataset, which includes 70,000 handwritten 28 by 28 pixels
in grayscale;
• Implemented models:
– The CNN model: We used a simple model: Fully-connected layer containing
ten output nodes and then a ﬁnal activation function softmax in a pure classical
convolutional neural network;
– The QNN model: A CNN with one quanvolutional layer seems to be the simplest
basic quanvolutional neural network. The single quantum layer will be the ﬁrst,
and then the rest of the model is identical to the traditional CNN model;
• Experimental Environment: The Pennylane library [80] was used to create the imple-
mentation, which was then run on the IBM quantum computer simulator QASM;
• Quanvolutional layer generation process described as follows:
– A quantum circuit is created by including some small section of the input image,
in our case a square of 22. A rotation encoding layer denoted by Ry(with
angles scaled by a factor p);
– The system performs a quantum computation associated with a unit U. A varia-
tional quantum circuit or, quite generally, a randomized circuit could generate
this unit;
– The quantum system is measured using a computational basis measurement,
which gives a set of four classical expectation values. The outcomes of the
measurements can eventually be post-processed in a classical way;
– Each value is translated into a distinct channels of one output pixel, as in a
classical convolution layer;
– In repeating the technique on different parts, the whole input image can be
scanned, thus obtaining an output object structured as a multi-channel;
– Other quantum or classical layers can be added after the quanvolutional layer.
4.3.2. Results
Before analyzing the performance of the QNN model and traditional CNN results, we
should ﬁrst conﬁrm that the model works as planned; the addition of the quanvolutional
layer to the model has resulted in a highest accuracy, and the more the training iterations
there are, the more the accurate the model becomes. The value of the loss function in the
QNN models is quite low, which shows that our model has fewer errors during testing.
As shown in Table 5 below, the QNN has a slightly higher accuracy than the CNN which
indicates that our QNN model has well predicted our test data which are not used in the
training of the model. We can conclude that the generated quantum features were effective
in constructing features for the MNIST data set for classiﬁcation purposes.
In Figure 20, we clearly observe the reduction of the sampling of the resolution and
certain local deformations generated by our quanvolutional layer. In addition, the general
shape of the input image is preserved, as expected for a convolution layer.