Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 33 of 41
an image of a height Hand a width Wmay indeed be visualized as just a matrix
inRHW, wherein every pixel represents a greyscale ranging between 0 and 255.
Furthermore, all three channels in color RGB (Red Green Blue) should be taken
into account, simply layering 3 times the matrix for every color. A whole image
is thus viewed as a three-dimensional vector in RHWDwherein Drepresents
the number of channels;
Figure 18. Representation of a CNN’s architecture. Source: Mathworks.
2. Feature Learning: The feature learning is built of three principal procedures,
executed and repeated in any sequence: Convolution Layers, usually followed
with an Activation Function and Pooling Layers at the end of this feature learning
process. We indicate by lthe present layer.
– Convolution Layer: Each lth layer is combined by a collection ﬁlter named
kernels. The result of this procedure would be the (l+1)th layer. The convo-
lution using a simple kernel may be considered to be like a feature detector,
which will screen through all sections of the input. If a feature described by
a kernel, for example, a vertical border, is present through some area of the
input, it will be highly valuable at the corresponding point of the outcome.
The outcome is known as the feature map of the whole convolution;
– Function: Just like in normal neural networks, we add certain nonlinearities
also named activation functions. These functions are necessary for a neural
network in order to be capable of learning any function. As in implementa-
tion of a CNN, every convolution is frequently followed by a Relu (Rectiﬁed
Linear Unit function). This is a basic function that sets all negative numbers
of the output to zero, then leaves the positive values as they are;
– Pooling Layer: The downsampling method that reduces the dimensions
of the layer, particularly optimizing the calculation. Furthermore, it pro-
vides the CNN the capability to learn a form invariant to lower translations.
Almost all of the cases, either we use a Maximum Pooling or perhaps an
Average Pooling. Maximum Pooling consists of swapping a subsection of
PPcomponents just by another with the biggest value. Average Pool-
ing achieves this by averaging all numbers. Note that the number of a
pixel relates to how often a certain feature is represented in the preceding
convolution layer;
3. Classiﬁcation/Fully Connected Layer: Following a speciﬁc set of convolution
layers, the inputs had been properly handled such that we may deploy a fully
connected network. The weights link every input to every output, wherein inputs
are all components of the preceding layer. The ﬁnal layer must include a single
node for each possible label. The node value may be read as the probability that
the input image belongs to the speciﬁed class.