Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 15 of 41
leverages the concepts of quantum computing to enhance traditional machine learning algo-
rithms. A few examples of such algorithms include quantum-inspired binary classiﬁer [ 53],
Helstrom Quantum Centroid which is a quantum-inspired binary supervised learning
classiﬁcation [ 54], Quantum-inspired Support Vector Machines [ 55], Quantum Nearest
Mean Classiﬁer [ 56], inspired Quantum K Nearest-Neighbor [ 57], quantum algorithms
for ridge regression [ 58] and Quantum inspired Neural network [ 59]. The third strategy,
hybrid classical-quantum machine learning algorithms, merges classical and quantum
algorithms to improve performance and reduce the cost of learning—for example, using
quantum circuit to propose a novel variational quantum classiﬁer [ 60], variational quantum
SVM and SVM quantum kernel-based algorithm [ 61], quantum KNN algorithm [ 62], and a
hybrid quantum computer-based quantum version of nonlinear regression [63].
In our study, we concentrate on the CQ scenario. There are two distinct approaches
to the development of quantum machine learning models. The ﬁrst approach involves
running traditional machine learning algorithms on quantum computers or simulators in
an effort to achieve algorithmic speedups. This approach needs to translate conventional
data into quantum data, a process known as quantum encoding . Another approach is to
create QML algorithms based on quantum subroutines, including Grover’s algorithm, HHL
algorithm, quantum phase estimation, and Variational Quantum Circuit (VQC), which we
cover later in detail.
Figure 8 illustrates the processing strategies used in conventional machine learning
and QML. In traditional machine learning, data are a direct input to the algorithm, which
then analyses the data and generates an output. QML, on the other hand, demands the
initial encoding of the data into quantum data. QML receives quantum data as input,
processes it, and generates quantum data as output. The quantum data are then converted
to conventional data.
Figure 8. Processing techniques of conventional machine learning and quantum machine learning.
CD represents classical data and QD represents quantum data.