Sensors 2020 ,20, 4276 3 of 23
detection e ect. However, the resolution of remote sensing images is large. The scales of remote
sensing targets are small and the backgrounds are complex. These algorithms, which have excellent
performance on routine datasets, are not suitable for remote sensing target detection. Therefore, we need
to design a feature extraction network and detection networks for our proposed algorithm elaborately.
According to the characteristics of remote sensing targets, the proposed method was improved
based on the YOLO-V3 model. The main contributions in this paper include the following. (1) In order
to reduce reliance on ResNet and enhance the ability of feature information extraction, which is
inspired by DenseNet, improved densely connected units proposed to replace some of the residual
units of Darknet53. (2) To further improve the ability of detecting multi-scale remote sensing targets,
we extended the original three output layers of YOLO-V3 to 4. (3) In order to avoid gradient vanishing,
instead of ﬁve convolutional layers in each detection layers, three residual units were adopted.
The experimental results on remote sensing images show that the proposed method not only has
good performance in accuracy, but also gives attention to real-time performance for remote sensing
target detection.
The rest of this paper is as follows. In Section 2, we introduced the theory of YOLO and the
framework of YOLO-V3. In Section 3, we described the improved method of our approach in details.
Section 4 gives the experiments of the proposed algorithm on the RSOD dataset and compared the
performance of our approach with other classical algorithms. Lastly, the conclusion is shown in
Section 5.
2. The Theory of YOLO
YOLO (You Only Look Once) is a kind of one-stage algorithm, which transforms target detection
as a regression problem. Compared with Faster R-CNN, YOLO obtain the predictive information
of location and categories directly without a region proposed network (RPN). After continuous
development, YOLO has been developed from YOLO-V1 to YOLO-V2 and the latest YOLO-V3.
2.1. The Principle of YOLO
At the beginning, the network divides each input image into SSgrid cells. The grid, which center
on the ground truth (GT) of the target falls in, is responsible for detecting it. Each grid cell deﬁnes B
bounding boxes as well as their corresponding conﬁdence scores. Each bounding box contains Cclasses.
We denote them as P(Class iObject ). If the center of the target falls in the grid cell, then P(Object )=1.
Otherwise, P(Object )=0. The conﬁdence score is deﬁned as: P(Object )IOUtruth
pred. It reﬂects
the probability that the grid cell contains targets and the accuracy that the bounding box predicts.
IOU represents the overlap area between the bounding box and the ground truth (GT). The class-speciﬁc
scores can be denoted in Equation (1).
P
Class iObject
P(Object )IOUtruth
pred=P(Class)IOUtruth
pred(1)
YOLO has made greater achievements than Faster R-CNN in terms of speed, but it also brings
the low accuracy of detection. On the basis of YOLO-V1, YOLO-V2 introduces the concept of the
anchor box and runs k-means on the dataset to generate appropriate prediction boxes at the beginning.
Instead of full connected layers (FC), YOLO-V2 introduces convolutional layers in the output end.
In addition, YOLO-V2 also adopts Batch Normalized, New feature extraction network (Darknet19),
which greatly improves the performance compared with YOLO-V1.
YOLO-V3 is a further improved version based on YOLO-V2 by upgrading the original Darknet19
to Darknet53 and adopts multi-scale detection layers (three scales) to detect the targets. This allows
YOLO-V3 to detect small targets more e ectively.