Sensors 2020 ,20, 4276 13 of 23
Based on the above reasons, it is often di cult to train an ideal target detector from conventional
datasets for target detection tasks of remote sensing images. A special remote sensing image database
is needed.
4.3.1. Dataset Analysis
Taking everything into consideration, we selected the RSOD and UCS-AOD dataset in the
experiment. RSOD is the dataset of aerial images. It contains the targets of four categories: aircraft,
playground, overpass, and oil tank. UCS-AOD is the dataset of target detection in aerial images.
We generally consider the target, which the ground truth takes up less than 0.12% of the whole image
as a small target. The ground truth takes up 0.12–0.5%, which is a medium target, and the ground
truth takes up more than 0.5%, which is a large target. Of the four categories, the aircraft targets are
mostly small in size. The oil tank targets are major of a small or medium size. The playground and
overpass targets are big in size. The dataset includes targets under di erent lighting conditions and at
dierent heights, and the shooting angles of the targets are also di erent.
Tables 5 and 6 show the statistics of our remote sensing datasets. The targets in the dataset are
mainly small or medium in size, and the distribution of the targets is relatively dense, which increases
the di culty of target detection. Figure 7 contains eight samples of the datasets in this paper. The targets
in these samples are under a complex background. After a series of convolutional layers and down
sampling layers, the targets take up even fewer pixels, which makes it di cult to detect them.
Sensors 2020 , 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 24 
 Playground 49 52 0 0 52 
Table 6. Dataset of object detection in aerial images  (UCS-AOD) dataset statistics. 
Dataset Class Image Instances 
Training Set Aircraft 600 3591 
Car 310 4475 
Test Set Aircraft 400 3891 
Car 200 2639 
    
(a) 
 
  
  
(b) 
Figure 7. The samples of the datasets: ( a) the samples of remote sensing object detection (RSOD) 
dataset and ( b) the samples of dataset of object detection in aerial images  (UCS-AOD) dataset. 
4.3.2. Experimental Results and Analysis in RSOD and UCS-AOD Dataset 
In order to compare the accuracy and real-tim e performance of the algorithms, the mAP and 
speed of our approach are evaluated. We compared our approach with the state-of-the-art target 
detection models in the RSOD dataset, and the compar ison results are shown in Table 7. Furthermore, 
the comparison results of the targets with  different sizes are shown in Table 8. 
Figure 7. The samples of the datasets: ( a) the samples of remote sensing object detection (RSOD)
dataset and ( b) the samples of dataset of object detection in aerial images (UCS-AOD) dataset.