Sensors 2020 ,20, 4276 2 of 23
Currently, the two-stage ones are represented by R-CNN [ 21], and then Fast R-CNN [ 22,23],
Faster R-CNN [ 24,25], and Mask R-CNN [ 26,27], which have been developed on the basis of it. As the
name implies, the two-stage target detection algorithms divide the detection processes into two steps.
First, the Region Proposed Network (RPN) [ 28–30] is used to extract the information of the targets
and then the detection layers predict location and category information of the targets. The other
ones are one-stage target detection algorithms including SSD (Single Shot Multibox Detector) [ 31–33],
DSSD (Deconvolution Single Shot Multibox Detector) [ 34], FSSD (Feature Fusion Single Shot Multibox
Detector) [ 35], YOLO [ 36], YOLO-V2 [ 37], and YOLO-V3 [ 38]. Instead of using the region proposed
network (RPN), the one-stage algorithms obtain the predictive information of location and category
directly. Therefore, they are also called the regression-based algorithms and they can usually achieve
higher detection speed than the two-stage ones. At present, numerous state-of-the-art target detection
models with higher speed are proposed based on YOLO such as YOLO-V3 tiny [ 39] and TF-YOLO [ 40].
Therefore, the accuracy of them is not satisfactory.
From the current research, remote sensing target detection usually faces the following challenges:
one is that remote sensing targets are usually small and take up fewer pixels, which makes it di cult to
extract features. The second challenge is that remote sensing images are usually disturbed by shadow,
light, and other external factors. In addition, the scales of the remote sensing targets are usually
dierent. To solve these problems, researchers have made unremitting e orts.
In order to realize remote sensing target detection, the inchoate research is mainly based on
template matching, which is to match the target with a speciﬁc template for detection. For example,
Weber et al. [ 41] proposed a method of making use of image analysis to extract coastline templates and
adopted this method to detect oil tanks. It achieved good results. However, although the method of
template matching is simple and e ective, its overall robustness is poor and it is sensitive to the shapes
of the targets and geometric deformation. The algorithms based on image analysis are to judge whether
each region of the remote sensing image has a target by segmentation and classiﬁcation. For example,
Feng et al. [ 42] proposed the algorithm named multi-resolution segmentation, which segmented remote
sensing images into multiple regions for detection by three parameters: shape, scale, and density.
Compared with the method of template matching, this method is more ﬂexible and can combine
contextual semantic information, which has achieved good results in some tasks. However, this kind
of algorithm still needs to be designed manually for segmentation, which is not universal.
Compared with the previous two algorithms, the remote sensing target detection algorithms
based on deep learning have better accuracy and robustness because they no longer use the features of
manual design. Sun et al. [ 43] extracted the region of interest with sliding windows, and then used the
features of Bag-of-Words to detect the targets. Zhang et al. [ 44] and Yu et al. [ 45] combined the prior
characteristics of the airports and coasts, respectively, with deep learning to conduct remote sensing
target detection. More commonly, researchers use existing target detection algorithms such as Faster
R-CNN in remote sensing target detection tasks. However, when these models are applied to remote
sensing target detection tasks, their performance is poor due to the factors such as illumination, cloud
cover, and complex background interference.
As an advanced target detection model, YOLO-V3 adopts a feature pyramid network (FPN) [ 46,47],
ResNet (Residual Network) [ 48], and achieves good performance in speed and accuracy. YOLO-V3
predicts targets at three di erent scales. Compared with the previous two versions, YOLO-V3 enhances
the capability of detecting multi-scale targets, especially small targets. Abundant improved algorithms
have been proposed since YOLO-V3 came out. References [ 49,50] adopted four detection layers to
enhance the performance of detecting small targets. Reference [ 51] adopted circular ground truth
to realize tomato detection. Reference [ 52] increased another shortcut connection to concatenate 2
CBLs (Convolution-Batch Normalization-Leak ReLU) between two ‘residual units’ to enhance the
performance for the feature extraction network of information transfer. Reference [ 40] simpliﬁed the
feature extraction network to obtain faster detection speed and adopted multiple layers concatenation
to enhance the performance of feature extraction. The above improved algorithms achieved a good