Sensors 2020 ,20, 4276 20 of 23
The improvement on the feature extraction network greatly improved the ability of extracting the
features of the targets. The additional fourth detection scale strengthens the performance of detecting
small targets. In the case of losing a portion of detection speed, the accuracy is greatly improved,
especially for small remote sensing targets compared with YOLO-V3. Although numerous improved
networks based on YOLO-V3 have been proposed, they usually detected targets in routine images.
When facing complex remote sensing images, they did not do well. On the contrast, with the above
measures adopted, our proposed algorithm is more suitable for remote sensing target detection than
other state-of-the-art target detection algorithms. In further work, multi-receptive ﬁelds for the feature
extraction of the network will be researched to boost the performance of remote sensing target detection.
In addition, the latest version of YOLO: YOLO-V4 [ 55] has been proposed and this will be researched
in further work.
Author Contributions: D.X. provided the original ideal, ﬁnished the experiment and this paper, and collected the
dataset. Y.W. contributed the modiﬁcations and suggestions to the paper. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: The National Nature Science Founding of China under Grant 61573183 and Open Project Program of
the National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR) under Grant 201900029 funded this research.
Acknowledgments: The authors wish to thank the editor and reviewers for their suggestions and thank Yiquan
Wu for his guidance.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.
Abbreviations:
The abbreviations in this paper are as follows:
YOLO You Only Look Once
CV Computer Version
SVM Support Vector Machine
HOG Histograms of Oriented Gradients
DPM Deformable Parts Model
IOU Intersection over Union
FC Full Connected Layer
FCN Full Convolutional Network
CNN Convolutional Neural Network
GT Ground Truth
RPN Region Proposal Network
FPN Feature Pyramid Network
ResNet Residual Network
DenseNet Densely Connected Network
NMS Non-Maximum Suppression
TP True Positive
FP False Positive
FN False Negative
AP Average Precision
mAP Mean Average Precision
FPS Frames Per Second
References
1. Shi, W.; Jiang, J.; Bao, S.; Tan, D. CISPNet: Automatic Detection of Remote Sensing Images from Google Earth
in Complex Scenes Based on Context Information Scene Perception. Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4836. [CrossRef]
2. Zhong, Y.; Weng, W.; Li, J.; Zhu, S. Collaborative Cross-Domain $k$ NN Search for Remote Sensing Image
Processing. IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett. 2019 ,16, 1801–1805. [CrossRef]
3. Zhu, H.; Zhang, P .; Wang, L.; Zhang, X.; Jiao, L. A multiscale object detection approach for remote sensing
images based on MSE-DenseNet and the dynamic anchor assignment. Remote Sens. Lett. 2019 ,10, 959–967.
[CrossRef]