Sensors 2020 ,20, 4276 19 of 23
Sensors 2020 , 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 20 of 24 
    
(a6) ( b6) ( c6) 
   
(a7) ( b7) ( c7) 
   
(a8) ( b8) ( c8) 
YOLO-V3 Faster RCNN Our approach 
Figure 9. The comparison results of YOLO-V3 and our approach: ( a1)–(a8) The detection results of 
YOLO-V3; ( b1)–(b8) The detection results of Faster RCNN; ( c1)–(c8) The detection results of our 
approach. 
In Figure 9, a total of 24 detection results of eight groups were chosen in the RSOD dataset and 
UCS-AOD dataset to prove the superiority of the im proved YOLO-V3. The pictur es in the first list 
are the detection results of the YOLO-V3 network. Th e pictures in the second list are the detection 
results of Faster RCNN and the pictures in the thir d list are the detection results of our approach. It 
can be clearly seen that there are several small targets missed and detected by YOLO-V3. Although 
Faster RCNN performed better than YOLO-V3, leak det ection still exists. On the other hand, all the 
targets were detected by our approach. The contrast  experiments of eight groups and the ablation 
experiments showed that, by improving the feature extraction network and increasing the fourth 
detection scale, our approach enhanced the perf ormance of detecting small targets with complex 
background conditions in remote sensing images. 
5. Conclusions 
In practical engineering applications, we need to consider both accuracy and speed of detection. 
The existing remote sensing target detection algorith ms often fail to consider both of them. In this 
paper, we proposed an improved YOLO-V3-based model for multi-scale remote sensing target 
detection. On account of the complexity of the ba ckground of remote sens ing targets, this puts 
forward a higher requirement for the ability of the network to extract features. In this paper, we 
focused on improving the original feature extrac tion network. Several improvements have been 
introduced to the original YOLO-V3 network. First,  in order to extract feature information more 
effectively, a dense connection network (DenseNet) was introduced in the feature extraction network. 
Second, to enhance the performance of detecting sma ll-sized targets, we extended the detection scales 
from 3 to 4. Third, we replaced three residual units with five convolutional layers, which is in each 
detection layer to avoid gradient fading. We ca n see from the ablation experiments that each 
Figure 9. The comparison results of YOLO-V3 and our approach: ( a1–a8) The detection results of
YOLO-V3; ( b1–b8) The detection results of Faster RCNN; ( c1–c8) The detection results of our approach.
In Figure 9, a total of 24 detection results of eight groups were chosen in the RSOD dataset
and UCS-AOD dataset to prove the superiority of the improved YOLO-V3. The pictures in the
ﬁrst list are the detection results of the YOLO-V3 network. The pictures in the second list are the
detection results of Faster RCNN and the pictures in the third list are the detection results of our
approach. It can be clearly seen that there are several small targets missed and detected by YOLO-V3.
Although Faster RCNN performed better than YOLO-V3, leak detection still exists. On the other
hand, all the targets were detected by our approach. The contrast experiments of eight groups and
the ablation experiments showed that, by improving the feature extraction network and increasing
the fourth detection scale, our approach enhanced the performance of detecting small targets with
complex background conditions in remote sensing images.
5. Conclusions
In practical engineering applications, we need to consider both accuracy and speed of detection.
The existing remote sensing target detection algorithms often fail to consider both of them. In this paper,
we proposed an improved YOLO-V3-based model for multi-scale remote sensing target detection.
On account of the complexity of the background of remote sensing targets, this puts forward a
higher requirement for the ability of the network to extract features. In this paper, we focused on
improving the original feature extraction network. Several improvements have been introduced to
the original YOLO-V3 network. First, in order to extract feature information more e ectively, a dense
connection network (DenseNet) was introduced in the feature extraction network. Second, to enhance
the performance of detecting small-sized targets, we extended the detection scales from 3 to 4. Third,
we replaced three residual units with ﬁve convolutional layers, which is in each detection layer to avoid
gradient fading. We can see from the ablation experiments that each improved module we proposed
is eective in improving the detection accuracy. Experiments on RSOD and UCS-AOD datasets
show that our approach achieves better performance on multi-scale remote sensing target detection.