A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:13
defined as:𝑝(𝑧|𝛽,𝑡)=Í𝑇
𝑖=1𝑡𝑖N(𝜇(𝛽𝑖),𝜎2(𝛽𝑖)), where𝑇is the number of topics, 𝜇(𝑑)and𝜎2(𝑑)are
functions implemented by MLP. TGVAE uses bag-of-words as input and embeds an input document
into a topic vector. The topic vector is then used to reconstruct the bag-of-words input, and the
learned topic distribution over words is used to model a topic-dependent prior to generate an output
sequence𝑌from conditioned on an input sequence 𝑋. Therefore, to maximize the log-likelihood
log𝑝(𝑌,𝑑|𝑋), a variational objective function is constructed as:
J𝑠𝑒𝑞2𝑠𝑒𝑞=E𝑞(𝑧|𝑋)[log𝑝(𝑌|𝑋,𝑧)]−E𝑞(𝜃|𝑑)[KL(𝑞(𝑧|𝑋)||𝑝(𝑧|𝛽,𝜃))], (19)
where𝑞(𝑧|𝑋)is variational distributions for 𝑧. The combined object function is given by:
J=J𝑡𝑜𝑝𝑖𝑐+J𝑠𝑒𝑞2𝑠𝑒𝑞. (20)
3.1.4 Discussion and Analysis of Different Methods .ForM1, topic models (e.g., LDA) has a
strict probabilistic explanation since the semantic representations of both words and documents
are combined into a unified framework. Besides, topic models can be easily used and integrated
into generation frameworks. For example, topic words can be represented as word embeddings;
topic embeddings can be integrated into the decoding phase through topic attention. However,
LDA models are separated from the training process of generation, so they cannot adapt to the
diversity of dependencies between input and output sequences.
ForM2, it is an end-to-end neural framework that simultaneously learns latent topic represen-
tations and generates output sequences. Convolutional neural networks (CNN) are often used to
generate the latent topics through iterative convolution and pooling operations. However, theoreti-
cal analysis is missing to ensure the quality of the topics captured by the convolutions. And their
interpretability is not as good as the LDA-based topic models.
ForM3, neural topic models combine the advantages of neural networks and probabilistic
topic models. They enable back propagation for joint optimization, contributing to more coherent
topics, and can be scaled to large data sets. Generally, neural topic models can provide better topic
coherence than LDAs [ 12,132,143]. However, neural variational approaches share a same drawback
that topic distribution is assumed to be an isotropic Gaussian, which makes them incapable of
modeling topic correlations. Existing neural topic models assume that the documents should be i.i.d.
to adopt VAE, while they are commonly correlated. The correlations are critical for topic modeling.
3.2 NLG Enhanced by Keywords
Keyword (aka., key phrase, key term) is often referred as a sequence of one or more words, providing
a compact representation of the content of a document. The mainstream methods of keyword
acquisition for documents can be divided into two categories [ 112]: keyword assignment and
keyword extraction. Keyword assignment means that keywords are chosen from a controlled
vocabulary of terms or predefined taxonomy. Keyword extraction selects the most representative
words explicitly presented in the document, which is independent from any vocabulary. Keyword
extraction techniques (e.g., TF-IDF, TextRank, PMI) have been widely used over decades. Many NLG
tasks can benefit from incorporating such a condensed form of essential content in a document to
maintain the semantic coherence and guide the generation process.
Next, we introduce popular NLG applications enhanced by keywords:
•Dialogue system. Keywords help enlighten and drive the generated responses to be infor-
mative and avoid generating universally relevant replies which carry little semantics. Besides,
recent work introduced personalized information into the generation of dialogue to help
deliver better dialogue response such as emotion [71, 114, 158], and persona [154, 157].
•Summarization. Vanilla Seq2Seq models often suffer when the generation process is hard
to control and often misses salient information [ 69]. Making use of keywords as explicit
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.