A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:31
set of terms directly or indirectly related to the words that describe the objects found in the scene
by the object recognition module [ 162]. In addition, Mao et al . [85] proposed a neuro-symbolic
learner for improving visual-language generation tasks (e.g., visual question answering).
However, existing approaches for knowledge-enhanced visual-language generation tasks still
have a lot of space for exploration. Some promising directions for future work include using other
knowledge sources, such as retrieving image/text to help solve open-domain visual question answer-
ing and image/video captioning tasks; bringing structured knowledge for providing justifications
for the captions that they produce, tailoring captions to different audiences and contexts, etc.
6.2 Learning Knowledge from Broader Sources
More research efforts should be spent on learning to discover knowledge more broadly and combine
multiple forms of knowledge from different sources to improve the generation process. More
knowledge sources can be but not limited to network structure, dictionary and table. For examples,
Yu et al. [ 147] and An et al. [ 2] augmented the task of scientific papers intention detection and
summarization by introducing the citation graph; Yu et al. augmented the rare word representations
by retrieving their descriptions from Wiktionary and feed them as additional input to a pre-
trained language model [ 148]. Besides, structured knowledge and unstructured knowledge can
play a complementary role in enhancing text generation. To improve knowledge richness, Fu et al.
combined both structured (knowledge base) and unstructured knowledge (grounded text) [34].
Leveraging Knowledge from Pre-trained Language Models. Pre-trained language models can learn a
substantial amount of in-depth knowledge from data without any access to an external memory, as a
parameterized implicit knowledge base [ 68,104]. However, as mentioned in [ 45], directly fine-tuning
pre-trained language generation models on the story generation task still suffers from insufficient
knowledge by representing the input text thorough a pre-trained encoder, leading to repetition,
logic conflicts, and lack of long-range coherence in the generated output sequence. Therefore,
discovering knowledge from pre-trained language models can be more flexible, such as knowledge
distillation, data augmentation, and using pre-trained models as external knowledge [ 100]. More
efficient methods of obtaining knowledge from pre-trained language models are expected.
6.3 Learning Knowledge from Limited Resources
Most of current NLG research conduct on extensively labelled data to favor model training. However,
this is in contrast to many real-world application scenarios, where only a few shots of examples are
available for new domains. Limited data resources lead to limited knowledge that can be learnt in new
domains. For examples, learning topical information of a dialogue occurring under a new domain
is difficult since the topic may be rarely discussed before; constructing a syntactic dependency
graph of a sequence in a low-resource language is hard since many linguistic features are of great
uniqueness. Besides, external knowledge bases are often incomplete and insufficient to cover full
entities and relationships due to the human costs of collecting domain-specific knowledge triples.
Therefore, quick domain adaptation is an essential task in text generation tasks. One potential route
towards addressing these issues is meta-learning, which in the context of NLG means a generation
model develops a broad set of skills and pattern recognition abilities at training time, and quickly
adapt to a new task given very few examples without retraining the model from scratch. Recently,
there has been raising interests in both academia and industry to investigate meta-learning in
different NLG tasks. Thus, it is a promising research direction to build efficient meta-learning
algorithms that only need a few task-specific fine-tuning to learn the new task quickly. And for
knowledge-enhanced text generation, it is of crucial importance to adapt the model quickly on new
domains with limited new knowledge (e.g., only a few knowledge triples).
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.