1:22 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
al. ranked and filtered paths to ensure both the information quality and variety via a 3-step scoring
strategy: initial node scoring, cumulative node scoring, and path selection [ 5]. Ji et al. heuristically
pruned the noisy edges between entity nodes and proposed a path routing algorithm to propagate
the edge probability along multi-hop paths to the entity nodes [56].
M3.2: Reinforcement learning based path finding .Reinforcement learning (RL) based meth-
ods make an agent to perform reasoning to find a path in a continuous space. These methods
incorporate various criteria in their reward functions of path finding, making the path finding
process flexible. Xiong et al. proposed DeepPath, the first work that employed Markov decision
process (MDP) and used RL based approaches to find paths in KGs [ 141]. Leveraging RL based
path finding for NLG tasks typically consists of two stages [ 81,97]. First, they take a sequence
as input, retrieve a starting node 𝑢0onG, then perform multi-hop graph reasoning, and finally
arrive at a target node 𝑢𝑘that incorporates the knowledge for output sequence generation. Second,
they represent the sequence 𝑋and selected path Φ𝑘(𝑢0,𝑢𝑘)through two separate encoders. They
decode a sequence with multi-source attentions on the input sequence and selected path. Path-based
knowledge graph reasoning converts the graph structure of a KG into a linear path structure that
can be easily represented by sequence encoders (e.g, RNN) [ 30,97,121]. For example, Niu et al.
encoded selected path and input sequence with two separate RNNs and generated sequence with
a general attention-based RNN decoder [ 97]. To enhance the RL process, Xu et al. proposed six
reward functions for training an agent in the reinforcement learning process. For example, the
functions looked for accurate arrival at the target node as well as the shortest path between the
start and target node, i.e., minimize the length of the selected path Φ𝑘(𝑢0,𝑢𝑘)[142].
4.2.4 M4: Improve the Graph Embeddings with Graph Neural Networks .The contexts
surrounding relevant entities on KGs play an important role in understanding the entities and
generating proper text about their interactions [ 46,63]. For example, in scientific writing, it is
important to consider the neighboring nodes of relevant concepts on a taxonomy and/or the
global context of a scientific knowledge graph [ 63]. However, neither KGE nor relational path
could fully represent such information. Graph-based representations aim at aggregating the con-
text/neighboring information on graph data; and recent advances of GNN models demonstrate a
promising advancement in graph-based representation learning [ 138]. In order to improve text
generation, graph-to-sequence (Graph2Seq) models encode the structural information of the KG in
a neural encoder-decoder architecture [ 6]. Since then, GNNs have been playing an important role
in improving the NLG models. They have been applied to both encoding anddecoding phases.
Learning KG-aware input text representation with GNNs (Encoding). For encoding phase,
a general process of leveraging GNNs for incorporating KG is to augment semantics of a word
in the input text by combining with the vector of the corresponding entity node vector to the
word on the KG [ 46,54,150,151,159]. A pre-defined entity linking function 𝜓:U×X→U 𝑠𝑢𝑏
maps words in the input sequence to entity nodes on the KG. Given an input sequence, all the
linked entities and their neighbors within 𝐾-hops compose a sequence-associated K-hop subgraph
G𝑠𝑢𝑏(formally defined in Definition 4.2). For each entity node in G𝑠𝑢𝑏, it uses the KG structure as
well as entity and edge features (e.g., semantic description if available) to learn a representation
vector u. Specifically, a GNN model follows a neighborhood aggregation approach that iteratively
updates the representation of a node by aggregating information from its neighboring nodes and
edges. After 𝑘iterations of aggregation, the node representation captures the structural information
within its𝑘-hop neighborhood. Formally, the 𝑘-th layer of a node 𝑢∈U𝑠𝑢𝑏is:
u(𝑘)=Combine 𝑘(u(𝑘−1),Aggregate 𝑘(
(u(𝑘−1)
𝑖,e(𝑘−1)
𝑖𝑗,u(𝑘−1)
𝑗):∀(𝑢𝑖,𝑒𝑖𝑗,𝑢𝑗)∈N(𝑢)	
)).(22)
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.