A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:3
ConceptNetInputKeyword… …TopicGeneration modelOutputInternal knowledgeKnowledge extractionKnowledge sourceInputGeneration modelOutput… …Path on KG……Relevantdoc.External knowledgeKnowledge acquisition
Fig. 1. We divide different knowledge sources into internal knowledge and external knowledge. Internal
knowledge creation takes place within the input text(s), while external knowledge acquisition occurs when
knowledge is provided from outside sources (e.g., Wikipedia, ConceptNet [115]).
text(s), including but not limited to keyword, topic, linguistic features, and internal graph structure.
External knowledge acquisition occurs when knowledge is provided from outside sources, including
but not limited to knowledge base, external knowledge graph, and grounded text. These sources
provide information (e.g., commonsense triples, topic words, reviews, background documents)
that can be used as knowledge through various neural representation learning methods, and then
applied to enhance the process of text generation. In addition, knowledge introduces interpretability
for models with explicit semantics. This research direction of incorporating knowledge into text
generation is named as knowledge-enhanced text generation .
Problem 1 (Knowledge-enhanced Text Generation). Given a text generation problem where
the system is given an input sequence 𝑋, and aims to generate an output sequence 𝑌. Assume we
also have access to additional knowledge denoted as 𝐾. Knowledge-enhanced text generation aims
to incorporate the knowledge 𝐾to enhance the generation of 𝑌given𝑋, through leveraging the
dependencies among the input text, knowledge, and output text.
Many existing knowledge-enhanced text generation systems have demonstrated promising
performance on generating informative, logical, and coherent texts. In dialogue systems, a topic-
aware Seq2Seq model helped understand the semantic meaning of an input sequence and generate
a more informative response such as “Then hydrate and moisturize your skin. ” to the aforementioned
example input “My skin is so dry. ” In summarization, knowledge graph produced a structured
summary and highlight the proximity of relevant concepts, when complex events related with the
same entity may span multiple sentences. A knowledge graph enhanced Seq2Seq model generated
summaries that were able to correctly answer 10% more topically related questions [ 54]. In question
answering (QA) systems, facts stored in knowledge bases completed missing information in the
question and elaborate details to facilitate answer generation [ 30,48]. In story generation, using
commonsense knowledge acquired from knowledge graph facilitated understanding of the storyline
and better narrate following plots step by step, so each step could be reflected as a link on the
knowledge graph and the whole story would be a path [46].
1.2 Why a Survey of Knowledge-enhanced Text Generation?
Recent years have witnessed a surge of interests in developing methods for incorporating knowledge
in NLG beyond input text. However, there is a lack of comprehensive survey of this research topic.
Related surveys have laid the foundation of discussing this topic. For example, Garbacea et al. [ 37]
and Gatt et al. [ 38] reviewed model architectures for core NLG tasks but did not discuss knowledge-
enhanced methods. Ji et al. [ 58] presented a review on knowledge graph techniques which could
be used for enhancing NLG. Wang et al. [ 125] summarized how to represent structural knowledge
such as knowledge base and knowledge graph for reading comprehension and retrieval.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.