A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:9
ConceptNetInputGeneration modelOutputGeneration loss
Knowledge lossLabelsLabelsInputGeneration modelOutputGeneration lossLabelscreate
keyword… …
ConceptNet
keyword… …
Fig. 3. Incorporating knowledge into text generation by treating knowledge as the target. The first category
of methods (left) combine knowledge-related tasks as auxiliary into the text generation task, resulting in
amulti-task learning setting. The second category of methods (right) create weakly-supervised labels from
knowledge, enforcing the relevancy between the knowledge and the target sequence.
with the standard conversation generation loss to enhance grounded conversation [ 27,61]. Similar
tasks include keyword extraction loss [ 70], template re-ranking loss [ 13,129], link prediction loss
on knowledge graph [ 57], path reasoning loss [ 81], mode loss [ 137,159], bag-of-word (BOW)
loss [ 74,143], etc. The second category of methods directly derive the text generation targets
from the knowledge, and use those (typically noisy) targets as supervisions in the standard text
generation task. The approach is called weakly-supervised learning. Weakly-supervised learning
enforces the relevancy between the knowledge and the target sequence. For example, in the problem
of aspect based summarization, the work [ 118] automatically creates target summaries based on
external knowledge bases, which are used to train the summarization model in a supervised manner.
Knowledge as condition .The second way of devising knowledge-related tasks is to augment
the text generation task by conditioning the generation on the knowledge. That is, the goal is
to learn a function 𝑝𝜃(𝑌|𝑋,𝐾), where𝑋is the input sequence, 𝑌is the target text and 𝐾is the
knowledge. Generally, the knowledge 𝐾is first given externally (e.g., style, emotion) or retrieved
from external resources (e.g., facts from knowledge base, a document from Wikipedia) or extracted
from the given input text (e.g., keywords, topic words). Second, a conditional text generation model
is used to incorporate knowledge and generate target output sequence. In practice, knowledge is
often remedied by soft enforcing algorithms such as attention mechanism [ 3] and copy/pointing
mechanism [ 43,109]. Regarding knowledge as condition is widely used in knowledge-enhanced
text generation. For examples, work has been done in making personalized dialogue response by
taking account of persona [ 154] and emotion [ 158], controlling various aspects of the response
such as politeness [ 96], grounding the responses in external source of knowledge [ 27,42,159] and
generating topic-coherent sequence [ 119,143]. Besides, using variational autoencoder (VAE) to
enforce the generation process conditioned on knowledge is one popular approach to unsupervised
NLG. By manipulating latent space for certain attributes, such as topic [ 132] and style [ 50], the
output sequence can be generated with desired attributes without supervising with parallel data.
2.3.2 Learning with knowledge constraints .Instead of creating training objectives in stan-
dalone tasks that encapsulate knowledge, another paradigm of knowledge-enhanced learning is to
treat the knowledge as the constraints to regularize the text generation training objective.
The posterior regularization (PR) framework was proposed to restrict the space of the model
posterior on unlabeled data as a way to guide the model towards desired behavior [ 35,164]. PR
has been used as a principled framework to impose knowledge constraints on probabilistic models
(including deep networks) in general [ 51,153]. PR augments any regular training objective L(𝜃)
(e.g., negative log-likelihood, as in Eq. (5)) with a constraint term to encode relevant knowledge.
Formally, denote the constraint function as 𝑓(𝑋,𝑌)∈Rsuch that a higher 𝑓(𝑋,𝑌)value indicates
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.