1:2 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
1 INTRODUCTION
Text generation, which is often formally referred as natural language generation (NLG), is one of
the most important yet challenging tasks in natural language processing (NLP) [ 37]. NLG aims at
producing understandable text in human language from linguistic or non-linguistic data in a variety
of forms such as textual data, numerical data, image data, structured knowledge bases, and knowl-
edge graphs. Among these, text-to-text generation is one of the most important applications and
thus often shortly referred as “text generation”. Researchers have developed numerous technologies
for this task in a wide range of applications [ 38,55,125]. Text generation takes text (e.g., a sequence,
keywords) as input, processes the input text into semantic representations, and generates desired
output text. For example, machine translation generates text in a different language based on the
source text; summarization generates an abridged version of the source text to include salient
information; question answering (QA) generates textual answers to given questions; dialogue
system supports chatbots to communicate with humans with generated responses.
With the recent resurgence of deep learning technologies [ 66], deep neural NLG models have
achieved remarkable performance in enabling machines to understand and generate natural lan-
guage. A basic definition of the text generation task is to generate an expected output sequence from
a given input sequence , called sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq). The Seq2Seq task and model were
first introduced in 2014 [ 117]. It maps an input text to an output text under encoder-decoder schemes.
The encoder maps the input sequence to a fixed-sized vector, and the decoder maps the vector to the
target sequence. Since then, developing NLG systems has rapidly become a hot topic. Various text
generation models have been proposed under deep neural encoder-decoder architectures. Popular
architectures include recurrent neural network (RNN) encoder-decoder [ 117], convolutional neural
network (CNN) encoder-decoder [39], and Transformer encoder-decoder [122].
Nevertheless, the input text alone contains limited knowledge to support neural generation
models to produce the desired output. Meanwhile, the aforementioned methods generally suffer
from an inability to well comprehend language, employ memory to retain and recall knowledge,
and reason over complex concepts and relational paths; as indicated by their name, they involve
encoding an input sequence, providing limited reasoning by transforming their hidden state given
the input, and then decoding to an output. Therefore, the performance of generation is still far
from satisfaction in many real-world scenarios. For example, in dialogue systems, conditioning on
only the input text, a text generation system often produces trivial or non-committal responses of
frequent words or phrases in the corpus [ 139,159], such as “Me too. ” or“Oh my god!” given the input
text “My skin is so dry. ” These mundane responses lack meaningful content, in contrast to human
responses rich in knowledge. In comparison, humans are constantly acquiring, understanding, and
storing knowledge from broader sources so that they can be employed to understand the current
situation in communicating, reading, and writing. For example, in conversations, people often first
select concepts from related topics (e.g., sports, food), then organize those topics into understandable
content to respond; for summarization, people tend to write summaries containing keywords used
in the input document and perform necessary modifications to ensure grammatical correctness and
fluency; in question answering (QA), people use commonsense orprofessional knowledge pertained
to the question to infer the answer. Therefore, it is often the case that knowledge beyond the input
sequence is required to produce informative output text.
1.1 What is Knowledge-enhanced Text Generation?
In general, knowledge is the familiarity, awareness, or understanding that coalesces around a
particular subject. In NLG systems, knowledge is an awareness and understanding of the input text
and its surrounding context. These knowledge sources can be categorized into internal knowledge
and external knowledge (see Figure 1). Internal knowledge creation takes place within the input
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.