A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:25
B: I like country music. It is the most listened to rush hour radio genre.3 relevant docsSequence encoderDocument encoderSequence DecoderOutput text
(a) M1: Retrieve relevant documents, use them for generation Input textB: It made $279,167,575 at the box office.Background docSequence encoderDocument encoderSequence DecoderOutput text
(b) M2: Read background document and generate outputInput text
(1) In 2009, country music was the most lis-tenedto rush hourradio genrein the US.(2) Country is a musical genre that origin-atedin the southern US in the early 1920s.(3) George Glenn Jones was an American musician, singer and songwriter.A dialogue between A and BA: Do you know George Glenn Jones?B: Yes, he was a famous American        singer and songwriter.A: Cool! You sure know some stuff about country music!Retrieve from WikipediaBackground: ... but if you like ben stiller, go see“meet the fockers”. Dustin’s antics will favorite character was jack (the older one), because he was so serious but always plotting and putting up a front. I think it was $279,167,575 awards ASCAP film and television music awards 2005 top box office films MTV… (~250 words)A dialogue between A and BA: That name is so ridiculous but funny. B: First off, the writers did not miss a single opportunity to play off ofthe name “focker”. A: Yeah, I heard it was a pretty successfulmovie overall.A background-based conversion (BBC)
Fig. 7. The left figure demonstrates retrieving relevant documents, then using them for generation; the right
figure demonstrate reading background document to conduct conversions.
have a public leaderboard for competition. Second, for KG sources, we observe that eight (57.1%)
papers use ConceptNet as external resource, while six (42.9%) papers constructed their own KGs
from domain-specific corpus. For example, Koncel et al. created a scientific knowledge graph by
applying the SciIE tool (science domain information extraction) [ 63]. Besides, Zhao et al. compared
the performance of models between using ConceptNet and using a self-built KG, and found the
model with self-built KG could work better on story generation and review generation tasks [ 156].
Third, we observed that KG-enhanced NLG methods made the largest improvement on generative
commonsense reasoning tasks, in which the average improvement is +2.55% in terms of ΔBLEU,
while the average improvement on all different tasks is +1.32%.
Qualitative analysis. Table 6 compares different KG-enhanced methods from three dimensions:
multi-hop information aggregation, multi-hop path reasoning, and auxiliary knowledge graph
related tasks. M3 is commonly used for multi-hop path reasoning and M4 is used for multi-hop
information aggregation, except that CCM [ 159] only aggregates one-hop neighbors. Besides, the
auxiliary KG-related tasks are often used to further help the model learn knowledge from the KG.
For example, ablation studies in [ 56,57,81] show that the tasks of path selection, concept selection
and link prediction can further boost the generation performance. GRF [ 57] learns these three
abilities at the same time. It achieves the state-of-art performance on three generation tasks.
4.3 NLG enhanced by Grounded Text
Knowledge grounded text refers to textual information that can provide additional knowledge
relevant to the input sequence. The textual information may not be found in training corpora
or structured databases, but can be obtained from massive textual data from online resources.
These online resources include encyclopedia (e.g., Wikipedia), social media (e.g., Twitter), shopping
websites (e.g., Amazon reviews). Knowledge grounded text plays an important role in understanding
the input sequence and its surrounding contexts. For example, Wikipedia articles may offer textual
explanations or background information for the input text. Amazon reviews may contain necessary
descriptions and reviews needed to answer a product-related question. Tweets may contain people’s
comments and summaries towards an event. Therefore, knowledge grounded text is often taken as
an important external knowledge source to help with a variety of NLG applications.
Next, we introduce popular NLG applications enhanced by knowledge grounded text:
•Dialogue system. Building a fully data-driven dialogue system is difficult since most of
the universal knowledge is not presented in the training corpora [ 42]. The lack of universal
knowledge considerably limits the appeal of fully data-driven generation methods, as they
are bounded to respond evasively or defectively and seldom include meaningfully factual
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.