1:26 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
contents. To infuse the response with factual information, an intelligent machine is expected
to obtain necessary background information to produce appropriate response.
•Summarization. Seq2Seq models that purely depend on the input text tend to “lose control”
sometimes. For example, 3% of summaries contain less than three words, and 4% of summaries
repeat a word for more than 99 times as mentioned in [ 13]. Furthermore, Seq2Seq models
usually focus on copying source words in their exact order, which is often sub-optimal in
abstractive summarization. Therefore, leveraging summaries of documents similar as the
input document as templates can provide reference for the summarization process [ 13,129].
•Question answering (QA). It is often difficult to generate proper answers only based on
the given question. For example, without knowing any information of an Amazon product, it
is hard to deliver satisfactory answer to the user questions such as “Does the laptop have a
long battery life?” or“Is this refrigerator frost-free?” So, the product description and customer
reviews can be used as a reference for answering product-related questions [9, 16].
To handle different kinds of relationships between grounded text and input/output sequences,
these methods can be categorized into two methodologies as shown in Figure 7: (M1) guiding gener-
ation with retrieved information; (M2) modeling background knowledge into response generation.
4.3.1 M1: Guiding Generation with Retrieved Information .Because knowledge grounded
text is not presented in the training corpora, an idea is to retrieve relevant textual information (e.g.,
a review, a relevant document, a summary template) from external sources based on the input text
and to incorporate the retrieved grounded text into the generation process. This process is similar
to designing knowledge acquisition and incorporation of KBs and KGs in text generation tasks.
The difference is that ground text is unstructured and noisy. So, researchers design knowledge
selection and incorporation methods to address the challenges. Based on the number of stages,
we further divide related methods into two categories: retrieve-then-generate (also known as
retrieval-augmented generation, short as RAG, in many existing papers [ 64,68,99]) methods
(2-stage methods) and retrieve, rerank and rewrite methods (3-stage methods).
M1.1: Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) .RAG follows a two-stage process: retrieval
and generation. Specially, as shown in Figure 7(a), a retriever 𝑝(𝑍|𝑋)first returns (usually top-K
truncated) distributions over text passages given a query 𝑋, and then a generator 𝑝(𝑦𝑖|𝑋,𝑍,𝑦 1:𝑖−1)
generates a current token based on a context of the previous tokens 𝑦1:𝑖−1, the original input 𝑋
and a retrieved passage 𝑍. Methods for retrieving fact or review snippets are various, including
matching from a collection of raw text entries indexed by named entities [ 42]; scoring relevant
documents within a large collection by statistical approaches such as BM25 [ 27], or neural-based
retrieval approaches such as dense paragraph retrieval (DPR) [ 68]. For training the retriever and
generator, most of existing work has jointly optimized these two components, without any direct
supervision on what document should be retrieve [ 64,68]. However, by asking human experts to
label what document should be retrieved and adding the retrieval loss (resulting in a multi-task
learning setting), the generation performance can be greatly improved [ 27,61], though the labelling
process is an extremely time-consuming and labor-intensive task.
Ghazvininejad et al. proposed a knowledge grounded neural conversation model (KGNCM),
which is the first work to retrieve review snippets from Foursquare and Twitter. Then it incorporates
the snippets into dialogue response generation [ 42]. It uses an end-to-end memory network [ 116]
to generate responses based on the selected review snippets. Lewis et al. introduced a general
retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) framework by leveraging a pre-trained neural retriever and
generator. It can be easily fine-tuned on downstream tasks, and it has demonstrated state-of-the-
art performance on various knowledge intensive NLG tasks [ 68]. Recently, the fusion-in-decoder
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.