1:20 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
one discourse into several segments, which can be represented as a linked path connecting
the entities and their relations.
•Creative writing. This task can be found in both scientific and story-telling domains. Scien-
tific writing aims to explain natural processes and phenomena step by step, so each step can
be reflected as a link on KG and the whole explanation is a path [ 63,130]. In story generation,
the implicit knowledge in KG can facilitate the understanding of storyline and better predict
what will happen in the next plot [45, 46, 80].
Compared with separate, independent knowledge triplets, knowledge graph provides compre-
hensive and rich entity features and relations for models to overcome the influence of the data
distribution and enhance its robustness. Therefore, node embedding and relational path have played
important roles in various text generation tasks. The corresponding techniques are knowledge
graph embedding (KGE) [ 131] and path-based knowledge graph reasoning [ 17]. Furthermore, it
has been possible to encode multi-hop and high-order relations in KGs using the emerging graph
neural network (GNN) [138] and graph-to-sequence (Graph2Seq) frameworks [6].
Definition 4.1 (Knowledge graph (KG)). A knowledge graph (KG) is a directed and multi-relational
graph composed of entities and relations which are regarded as nodes and different types of edges.
Formally, a KG is defined as G=(U,E,R), whereUis the set of entity nodes and E⊆U×R×U
is the set of typed edges between nodes in Uwith a certain relation in the relation schema R.
Then given the input/output sequences in the text generation task, a subgraph of the KG which
is associated with the sequences can be defined as below.
Definition 4.2 (Sequence-associated K-hop subgraph). A sequence-associated K-hop subgraph
is defined asG𝑠𝑢𝑏=(U𝑠𝑢𝑏,E𝑠𝑢𝑏,R), whereU𝑠𝑢𝑏is the union of the set of entity nodes mapped
through an entity linking function𝜓:U×X→U 𝑠𝑢𝑏andtheir neighbors within K-hops. Similarly,
E𝑠𝑢𝑏⊆U𝑠𝑢𝑏×R×U𝑠𝑢𝑏is the set of typed edges between nodes in U𝑠𝑢𝑏.
Sequence-associated subgraph provides a graphical form of the task data (i.e., sequences) and
thus enables the integration of KGs and the sequences into graph algorithms.
Many methods have been proposed to learn the relationship between KG semantics and in-
put/output sequences. They can be categorized into four methodologies as shown in Figure 6: (M1)
incorporate knowledge graph embeddings into language generation; (M2) transfer knowledge into
language model with triplet information; (M3) perform reasoning over knowledge graph via path
finding strategies; and (M4) improve the graph embeddings with graph neural networks.
4.2.1 M1: Incorporate Knowledge Graph Embeddings into Language Generation .Knowl-
edge graph embedding (KGE) techniques learn node embedding from a KG [ 131]. KGE aims to
capture the semantic relatedness between entity nodes from their connectivity information (i.e.,
different types of relations) in the KG. The primary idea is to represent entities and relations in a
low-dimensional vector space R𝑑, where𝑑≪|U∪R| , to reduce data dimensionality while preserv-
ing the inherent structure of the KG. TransE [ 11] is the most widely used KGE technique. In TransE,
given a KG edge(𝑢𝑖,𝑟,𝑢𝑗), the relation is seen as a translation vector rso that the embedded entities
u𝑖and u𝑗can be connected with low translation error, namely u𝑖+r≈u𝑗. For example, we have
−−−−−→𝑇𝑜𝑘𝑦𝑜+−−−−−−−−−−−−→𝐼𝑠𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑂𝑓≈−−−−→𝐽𝑎𝑝𝑎𝑛 for the knowledge edge (Tokyo,IsCapticalOf ,Japan). As shown
in Figure 6(a), a common strategy of incorporating KGE into NLG is to concatenate the original
word representations ( x) with the corresponding entity representations ( u) from KGE [151, 159].
4.2.2 M2: Transfer Knowledge into Language Model with Knowledge Triplet Informa-
tion .The vector spaces of entity embeddings (from KGE) and word embeddings (from pre-trained
language models) are usually inconsistent [ 80]. Beyond a simple concatenation, recent methods
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.