1:28 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
4.4 M2: Modeling Background Knowledge into Response Generation
Background document, with more global and comprehensive knowledge, has been often used for
generating informative responses and ensuring a conversation to not deviate from its topic. Keeping
a conversation grounded on a background document is referred as background based conversation
(BBC) [ 9,90]. Background knowledge plays an important role in human-human conversations.
For example, when talking about a movie, people often recall important points (e.g., a scene or
review about the movie) and appropriately mention them in the conversation context. Therefore, an
intelligent NLG model is expected to find an appropriate background snippet and generate response
based on the snippet. As shown in Figure 7(b), the task of BBC is often compared with machine
reading comprehension (MRC), in which a span is extracted from the background document as a
response to a question [ 105]. However, since BBC needs to generate natural and fluent responses,
the challenge lies in not only locating the right semantic units in the background, but also referring
to the right background information at the right time in the right place during the decoding phase.
As MRC models tie together multiple text segments to provide a unified and factual answer,
many BBC models use the same idea to connect different pieces of information and find the
appropriate background knowledge based on which the next response is to be generated [ 87,101].
For instance, Qin et al. proposed an end-to-end conversation model that jointly learned response
generation together with on-demand machine reading [ 101]. The MRC models can effectively
encode the input utterance by treating it as a question in a typical QA task (e.g., SQuAD [ 105]) and
encode the background document as the context. Then, they took the utterance-aware background
representation as input into decoding phase.
4.4.1 Discussion and Analysis of Different Methods .
Pros and cons. For M1, guiding generation with retrieved information explicitly exposes the
role of world knowledge by asking the model to decide what knowledge to retrieve and use
during language generation. Since retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) captures knowledge in a
interpretable and modular way, it is often used for knowledge-intensive tasks such as long-form QA
and argument generation. However, a knowledge retriever is expected to retrieve documents from
a large-scale corpus, e.g., the entire Wikipedia, which causes significant computational challenge.
Besides, one input often requires retrieved text whose amount is much larger than the input itself
(as indicated in Table 7), leading to serious information overwhelming for the generation model.
For M2, background based conversations (BBCs) avoid generating generic responses in a dialogue
system and are able to generate more informative responses by exploring related background
information. However, existing methods still cannot solve inherent problems effectively, such as
tending to break a complete semantic unit and generate shorter responses [87].
Qualitative analysis. Table 7 summarizes tasks, datasets and evidence sources used in existing
grounded text enhanced work. Three important things should be mentioned. First, all the datasets in
the table are public, and we include their links in Table 11. Second, Wikipedia is the most commonly
used evidence source since it is the largest free online encyclopedia. Besides, some online platforms
contain plenty of product-related textural information, e.g., product reviews on Amazon, which
are often used to build up task/goal oriented dialogue systems for business purpose. Third, the
retrieval space of candidate documents are usually larger than 1 million and only 7-10 documents
are selected. So, the process of retrieving relevant documents is challenging.
Table 8 compares different grounded text enhanced methods from three dimensions: retrieval
supervision, pre-training of the retriever, and number of stages. First, as mentioned above, retrieving
relevant documents from a large candidate set is a challenging task. To improve the retrieval
accuracy, four (57.1%) papers added the retrieval supervision either by human annotated labels
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.