1:8 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
h𝐺), the Readout(·)function (either a simple permutation invariant function or sophisticated
graph-level pooling function) pools node features from the final iteration 𝐾,
h𝐺=Readout(
u(𝐾):𝑢∈U	
). (14)
Applications. Graph network has been commonly used in integrating knowledge in graph struc-
ture such as knowledge graph and dependency graph. Graph attention network [ 123] can be
combined with sequence attention and jointly optimized [ 151,159]. We will introduce different
graph structure knowledge in subsequent sections such as knowledge graph (Section 4.2), depen-
dency graph (Section 3.3.2-3.3.3), and open knowledge graph (OpenKG) (Section 3.4).
2.2.5 Pre-trained Language Models .Pre-trained language models (PLMs) aims to learn uni-
versal language representation by conducting self-supervised training on large-scale unlabeled
corpora. Recently, substantial PLMs such as BERT [ 25] and T5 [ 104] have achieved remarkable
performance in various NLP downstream tasks. However, these PLMs suffer from two issues when
performing on knowledge-intensive tasks. First, these models struggle to grasp structured world
knowledge, such as concepts and relations, which are very important in language understanding.
For example, BERT cannot deliver great performance on many commonsense reasoning and QA
tasks, in which many of the concepts are directly linked on commonsense knowledge graphs [ 146].
Second, due to the domain discrepancy between pre-training and fine-tuning, these models do not
perform well on domain-specific tasks. For example, BERT can not give full play to its value when
dealing with electronic medical record analysis task in the medical field [78].
Recently, a lot of efforts have been made on investigating how to integrate knowledge into
PLMs [ 45,78,80,140,146,161]. Specifically, we will introduce some PLMs designed for NLG
tasks. Overall, these approaches can be grouped into two categories: The first one is to explicitly
inject entity representation into PLMs, where the representations is pre-computed from external
sources [ 80,155]. For example, KG-BART encoded the graph structure of KGs with knowledge
embedding algorithms like TransE [ 11], and then took the informative entity embeddings as
auxiliary input [ 80]. However, the method of explicitly injecting entity representation into PLMs
has been argued that the embedding vectors of words in text and entities in KG are obtained in
separate ways, making their vector-space inconsistent [ 78]. The second one is to implicitly modeling
knowledge information into PLMs by performing knowledge-related tasks, such as concept order
recovering [ 161], entity category prediction [ 146]. For example, CALM proposed a novel contrastive
objective for packing more commonsense knowledge into the parameters, and jointly pre-trained
both generative and contrastive objectives for enhancing commonsense NLG tasks [161].
2.3 Knowledge-enhanced Learning and Inference
Besides specialized model architectures, one common way of injecting knowledge to generation
models is through the supervised knowledge learning. For example, one can encode knowledge into
the objective function that guides the model training to acquire desired model behaviors [ 27,61].
Such approaches enjoy the flexibility of integrating diverse types of knowledge by expressing them
as certain forms of objectives. In general, knowledge-enhanced learning is agnostic to the model
architecture, and can be combined with the aforementioned architectures.
2.3.1 Learning with knowledge-related tasks .One could devise learning tasks informed by
the knowledge so that the model is trained to acquire the knowledge information.
Knowledge as target .The methods can be mainly divided into two categories as shown in Figure
3. The first category of knowledge-related tasks creates learning targets based on the knowledge,
and the model is trained to recover the targets. These tasks can be combined as auxiliary tasks with
the text generation task, resulting in a multi-task learning setting. For example, knowledge loss is
defined as the cross entropy between the predicted and true knowledge sentences, and it is combined
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.