1
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation
Accepted to ACM Computing Survey (CUSR) WENHAO YU, University of Notre Dame, USA
CHENGUANG ZHU, Microsoft Research, USA
ZAITANG LI, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China
ZHITING HU, University of California at San Diego, USA
QINGYUN WANG, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
HENG JI, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
MENG JIANG, University of Notre Dame, USA
The goal of text-to-text generation is to make machines express like a human in many applications such as
conversation, summarization, and translation. It is one of the most important yet challenging tasks in natural
language processing (NLP). Various neural encoder-decoder models have been proposed to achieve the goal
by learning to map input text to output text. However, the input text alone often provides limited knowledge
to generate the desired output, so the performance of text generation is still far from satisfaction in many
real-world scenarios. To address this issue, researchers have considered incorporating (i) internal knowledge
embedded in the input text and (ii) external knowledge from outside sources such as knowledge base and
knowledge graph into the text generation system. This research topic is known as knowledge-enhanced text
generation . In this survey, we present a comprehensive review of the research on this topic over the past five
years. The main content includes two parts: (i) general methods and architectures for integrating knowledge
into text generation; (ii) specific techniques and applications according to different forms of knowledge data.
This survey can have broad audiences, researchers and practitioners, in academia and industry.
CCS Concepts: •General and reference →Surveys and overviews ;•Computing methodologies →
Natural language processing ;Neural networks .
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Natural language generation, Knowledge-enhanced Methods
§§Some useful materials related to this survey:
•A tutorial entitled “Knowledge-enriched Natural Language Generation”, at EMNLP 2021.
Tutorial abstract, slides, videos can be found at https://kenlg-tutorial.github.io.
•A tutorial entitled “Knowledge-augmented Methods for NLP”, to appear at ACL 2022.
•A Github repository with a more complete collection of papers and codes can be found at
https://github.com/wyu97/KENLG-Reading. It will be frequently updated with new papers.
Authors’ addresses: Wenhao Yu, wyu1@nd.edu, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, USA, 46556; Chenguang Zhu,
chezhu@microsoft.com, Microsoft Research, Redmond, Washington, USA, 98052; Zaitang Li, 1155107739@link.cuhk.edu.hk,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China, 999077; Zhiting Hu, zhitinghu@gmail.com, University of
California at San Diego, San Diego, California, USA, 92092; Qingyun Wang, qingyun4@illinois.edu, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA, 61801; Heng Ji, hengji@illinois.edu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, Illinois, USA, 61801; Meng Jiang, mjiang2@nd.edu, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, USA, 46556.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
©2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
0360-0300/2022/1-ART1 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3512467
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.arXiv:2010.04389v4  [cs.CL]  22 Jan 2022