1:32 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
6.4 Learning Knowledge in a Continuous Way
A machine learning is expected to learn continuously, accumulate the knowledge learned in
previous tasks, and use it to assist future learning. This research direction is referred as lifelong
learning [ 20]. In the process, the intelligent machine becomes more and more knowledgeable
and effective at learning new knowledge. To make an analogy, humans continuously acquire
new knowledge and constantly update the knowledge system in the brain. However, existing
knowledge-enhanced text generation systems usually do not keep updating knowledge in real time
(e.g., knowledge graph expansion). A meaningful exploration of was discussed in [ 86]. They built a
general knowledge learning engine for chatbots to enable them to continuously and interactively
learn new knowledge during conversations. Therefore, it is a promising research direction to
continuously update knowledge obtained from various information sources, empowering intelligent
machines with incoming knowledge and improving the performance on new text generation tasks.
7 CONCLUSIONS
In this survey, we present a comprehensive review of current representative research efforts and
trends on knowledge-enhanced text generation, and expect it can facilitate future research. To
summarize, this survey aims to answer two questions that commonly appears in knowledge-
enhanced text generation: how to acquire knowledge andhow to incorporate knowledge to facilitate
text generation . Base on knowledge acquisition, the main content of our survey is divided into
three sections according to different sources of knowledge enhancement. Based on knowledge
incorporation, we first present general methods of incorporating knowledge into text generation and
further discuss a number of specific ideas and technical solutions that incorporate the knowledge to
enhance the text generation systems in each section. Besides, we review a variety of text generation
applications in each section to help practitioners learn to choose and employ the methods.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank all anonymous reviewers for valuable comments. We also appreciate the suggestions from
readers of the pre-print version. We thank Dr. Michael Zeng (Microsoft) and Dr. Nazneen Rajani
(Saleforce) for their constructive comments and suggestions. Wenhao Yu and Dr. Meng Jiang’s
research is supported by National Science Foundation grants IIS-1849816, CCF-1901059, and IIS-
2119531. Qingyun Wang and Dr. Heng Ji’s research is based upon work supported by Agriculture
and Food Research Initiative (AFRI) grant no. 2020-67021-32799/project accession no.1024178
from the USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture, U.S. DARPA SemaFor Program No.
HR001120C0123, DARPA AIDA Program No. FA8750-18-2-0014, and DARPA KAIROS Program No.
FA8750-19-2-1004. The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should
not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of
DARPA, or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute
reprints for governmental purposes notwithstanding any copy-right annotation therein.
REFERENCES
[1] Roee Aharoni and Yoav Goldberg. 2017. Towards String-To-Tree Neural Machine Translation. In Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[2]Chenxin An, Ming Zhong, Yiran Chen, Danqing Wang, Xipeng Qiu, and Xuanjing Huang. 2021. Enhancing scientific
papers summarization with citation graph. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[3]Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to
align and translate. In International Conference for Learning Representation (ICLR) .
[4]Joost Bastings, Ivan Titov, Wilker Aziz, Diego Marcheggiani, and Khalil Sima’an. 2017. Graph Convolutional Encoders
for Syntax-aware Neural Machine Translation. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
[5]Lisa Bauer, Yicheng Wang, and Mohit Bansal. 2018. Commonsense for Generative Multi-Hop Question Answering
Tasks. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.