1:16 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
improvement than assigning keyword before the sentence decoding. For M2 methods, since most
methods were evaluated on different tasks, we can only compare the performance between “without
using keyword” and “using keyword”. As shown in Table 3(b), leveraging extracted keywords from
input sequence into Seq2Seq model can improve the generation quality on summarization and
question generation tasks. Comparing with KGAS [ 70] and KIGN [ 69], we can observe using
BiLSTM-Softmax to extract keyword (a supervised manner by using overlapping words between 𝑋
and𝑌as labels) can make better performance than using TextRank (an unsupervised manner).
3.3 NLG Enhanced by Linguistic Features
Feature enriched encoder means that the encoder not only reads the input sequence, but also
incorporates auxiliary hand-crafted features [ 110,149,160]. Linguistic features are the most common
hand-crafted features, such as part-of-speech (POS) tags, dependency parsing, and semantic parsing.
3.3.1 POS tags and NER tags .Part-of-speech tagging (POS) assigns token tags to indicate the
token’s grammatical categories and part of speech such as noun (N) ,verb (V) ,adjective (A) . Named-
entity recognition (NER) classifies named entities mentioned in unstructured text into pre-defined
categories such as person (P) ,location (L) ,organization (O) . CoreNLP is the most common used
tool [ 84]. In spite of homonymy and word formation processes, the same surface word form may
be shared between several word types. Incorporating NER tags and POS tags can detect named
entities and understand input sequence better, hence, further improve NLG [28, 93, 160].
3.3.2 Syntactic dependency graph .Syntactic dependency graph is a directed acyclic graph
representing syntactic relations between words [ 4]. For example, in the sentence “The monkey eats
a banana”, “monkey” is the subject of the predicate “eats”, and “banana” is the object. Enhancing
sequence representations by utilizing dependency information captures source long-distance depen-
dency constraints and parent-child relation for different words [ 1,4,15]. In NLG tasks, dependency
information is often modeled in three different ways as follows: (i) linearized representation: lin-
earize dependency graph and then use sequence model to obtain syntax-aware representation [ 1];
(ii) path-based representation: calculate attention weights based on the linear distance between a
word and the aligned center position, i.e., the greater distance a word to the center position on the
dependency graph is, the smaller contribution of the word to the context vector is [ 15]; and (iii)
graph-based representation: use GNNs to aggregate information from dependency relations [4].
3.3.3 Semantic dependency graph .Semantic dependency graph represents predicate-argument
relations between content words in a sentence and have various semantic representation schemes
(e.g., DM) based on different annotation systems. Nodes in a semantic dependency graph are
extracted by semantic role labeling (SRL) or dependency parsing, and connected by different
intra-semantic and inter-semantic relations [ 98]. Since semantic dependency graph introduces a
higher level of information abstraction that captures commonalities between different realizations
of the same underlying predicate-argument structures, it has been widely used to improve text
generation [ 59,75,98]. Jin et al. propose a semantic dependency guided summarization model [ 59].
They incorporate the semantic dependency graph and the input text by stacking encoders to guide
summary generation process. The stacked encoders consist of a sequence encoder and a graph
encoder, in which the sentence encoder first reads the input text through stacked multi-head
self-attention, and then the graph encoder captures semantic relationships and incorporates the
semantic graph structure into the contextual-level representation.
3.4 NLG Enhanced by Open Knowledge Graphs
For those KGs (e.g., ConceptNet) constructed based on data beyond the input text, we refer them as
external KGs . On the contrary, an internal KG is defined as a KG constructed solely based on the
input text. In this section, we will discuss incorporating internal KG to help NLG [30, 54].
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.