1:34 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
and International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) .
[31] Angela Fan, Yacine Jernite, Ethan Perez, David Grangier, Jason Weston, and Michael Auli. 2019. ELI5: Long Form
Question Answering. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[32] Zhihao Fan, Yeyun Gong, Zhongyu Wei, Siyuan Wang, Yameng Huang, Jian Jiao, Xuan-Jing Huang, Nan Duan,
and Ruofei Zhang. 2020. An Enhanced Knowledge Injection Model for Commonsense Generation. In International
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING) .
[33] Xiyan Fu, Jun Wang, Jinghan Zhang, Jinmao Wei, and Zhenglu Yang. 2020. Document Summarization with VHTM:
Variational Hierarchical Topic-Aware Mechanism. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[34] Yao Fu and Yansong Feng. 2018. Natural answer generation with heterogeneous memory. In Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL) .
[35] Kuzman Ganchev, Jennifer Gillenwater, Ben Taskar, et al .2010. Posterior regularization for structured latent variable
models. In Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR) .
[36] Ce Gao and Jiangtao Ren. 2019. A topic-driven model for learning to generate diverse sentences. In Neurocomputing .
[37] Cristina Garbacea and Qiaozhu Mei. 2020. Neural Language Generation: Formulation, Methods, and Evaluation. In
arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.15780 .
[38] Albert Gatt and Emiel Krahmer. 2018. Survey of the state of the art in natural language generation: Core tasks,
applications and evaluation. In Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research (JAIR) .
[39] Jonas Gehring, Michael Auli, David Grangier, Denis Yarats, and Yann N Dauphin. 2017. Convolutional sequence to
sequence learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) .
[40] Sebastian Gehrmann, Tosin Adewumi, Karmanya Aggarwal, Pawan Sasanka Ammanamanchi, Aremu Anuoluwapo,
Antoine Bosselut, Khyathi Raghavi Chandu, Miruna Clinciu, Dipanjan Das, Kaustubh D Dhole, et al .2021. The
gem benchmark: Natural language generation, its evaluation and metrics. In Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[41] Sebastian Gehrmann, Yuntian Deng, and Alexander M Rush. 2018. Bottom-Up Abstractive Summarization. In
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
[42] Marjan Ghazvininejad, Chris Brockett, Ming-Wei Chang, Bill Dolan, Jianfeng Gao, Wen-tau Yih, and Michel Galley.
2018. A knowledge-grounded neural conversation model. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[43] Jiatao Gu, Zhengdong Lu, Hang Li, and Victor OK Li. 2016. Incorporating Copying Mechanism in Sequence-to-
Sequence Learning. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[44] Jiatao Gu, Yong Wang, Kyunghyun Cho, and Victor OK Li. 2018. Search engine guided neural machine translation. In
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[45] Jian Guan, Fei Huang, Zhihao Zhao, Xiaoyan Zhu, and Minlie Huang. 2020. A knowledge-enhanced pretraining
model for commonsense story generation. In Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics (TACL) .
[46] Jian Guan, Yansen Wang, and Minlie Huang. 2019. Story ending generation with incremental encoding and common-
sense knowledge. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[47] Dandan Guo, Bo Chen, Ruiying Lu, and Mingyuan Zhou. 2020. Recurrent Hierarchical Topic-Guided RNN for
Language Generation. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) .
[48] Shizhu He, Cao Liu, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao. 2017. Generating natural answers by incorporating copying and
retrieving mechanisms in sequence-to-sequence learning. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL) .
[49] MD Zakir Hossain, Ferdous Sohel, Mohd Fairuz Shiratuddin, and Hamid Laga. 2019. A comprehensive survey of deep
learning for image captioning. In ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) .
[50] Zhiting Hu, Zichao Yang, Xiaodan Liang, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Eric P Xing. 2017. Toward controlled generation
of text. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) .
[51] Zhiting Hu, Zichao Yang, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Xiaodan Liang, Lianhui Qin, Haoye Dong, and Eric Xing. 2018. Deep
Generative Models with Learnable Knowledge Constraints. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .
[52] Xinyu Hua, Zhe Hu, and Lu Wang. 2019. Argument Generation with Retrieval, Planning, and Realization. In Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[53] Xinyu Hua and Lu Wang. 2018. Neural Argument Generation Augmented with Externally Retrieved Evidence. In
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[54] Luyang Huang, Lingfei Wu, and Lu Wang. 2020. Knowledge Graph-Augmented Abstractive Summarization with
Semantic-Driven Cloze Reward. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[55] Touseef Iqbal and Shaima Qureshi. 2020. The Survey: Text Generation Models in Deep Learning.. In Journal of King
Saud University-Computer and Information Sciences . Elsevier.
[56] Haozhe Ji, Pei Ke, Shaohan Huang, Furu Wei, and Minlie Huang. 2020. Generating Commonsense Explanation by
Extracting Bridge Concepts from Reasoning Paths. In Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and International Joint Conference on Natural Language (AACL-IJCNLP) .
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.