A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:15
M1.2: Assigning keyword for generated sequence .As mentioned in [ 114], explicitly incorpo-
rating emotional keywords suffers from expressing a certain emotion overwhelmingly. Instead,
Song et al. propose to increase the intensity of the emotional experiences not by using emotional
words explicitly, but by implicitly combining neutral words in distinct ways on emotion [ 114].
Specifically, they use an emotion classifier to build a sentence-level emotion discriminator, which
helps to recognize the responses that express a certain emotion but not explicitly contain too many
literal emotional words. The discriminator is connected to the end of the decoder.
3.2.2 M2: Incorporate Keyword Extraction into Text Generation .Keyword extraction se-
lects salient words from input documents [ 112]. Recent work has used statistical keyword extraction
techniques (e.g., PMI [ 73], TextRank [ 69]), and neural-based keyword extraction techniques (e.g.,
BiLSTM [ 70]). The process of incorporating extracted keywords into generation is much like the
process discussed in Section 3.2.1. It takes keywords as an additional input into decoder. Recent
work improves encoding phase by adding another sequence encoder to represent keywords [ 69,70].
Then, the contextualized keywords representation is fed into the decoder together with input
sequence representation. To advance the keyword extraction, Li et al. propose to use multi-task
learning for training a keyword extractor network and generating summaries [ 22,70]. Because both
summarization and keyword extraction aim to select important information from input document,
these two tasks can benefit from sharing parameters to improve the capacity of capturing the gist
of the input text. In practice, they take overlapping words between the input document and the
ground-truth summary as keywords, and adopt a BiLSTM-Softmax as keyword extractor. Similar
idea has also been used in question generation tasks [ 22,133]. They use overlapping words between
the input answer context and the ground-truth question as keywords.
3.2.3 Discussion and Analysis of Different Methods .
Pros and cons. ForM1, the primary advantage of keyword assignment is that the quality of
keywords is guaranteed, because irrelevant keywords are not included in the pre-defined vocabulary.
Another advantage is that even if two semantically similar documents do not have common words,
they can still be assigned with the same keyword. However, there are mainly two drawbacks. On
one hand, it is expensive to create and maintain dictionaries in new domains. So, the dictionaries
might not be available. On the other hand, potential keywords occurring in the document would be
unfortunately ignored if they were not in the vocabulary. Therefore, keyword assignment is suitable
for the task that requires specific categories of keywords to guide the generated sentences with
these key information. For example, dialogue systems generate responses with specific attitudes.
ForM2, keyword extraction selects the most representative words explicitly presented in the
document, which is independent from any vocabulary. It is easy to use but has two drawbacks. First,
it cannot guarantee consistency because similar documents may still be represented by different
keywords if they do not share the same set of words. Second, when an input document does not
have a proper representative word, and unfortunately, the keyword extractor selects an irrelevant
word from the document as a keyword, this wrong guidance will mislead the generation. Therefore,
keyword extraction is suitable for the task that the output sequence needs to keep important
information in the input sequence such as document summarization and paraphrase.
Quantitative analysis. Table 3 summarizes tasks and datasets used in keyword-enhanced NLG
work. Comparing with keyword-enhanced methods (E-SCBA [ 71]) and the basic Seq2Seq attention
model, keyword-enhanced methods can greatly improve both generation quality (evaluated by
BLEU) and emotional expression (evaluated by emotion-w and emotion-s) on the NLPCC dataset.
Besides, as shown in Table 3(a), EmoDS [ 114] achieved the best performance among three M1
methods, which indicates taking keyword assignment as a discriminant task can make better
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.