A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:17
Internal KG plays an important role in understanding the input sequence especially when it is of
great length. By constructing an internal KG intermediary, redundant information can be merged or
discarded, producing a substantially compressed form to represent the input document [ 30]. Besides,
representations on KGs can produce a structured summary and highlight the proximity of relevant
concepts, when complex events related with the same entity may span multiple sentences [ 54]. One
of the mainstream methods of constructing an internal KG is using open information extraction
(OpenIE). Unlike traditional information extraction (IE) methods, OpenIE is not limited to a small
set of target entities and relations known in advance, but rather extracts all types of entities and
relations found in input text [ 95]. In this way, OpenIE facilitates the domain independent discovery
of relations extracted from text and scales to large heterogeneous corpora.
After obtaining an internal KG, the next step is to learn the representation of the internal KG and
integrate it into the generation model. For example, Zhu et al. use a graph attention network (GAT)
to obtain the representation of each node, and fuse that into a transformer-based encoder-decoder
architecture via attention [ 163]. Their method generates abstractive summaries with higher factual
correctness. Huang et al. extend by first encoding each paragraph as a sub-KG using GAT, and then
connecting all sub-KGs with a Bi-LSTM [ 54]. This process models topic transitions and recurrences,
which enables the identification of notable content, thus benefiting summarization.
4 NLG ENHANCED BY EXTERNAL KNOWLEDGE
4.1 NLG Enhanced by Knowledge Base
One of the biggest challenges in NLG is to discover the dependencies of elements within a sequence
and/or across input and output sequences. The dependencies are actually various types of knowledge
such as commonsense, factual events, and semantic relationship. Knowledge base (KB) is a popular
technology that collects, stores, and manages large-scale information for knowledge-based systems
like search engines. It has a great number of triples composed of subjects, predicates, and objects.
People also call them “facts” or “factual triplets”. Recently, researchers have been designing methods
to use KB as external knowledge for learning the dependencies easier, faster, and better.
Next, we introduce popular NLG applications enhanced by knowledge base:
•Question answering. It is often difficult to generate proper answers only based on a given
question. This is because, depending on what the question is looking for, a good answer may
have different forms. It may completes the question precisely with the missing information.
It may elaborate details of some part of the question. It may need reasoning and inference
based on some facts and/or commonsense. So, only incorporating input question into neural
generation models often fails the task due to the lack of commonsense/factual knowledge [ 8].
Related structured information of commonsense and facts can be retrieved from KBs.
•Dialogue system. The needs of KB in generating conversations or dialogues are relevant with
QA but differ from two aspects. First, a conversation or dialogue could be open discussions
when started by an open topic like “ Do you have any recommendations? ” Second, responding
an utterance in a certain step needs to recall previous contexts to determine involved entities.
KB will play an important role to recognize dependencies in the long-range contexts.
To handle different kinds of relationships between KB and input/output sequences, these methods
can be categorized into two methodologies which is shown in Figure 5: (M1) design supervised
tasks around KB for joint optimization; (M2) enhance incorporation by selecting KB or facts.
4.1.1 M1: Design Supervised Tasks around KB for Joint Optimization .Knowledge bases
(KBs) that acquire, store, and represent factual knowledge can be used to enhance text generation.
However, designing effective incorporation to achieve a desired enhancement is challenging because
a vanilla Seq2Seq often fails to represent discrete isolated concepts though they perform well to
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.