1:24 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
Pros and cons. Knowledge graph embedding ( M1) was the earliest attempt to embed com-
ponents of a KG including entities and relations into continuous vector spaces and use them to
improve text generation. Those entity and relation embeddings can simply be used to enrich
input text representations (e.g., concatenating embeddings), bridging connections between entity
words linked from input text in latent space. Because the graph projection and text generation are
performed as two separate steps, the embedding vectors from knowledge graph and the hidden
states from input text were in two different vector spaces. The model would have to learn to bridge
the gap, which might make a negative impact on the performance of text generation.
Fine tuning pre-trained language models on the KG triplets ( M2) can eliminate the gap between
the two vector spaces. Nevertheless, M1 and M2 share two drawbacks. First, they only preserve
information of direct (one-hop) relations in a KG, such as pair-wise proximity in M1 and KG triplet
in M2, but ignore the indirect (multi-hop) relations of concepts. The indirect relations may provide
plausible evidence of complex reasoning for some text generation tasks. Second, from the time
KGs were encoded in M1 or M2 methods, the generation models would no longer be able to access
the KGs but their continuous representations. Then the models could not support reasoning like
commonsense KG reasoning for downstream tasks. Due to these two reasons, M1 and M2 were
often used to create basic KG representations upon which the KG path reasoning (M3) and GNNs
(M4) could further enrich the hidden states [151, 159].
The path finding methods of KG reasoning ( M3) perform multi-hop walks on the KGs beyond
one-hop relations. It enables reasoning that is needed in many text generation scenarios such as
commonsense reasoning and conversational question answering. At the same time, it provides
better interpretability for the entire generation process, because the path selected by the KG
reasoning algorithm will be explicitly used for generation. However, the selected paths might not
be able to capture the full contexts of the reasoning process due to the limit of number. Besides,
reinforcement-learning based path finding uses heuristic rewards to drive the policy search, making
the model sensitive to noises and adversarial examples.
The algorithms of GNN and Graph2Seq ( M4) can effectively aggregate semantic and structural
information from multi-hop neighborhoods on KGs, compared to M3 that considers multi-hop
paths. Therefore, the wide range of relevant information can be directly embedded into the en-
coder/decoder hidden states. Meanwhile, M4 enables back propagation for jointly optimizing text
encoder and graph encoder. Furthermore, the attention mechanism that has been applied in GNN
and Graph2Seq (e.g., graph attention) can explain the model’s output at some extent, though the
multi-hop paths from M3 has better interpretability.
M3 and M4 are able to use multi-hop relational information, compared to M1 and M2. However,
they have two weak points. First, they have higher complexity than M1 and M2. In M3, the action
space of path finding algorithms can be very large due to the large size and sparsity of the knowledge
graph. In M4, the decoder has to attentively read both input sequence and knowledge graph. Second,
the subgraphs retrieved by M3 and M4 might provide low coverage of useful concepts for generating
the output. For example, people use ConceptNet, a widely used commonsense KG, to retrieve the
subgraph on three generative commonsense reasoning tasks. The task datasets are ComVE [ 57],
𝛼-NLG [ 7], and ROCSories [ 46]. We found 25.1% / 24.2% / 21.1% of concepts in the output could
be found on ConceptNet, but only 11.4% / 8.1% / 5.7% of concepts in the output can be found on
the retrieved 2-hop sequence-associated subgraph, respectively. It means that a large portion of
relevant concepts on the KG are not utilized in the generation process.
Quantitative analysis. Table 5 summarizes tasks, datasets, and KG sources used in existing
KG-enhanced works. Three important things should be mentioned. First, all the datasets in the table
are public, and we include their links in Table 11. CommonGen [ 76], ComVE [ 124] and𝛼-NLG [ 7]
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.