1077-2626 (c) 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVCG.2019.2944182, IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. X, NO. Y , MONTH 2019 2
between dataset types, projection techniques, and quality
aspects. Next, we select a few special cases (points of interest
in our data, projections, and quality space) and examine
these in more detail (Sec. 8.4). Section 9 discusses the main
ﬁndings and limitations of our survey. We conclude by
outlining directions of future work (Sec. 10).
Benchmark
datasets
techniques
metrics
a) Datasets
b) Projection techniques
c) Quality metricsrelevant traitsall nD
datasets
selected
datasets D• type
• dimensionality
• intrinsic dim. ratio
• sparsity ratio sample
relevant traits
• linearity
• input type
• neighborhoods
• complexity
• out-of-sample
• ease of useall 
techniques
selected
techniques  P
relevant traits
• neighborhood hit
• trustworthiness
• continuity
• stress
• Shepard diagram
• false neighbors
• missing neighborsscalar distributionall 
metrics
selected
metrics Msample
sampled) Measurement
parameter πi
optimization
parameter valuesmetric values,
trical
e) Analysis
general observations,
particular cases_
_
_D
P
M
Figure 1. Workﬂow of survey outlining its main stages: Construction
of benchmark of datasets (a), projection techniques (b), and quality
metrics (c) based on taxonomies of these spaces; measurement of
metric values using parameter optimization (d); and analysis of results
(e). See Sec. 1.
2 P RELIMINARIES
To discuss our (and related) work, we introduce a few
notations. Let x= (x1;:::;xn),xi2R;1inbe a
n-dimensional (nD) real-valued observation or sample, and
letD=fxig,1iNbe anD dataset of Nsamples. Let
xj= (xj
1;:::;xj
N),1jnbe thejthfeature vector of D.
Thus,Dcan be seen as a table with Nrows (samples) and
ncolumns (features or dimensions). A projection technique,
or algorithm, is then a function
P:Rn!Rq; (1)
whereqn, and typically q= 2.Pcan also have pso-
called free parameters, or hyperparameters, i,1ip,
which can be tuned by the end user to obtain different trade-
offs ofP. The projection P(x)of a sample x2Dis a 2Dpoint. Projecting an entire dataset Dyields a 2D scatterplot,
denoted as P(D). We denote by cursive letters the power
set (set of all sets) of a given type, e.g.,Dis the set of all
nD datasets D, andPis the set of all projection techniques
P. Table 1 lists the projection techniques considered in this
survey as well as the abbreviations we use for them.
To capture the quality of a projection technique P, let
M:f(D2D;P(D))g! Rk(2)
be a metric that assigns to the pair formed by dataset D
and its projection P(D)a scalar (k = 1) or vector (k > 1)
value. LetMbe the set of all such metrics. Different metrics
Mcapture different desirable aspects of a projection P.
The key one, that all techniques consider, is preserving
similarity of points when projecting from nD toqD. This is
usually deﬁned as Euclidean, geodesic, Procrustes, or cosine
distance, or the probabilities of a point to have the same
neighbors in RnandRq[14], [15]. Besides similarity, other
quality aspects include computational scalability, ease of use
(vsparameter setting), and robustness vssmall input-data
changes or hyperparameter changes. We discuss quality
metrics in detail in Sec. 6.
Formally, to compare several projection techniques, we
need to understand the distribution of allvalues ofM
over allvalues ofDandP,i.e., how all quality metrics
Mvary over all combinations of datasets and projection
techniques. Fully computing this distribution is practically
impossible, since the spaces PandMhave a very high
cardinality, while Dis inﬁnite. All projection evaluation
papers handle this by samplingD, andP, andMto select
a small subset of datasets DD , techniques PP , and
metricsM M to evaluate over. We call such a subset
B=DPMabenchmark. An evaluation of a benchmark
is thus the multidimensional set of values
E=fM(D;P (D))j(D;P;M )2Bg: (3)
We next discuss how existing surveys design evaluations
E,i.e., which decisions they take to sample the continuous
spacesD,P, andMto evaluate B. We next propose ways
to extend this state of the art in Secs. 4-6.
3 R ELATED WORK
In this section, we discuss related work on comparisons
and evaluations of DR techniques. We do not detail here
all projection techniques and quality metrics (and related
papers) — this is done in context in Secs. 5 and 6, re-
spectively. Several surveys that compare DR techniques for
visualization (and sometimes beyond) have been published.
We discuss these in chronological order. Since DR is at the
crossroads of infovis and ML, we group surveys accordingly
(Tab. 1).
3.1 Surveys from Machine Learning
Projection techniques are known and used since decades in
ML [16], [17]. Fodor [18] presents the earliest survey on
projection techniques that we are aware of, which includes
what are now considered modern methods, i.e., nonlinear
methods, vector quantization, and neural networks. This
survey discusses 12 projection methods, including linear