1077-2626 (c) 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVCG.2019.2944182, IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. X, NO. Y , MONTH 2019 11
The exact details of the optimization process, including the
parameters iand their ranges ifor each technique P,
are given in Appendix A. During this process, we were
careful to reset the random seeds used by non-deterministic
optimization algorithms, e.g., t-SNE, at the beginning of each
subsequent execution of the same algorithm. This way, the
results we report in here can be replicated.
We next denote the quality of Popt(D)byopt(P;D ),
and the parameter set realizing this quality by opt(P;D )
respectively. The values opt(P;D )allow us to study how
well a technique Pperforms over the different types of
datasets in D, and also how well different techniques
perform for the same dataset. Key to this is that the
techniques are optimized independently per dataset. This
allows seeing the “best” that a given technique can yield
for each dataset. Also, by studying the distribution of
optimal parameters opt(P;D )overD, we can assess how
much parameter tuning a technique Pactually needs in
practice. The results of using the dataset-wise view on our
benchmark are discussed in Sec. 8.1).
Projection-wise view: The dataset-wise view chooses a
separate optimal parameter set opt(P;D )for each dataset
D. Clearly, this expensive grid-search cannot be done in
routine practice. Rather, users like to have so-called param-
eter presets when applying a technique Ponany dataset.
The projection-wise view measures quality in this way: For
each technique P2P, we choose as preset the parameter-
setpreset(P)2opt(P;D )that yields the best quality
most times (statistical mode) over all datasets in D.
The projection-wise view allows comparing projection tech-
niques more globally, i.e., seeing how they perform with
respect to each other when no per-dataset parameter tuning
takes place. The results of using the projection-wise view on
our benchmark are discussed in Sec. 8.2).
8 R ESULTS
After evaluating our benchmark, we obtain a multidimen-
sional dataset consisting of ﬁve quality metrics (plus the
aggregated one, see Eqn. 4), measured for 44 projections,
each run over 18 datasets, and additional values for optimal
parameters – in total, over 5000 measured values. We next
present and discuss ways to (visualy) explore this measure-
ments dataset to gain insights on the tested projections, and
answer different questions on various levels of detail.
8.1 How good are projections, and for which data?
To answer this, we use the dataset-wise view (Sec. 7). The
table in Fig. 2 has rows for DR techniques Pand columns
for datasets D. Each cell shows the optimal quality value
opt(P;D ), color coded by a sequential colormap. Grey cells
show techniques which could not complete the projection of
the respective datasets (crashing or hanging).
Scanning Fig. 2 along rows shows how much the optimal
quality of a given projection varies over the studied datasets.
For instance, we see that the projection-set starting with
GLPVM and ending with LLE has quite similar (and high)
optimal qualities over all datasets — that is, Fig. 2 shows
a relatively dark-green compact block of cells starting with
the GLPVM row and ending with the LLE row. In contrast,if we focus in Fig. 2 on the block spanned by the PCA-
class projection rows (starting with PCA and ending with
S-PCA), over all columns, we see little variation of colors
along columns and more variation along rows, respectively.
Hence, the PCA-class projections have quite similar optimal
qualities for the given dataset, but the optimal qualities
vary as a function of the dataset itself. Another salient
pattern is given by N-MDS. While N-MDS only failed for a
single dataset (spambase, grey cell on N-MDS row in Fig. 2),
the respective row shows a higher error for N-MDS for
basically all datasets and compared to most other projection
techniques.
Scanning the ﬁgure along columns shows which are
the best projections for a given dataset. For instance, we
see that the earlier-mentioned set of projections starting
with GPLVM and ending with LLE, and also all PCA
variants, yield very good quality for the orl, secom, and
seismic datasets. This can be explained by the fact that these
datasets have a low intrinsic dimensionality (see Tab. 3)
and these projection techniques handle very well such data.
In contrast, sentiment has the second-highest intrinsic di-
mensionality of all datasets, and we see that it also yields
relatively lower optimal qualities for all projections. Overall,
t-SNE, UMAP , IDMAP and PBC perform well on average
for most datasets. PLSP , LLTSA, LPP and GDA perform
poorly. The PCA variants perform reasonably well for most
datasets.
To better understand quality, we next explore how easy
is to obtain optimal values for it (Sec. 8.1.1), and how quality
depends on parameter values (Sec. 8.1.2) and dataset types
(Sec. 8.1.3).
8.1.1 How easy is to obtain optimal quality?
The rightmost four columns of Fig. 2 show the standard
deviations of the optimal parameters opt(P;D ), computed
over all datasets Dtreated by every projection P, nor-
malized to the interval [0;1], depicted by a heat colormap
(darker = higher standard deviation). Empty cells corre-
spond to techniques that have less than four parameters
(see Appendix A). Good projections are those which yield
high optimal quality values (green cells along their rows)
and achieve this with little parameter tuning (light cells
in the parameter columns, if they have any parameters).
For instance, ISO is better than L-ISO as it achieves over-
all the same maximal quality, but requires less parameter
tuning (0.27 vs0.47 variance). PBC is better than NMF as it
achieves slightly higher maximal quality and requires less
parameter tuning for that. We also see that the four overall
best performing techniques (t-SNE, UMAP , IDMAP and
PBC) require some tuning effort over most parameters to
yield optimal results. Of the techniques that do not require
parameter tuning, PCA is the best performing, albeit with
lower quality than that of the best projections.
8.1.2 How does quality depend on parameter settings?
To give more insight into this, inside each cell, a four-bin
histogram shows how many runs, with different parameter
values, done during the grid-search process over the pa-
rametersi, achieved a quality in the ranges [0:0;0:62),
[0:62; 0:75), [0:75; 0:87), and [0:87; 1:0] respectively. These
seemingly arbitrary ranges were selected because most of