1077-2626 (c) 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVCG.2019.2944182, IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. X, NO. Y , MONTH 2019 1
Towards a Quantitative Survey of Dimension
Reduction Techniques
Mateus Espadoto, Rafael M. Martins, Andreas Kerren, Nina S. T. Hirata, and Alexandru C. Telea
Abstract—Dimensionality reduction methods, also known as projections, are frequently used in multidimensional data exploration in
machine learning, data science, and information visualization. Tens of such techniques have been proposed, aiming to address a wide
set of requirements, such as ability to show the high-dimensional data structure, distance or neighborhood preservation, computational
scalability, stability to data noise and/or outliers, and practical ease of use. However, it is far from clear for practitioners how to choose
the best technique for a given use context. We present a survey of a wide body of projection techniques that helps answering this
question. For this, we characterize the input data space, projection techniques, and the quality of projections, by several quantitative
metrics. We sample these three spaces according to these metrics, aiming at good coverage with bounded effort. We describe our
measurements and outline observed dependencies of the measured variables. Based on these results, we draw several conclusions
that help comparing projection techniques, explain their results for different types of data, and ultimately help practitioners when
choosing a projection for a given context. Our methodology, datasets, projection implementations, metrics, visualizations, and results
are publicly open, so interested stakeholders can examine and/or extend this benchmark.
Index Terms—Dimensionality reduction, quality metrics, benchmarking, quantitative analysis, design space
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
Exploring high-dimensional data is central to many ap-
plication domains such as statistics, data science, machine
learning, and information visualization. The main difﬁculty
encountered in this task is the large size of such datasets,
both in the number of observations (also called samples)
and measurements recorded per observation (also called
dimensions, features, variables, or attributes). As such, high-
dimensional visualization has become an important sub-
ﬁeld of Information Visualization (InfoVis) [1], [2], [3], [4].
Several techniques exist for high-dimensional data visu-
alization, including glyphs [5], parallel coordinate plots [6],
table lenses [7], [8], scatterplot matrices [9], dimensionality
reduction methods [10], and multiple views linking the
above visualization types [11]. In this family, dimensionality
reduction (DR) methods, also called projections, have a par-
ticular place: compared to other techniques, they scale much
better in terms of both the number of samples and the num-
ber of dimensions they can show on a given screen space
area. As such, projections have become the tool of choice
for exploring data which has a high number of dimensions
(tens up to hundreds) and/or in applications where the
individual identity of dimensions is less important, as in
e.g.machine learning applications. In the last decade, many
projection techniques have been proposed [10], [12], [13], of
which t-SNE [14] is arguably one of the best known and
most adopted by applications.
This explosion of the number and variety of projection
techniques and their widespread use in many applications
makes it hard for end users to understand how to choose a
good technique for a given use context. Several functional
and non-functional requirements must be considered, such
as the ability of the projection to preserve certain patterns
(e.g., neighbors, distances, or clusters); doing this for a
given number of dimensions (which can be low or very
high); computational scalability in both observation anddimension counts; robustness to small changes in both data
and algorithm parameters, i.e., yielding similar results for
small changes of these inputs; ease of use in terms of
number and complexity of settings asked from the end user;
and available implementations. Current literature addresses
such questions by comparative studies (e.g., in papers that
propose new projection techniques), best-practice studies,
or survey papers. Yet, such approaches have limitations:
Technique papers typically cover only a few techniques; sur-
vey papers consider tens of techniques, but typically focus
on high-level and/or more theoretical aspects, and less on
benchmarking many projection techniques on combinations
of datasets, technique parameter settings, and evaluating
quality metrics. Best-practice studies fall somewhere in the
middle.
This survey aims to address the above-mentioned limi-
tations, as follows (see also Fig. 1). First, we overview re-
lated surveys in evaluation and comparison of DR methods
(Sec. 3). Based on these, we propose taxonomies covering the
types of multidimensional datasets, projection techniques,
and quality metrics used to assess these. This way, we
explicitly show which parts of the data, projection, and
quality spaces we next cover, and how. We model these
taxonomies based on a number of so-called traits of datasets,
techniques, and metrics respectively (we use the term traits
to avoid confusion with dimensions). Next, we sample these
spaces by 18 datasets, 44 techniques, and 7 quality metrics
respectively, to create a projection assessment benchmark.
The respective taxonomies, their traits, and how these are
sampled to yield our benchmark are discussed in Secs. 4,
5, and 6 respectively. We run this benchmark, using an
optimization strategy to ﬁnd the best projection-technique
parameter values for the considered quality metrics (Sec. 7).
Finally, we present and discuss the obtained measurements
(Sec. 8). We outline several observations on the correlations