1077-2626 (c) 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVCG.2019.2944182, IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. X, NO. Y , MONTH 2019 9
Table 4
Selected projection techniques for evaluation and their trait values (Sec. 5.1). In the Complexity column,nis the number of dimensions; Nis the
number of samples; iis the number of iterations (for neural network training), and wis the number of weights (for a neural network).
Projection linearity Input Neighborhood Free parameters Complexity Out-of-sample Inverse transform Deterministic Implementation
AE nonlinear samples global network size O(iNw ) yes no no Keras
DM nonlinear samples local 2 O(N3) no no yes Tapkee
FA linear samples global 1 O(n3) yes no yes scikit-learn
FMAP nonlinear distances global 0 O(N) no no yes Vispipeline
GDA nonlinear distances global 1 O(n3) no no yes DR Toolbox
GPLVM nonlinear distances global 1 O(n3) no no no DR Toolbox
F-ICA linear samples global 2 O(n3) yes yes yes scikit-learn
IDMAP nonlinear samples local 3 O(N2) no no yes Vispipeline
ISO nonlinear samples local 1 O(N3) yes no yes scikit-learn
L-ISO nonlinear samples local 1 O(N3) no no no Vispipeline
LAMP nonlinear samples local 3 O(Nn) yes yes no Vispipeline
LE nonlinear distances local 0 O(N3) no no no scikit-learn
LLC nonlinear samples local 3 O(in3) no no yes DR Toolbox
LLE nonlinear samples local 3 O(N3) yes no no scikit-learn
H-LLE nonlinear samples local 3 O(N3) yes no no scikit-learn
M-LLE nonlinear samples local 3 O(N3) yes no no scikit-learn
LMNN linear samples local 3 O(n2) no no yes DR Toolbox
LPP linear samples global 1 O(N3) yes no yes Tapkee
LSP nonlinear samples local 4 O(N3) no no yes Vispipeline
LTSA nonlinear samples local 3 O(N3) yes no no scikit-learn
L-LTSA linear samples local 1 O(N3) no no no Tapkee
MC nonlinear samples local 2 O(in3) no no yes DR Toolbox
MCML nonlinear samples local 0 O(n2) no no no DR Toolbox
MDS nonlinear distances global 2 O(N3) no no no scikit-learn
L-MDS nonlinear distances global 1 O(N3) no no no Tapkee
N-MDS nonlinear samples global 2O(iN2) no no no scikit-learn
L-MVU nonlinear samples global 2 O(N3) no no no DR Toolbox
NMF linear samples global 4 O(n2) yes yes no scikit-learn
PBC nonlinear samples local 4O(Np
N) no no yes Vispipeline
PCA linear samples global 0 O(n3) yes yes yes scikit-learn
I-PCA linear samples global 0 O(n3) yes yes no scikit-learn
K-PCA-P nonlinear samples global 1 O(N3) yes yes no scikit-learn
K-PCA-R nonlinear samples global 1 O(N3) yes yes no scikit-learn
K-PCA-S nonlinear samples global 1 O(N3) yes yes no scikit-learn
P-PCA linear samples global 1 O(N3) yes no yes DR Toolbox
S-PCA linear samples global 3 O(N3) yes no yes scikit-learn
PLSP nonlinear samples global 0 O(N3) no no yes Vispipeline
G-RP nonlinear samples global 0O(Nn3) yes no no scikit-learn
S-RP nonlinear samples global 0O(Nn3) yes no no scikit-learn
R-SAM nonlinear samples global 0O(iN2) yes no no Vispipeline
T-SNE nonlinear distances local 3O(iN2) no no no Multicore TSNE
SPE nonlinear samples global 2 O(N2) no no no Tapkee
T-SVD linear samples global 1 O(N2) yes yes no scikit-learn
UMAP nonlinear distances local 3O(iN2) yes yes no umap-learn
perception [113]. While such measures can very effectively
model human perception of class separation, they cannot be
directly used in our context: Our aim is to model how well a
DR scatterplot captures aspects of the nD data, and not how
the plot is actually perceived by users for a given task. By
analogy, while the ground-truth in the comparison in [111],
[113] and related work is human perception, such ground
truth is the nD data in our case. In terms of [10], we are
interested in the DR errors at the so-called ‘model stage’,
not at the visualization stage. Hence, we cannot directly
use such metrics in our case. The only exception here is
the DSC metric, which relates the 2D scatterplot to the
underlying nD data structure. However, DSC’s formulation
assumes that clusters are well separated innD (for details see
[110], [112]). Our benchmark, and the space D, contain more
general datasets which do not necessarily comply with this
constraint.
Other scalar metrics exist and, as with any work, we
had to make choices of which aspects we leave out of our
study. For instance, stability [10] is a relevant metric which
quantiﬁes how much a projection changes upon changes of
either its parameters or changes in the input data. Ideally,
projections should be smooth functions of such changes,so small data and/or parameter changes imply only small
changes in the visual result. However, formally deﬁning
stability in both these senses is hard, and quantifying it
over the entire spectrum of data- and parameter-changes
is even harder. Hence, our choice to leave stability out of the
evaluation.
6.2 Point-pair metrics
While simple to compute and interpret, scalar metrics
average a projection’s quality over all its points. Comparing
DR techniques using only averages is either misleading
or not insightful enough. This was recognized by Joia et
al.[73] when comparing the distortions of (Euclidean)
distances caused by several projection techniques, and
further elaborated by Nonato et al. [10]. For example, two
projections may have similar average distortions, but one
may preserve small distances better than the other, which
makes it more suitable for, e.g., cluster analysis. To capture
such aspects, point-pair metrics measure properties of every
point pair in the data (and projection result), as follows.
Shepard diagram [73]: The Shepard diagram is a scatterplot
of the pairwise (Euclidean) distances between all points in