1077-2626 (c) 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVCG.2019.2944182, IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. X, NO. Y , MONTH 2019 3
(PCA, ICA, FA) and some nonlinear (SOM, VQ, and NN)
methods. While the survey (brieﬂy) outlines the techniques
underlying these methods, no actual side-by-side evaluation
or quality metrics are discussed.
Yin [19] proposes a survey for nonlinear DR, focusing
on visualization, covering seven projection methods. It also
discusses variants of the stress metric for measuring pro-
jection quality. Yet, only two simple datasets are evaluated,
using only four of the seven DR methods.
Maaten et al. [13] present, to our knowledge, the ﬁrst
systematic theoretical and practical comparison of PCA (lin-
ear) and other 13 (nonlinear) DR techniques. The theoretical
side discusses the number of parameters, computational and
memory complexities, and out-of-sample ability (whether a
projection can handle new samples based on existing pro-
jected ones). Practical comparison includes measuring three
scalar metrics (trustworthiness, continuity, and preservation
of closest neighbors [20]) on 5 artiﬁcial and 5 real-world
datasets. Optimal parameters were found using grid search.
However, how the three quality metrics listed above were
merged into a single quality (cost) function to optimize by
grid search is not detailed. Also, the survey does not cover
many well-known projection techniques (Tab. 1).
Bunte et al. [15] propose a theoretical framework to unify
nine existing projection techniques. These are compared in
terms of how similarity between points in nD and 2D is
deﬁned; which error metric the projection Pminimizes;
and which additional constraints the methods have. The
techniques are evaluated on three datasets ranging between
a few thousand and 20K points having between 16 and 36
dimensions. However, many existing projection techniques
are not covered by this survey.
Sorzano et al. [12] present one of the most complete
surveys from the viewpoint of number of discussed DR
techniques – around 30, including variants of some main
techniques. Yet, this survey has mainly a theoretical focus.
Heuristics and cost functions underlying the DR techniques
are discussed, but practical evaluation involves only a single
image showing how LLE, HLLE, and ISO perform on a
small synthetic dataset of 1K points in 3 dimensions. Mea-
surements of quality metrics are not given.
Gisbrecht et al. [21] evaluate the suitability for data
visualization of 10 DR techniques on 3 synthetic datasets
of 1K three-dimensional points each. Projection quality is
deﬁned as a single scalar value using the rank-based criteria
in [22]. Compared to earlier surveys, this one includes as-
sessing computational scalability; and focuses on “popular”
projection techniques, as these are more likely to be used in
practice, so understanding how they perform is of increased
added value. Yet, the evaluation conﬁdence is limited by the
very small number of tested datasets.
Cunningham et al. [23] present an excellent survey of
linear DR techniques. This work is very similar in goals and
structure to Sorzano et al. [12], i.e., it aims to compare 15 DR
techniques and a few sub-variants thereof from theoretical
and mathematical viewpoints. No practical evaluations of
quality metrics of existing techniques on datasets are given.
Also, nonlinear projections are not considered.
Finally, Xie et al. [24] survey DR techniques based on
the Random Projection (RP) method [25]. Such methods are
arguably better at keeping data structure and/or reducingcomputational effort when dealing with a high dimension
count. About 25 RP variants and a few sub-variants are
discussed from a general perspective. This survey aims to
provide a “reading map” for the RP literature. Yet, no side-
by-side evaluation of existing methods on a benchmark,
using speciﬁc quality metrics, is given.
3.2 Surveys from InfoVis
The infovis literature is rich in papers that evaluate projec-
tions. We next focus on key papers that share the aim of
our work (comparing projections from a quantitative per-
spective). Additional papers related to assessing projection
quality are discussed later in context.
Buja et al. [11] present one of the earliest surveys on
projection usage to visualize multidimensional data. They
propose a task-based taxonomy of interaction techniques for
analyzing high-dimensional data. Projections, implemented
in the XGobi tool [26], are just one of the considered tech-
niques, in a linked-view set-up, to validate the proposed
interaction taxonomy. In a related work, Hoffman et al. [1]
compare 15 visualization techniques on two small datasets
(hundreds of observations, 4 to 6 dimensions). Among these,
three are projection techniques (Sammon’s mapping (SAM),
MDS, and Kohonen’s self-organizing maps (SOM)). This
survey does not contain any quantitative comparison of the
discussed techniques.
Engel et al. [27] propose “an introduction to dimension
reduction from a visualization point of view”. They pro-
pose a taxonomy that compares nine DR methods from the
viewpoint of their online behavior (out-of-sample ability)
and computational complexity. Yet, no actual evaluation of
quality metrics on datasets is given. The survey strongly
makes the point that optimal parameter setting is an impor-
tant but not well explored aspect that inﬂuences the quality,
and ﬁnally usability, of projection techniques. We address
this aspect in our work (Sec. 7).
Kehrer et al. [3] present a survey of methods for vi-
sualization of so-called “multi-faceted” scientiﬁc data. The
survey overviews the context in which projection techniques
are used in the (much) broader scope of visual analysis
of multidimensional, multi-source, and multi-type datasets.
Given this broad scope, details concerning the evaluation
of projection techniques are not given. Liu et al. [2] present
a related survey focused more speciﬁcally on visualizing
high-dimensional data. They propose a 14-element taxon-
omy of techniques for high-dimensional visualization, of
which dimensionality reduction is one. They also brieﬂy
introduce several projection quality metrics, such as global
stress, local stress [28], ranking discrepancy [22], [29], and
the projection precision score [30]. While seven concrete
projection techniques are named, evaluating these and/or
the aforementioned metrics is not covered.
Close to our goals, Nonato and Aupetit [10] survey
the use of projections in visual analytics (VA) tasks. Their
work, which is arguably together with [13] one of the most
extensive and detailed surveys in DR literature, propose
a taxonomy where 28 projection techniques are classiﬁed
along their input data types, linearity, ﬂexibility for su-
pervision (label data), handling multilevel structures, lo-
cality, steerability, stability, and ability to handle out-of-
code (large) data. They also discuss 14 projection quality