1077-2626 (c) 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVCG.2019.2944182, IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. X, NO. Y , MONTH 2019 17
fashion_mnist har cnae9 coil20
0.09
0.34
 0.05 0.28
 0.11 0.43
 0.15 0.50
0.12 0.33
 0.08 0.41
 0.12 0.33
 0.17 0.38
0.10 0.25
 0.04 0.13
 0.08 0.24
 0.12 0.32
0.09 0.34
 0.05 0.32
 0.10 0.56
 0.11 0.51
t-SNE UMAP IDMAP PBCfashion_mnist har cnae9 coil20
Figure 7. Left: Shepard diagrams for the analyzed four projections and four datasets. The xandyaxes map inter-point distances in Rn, respectively
R2. Right: Average local errors Mafor the same datasets and projections. See Sec. 8.4.2.
Best-quality projections: Our studies showed that t-SNE,
UMAP , PBC, and IDMAP yield the best quality vsthe
considered metrics and over the considered datasets,
when using preset parameters. Our parameter analysis
also shows that these techniques yield high quality quite
consistently when their parameters are tuned. We also
provide parameter presets and show that using these
decrease the optimal quality of the studied projections only
slightly. All in all, this tells end users that choosing one of
these four techniques, with its respective parameter presets,
can consistently deliver good quality.
Similar-quality projections: We compare all 44 studied
projections from the perspective of all 5 quality parameters.
Our results show that the “space” of projection techniques
can be easily ordered, from low to high quality ones, and
that the notion of average quality (using the 5 proposed
quality metrics) does make sense—see smooth color-coded
average quality gradient in Fig. 5. This helps end users
to see which projections behave similarly quality-wise,
supporting trade-off scenarios, when one wants to swap
a technique for a similar-quality one that has, e.g., a more
robust, or faster, implementation.
Reﬁning decisions: We analyze the top-four best quality
techniques from the additional viewpoints of speed,
distance preservation, and error spread over the 2D space.
Our results show that the four techniques are quite different,
even if their scalar (aggregated) quality metrics are quite
similar. We discover that UMAP and PBC are about
two orders of magnitude faster than t-SNE and IDMAP .
However, UMAP has the worst distance-preservation
pattern of the four. This offers directly actionable ways forend users to select a suitable projection from this set of
four depending on their desires regarding speed and/or
distance preservation.
Limitations: Densely covering the huge space of dataset
types, projection techniques, algorithm parameters, and
quality metrics is deﬁnitely very hard. Our work so far
represents only a limited sampleBof this space (Sec. 2).
For instance, one could consider more datasets, traits, trait
classes, quality metrics, or consider more runs of the con-
sidered projections, to account for those which have a non-
deterministic behavior. An interesting avenue is to generate
synthetic datasets that sample the desired dataset traits in
a user-controlled manner. Doing this would allow a richer,
and more automated, evaluation. However, how to suitably
construct such a controlled dataset generator, able also to
generate labels for well-separated point groups (needed for
the visual assessment of projection results and computing
the neighborhood hit), is not a trivial question, hence one
that we consider for a signiﬁcant future-work iteration.
However, our sample is considerably denser than other
similar samples (evaluations) present in the literature, in
all the considered aspects (datasets, parameter values, qual-
ity metrics, and number of studied projection techniques).
Hence, we argue that our work is a necessary (but deﬁnitely
not ﬁnal) next step from current state-of-the-art in the quest
of quantitatively evaluating the projection landscape.
We make all our results (methodology, data, code, mea-
surements) open and public [119], so Bis a ‘live benchmark’
that will grow as us, or others, will add datasets, techniques,
and metrics to it. This way, coverage can increase over
time with incremental efforts, sparing professionals from the
very large effort required to set up such work from scratch.