IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 3
In machine learning, users are requested to provide some
guidelines for the machine (algorithm). These guidelines are
usually provided by applying hand-crafted feature extraction
approaches to provide informative features for the subsequent
classiﬁer. At the very beginning, each image pixel is regarded
as a pattern, and its spectrum (i.e., a vector of different values
of a pixel in different spectral channels) is considered as
the initial set of features. This set of features, which are
also known as spectral features, suffers from two important
downsides: (1) These features are often redundant and (2) they
do not consider the spatial dependencies of the adjacent pixels.
To address the ﬁrst issue, a feature reduction (through
feature extraction or selection) step can be applied, aiming
at reducing the dimensionality of the input data (from p1
dimensions in the original data to p2dimensions in a new
feature space p2< p 1). This step can also be known as
spectral feature extraction , which tries to preserve the key
spectral information of the data by reducing the dimensionality
and maximizing separability between classes. It is interesting
to note that the second issue can also be addressed using
feature extraction approaches. Please note that here the feature
extraction step, which is also known as spatial feature extrac-
tion, is not aiming at reducing the dimensionality and instead
is trying to model (extract) spatial contextual information
suitable for the subsequent classiﬁcation or object detection
step and usually leads to an increase in the number of features.
The simultaneous use of spectral and spatial features for
hyperspectral data classiﬁcation were studied in numerous
works such as [5], [11]–[13].
Deep learning (as shown in Fig. 2), which is regarded as
a subset of machine learning, tries to automatize the build-
ing blocks of the machine learning approaches (i.e., feature
extraction and classiﬁcation) by developing an end-to-end
framework, which takes the input, performs automatic feature
extraction and classiﬁcation by considering the unique nature
of the input data (instead of those hand-crafted feature extrac-
tion designs in machine learning), and outputs classiﬁcation
maps. It turns out that if an adequate amount of training data
is supplied, deep learning approaches can outperform any other
shallow machine learning approaches in terms of accuracies.
Here, a question arises: Due to the fact that the number of
available training data is often limited in the remote sensing
community, would advanced deep learning-based approaches
outperform their shallow alternatives in terms of accuracies?
This question will be addressed in this paper.
Based on the above-mentioned descriptions, feature ex-
traction is a key step in both machine learning and deep
learning, whose concept has been evolved signiﬁcantly through
time from unsupervised to (semi-)supervised, from spectral or
spatial to spectral-and-spatial, from manual to automatic, from
hand-crafted to end-to-end, and from shallow to deep.
D. Contributions
This article provides a detailed and organized overview of
hyperspectral feature extraction techniques, categorized into
two general sections: shallow feature extraction techniques
(further categorized into supervised and unsupervised) and
Fig. 2. Feature extraction via machine learning and deep learning.
deep feature extraction techniques. Each section provides
a critical overview of the state of the art that is mainly
rooted in the signal and image processing, statistical in-
ference, and machine (deep) learning ﬁelds. Then, a few
representative and advanced feature extraction approaches
are chosen from each of the above-mentioned categories for
further analysis and comparisons (mostly in terms of useful-
ness for classiﬁcation). This article will, therefore, contribute
to answering the following questions: When it comes to
hyperspectral data in Earth observation, are deep learning-
based feature extraction approaches better alternatives than
their conventional (yet advanced) shallow feature extraction
techniques? Which factors should be considered to design
robust shallow and deep feature extraction techniques? In
addition, to further promote this ﬁeld of research, this paper is
accompanied with a signiﬁcant amount of codes and libraries
for hyperspectral feature extraction, which is made pub-
licly available at https://github.com/BehnoodRasti/HyFTech-
Hyperspectral-Shallow-Deep-Feature-Extraction-Toolbox. Fi-
nally, several possible future directions are highlighted. To
make the contribution of this paper clearer compared to the
existing papers in the literature, here we provide a brief
discussion. The work of [14] is dedicated to the evolution of
discriminant analysis-based feature extraction models, which
is a speciﬁc type of dimensionality reduction approaches. The
work of [15] reviewed feature extraction and data mining
works, which had been published mostly until 2012. Since
2012, however, many deep and shallow feature extraction
approaches have been developed, which are critically reviewed
and compared against each other in this work. The work
of [16] focuses only on feature selection approaches while
our proposed paper covers feature extraction techniques, and
therefore, they complement each other.
II. D ATASETS AND NOTATIONS
A. Datasets
1) Indian Pines 2010: This dataset (Fig. 3) is a very
high resolution hyperspectral image (VHR HS) acquired by
the ProSpecTIR system over near Purdue University, Indiana,
between 24-25th of May 2010. In this paper, we use a subset