IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 19
sively designed for the classiﬁcation task, so they are
able to learn more discriminative features than CAE,
leading to better classiﬁcation performance especially on
the Houston 2018 dataset. Although CRNN also focuses
on the classiﬁcation task, it has a higher number of
parameters to train. Using the same number of training
samples and epochs, PCNN and CNN can achieve better
results than CRNN in terms of AA, OA, and Kappa.
.PCNN versus CNN: PCNN outperforms CNN in terms
of the classiﬁcation accuracies for all three datasets. We
should note that the improvements are substantial in the
case of the Houston 2013 and 2018 datasets. Due to the
use of PCA, most of the redundant spectral information
is reduced. Therefore, the number of trainable parame-
ters in PCNN is smaller than that of CNN, making it
easier to learn under the same condition.
4) Shallow UFE Versus Shallow SFE: For all three datasets
used in the experiments, the UFE techniques provide better
classiﬁcation accuracies than the SFE techniques. Unlike the
SFE, the UFE tends to pay more attentions on spatial-spectral
information extraction, owing to fully considering all samples
of HSI as the model input. Conversely, the performance of SFE
is, to a great extent, limited by the ability to largely gather HSI
ground sampling. A direct evident is given in Tables V, VI,
and VII. For the Indian Pines 2010 and Houston 2018 datasets
where more training samples are available, SFE-based methods
hold the competitive results with UFE-based ones, while for
the Houston 2013 dataset, the classiﬁcation performance of
SFE is relatively inferior to that of UFE, due to the small-
scale training set. Considering the low number of ground
samples often available in HSI applications the experimental
results conﬁrm the advantage of UFE over SFE for HSI feature
extraction.
5) Shallow FE versus Deep FE: At the ﬁrst glance, the
shallow FE approaches slightly outperform the deep FE tech-
niques for the two datasets, i.e., Indian Pines 2010 and Hous-
ton 2013. However, a deep comparison reveals that some deep
FE techniques, such as CNN-based FE, provide consistency
and good performance over all three datasets. Additionally,
when the dimension-reduced step (e.g., using PCA) is applied
prior to the CNN technique, the resulting PCNN yields by
far the second highest accuracies in the case of Indian Pines
2010 and Houston 2013 datasets (only moderately lower than
LPP or OTVCA, respectively), and simultaneously obtains
the best performance on the Houston 2018 dataset. It is
worth mentioning that CNN-based FE methods obtain at least
10% increase over the shallow ones in the case of Houston
2018. This could be due to the high nonlinear behaviour of
this dataset which contains 20 land cover classes. The main
factors for CNN-based FE methods to obtain around 20% of
improvement over those shallow FE methods on the Houston
2018 dataset are the availability of the sufﬁcient training
samples and modeling the spatial information of HSI well.
6) Comparisons of the Land Cover Maps: Figs. 10, 11, and
12 compare the classiﬁcation maps for Indian Pines, Houston
University 2013, and Houston University 2018, respectively.
The ﬁgures compare the maps obtained from methods which
provide the highest OA from each category (i.e., Shallow UFE,shallow SFE, and deep FE) along with the map obtained from
the spectral classiﬁer (HSI). Additionally, we depicted the
maps obtained by CNN for all three datasets since it provides
the highest OA among the deep FE techniques which do not
exploit a reduction step.
Overall, the classiﬁcation maps of either unsupervised or su-
pervised FE-based approaches (e.g., LPP, JPlay, CNN, PCNN)
are smoother compared to the results only using HSI that
tends to generate sparse mislabeled pixels. More speciﬁcally,
the classiﬁcation maps generated by spectral-spatial FE-based
methods, e.g., OTVCA, CNN, and PCNN, are usually a bit
over-smoothed, leading to the creation of fake structures, es-
pecially for the Indian Pines 2010 and Houston 2018 datasets.
In the case of OTVCA, the over smoothing can be avoided
by decreasing the tuning parameter. In contrast, JPlay obtains
relatively desirable classiﬁcation maps, despite the lack of
spatial information modeling. It is worth mentioning that the
JPlay algorithm can maintain the structural information for
Houston 2013 in the shadow covered region where pixels
at some bands are considerably attenuated. This is due to
the elimination of the spectral variability using the self-
reconstruction regularization (the third term in (32)) and the
multi-layered linearized regression technique.
C. Performance with respect to the Number of Training Sam-
ples
In this subsection, we investigate the performance of the FE
techniques in terms of classiﬁcation accuracies with respect
to the number of training samples. As we have already
stated, this analysis is of great interest due to two main
reasons; ﬁrst, ground sample acquisition and measurements
are often cumbersome and could be impossible in cases
for which the target area is not reachable. Additionally, the
limited number of samples not only affects the performance
of the supervised classiﬁers but also the supervised features
extraction techniques since they are highly reliable on the
number of training samples. Therefore, in this experiment,
we perform an analysis on the Houston University dataset
2018 by comparing the performances of the feature extraction
techniques by selecting 10, 25, 50, and 100 training samples
randomly. Fig 13 compares the OAs obtained by applying RF
on the spectral bands (labeled by HSI), the features extracted
by OTVCA, and JPlay along with the OAs obtained by CNN,
and PCNN. The results are mean values over 10 experiments
by selecting the samples randomly (the standard deviations are
shown by the error bars). The outcomes of the experiment can
be summarized as follows:
.The SFE technique (i.e., JPlay) improves the OAs com-
pared to the spectral classiﬁer. However, it provides much
lower OA compared with the UFE and deep FE for all
cases. Two aspects might explain this point. One is that
JPlay fails to model spatial and contextual information,
and another is that although JPlay attempts to enhance
the reorientation ability of the features via multi-layered
linear mapping, yet it is still incomparable to the non-
linear deep FE-based techniques, particularly when the
number of samples are increased.