IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 2
Saving timeAccurate 
classificationSaving storage 
space and faster 
transmission
Feature Extraction
Input Data Extracted Features Possible Advantages
Fig. 1. Feature extraction and its advantages for hyperspectral image analysis.
A. Unique Geometrical and Statistical Properties of High
Dimensional Data and the Need for Feature Extraction
Several studies (e.g., [2]–[4]) have demonstrated the unique
geometrical, statistical, and asymptotical properties of high-
dimensional data compared to RGB and multispectral images.
These properties, which have been shown through some ex-
perimental and theoretical examples, clearly justify the reasons
why most of the analytical approaches that are developed for
RGB and multispectral images are not applicable to hyper-
spectral images [5]. Among those experimental examples, we
can recall that (1) as dimensionality increases, the volume of
a hypercube concentrates in corners, or (2) as dimensionality
increases, the volume of a hypersphere concentrates in an
outside shell. With respect to these examples, the following
conclusions have been drawn:
A high-dimensional feature space is almost empty, which
indicates that multivariate data in Rp(prepresents the
number of bands, spectral channels, or dimensions) can
usually be represented in a lower dimensional space
(referred to as subspace) without loosing considerable
information in terms of class separability [5].
Since the high-dimensional feature space is almost empty
(i.e., Gaussian distributed data have a tendency to con-
centrate in the tails while uniformly distributed data have
a tendency to be concentrated in the corners), the density
estimation of hyperspectral data for both Gaussian and
uniform distributions become extremely challenging.
Fukunaga [6] claimed that there is a relation between the
type of the classiﬁer, the required number of training samples,
and the number of input dimensions. As reported in [6], the
required number of training samples is linearly related to the
dimensionality for linear classiﬁers and to the square of the di-
mensionality for quadratic classiﬁers (e.g., the Gaussian max-
imum likelihood classiﬁer [6]), and for nonparametric classi-
ﬁers, the number of required samples exponentially increases
as the dimensionality increases. Landgrebe showed a ground-
breaking fact that too many spectral bands might have negative
impacts in terms of expected classiﬁcation performance [7].
When dimensionality increases, with a constant and limited
number of training samples, a higher amount of statistics must
be estimated. Thus, the accuracy of the statistical estimationdecreases although higher spectral dimensions increase the
separability between the classes. This leads to a decrease in
classiﬁcation accuracies beyond an unknown number of bands.
These problems are related to the curse of dimensionality , also
known as Hughes phenomenon [8]. This ﬁnding was against
the general understanding of hyperspectral data where it was
wrongly believed that full dimensionality is always better than
subspace in terms of classiﬁcation accuracies.
The unique characteristics of high-dimensional data, as dis-
cussed above, have a pronounced impact on the performances
of supervised classiﬁers [9], as they demand an adequate
number of training samples, which is almost impossible to
obtain in practice since the collection of such training samples
is either expensive or time demanding. To address this issue,
feature extraction-based dimensionality reduction is found to
be effective.
B. Storage Systems and Processing Times
We are now in the era of massive data acquisitions. Statistics
demonstrate that the cumulative volume of existing big data
has been tremendously increased from 4.4 ZB to 44 ZB
from 2013 to 20201. The EO community has also faced a
similar trend because of the enormous volume and variety of
data being generated by EO missions. For example, EnMAP
(Environmental Monitoring and Analysis Program), which
is a hyperspectral satellite mission, is planning to capture
hyperspectral data with a maximum ground coverage of 5000
km30 km per day and the target revisit time of 4 days
(30) with 512 Gbit onboard mass memory [10].
Feature extraction-based dimensionality reduction helps in
data compression, which leads to the reduced storage space,
faster transmission time, removing redundant features, reduc-
ing the storage space required, and fasten the required time
for performing the same computations.
C. An Ever-Growing Relation between Machine learning and
Feature Extraction
Fig. 2 illustrates the basic idea of a machine learning ap-
proach, which consists of feature extraction and classiﬁcation.
1https://www.emc.com/leadership/digital-universe/2014iview/executive-
summary.htm