IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 20
0 20 40 60 80 100
Number of Training Samples0.30.40.50.60.70.80.9OAHSI
OTVCA
JPlay
CNN
PCNN
Fig. 13. The classiﬁcation accuracies w.r.t. the number of the training samples
on Houston University 2018 data. The results shown are means over 10
experiments and the standard deviations are shown by the error bars.
.In this experiment, the UFE technique (i.e. OTVCA)
and the deep FE one, CNN, are performed similarly
in terms of classiﬁcation accuracies. Compared with the
results given in Table VII, it can be observed that the
random selection of the training samples over the entire
class regions from the ground reference considerably
improves the performance of RF applied on the features
extracted by OTVCA. This is often due to the lack of
a parameter selection technique to select the optimum
parameter for the OTVCA algorithm which could lead to
over-smoothing on the features.
.The deep learning technique (i.e., PCNN) after using the
reduction (i.e., PCA) provides very high OA for all the
cases. Comparing the results with CNN (i.e., without
using the PCA reduction) conﬁrms the advantage of using
the reduction stage prior to deep learning techniques.
VI. C ONCLUSION AND SUMMERY
In the past decade, hyperspectral image FE has considerably
evolved leading to three main research lines (i.e., shallow
unsupervised, shallow supervised, and deep feature extraction
approaches) that include the majority of feature extraction
techniques, which were studied in this paper. The paper has
systematically provided a technical overview of the state-of-
the-art techniques proposed in the literature by categorizing
the aforementioned three focuses into subcategories. In order
to make this research paper easy-to-follow for researchers
at different levels (i.e., students, researchers, and senior re-
searchers), we aimed at showing the evolution of each cate-
gory over the decades rather than including many techniques
with an exhaustive reference list. The experimental section
was designed in a way to compare the performances of the
techniques in two ways: (1) between all the categories (i.e.,
shallow unsupervised, shallow supervised, and deep feature
extraction approaches) and (2) within each category by an-
alyzing the corresponding subcategories. In this manner, a
variety of subcategories is investigated detailing the evolu-
tion of shallow unsupervised approaches (i.e., conventional
data projection schemes, band clustering/splitting techniques,
low-rank reconstruction techniques, and manifold learningtechniques), shallow supervised approaches (i.e., class sep-
aration discriminant analysis, graph embedding discriminant
analysis, regression-based representation learning, and joint
& progressive learning strategy), and deep approaches (i.e.,
AE, CNN, RNN, and integrative approaches). Three recent
hyperspectral datasets have been studied in this paper and
the results are evaluated in terms of classiﬁcation accuracies
and the quality of the classiﬁcation maps. The experiments
carried out in this study showed that in terms of classiﬁcation
accuracies; 1) deep learning FE techniques (i.e., CNN and
PCNN) can outperform the shallow ones in particular when
a sufﬁcient amount of training data is available 2) applying a
dimensionality reduction step (such as PCA) prior to the deep
learning technqiues considerably improves their performances
3) shallow UFE techniques not only outperform the SFE ones
but also are very competitive compared with deep FE ones.
However, we should mention that the conclusions are limited
by the experiments carried out on the three HSI datasets. In
addition, this paper provides an impressive amount of codes
and libraries mostly written in Python and Matlab to ease out
the task of researchers in this very vibrant ﬁeld of research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Prof. Melba Crawford for providing
the Indian Pines 2010 Data and the National Center for
Airborne Laser Mapping, the Hyperspectral Image Analysis
Laboratory at the University of Houston, and the IEEE GRSS
Image Analysis and Data Fusion Technical Committee. This
work is partially supported by an Alexander von Humboldt
research grant. We also would like to thank the AXA Research
Fund for supporting the work of Prof. Jocelyn Chanussot. The
corresponding author of this paper is Dr. Danfeng Hong.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Ghamisi, J. Plaza, Y . Chen, J. Li, and A. J. Plaza, “Advanced spectral
classiﬁers for hyperspectral images: A review,” IEEE Geosci. Remote
Sens. Mag. , vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 8–32, March 2017.
[2] D. W. Scott, Multivariate Density Estimation , John Wiley & Sons, New
York, NY , 1992.
[3] E. J. Wegman, “Hyperdimensional data analysis using parallel coordi-
nates,” J. Am. Stat. Assoc. , vol. 85, no. 411, pp. 664–675, 1990.
[4] L. Jimenez and D. Landgrebe, “Supervised classiﬁcation in high-
dimensional space: geometrical, statistical, and asymptotical properties
of multivariate data,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. C: Appl. Rev. ,
vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 39–54, 1998.
[5] J. A. Benediktsson and P. Ghamisi, Spectral-Spatial Classiﬁcation of
Hyperspectral Remote Sensing Images . Artech House Publishers, INC,
Boston, USA, 2015.
[6] K. Fukunaga, Introduction to Statistical Pattern Recognition. , 2nd ed.
Academic Press, Inc., San Diego, CA, 1990.
[7] D. A. Landgrebe, Signal Theory Methods in Multispectral Remote
Sensing . John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2003.
[8] G. Hughes, “On the mean accuracy of statistical pattern recognizers,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 14, pp. 55 – 63, 1968.
[9] Y . Qian, F. Yao, and S. Jia, “Band selection for hyperspectral imagery
using afﬁnity propagation,” IET Comput. Vis. , vol. 3, no. 4, p. 213,
2009.
[10] L. Guanter and et. al., “The EnMAP spaceborne imaging spectroscopy
mission for earth observation,” Remote Sens. , vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 8830–
8857, July 2015.