IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 13
Splito
h
xUV Wo
h
xUVt- 1
t- 1
t- 1Wo
h
xUVt
t
tWo
h
xUVt+1
t+1
t+1W WHSI Ground Truth HSI Reconstructed HSI 
HSI 
o
h
xUVt- 1
t- 1
t- 1Wo
h
xUVt
t
tWo
h
xUVt+1
t+1
t+1W WExtracted Features 
HSI AE-based DL Model CNN-based DL Model
RNN-based DL Model Integrated DL Model
Fig. 9. Four major categories of deep learning models.
information as possible. However, to make full use of the
representation ability of CNNs, two important issues need to
be considered. The ﬁrst issue is the small number of training
samples but high-dimensional spectral information, which will
easily lead to the overﬁtting problem. The second issue is the
extraction of spectral-spatial joint features, which can improve
the classiﬁcation performance in comparison with using the
spectral or spatial feature only.
For the ﬁrst issue, many widely used strategies in the ﬁeld of
natural image classiﬁcation, such as dropout and weight decay,
can be naturally adopted. In addition, a lot of promising meth-
ods have been proposed in the past few years. These methods
can be divided into four different classes. The ﬁrst class of
methods is dimensionality reduction. In [100], [101], [103],
PCA was employed to extract the ﬁrst principal components of
hyperspectral images as inputs of CNNs, thus simplifying the
network structures. Similarly, a similarity-based band selection
method was used in [104]. However, these dimensionality
reduction methods are independent from the following CNNs,
which may lose some useful information. Different from them,
Ghamisi et al. proposed a novel method to adaptively select
the most informative bands suitable for the CNN model [105].
The second class of methods is data augmentation. In [101],
two methods were proposed to generate virtual samples. One
is to multiply a random factor and add a random noise to
training samples, while the other one is to combine two given
samples from the same class with proper ratios. In [106],
a data augmentation method based on distance density was
proposed. Recently, Kong et al. proposed a random zero
setting method to generate new samples [107]. The third class
of methods is transfer learning. In [108] and [109], the authors
found that CNNs trained by one hyperspectral data can be
transferred to another data acquired by the same sensor, and
ﬁne-tuning only a few top layers achieves satisfying results.
More interestingly, the works in [110]–[112] indicated that
CNNs pretrained by natural images can be directly applied to
extract spatial features of hyperspectral images. The fourth
class of methods is semi-supervised or even unsupervised
learning. For examples, Wu and Prasad attempted to use a
clustering model to obtain pseudo labels of unlabeled samples,
and then combine the training samples and unlabeled samples(with their pseudo labels) together to train their network [113].
In terms of the second issue, one popularly used method
is feeding a local cube, directly cropped from the original
hyperspectral image, into a CNN with 3-D convolution kernels
for processing the spectral and spatial information simultane-
ously. The number of channels in the 3-D convolutional kernel
is smaller than or equal to that of its input layer. However,
the former one dramatically increases the computational com-
plexity due to the simultaneous convolution operators in both
spectral domain and spatial domain, while the latter one heav-
ily increases the number of parameters to optimize. Another
candidate method is to decouple the task of spectral-spatial
feature extraction into two parts: Spectral feature extraction
and spatial feature extraction. In [108] and [114], a parallel
structure was employed to extract spectral-spatial features.
Speciﬁcally, 1-D CNN and 2-D CNN were designed to extract
spectral features and spatial features,respectively; these two
features were then concatenated together and fused via a few
fully-connected layers. Since 2-D CNN focuses on extracting
spatial features, some redundant spectral information can be
preprocessed to reduce the computational complexity. In [115],
a serial structure was also used to extract spectral-spatial
features. It ﬁrstly applied several 11convolutions to extract
spectral features and then fed the extracted features into several
3-D convolutions to extract spatial features.
C. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
RNNs have been popularly employed to sequential data
analysis, such as machine translation and speech recognition.
Different from the feedforward neural network, RNN takes
advantage of a recurrent edge for connecting the neuron to
itself across time. Therefore, it is able to model the probability
distribution of sequence data. To make this subsection easier
to follow, we ﬁrst provide a brief and general discussion on
RNN. Then, we brieﬂy describe how to use RNN speciﬁcally
for the classiﬁcation of hyperspectral images.
Fig. 9 shows an example of RNN. Given a sequence
x= (x1;x2;;xT), where xt;t2f1;2;;Tggenerally