IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 1
Feature Extraction for Hyperspectral Imagery:
The Evolution from Shallow to Deep (Overview
and Toolbox)
Behnood Rasti, Senior Member, IEEE, Danfeng Hong, Member, IEEE, Renlong Hang, Member, IEEE,
Pedram Ghamisi, Senior Member, IEEE, Xudong Kang, Senior Member, IEEE, Jocelyn Chanussot, Fellow, IEEE,
and Jon Atli Benediktsson, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —The ﬁnal version of the paper can be found in
IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Magazine. Hyperspectral
images provide detailed spectral information through hundreds
of (narrow) spectral channels (also known as dimensionality
or bands) with continuous spectral information that can ac-
curately classify diverse materials of interest. The increased
dimensionality of such data makes it possible to signiﬁcantly
improve data information content but provides a challenge to the
conventional techniques (the so-called curse of dimensionality)
for accurate analysis of hyperspectral images. Feature extraction,
as a vibrant ﬁeld of research in the hyperspectral community,
evolved through decades of research to address this issue and
extract informative features suitable for data representation and
classiﬁcation. The advances in feature extraction have been
inspired by two ﬁelds of research, including the popularization of
image and signal processing as well as machine (deep) learning,
leading to two types of feature extraction approaches named
shallow and deep techniques. This article outlines the advances
in feature extraction approaches for hyperspectral imagery by
providing a technical overview of the state-of-the-art techniques,
providing useful entry points for researchers at different levels,
including students, researchers, and senior researchers, willing
to explore novel investigations on this challenging topic. In more
detail, this paper provides a bird’s eye view over shallow (both
supervised and unsupervised) and deep feature extraction ap-
proaches speciﬁcally dedicated to the topic of hyperspectral fea-
ture extraction and its application on hyperspectral image classiﬁ-
cation. Additionally, this paper compares 15 advanced techniques
with an emphasis on their methodological foundations in terms
This work is partially supported by Alexander von Humboldt (AvH)
research grant.
B. Rasti is with the Machine Learning Group, Exploration Division,
Helmholtz Institute Freiberg for Resource Technology, Helmholtz-
Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf, 09599 Freiberg, Germany (e-mail:
behnood.rasti@gmail.com).
D. Hong is with Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, GIPSA-lab,
38000 Grenoble, France. (e-mail: hongdanfeng1989@gmail.com)
R. Hang is with the Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis
Technology, School of Automation, Nanjing University of Information Science
and Technology, Nanjing 210044, China (e-mail:renlong hang@163.com)
P. Ghamisi is with the Machine Learning Group, Exploration Division,
Helmholtz Institute Freiberg for Resource Technology, Helmholtz-
Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf, 09599 Freiberg, Germany. (e-mail:
p.ghamisi@gmail.com)
X. Kang is with the College of Electrical and Information Engineering,
Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China, and also with the Key Laboratory
of Visual Perception and Artiﬁcial Intelligence of Hunan Province, Changsha
410082, China (e-mail: xudong kang@163.com).
J. Chanussot is with the Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble
INP, LJK, F-38000 Grenoble, France, also with the Faculty of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, University of Iceland, Reykjavik 101, Iceland. (e-mail:
jocelyn@hi.is)
J. A. Benediktsson is with the Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineer-
ing, University of Iceland, 107 Reykjavik, Iceland (e-mail: benedikt@hi.is).of classiﬁcation accuracies. Furthermore, to push this vibrant
ﬁeld of research forward an impressive amount of codes and
libraries is shared at: https://github.com/BehnoodRasti/HyFTech-
Hyperspectral-Shallow-Deep-Feature-Extraction-Toolbox.
Index Terms —Classiﬁcation, deep feature extraction, deep
learning, dimensionality reduction, feature extraction, hyperspec-
tral image, machine learning, shallow feature extraction, signal
processing.
I. I NTRODUCTION
HYPERSPECTRAL imaging technology provides de-
tailed spectral information by sampling the reﬂective
portion of the electromagnetic spectrum covering a wide range
from the visible region (0.4-0.7 m) to the short-wave infrared
(SWIR) region (almost 2.4 m). Hyperspecral sensors can also
characterize the emissive properties of objects by acquiring
data in the range of the mid-wave and long-wave infrared
regions, in hundreds of narrow contiguous spectral channels.
Detailed spectral information provided by hyperspectral sen-
sors present both challenges and opportunities. For instance,
hyperspectral images can be used to differentiate between
different classes of interest with slightly different spectral char-
acteristics [1]. However, most of the commonly used methods
utilized for the analysis of gray scale, color, or multispectral
images cannot be extended to analyse hyperspectral images
due to several reasons, which will be detailed later in Section
I.A.
The limited availability of training samples (which is a
common issue in remote sensing) dramatically impacts the
performances of supervised classiﬁcation approaches due to
the high dimensionality of hyperspectral images, which poses
a problem for designing robust statistical estimations. Feature
extraction can be used as a solution to address the afore-
mentioned issue, which can be described as ﬁnding a set
of vectors that represents an observation while reducing the
dimensionality by transforming the input data linearly or non-
linearly to another domain and extract informative features in
the new domain. The use of feature extraction techniques can
be advantageous for a number of reasons which is illustrated
in Fig. 1 and described in the following subsections.arXiv:2003.02822v4  [cs.CV]  29 Jul 2020