160  P. ROSATI AND T. ČUK
technology readiness (e.g. scalability and throughput). A number of ini-
tiatives have been undertaken to overcome regulatory barriers (Van der Elst and Laferre 2018). For example, the State of Delaware explicitly 
reference the use of blockchain technology in Section 224
6 of the gen-
eral corporation law (DGCL) on July 21, 2017. Also, there are ongoing efforts from multiple stakeholders aiming to enhance blockchain per -
formance and reliability (Yli-Huumo et al. 2016; Higgins 2018; Chiu 
and Koeppl 2018), which suggest that it will not be long before block-chain-based applications start moving from the proof-of-concept stage to the production stage. For example, the European Central Bank and the Central Bank of Japan have already conducted a first study to evaluate the possibility of using blockchain for real-time gross settlements that are crucial in conducting monetary policy (ECB 2017).
10.6  c omPliance
Regulation is becoming increasingly burdensome in financial services. In order to increase investor protection and to prevent financial crime, post-crisis regulatory changes have dramatically increased the amount of reporting and compliance requirements for all the actors involved in the industry. Banks spent almost $100 billion for compliance in 2016 (McDowell 2017) and the overall expenditure is growing year-by-year 
(Thomson Reuters 2018). Regulatory technology (RegTech
7) may be a 
way to reduce these costs and so financial services are investing a signifi-cant amount of resources in this direction (Spezzati 2017).
In this section, we will focus on three main regulatory frameworks: 
(1) the EU Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (MiFID II
8) and 
the corresponding US Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer 
7 Chapter 6 covers this topic in more details.
8 https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/banking-and-finance/finan-
cial-markets/securities-markets/investment-services-and-regulated-markets-markets-finan-
cial-instruments-directive-mifid_en.6 “Any records administered by or on behalf of the corporation in the regular course of 
its business, including its stock ledger, books of account, and minute books, may be kept on, or by means of, or be in the form of, any information storage device, method, or 1 or more electronic networks or databases (including 1 or more distributed electronic networks or databases) […]” (Delaware General Corporation Law—Section 224).