76  D. CORTIS ET AL.
(e.g., smoke alarms, thermostats and fridges) to environmental monitor -
ing (e.g., examining air and water quality) and has permeated the market 
to such an extent that forecasts suggest that by 2020 IoT will consist of as many as 30 billion objects (Nordrum 2016) and will have a global market value of $7.1 trillion (Hsu and Lin 2016).
As per telematics and wearables, IoT also facilitates the provision 
of a multitude of new data sources of interest to the insurance world. And again, as per telematics and wearables, the opportunities to use this data extend beyond pricing power (e.g., discounts to customers that lock their sensor-based windows and doors when away from the house). Smart home devices, for example, allow the insurer to potentially move towards being proactive in terms of managing risks. The traditional insurance model has been one of zero intervention prior to a claims assessment, but the data from IoT smart home sensors opens the poten-tial for a new type of customer interaction. A relationship whereby the insurance company now takes an active role in engaging with the cus-tomer between the point of sale and claim. For example, the data from a sensor monitoring water pressure could be used to alert the policyholder of a leakage problem before substantial damage occurs.
5.3.4  Big Data: Trustworthiness and Privacy Concerns
In Big Data, veracity is one of the main Big Data dimensions. Whilst in the past this was frequently overlooked as long as data was being har -
vested from multiple heterogeneous sources, veracity is nowadays a more pressing issue (e.g., due to an increase in public discourse on fake news). Simply put, veracity deals with data uncertainty due to inconsistencies and deliberate deception. These problems create obfuscated data, hinder -
ing accurate and correct future analysis and understanding of data and leading to potential insurance fraud.
A second issue in harvesting data from multiple sources is privacy. 
Personal data might have been generated (e.g., GPS location from mobile device) or harvested (e.g., social networks) from multiple heter -
ogeneous sources. Ethically, data owners (including insurers) should ask the consent of their customers prior to use this data for analysis purposes. Furthermore, businesses with customers in Europe have to comply with the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) which looks after the privacy and protection of an individual, addressing problems such as how personal data can be used in this data-driven technological age