3 MACHINE LEARNING AND AI FOR RISK MANAGEMENT   39
based on similarity of where they are on this plane. As a financial risk 
example, Nazemi et al. (2018) apply a SVM approach to predict financial 
loss to holders of bonds that have defaulted (normally some proportion of loss is recoverable from firm assets after bond default) and are able to demonstrate the superiority of the approach compared to more conven-tional methods.
Turning now to unsupervised learning, we first have clustering 
machine learning techniques which have some similarity with SVM in that they involve mapping characteristics on a plane. The technique dif-fers in that it is not trying to predict outcomes but instead create sim-ilar groups. Email ‘spam’ detection, for example, is usually based on a clustering approach—if an email looks like other emails that are deemed spam then it is likely to also be spam. K-means clustering is the most popular approach, although other methods such as X-means and hierar -
chical clustering are growing in popularity. We’ll focus on K-means clus-tering to describe the general technique. In K-means a number of cluster groups the data scientist wishes to arrive at is predetermined (although in practice a range of the number of groups is tested), characteristics are mapped on a plane and a dividing line (not necessarily straight) is drawn that best distinguishes between groups. The idea of the iterative process behind the technique is to maximise the difference in means between determined groups.
Deep learning and neural networks
2 are viewed as being at the fore-
front of machine learning techniques and are often classified separately to the machine learning techniques already described. Indeed deep learning can be both supervised and unsupervised forms of learning depending on the purpose to which it is being applied. The intuition behind deep learning is to more accurately model complex relationships between var -
iables and ultimately to better mimic human decision-making. To that extent these techniques represent the closest to actual AI techniques, albeit still missing some of the data identification and automation fea-tures necessary for true AI. Heaton et al. (2017) provide a detailed 
analysis of the recent application of deep learning to finance, as well as highlighting the potential of the approach.
A key feature of deep learning is the addition of ‘hidden layers’ 
after the input data stage that allow multiple and combined influences 
2 While subject to some debate, it is worth thinking of deep learning as a newer term of 
neural networks, and the terms can in practice be used interchangeably.