1 DECIPHERING CROWDFUNDING   11
finding that whereas language style is of little importance to commercial 
entrepreneurs, social entrepreneurs need to pay more attention to how they deliver their pitches: the use of concrete language, precise terminol-ogy, and an interactive style, are fundamental for the success of a social crowdfunding campaign. The perception that an entrepreneur conveys to potential investors is of fundamental importance since the financing pitch is often made before or during the development stage, that is, before the audience can actually see the finished product. Future research can build on these very preliminary findings and explore the role of communica-tion and storytelling in crowdfunding in much greater depth.
Another important question to address in future research is related to 
factors that help us understand cross-country and cross-regional differ -
ences in the development of crowdfunding. In fact, despite a significant variation in entrepreneurial financing activity across countries (Reynolds 2011; Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance 2018), the theoretical explanations of the antecedents and processes are limited (Baker et al. 
2005). Drawing from cognitive psychology theories, recently Di Pietro et al. (2018d) show that linguistic structures may help in explaining dif-ferences in entrepreneurial finance market dynamics across nations and cultures. More interdisciplinary research is needed to discover underlying mechanisms that will help us to understand international differences of the crowdfunding phenomenon.
references
Agrawal, A., Catalini, C., & Goldfarb, A. (2011). Friends, family, and the flat 
world. Toronto: The Geography of Crowdfunding.
Agrawal, A., Catalini, C., & Goldfarb, A. (2014). Some simple economics of 
crowdfunding. Innovation Policy and the Economy, 14(1), 63–97.
Ahlers, G. K. C., Cumming, D., Günther, C., & Schweizer, D. (2015). Signaling 
in equity crowdfunding. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 39(4), 
955–980.
Allison, T. H., Blakley, C., Davis, J., Short, C., & Webb, J. W. (2015). 
Crowdfunding in a prosocial microlending environment: Examining the role 
of intrinsic versus extrinsic cues. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 39(1), 
53–73.
Baker, T., Gedajlovic, E., & Lubatkin, M. (2005). A framework for comparing 
entrepreneurship processes across nations. Journal of International Business Studies, 36(5), 492–504.