22  M. CUMMINS ET AL.
suggests that communicating soft information relating to the borrower’s  
education, profession, and qualifications had a small but significant 
effect. Research by Herzenstein et al. (2011b) suggest that borrower 
claims about themselves (identities) in narratives that focus on trustwor -
thiness or success increase the likelihood of loan funding but have less predictive loan performance than other identities, e.g. borrowers claim-ing economic hardship. Furthermore, borrowers who claim more iden-tities in narratives both have increased likelihood of loan funding and a reduced final interest rate. Similarly, Michels (2012) suggests that vol-untary information disclosures, over and above those required by the platform, even when unverified, results in an increase in bidding activity by prospective lenders and a reduction of interest rates. Dorfleitner et al. 
(2016) compared two European P2P lending platforms, and found that description text, and specifically spelling errors, text length, and the sen-timent intensity of keywords, predicted funding probability on the less restrictive of the two platforms examined. Gao et al. (2016) show that 
the presence of well-established features that influence reader behaviours (readability, positive tones, and deception cues) in narrative texts of loan listings all meaningfully relate to loan repayment.
Many researchers have explored the extent to which lenders are 
rational or perceptual in their decision-making on P2P lending plat-forms. Research on the Prosper.com platform by Herzenstein et al. 
(2008) suggests that prospective borrowers who provided a photo affected loan success negatively but found while demographic attrib-utes, such as race and gender do affect likelihood of funding success, their influence was minor compared to other factors. Pope and Sydnor (2011) examining the same platform found evidence of racial dispari-ties with loan listings featuring pictures with ‘blacks’ 25–35% less likely to receive funding than pictures featuring ‘whites’. Similarly, Ravina (2012) reports that after hard information is taken into account, more attractive prospective borrowers have a higher likelihood of loan fund-ing and lower interest rates and that consistent with Pope and Sydnor (2011) identifies disparities between ‘blacks’ and ‘whites’. Again using photographs of borrowers from Prosper.com, Duarte et al. (2012) found 
that borrowers who appear more trustworthy have higher probabili-ties of having their loans funded, have better credit scores and default less often. Age-based research would seem to be conclusive. Gonzalez and Loureiro (2014) found that loan success is sensitive to relative age and attractiveness. Furthermore, they found that (a) attractiveness had