viii   PREFACE
make it something very different—frictionless, anonymous, transparent, 
non-denominated and dataful. Furthermore, the authors discuss the con-cept of money as opportunities for social encounters in transactions with very real social impacts.
The final two chapters focus on the related topic of cryptocurrencies 
and blockchain. Following on from this discussion on the future of pay-ment and money, Chapter 9 focuses on cryptocurrencies as two distinct flavours of digital token—native coins and crypto tokens. While native coins are well known as a new form of digital money such as bitcoin, crypto tokens are less well known. They represent a form of “digital vouchers” that allow the token holders to get access to almost any type of service and assets from monetary rewards, or commodities to loyalty points to even other cryptocurrencies. As well as discussing the differ -
ences between these token based models, Chapter 8 explores the emer -
gent start-up token funding model of Initial Coin Offerings (ICOs), which allows entrepreneurs to bypass the traditional capital market by issuing crypto tokens out of thin air. Blockchain, or distributed ledger technology, is one of the most hyped technologies in recent years and no FinTech book would be complete without a wider discussion on it. Chapter 10 discusses the current challenges and opportunities that 
blockchain poses for financial services firms and its potential impact on four main financial activities: (1) payments and remittance, (2) credit and lending, (3) trading and settlement, and (4) compliance.
The ten chapters in “Disrupting Finance” are by no means exhaustive 
nor were they intended to be. Rather the collection of topics in this book were collated to be a primer and signpost for FinTech. The financial ser -
vices sector is a dataful one—it comprises data and generates data. It is unsurprising therefore that technologies that enable the exchange, vali-dation, and analysis of this data faster and in more complex ways domi-nate the FinTech discourse today. Blockchain, deep learning and artificial intelligence are not only challenging how we conceive financial services but introduce new avenues for research not just in finance and computer science but in ethics, sociology and law, to name but a few.
Dublin, Ireland  
Malibu, USA  Dublin, Ireland  Dublin, IrelandTheo Lynn
John G. Mooney
Pierangelo Rosati
Mark Cummins