PREFACE   vii
datasets are transforming general insurance markets and their business 
processes, modifying policyholder behaviour, and streamlining claims management. The authors illustrate how machine learning, artificial intelligence and blockchain are creating and helping to capture new value in the insurance market.
A common theme in each segment of financial service sector are the 
barriers to entry created by regulation. Indeed, the lending, insurance, and stock markets are all characterised by regulatory requirements that are complex to understand and costly to implement for incumbents and new entrants alike. With over US$100 billion spent by banks on regu-latory compliance in 2016 alone, RegTech solutions represents a sig-nificant market opportunity in itself by (a) identifying the impacts of regulatory provisions on business models, products and services, func-tional activities, policies, operational procedures and controls; (b) ena-bling compliant business systems and data; (c) helping control and manage regulatory, financial and non-financial risks; and (d) perform-ing regulatory compliance reporting. Chapter 6 explores the drivers of RegTech adoption and the risks and challenges inherent in this adoption. It presents a timely focus on the lack of standardisation and interopera-bility in RegTech data and systems and the need for open standards and semantic technologies in order to avoid a digital Tower of Babel in the financial sector.
Chapters 7 and 8 focus on the future of payment and money. The 
European Union required its member states to implement the new Payment Service Directive (PSDII) in January 2018. This directive has the potential to drastically reimagine the relationships between con-sumers and their banks and the structure of the banking and payments sector. Driven by the Internet and mobile banking and the need for more efficient and effective support for cross-border payment services, PSDII seeks to level the competitive playing field by reducing the var -
ious exemptions from payment services regulation and to permit two new innovative arrangements: “account information service providers” and “payment initiation service providers”. Chapter 7 presents the back-ground and detail of PSDII and the implications for banks, credit card issuers, merchant acquirers and new FinTech operations, not least tech-nology firms such as Apple, Google, PayPal etc. While Chapter 7 reima-gines the role of banks in the payment sector, Chapter 8 discusses the reconceptualisation of money in the digital age. This chapter explores the characteristics of money and the affordances of digital money which