80  D. CORTIS ET AL.
5.5.1  Improving Current Processes Using DLTs
DLTs aim to transform the process of verifying not only transactions 
(like in cryptocurrencies) but also verification of identities and smart contracts.
Mainelli and von Gunten (2014) summarise the effect of DLTs for 
insurance within four domains: identity, time, space and mutuality. Using DLTs through the identity checking can improve the underwriting and Know Your Customer requirements for an insurer (Mainelli and Smith 2015; Mainelli and von Gunten 2014). These are particularly useful for a product, individual or data that has gone through a chain of custody or changes. Identity improvements could also potentially limit mul-tiple claims for the same incident. For example, in the case of a travel  
delay, the policyholder would not be able to claim twice for the same incident.
Consider an alternative scenario whereby health and financial trans-
actions are shared over a DLT. At the policyholder’s permission, the insurer may be able to quote a premium for health insurance without the need to provide the data from scratch by filling in forms. Moreover,  
creating models of this personal data and analysing it together with external data (e.g., from personal wearables provided by the insurance company), this enables real-time adjustments to coverage and pricing, hence reducing the time cycles of insurance products. Conversely, DLTs may lead to a lengthening of time as transactions recorded on DLTs can-not be erased or changed, altering the general perception of longer term contracts.
Whilst the current insurance business model is localised as each insur -
ance product is developed by country, market and region; DLTs are distributed over a network of computers. This may increase the space ‘covered’ by insurance worldwide. For example, Lorenz et al. (2016) 
argue that DLTs may be particularly useful in microinsurance within emerging markets, citing the example of crop insurance for farmers. Any such coverage may be automated as claims are paid automatically due to weather conditions without the need of an on-the-ground evalu-ation. The rewards of DLTs within claims management are not restricted to esoteric insurance practices. The implementation of a smart contract would imply an immediate payment on the delivery of parts following a motor vehicle damage claim (Mainelli and von Gunten 2014).