62  E. MONACO
as demonstrated by Menkveld (2013). Similarly, the “arbitrage strat-
egy” does not depend on directional price movements but on price con-vergence seeking to keep the differences between related products or markets.
If HFTs follow “structural strategies”, they attempt to find the weak-
ness in the market structure to take advantage of the other participants. In fact, given HFT can access market data in real time, the lower latency allows them to establish prices both on the seller and buyer side. In contrast, “directional strategies” involve establishing a short position in anticipation of a price move up or down. The Concept Release (SEC 2010) requested comment on two types of directional strategies, order anticipation and momentum ignition, that “may pose particular prob-lems for long-term investors” and “may present serious problems in today’s market structure”.
Regarding HFT speed, Menkveld (2016) estimates that algorithms 
have a response time in the order of microseconds (one microsecond is 10
−6). Therefore, even if HFT effects on the market are known, both 
in terms of less adverse-selection cost, tighter bid-ask spread (higher liquidity), frequent quote updates between trades and higher price dis-covery between the quoted updates, and a higher trade probability (Brogaard et al. 2018), the main concerns of regulators remain whether 
their speed represents a barrier that limits retail investor trading activ-ity. Moreover, regarding the open question regarding whether HFTs are better informed agents, few studies (Goettler et al. 2009; Aït-Sahalia and 
Saglam 2013) find a liquidity improvement when market makers become 
more informed about fundamental value. Agents arrive randomly and, conditional on the state of the limit-order book, they can choose to send either a limit or a market order. Other studies discussed HFT speed to cancel their outstanding limit order after news (Hoffmann 2014), an endogenous strategy that post limit orders at less aggressive prices, reducing the trade rate.
Finally, observing the price competition in a limit-order market 
Bongaerts et al. (2016) discover that the increase of HFT has as the final 
effect a general improvement of liquidity.
4.3.2.3 Market Structure, Co-location and Regulation After the Flash Crash
On 6 May 2010, the US financial markets experienced the Flash Crash. 
Nearly one trillion US dollars’ worth of equity vanished in minutes result-ing from a large automated selling program being rapidly executed in the E-mini S&P 500 stock index futures market (Kirilenko et al. 2017).