6 UNDERSTANDING REGTECH FOR DIGITAL REGULATORY COMPLIANCE   89
Another driver is the relative complexity of financial institutions in 
terms of their business models, legal entity structures, processes, prod-
ucts, services, and markets served. Monitoring, interpreting, and com-plying with the current and planned regulations is a challenge, even for the largest banks. For smaller firms the costs and complexity may become prohibitive (Walker 2018). The move from people-based solutions to RegTech is reflected in the fact that the aforementioned costs are being expended on consultants, professional services, and IT vendors (Marenzi 2017).
The final drivers are information and data related. Unpublished 
research from a 5-year-long empirical study by the authors on the issue, involving UK and US regulators and financial institutions, indicates that financial institutions are challenged by their inability to understand:
1.  Regulatory requirements and compliance imperatives;
2.  The impacts of such regulations on functional activities, policies, and procedures;
3.  The changes that are required to business processes and activities;
4.  The risks associated with financial products and related business models;
5.  The implications for IT systems in terms of data governance and analytics; and
6.  How to meet consumer needs, while protecting their rights.
It was in this context that RegTech was first identified as a separate, but emerging industry sector in the financial industry, in the UK Treasury’s 2015 Budget Report and subsequently explored comprehensively in the UK’s Government Organisation for Science (Walport 2015). UK regula-tors took note of this new perspective on technology-based solutions for the myriad of problems facing the financial industry and have responded accordingly. In 2016, for example, and in the context of the FCA’s Innovation Hub and its Project Innovate, the FCA identified a number of candidate FinTech and RegTech solutions and how they might be used.
Given the significant challenges facing both regulators and the reg-
ulated, Christopher Woolard, Director of Strategy and Competition at the FCA, identified several use cases for and capabilities of RegTech (Woolard 2016) viz.