4 WHAT FINTECH CAN LEARN FROM HIGH-FREQUENCY TRADING …   53
• What are the main issues and critique on HFT activity?
• What is the future of HFT research?
The remainder of this chapter is organised as follows. The next section 
considers the differing approaches to defining HFT by both regulators and scholars and presents an overview of common datasets used to inves-tigate HFT activity. This is followed by a summary of the methodology used for the literature review and associated data collection. The results of the literature review are then presented. The chapter concludes with a discussion of the findings and directions for future research.
4.2  h igh-frequency  trading : definition  and data
In general, total trading activity can be classified into two main cate-gories: algorithmic trading (AT)  and non-algorithmic trading activity (NAT) depending on whether or not market participants use algorithms to make trading decisions without human intervention (ESMA 2014). The European Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (MiFID II)  
provides two different definitions of the concepts HFT and AT, where the former is a subset of the latter. Specifically, AT is defined as “[…] trad-ing in financial instruments where a computer algorithm automatically determines individual parameters of orders, such as whether to initiate of an order or how to manage the order after its submission, with lim-ited or no human interaction” (MiFID II 2014, p. 384). This does not  
include any system that is only used for the purpose of routing orders to one or more trading venues or for the processing of orders involving no determination of any trading parameters or for the confirmation of orders or the post-trade processing of executed transactions (MiFID II  
2014). Moreover, the MiFID II (2014, pp. 384–385) defines HFT as “an algorithmic trading technique that is characterized by an infrastructure that minimize network and other type of latencies using specific facilities as co-location, proximity hosting or high-speed direct electronic access and by a system determination of order initiation, generation and execu-tion without human intervention for trades or orders”.
The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission takes a broader 
approach in defining HFT as “professional traders acting in a proprietary capacity that engage in strategies that generate a large number of trades on a daily basis” (SEC 2010, p. 45). Similarly, the Australian Securities and Investments Commission emphasises HFT’s ability to generate large