16  M. CUMMINS ET AL.
Both online P2P lending platforms and lenders seek to minimise the 
impact of information asymmetries through a variety of mechanisms. This chapter discusses the structure of online P2P lending platforms and reviews how the disclosure of hard and soft information, and herding can reduce information asymmetries. The chapter concludes with a discus-sion of further avenues for research.
Keywords  P2P lending
 · Online P2P lending  · Information 
asymmetry
2.1  i ntroduction
It is widely agreed that small businesses play a critical role in economic 
growth, regardless of country size or development, by providing employ-ment and income to a broad range of citizens, supporting a wider  
eco-system of firms, and fostering innovation (OECD 2017a). Their via-bility, sustainability, and growth depend on access to strategic resources, not least finance. The supply and sourcing of financing is a perennial strategic challenge for small businesses the world over, exacerbated by their innate characteristics and market inefficiencies. Due to under-  
collateralisation, limited or no credit history, and lack of sophisticated finan-cial statements (and the expertise to produce such statements), a higher level of default risk is typically attached to small businesses and as a result access to credit is limited (Bhide 2003; OECD 2013). This situation per -
sists despite a consistent decrease in the costs of financing in recent years, partly as result of the aforementioned characteristics of small business but also as a result of supply-side lending policies by traditional credit sources during the recent recession (Mills and McCarthy 2014; OECD 2017b).
Digital technologies are transforming the business models and dra-
matically increasing access to markets for small businesses. In the same way, it is also transforming how these businesses access finance and from whom. This chapter explores online peer-to-peer (P2P) lending, a form of crowdfunding (see Chapter 1) that bypasses conventional interme-diaries, processes, and requirements to connect borrowers and lenders (Yum et al. 2012). Information asymmetry is a key issue in P2P lend-
ing that can result in moral hazard or adverse selection (Akerlof 1970) 
and ultimately impact the viability and success of individual P2P lend-ing platforms. Both P2P lending platforms and lenders seek to minimise the impact of information asymmetries through a variety of mechanisms,