4 WHAT FINTECH CAN LEARN FROM HIGH-FREQUENCY TRADING …   65
ease with “which a computer program or a computer programmer can 
transform the large amounts of unstructured data contained in various firm disclosures into usable information (Bloomfield 2002)”. The general 
assumption here is that “more scriptable” filings allow HFT (and other sophisticated investors) gain a short-term information advantage to react and trade quickly and increase the information asymmetry immediately following disclosures; bid-ask spreads increase by 20–25% in the 30–60 seconds following Form 4 filings (Rogers et al. 2017). Similar results 
have been found by Frino et al. (2017) that demonstrate that spreads 
increase at the time of the event and decrease in the following minutes.
4.4  c onclusion  and future  research  directions
The advent of HFT and the introduction of co-location services and other facilities irredeemably changed market structures around the world. Consequently, transaction costs have decreased sharply—by over 50% for both retail and institutional investors (Menkveld 2016). Several studies discuss the consequences of HFT activity on market quality and find a rise in both trading volume and in the number of orders (trades), as well as large increases in the number of submissions (messages) and cancellations. However, the lack of identification codes (in the main financial dataset available) does not allow the disentanglement of trading activity by different type of investors (institutional vs. retail investors). As a result, both the number of orders and the number of submissions or cancellations (messages) are commonly used to build proxies that allow the detection of HFT activity thereby allowing scholars to detect the consequences of HFT activity in the main financial markets.
Studies of the impact of HFT suggest that information asymmetry 
between buyers and sellers is reduced over the time and, even if very often HFT are accused of arbitrage, many empirical studies demonstrate a general improvement in market liquidity (as measured by reduction of spreads or increases in depth) and a general reduction of the intraday price volatility. These results ultimately suggest that any regulatory action introduced to curtail this activity may have serious negative implications for liquidity and market participants (Frino et al. 2017), as demonstrated 
recently both in France and in Italy (Friederich and Payne 2015).
The large volume of papers published on the topic of AT and HFT 
indicate a clear academic interest in the potential contributions and