2 ADDRESSING INFORMATION ASYMMETRIES IN ONLINE PEER-TO-PEER …   25
extant literature, the interest rate often depends on the social relationship 
with the prospective borrower and the quality of the credit rating with more professional lenders seeking higher economic rents through higher interest rates. Notwithstanding this, Chen et al. (2016) find that group 
membership and the borrower’s credibility and trust within that group yielded inconsistent results, however, the degree of group inclusiveness had a negative impact on, his/her funding and repayment performance.
Borrower groups may also play a role in herding. For example, group 
leader endorsements and bidding can initiate cascades leading to herd-ing. Regarding the impact of group leader actions on loan funding, Kumar (2007) suggests group leader endorsement can increase the like-lihood of loan funding success. However, the impact of group leader behaviour on interest rates is less conclusive. For example, while Berger and Gleisner (2010) suggest that active bidding by the group leader with others, and in itself, may result in lower interest rates, Freedman and Jin (2008) suggest that in certain instances group leader actions will increase the average interest rate.
2.4  c onclusions  and future   
directions  for research
In this chapter, we provided an overview of online P2P lending platforms and discussed the extant literature on how information asymmetries are reduced through various platform mechanisms and the lenders them-selves, including information disclosure, herding and relatedly in-platform  
groups. Peer-to-peer lending as a subset of the wider crowdfunding and FinTech domain is experiencing rapid adoption worldwide and is the dominant segment of most alternative finance markets. While there is a substantial literature base on information asymmetries and P2P lending, the increasingly global adoption of P2P lending, the proliferation of new platforms and marketplaces, and the evolution of new technologies pro-vides a fertile ground for future research which we will discuss briefly.
Researchers have suggested that understanding the behaviour, and in 
particularly the ‘inner life’, of investors requires a greater appreciation of the both the socio-economic and technical context in which investment takes place (Hirsto 2011; Zwick and Schroeder 2011). For example, US data prior to 2008 operated under a different regulatory environment when the SEC required registration under the Securities Act of 1933