40  S. AZIZ AND M. DOWLING
between input variables to be determined by the modelling (Goodfellow 
et al. 2016). As the input data progresses through the hidden layers var -
iables are combined and recombined into newer factors weighted on influence from the prior layer. Thus, for example, a simple economic forecasting model fed with the input variables of GDP growth, unem-ployment rate, exchange rates, government budget deficit, might then recombine in hidden nodes into new factors. A random example at the first layer of one such recombination (performed by the deep learning model, not by the researcher) might be 0.2*GDP growth + 0.4*exchange 
rates. As each hidden layer progresses these recombinations could become more and more abstract if that helps with the task set the model.
The addition of hidden layers between input and output is what cre-
ates the perceived problem with deep learning—that the process is a ‘black box’—in that it is not always clear how inputs have been recom-bined to create a predicted output. This has obvious implications for use in risk management, where the very presence of a black box at the centre of decision-making can be its own source of risk in a firm.
3.3  m achine  learning  and ai a PPlications   
for risk management
In this section, we provide details and analysis of actual applications of AI and machine learning to various areas of risk management. We categorise risk management using common distinctions in financial risk manage-ment, namely: credit risk, market risk, operational risk, and add a fourth category around the issue of compliance.
3.3.1  Application to Credit Risk
Credit risk is economic loss that emanates from the failure of a counter -
party to fulfil its contractual obligations (e.g., timely payment of inter -
est or principal), or from the increased risk of default during the term of the transaction. Traditionally, financial firms have employed classical linear, logit, and probit regressions to model credit risk (Altman 1968). However, there is now an increased interest by institutions in using AI and machine learning techniques to enhance credit risk management practices, partially due to evidence of incompleteness in traditional tech-niques. The evidence is that credit risk management capabilities can be significantly improved through leveraging AI and machine learning