128  J. FERREIRA AND M. PERRY
8.4  s ocial  imPacts of digital  transactions
Along with recognising the opportunities for social encounters in trans-
actions, there is a need to examine the social impacts brought on by transacting digitally. In this section, we present our observations on social impacts with respect to attitudes around financial data, the availa-bility of different forms of money, and understanding of money and pay-ment systems.
8.4.1  Sensitive Data Generation and Sharing
Financial and credit card data have been shown to be considered the most sensitive personal data (Rose et al. 2013) and Experian cyber ana-
lysts estimate the value of stolen financial data to be worth up to USD 200 on the Dark Web (Stack 2018). In order to protect financial data, laws and regulations have emerged that impose strict security require-ments on the institutions and other financial service providers that pro-cess financial data. As a result, there are limitations on how financial data can be shared or opened up for inspection. In Europe, there have been moves to allowing third parties (in practice, new FinTech entrants being allowed banking) permissioned access. This poses challenges for new entrants to the FinTech space where no or limited access to data requires creative workarounds in the design of technologies that interface with financial infrastructures.
8.4.2  Choice Proliferation
Despite the drive towards cashless societies, digital money and digi-tal exchange continue to co-exist alongside non-digital forms of money and non-digital forms of exchange. Increasingly, the money we use and the ways in which it is exchanged are understood to be a collection of pragmatic responses to wide-ranging needs. So despite governmental and regulatory attempts at homogenising the money system, the varieties of uses and social contexts that emerge around money continue to engen-der new forms of money and exchange. For example, loyalty points, and volunteer currencies such as time dollars. The proliferation of connected digital tools that enable new forms.
An integrated approach to parallel physical and digital media  
seems to be a prevalent concern across fiat and alternative currencies