NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS   xix
HEC School of Management in Paris, and Cass Business School in 
London. She holds a Ph.D. in Management and Business Administration from University G. d’Annunzio, Pescara. Her main research interests are in the areas of entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial finance.
Michael Dowling is Associate Professor of Finance in Rennes School of 
Business in France. He obtained his Ph.D. in behavioural finance from 
Trinity College Dublin, Ireland. Michael is Director of the AI-driven Business research group in Rennes, and through this explores how organisations can benefit from, and adapt to, the arrival of AI in the organisation. He is also editor of the leading behavioural finance journal: Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Finance.
Mark Farrell is a Fellow of the Institute and Faculty of Actuaries (FIA) 
and Senior Lecturer at Queen’s University Belfast. He is Programme 
Director of Actuarial Science and Risk Management at Queen’s Management School. He has a Ph.D. in Finance and is a Fulbright Scholar. Prior to moving into academia, he spent 10 years working as a consulting actuary in London, Toronto, Belfast and Dublin.
Jennifer Ferreira teaches and conducts research in the field of human–
computer interaction. Her publications span three broad themes: the 
digital economy, agile development and user experience design, and user interface design and evaluation. She applies qualitative methods in her work, with an emphasis on ethnographically-informed and participatory design approaches. Her interest in financial services and digital money began as part of the 3DaRoC project, which explored the ways digital con-nectivity shapes peer-to-peer relationships in alternative financial services.
Theo Lynn is Professor of Digital Business at Dublin City University 
and is the Principal Investigator (PI) of the Irish Centre for Cloud 
Computing and Commerce, an Enterprise Ireland/IDA-funded Cloud Computing Technology Centre. Professor Lynn specialises in the role of digital technologies in transforming business processes.
Ciarán Mac an Bhaird is Assistant Professor of Economics and Finance 
at Fiontar (Enterprise), Dublin City University and founder of USTART, 
the DCU student Start-up accelerator. His research is focused on Entrepreneurial Finance, specifically capital structure, financial manage-ment, resourcing nascent firms, and alternative sources of finance.