34  S. AZIZ AND M. DOWLING
Keywords  AI  · Machine learning  · Risk management  · RegTech  · 
Credit risk  · Operational risk  · Market risk
3.1  i ntroduction
Artificial intelligence (AI), and the machine learning techniques that form 
the core of AI, are transforming, and will revolutionise, how we approach financial risk management. Everything to do with understanding and con-trolling risk is up for grabs through the growth of AI-driven solutions: from deciding how much a bank should lend to a customer, to providing warning signals to financial market traders about position risk, to detecting customer and insider fraud, and improving compliance and reducing model risk. In this chapter we detail current machine learning and AI techniques being used and current applications of those techniques. We further envisage the future role for fully AI solutions as the natural next step after the widespread adoption of machine learning in helping the organisation to manage risk.
An example of ZestFinance serves to illustrate the potential for AI and 
machine learning in risk management. ZestFinance was founded by a for -
mer Chief Information Officer of Google and in 2016 partnered with Baidu, the dominant search engine in China, to improve Baidu’s lend-ing decisions in the Chinese market. Baidu was particularly interested in making small loan offers to retail customers buying products from their platform. Unlike most developed countries, the risk with lending in the Chinese market is that less than 20% of people have credit profiles or credit ratings. Lending to people who have either ‘thin’ credit profiles, or no credit profiles, is inherently risky as there is no history to draw on to check borrower reliability. ZestFinance (with permission) taps into the huge volume of information on members held by Baidu such as their search or purchase histories to help Baidu decide whether to lend. They use thousands of data points per customer and are still able to make lend-ing decisions on new applications in seconds. A reported trial in 2017 of their system led to a 150% increase in total small-item lending by Baidu with no increase in credit losses in the space of just two months.
1
The exact nature of how ZestFinance makes these decisions is not 
disclosed except under the broad umbrella of machine learning and AI, but essentially what they use as a base is a core machine learning set of 
1 https://www.technologyreview.com/s/603604/an-ai-fueled-credit-formula-  
might-help-you-get-a-loan/.