130  J. FERREIRA AND M. PERRY
8.5  c onclusion
Money is a multifaceted dynamic concept and our understanding of it 
is continually challenged and modified by financial innovations. Perhaps due to a long tradition within monetary theory of treating money as ‘neutral,’ there is still no agreed position on what money is and, despite ongoing critique, the ‘textbook triad’ of money as a unit of account, a store of value and a medium of exchange, continues to structure much of the discussion. This difficulty carries over to discussions of digital money and digital transactions. Understanding its use and working to change its operation is an especially complex task precisely because money is so per -
vasively connected to our lives.
In this chapter, we examined the affordances of digital transactions to 
illustrate possibilities for action, opportunities for interaction, and the roles of negotiation and intermediation within digital transactions. We have highlighted some social impacts of digital transactions and its asso-ciated data generation, its embeddedness alongside other available forms of transaction, and the ways in which the digital world conflate money and payment systems.
As digital money plays an increasingly central role in our lives, having 
the means to articulate our interactions with it helps to ensure digital transactions are designed to be the kinds of experiences we wish to have. Payment platforms, like any other digital tools, are open to be shaped by their designers, and can do more to support the interactional and trans-actional work required—future systems that attend to their users’ needs offer opportunities that extend far beyond the rather limited current notions of faster payments and cheaper services.
references
Anonymous. (2017, August 23). Bitcoin transactions aren’t as anonymous 
as everyone hoped. MIT Technology Review. Available at: https://www.
technologyreview.com/s/608716/bitcoin-transactions-arent-as-anony -
mous-as-everyone-hoped. Last accessed 19 July 2018.
Asmundson, I., & Oner, C. (2012). What is money? Finance & Development, 
49(3). Available at: http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2012/09/basics.htm. Last accessed 14 May 2018.
Baker, W. E. (1987). What is money? A social structural interpretation. In  
M. S. Mizruchi & M. Schwartz (Eds.), Intercorporate relations (pp. 109–144). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.