6  F. DI PIETRO
that could fully explain the dynamics behind crowdfunding, focusing on 
two main aspects: (1) the incentives and disincentives for starting or tak-ing part in crowdfunding projects (see, e.g., Gerber et al. 2012; Agrawal 
et al. 2014; Allison et al. 2015) and (2) factors associated with success-
ful campaigns (see, e.g., Agrawal et al. 2011; Mollick 2014; Colombo 
et al. 2015; Giudici et al. 2018).
Investigating initiators’ incentives for starting a crowdfunding project, 
research shows that fundraisers consider crowdfunding as an opportunity (1) to finance their company at a lower cost of capital; (2) to receive pub-lic attention; and (3) obtain feedback on the product or service offered (Gerber et al. 2012; Agarwal et al. 2014; Belleflamme et al. 2014). 
Crowdfunding platforms are easily accessible and thereby represent an opportunity for entrepreneurs to test the marketability of the project and receive suggestions. Nevertheless, embracing crowdfunding entails a great deal of public exposure and information disclosure (Agarwal et al. 2014). If creators are unable to collect the necessary funds from 
the crowd they will face the threat of not only reducing their chances of receiving future investments but also that others may steal their ideas.
Funders, on the other hand, finance crowdfunding campaigns to sup-
port an innovative idea, to help others to realise their dreams, to gain early access to new products, and to be part of a community (Zhang 2012; Agarwal et al. 2014). The exchange of resources, followed by con-
tinuous interactions among members (both supporters and creators) of these platforms, generates a sense of belonging to a community where individuals share similar views and beliefs. Nonetheless, funders face some disincentives in engaging in crowdfunding projects. Early-stage compa-nies that generally approach crowdfunding are inherently risky and often funders and creators are overoptimistic about projects outcomes (Mollick 2014). Moreover, crowdfunding is a fertile ground for fraudulent behav-iours. Creators could provide false information to promote their company and information asymmetries are very high (Agarwal et al. 2014). Lastly, 
in crowdfunding, virtual meetings replace real-life encounters, making it more challenging for the crowd to understand what businesses and what intermediary can be trusted (Schwienbacher and Larralde 2010).
1.2.1  Investment Models
Although it represents the greatest share of the crowdfunding market, there is a relatively small literature on lending crowdfunding. Lending