3 MACHINE LEARNING AND AI FOR RISK MANAGEMENT   41
techniques due to its ability of semantic understanding of unstructured 
data.
The use of AI and machine learning techniques to model credit risk 
is not a new phenomenon though it is a growing one. Back in 1994, Altman and colleagues performed a first comparative analysis between traditional statistical methods of distress and bankruptcy prediction and an alternative neural network algorithm, and concluded that a com-bined approach of the two improved accuracy significantly (Altman et al. 
1994).
It is particularly the increased complexity of assessing credit risk that 
has opened the door to machine learning. This is evident in the growing credit default swap (CDS) market where there is a lot of uncertain ele-ments involving determining both the likelihood of an event of default (credit event) and estimating the cost of default in case a default takes place. Son et al. (2016) use daily CDS of different maturities and dif-
ferent rating groups from January 2001 to February 2014 to show that nonparametric machine learning models involving deep learning outper -
form traditional benchmark models in terms of prediction accuracy as well as in proposing practical hedging measures.
The areas of consumer lending and SME lending involve large 
amounts of potential data and are increasingly relying on machine learn-ing to make better lending decisions. The example of ZestFinance in the opening section is an example of this, but there are a wide number of similar firms operating in this space. There is substantial empirical sup-port for the effectiveness of machine learning. In consumer lending, Khandani et al. (2010) propose a machine-learning technique based on 
decision trees and SVM that, when tested on actual lending data lead to cost savings of up to 25%. More recently, Figini et al. (2017) show that 
a multivariate outlier detection machine learning technique improves credit risk estimation for SME lending using data from UniCredit Bank.
3.3.2  Application to Market Risk
Market risk is the risk that emanates from investing, trading, and gener -
ally from having exposure to financial markets. Kumar (2018) provides a structural overview of how machine learning can help in market risk management, noting the benefits at each stage from data preparation, to modelling, stress testing, and providing a validation trail for model expla-nation (see also Financial Stability Board 2017).