1 DECIPHERING CROWDFUNDING   9
Colombo et al. (2015), investigating reward-based crowdfunding 
from a social capital perspective, show that during the first stages of the 
campaign, when the level of uncertainty concerning the proposed pro-jects is high, the founders’ relationships within the crowdfunding com-munity are necessary to spread information and attract early backers. The relationships and social contacts developed among founders and backers within the same online platform—internal social capital—appears to be crucial in attracting both early-capital and early-backers, which are strong predictors of a campaign’s success. Internal social capital, reducing the information asymmetry between founders and backers, triggers imitat-ing behaviours of other investors that feel more confident in endorsing the proposed project. Along this line, Butticè et al. (2017) showed that 
serial projects’ proponents in reward-based crowdfunding platforms were able to build internal social capital by launching several successful cam-paigns, increasing their chances of succeeding also in their subsequent campaigns. By supporting the same project throughout its whole crea-tive process, backers become part of a virtual community sharing com-mon views and goals and this creates an emotional connection with other members of the group and with the entrepreneur as well.
The importance of social capital in reward-based crowdfunding and, 
in general, the characteristics of the geographic area where project’s pro-ponent reside were also examined by Giudici et al. (2018). Their study 
demonstrates that local altruism—the level of altruism shared by people living in the founder’s city—represents a key success factor for crowd-funding projects and this effect is strengthened by the entrepreneur’s personal social networks, supporting the findings of Mollick (2014), and local relations among residents. More recently, Di Pietro et al. (2018a), 
looking at the characteristics of the geographic area where investors reside, suggest that local religiosity can play a significant role in enhanc-
ing the fundraising of cross-regional crowdfunding projects.
On the topic of donation-based crowdfunding, scholars have 
focused their attention mainly on the determinants of funding behav-iours (Gleasure and Feller 2016), considering the benefits that donors achieve through donations. In some cases, financial benefits are gained in the form of tax deductibility as suggested by Meer (2014), but more frequently social benefits represent the main reward for donors. From this perspective, the way in which projects are described and the ano-nymity of users influence the propensity and the amount of donations