10 BLOCKCHAIN BEYOND CRYPTOCURRENCIES   157
credit score models (Abdou and Pointon 2011). These issues are particu-
larly pronounced when potential borrowers are small- and medium-sized businesses or individuals for which information is rarely publicly and/or readily available (Thomas et al. 2017). This ultimately results in ineffi-
cient capital allocation (Jacobson and Roszbach 2003) and lost growth opportunities (Beck and Demirguc-Kunt 2006).
In order to overcome these limitations, financial institutions have 
started looking at using “alternative data” in their models such as mobile-phone information, psychometric testing, social media activity, or ecommerce transactions (McEvoy 2014). However, collecting, aggre-gating, and integrating data from different sources can be challenging and require specialist skills that financial companies do not always have in-house. The growing demand for this kind of service has led to the emergence of data marketplaces (Stahl et al. 2014). Data marketplaces 
usually offer a wide range of capabilities, such as data gathering, aggrega-tion, integration, processing, enrichment, etc. (Roman and Gatti 2016). When it comes to credit scoring, data marketplaces can represent a com-mon point of entry for perspective lenders and borrowers through which information is exchanged securely (Roman and Gatti 2016). Data mar -
ketplaces are essentially centralised systems, therefore require different stakeholders to trust a third-party managing their data. This may prove to be particularly challenging for very sensitive and potentially valuable data like those used for credit scoring. In this context, blockchain can be leveraged to create disintermediated trusted data marketplaces that securely connect together information providers, perspective borrowers and lenders, and guarantees data provenance and data integrity (Roman and Gatti 2016). Blockchain-enabled systems have therefore the poten-tial to improve the credit scoring processes, therefore lowering default rates and providing undoubted economic benefits (Byströrm 2016).
10.5  t rading  and settlements
Chapter 8 in this book is dedicated to recent advancements in trad-
ing technology. Even though trade execution time has been brought down to milliseconds, post-trade settlement is still a lengthy and redun-dant process that spans over multiple days. Two-day (T + 2) or three-
day (T + 3) settlement is still the industry standard but more complex 
transactions like syndicated loans can take up to three weeks (Chiu and