96  T. BUTLER AND L. O’BRIEN
was able to create ontology-based meta-data models, based on SmaRT 
vocabularies and rules, that will help scale up the findings and make Digital Regulatory Reporting a reality in the Enterprise. During the Sprint, the ModelDR application was integrated with SmaRT in order to demonstrate how SMEs could capture domain knowledge (here on regulatory provisions) and use this as an input to semantic models expressed in OWL—such models may be used for data virtualisation (see Kontchakov et al. 2013). Such models are currently being built at great 
cost by major banks. The ability to have business professionals partic-ipate in this process is argued to make this process more efficient and help address the aforementioned translation problem and make semantic interoperability possible. This approach also helps scale up the PoC to a working enterprise-wide solution.
6.4  d iscussion  and imPlications
While Know Your Customer (KYC), Anti-money Laundering (AML), and the financial crime problem spaces are, perhaps, the most mature areas in the application of RegTech, Enterprise Data Management is, perhaps, the most important area for the application of RegTech and the lens through which all RegTech solutions should be viewed. The rationale for this assertion is simple and straightforward—financial enter -
prises have become more or less fully digitised and almost all people, business objects and processes are represented in and through data, be it structured or unstructured. Regulations themselves are unstructured data—although, regulators are seeking to bring structure to regulatory provisions and rules. In the area of conduct risk, for example, predictive analytics and machine learning are being used to identify insider (cyber)threats, suspicious activity (fraud and financial crime), insider trading, and employee misconduct, all based on data captured from phone calls, emails, business transactions, and so on. Unfortunately, the approaches being taken by multiple vendors using proprietary approaches, and applying technologies as diverse as AI, machine learning, NLP, DLT, biometrics, cryptography, cloud computing, and open APIs, may result in a digital Tower of Babel, as semantic interoperability a major issue for the industry.
The traditional approach employed in Bamberger’s Technologies of 
Compliance, whether GRC or RegTech, is to transform and map regu-latory provisions, compliance imperatives and rules into software code.