9 TOKEN-BASED BUSINESS MODELS   145
Runway is a platform that enables women to rent unique clothing and 
personal accessories online.
As this new economic paradigm is unfolding, now a hybrid economy 
is flourishing where some industries based on the Commons are starting to operate at near zero marginal cost, while other industries continue to cling to capitalist consumer markets. Companies like Uber and Airbnb will attempt to bridge the gap between the two economies and take advan-tage of both. Though, it is very likely that over the coming few years, new business models based on decentralised “dumb” platforms, such as Citi Arcade and LaZooz will continue to disrupt the Uber-like “smart” plat-form business models. Blockchain allows buyers and sellers or lenders and borrowers to do business directly with each other, without the interven-tion of a large commercial platform. In other words, as Ethereum founder Vitalik Buterin has put it: Blockchain does not make the taxi driver lose his job, the network technology makes Uber superfluous.
The introduction of token networks based on blockchain technol-
ogy in such a dynamic environment could represent an additional stage towards a completely disintermediated sharing economy and distributed business models where the lines between users, producers and investors are blurred. Decentralied Collaborative Commons will expand across lat-eral networks, and as access will overcome ownership, competition will be superseded by cooperation, buyers (borrowers) and sellers (investors) will transition to prosumers.
Utility tokens will play an active role in this new system. A consumer 
who buys a utility token supports the network stability and liquidity. The more purchases and sales of services or goods happen in the network, the more effective the network will be. The use of utility tokens by new users increases the value of the tokens and consequently the investment value of the other users. More importantly, an investor using the utility token will increase the value of its investments while providing a better network for another user. Therefore, the distinction between stakeholders will fade: a customer will be an investor and vice versa. A business company based on utility tokens will potentially be favoured by a positive escala-tion effect where use of tokens will benefit users and platform originating a self-enforcement mechanism.
To conclude, we also want to emphasise that a token-based economy 
is not immune from hazards. Cascade-effects, scams and hoarding move-ments remain main risks to be addressed in order to smoothly evolve towards an authentic Sharing Economy.