7 PAYMENT SERVICE DIRECTIVE II AND ITS IMPLICATIONS   107
services providers across the various EU jurisdiction with no obvious 
explanations. 85% of the APIs existed before the Directive so there is no evidence of much new competition entering the market.
Additionally, the impact study found that the use of passporting for 
payment services varied greatly between jurisdictions but even when this legislative facility was employed, firms only operated in a small number of EU states besides their home nation. The process of obtaining a pass-port was seen as lengthy and complex. Reasons given for this included a lack of harmonisation of customer protection and anti-money laundering measures. The impact study also indicated that APIs that also provided credit to customers were subject to two separate regulators. It recom-mended that a single regulator supervise both the provision of credit and payment services.
One of the aims behind PSD I was to ensure equal charges for 
both domestic and cross-border payments within the EU for sums of €50,000 or less. However, the impact study found mixed results. In some instances, this had resulted in higher fees for both types of trans-action and the introduction of new charges. Some EU states also per -
mitted differential charges for different payment instruments reflecting the increased charges on merchants for credit card transactions. These charges could exceed the actual costs card companies imposed on mer -
chants. This appears to contradict the Consumer Rights Directive.
4 This 
limits merchants charging “in respect of the use of a given means of pay-ment, fees that exceed the cost borne by the trader for the use of such means”.
5 However, the impact study did point out that establishing and 
enforcing the true cost to a merchant of accepting a credit card payment may be complex and difficult.
The impact study also found potential confusion between payments 
under the PSD I and those relating to e-money, which are subject to the Electronic Money Directive II.
6 In essence, a payment service provides 
secure messaging between the person or entity instructing the payment and the recipient of the funds and the respective businesses holding the money to be transmitted and the organisation receiving the funds.  
4 2011/83/EU, published in 2011 and enacted into national laws in 2013, https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32011L0083.
5 Ibid., Art 19.
6 2009/110/EC, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/en/ALL/?uri= CELEX:  
32009L0110.