9 TOKEN-BASED BUSINESS MODELS   137
The creation of new tokens is generally a less complex process than 
creating native coins as it does not require to modify the codes from a 
particular protocol or create a new blockchain from scratch. Moreover, the recent implementation of blockchain middleware and app develop-ment tools, Turing-complete codes for smart contracts on the block-chain allow crypto tokens to be easily created, published, shared and exchanged.
This chapter will not provide a taxonomy of cryptocurrencies but it 
will rather focus on crypto tokens as alternative funding instruments of new token-based business models. For a taxonomy of cryptocurrencies, we refer the readers to Bech and Garratt (2017).
9.2  n ative  digital  assets
Native tokens are digital fungible assets created within a novel or “forked” off a pre-existing blockchain. A native token “a” exists and operates on the blockchain network “A” which allows peer-to-peer (sometimes, anonymous or pseudo-anonymous) transactions of “a” between different network participants. However, the reader should be aware that a native token needs a blockchain but a blockchain can func-tion even without a token (Tasca and Tessone 2018).
In order to present the main features of native coins, we take the 
configuration proposed by Tasca (2016) who highlights a dual nature of Bitcoin: as a currency and as a payment network. In its first nature, Bitcoin operates as a currency. According to economic theory, a currency has three main features: it is a medium of exchange, a unit of account and a store of value. These frameworks can be extended beyond Bitcoin to analyse the characteristics of any other native coin.
Whether native coins could be considered currencies or not is an 
ongoing debate. As a matter of fact, the European Central Bank (ECB)  and other financial market authorities do not confirm this view. For this reason, these institutions do prefer to use the term “digital tokens” instead of “cryptocurrencies” when referring to native coins. This thesis is supported by the fact that digital assets do not ensue a legal tender (Tasca 2015). Within a given jurisdiction, a legal tender is mandatory 
accepted, accepted at full-time value and it has the power to release debtors from paying their obligation. However, some jurisdictions have already begun the process towards legalisation of cryptocurrencies. For instance, in Japan the Financial Services Agency is working towards