110  A. BRENER
be used for buying goods and services from a prescribed list of businesses 
are now included within the Directive’s scope.11 However, payments 
made within a group of companies remains exempt from the need for regulation as do payments aimed at collecting funds for charitable pur -
poses. As before, with PSD I, physical cash and paper based payment instruments (e.g. cheques) remain outside the scope of the Directive.
Payments sent or received where one of the Payment Service 
Providers (PSPs) is located outside the EEA will be covered, as will pay-ments in non-EEA currencies.
12
PSD II, as with PSD I, is limited to regulating payment services pro-
viders which do not also take deposits or issues electronic money. Firms which take deposits which are used to fund payments will continue to be regulated under the Capital Requirements Directive IV (i.e. banks and similar credit institutions).
13 Similarly, businesses which issue electronic 
money will continue to be subject to their own Directive.14
7.4.2  Authorisation of Payment Institutions
There are no substantial changes from PSD I on the authorisation and supervision of payment institutions. However, the EBA is tasked with the job of determining criteria for establishing the minimum amount of professional indemnity insurance or other forms of guarantee required by authorised firms. Moreover, the APIs will only be permitted to provide credit when it is closely linked to the payment service.
15
In order to enhance co-operation between EU member states, the 
Directive requires the EBA to assist in resolving cross-border disputes between regulators and to publish guidance on this and the necessary data exchanges to aid supervision.
16 The EBA is also required to pub-
lish a central public register of authorised payment services firms.17 The 
Directive contains various other customer protection measures such as 
16 PSD II, Art 25 (5).
17 PSD II, Art 15.11 PSD II, Recital 14.
12 PSD II, Art 2.
13 Directive 2013/36/EU.
14 PSD II, Art 63 (3), The taking up, pursuit and prudential supervision of the business 
of electronic money institutions, Directive 2009/110/EC.
15 PSD II, Art 1 (a).