78  D. CORTIS ET AL.
the individual’s physical features and determine the health status, dis-
ease susceptibility and longevity (Lapetus Solutions 2017). From the photo provided, the facial analytics technology in this system examines a considerable number of regions on the face in order to provide data to underwriters relating to Body Mass Index (BMI), estimated age and smoking indication. Furthermore, the system scientifically formulates specific questions that vary depending on the responses provided. These will provide more insight and veracity into the individual longevity as opposed to the standard questions normally found in life insurance pro-posal forms. The advantage of such system is that the whole process only takes a few minutes to complete.
The insurance industry has also started to adopt the use of AI in 
health and accident insurance. Innovations such as implanted sensors and wearables that make use of AI provide insurers with valuable data regard-ing the insured’s health. This AI technology would also be advising and educating customers about bad lifestyle choices which may ultimately lead to lower costs for both policyholders and insurers.
5.4.2  AI in Claims Management Process
Presently, AI is also taking over administration associated with run of the mill claims. In one particular case in Japan, an AI system has replaced a team of 30 employees calculating payouts for policyholders  
(McCurry 2017).
This is not all doom and gloom from an employment perspective as 
developments may lead to claims handlers dealing with the more chal-lenging claims rather than the tedious ones. For example, Lemonade, a start-up property insurance company, has developed an automated claims process and filing a new claim became relatively easy. The smartphone application will ask the policyholder some generic questions to gather basic information on the claim. The insured does not have to complete a claim form but provide a summary of the claim such as what property was damaged, through the smartphone camera. The data provided will be analysed by the AI and run through 18 anti-fraud algorithms. Non-complex claims are approved within seconds whilst complicated claims are handed over to humans in the claims department.
The use of technology is not only pointing out but also easing the 
management of complex claims such as, making use of drones to take aerial photos of significant property damage and image analytics to quan-tify the extent of the damage (Cognizant 2017).