xx   NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS
Eleonora Monaco is Assistant Professor of Accounting and Finance at 
Católica Porto Business School (Portugal) where she teaches courses in 
financial accounting, financial statements analysis and accounting quality.  
She holds a Ph.D. in accounting from University of Chieti (Italy) and a postdoc spent at Capital Markets Cooperative Research Centre in Sydney. During her career, she has been appointed Visiting Fellow both at the University of Edinburgh Business School and at Queensland University of Technology in Australia. Her primary research areas include capital markets-based accounting research, M&A and earnings management.
John G. Mooney is Associate Professor of Information Systems and 
Technology Management and Academic Director of the Executive 
Doctorate in Business Administration at the Pepperdine Graziadio Business School. Dr. Mooney previously served as Executive Director of the Institute for Entertainment, Media and Culture from 2015–2018, Associate Dean for Academic Affairs and Online Programs from 2014–2015; Department Chair for Strategy, Entrepreneurship, Information Systems and Decision Sciences from 2012–2014; and as Associate Dean for Academic Programs from 2005–2010. He was Conference co-Chair for the 2016 37th International Conference on Information Systems that was held in Dublin, Ireland. Dr. Mooney holds a B.S. in Computer Science and a Master of Management Science both from University College Dublin, and a Ph.D. in Information Systems from UC Irvine. He was a Visiting Scholar at the MIT Sloan Center for Information Systems Research from 2010–2011 and continued his affiliation as Research Associate until 2016. His current research interests include management of digital innovation (i.e. IT-enabled business innovation) and business executive responsibilities for managing digital platforms and information resources.
Leona O’Brien, LL.M., B.C.L., BBus is Senior Legal Researcher at 
the Department of Accounting Finance and Information Systems. Her 
research interests are Semantic Technologies, Financial Regulation and RegTech/FinTech. Leona has attracted over €440,000 research fund-
ing as co-PI and is co-founder of SemanticRule, a RegTech spinout from UCC.
Mark Perry is an interdisciplinary user studies researcher. His work 
involves evaluating the ways that digital technology is practically used