36  S. AZIZ AND M. DOWLING
management we are normally particularly interested in artificial super- 
intelligence; that is machines that can demonstrate a risk management- specific intelligence higher than human intelligence in this field. To compare the two terms in a more technical manner, we can say machine learning is a core technique of AI involving learning from data, but that AI often involves additional techniques and requirements. For example, as noted by Bostrom (2014), a full AI solution would be automated in terms of data identification, data testing, and making decisions based on the data testing. In practice, AI might involve additional techniques in addition to machine learning, such as including hard-coded and logic rules. Machine learning on the other hand normally involves manual data identification and testing by the data scientist, and human decisions as to how to apply the outputted information. Given the lack of technolog-ical and organisational readiness for pure AI, and the reality that most claimed AI is in fact machine learning, in this section we outline the core machine learning techniques applied to risk management. In the follow-ing section and especially the last section, we move our discussion more towards AI as the logical next step to follow from the widespread usage of machine learning techniques.
Machine learning falls into two broad categories of supervised and 
unsupervised machine learning. In supervised learning you have input data that you wish to test to determine an output. This is similar to how in traditional statistics terms you have a range of independent variables that you test to determine relationship with the dependent variable. In unsupervised learning, you only have input data and wish to learn more about the structure of the data. Table 3.1 shows the distinction between 
these two categories as well as the main techniques within each category. A category of note that crosses both supervised and unsupervised learn-ing is deep learning, which is viewed as the closest towards AI, and to which we turn at the end of this section.
Regression machine learning is the closest group of techniques to  
that usually applied in traditional determination of the causal relation-ship between variables. In simple terms, we might describe a traditional  
linear regression equation for a credit lending risk assessment as perhaps the dependent variable being the risk of loan non-repayment, which is then sought to be explained by a range of independent variables that should influence the risk of loan non-repayment. These independent var -
iables might, for example, include financial measures such average non- repayment rates, whether the person is full-time employed, whether they have a good credit history, and whether they own property.