xviii    NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS
Dominic Cortis is a lecturer with Faculty of Economics, Management 
and Accountancy at The University of Malta. He is an associate actuary 
and is a non-executive director of a non-life insurer. Dominic has pub-lished academic papers focusing on the challenges faced in the insurance and sports betting industries.
Tilen Čuk is a Ph.D. candidate at the Perelman Centre for legal phi-
losophy (Université libre de Bruxelles). He has previously studied at 
the Ecole normale supérieure (Cachan), Paris I Sorbonne and Oxford University (MJur). His research activities focus between law and eco-nomics, with a particular interest in artificial intelligence, blockchain and algorithmic and high-frequency trading. Tilen is also a co-founder of the knowledge hub FinTech Policy EU.
Mark Cummins is Professor of Finance at the DCU Business School. 
He holds a Ph.D. in Quantitative Finance with specialism in the appli-
cation of integral transforms and the fast Fourier transform (FFT) for derivatives valuation and risk management. Mark has research interests in an array of areas, including computational finance, model risk man-agement, and the emerging areas of FinTech and InsurTech. He has published in leading international finance journals, as well as leading international field journals. He is co-editor of the “Springer Proceedings in Mathematics” title Topics in Numerical Methods for Finance and is Associate Editor with Finance Research Letters.
Jeremy Debattista is a Research Fellow within the ADAPT Centre 
at Trinity College Dublin. He currently holds a grant from the Irish 
Research Council. Jeremy’s research area focuses on challenges related to data quality, Linked Data, and applied AI.
Johann Debono is a B.Com. (Hons.) Insurance graduate from the 
University of Malta and works as a senior broker with one of the lead-
ing insurance brokers in Malta. He is in the final stages of completing a Masters in Risk Management through Birmingham City University with a research focusing on cyber risk and the use of cyber liability insurance as risk mitigation tool.
Francesca Di Pietro is Assistant Professor in Business Strategy at Trinity 
Business School, Trinity College Dublin, the University of Dublin. She 
was a Postdoctoral research fellow at LUISS Guido Carli University in Rome, Italy. She has been visiting scholar at Aalto University in Finland,