5 INSURTECH   79
Fraud is reported to represent 10% of all claims in Europe (Insurance 
Europe 2013). Rather than relying on experienced humans to detect 
fraud, insurance companies are opting for AI to investigate certain dis-
honest patterns. An Australian tech company developed an AI fraud investigation system that provides support to insurance companies in the detection of fraudulent claims. Whilst the scope of this AI technology is to assist claims handlers in preventing fraud, it also reduces adminis-tration costs for insurance companies. The system can investigate social media accounts, criminal records, property and vehicle history and other documentation submitted with the claim, thus enabling more time for the claims department to analyse results and close claims in a timely man-ner. Similar services that weed out possible fraudulent policyholders at underwriting stage are available in the market (e.g., ThreatMetrix).
5.4.3  AI in Customer Interaction
The insurance industry is seldom considered as the most innovative with respect to customer services. Despite this view, some insurance compa-nies started to make some progress and introduced the use of chatbots in their day-to-day operations in a similar fashion to other industries. Chatbots are an AI system that are normally linked with messaging appli-cations such as Facebook Messenger, with the main purpose of interact-ing with existing and prospective clients, thus acting as a virtual customer service representative. These chatbots would interact with clients by determining which insurance products would be most appropriate based on their requirements and answer queries using natural language.
Having chatbots that are powered by AI enables digital interaction 
with policyholders and prospective clients simpler and faster than with a human element. In recent years, insurance intermediaries have also invested in chatbots, for example, to provide real-time insurance quo-tation comparisons through messaging applications. Such chatbots can also provide clients with recommendations as to what insurance product would best suit their needs.
5.5  d istributed  ledger  technologies
Distributed Ledger Technologies provide opportunities for disruptive developments within the insurance industry. DLTs can be beneficial to current insurers in their processes but could also create a competitive form of peer to peer insurance networks.