2 ADDRESSING INFORMATION ASYMMETRIES IN ONLINE PEER-TO-PEER …   19
(or collect deposits as in traditional banks), they have much lower trans-
action and intermediation costs than conventional credit institutions–key drivers of interest margins (Maudos and Guevara 2004). Operating costs are minimised through the use of online automated systems, operating outside the banking regulatory system, and not carrying the loans on their books thus avoiding liabilities for loans (Serrano-Cinca et al. 2015). 
These lower costs are transferred across to both the supply and demand sides of the P2P network. Accordingly, borrowers are attracted to P2P lending platforms by transparency, rapid decision-making, the promise of non-collateralised loans often at competitive interest rates (Sviokla 2009; 
Wang et al. 2009; IOSCO 2017) and lenders are attracted by lower 
transaction costs, risk diversification, access to market, and higher poten-tial returns (Morse 2015; IOSCO 2017).
Given the strong incentives for all stakeholders in the P2P lending 
value network, it is unsurprising that the P2P lending segment has expe-rienced rapid and substantial growth since the launch of what is con-sidered the first online P2P lending platform, Zopa.com, in 2005. P2P lending platforms may be categorised in a variety of ways including busi-ness model (profit/not-for-profit), number of borrowers per loan (one-to-one/one-to-many), borrower type (consumer/business) or loan use (e.g. real estate financing). P2P lending is still at a relatively early stage of development and analyst reports on market sizing is characterised by regional focus, definitional ambiguity, and significant variances. Table 2.1 provides a summary of the size of the overall market and main segments by region.
The rapid growth of P2P lending has been justified through two main 
arguments–financial intermediation theory and market equilibrium the-ory (Serrano-Cinca et al. 2015). The financial intermediation hypothe-
sis suggests that as P2P lending platforms are more cost efficient than traditional credit institutions and therefore have lower intermediation costs, they are more attractive to both lenders and borrowers for the reasons discussed earlier. The market equilibrium hypothesis recognises that if markets function efficiently, supply and demand should be in equi-librium. However, a credit rationing problem exists, particularly in eco-nomic downturns, in that some prospective borrowers may not receive loans even if they are willing to pay higher interest rates. Proponents of the market equilibrium hypothesis argue that P2P lending platforms solve this credit rationing problem and bring the credit market towards equilibrium.