8 FROM TRANSACTIONS TO INTERACTIONS …   123
conducting transactions (e.g. Apple Pay, Square, Stripe). The benefits 
of transacting digitally, in large part lies in the speed with which iden-tities can be verified and transactions confirmed. Digital payments (see Chapter 7) are considered to be a cheaper form of transaction, and it is 
estimated that the use of cash can cost countries more than 1% of their Gross Domestic Product (GDP) (Denecker et al. 2013); electronic pay-
ment systems have lower administrative costs, lower security costs, and digital money does not require transportation, so that such reduced digital infrastructural overheads offer considerable advantages. So there is a reasonable argument to be made for considering the value of finan-cial digitalisation as presenting efficiency gains with faster, cheaper, and more mobile transactions. Yet, as we have argued, this ignores aspects of money that are pervasive even in quantitative fields such as economics in which the use of money (through prices) provides information about markets, so that money necessarily involves interactions, not just transac-tions. So how do we account for the social aspects around transactions? Returning to the conceptualisation of financial transactions embedded in social relations, we investigate where opportunities are for social interac-tions in digital transactions.
In this chapter, we examine the affordances of digital transactions to 
illustrate possibilities for action, opportunities for interaction, and the roles of negotiation and intermediation within digital transactions. We then highlight some social impacts of digital transactions and its associ-ated data generation, its embeddedness alongside other available forms of transaction, and the ways in which the digital world conflates money with payment systems.
8.2  a ffordances  of digital  money
How money is designed lends itself to different forms of use, both phys-ically and socially, and we refer to these forms of use as affordances. Norman (1999, p. 39) explains that “the word affordance was coined by the perceptual psychologist J. J. Gibson (1977) to refer to the actiona-ble properties between the world and an actor (a person or animal).” Similarly, how money is represented shapes the ways in which we can interact with it and use it. Different materials offer different affordances and ‘forcing functions’ (i.e. constraints on use; Norman 1999), histori-cally illustrated by Jevons from classical literature, noting “there was a tra-dition in Greece that Lycurgus obliged the Lacedæmonians to use iron