108  A. BRENER
The impact study considered that this process, and its importance, may 
not be clear to customers.
There are a number of payment services providers who were exempt 
from the Directive (e.g. pre-paid cards, ATM operators, money exchanges, etc.) whom the review, though, could be used to circum-vent the Directive’s requirements and hence gain an unfair competition advantage.
Another area of focus is known as “one-leg” transactions, mentioned 
earlier, since such transactions are normally undertaken by vulnerable migrant customers sending money home. The review recommended treating these types of transfers on the same basis as intra-EU payments. These and the other exemptions cause customer confusion since they may fail to understand which transactions are protected by the Directive and which fall outside it.
There was considerable confusion about the liability for unauthor -
ised payments. Article 61 limited customer liability to €150 except in circumstances involving customer fraud or gross negligence. However, implementation in member states varied. The issue appeared to be the different evidential requirements demonstrating “gross negligence” in each jurisdiction.
Finally, the review reported large differences between national com-
plaints arrangements required by the Directive. It praised those available in the Republic of Ireland and in the UK while observing that in most other member states, complaints systems had still to be developed.
In response to these findings in 2012, the EU Commission published 
a consultative “Green Paper”: “Towards an integrated European market for card, Internet and mobile payments”.
7 The Commission remained 
particularly keen to develop cross-border payments. However, it is possi-ble to speculate that the Commission was also concerned that the major credit card companies continued to dominate the consumer payments system within the EU. This may be seen as reflected in the Commission’s wish to help “to launch innovative, safe and easy-to-use digital payments services and to provide consumers and retailers with effective, convenient and secure payments methods in the Union”.
8
7 http://ec.europa.eu/finance/consultations/2012/card-internet-mobile-payments/
index_en.htm.
8 PSD II, Recital 4.