vi   PREFACE
upon which the financial sector is based. In the same way that established 
financial services firms, banks, and insurance companies are being forced to rethink their role and activities in the market, finance researchers need to reflect on the impact of FinTech innovation on finance research. What are the implications of FinTech innovation for finance literatures? As FinTech represents greater convergence of finance and technology, is greater collaboration between the finance and technology research domains required to ensure greater relevance and market impact? Does FinTech represent a new discipline in itself? While this book does not seek to address these questions, it has value to university educators and researchers, industry practitioners, and policymakers as an entrée into the wider FinTech ecosystem and some of the extant, although early stage, research being undertaken in this space.
Addressing the call for inter-disciplinarity, contributors have been 
drawn from an international group of scholars in finance, law, computer science and management. “Disrupting Finance” presents a variety of per -
spectives on how technologies are making us rethink lending, regulation and compliance, risk management, insurance, stock trading, payments, and money in the fourth industrial age. FinTech is changing how individ-uals, projects and businesses access finance and from whom. Chapters 1  
and 2 discuss crowdfunding and online peer-to-peer (P2P) lending, a 
form of crowdfunding that bypasses conventional intermediaries, pro-cesses and requirements to connect borrowers and lenders. Information asymmetry is a key issue in lending that can result in moral hazard or adverse selection. Chapter 2  explores this issue specifically discussing 
some of the mechanisms being used by online P2P lending platforms to reduce this risk. The theme of risk management is continued in Chapter 3 
where the role of machine learning and artificial intelligence is discussed in the context of the assessment and management of credit risk, market risk, operational risk, and compliance.
Chapter 4 presents a thematic analysis of extant literature on the 
somewhat controversial area of high-frequency trading and discusses key themes in extant literature including the impact of high frequency trad-ing (HFT) on market liquidity, trading strategies and speed, implications for market structure changes, and the relationship between the “script-ability” of corporate disclosure and short-term information advantage. Asymmetric information and the use of new data science techniques is a common theme in many of the chapters. Chapter 5 deals with emerg-ing uses cases in InsurTech and specifically how large and continuous