1 DECIPHERING CROWDFUNDING   7
crowdfunding is best suited for ventures that have built a viable prod-
uct and generates some initial revenue, demonstrating early traction (Paschen 2017). Scholars have analysed the role of networks within 
peer-to-peer lending crowds and their effect on crowdfunding cam-paigns’ performance. Network relations provide larger proportions of loans, lending four times more than strangers. Investors with preexist-ing network ties also respond to loan requests on average 59.5% sooner than strangers (Horvát et al. 2015). These results are in line with extant 
research on other crowdfunding models highlighting the importance of relations and network in online fundraising success (Agrawal et al. 2011; 
Mollick 2014; Colombo et al. 2015; Butticè et al. 2017).
Scholars have further investigated the lending behaviour in P2P 
crowdfunding platforms. Cummins et al. (2018), comparing lend-
ing practices of non-banking institutional investors and retail investors, found that institutional investors generally outperform retail investors, achieving higher returns upon repayments and having a lower likelihood of loan default than retail investors. Along the same lines, Kgoroeadira et al. (2018), investigated whether P2P small business lending has dif-ferent characteristics than traditional small business lending. Unlike traditional lenders, P2P online lenders, in deciding whether or not  
to lend money to businesses, focus more on entrepreneurs’ personal characteristics—e.g. person’s credit score, employment, picture, etc.—than business characteristics. This suggests that entrepreneurs should approach online markets, tailoring their pitch as personal rather than focusing on firm characteristics, since the latter are the main determi-nants of securing funding.
Similarly, while equity crowdfunding has reached significant invest-
ment volumes, the number of research studies on the area is relatively small. One of the first studies tackling the equity crowdfunding phenom-enon was conducted by Ahlers et al. (2015) examining the impact of 
project quality (human capital, social capital, and intellectual capital) and perceived level of uncertainty on the success of a campaign. The authors found that while entrepreneur’s human capital was relevant in attracting a higher number of investors and capital, social, and intellectual capi-tal did not appear to be key success factors. They also highlighted the importance of providing detailed information about the company—e.g. financial roadmaps, risk factors, etc.—to prospective backers to reduce information asymmetry. Nevin et al. (2017), focusing on the role of 
social media activities in equity-crowdfunding campaign success, show