106  A. BRENER
7.3  eu i nitiated  review  of the effectiveness   
of Psd i
The importance of the Directive is evidenced by the fact that rela-
tively shortly after it came into effect, the EU organised an independ-ent review (“the impact study”) of its effectiveness.
3 The final report of 
the impact study prepared by London Economics and iff (in association with PaySys) was submitted in 2011. Its key findings addressed passport-ing, fees and charges for payment services, market fragmented and what are known as “one-leg” transactions (i.e. where funds are sent from an EU state to a non-EU jurisdiction). These issues are considered in more detail below.
The impact study praised the way the Directive had helped develop 
a single market in EU payment services and had increased transparency within the payments market and had also increased the speed at which they were executed. All this was seen as aiding business efficiency. No longer were electronic payments allowed to march at the speed of the slowest piece of paper through the payments’ clearing system. However, there were still significant failures.
7.3.1  Main Findings of Impact Study
The impact study found little evidence of innovation in the market struc-ture. There had been very few new entrants since the Directive came into force in 2009. Moreover, payment services firms had not grasped the opportunity to operate across EU borders using passporting privileges under the Directive.
PSD I required businesses offering payment services, whether within 
a single EU jurisdiction or across EU member state borders, to be authorised by their local or “home” state regulator. By late 2012 there were only 568 authorised payment institutions (APIs). Of these some 40% carried on the business of money remittance (i.e. sending money to non-EU states; often used by migrant workers). In spite of PSD I, there remained very wide differences between the structures of payment 
3 Study on the impact of Directive 2007/64/EC on payment services in the internal 
market and on the application of Regulation (EC) No. 924/2009 on cross-border pay-
ments in the Community, Final Report, http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/payments/docs/framework/130724_study-impact-psd_en.pdf.