42  S. AZIZ AND M. DOWLING
Trading in financial markets inherently involves the risk that the 
model being used for trading is false, incomplete, or is no longer valid. 
This area is generally known as model risk management. Machine learn-ing is particularly suited to stress testing market models to determine inadvertent or emerging risk in trading behaviour. Woodall (2017) describes a variety of current use cases of machine learning for model val-idation, including the French investment firm Nataxis which at the time of writing was running over 3 million simulations a night using unsuper -
vised learning to establish new patterns of connection between assets and investigating further any simulations that emerged from the testing that showed ‘errant’ patterns compared to average estimates. Woodall also notes how Nomura uses machine learning to monitor trading within the firm to verify that unsuitable assets are not being used in trading models. An interesting current application of model risk management is the firm yields.io which provides real-time model monitoring, model testing for deviations, and model validation, all driven by AI and machine learning techniques.
Another area of focus within the category of market risk of impor -
tance to large trading firms is understanding the impact of their trad-ing on market pricing. Day (2017) explores how large trading firms are using AI, and particularly clustering techniques, to avoid the costs of try-ing to trade into and out of large positions in illiquid markets. He pro-vides a quote from Capital Fund Management, one of the largest hedge funds in France with $11 billion under management, claiming that up to two-thirds of their profit from trades can be lost due to market impact costs. Machine learning techniques significantly help with this issue by identifying connections between assets that are not easily observable and thus allow entering desired positions through a series of related assets rather than taking a large position in a single asset. Cluster analysis par -
ticularly helps in this regard (Calvalcante et al. 2016), as can deep learn-
ing models (Heaton et al. 2017).
One future direction is to move more towards reinforcement learning, 
where market trading algorithms are embedded with an ability to learn from market reactions to trades and thus adapt future trading to take account of how their trading will impact on market prices (Hendricks and Wilcox 2014). Another interesting direction is proposed in Chandrinos et al. (2018), based on tests using foreign exchange market 
trading data, where a combination of neural networks and decision tree techniques are used to provide real-time warnings to traders of changes