6 UNDERSTANDING REGTECH FOR DIGITAL REGULATORY COMPLIANCE   97
This approach is evident in early RegTech solutions in the AML/
KYC/Financial Crime domains. Thus, financial institutions adopting such technologies face a “black box” solution, with an attendant regula-tory risk that a client will, for example, be on-boarded in breach of gov-erning regulations. This might happen if a regulatory rule is not properly encoded or if all permutations and combinations are not accounted or tested for. Depending on the gravity of the breach, a financial institu-tion could find itself with a hefty fine or risk of being put out of busi-ness. In the course of our research, lawyers critical of RegTech put this argument forward and criticised the often unquestioning acceptance of vendor claims by financial institutions as to the abilities of their soft-ware applications to automate or support decision-making around KYC and client on-boarding. RegTech vendors cite Intellectual Property (IP) considerations for their unwillingness to disclose what is in their black boxes (Tyler 2017). What is required here by financial institutions and regulators is provenance between the original provisions/rules and their instantiation in computer algorithms. The RegTech Sprint PoC provides evidence of the utility of a human- and machine-readable intermediate language in ensuring faithful translation between the source regulations, the interpreted provisions, and their representation in the software that underpins technologies of compliance.
Echoing Kenneth Bamberger’s argument presented at the beginning  
of this chapter, Packin (2018, p. 194) warns of the downside to RegTech and argues that its adoption “requires a carefully tailored design of the technology, a joint effort of the regulators and the private sector and some shifts in corporate thinking.” Evidence from the RegTech Sprint indicates that this is underway. However, the RegTech genie is out of the bottle and a major problem facing the industry is the growing number of proprie-tary RegTech solutions from multiple vendors, none of which are aligned around a common model or infrastructure. It has been brought to our attention by executives from Globally Systemic Important Banks (GSIBs or GSIFIs) that the last thing they want is to have multiple FinTech and RegTech solutions, from multiple vendors, adding to the proliferation of applications across their institutions and to the burgeoning “spaghetti pots” of code and data.
The FCA is advocating the adoption of open source technologies 
and open semantic standards, such as those developed by the W3C, to link and make machine-readable and machine-executable structured and unstructured data across heterogeneous sources. Hence, its focus is on