156  P. ROSATI AND T. ČUK
into the pockets of families in developing countries therefore reducing 
(at least partially) the gap with richer countries.
10.4  c redit  and lending
Credit and lending is another area where blockchain can significantly change current operations. Other chapters in this book discuss peer- to-peer lending (Chapter 2) and crowdfunding (Chapter 1), two well- established innovations in the FinTech landscape with significant growth rates. Despite the attention they receive today, these practices are essen-tially as old as commerce; the main difference is that they were tradition-ally based on informal and interpersonal trust relationships. Peer-to-peer platforms have essentially found a way to reduce information asymme-try and formalise the relationship between parties therefore increas-ing trust between the two sides of the market, and, of course, to profit from their intermediation role. As a technology enabling peer-to-peer “trust-free” transactions, blockchain can replace both traditional (e.g. banks, credit unions) and new intermediaries (e.g. peer-to-peer lending platforms) therefore lowering transaction costs of lending and business financing (Larios-Hernández 2017). A typical example is the adoption of blockchain-based tokens to enable disintermediated crowdfunding campaigns also known as Initial Coin Offerings
4 (ICOs) (see, among 
others, Rohr and Wright 2017; Adhami et al. 2018; Catalini and Gans 
2018; Chen 2018; Howell et al. 2018). Despite all the attention these 
blockchain-enabled peer-to-peer systems are receiving from investors, regulators, and the media, the volume of capital that goes through these channels still represents a tiny portion of the overall credit/lending mar -
ket. As Hawlitschek et al. (2018) suggest, these systems still struggle in 
crossing users’ “trust frontier”. The authors further suggest that a wide-spread adoption of these systems depends on the development of trusted interfaces.
In the context of credit and lending, blockchain could also be lev-
eraged to improve lenders’ decision-making. Risk assessment of poten-tial borrowers (be it a company or an individual) is usually based on the historical records of financial transactions. Data availability and quality, however, pose significant challenges to the validity and robustness of 
4 This topic is discussed in more details in the previous chapter.