90  T. BUTLER AND L. O’BRIEN
1.  First, making the business of complying with reporting require-
ments simpler.
2.  Second, technology that drives efficiencies in regulatory com-pliance by seeking to close the gap between the intention of reg-ulatory requirements and the subsequent interpretation and implementation within firms.
3.  Third, technology that simplifies and assists firms in managing and exploiting their existing data, supporting better decision-making and finding those who are not playing by the rules easier.
4.  Finally, technologies and innovations that allow regulation and compliance processes to be delivered differently and more efficiently.
The above conceptualisation indicates a role for several new technologies including artificial intelligence (AI), blockchain/distributed ledger tech-nologies (DLT), machine learning, natural language processing (NLP), and data analytics. However, it was clear from several presentations at the European Central Bank Data Standards for Granular Data Conference 2017 that the sine qua non for the success of RegTech would be the use of open standards and semantic technologies (Palmer 2017). A stand-ards-based approach would be necessary to address the core issues of the translation and Tower of Babel problems (Bamberger 2009; Haldane 
2012; Butler 2017).
6.3  r egtech in focus: digital   
regulatory  rePorting
The need for an industry-wide standards-based approach to regulatory compliance and reporting, articulated in the position paper of Butler (2017) on open standards for RegTech, found purchase with both UK 
regulators and the financial industry. The Bank of England and the FCA subsequently hypothesised that standards-based RegTech could help automate, and make more efficient and cost-effective, the task of regula-tory reporting by financial institutions. To confirm their hypothesis, the UK regulators instituted a Technology Sprint—in this case the RegTech Sprint.
The remainder of this chapter presents a short case study of the 
RegTech Sprint. This was undertaken by the Bank of England and the