10 BLOCKCHAIN BEYOND CRYPTOCURRENCIES   161
Protection Act,9 (2) Know Your Customer (KYC) and Anti-Money 
Laundering (AML) regulation, and (3) financial reporting standards 
(IFRS/IAS). Blockchain can help financial companies and regulators in handling compliance requirements across all these areas. MiFID II and the Dodd-Frank have been enacted in response to the global financial crisis with the main objective of increasing transparency in the financial markets and strengthening investor protection (Black 2010; Prorokowski 
2015). Both regulations require financial firms to keep track of all inter -
actions related to every single transaction. Comprehensive, traceable and time-stamped reporting is essential to comply with these regulations and this is where blockchain may represent a valuable solution. For example, Sheridan (2017) argues that a publicly available blockchain can be an effective solution to effectively communicate equivalence decisions under MiFID II; this would represent a single source of truth for identifying third-party countries that are allowed to conduct financial business in the EU. Similarly, a distributed ledger can be used by different regulators to uniformly record firm-by-firm authorisations and permissions.
Processes for KYC/AML compliance are particularly redundant. 
Financial institutions are required to onboard their customers before conducting any business activity with them in order to avoid work-ing with/for customers involved in illegal activities (Ruce 2011). The onboarding process consists of an exchange of documents and informa-tion between a financial institution and the perspective customer. Even though most of the documents required for onboarding customers are standardised, the overall process has to be repeated by each institution for each customer with which it wants to interact. Secure and reliable information sharing could eliminate redundancies therefore making the process more efficient and improving customer experience (Moyano and Ross 2017). Moyano and Ross (2017) propose a system architecture for 
a distributed ledger through which financial institutions can verify the result of standardised KYC tasks that have already been conducted for a specific customer. Such a system would lower the cost associated with KYC processes without compromising participants’ security and privacy.
Financial reporting quality is historically a key concern for regulators. 
Even though this applies to every industry, the financial sector has tradi-tionally received special attention in this respect due to the key enabling 
9 https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/111/hr4173/text.