3 MACHINE LEARNING AND AI FOR RISK MANAGEMENT   45
relates to topics already discussed in prior sections, the key advantage 
of machine learning in a pure RegTech sense is the ability for contin-uous monitoring of firm activities. Arner et al. (2016) note this ability 
for real-time insights and therefore avoiding compliance breaches rather than having to deal with the consequences of breaches after they have occurred. Other advantages noted are the ability to free up regulatory capital due to the better monitoring, as well as automation reducing some of the estimated $70 billion that major financial institutions spend on compliance each year.
A key player in this field is IBM following their acqui-hire purchase of 
Promontory (a 600-staff RegTech startup), and they now offer a range  
of AI-driven solutions for reducing RegTech costs, demonstrating the widespread industry interest in the area not just confined to startups. For example, real-time voice conversation analysis to being used to ensure compliance through a combination of IBM’s Watson AI expertise and Promontory’s domain-specific expertise. This involves translating voice conversations to text and then classifying this text using natural language processing into categories that identifies potential non-compliance. Other applications of machine learning include the automatic read-ing and interpretation of the implications of regulatory documentation, again using natural language processing, as a London-based Waymark currently offers to financial institutions.
3.4  t he challenges  and future  of machine   
learning  and ai for risk management
There are some significant practical issues that need to be addressed before AI and machine learning techniques for risk management can claim its full potential. The most important of these is the availability of suitable data. Although machine learning packages for Python and R can easily read all types of data from Excel to SQL and can perform natural language processing and process images, the speed with which machine learning solutions have been proposed has not kept pace with firms’ abil-ities to suitably organise the internal data they have access to. Data is often held in separate silos across departments, perhaps on different sys-tems, and perhaps with internal political and regulatory issues restricting the sharing of data. Important data might not even be recorded as data but rather kept as informal knowledge of the firm.