4 WHAT FINTECH CAN LEARN FROM HIGH-FREQUENCY TRADING …   63
Although HFTs were blamed for this systemic intraday event, an investi-
gation of the FINRA Dataset shows that 6 out of 12 HFTs reduced their trading activity in the market “sometime after the crash which caused a decline in overall market liquidity. Hence, High-frequency traders did accelerate the rate of crash” (Chung et al. 2016, pp. 17–18).
The Flash Crash highlighted for the first time both the changes 
in trading speed and in the market’s structure, a new arena where the low-frequency traders (LFTs) can only fail to defend themselves from predatory HFTs strategies (Goldstein et al. 2014). It remains still unclear 
if it is the presence of a weak financial market structure that generates negative events (like the Flash Crash) or whether the latter can be caused by HFT activity. In this respect, Conrad et al. (2015, p. 290) discuss 
“[…] while dislocations are harmful to market integrity, it is important to recognize that some discontinuities have always occurred in markets (even before the age of electronic trading), just as flickering quotes have existed well before the advent of high-frequency quotation…if liquid-ity provision is not mandated by law, liquidity providers can always exit without notice, exposing marketable orders to price risk”.
Some Scholars argue that exchanges have modified their market struc-
ture (Menkveld and Yueshen 2017) to attract more high-frequency trad-ers by, among other things, permitting “algorithmic traders to co-locate their servers in the market’s data centre” (Hendershott et al. 2011). This 
co-location reduces latency and permits HFT to more quickly adjust their quotes as market conditions change and to decrease bid-ask spreads and increase market depth in the period following the introduction of these new facilities (Frino et al. 2014). Using colocation services as a proxy for 
AT and HFT, Aitken et al. (2014) examine the impact of changes in AT 
and HFT on trade size across 24 stock exchanges around the world. Mixed results on AT and HFT effects on the average trade size (used to identify AT and HFT start dates) were found. The study also demonstrated, for the first time, that even if the introduction of co-location facilities leads to the presence of HFT, the “colocation dates” do not properly measure effective AT and HFT (Aitken et al. 2014) that may enter into the market a few 
months before or after the co-location launch (Frino et al. 2017).
While on one hand the main stock exchanges seek to attract a larger 
number of HFT, both reducing the low latency and introducing new trading platforms, on the other hand many regulators around the world are trying to limit the massive volume of messages (orders), as submis-sions and cancellations, made by high-frequency traders. More recently, many regulators have attempted to discourage the HFT activity by