5 INSURTECH   81
5.5.2  P2P Insurance
The diminishment of space may result in the generation of more peer-
to-peer (P2P) insurance practices. This would act like a mutual, being Mainelli and von Gunten’s (2014) fourth domain of possible effect of a DLTs on insurance. This may lead to a reshaping of the insurance industry for particular coverages in the same manner that AirBnB and Uber/Grab have disrupted their respective industries. Mainelli and von Gunten (2014) explain that P2P networks may lead to some insurance to function like a Protection and Indemnity Club (P&I Club) rather than a mutual. Considering the example of a delayed flight, costing €10 per person each, a group of ten independent individuals may be able to cre-ate a mutual coverage. In a P&I Club format, they would pass some pro-cess to join, pay a certain amount per year (say €10) and be ready to add supplementary funds should this not be enough. For example, if a total of two claimed, then the claim costs would be €200, meaning that every participant should pay in an additional €10. If no one claimed, a profit of €100 is shared between the participants (€10 each).
3
We also envisage the possibility of a similar P2P structure through 
DLTs with reinsurance added to cover in case that the total premiums do not cover the claims. This would replace the need to add funds should the reserves not be enough to pay out claims.
5.6  c onclusion
Insurers have been accused of being slow to adapt to new technologies as 50–70% of insurers’ IT budget is spent on running costs rather than research and development (Acord and Equinix 2014). It is clear that 
Big Data is already and has further potential to revolutionise the insur -
ance business. Areas such as telematics, wearables and IoT are provid-ing a plethora of data which, when combined with advances made in AI, are enabling a much more personalised product to be developed for the consumer. Furthermore, a very different customer relationship is start-ing to emerge, from these data sources, allowing the insurer to engage more meaningfully with policyholders. Consequently, big data is likely to 
3 We are ignoring management costs or investments profits for simplification purposes.