9 TOKEN-BASED BUSINESS MODELS   141
9.4  t oken -based business  models
Having an idea is useless if one does not have enough capital to translate it 
into a reality. That is why capital raising is a vital process for any entrepre-neurial endeavour, which allows the entrepreneurs to get the business off the ground or help them in the daily operations or business development.
With regards to capital raising, the last number of years have wit-
nessed an exponential adoption of alternative token-based funding models. The lack of regulation and the relatively easy process of token creation engender the perfect conditions for a new funding trend: com-panies, especially start-ups, instead of raising funds through the tradi-tional channels (equity issuing or taking out a loan) have been selling tokens in the market to the public and bootstrapping their own project based on the proceedings collected with the token allocations. There has been a massive adoption of this solution resulting in the proliferation of token-based business models. At the moment of writing we count about 800 tokens, which means an equivalent number of token-based business projects worldwide. Just to name a few, Nexo (www.nexo.io) is a token-based business that offers the opportunity to provide crypto-backed loans. Another example is Augur (www.augur.net) which is a decentral-ised oracle and prediction market. Coinlion (coinlion.com) distributes tokens to those who share information related to the portfolio manage-ment and trading of cryptocurrencies.
Apart from a few notable projects, the quality of token-based busi-
ness models, whose number has skyrocketed in the last number of years, is generally very low (Tasca and Widmann 2017). Moreover, scams and frauds occur regularly. According to a recent study, 25% of the projects default in about 50 days after their token being listed in public trading markets (Tasca et al. 2018). As reported by Fortune, nearly half of ICOs 
started in 2017 failed by February 2018 (Morris 2018).
In order to protect investors and limit these frauds and excessive risks, 
regulators have started to develop the first regulatory frameworks and to promulgate the first official laws (Clayton 2017). On the other hand, a positive aspect of the token-based funding models is that investors are not locked-in for months or years as in the traditional VC market. Instead, tokens are tradable in the secondary market generally after a few weeks from the date of the ICO.