5 INSURTECH   75
5.3.2  Wearables
Wearables are typically viewed as being those of a wrist-borne nature 
(e.g., FitBit and the Apple watch), however, the technology is now gen-erating masses of data from a variety of sensors embedded in devices (e.g., medical technology) to fashion items such as jewellery, clothing and shoes. These devices are becoming more affordable to the general public, and similar to the uptake of telematics, insurers are benefiting from this surge of available data to improve upon their pricing models.
Potential wearable derived biometric information includes those from 
physical activity (e.g., number of steps, time spent sitting, miles cycled), cardiovascular measures (heart rate, heart rate variability, ECG, blood pressure), sleep data (quantity and quality), body temperature, galvanic skin response, blood sugar and even pollution exposure. It should come as no surprise, therefore, that the main insurance interest from wearable data comes from health long-term care insurers and to a lesser degree  
life insurance companies.
In a similar fashion to telematics, wearables provide the insurer with a 
means to determine, or at least get closer to, the true underlying risks of the insured policyholder. The opportunities for wearables, in the insur -
ance world, potentially go beyond that of refinement of current mor -
bidity and mortality models. They also provide the insurer with a means by which they can improve their marketing efforts (e.g., providing free wearables as has already been done in the UK [Stables 2016]), reduce 
customer churn through greater engagement and touch points (e.g., from monthly premium discounts) and potentially even motivate healthy behaviour change as well as alerting customers to health concerns (and hence reducing moral hazard).
Whilst the opportunities for insurance companies in this space do 
indeed appear to be great, the nascent nature of wearables for insurance purposes means that there are many issues and considerations to over -
come before their use becomes mainstream. Chief amongst these issues is the accuracy of pricing models and reliability of the devices.
5.3.3  Smart Homes and the Internet of Things (IoT)
The network of physical devices embedded with sensors and connec-tivity, allowing the transmission and communication of data has come to be known as IoT. Applications range from smart home devices