5 INSURTECH   77
(EU 2016). It will be interesting to follow how insurers may use social 
credit schemes, which monitor also social circles to create a ‘credit score’ 
(Gapper 2018), in their underwriting processes in light of these issues.
5.4  a rtificial  intelligence
Insurers have already started embracing the use of AI techniques to make sense out of the big raw data and obtain useful insights. Techniques such as deep learning, neural networks and natural language processing, amongst others, are helping in improving business operations and as a natural consequence customer’s satisfaction.
5.4.1  Machine Learning and AI in the Underwriting Process
It is very likely that all underwriters will be using machine learning and AI as predominant technologies behind their underwriting decisions over time. Workflows of Big Data processing techniques and AI algorithms enable underwriters to process and understand far more data than tradi-tional processes as well as provide more accurate underwriting predictive assessments. With more predictive models, underwriters can apply more adequate premiums and thus enabling underwriters to reduce their loss ratios.
Motor insurance premiums are traditionally charged for a pre- 
determined amount for a period of twelve months. This buffet-style approach, where you pay the same amount irrespective of use, would not apply if priced via a telematics device (Azzopardi and Cortis 2013) as explained in the earlier section. This device enables data between the insured vehicle and the insurer’s central management system to be sent instantly. This means that with the help of AI techniques, insurance com-panies develop a system of adaptive continuous pricing, instead of having a one-off yearly payment.
Traditional life insurance underwriting involves an under -
writer asking a specific set of questions to predict life events of the  
proposer/s. Lapetus Solutions, a US-based InsurTech start-up, have developed an AI system and is currently partnering with life underwrit-ers to provide quotations using facial analytics technology. This system comprises sensory analytics as well as dynamic questioning. To receive a quotation, the client just needs to send a self-portrait photograph  
(a “selfie”) and this technology will use the image provided to examine