142  P. TASCA
9.5  d riving  forces  behind  the token -based  
business  models
In the previous section, we have seen that new business models are 
designed and built around the concept, the meaning and the utility of “brand coins”, which represent alternative funding instruments for the platform economy (Hayes and Tasca 2016). This is a remarkable nov-elty that stems from four major trends: (1) platform business models, (2) peer-to-peer networks, (3) open-innovation, and (4) crowdfunding.
Platform business models: These are “intermediaries that connect two or 
more distinct groups of users and enable their direct interaction” (Zhu and Furr 2016, p. 4). More recently, these platforms deal in not only market-  
mediated digitally-encoded information such as software, music and banking services, but also goods and services more generally. While, the first-generation platforms were online or digital only, the second gen-eration of platforms has emerged operating “online to offline” (O2O) throughout the economy. Uber, Airbnb and Caviar are just a few examples of the myriad of O2O platforms operating across different sectors.
Three elements are recognised to make a platform business model 
successful (Boncheck and Choudary 2013):
• The Toolbox. It creates a connection by making it easy for others to 
plug into the platform;
• The Magnet. It creates a pull that attracts participants to the plat-
form. For transaction platforms, both producers and consumers must be present to achieve critical mass;
• The Matchmaker. It facilitates the connections between producers 
and consumers or lenders and borrowers.
Most successful internet-based businesses recently developed, have adopted the platform business model because they use technology to connect people, organisations and resources in an interactive ecosystem in which value can be created and exchanged. In these cases, the compa-nies scale up by building on their networks of users instead of accumulat-ing inventories (Parker et al. 2016).
Peer-to-peer (P2P) networks: A peer-to-peer network is “group of com-
puters, each of which acts as a node for sharing files within the group” (Technopedia). This form of network blossomed during the progressive