116  A. BRENER
(something only the user knows, e.g. a password or a PIN), possession 
(something only the user possesses, e.g. the card or an authentication code generating device) and inherence (something the user is, e.g. the use of a fingerprint or voice recognition)”.
46 There is a view that these 
arrangements may “ring alarm bells” as these services “open up a new class of vulnerabilities” (Mansfield-Devin 2016). “For remote transac-
tions, such as online payments, the security requirements go even fur -
ther, requiring a dynamic link to the amount of the transaction and the account of the payee, to further protect the user by minimising the risks in case of mistakes or fraudulent attacks”.
47
7.6.1  Exemptions for SCA
“As a matter of principle, all electronic means of payment are subject to the requirement for SCA. However, exemptions are possible as it is not always necessary and convenient to request the same level of security from all payment transactions”.
48 For example, low value transactions such as 
that used for contactless payments at terminals should not require SCA.49
7.7  c ommentary
It is not immediately obvious how the availability of PISs will change how customers operate. Customers will not see much change if they use a PISP compared to using their current credit or debit card for making a payment. However, credit card issuers and acquirers are likely to be disintermediated since merchants will not need their services. The PISP will move the funds straight from the customer’s bank account into that of the merchant.
It is likely that this will be cheaper for merchants who, in any event, 
are not permitted to charge extra for different payment methods under the Directive (Grüschow et al. 2016). It may be possible for the mer -
chant to pass some of the margin saved to the customer but again how this might be done is still not clear since offering a discount, say, for those using a PIS compared with a credit card would fall foul of PSD II.
46 European Commission—Fact Sheet—PSD II: frequently asked questions, 16, http://
europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-15-5793_en.htm. Accessed 4 April 2018.
47 Ibid., 16.
48 Ibid., 17.
49 Ibid., 17.