9 TOKEN-BASED BUSINESS MODELS   139
between hashed addresses so the risk of unauthorised transactions is very 
low (Antonopoulos 2014). However, wrong transactions cannot be can-celled but only adjusted with other transactions of opposite sign. Finally, from the perspective of universality, although cryptocurrencies count on a smaller network when compared with more traditional payment sys-tems, we need to highlight the constantly growing trend of users that opt for cryptocurrency payment systems. It has been roughly estimated that, as of March of 2017, the number of active users of Bitcoin wallets was in the range of 2.9 million and 5.8 million (Hileman and Rauchs 2017). However, since then, proportional to the market valuation and price of Bitcoin, the cryptocurrency’s user base has grown at a rapid rate. Coinbase alone, the global market’s largest bitcoin brokerage and wallet platform, serves more than 13 million active users.
That being said, one should also consider that cryptocurrency pay-
ment networks are stand-alone systems: each native coin functions within its unique payment network without any possibility to interact with other networks. For this reason, the interoperability between different block-chain systems remains one of the major future challenges to be addressed (Bridgwater 2018). In this respect, it is worth mentioning that some new 
technological solutions have been proposed to overcome this problem, see, for example, Sidechains (Back et al. 2014) and Quant Overledger 
(Verdian et al. 2018).
9.3  c ryPto  tokens
Since 2008, when an inventor (or group of inventors) under the pseudo-nym of Satoshi Nakamoto introduced Bitcoin (Nakamoto 2008), many other cryptocurrencies have been introduced by leveraging on the orig-inal Nakamoto’s protocol or by elaborating new ones. The recent tech-nological improvements have enhanced the number of applications of blockchain through smart contracts to automatically move digital assets according to arbitrary pre-specified rules (Buterin 2014). Specifically, crypto tokens give the opportunity to create businesses and auto-mate them while maintaining the record of the different states of data exchanged in the blockchain. Token Market provides a quite exhaustive list of the tokens available in the market.
A commonly accepted taxonomy—adopted by many institutions 
including the Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority (FINMA 2018)—dentifies three main token classes: