100  T. BUTLER AND L. O’BRIEN
may turn out to nothing more be fads, with little practical application or 
impact. Our previous research revealed that as of late 2016, the indus-try Chief Data Officers had yet to go beyond CDO 1.0 (Governance) to reach CDO 2.0 (Analytics) (Butler 2017). The point here being that the industry still finds difficulty in realising the benefits of data analyt-ics, and this has major implications for RegTech, as it still has not solved the problems of data governance. Likewise, while it is clear that AI, machine learning, and robotics have significant implications for FinTech and, particularly, RegTech domains, the real benefits of AI, in terms of unsupervised learning, are still some way off. Nevertheless, it is clear that ontologies, machine learning, and NLP technologies are being used effectively. That said, it is clear that AI will do little to address the fun-damental issue of “natural stupidity” in financial engineers and quants (Wilmott and Orrell 2017) or in financial experts and senior managers, whether in banks or general business organisations (Kahneman 2012), or in those responsible for systematic misconduct and fraud in the banking system (Vaughan and Finch 2016).
RegTech holds much promise for regulators and firms in the finan-
cial industry to fully benefit from the power that digitalisation offers—to solve a big problem for a relatively small effort. However, a considered, collaborative approach by all stakeholders is required if that promise is to become a reality. As societal stakeholders, IS researchers have a role to play in this, in that there is much the discipline can offer in helping practitioners develop and express a “common language” in human- and machine-readable formats.
Acknowledgements  SmaRT was developed under the Enterprise Ireland 
Commercialisation Fund, co-funded by the Irish Government and European 
Regional Development Fund (ERDF) under Ireland’s European Structural and 
Investment Funds Programme 2014–2020.
references
Arner, D. W., Barberis, J., & Buckey, R. P. (2016). FinTech, RegTech, and 
the reconceptualization of financial regulation. Northwestern Journal of 
International Law & Business, 37, 371–414.
Bamberger, K. A. (2009). Technologies of compliance: Risk and regulation in a 
digital age. Texas Law Review, 88, 669–739.
Butler, T. (2017). Towards a standards-based technology architecture for 
RegTech. Journal of Financial Transformation, 45, 49–59.