10 BLOCKCHAIN BEYOND CRYPTOCURRENCIES   151
Blockchain is mostly known as the technology underpinning 
Bitcoin, “a payment system based on cryptographic proof instead of trust” 
(Nakamoto 2008, p. 1), also referred to as cryptocurrency. While cryp-
tocurrencies have been discussed in Chapter 9, this part of the book 
explores other blockchain applications for the financial sector and dis-cusses related literature gathered from the finance, information systems and computer science fields. The rest of the chapter is structured as fol-lows. The next section provides an overview of blockchain technology. This is followed by a discussion of the current challenges that the tech-nology poses for financial services firms, and the impact of blockchain on four main financial activities: (1) payments and remittance, (2) credit and  
lending, (3) trading and settlement, and (4) compliance. The chapter concludes with a discussion of further avenues for research.
10.2  w hat is blockchain ?
Commercial transactions have been stored in ledgers since ancient times. Initially kept on clay tablets or papyrus, they then moved to paper and ultimately to bytes with the advent of computerised information sys-tems (Rosati and Paulsson 2017). Regardless the format in which ledgers were kept, they have traditionally relied on human inputs; as such, ledg-ers have been prone to errors which translate into additional costs and inefficiencies for organisations and for the economic system as a whole. Digital distributed ledgers promise to fix these issues through a unique combination of distributed networks and cryptography. Blockchain tech-nology is by far the most famous example of distributed ledgers tech-nologies (Beck et al. 2017). It was first launched in 2008 by either 
a programmer or a group of programmers under the pseudonym of Satoshi Nakamoto (Nakamoto 2008) and today is mostly known for being the technology underpinning Bitcoin, arguably the most famous open-source peer-to-peer digital currency (Mougayar 2016). However, potential applications of blockchain extend beyond digital currencies, potentially impacting corporate governance, social institutions, demo-cratic participation, and the functioning of capital markets (Wright and De Filippi 2015).
Blockchain can be defined as a decentralised, transactional data-
base that enables validated, tamper-resistant transactions across a large number of participants (i.e. nodes) in a network (Glaser 2017;