8  F. DI PIETRO
that being active on social media, engaging with the crowd, and under -
standing social media selectivity—using different social media according 
to the target audience—positively impact the outcome of a crowdfund-ing campaign. Lynn et al. (2017) provide insights on the crowdfunding 
network on Twitter—comprising multiple subcommunities, hubs, and influencers–illustrating the geographical concentration of crowdfunding in specific areas or communities and highlighting the importance of the social media use during crowdfunding campaigns.
Looking at the post-equity funding performance of crowd-backed 
start-ups in the UK, Signori and Vismara (2018) found that 18% of them were not active anymore, whereas 35% raised further funding from either traditional investors (9%) or follow-on crowdfunding offering (25%). Lastly, taking a qualitative perspective, the study by Di Pietro et al. 
(2018c) illustrates how entrepreneurs leveraging investor networks gen-erated in the course of equity-based crowdfunding campaigns, contrib-utes to the success of start-up firms. Crowd investors can provide firm founders with knowledge related to the product, strategy, and market as well as network ties with industry players and other stakeholders.
1.2.2  Non-investment Models
Agrawal et al. (2011) conducted one of the first studies investigating 
how online reward-based crowdfunding platforms reduce investors’ costs related to early-stage financing (e.g. collecting initial information, moni-toring, providing inputs, etc.) and eliminate most of the distance-related economic frictions. Their study shows that Family and Friends (F&F) investors are mostly local and invest in the project in the early phases of the funding process, whereas non-F&F investors are more geographi-cally disperse and willing to fund as the capital raised increases. Mollick (2014), taking a broader perspective, focused on the role of the founders themselves in determining the success (or failure) of their online reward-based campaigns. The perceived quality of the underlying project, which can be signalled, for example, by including videos, providing frequent updates, and avoiding spelling errors, together with the founders’ social network size, increase the chances of success of a crowdfunding cam-paign. The effects of geography on the success of the project were also considered, in terms of proximity to funders, supporting Agrawal et al. 
(2011) findings.