92  T. BUTLER AND L. O’BRIEN
6.3.1  Phase 1: Digital Regulatory Alerts
RegTech vendor RegDelta has developed taxonomies of regulatory top-
ics using the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)’s Simple Knowledge Organisation System (SKOS)
1 and AI to semantically tag regulatory pro-
visions to indicate their scope and application so alerts could be gener -
ated. SKOS is based on the W3C’s Resource Description Framework (RDF),
2 and is one of the three foundational Semantic Web technolo-
gies, the other two being SPARQL and the Web Ontology Language (OWL).
3 SKOS enables organisation to transcend the limitations of 
business glossaries to create taxonomies and thesauri that are both human- and machine-readable. Semantic tagging of regulations is but the first step in the regulatory compliance process and the SKOS name-space helps address the Tower of Babel problem. This is an example of 
the straightforward application of AI and semantic technologies to help manage the volume and complexity of regulations by having a machine answer the what and which questions. That is, what are the themes in regulatory provisions and which activities and products do they target. While this process helps partially digitalise regulatory provisions, Sprint participants recognised that the source regulations would have to be redrafted and captured in RDF, if the objective was to be achieved. This task fells to the SmaRT application.
6.3.2  Phase 2: Making Regulations Digital
The core semantic technologies in SmaRT are based on W3C and indus-try standard semantic technologies. SmaRT applies the Semantics of Business Vocabulary and Business Rules (SBVR) standard proposed by Object Management Group. SBVR enables business subject matter experts to capture and express their vocabularies and rules in a system-atic way according to the precepts of first-order deontic-alethic logic. The SmaRT application applies its Mercury implementation of SBVR Structured English to capture the meaning of the tagged regulatory pro-visions in vocabularies (alethic logic, indicating a necessity, possibility, or impossibility) and rules (deontic logic, i.e. what should be, specifying 
1 https://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/.
2 https://www.w3.org/RDF/.
3 https://www.w3.org/2003/Talks/0617-Munchen-IH/25.html.