98  T. BUTLER AND L. O’BRIEN
XML/RDF (and also Turtle and JSON-LD), ontologies (in OWL), and 
related standards, such as the SBVR, and its extensions, to express regu-latory vocabularies and rules in order to underpin the semantic interop-erability of systems.
It is also clear from our experience that large financial institutions are 
beginning to address the core problems of data governance and data virtualisation using semantic technologies that enable interoperabil-ity between systems. SBVR is being used by major banks to help map regulatory concepts on to business concepts. Ontologies are being used as meta-data models hosted in RDF triple stores as knowledge bases for data extracted from heterogeneous relational data stores and other sources. This semantic approach to data virtualisation uses SPARQL to field federated queries over the distributed meta-data/data in relational data stores. The operational data stays where it is, with the data of inter -
est returned from multiple data sources, integrated using the ontologies (as meta-data models), with further analysis and processing performed in an RDF triple store. This approach takes on an AI dimension when inferencing engines or reasoners are employed to add knowledge to a knowledge base. A semantic reasoner or rules engine consists of algo-rithms that infer logical conclusions from a set of asserted axioms or facts expressed in RDF/OWL. From a data perspective, previously unknown or unrecognised relationships across heterogeneous data sets can be asserted, thus adding more knowledge. Successful ontology-based solu-tions already exist in a wide variety of domains from defence and intelli-gence, to capital markets, to regulatory compliance (Palantir 2018).
From a business perspective, this approach enables regulatory seman-
tics (vocabularies and rules underpinning regulatory provisions and com-pliance imperatives) to be mapped to business semantics (vocabularies and rules expressed in business policies, operational standards, controls through to meta-data repositories/data dictionaries). It also permits the disambiguation, extraction, and integration of heterogeneous firm- specific data for regulatory compliance reporting and risk management. Capturing business semantics in a knowledge base is the sine qua non of good data governance. An example here is the Model Knowledge Base referred to in Fig. 6.1. Linking a model knowledge base like this with a regulatory knowledge base and integrating both with a busi-ness knowledge base can enable straight-through processing of regula-tions and automated regulatory compliance reporting of both financial data and non-financial data. Interestingly, industry bodies like the IFRS