9 TOKEN-BASED BUSINESS MODELS   143
and constant increase in bandwidth Internet capacity registered during 
the 80s, 90s and 2000s (Oram 2001). P2P networks are built on dis-intermediation and share of content. Indeed, the robustness of the net-work itself is not provided by a single central entity or restricted group of peers anymore.
Open-innovation: This is important because it highlights organisations’ 
need for a more enlightened role for R&D in a world of abundant infor -
mation, better managing and accessing intellectual property, increasing future business (Chesbrough 2006).
Crowdfunding: Defined as an open call over the Internet for financial 
resources in the form of a monetary donation, sometimes in exchange for a future product, service or reward (Kleemann et al. 2008). The 
slow action by national and international regulators left a wide legislative space to new venture attracted by the opportunity to collect easily signif-icant amount of funds from the retail market in non-traditional and not monitored ways. There are many facets of crowdfunding: (1) lending-  
based crowdfunding, which consists of loans which are repaid with inter -
est, (2) equity-based crowdfunding in which investors receive shares of the startup company, (3) reward-based crowdfunding that involves rewarding funders with a product that has actual monetary value, often an early version of the product or service being funded, and (4) donation-  
based crowdfunding in which backers donate funds because they believe in the cause (Pelizzon et al. 2016). See Chapter 1  for further discussion 
of crowdfunding.
Token-based business benefits from those four drivers as they build 
on the principles of the platform models by providing a digital means of exchanging information and value. At the same time, they leverage the latest innovations in the blockchain space that enhance the potential of P2P decentralised networks. Moreover, in line with the open-innovation  
trend described above, blockchain software is generally based on an open-source license model. The open-source model allows everyone to audit and improve the source code of protocols and smart contracts. For example, Ethereum is licensed under GNU LGPLv3, Bitcoin Core is licensed under the MIT License and Hyperledger Fabric is licensed under Apache 2.0. At the same time, blockchain-based systems leverage a crowdsourced means of verifying transactions. In that sense, it is like Wikipedia, where community consensus governs what information is trusted to be accurate. This aspect of token-based business models refers