3 MACHINE LEARNING AND AI FOR RISK MANAGEMENT   35
techniques around clustering and decision trees, and possibly deep learn-
ing. Thus a search history indicating accessing gambling websites would cluster a potential borrower into a higher risk group. While on the other hand, a history of online spending that supports the applicant’s reported income in their application to borrow, or maybe even data indicating upward career mobility, might cluster someone into a group of lower risk borrowers. The actual clusters will be significantly more refined than the simple examples given above. This approach crosses the line from machine learning to AI due to the automated nature of the lending  
decision-making process.
The ZestFinance example illustrates the essence of how AI and 
machine learning can improve risk management. A standard credit score is largely a linear calculation of a small number (about 50) positive or negative numerical characteristics about a person and thus misses out on a huge amount of additional personal information that can help to either reduce negative risk or accept positive risk. This new information is often atypical and non-numerical; the type of data which machine learning is innately suited to analysing. Our chapter thus expands on this idea of how AI and machine learning can improve risk management— particularly around the techniques being used to make decisions based on such large volumes of atypical data. The next section briefly details, in a non-technical manner, the core machine learning techniques which can be applied to improve risk management. The remainder of the chapter is devoted to the actual application of AI and machine learning to various forms of risk management, finishing with a forward-looking perspective on what is next for the role of AI in risk management and some chal-lenges that need to be addressed.
3.2  m achine  learning  and ai t echniques   
for risk management
A first step is defining what we mean by AI and machine learning, and this is not necessarily a straightforward distinction. In a glib sense the public relations and fundraising functions of startups tend to use the more attractive AI term when they most often mean machine learning, but even in research there is a reasonably fluid distinction. AI is most commonly viewed as intelligence demonstrated by machines, with intelligence being defined with reference to what we view intelligence as in humans (Turing 1952, cf. Shieber 2004). As it matters to risk