7 PAYMENT SERVICE DIRECTIVE II AND ITS IMPLICATIONS   111
those relating to the transparency of charges and prohibitions on dis-
crimination, based on nationality or place of residence against those resi-dents legally in the EU.
18
Host member states are permitted to take precautionary measures in 
the event of an emergency situation such as a large-scale fraud.19
7.4.3  Innovation
PSD II seeks to promote the development of two aspects of FinTech. The first collects, aggregates and analyses information from customer payments transactions. The Directive describes this as an “account infor -
mation service” (AIS). PSD II views the second as a “software bridge between the website of the merchant and the online banking platform” of the customer initiating a payment across to the merchant’s account.
20 
It is classified in the Directive as a “payment initiation service” (PIS). It is defined in Article 4 (15) as “a service to initiate a payment order at the request of the payment service user with respect to a payment account held at another payment service provider”. It is a secure messaging sys-tem and at no stage does the PIS provider ever hold the customer’s payment.
Providers of such services are termed “PISPs” and “AISPs”. They are 
also known collectively as third-party providers (TPPs).
21 These may be 
seen as distinct new financial services industries developing new customer services (Chiu 2017).
The Directive also refers to “account servicing payment service pro-
vider” (AS PSP). This is the firm where the customer’s payment account is held (e.g. the customer’s bank).
Customers must give explicit consent to use PIS and AIS arrange-
ments. There is no requirement for a contract between the customer and either the PISP or AISP. Nor is a contract necessary between the PISP and the merchant supplying goods or services to the customer.
22 
Customer agreements with PSP can be either ad hoc, good for a sin-gle transaction or set-up under a continuing contract. The latter must be 
18 PSD II, Art 98 and Title III.
19 PSD II, Art 30.
20 PSD II, Recital 26–29.
21 PSD II, Art 4.
22 PSD II, Recital 30.