7 PAYMENT SERVICE DIRECTIVE II AND ITS IMPLICATIONS   105
successful and the EU’s attempt to get ahead of and, to a certain extent, 
guide the development of both markets and technologies which are fast changing through PSD II.
7.2  b ackground
In 2007 the EU published its first attempt at payment services regulation—  
the PSD I.1 EU member states were required to implement the Directive 
in 2009. It was a maximum harmonisation Directive (i.e. EU states cannot exceed the terms of the Directive by, for example, imposing additional restrictions).
The central issue was that the payments systems within the EU were 
organised along national lines and fragmented. The aims of the Directive were to align these to help facilitate the EU single market in goods and services and to support greater competition in payment services (Donnelly 2016). Specifically, its objectives were to assist in the devel-
opment of the Eurozone’s cross-border payment system known as the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA); to regulate payment businesses to encourage non-banks to enter the payments market; to increase services for customers by setting maximum payment processing times and stand-ardised terms and conditions and to increase customer protection so that the latter would have greater confidence in the market.
Fundamental to this were provisions to ensure non-discrimination 
so that any payment service provider competing in the internal market could use “the services of the technical infrastructures” of incumbent payment systems providers on matching terms.
2
The Directive was seminal, in that it set the foundations for future 
work to improve competition and innovation both within national  
jurisdictions and across the borders of EU states. It sought to break the associations of banks which, for example, in the UK had steered the payments systems. That it did not fully succeed is not to diminish the Directive’s ground-breaking role as new technologies rapidly over-took legislation and existing market practices.
1 2007/64/EC, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri= CELEX:  
32007L0064&from= EN.
2 Ibid., PSD I, Recital 16.