2 ADDRESSING INFORMATION ASYMMETRIES IN ONLINE PEER-TO-PEER …   23
no effect where perceived age might signal competence, and (b) when 
the lender and borrower were of the same gender, attractiveness might negatively impact loan success. Similarly, research on Chinese borrower perceptions by Chen et al. (2016) suggests that borrowers perceived hav-
ing a shared birthplace, location or occupation with lenders increased the ‘ease of funding’. Burtch et al. (2014) note that location proximity and 
cultural differences in borrower and lender country of origin impact loan funding.
In many, but not all, P2P lending platforms operate auctions where 
the loan is only funded on a ‘fund it all’ basis, i.e. there must be suffi-cient bids to fund the loan amount requested loan in its entirety. This is sometimes referred to as the “rule of full funding” (Herzenstein et al. 2011a). As per other financial markets, where there is asymmetric 
(or imperfect) information, investors tend to herd (Bikhchandani and Sharma 2000). Bikhchandani and Sharma (2000, p. 280) define herding 
as follows:
an individual can be said to herd if she would have made an investment 
without knowing other investors’ decisions, but does not make that invest-ment when she finds that others have decided not to do so. Alternatively, 
she herds when knowledge that others are investing changes her decision 
from not investing to making the investment.
Bikchandani and Sharma (2000) differentiate between two types of 
herding–intentional and spurious. The former occurs when one set of investors copies another set of investors behaviour intentionally, i.e. the mimicry is post hoc; the latter occurs when investors behave simi-larly whether they are aware of the others investors’ behaviour or not. Intentional herding may be rational or irrational. Rational herding is based on the observation of publicly visible investment choices or actions by one or more investors and therefore involves some form of observa-tional learning and information cascades. In contrast, irrational whereas irrational herding is based on irrational beliefs or sentiment and is typi-fied by momentum-investment strategies.
In the context of P2P lending, lenders may be particularly prone 
to herding due to the transparent nature of the platforms. Indeed this transparency and access to data also makes such platforms a fertile space for academic research. Berkovich (2011) analyses data from Prosper.com and his findings suggest that there is evidence of herding as per