52  E. MONACO
The analysis also suggests that many open questions remain unanswered 
including more recent HFT trading strategies and complex techniques applied to analyse the content of both voluntary and mandatory corpo-rate disclosure. As capital markets evolve, HFT’s speed may no longer be sufficient to maintain competitiveness. The chapter concludes with a discussion of future trends and areas for research on HFT.
Keywords  High-frequency trading
 · Literary review  · Market quality  · 
Regulation  · Corporate disclosure scriptability
4.1  i ntroduction
In the last years, investment in financial technology (FinTech) grew by 
201% around the world; total venture capital investments only grew by 63% in the same period (Aldridge and Krawciw 2017). According to Informilo.com, in 2015 payment services, online loans, data analytics and automated investing have resulted in the fastest-growing areas for big data in finance. Specifically, investment automation and other new related technologies have transformed the structure of capital markets. Reducing market-wide latency, the introduction of both co-location services and fast trading platforms enable new sophisticated investors to enter into the market. Therefore, using high speed and high-performance computing, sophisticated tools and algorithms, algorithmic traders (AT) rapidly trade securities in the main stock exchanges around the world. These changes and the behaviour of market participants attract considerable attention by both the academic community and policymakers. Many papers discuss the role played by AT in capital markets as well as their trading strategies and consequences for market quality. Similarly, market regulators have expressed concerns about the growing participation of ATs and the costs associated with monitoring their activities.
This chapter provides a review of the High-frequency trading (HFT) 
literature based on 11 years of publications, discusses HFT consequences on capital markets, and suggests future research directions. Following a similar approach adopted by prior studies (Massaro et al. 2016), this 
chapter aims to answer three questions:
• What are the major themes that have been discussed in HFT research field?