26  M. CUMMINS ET AL.
resulting in changes to platform operation. Similarly, different countries 
operate under different levels of regulation and oversight. While there has been a small number of European studies and an increasing base of literature from China, the majority of early research has a US-focus. There is little truly comparative work examining the impact of local socio-economic forces, culture, language, and other aspects of national identity on borrower and lender behaviour on domestic and interna-tional P2P lending platforms.
The number of P2P lending platforms has increased dramatically since 
2005. In China alone, media reports suggest over 2000 P2P lending platforms were active in the market in February 2018. Today, there are P2P lending platforms of every hue; they each have different features, functionalities, and affordances that impact the operation of the market. As with geo-cultural focus of early research, early P2P lending research focused on available datasets such as Prosper.com. Whether extant find-ings are generalisable across all platforms and take into account platform idiosyncrasies is worthy of further exploration.
The role and impact of information disclosure, hard and soft, has 
been the focus of much of the academic research to date. In this era of big data and API-fication, platforms are increasingly looking to integrate third-party data sources into P2P lending platforms. Yan et al. (2015) 
discuss the potentially transformational role such big data can have in reducing information asymmetry through reduced signalling and search costs. While highlighting the benefits of increased data volumes and vari-ety, they warn that such volumes and velocity of data will only reduce information asymmetries where the quality of the data analysis and sub-sequent analysis is relatively high. Related technologies such as machine learning, deep learning and artificial intelligence similarly can contrib-ute to loan decision-making and reducing information asymmetries but provide their own unique challenges and may result in unexpected con-sequences, not least diluting or removing the human element in P2P lending.
This chapter primarily focuses on information disclosure and herding 
as a means of reducing information asymmetries in P2P lending. Due to the large number of platforms operating today, there is greater heteroge-neity in the structural mechanisms for reducing information asymmetries including provision point mechanisms, platform rules, contractual agree-ments, etc. The heterogeneity, scale, and global footprint of P2P lending