44  S. AZIZ AND M. DOWLING
predict latent risks and detect links between employees. It also enables 
banks to generate and prioritise alerts based on types of suspicious activ-ity and the level of risks involved. Ngai et al. (2011) provide an excellent 
overview of the core AI techniques used in the financial fraud detection, and note the main techniques applied as being decision trees and neural networks.
As a practical application, five of the biggest banks in the Nordics have 
recently joined together to establish a joint anti-money laundering infra-structure—known as the Nordic KYC Utility. An AI-based infrastruc-ture will help comply with regulations and requirements related to KYC (Know Your Customer) regulations and avoid the imposition of fines by regulators. Similarly, HSBC is introducing AI technology, developed by data analytics firm Quantexa, to monitor their anti-money launder -
ing processes. There are practical efforts in fraud prevention too. For example, a joint venture of Royal Bank of Scotland and Vocalink in the UK is creating a machine learning system to scan transactions by small and large business customers to identify and circumvent false invoices and potential instances of fraud. A study by Colladon and Remondi (2017) using real data from 33,000 transactions of an Italian factoring firm shows the effectiveness of such analysis in fraud detection (see also Demetis 2018).
3.3.4  Application to RegTech
Compliance with risk management regulations is a vital function for financial firms, especially post the financial crisis. While risk management professionals often seek to draw a line between what they do and the often-bureaucratic necessity of regulatory compliance, the two are inex-tricably linked as they both relate to the overall firm systems for manag-ing risk. To that extent compliance is perhaps best linked to enterprise risk management, although it touches specifically on each of the risk functions of credit, market, and operational risk.
RegTech, an analogous area to FinTech focused on compliance dis-
cussed further in Chapter 6, has thus arisen to assist firms in the increas-ing demands of meeting compliance. In this area AI and machine learning is starting to play a significant role driven by the sheer volume of data that needs to be assessed as well as the non-conventional nature of this data. While much of the role of AI and machine learning in RegTech