4  F. DI PIETRO
the product or project announced during the campaign may be false or 
non-existent and thus the fundraiser could attempt to use the funds col-lected from the backers for other (personal) purposes; and (2) the risk of platform collapse due to malpractice by fundraisers (Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance 2018). Other risks, such as the loan default or late repayments to investors, in the case of lending-based crowdfunding, as well as changes in local and/or EU regulation were perceived as less critical for investors (Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance 2018). It is noteworthy that in the UK, unlike the general EU outlook, cybersecu-rity was viewed as a major risk factor and the impact of Brexit was not a major concern (Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance 2017c).
1.1.2  The US Market
In the United States, one of the world’s largest and most innovative countries for alternative finance, the total volume raised via crowdfund-ing in 2016 was US$34.5 billion. Regulatory interventions, such as the signing of JOBS ACT, in April 2012, have significantly contributed to the development of the crowdfunding market. Specifically, the Tittle III of the JOBS ACT brought big changes within the entrepreneur -
ial finance landscape, alleviating the burden of entrepreneurs’ in raising finance, allowing fundraising from large number of investors through approved intermediary portals.
Like in the European market, P2P lending is the dominant crowd-
funding model in the United States, accounting for 61% of the market in 2016, followed by the equity-based model which delivered US$549 million to approximately 637 businesses and reward-based crowdfunding (US$551 million) (Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance 2017b). Data also reveals a slight drop in equity-based crowdfunding com-pared to 2015, which seems to be related to regulatory ambiguity, also a feature of the EU market. Among the non-investment models, dona-tion-based crowdfunding expanded a great deal in 2016 with US$224 million raised, while reward-based crowdfunding suffered a decline from 2015 to 2016, but still continues to attract significant funds from crowds (Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance 2017b).
According to investors’ risk perceptions, in the United States the risk 
of fraud involving high-profile campaigns and business failure rate were viewed as the greatest risks to the crowdfunding industry (Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance 2017b).