7 PAYMENT SERVICE DIRECTIVE II AND ITS IMPLICATIONS   117
AISPs may be able to help customers who have multiple financial 
products which they want to view regularly. With the customer’s express 
permission, the AISP could access all the customer’s accounts in the EU and present the information in near enough real time. The data could be expressed in charts and analysed into different categories of expenditure.
This information would be of value in the market both in aggre-
gate and individually. It would help firms decide what to market and to whom. It would be of value to competitors since, for example, a cus-tomer could be enticed to move their current account with a cheaper overdraft offer.
However, it is not clear what actual level of customer demand exists 
for AIS. Typically, in the EU, only around 19% of customers have more than two bank accounts (EY 2012). Further, where a customer has two bank accounts, one will normally be for their banking transactions and the other for savings. There is a view that in Europe the advan-tages for customers of A2A have yet to emerge (Wyman 2016). Banks will almost certainly act to protect their current positions since it is esti-mated that some 9% of retail payments revenue may be under threat by 2020 (Jackson 2018). The evidence is that most customers are very pas-sive; reluctant to change “their” bank and it usually takes a significant operational failure to prompt a customer to move accounts (European Commission 2007).
There is scope for future socio-legal research on both merchant sup-
pliers and customer attitudes to the changes brought about by PSD II. Various businesses will be undertaking their own research but they are unlikely to approach it from the legal perspective. The EU will probably review whether the results from the Directive demonstrate that the mar -
kets in payment services are moving towards meeting its own objectives. Indeed, the EU will need to keep this whole area under close review as a result of both social and technological changes affects the markets and customer outcomes. Much also will depend on fraud prevention where even SCA may prove vulnerable (European Payments Council 2017).
PSD II provides scope for FinTech to develop in key parts of the pay-
ment services market. However, it is likely that growing market share will be a significant challenge for small innovators. Nevertheless, there are opportunities for large players such as the Apples and Amazons’ of this world to gain margin from card companies and for banks to intro-duce their own A2A arrangements buttressed by their reputation with customers.