10 BLOCKCHAIN BEYOND CRYPTOCURRENCIES   163
difficult task; it would be naïve to think that organisations will get rid of 
existing systems to move to blockchain-based systems. Therefore, inte-gration/migration patterns have to be identified in order to streamline adoption. The trade-off between security, performance, and sustainabil-ity is another topic that is widely discussed. In relation to this, different combinations of block sizes and encryption and consensus mechanisms are being explored; different combinations are likely to be more suitable for some applications but not for others, hence the need for a contin-gency approach to this issue.
Although there are a number of question marks around blockchain 
as a technology, the number of technical studies is arguably growing fast (Yli-Huumo et al. 2016). The same cannot be said for organisational and 
business-related research (Risius and Spohrer 2017). In a conservative, heavily regulated and profit-driven sector like financial services, reduc-ing the uncertainty around implementation outcomes, and increasing regulatory and community acceptance are likely to play a critical role in fostering blockchain adoption. We identify at least two ways to reduce uncertainty: (1) in-depth investigations of different use cases: as Risius and Spohrer (2017) also point out the number of business case studies is still very limited; (2) a suitability framework for blockchain applica-tions: not all applications or all organisations may benefit from block-chain adoption, therefore a suitability framework like the one proposed by Misra and Mondal (2011) for cloud computing applications may represent a useful “reality check” for organisations. Building legitimacy around blockchain is extremely important in this context in order to increase regulatory and community (i.e. customers, employees, inves-tors, and other stakeholders) acceptance (Rosati et al. 2016; Lynn et al. 
2018). While Lynn et al. (2018) offer a first approach to this matter, 
further research is needed to gain a deep understanding of how block-chain legitimacy is changing over time, and if and how organisations are proactively trying to build it across multiple audiences (i.e. stakeholders). Regulators indeed have mostly taken a “wait and see” position on block-chain so far but they would be more likely to incentivise the adoption of a technology that is welcomed by multiple stakeholders. Finally, creat-ing an analytical framework for measuring the value generated by block-chain investments may be extremely useful for building business cases for blockchain adoption. This is particularly relevant for financial services where financial resources are usually available but are allocated based on the return they are expected to generate. In this context being able to