124  J. FERREIRA AND M. PERRY
money, in order that its weight might deter them from overmuch trading” 
(Jevons 1876, p. 53). These notions of portability designed into the cur -
rency would seem to have had a direct impact on use, much in the same way that certain configurations of digital money and payment operations might confer financial benefits around Anti Money Laundering (AML)  or Know Your Customer (KYC)  regulations, or tracking data on user spend-ing or income might, for example, allow different forms of social sharing, customised marketing, preferential interest rates, or personalised finan-cial services to be made available to users. Here we list some of the affor -
dances of digital money and the opportunities for digital value transfer:
Frictionless: Digital money offers the promise of frictionless trans-
actions. That is, financial interactions that are fast and easy, enabled by contactless technologies. For example, checkout terminals supporting contactless payments are becoming increasingly ubiquitous, where pay-ment simply requires the consumer to wave a card or device in front of a reader, eliminating the need for entering a PIN or swiping a card through the machine. Likewise, but offering a different set of social affordances, Alipay in China supports the use of personalised QR codes, where payment is completed with a scan of the QR code. But even these forms of directly replacing the traditional form of payment are being challenged as digital technology can reformat the nature of the transac-tion dramatically. Thus, using a combination of computer vision, sen-sor fusion, and deep learning with a mobile app, Amazon Go stores  
eliminate the need for consumers to pass through a checkout point altogether, and therefore eliminate the need for any interaction on the  
part of the consumer. Described as ‘grab-and-go,’ the transaction is fric-tionless in that it is fully automated—consumers enter the store, select their items and then leave. Giving users a means of making sense of how this works, when it is operational, and which payment system is currently operating will be a significant challenge in order to ensure user under -
standing and trust.
Anonymous: Digital money offers new possibilities for conduct-
ing transactions anonymously. Persisting weaknesses in Internet secu-rity and privacy concerns drive the need for technological solutions that protect consumers’ identities (Juang 2003). One early example of an attempt at an anonymous payment system was e-cash, invented by David Chaum, as a type of limited-traceability system (Chaum 1983; Chaum 
and Brands 1997). The aim was to emulate the anonymity of cash transactions, through cryptographic protocols (Goldberg et al. 1997).