104  A. BRENER
benefits of the new Directive will only be gained if a critical mass of cus-
tomers see the value of the new services and trust the firms and processes involved.
Keywords  Payment service · European Union  · Single market  · 
Customer protection  · PSD II  · FinTech
All banks do is really data, so when you open that data up to third parties 
it allows for the first time a separation between the person that manages the customer relationship and the person that provides the balance sheet 
services. (Antony Jenkins, Financial Times, 12 January 2018)
7.1  i ntroduction
The new Payment Services Directive II (PSD II) is on the face of it, 
another technical piece of legislation. However, it is much more. It has been described as the EU firing the “starting gun for banks vs. fin-tech fight over payments” (Reuters 2017). It is both “another step towards a digital single market in the EU” and a move to introduce more competi-tion into the EU’s payments market and to break the banks’ control over customer transaction information (Dombrovskis 2018).
A number of existing businesses may be disrupted by the devel-
opments encouraged by PSD II. These include credit card issuers and merchant acquirers, providing opportunities for new FinTech com-panies and very large firms such as Amazon, Apple, etc. There will be opportunities for firms that specialise in “account to account” transfers  
(A2A) and those who, for example, collect individual customer spend-ing information, analyse the data and market it. Moreover, other juris-dictions are looking at EU legislative innovation which they may emulate (Yap 2017).
Payment services have largely avoided EU regulation until recently. 
However, regulation can “when drafted and applied correctly … be an effective tool for creating incentives to increase innovation, economic development and competition” (Romānova et al. 2018, p. 21). This 
chapter looks at how the original view has changed with, initially, the first  
Payment Services Directive (PSD I); why PSD I was judged less than