126  J. FERREIRA AND M. PERRY
be made viable. Early instantiations of micropayment systems faltered 
in the 1990s, but blockchain technology, with its potential for low-  
transaction cost micropayments offers credible opportunities for casual and ad hoc payments. This has been demonstrated as having value in thing-to-thing (also known as machine-to-machine) payments in the Internet of things (Lundqvist et al. 2017), for example, to purchase or 
sell power, bandwidth, or data. The effort of making or setting up mul-tiple tiny payments manually, is however, a challenge, and allowing end users (i.e. ordinary citizens) to set these payments up, to monitor them over time, and to ensure that fraudulent payments are not being made requires user interface designs that are easily understandable and simple to operate.
Dataful: Using digital money itself generates data, in a way that using 
cash does not. This data has enormous potential value and can be used to both generate revenue with new business models, as well as to provide the users themselves with information about their monetary activities, in the same way that Google gains knowledge through users’ search activi-ties at the same time as users can gain access to more personalised knowl-edge as they do so.
8.3  o PPortunities  for interaction
For money use to be conceived as social interactions, rather than just transactions, hinges on identifying the opportunities available for money users to engage in social encounters with each other. In the following sections, we draw attention to where these opportunities might be in the transaction, the effects of intermediation on these opportunities, and implications for understanding value in the transaction.
8.3.1  Negotiating Payment
Two parties coming to agreement on how payment will proceed, what information will be exchanged and how. While a typical cash transac-tion occurs during a face-to-face exchange of cash, it is easy to imagine any means of exchange using similar physical formats of money. As one example, one party could place their money in a physical location and hand the other party a set of instructions for how to locate it. The mechanics we choose to adhere to during the exchange of money in our everyday lives are guided by social conventions (Carruthers 2010), but