4 WHAT FINTECH CAN LEARN FROM HIGH-FREQUENCY TRADING …   61
Yao and Ye (2018) find that HFT liquidity supply is larger for stocks for 
which the spread is constrained to be large because of tick size. Jarnecic and Snape (2014) describe the HFT provision of liquidity on an on- going basis which robust to fast versus slow and volatile markets resolv-ing in this way the temporal liquidity imbalances.
Other studies examine HFT consequences around specific events such 
as earnings announcements (EPMs) (Frino et al. 2017), short sale-ban 
(Brogaard et al. 2017), predictable trades (Bessembinder et al. 2016) 
and extreme price movements (EPMs) (Brogaard et al. 2018), generally 
confirming the liquidity improvement.
Using the September 2008 short sale-ban, Brogaard et al. (2017) dis-
entangle the separate impact of short selling by HFTs and non-HFTs. They suggest that non-HFTs increase liquidity (as measured by bid-ask spreads) while HFTs’ short selling has the opposite effect by adversely selecting limit orders which decrease liquidity during extremely volatile short-sale ban period. Brogaard et al. (2018) investigate the activity of a 
common endogenous liquidity providers (ELPs), such as HFTs, around EPMs discovering that on average HFTs provide liquidity not only dur -
ing normal market conditions but also around a market stress such as EPMs.
Other studies have focused on HFT strategies and their influence on 
market quality. For example, Hagstromer and Nordén (2013) examine the tick-size changes and find that the activity of market-making HFTs mitigates intraday price volatility (or short-term volatility for Boehmer et al. 2015), and thus can contain the deterioration of market quality.
4.3.2.2 HFT’s Trading Strategies and Speed
The SEC’s Concept release on Equity Market Structure recognised not 
only that the advent of HFTs is one of the most significant market struc-ture developments in recent years (SEC 2010) but identified the exist-ence of four types of short-term HFTs trading strategies—passive market making, arbitrage, structural and directional.
“Passive market making” involves the submission of non-marketable 
resting orders that provide liquidity to the marketplace at specified prices. Following this strategy, HFT orders are not executed immediately but rest on an order book and prices are updated frequently to reflect market conditions. In this way HFTs generate a great number of order cancellations or modifications as orders are updated and earn a spread between bids and offers. This passive strategy decreases effective spread