2 ADDRESSING INFORMATION ASYMMETRIES IN ONLINE PEER-TO-PEER …   17
most notably by supplementing hard information with soft information, 
and herding. The remainder of this chapter discusses the structure of online P2P lending platforms in greater detail. Extant literature on infor -
mation asymmetries and online peer-to-peer lending platforms is then discussed. The chapter concludes with a discussion of further avenues for research.
2.2  o nline  Peer-to-Peer lending  Platforms
Online P2P lending platforms represent a convergence of P2P lending and collective financing, enabled by an Internet-based platform. Both P2P lending and collective financing are not new ideas in themselves. New venture financing, in particular, often mobilises existing peers based on family, friendship, or professional social relationships with the entre-preneur(s) (Berger and Udell 1998; Kotha and George 2012; Robb and 
Robinson 2014). This type of funding is often referred to as insider or 
informal funding in contrast to formal finance, whether intermediated from an equity or debt perspective (Berger and Udell 1998). Similarly, collective financing has a long history. Haas et al. (2014) cite the funding 
of the Statue of Liberty’s pedestal in the nineteenth century as an early example of collective financing. In contrast, online P2P lending platforms harness the power of the Internet to enable an online marketplace for microcredit funding that acts as an intermediary to connect individuals or businesses wishing to obtain a loan (borrowers) with individuals and insti-tutions wishing to fund loans (lenders). Lenders may not necessarily have existing social relationships with the entrepreneurs, management, or the business, and are more likely strangers with no preexisting relationship. They may be individuals or organisations established to provide credit on a formal basis. As such, online P2P lending platforms may, and increas-ingly do, allow traditional credit institutions such as banks to invest.
Online P2P lending marketplaces are two-sided networks where 
a P2P lending platform enables interactions between the demand (the borrower) and supply (the lender) sides of the network.
1 As well as 
recruiting potential borrowers and lenders (market-making), the P2P lending platform sets the rules or terms of engagement between bor -
rowers and lenders in the platform. Typically, registered borrowers post 
1 For the remainder of this chapter, ‘P2P lending’ refers to online P2P lending.