6 UNDERSTANDING REGTECH FOR DIGITAL REGULATORY COMPLIANCE   87
institutions, where products, concepts, and terms have different mean-
ings in and across business functions and communities of practice. The emergence of FinTech and RegTech will do little to solve fundamental problems if the industry ends up with a digital Tower of Babel that simply digitises the status quo. The essential issue of arriving at shared business and regulatory terminological dictionaries, thesauri, and taxonomies is a huge challenge and a significant obstacle for RegTech. Only then will the issue of semantic interoperability be addressed—that is, the capacity of information systems to exchange data with unambiguous, shared mean-ing. “Semantic interoperability ensures that these exchanges make sense—  
that the requester and the provider have a common understanding of the “meanings” of the requested services and data” (Heiler 1995, p. 271). 
However, even if a “common language” did exist in a financial institu-tion, we are still left with what Bamberger (2009) termed the problem 
of “translation”—that is the gap between the meanings accorded to business concepts by business professionals and the intended behaviours of automated processes, and the meanings recorded by systems analysts and software engineers in data stores and the behaviours embedded in software code. Bamberger demonstrated how the “translation problem” resulted in financial, risk and compliance applications and systems that masked risk, led users into a false sense of security, and provided erro-neous signals to business managers resulting in poor decision-making on  
key issues.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. First, we discuss 
the business drivers for the adoption of RegTech, which incorporates a regulatory perspective. Then we present our empirical case study. We fin-ish by discussing the implications of our research and offer concluding comments.
6.2  b usiness  drivers  of regtech
The costs of regulatory compliance for the financial industry represent the primary drivers for RegTech adoption. Research published by The Trade indicates that banks spent over $100 billion on regulatory com-pliance in 2016 alone and this cost is rising (McDowell 2017). Bain & 
Co. estimates that governance risk and compliance (GRC) expenditure accounts for 15–20% of “run the bank cost” and 40% of “change the bank costs” (Memminger et al. 2016). Looking at specific regulations, Dodd 
Frank has cost $36 billion to date, while MiFID II has cost a € 2.5 billion