10 BLOCKCHAIN BEYOND CRYPTOCURRENCIES   155
10.3  Payments  and remittance
Departing from cryptocurrencies, here we mainly focus on interbank 
and cross-border payments which are often processed by intermediary clearing firms. These processes require a series of complicated processes including bookkeeping and transactions and balance reconciliations across multiple financial institutions
3 (Guo and Liang 2016). The result 
is a long and time-consuming process which often translates in delays in payments settlement and additional costs. Cross-border payments totalled $27.7 trillion in the first quarter of 2017 (BIS 2017), and repre-
sent 20% of total transaction volumes in the payments industry and 50% of the revenues (McKinsey 2016). Notwithstanding the scale, 43% of the capital transferred is lost in transaction costs (Guo and Liang 2016).
Beside the actual transaction cost, the time delay between payment 
initiation and settlement creates a risk for the parties involved; this is mostly related to the risk default of the counterparty and to fluctuations of the foreign currency whose value is determined by market rules (Bott and Milkau 2017). By enabling peer-to-peer payments and by offering 24/7 settlements, blockchain can reduce transaction costs and risk while bringing (almost) real-time settlements and increased transparency and traceability (Buitenhek 2016). Given these undeniable benefits, it is not surprising that both central banks and private institutions have started looking at blockchain-based applications for payments (Bott and Milkau 2017).
Inefficient payments processing is a business as much as an ethical 
problem. In fact, cross-border multi-currency payments are not only associated with business transactions; remittance also accounts for a sig-nificant amount of cross-border money transfers. According to recent World Bank estimates, international remittance totalled $585 billion in 2017, 7.32% of which was lost in transfer fees (World Bank 2017). In addition, 39% of the world’s population, mostly comprised of the pop-ulation in developing countries, does not have a bank account making it very hard for the receiver to actually collect the money being transferred (Mesropyan 2016). In this context, thoughtful combinations of block-
chain systems and mobile technologies could potentially put billions back 
3 See, for example, Park (2016) for more details on the current cross-border payment 
settlement process.