2 ADDRESSING INFORMATION ASYMMETRIES IN ONLINE PEER-TO-PEER …   21
representing the likelihood that the borrower will repay their debt. Such 
scores are derived from mandatory information disclosures from pro-spective borrowers such as credit history and personal data, but also supplemental voluntary information disclosures including more detailed biographical data, photographs, and in some cases, peer endorsements (Yan et al. 2015). Both conventional and non-standard information has 
been explored by researchers in terms of their contribution to key out-comes of the lending process, e.g. loan funding, final interest rate level, and default.
The importance of the credit grade as a signal is underlined by extant 
research which suggests, unsurprisingly, that higher credit grades are predictive of successful loan funding and lower risk of default (Greiner and Wang 2010; Emekter et al. 2015). A significant focus of research 
has been on so-called hard information which is easy to compare across borrowers and categories of borrowers. In addition to credit grade, debt-income ratio, bank account verification, and borrower debt level have been found to be significant for predicting funding probability and final interest rate (Greiner and Wang 2010; Serrano-Cinca et al. 2015). 
Despite this, it should be noted that Freedman and Jin (2008) suggest 
that exposure to credit grades rather than actual credit scores adversely effects loan decision making. In a similar vein, recent research suggests that credit grades may not represent accurate estimates of borrowers’ creditworthiness, and that the accuracy of hard information for P2P lending decision-making is improved with further information disclosure (Serrano-Cinca et al. 2015; Tao et al. 2017; Zhu 2018).
Soft information in the context of P2P lending research typically 
refers to information about the borrower and their individual situation (Dorfleitner et al. 2016). Soft information is often viewed as a means 
to addressing information asymmetry and associated adverse selection in P2P lending platforms (Weiss et al. 2010; Gao et al. 2016; Prystav 
2016). Iyer et al. (2009) suggest that screening through soft infor -
mation, in this case, the number of friend endorsements and the loan purpose, is relatively more important when evaluating lower-quality borrowers. This is consistent with Prystav (2016) who found that bor -
rowers with poorer relative credit ratings will be ignored if not for soft information. Gao et al. (2016) also identify that loan purpose is taken 
into account by lenders but they also note that they may be deceived by such information. Several studies have examined the narrative descrip-tions provided in loan listings. Research by Pötzsch and Böhme (2010)