2  F. DI PIETRO
1.1  t he crowdfunding  Phenomenon : an overview
Crowdfunding can be defined as “an open call, essentially through the 
Internet, for the provision of financial resources in order to support ini-tiatives for specific purposes” (Belleflamme et al. 2014, p. 588). Mollick 
(2014), narrowing the definition in an entrepreneurial context, defines crowdfunding as the efforts by entrepreneurial individuals and groups–cultural, social, and for-profit–to fund their ventures by drawing on small contributions from a relatively large number of individuals using the Internet. Crowdfunding draws inspiration from the concept of microfi-nance (Morduch 1999) and crowdsourcing. It represents a unique form of fundraising where capital seekers (project proponents) are linked with capital givers (investors) through a crowdfunding intermediary (plat-form) (Haas et al. 2014).
During the past five years different forms of crowdfunding have 
emerged. Based on the risk of funding for investors, we can distinguish between investment and non-investment crowdfunding models. Within these two groups, according to the right of crowdfunders in the projects’ outcome, crowdfunding platforms can further be categorised as follows:
Investment models:
• Lending-based crowdfunding: funds are paid back and funders have 
the right to receive a contractually agreed interest payment. This model is further categorised into two major submodels–(1) peer-to-peer lending (P2P) which is characterised by direct interaction between the two parties (see Chapter 2), and (2) social lending, usually used for entrepreneurial projects at local level.
• Equity-based crowdfunding: funds are provided in exchange for company’s shares. Investors have the right to receive returns on investments if the company performs well.
Non-investment models:
• Reward-based crowdfunding: funds are provided in exchange for non-monetary benefits. Common benefits include a small gift (reward) or a reservation for a product which is still under produc-tion (pre-order).
• Donation-based crowdfunding: funds are provided for philanthropic or sponsorship reasons with no expectation of remuneration.