8 FROM TRANSACTIONS TO INTERACTIONS …   127
not limited to them. Consequently, the rules for the exchange of phys-
ical money can be considered negotiable by the transacting parties and, hence, become opportunities for interaction.
8.3.2  Effects of Intermediation
The more the transaction is intermediated (by banks, financial institu-tions, technology, and infrastructure companies), the less choice transact-ing parties have in setting the rules of the value transfer. For example, a payment involving a bank deposit, will heed the rules as set by the bank and the regulatory framework in which the bank operates. Negotiable matters between the transacting parties are mostly limited to non- procedural decisions such as the agreement that bank deposit money is a valid form of payment and which banks may be involved. When pay-ments involve digital money, the tools used in the transfer of digital  
money, and by implication the designers of those tools, further constrain which decisions are left to transacting parties concerning the rules of the value transfer.
8.3.3  Collaborative Value Creation
During a transaction, the value is not only something that is transferred between transactors, it can also be created by virtue of the interaction between the transacting parties (Carroll and Bellotti 2015). When peo-ple (and devices) have to work together, that is, purposefully coordinate their actions to accomplish a monetary transaction, these transactors are engaging in what has been found to be a valuable set of opportunities for building social connections (Ferreira et al. 2015). In this way, transac-
tors are creating value in the exchange that extends beyond its economic value. Research into cumbersome transactions, that is, transactions that are perceived as slow or tedious, has highlighted the ways in which peo-ple engage with each other during the transaction and the implications of this type of interaction for enriching their social relationships. Bringing digital payment devices, such as mobile phones, into the exchange sets up the interactions with yet more potential variations.
What this would suggest is that the payments technology used—infra-
structure, interaction design, and physical form factor—offer ways of cre-ating new connections between people and new ways of using money to drive social interactions.