46  S. AZIZ AND M. DOWLING
Another issue is the availability of skilled staff to implement these new 
techniques. A survey of the top 1000 firms in the United States on AI 
implementation in their firms found that their biggest concern in the implementation of AI was the readiness and ability of staff to under -
stand and work with these new solutions (Wilson et al. 2017). Training 
a skilled cohort of staff is something that will take time, although Goldman Sachs, among other firms, has recently attempted to bypass this problem by developing a campus with space for 7000 workers in India where prevalence of these skills is more present.
There are also practical issues over how accurate machine learning 
solutions actually are. The range of testing approaches available within machine learning is growing rapidly, and that is a good thing, but it is also driven by the evident limitations of the previous methods and the need to overcome those limitations. This suggests that firms cannot simply ‘apply’ a machine learning risk management solution, but rather that it is a continuous process requiring a constant evaluation of whether their particular machine learning solution is currently considered best practice. When it comes to AI, where there is some or full automation of process from data gathering to decision-making, the need for human oversight will become even more pressing. The case of Knight Capital in 2012 serves to illustrate this risk, with their stock trading automation through algorithms resulting in a loss of $440 million in the space of just 45 minutes.
3 As AI starts to automate lending and credit risk decisions 
it will be imperative to ensure that such risks can be controlled before handing over control.
This last point serves to introduce the final major issue around trans-
parency and ethics which AI-driven solutions need to further address. Transparency is especially an issue for the increasingly popular deep learning method of machine learning as the models work on hidden lay-ers between the input data and the output decision. A black box system of this type of not conducive to effective risk oversight and can cause regulatory compliance issues especially around demonstrating model validity. A more hypothetical issue related to this is that models used by different firms might converge on similar optimums for trading causing systematic risk as well as loss to the firm. There are also broader ethi-cal issues. For example, discrimination against race in lending decisions is 
3 http://fortune.com/2012/08/02/why-knight-lost-440-million-in-45-minutes/.