144  P. TASCA
not so much to open source, but to open culture based on the participa-
tion of the crowd brought together to build, exchange and share.
9.6  c ryPto  tokens  to enhance  the sharing  economy
There is no official definition of the Sharing Economy because it is a concept adapted to the context of reference. Some proxies enclose ideas of the Sharing Economy. Take for instance “access-based consumption” which represents a set of “transactions that can be market mediated but where no transfer of ownership takes place and differ from both own-ership and sharing” (Eckhardt and Bardhi 2015). Also “collaborative consumption” is a proxy for Sharing Economy. In this respect, it can be defined as a “peer-to-peer-based activity of obtaining, giving, or sharing the access to goods and services, coordinated through community-based online services” (Hamari et al. 2016, p. 2049).
Regardless of the different conceptual forms, it is inevitable that the 
Sharing Economy challenges the current economic institutional frame-work by shifting from a framework that protects people from each other, to a framework that helps people trust each other via the “trust machine” (The Economist 2015). This is achieved thanks to universally 
acceptable censorship-resistant ledgers that solve the double spend prob-lem and allow anonymous users to achieve consensus on the states of the shared ledgers.
The blockchain platforms that empower the token-based business mod-
els have the potential to lead us towards a new economic paradigm: a shift from centralised to decentralised online marketplace solutions and from centralised two-sided platform business models—which market-mediate  
suppliers (lenders) and consumers (borrowers)—to P2P blockchain-based platforms on the top of open and decentralised networks where users are also producers/shareholders and where the value created is fairly and transparently redistributed.
We are already living in the so-called economy of Collaborative 
Commons characterised by the prevalence of sharing over ownership. This major structural and cultural change mainly applies to fungible products and services that can be easily standardised and automated, similar to the broad spectrum of services offered by traditional banks. But this is not necessarily the case. These platforms allow also for non-
 
fungible assets and services to be exchanged. For example, Rent and