74  D. CORTIS ET AL.
other market participants. We now examine three different areas in which 
big data has impacted the insurance world, to date: Telematics, Wearable Technology and the Internet of Things (IoT).
5.3.1  Telematics
A key consideration of insurance is to ensure that it charges adequate premiums by pricing its products appropriately. Within the automo-tive insurance industry, insurers have, for a long time, proxied the risk of policyholders making an accident related claim via rating factors such as drivers’ age, gender,
2 postcode, car model and claims experience. 
The underlying assumption is that these rating factors are predictive of  
the likelihood of claim. For example, a young driver with a sports car  
is deemed to be more likely to be involved in an accident than a  
middle-aged driver in a sedan and thus is priced accordingly. This pricing mechanism is problematic in the sense that some of the young drivers in question may actually be a much lower risk, in terms of driving ability, irrespective of their car type and age status. This mispricing can lead to adverse-selection where the low-risk individuals move out of the insured pool and seek cover elsewhere, eventually leading to what is known as the adverse-selection spiral. Telematics seeks to overcome this issue by using on-board technology to monitor and assess the driving behaviour of each individual driver, thus moving insurance from a pooled pricing model to a more individual specific model where the underlying risk is more closely monitored (Barbara et al. 2017).
The telematics technology devices (also known as a “black box”) can 
pick up diverse driving metrics such as location, time of day, mileage, driv-ing frequency, behaviour around hazardous zones, speed, rates of acceler -
ation and braking habits. These metrics can then be considered in a more accurate and individualised pricing model, which ultimately allows the previously trapped pooled policyholders to break free from their features such as age and prove their worth as safe drivers that are a good risk and unlikely to have an accident and hence claim. Not all policyholders are bound to profit from this as pricing accuracy may lead in certain individu-als being priced out of the market, as the previously good risks that were subsidising their premium, are now priced on a more personalised basis.
2 Although it is now illegal to base any insurance pricing on gender with the European 
Union.