8 FROM TRANSACTIONS TO INTERACTIONS …   125
Bitcoin, currently the most widely known cryptocurrency, is often cited 
as an anonymous currency, but it is in fact pseudonymous (Anonymous 2017). Full anonymity, requires hiding not only the identities of those involved in the transaction, but also the content of the transaction as well as metadata such as the date of transaction and method of payment. Further, anonymity in transactions tends to be traded off against speed and requires high levels of processing power. Achieving fully anonymous digital transactions is still an ongoing challenge, and the socio-political value that payment anonymity holds is a topic of contentious debate. Anonymous—and partially anonymous—payments can be problematic in the context of customer service: showing that something has been paid for by a customer (e.g. for item pickup or returns) when it is unclear who has paid is likely to present difficulties when these scenarios are not actively considered by designers.
Transparent: Digital money offers mechanisms for transparency in 
financial transactions. Blockchain technology (see Chapter 10), popular -
ised by Bitcoin “[..] offers a way of recording transactions or any digital interaction in a way that is designed to be secure, transparent, highly resist-ant to outages, auditable, and efficient” (Schatsky and Muraskin 2015). Transparency around transactions allows auditing, gauging who you are transacting with, and can help build trust and discourage fraudulent trans-actions. While this enables an “unprecedented level of forensic analysis to be carried out on the transactions themselves” (Buenaventura 2017,  
p. 26), it also allows the transactional metadata to be used by other par -
ties, which might include banks, third-party financial services, govern-ment agencies and tax authorities, or even users themselves in exploring their patterns of spending. Herein lies a challenge for designers in deter -
mining how transparency is managed, and who has access to what infor -
mation. To what extent would you like others to know your financial arrangements in the same way that Google, Facebook, and Amazon  
know about your digital existence: Your partner? Your boss? Your bank? Your life or health insurance company? The government? Permissioned transparency also potentially offers criminals access through a backdoor to users’ financial records.
Non-denominated: Digital money is divisible in ways that physical 
money is not. The use of digital money allows micropayments; payments that may even be below normal minimum denominations of currency (e.g. sub-cent or sub-penny). This is made more plausible when trans-action charges are low, which enable payments in very small amounts to