6 UNDERSTANDING REGTECH FOR DIGITAL REGULATORY COMPLIANCE   99
Foundation/International Accounting Standards Board are using seman-
tic technologies and ontologies to make their standards and reporting XBRL taxonomies both human- and machine-readable. So too are the ISO20022/SWIFT initiatives in their efforts to enhance its financial messaging standard. Thus, a point of convergence is not too far off, and firms across the financial industry need to ensure that they are in a posi-tion to capitalise on the very real benefits offered by semantic technolo-gies for FinTech and RegTech.
6.5  c onclusion
This chapter draws on recent field research to demonstrate the prom-ise and potential of RegTech. However, it adds a cautionary note that the full benefits of RegTech will only materialise if the pitfalls of a frag-mented Tower of Babel approach are avoided (Butler 2017). Semantic 
standards are the key to all this.
It is clear that the benefits of RegTech go well beyond straight-
through processing of compliance reporting of financial data, such as  
balance sheet reporting and the quantification of organisational or sys-temic financial risk. We have argued that one of the benefits of the appli-cation of semantic standards is data governance, through the ability to create machine-readable meta-models that enable data virtualisation across heterogeneous data stores. This approach may make the enterprise data warehouse a thing of the past. However, it also enables an enhanced  
data-driven approach to the management of non-financial risk and asso-ciated regulatory compliance reporting. Here, data from siloed, hetero-geneous databases can be virtualised and ontologies and/or predictive analytics/machine learning algorithms and AI applied to identify insider or cyber threats, suspicious activities, financial fraud by customers/  
clients, and a wealth of other applications. Readers will begin to realise that in this context RegTech can be applied across industry sectors, and not just the financial industry, as non-financial risks, such as operational risk and employee misconduct, consumer protection are not industry specific.
The financial industry spends more on IT and data than any other, 
over $360 billion per annum according to Gartner. Given the fundamen-tal problems, it faces with regulatory compliance, which is costing the industry over $100 billion per annum, and the persistent problem of data governance, management, and analytics, it seems absurd to see financial institutions chasing will-o’-the-wisp solutions or technologies which