6 UNDERSTANDING REGTECH FOR DIGITAL REGULATORY COMPLIANCE   93
obligations, prohibitions, permissions, etc.). This approach helps for -
malise regulatory and legal knowledge in the form of vocabularies (a la 
SKOS) and rules explicitly expressed to identify whether a regulatory provision prohibits certain behaviours, processes or products, or per -
mits them, or obliges firms to behave in a certain way towards custom-ers, and so on. SmaRT regulatory knowledge is persisted in an RDF Knowledge Base to make it machine-readable and machine-computable. AI-based inference and reasoning capabilities are provided by the SmaRT Ontology expressed in OWL.
4 An OWL ontology permits granular 
semantic querying (using SPARQL) and reasoning to identify new or consolidate existing knowledge—it helps bring semantic interoperability to traditional data systems.
In order to achieve the objective of the Sprint, the Bank of England 
and the FCA chose to use the Supervision Reporting Requirements pro-visions in the FCA Handbook (Sup 16.12) along with supplementary definitions supplied by regulators from the Bank of England. Sup 16.12 instructs financial institutions how to report relevant financial data to the UK supervisory authorities—the Bank of England and the Prudential Regulatory Authority (PRA) in this case. The problem with the FCA Handbook, and indeed regulatory rules in general, is that they tend to be ambiguous, drafted in legalese, with links to parent and related leg-islation, references to financial and technical standards, and links to rele-vant guidelines.
During the Sprint, the SmaRT application enabled legal and financial 
industry experts to transform complex legislation in Sup 16.12, related regulatory rules, and other texts containing standards and guidelines, into a human-readable regulatory natural language (RNL) This standards-  
based RNL is captured by SmaRT using a combination of human knowledge and expertise, augmented by AI and Machine Learning technologies, such as those in RegDelta, and presented to users in an  
HTML- and XML-based web interface.
Thus, Sprint participants encoded the regulatory provisions into 
SmaRT’s vocabulary and rules in a human-readable format. However, they are also automatically persisted in a machine-readable format in the SmaRT Regulatory Knowledge Base in RDF. As indicated, SmaRT cap-tures the relationships between concepts in RDF triples (e.g. investments 
4 https://www.w3.org/OWL/.