10  F. DI PIETRO
(Smith et al. 2013; Burtch et al. 2015). Di Pietro et al. (2018b), analys-
ing crowdfunding donations collected in Italy by Mary’s Meals Charity 
over a 15-month period, illustrate that (lower) digital divide, i.e. access to infrastructure such as broadband connection, and user’s digital liter-acy, i.e. habitual use of Internet, enhance funder’s propensity to use a crowdfunding platform for donation purposes. The findings also support the hypothesis that the use of social media, in particular Facebook shar -
ing, positively influences donations.
Overall, research in both investment and non-investment crowdfund-
ing models illustrate that (1) funding is not geographically constrained although geographical proximity matters since most of the capital flows to the same regions (e.g. Agrawal et al. 2011; Lynn et al. 2017; 
Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance 2018); (2) funding propensity grows with collected capital, highlighting the importance of friends and family as well as entrepreneurs’ internal social capital as they invest early in the funding cycle (e.g. Agrawal et al. 2011; Mollick 2014; Colombo 
et al. 2015; Butticè et al. 2017); and that (3) funding is influenced by 
the characteristics of the local area in which entrepreneurs and investors live (e.g. Di Pietro et al. 2018a; Giudici et al. 2018).
1.3  n ew research  trends : the language  
of crowdfunding
Recent studies are exploring the relevance of linguistic style in entrepre-neurial finance, a relatively nascent research area. It is widely accepted that the way entrepreneurs articulate their business is vital for fundrais-ing and legitimacy purposes. Prior research highlights storytelling as a means for entrepreneurs to establish venture legitimacy and gain stake-holder support. Specifically, Gorbatai and Nelson (2015) focus on the linguistic features of crowdfunding platforms to test the effect of lan-guage on the outcome of alternative financing campaigns and the rela-tionship between linguistic content and gender. The authors suggest that the three types of language most likely to be successful in crowd-funding campaigns are positive, vivid, and inclusive, while business lan-guage would be less rewarding for the outcome of a campaign. Davis et al. (2017) support the idea that product originality and passion dis-played by entrepreneurs in their pitches strengthen entrepreneurs’ ability to collect funding. Similarly, Parhankangas and Renko (2017) compare the linguistic style of commercial and social entrepreneurs’ pitches,