6 UNDERSTANDING REGTECH FOR DIGITAL REGULATORY COMPLIANCE   95
machine-readable format as an RDF graph pattern. The closest analogue 
to this approach is the relationship between Wikipedia and DBpedia.9 
The human-readable Wikipedia content is expressed in HTML and ren-dered into web page in a browser; however, DBpedia captures Wikipedia content and data in RDF, with concepts modelled in an ontology. Thus, information contained in related/linked Wikipedia pages can be queried (using SPARQL), extracted, federated, integrated, relationships uncov-ered or inferred, and new knowledge created.
6.3.3  Phase 3: Performing Digital Regulatory Reporting
The knowledge embedded in the SmaRT RDF-based vocabulary was used by software engineers from Hitachi, Regnosys, and Lombard Risk to map firm-specific data concepts in the anonymised customer account data sup-plied by Santander to equivalent concepts in the Regulatory Knowledge Base. The RDF-based rule graph patterns were employed to create SPARQL queries to extract compliant data on retail customer accounts. Using the SPARQL Inference Notation (SPIN) framework, rules can be graphed and executed. A software application was created to automate this process. This was then used to extract the required data, transform and load it, and then perform the required calculations and populate relevant cells in the FSA 001 Balance Sheet form for submission to the Bank of England.
The major achievement in executing the PoC came when the rule 
governing customer account reporting was changed. Once the rule change was captured in SmaRT and expressed in RDF, the software application executed over the changed rule (as an RDF graph pattern) and then populated the appropriate fields in FSA 001 form with the required data. No change in the software algorithm was required. This was a major development and provided the PoC.
6.3.4  Phase 4: Creating Meta-Data Models  
for Semantic Interoperability
Referring back to Fig. 6.2, Model Drivers (ModelDR) demonstrated a 
key benefit of the above approach to solving the semantic interoperabil-ity problem discussed earlier. ModelDR semantic modelling application 
9 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DBpedia.