154  P. ROSATI AND T. ČUK
Blockchain is mostly known for its ability to process monetary and finan-
cial transactions. However, it can also ensure that transactions comply with specific rules parties have agreed upon in the form of “smart con-tracts” (Tschorsch and Scheuermann 2016; Risius and Spohrer 2017). Beck and Müller-Bloch (2017) refer to blockchains supporting this kind of applications as “blockchain 2.0”.
Despite all the hype around blockchain, it is still a nascent technology 
and there are technical, non-technical, and regulatory challenges to over -
come in order to foster adoption. Extant academic research has focused on technical aspects of blockchain (Yli-Huumo et al. 2016; Risius 
and Spohrer 2017) but a number of issues, such as efficiency, latency, throughput, scalability, security, and systems integration still need to be (partially) addressed (Yli-Huumo et al. 2016). Security issues represent 
real concerns for financial institutions as they store and exchange highly sensitive information about their customers and operate under strict regulations. In addition, the new European General Data Protection Regulation
1 (GDPR) now requires organisations to obtain specific con-
sent from their clients to use their private information. With permis-sionless public blockchains, it is difficult to control who accesses the blockchain. As such, financial institutions are more likely to adopt a pri-vate or permissioned blockchain than a public blockchain (Fink 2017). 
However, due to smaller number of participants (i.e. nodes), private or permissioned blockchains are more vulnerable to 51-percent attacks
2 
(Peters and Panayi 2016; Yli-Huumo et al. 2016). Further research is 
arguably needed in this space in order to increase technology adoption in the financial sector.
Non-technical challenges, instead, are mostly related to (a) build-
ing up innovation legitimacy (Lynn et al. 2018), (b) understanding the 
determinants of users’ adoption, (c) measuring the value generated by blockchain investments, and (d) assessing potential impacts on society (Risius and Spohrer 2017). Finally, regulatory challenges mostly arise from the distributed nature of blockchain applications which, by defi-nition, can span across multiple jurisdictions, with responsibilities for system maintenance are shared among all network participants (Yeoh 2017).
1 See https://gdpr-info.eu/ for further details.
2 “The ability of someone controlling a majority of network hash rate to revise transaction 
history and prevent new transactions from confirming” (Bitcoin.org 2018).