38  S. AZIZ AND M. DOWLING
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and partial-least squares regres-
sions are quite similar in that they both aim to reduce the number of 
variables by combining variables and extracting common factors. PCA is the more popular of the two as it is widely used in traditional statistics and therefore better understood. A simple example of PCA is that for a set of potential variables to be used to determine credit repayment risk consisting of: (1) owns a house, (2) owns a car, and (3) has significant savings: a common factor might be extracted from these that could be termed ‘asset ownership’. A more applied example is provided by Zhong and Enke (2017) who use PCA to reduce 60 correlated economic and financial measures to a smaller set of factors and then apply a set of neu-ral network machine learning techniques to forecast the US S&P 500 index. This latter example is a common use of PCA in machine learning: that it is used as a first step for dimension reduction and then a more advanced machine learning technique is applied to learn from the PCA components.
The other main category of supervised learning is ‘classification’, with 
support vector machines (SVM) and decision trees being the most pop-ular techniques within this group. The outcomes and visuals of decision trees are easily understood in practice and therefore amenable to expla-nation to non-data scientists. A famous application of the decision tree technique is to Titanic survival prospects. Starting with the initial tree trunk statistic that 62% of passengers died and 38% survived the Titanic disaster, we can build a decision tree to classify groups that had a greater or lesser chance of survival. Thus, a first classification of whether a pas-senger is male or female shows that only 19% of males survived while 74% of females survived. We can branch out the tree even further by, for example, looking at age groups beneath the first male–female division, and this shows that despite only 19% of males surviving, male boys under the age of 6 had a 67% survival chance.
This classification approach of creating sub-groups then helps to 
understand what characteristics determine outcomes. In practice decision trees for machine learning have many more challenges than in the Titanic example, particularly around the issue of overfitting to existing data and thus determined sub-groups having poor predictive power with new data and in new situations. SVM are more complex in formulation than deci-sion trees but have the same essential end goal of creating groups based on input characteristics to classify and predict outcomes. In the case of SVM the approach is to map characteristics on a plane and classify groups