4 WHAT FINTECH CAN LEARN FROM HIGH-FREQUENCY TRADING …   55
the main accounting and finance journals featured in the Scopus database 
by Elsevier for the 11-year period from 1 January 2007 to 15 May 2018. In order to be included in the sample, articles must mention the terms “high-frequency trading” or “algorithmic trading” in the title, abstract or keywords. Those papers that did not meet the required conditions were discarded, reducing the list of articles to 265 articles (either published or forthcoming on 15 May 2018). Author details, article title, year of publica-tion, SCOPUS citations, affiliation of authors and location were collected.
Firstly, the articles were classified based on whether they were published 
in generalist or specialist journals. 87 articles were published in general journals, while 178 articles were published in specialist journals. The latter category includes journals whose scope focuses specifically on HFT activ-ity e.g. Algorithmic Finance Journal, on trading issues and structures of financial markets e.g. Journal of Finance, Journal of Financial Economics, 
Journal of Financial Markets, Journal of Empirical Finance and others.
Secondly, the selected articles were classified by examining their cita-
tions to measure the academic impact of each article and to provide insights into the evolution of the literature (Table 8.1). The journals were further categorised by ABS Journal Ranking (or not) and the main topics covered in each article were identified.
4.2.2  Descriptive Statistics
This section reports some descriptive statistics to provide a clear picture of the evolution of the HFT literature. The first article that refers to the “activity of algorithmic trading” was published in 2007 (Prix et al. 2007) 
and describes the systematic patterns in the submission and cancellation of certain Xetra orders.
1 Figure 4.1 shows the evolution of the volume of 
papers published in generalist or in specialist journals ranked by Scopus in the chose time period. A sharp increase in the articles is evident from 2010, following the “Flash Crash” in May of that year, which signalled the start of increased academic discussion of the consequences of HFT activity on capital markets.
However, the largest number of contributions was published in the 
four years between 2013 and 2017 in which not only specialist jour -
nals but also generalist journals published articles (123 and 58 articles, 
1 The advantage of “the predatory traders” over uninformed traders has been discussed 
for the first time by Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2005).