3 MACHINE LEARNING AND AI FOR RISK MANAGEMENT   47
widely legislated against, as are increasingly discrimination based on gen-
der and sexuality. Normally these restrictions are incorporated as hard-coded rules in AI and machine learning techniques concerning credit risk and lending decisions. However as deep learning becomes more popu-lar it becomes much harder to police that the model is not inadvertently making decisions based on indirect proxies for these red lines. This is especially the case as more and more atypical data is incorporated in risk management. These ethical aspects are only likely to increase in signifi-cance over time.
Leaving these important issues aside for now, it is worth consid-
ering the future role for AI and machine learning in risk management from a more positive angle. One obvious conclusion is that the time- consuming and costly nature of risk management will diminish signifi-cantly. For example, BBVA, the second largest bank in Spain, has 8000 of their 137,000 staff working in compliance. They are investing heavily in AI solutions to reduce this compliance cost base. The ability of AI and machine learning to automate repetitive tasks and to organise, retrieve, and cluster non-conventional data such as documents is naturally going to confer cost benefits on firms that move more into this area.
AI will also increasingly deliver accurate real-time information on all  
types of risks being taken by the firm. As data organisation becomes more orientated towards use by AI, real-time advice will become a per -
vasive presence. The following step from real-time knowledge of risks being taken is pre-emptive notice of risks. To some extent this is the holy grail of an AI-driven risk management system—to be able to accurately know in advance firm risks, be they market, operational, or credit risk. The techniques of machine learning offer this ability in the way that tra-ditional statistical techniques could never hope to. Thinking even further ahead there is no technological impediment to a truly AI risk manage-ment system that will automatically intervene to prevent unwarranted risks, to immediately unwind dangerous exposures, and to dynamically adjust the risk appetite of the firm based on the system’s estimate of the broader risk environment. Although that then will present its own risks which will in turn have to be managed, keeping risk management profes-sionals happily employed (albeit in a fast-changing environment) for the foreseeable future.
We thus conclude on a positive note (albeit with some issues to 
consider), about how machine learning and AI is transforming the way we carry out risk management. The issue for the established risk