54  E. MONACO
numbers of orders, many of which are cancelled rapidly and to hold posi-
tions for very short time horizons (ASIC 2010).
Although there is no common definition of HFT, several regulatory 
agencies and scholars do attempt to identify two main features and trading strategies of HFT, namely: (i) the automation of the trading process, and (ii) the high speed of transactions and submission (cancellation) of orders.
Different methods have been applied to classify HFT activities. For 
example, the definition used by SEC (2010) allows the identification of HFT activities but fails to detect large blocks of HFT. Some scholars instead detect such blocks by focusing on the evidence of high trading vol-ume and balance inventory (Kirilenko et al. 2017) or on complex trading 
strategies characterised by “series of submissions, cancellations, and execu-tions that are linked by direction, size and timing, and which are likely to arise from a single algorithm” (Hasbrouck and Saar 2013, p. 656).
Given that only a few datasets (such as E-Mini Data and NASDAQ 
data) allow the identification of HFT, most studies are based on proxies to detect HFT activity and highlight the effects of HFT on capital markets. The current HFT datasets available can be classified into five categories:
• Data for equity trading on NASDAQ;
• Data on trading in the E-Mini;
• Data that CFTC and SEC staff used to prepare their report on the market disruption that occurred in 2010 (Flash Crash);
• A variety of datasets made available to researchers by exchanges and regulators that require proxies to identify HFT activity.
According to Boehmer et al. (2018) and Hendershott et al. (2011), mes-
sage traffic can include new order submissions, modifications or order cancellations. Hence, the main proxies used by researchers are trading volume (Clark-Joseph 2013; Baron et al. 2017; Kirilenko et al. 2017), 
raw messages, the ratio of both trading volume and number of messages (Hendershott et al. 2011), and the ratio of messages and total transactions.
4.2.1  Methodology
This section explains the methods for selecting and reviewing the arti-cles examined in this study. Following the methodology used in Massaro  
et al. (2016) and similar approaches used by prior studies, a dataset of articles was constructed. The dataset counts HFT articles published in