162  P. ROSATI AND T. ČUK
role that it plays in the economy. Standard setters are continuously try-
ing to increase the transparency and accuracy of financial statements, and to unify financial reporting practices across multiple jurisdictions (Barth et al. 2008). There is still limited evidence of blockchain appli-
cations for financial reporting purposes (Dai and Vasarhelyi 2017) and some contrasting opinions in the literature (Coyne and McMickle 2017). However, some characteristics of the blockchain like data integ-rity, (almost) real-time updates, instant sharing of necessary informa-tion, and programmable and automatic controls may represent the basis for a new financial reporting ecosystem (Dai and Vasarhelyi 2017). Dai 
and Vasarhelyi (2017) present a first example of a blockchain-enabled  
triple-entry accounting information system, which may represent a step forward towards real continuous auditing. In a similar vein, Wang and Kogan (2018) propose a prototype of a blockchain-based trans-action processing system for real-time accounting that leverages zero-knowledge proofs to find a trade-off between transparency and  
confidentiality. This kind of financial reporting systems could prove to be particularly suitable for the financial sector where every transaction has to be recorded and where traceability and records’ immutability are extremely important to prevent fraud. Furthermore, auditors and regula-tors may be able to access financial records in real time if needed, there-fore increasing transparency and timely interventions where needed.
10.7  c onclusion  and avenues  for future  research
This chapter provides an overview of blockchain technology and of the extant literature on its potential applications and implications for the financial sector. Despite all the hype and all the promises around block-chain technology, it still remains an early-stage technology; the number of potential use cases is getting larger and larger but very few of them have made their way to the market. This is particularly the case for finan-cial services where conservatism and regulatory requirements represent significant challenges for innovation.
Blockchain is, in essence, a technological innovation. Thus, perhaps 
unsurprisingly, most of the research so far comes from computer science domain. Even though pure technical aspects of blockchain go beyond the scope of this chapter, it is worth to briefly mention some existing technical challenges that also represent opportunities for research. First of all, integrating existing legacy systems with blockchain is still a very