7 PAYMENT SERVICE DIRECTIVE II AND ITS IMPLICATIONS   109
7.4  Payment  services  directive  ii
In the light of this report and the rapid changes in technology, the EU 
quickly developed PSD II.9 This repealed and replaced all the measures 
in PSD I. However, many articles in the original Directive were re- enacted in PSD II.
PSD II was published at the end of 2015 and required implementa-
tion in local law by January 2018. The Directive required the European Banking Authority (EBA) to develop a range of technical guidance to flesh out the Directive. These are considered later in this chapter.
The aims of the new Directive were to:
• assist in the integration of the EU’s payments market,
• promote competition by encouraging new participants in the mar -
ket including FinTech and the development of mobile and Internet 
payment services across the EU,
• encourage lower prices for payments, and
• increase customer confidence in making more efficient electronic payments by introducing better customer protection against fraud and other abuses and error. This would require enhanced security arrangements.
10
The main themes in the Directive were to increase security measures and other customer protections, level the competitive playing field by reduc-ing the various exemptions from payment services regulation and to permit two new innovative arrangements: “account information service providers (AISPs)” and “payment initiation service providers (PISPs)”. These important developments are considered later. The next sections look at the other major changes first.
7.4.1  Scope of the Directive and the Removal of Exclusions
A number of exclusions exempting business operations from regulation have been removed. For example, payment arrangements which can only 
9 2015/2366/EC, http://ec.europa.eu/finance/payments/framework/index_en.htm.
10 European Commission—Fact Sheet, Payment Services Directive: frequently asked 
questions (12 January 2018), http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-15-5793_
en.htm. Accessed 4 April 2018.