86  T. BUTLER AND L. O’BRIEN
6.1  i ntroduction
RegTech is information technology (IT) that (a) helps firms manage 
regulatory requirements and compliance imperatives by identifying the impacts of regulatory provisions on business models, products and ser -
vices, functional activities, policies, operational procedures and controls; (b) enables compliant business systems and data; (c) helps control and manage regulatory, financial and non-financial risks; and (d) performs regulatory compliance reporting. In reference to the previous generation of RegTech (and FinTech) Law Professor Kenneth Bamberger points out that:
While these technology systems offer powerful compliance tools, they also 
pose real perils. They permit computer programmers to interpret legal requirements; they mask the uncertainty of the very hazards with which 
policy makers are concerned; they skew decision-making through an 
“automation bias” that privileges personal self-interest over sound judg-ment; and their lack of transparency thwarts oversight and accountabil-ity. These phenomena played a critical role in the recent financial crisis. 
(Bamberger 2009, pp. 669–670)
As Bamberger notes, in the rush to embrace new technologies, the 
downside risks are either ignored, played down, or transferred. This is apparently so with RegTech, as Patrick Armstrong, Senior Officer for Financial Innovation at the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA), warned “it is not without risks” and financial institutions must take care to “delegate tasks, not responsibility…for compliance and risk management activities. Instead the ultimate responsibility remains with the regulated financial institution” (McNulty 2017). There is a dearth of IS research in this new important area of study; however, research in other disciplines is also deficient. Few academic researchers have adopted a critical stance (Packin 2018), while others fail to question the risks 
associated with this new paradigm (Arner et al. 2016), including the real 
possibility of creating a digital Tower of Babel (Butler 2017). This is, per -
haps, the major issue confronting the financial industry.
The industry has, according to Andrew Haldane, created a Tower of 
Babel, which refers to the absence of a “common language” in the finan-cial industry, and the existence of heterogeneous terms and concepts to describe similar business objects, processes, and products (Haldane 2012). This problem permeates the industry down to individual financial