3 MACHINE LEARNING AND AI FOR RISK MANAGEMENT   43
in underlying trading patterns while trading. Wu and Olson (2015, 
Chapter 5) also examine the use of machine learning to provide warn-
ing signals to traders and demonstrate the benefits of SVM as a suitable technique.
3.3.3  Application to Operational Risk
Operational risk management entails the firm seeking to identify the risk of direct or indirect financial loss emanating from a host of poten-tial operational breakdowns (Moosa 2007). These risks can be internal to the institutions (e.g., inadequate or failed internal processes, people, and systems), or from external events (e.g., frauds, vulnerable computer sys-tems, a failure in controls, operational error, a procedure that has been neglected, or a natural disaster). Given the increase in quantity, variety, and complexity, of operational risk exposures, especially for financial firms, this has introduced a path towards AI and machine learning based solutions (Choi et al. 2017).
AI can assist institutions at various stages in the risk management pro-
cess ranging from identifying risk exposure, measuring, estimating, and assessing its effects (Sanford and Moosa 2015). It can also help in opting for an appropriate risk mitigation strategy and finding instruments that can facilitate shifting or trading risk. Thus, use of AI techniques for oper -
ational risk management, which started with trying to prevent external losses such as credit card frauds, is now expanding to new areas involving the analysis of extensive document collections and the performance of repetitive processes, as well as the detection of money laundering that requires analysis of large datasets.
The detection of financial fraud is another commonly referenced risk 
management use case for machine learning and AI. Here, banks attempt to control financial fraud through evaluating the best ways to protect their systems, their data, and ultimately their clients. AI’s ability to intro-duce better process automation can accelerate the pace of routine tasks, minimise human error, process unstructured data to screen out relevant content or negative news, and determine individuals’ connectedness to evaluate risky clients and networks. This same network analysis can also be used to monitor employees and traders. Clustering and classifica-tion techniques can be used to establish behaviour-based trader profiles, where combinations of trade data, electronic and voice communica-tions records enable banks to observe emerging patterns of behaviour to