5 INSURTECH   73
flight and hence paying out €100 each is 0.00000001%.1 In a typical sce-
nario, the insurer would charge above €10 (the fair price) as a premium 
to cater for claims, contingency, management costs and profits.
The insurer goes through the process of underwriting on being 
approached to provide cover, that is assessing whether the risk should be taken on board and at what price and then in the event a claim is notified, a claims management process is initiated. Two main challenges faced by insurers are ‘adverse selection’ and ‘moral hazard’. The latter refers to the policyholder changing attitude following attainment of insurance cover (e.g., not locking the doors of a property as knowing the property is insured). ‘Adverse selection’ is typically the outcome of asymmetrical information whereby a policyholder ends up being pooled (and priced) in a specific risk group despite having a riskier profile. This may have been the case whereby the insurer does not use particu-lar information in pricing risk or this information was possibly withheld. Throughout this chapter we discuss how technology is enabling insurers to price policyholders actuarially fair and reduce moral hazard by con-trols or gentle prompting.
5.3  t he big data Paradigm
In today’s world, data is becoming an indispensable commodity, lead-ing industries to transform their business processes and value chains into data-driven ones. In the insurance industry, one can relate to this “phe-nomenon” by observing how historic insurance models became more adaptive by making provisions for this ever-growing flow of data through various heterogeneous (unstructured/semi-structured) sources such as sensors or social media. This is often called Big Data, which is charac-terised by the 5 dimensions (5Vs): Volume (how much), Velocity (how fast), Variety (different kinds), Veracity (truthfulness and trustworthi-ness) and Value (the worth of data).
This proliferation of data, or “big data”, has allowed the InsurTech 
businesses and more forward-thinking established insurance companies to harness a unique selling proposition and competitive advantage over 
1 On the other side of the scale, the probability of no one having a delayed flight is 
90.438% which is lower than 99%.