138  P. TASCA
the full regularisation of cryptocurrencies as a legal means of payment 
(Terazono 2017). Switzerland is also very advanced in this respect 
(FINMA 2018).
Despite the fact that native coins are not always perfectly designed 
and implemented, it is undoubted that they bring some features typi-cal of money. Back to Bitcoin again, we can say that it acts as a means of exchange and allows counterparties to avoid the “coincidence of the wants”
1: the number of daily transactions has grown over time from 
around 1000 in 2011 to around 200,000 in 2018. At the same time, Bitcoin is a unit of account since it is divisible (the smallest possible unit is called Satoshi: 1 satoshi = 0.00000001 Bitcoins), fungible and  
countable. At the same time, Bitcoin’s deflationary property prevents it from being considered as a good store of value. The number of Bitcoins issued over time is destined to decrease geometrically with 50% reduc-tion every 4 years (Tasca 2015). That being said, from a pure monetary 
viewpoint, native coins do not generally fulfil the properties of money  
(Tasca 2016).
A novelty of native coins with respect to more traditional forms of 
money is that they come together with a network infrastructure that enables a disintermediated peer-to-peer exchange of coins. They com-bine together the characteristic of money with those of the payment systems. To better understand this aspect, the framework proposed by Bradford and Keeton (2012) can be taken into consideration. It iden-tifies four main relevant features of a payment network: speed, payer control, security and universality. As a matter of fact, a Bitcoin transac-tion takes 1 + hours to be settled in the ledger. However, other coins are 
much faster. Ripple, for example, takes 4 seconds per transaction to be registered (Morgan 2018). With respect to payer control feature, there is no limit as cryptocurrencies can easily and quickly be transferred with-out any working hours constraints from wallet app or other operators. From a security perspective, transfers in cryptocurrency networks happen 
1 Coincidence of wants (also known as “double coincidence of wants”) occurs when 
the supplier of good A is a demander of good B and vice versa. Without a medium of 
exchange, trades would be limited to this situation only (Jevons 1876; Ostroy and Starr 1990).