72  D. CORTIS ET AL.
as enticing desirable policyholder behaviour and streamlining claims 
management. We then discuss how artificial intelligence is improving traditional insurance processes from the first point of contact to claims management. We also examine the use of artificial intelligence as a means of interacting with prospective clients and existing policyholders. Finally, we explain how blockchain technology can transform the structure of the insurance market to a peer-to-peer format.
Keywords  InsurTech
 · Insurance  · Telematics  · P2P insurance
5.1  i ntroduction
It appears that the age-old business of insurance is finally in the throes of 
change. Incumbent insurance companies are under threat not only from tech giants such as Amazon entering the market (Seekings 2017), but also from agile start-up entities, that are leveraging the power of tech-nology to innovate their way to market share. This utilisation of tech-nology to improve efficiency and savings in underwriting, risk pooling and claims management from the current insurance model has come to be known as “InsurTech”, deriving inspiration from the more well- established concept of “FinTech”.
This chapter starts off by describing the process and challenges of a 
traditional insurer. This is followed by a discussion of future develop-ments in InsurTech. These developments are then discussed in light of the big data paradigm, artificial intelligence (AI) techniques and distrib-uted ledger infrastructures (also known as blockchains or distributed ledge technologies [DLT]).
5.2  h ow does insurance  work?
The business of insurance involves risk transfer from the policyholder to the insurer. The insurer pools similar risks in homogenous groups and pays out any claims from the collected premiums and sometimes from own reserves. The consequence of such risk pooling is a lower variabil-ity of outcomes and less likelihood of extreme payouts. For example, consider the probability of a delayed flight as 10% and the cost incurred being €100 if this happens. If ten individuals on separate independent 
flights pool their risk, the probability of all of them having a delayed