type of collected material and the geospatial area. Owing to the fine spatial and temporal 
granularity of the comprehensive DSNY data, the model can successfully estimate weekly waste generation. On the other hand, relevant studies have concluded that seasonal patterns act as important roles in short-term MSW forecasting (Abbasi et al., 2013; Noori et al., 2010). For the purpose of developing applicable prediction models for weekly MSW generation, Abbasi et al. (2013) took a weekly time series with 12 lag times (equal to a full season) as model inputs. Specifically, the last time series which relied upon 12 previous time series as predictors were assumed as the response variable. Such kind of input variable is consistent with some other reports about weekly MSW forecasting (Abbasi et al., 2014; Noori et al., 2009), so it can be inferred that seasonal patterns should be taken into account when determining input variables for short-term 	forecasting models of MSW generation.  
Furthermore, AI based mid-term and long-term prediction models were also investigated, most of which were proved to be effective with accuracy over 90% as displayed in Table 7. Kontokosta et al. (2018) integrated GBRT with ANN to develop a socio-spatial model for mid-term estimation of building-level waste generation for more than 750,000 residential properties in New York City. The model was presented with 93.9% prediction accuracy. An ANN model was trained by historical data from 2005 to 2015 to forecast MSW generation in Bangkok (Sun and Chungpaibulpatana, 2017). Using PCA, main indicators such as total MSW, total number of residents, number of households, number of tourists, income per household, native and total people aged 15 to 59 years were identified as key variables and inputs of the ANN model. This 	proposed model showed satisfactory predictive performance on estimating annual MSW 
generation with an R2 value of 0.96. However, the lack of sufficient predictor variables (e.g., weather, seasonality and urban form) in the dataset could result in model deficiency with high errors and poor R2 values. For example, based on socio-economic and demographic data of 220 municipalities in Canada, ANN and DT models were employed to estimate MSW generation and paper diversion (Kannangara et al., 2018). The proposed models of paper diversion exhibited worse performance with poorer R2 (0.31–0.35) and higher errors (32–36%) compared to other models of MSW prediction, because the socio-economic and demographic variables were insufficient to describe the variation in the paper recycle rate. 