temperature, and heating rate in their study. Rego et al. (2018) applied ANN and ANFIS models 
for optimizing the sugarcane bagasse pre-treatment using alkaline hydrogen peroxide (AHP). 
About 75% lignin removal was achieved with the obtained optimal delignification conditions of 
	7.5% H2O2 solution at 45°C. It was demonstrated that AI models trained by limited experimental 

data can establish reliable correlations between impact factors and expected results, thus helping 
the researchers to comprehensively understand the dynamics and biochemical mechanism of the 
multiphase system in the solid waste disposal process. It is conducive to use AI models to promote the disposal process in a practical issue. 4. Conclusions and prospects One notable development over the past decades was the popularity of artificial intelligence technologies in the area of environmental pollution controls, which has been considered as attractive and efficient alternative methods to tackle the complexities of uncertain, interactive and dynamic environmental problems. As is shown in Fig.6, among all these technologies, various 	types of ANNs are the most widely used AI technologies because they are much easier to 
implement. However, the performance of ANNs is restricted since their relatively poor reproducibility and limited global searching ability. As a result, with the rapid development of various AI technologies, an increasing number of researchers emphasize on hybrid methods (e.g., FNN, ANFIS and GA-ANN) instead of single ones. It is clear from Fig. 7 that the studies on hybrid AI methods are catching up in the last three years and it seems that these methods are on the verge of overtaking single methods and become the most popular AI methods applied in the fields of environment. One trend that worth noting is that increasing linear and nonlinear multivariate data analysis methods (i.e., PCA (Fernandez de Canete et al., 2016; Han et al., 2018; He et al., 2016), PLS (Zhu et al., 2017), MLR (Zhu et al., 2018), etc.) have been incorporated into 	different AI models as pre-processing methods for data dimensionality reduction or feature 
extraction. Fig. 8 summarized the types of reviewed case studies (not limited to the reported tables above), showing that the main applications of AI technologies are simulation processes, except for water pollution control. The intelligent control and soft measurement of wastewater treatment are becoming new tools in practical WWTPs, the number of practically implemented works in WWTPs is even higher than simulation studies.  