Costache (2019) carried out a study on flash-flood susceptibility assessment and mapping in the 	basin of Prahoa river, Romania. In order to calculate the potential for flash-floods occurrence, a 	260 km2 area was divided into training (70%) and validation areas (30%), ten hydrologic, 	lithologic and morphologic parameters (e.g., slope angle, aspect, hydrological soil group, land use, 	topographic wetness index, etc.) were selected through statistical analysis and integrated into four 	different hybrid models namely Support Vector Machine-Weights of Evidence (SVM-WoE), 		Support Vector Machine-Frequency Ratio (SVM-FR), Logistic Regression-Weights of Evidence 	
(LR-WoE) and Logistic Regression-Frequency Ratio (LR-FR). Considering the presence of the 	surfaces previously affected by torrential phenomena, the results of this study indicated that more 	than 33% of the evaluated areas were characterized by the high and very high flash-flood potential. 
The comparison of the four hybrid models showed that all of these models achieved satisfactory 
prediction results (AUC values of 0.724-0.904) with the accuracies ranging from 0.708 to 0.801 
for both training and validating areas. Similar data-based hybrid models have been introduced and 
also proved to be feasible and efficient according to some studies on flood susceptibility 
assessment and early-warning in the areas of different countries such as Vietnam (Bui et al., 2019), 
Iran (Khosravi et al., 2018), and China (Hong et al., 2018a, 2018b; Zhao et al., 2019). 
	As seen in Table 5, monitoring and early-warning of surface water quality parameters account 

for another important subject among these recent works. For instance, based on a total of 363 
collected measurements of chlorophyll-a (Chl-a) and DO, Fijani et al. (2019) designed a hybrid 
framework integrating two-layer decomposition method with extreme learning machines (ELM) 
for estimating important water quality parameters (Chl-a and DO) in a Lake reservoir. Shi et al. 
(2018) proposed an integrating method of WNN model and high-frequency surrogate 
measurements for anomaly detection of water quality in a rapid way. The results suggested that the 
proposed method can successfully tell two anomaly events of TP variations with a scale of 15 
minutes using high-frequency on-line ANN sensors.   
Suspended sediment load (SSL) is used as a critical indicator to evaluate the influence of water 
	quality researches, land use changes and engineering practices in watercourses. Direct 

measurement of SS is believed to be the most credible method, but the cost limits the application 
at all gauging stations. Nowadays, AI prediction models have been developed to estimate SSL in 
