2.1 Artificial neural networks (ANNs) ANNs are being broadly employed as approaches for prediction, classification and optimization in various fields due to their remarkable capacity to capture the nonlinear behavior between 	independent and dependent variables based on historical data using an applicable training 
algorithm (Ghaedi and Vafaei, 2017; F. J. Li et al., 2016). There are several different classifications of ANNs, this chapter focuses on the typical types of configurations that have been employed in research works of environmental controls, such as feedforward neural networks, specifically multilayer perceptron networks (MLPNN) and radial basis function neural network (RBFNN). 2.1.1 Multilayer perceptron neural network (MLPNN) MLPNN is one of the simplest and the most well-known type of ANNs. The structure of MLPNN, which includes input layer, hidden layer and output layer, has a significant impact on predictive capability. Independent and dependent parameters determine the numbers of neurons in 	the input and output layer, respectively. Neurons numbers in the hidden layer are generally 
determined via the procedure using the trial and error observation, rather than being specified at first (Zonouz et al., 2016). Insufficient hidden layer neurons make the network difficult to fully learn the data laws, causing under-fitting problems. However, excessive neurons may lead to 	over-fitting as a result of extra degrees of freedom. Normally, MLPNN model begins with fewer 	neurons in the hidden layer, and then the numbers of neurons will be updated in the training 	process by adjusting the numbers of neurons, so far there aren’t any systematic methods to define 	the optimal numbers of neurons in hidden layer (Bahrami et al., 2017; Moosavi and Soltani, 2013). 	Based on specific neurons and weights contained in each layer, as well as an appropriate training 	algorithm, a well-trained MLPNN is capable of generating principle to track nonlinear 		input-output relationships, giving predicted values of the corresponding output(s) based on input 	
conditions (Ghaedi and Vafaei, 2017).  	A MLPNN trained by back-propagation (BP) algorithms, also known as the back-propagation 	neural network (BP-ANN), is the most representative type of ANN which is widely applied in the 
field of environmental pollution controls. Fig. 2 shows that the input signals are processed through 
