most works focused on intelligent control of aerobic stage of wastewater treatment process, to reduce total aeration time and save cost on the premise of meeting effluent standards (Asadi et al., 2017; Foscoliano et al., 2016; Ruan et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2017; Wen et al., 2017). On-line DO controlling is one of the essential parts of intelligent control as shown in Table 3. Notably, FL based intelligent control systems such as FNN and ANFIS controllers have received increasing 	attentions and been broadly used to achieve better effluent quality and higher cost-effective in the 
processes of biological wastewater treatment (Huang et al., 2009; Qiao et al., 2018; Ruan et al., 2017; Shamiri et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2016). Wen et al. (2017) designed a real-time DO intelligent control system consisting of a feedforward controller based on an RBF network and an improved proportion integral differential (PID) controller built on a BP network. Specifically, the proposed system contains two controlling systems, i.e. feedforward and feedback. The former system is able to obtain setting optimizing input values for feedback control system, then the latter one could ensure the stable qualified effluent through precise real-time control of DO concentration, exhibiting the feasibility of intelligent control system for wastewater treat plants (WWTPs). Ding et al. (2011) adopted a novel 	intelligent control system (ICS) to optimize the operation of conventional sequencing batch 
biofilm reactor (SBBR) in terms of the aeration process. With regard to the effects on the activity of the microorganisms, three key variables (DO, temperature and intermittent aeration) were selected as controlling factors in this proposed SBBR with ICS. Compared with traditional SBBR, the proposed system reduced the total aeration time and HRT by 50% and 56%, respectively, meanwhile achieved higher efficiency of COD removal.  Generally, aeration is regarded as the most energy-consuming part of the wastewater treatment process. It was reported that aeration could reach 50–75% of the total energy expenditure in WWTPs (Gude, 2015; Longo et al., 2016). Unlike other biochemical processes, in fact, one of the characteristics of WWTPs is large time-varying disturbances, as the random quality of the inlet 	wastewater. It is indicated that it could be difﬁcult to propose an efficient aeration control strategy 
on the premise of reducing costs. However, it seems that AI-based aeration intelligent control systems provide an applicable possibility to reduce the operation costs of WWTPs.   