process monitoring and process fault detection. Additionally, in another review of the estimator 		applications in chemical process systems by Mohd Ali et al. (2015), the exploiting principles of 			soft-sensors were outlined. According to which, the first step is to understand the behavior of the 		
process, followed by the determination of estimated parameters (e.g. concentration, temperature, 		and pressure) and the selection of suitable AI technologies. A guideline for researchers to choose 		appropriate AI methods for specific soft-sensors was also provided by a discussion of the strengths, 	
limitations, practical implications and comparisons among different AI technologies. 	
3.2 Applications of environmental early-warning and assessment 	
3.2.1 Early-warning and assessment of aquatic environment 	
As a novel and efficient modeling and forecasting tool, AI technology has been gaining 	
popularity for the aquatic environment warning and water quality assessment in rivers, lakes, 	
oceans, as well as groundwater. As shown in Table 5, the latest studies emphasized on risk 	
	mapping of flood susceptibility using data-based AI technologies (Bui et al., 2019; Costache, 2019; 	

Hong et al., 2018a, 2018b; Khosravi et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2019). Identifying flood susceptible 	
areas, assessing the distribution and magnitude of floods are crucial aspects for suggesting proper 	
timely mitigation strategies and management of flood hazards. Although the multiple 	geo-environmental variables, the varyingclimatic condition and human factors make it rather 	difficult to forecast the occurrence of flash-flood locations, flood susceptibility mapping can be 	done with the aid of SVM, DT, ANFIS, and other AI models. The efficiencies of these models 	were generally evaluated by the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC) and the area under 	ROC curve (AUC). Speciﬁcally, the ROC curve is a graph that illustrates the capacity of a 	performed statistical model to accurately forecast the occurrence of a flood event (Costache, 2019; 		Hong et al., 2018a). Higher AUC values stand for better prediction abilities of the susceptible 	
models (Bui et al., 2019; W. Chen et al., 2017). 	