Foscoliano et al. (2016) revealed that a recurrent neural network model (RNN) was presented to capture the required input-output behavior. For predictive control algorithm, the dynamic matrix control (DMC) was selected to control the nitrogen compounds in the bioreactor. It was revealed that the pollutants such as ammonia and nitrate and the energy cost were reduced in this proposed 	predictive control of activated sludge process (ASP). In order to reduce the cost of 
anaerobic/anoxic/oxic (A/A/O) process in the treatment of papermaking wastewater, GA evolving fuzzy wavelet neural network software sensor was developed to control DO (Ruan et al., 2017). It was concluded that the operating costs was reduced by 20% while ensuring the effluent quality met standards. Based on SVM classiﬁcation and features extraction, Jaramillo et al. (2018) suggested an on-line prediction of the length of aerobic reaction for nitrate compounds removal by closed-loop controlling the value of pH and DO. Aiming to determine the end-point of the aerobic process, a decision rule between the completion state of NH4+-N degradation and the NH4+-N degradation state was generated by using an SVM classiﬁer. The results showed that the suggested strategy allowed for a total decrease in aerobic process lengths of 7.52% (corresponding to 9.54 	days).  
Although with a disadvantage of high dependence on the training data quality, fuzzy logic control systems (e.g., FNN and ANFIS) have been proved to be a remarkably superior tool to construct the strategy of multi-objective optimal control. Owing to the fuzzy rules generated by fuzzy logic with its capability to handle uncertainty, the fuzzy control systems can achieve better effluent quality on biological wastewater treatment processes (Huang et al., 2009; Kalogirou, 2003; Mohd Ali et al., 2015; Qiao et al., 2018; Ruan et al., 2017).  To realize the optimal control of DO and nitrogen nitrate concentration, Qiao et al. (2018) presented a multi-objective optimal control strategy, consisting of a control module with an FNN and the adaptive multi-objective differential evolution (AMODE) algorithm for optimization. 	Setting DO concentration in the 5th tank (SO5) and the nitrogen nitrate concentration in 2nd anoxic 
tank (SNO2) were optimized by the means of AMODE algorithm. The objective of FNN was to adjust the setting values of SO5 and SNO2 for better control results. It is noteworthy that in spite of the satisfactory of tracking performance, it is necessary to consider the stability of multi-objective control before the industrial applications. Huang et al. (2014) suggested an integrated FNN control 