assessment of influencing factors affecting As concentration suggested that low temperature, high 
nitrite nitrogen concentration and large one-month antecedent rainfall would lead to high arsenic 
concentration in surface water. 
In reports related to the assessment of contaminated groundwater, Yoo et al. (2016) integrated 
decision tree (DT) and ruled induction to predict patterns of groundwater pollution sensitivity. The 
data samples were collected from a trichloroethylene (TCE) contaminated site from the Woosan 
Industrial Park in South Korea. The author revealed that net recharge, aquifer media and soil 
media were the main hydrogeological parameters affecting the sensitivity of groundwater to TCE. 
	Bagheri et al. (2017) employed FL, MLPNN and RBFNN to simulate the infiltration process of 

landfill leachate, the developed models were applied to predict and evaluate the environmental 
impact of leachate penetration. The results indicated that Mo, Na and COD are the three most 
influencing variables for leachate penetration into groundwater. Besides, Thoe et al. (2012) 
	conducted a comprehensive research to predict the next-day bacterial concentration in four 
	selected beaches in Hong Kong. Both the presented MLR and ANN estimators outperformed the 
	current beach strategies in tracking water quality parameters and estimating water quality 
	objective exceedances. Compared to MLR, the ANN estimator is good at estimating the high-end 
	concentrations, but has more false alarms (false positive predictions). The issue was possibly 
	caused by the deficiency of routine monitoring data in extreme conditions (such as strong winds, 
		typhoons or rainstorms).  
	
3.2.2 Analysis and forecast of pollutant concentration in the atmospheric environment 
	It was reported that series of AI models have been used to estimate air pollutants (Bunsan et al., 
	2013; Niu et al., 2016; Park et al., 2018; Sarigiannis et al., 2014; V oukantsis et al., 2011; Wang et 

al., 2018, 2015; Zhou et al., 2014) and establish air quality monitoring and early-warning systems 

(Li and Zhu, 2018; Wang et al., 2017; Yang and Wang, 2017). Large amounts of historical data 

were required to develop AI models for analyzing and forecasting various atmospheric pollutants 

concentrations. Long-term observational datasets with a period of more than one year were 

fundamental for AI models training, validating and testing (He et al., 2017, 2016; Li and Zhu, 

2018; Zhou et al., 2019). Given the concentrations of air pollutants have characteristics of strong 

	time-variability and uncertainty, the reported models generally took more than 8 influencing 


