represents a potential solution of the optimization problem. Then every single particle will be 	evaluated by a fitness function, a new position with better fitness value will be selected, and the 
position of particles will be updated continually by moving toward maximum objective function. Eventually, an optimal solution is obtained when the number of iterations reaches the maximum (Agarwal et al., 2016; Khajeh et al., 2017, 2013). The further information of PSO can be found elsewhere (Eberhart and Yuhui, 2001; Shi and Eberhart, 1998). Both of GA and PSO use fitness function to evaluate solutions, and both perform random searches based on fitness values, but PSO depends on the particle velocity for the completion of search process with higher convergence rate comparing to GA. On the other hand, PSO lacks the dynamic velocity adjustment resulting in easier to get trapped into local optima, this would cause convergence difficulties and low convergence accuracy. In all, it seems more feaible to use GA in 	research of environmental fields due to good global search capability.  
2.4 Hybrid intelligent systems Hybrid intelligent systems (e.g. ANFIS, FNN, GA-ANN, etc.) are systems which combine two or more AI technologies to overcome certain shortcomings in a single AI method, achieving synergistic advantages. For most complicated nonlinear problems, AI methods have many advantages over traditional methods. However, each AI method has its limitations (as seen in Table 1), causing the difficulty to achieve the expected results. Give an example, a three-layer MLPNN has strong nonlinear mapping abilities and can approximate any nonlinear continuous functions. However, the convergence rate of MLPNN is slow, and there is a risk of overfitting and  local minimum. Taking advantage of two or more AI technologies to construct a hybrid system is 	an effective way to solve such problems. For instance, SVM can achieve global optimization and 
eliminate overfitting in the ANN framework (Taghvaei et al., 2016), GA and PSO have been widely applied to optimize the initial thresholds and weights of ANN for improving its reliability and generalization performance (Hoseinian et al., 2017). The classical hybrid system is the neuro-fuzzy system, other types of hybrid system, such as heuristic algorithms coupled with different types of ANNs, SVM models or fuzzy systems, are considered to be efficient tools to solve complicate problems. Since neuro-fuzzy system is widely used as a optimization tool in treatment of wastewater field, more details will be discussed. 