	Among the neuro-fuzzy systems, adaptive network-based fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) is proved to be a powerful tool in many fields, such as forecasting, controlling, data mining and 	noise elimination (Bagheri et al., 2017; Hong et al., 2018a; Huang et al., 2009; Pai et al., 2011; 
Wan et al., 2011). Based on Takagi-Sugeno fuzzy inference system, an ANFIS is a feedforward neural network coupled with FL to illustrate nonlinear behavior in complicate systems, in other words, a fuzzy inference system (FIS) employed in the configuration of adaptive neural networks (Huang et al., 2009). As shown in Fig. 4, the framework of an ANFIS model contains the antecedent and the conclusion, that are connected by fuzzy rules in the form of networks. Since ANFIS integrates the learning capacities of the neural network and reasoning abilities of the fuzzy system, synergistic advantages can be achieved in one hybird model (Huang et al., 2015; Mohd Ali et al., 2015). More details of the ANFIS can be found in other literatures (Jang, 1993; Yilmaz and Kaynar, 2011). 	Hybrid technologies that combine machine learning algorithms with statistical and multivariate 
data analysis methods are currently emerging. For instance, principal component analysis (PCA) was employed to extract variables with high contribution rates from the initial dataset. Experimental design methods such as orthogonal experimental design and response surface 	methodology (RSM) have been used to obtain representative experimental data. These hybrid 	technologies make supervised learning more flexible, and improve the accuracy of AI models to 	some extent (Gadekar and Ahammed, 2019; Xie et al., 2018). 	It’s worth noting that hybrid AI systems can’t be employed to all circumstances. The higher 	integrated the approach, the more complex the model structure. Hence, it will be more difficult for 	hybrid AI systems development. In this regard, hybrid methods are not preferred when a single AI 		method is sufficient to describe the input-output relationships with satisfactory results. Further 	
information on hybrid intelligent systems can be found in Goonatilake and Khebbal (1994) and 	Medsker (1995). 	