factors (such as meteorological factors and the historical concentrations of various pollutants) as 

inputs, and the number of predicted pollutant indicators is always multiple. Although PCA and 

other data analysis methods were widely applied to preprocess large datasets, the predictive 
accuracy of these models was generally lower than that of the models applied to the aqueous 
environment.  
He et al. (2016) suggested a BP-ANN model to predict daily concentrations of PM10, NO2, and 
SO2 over urban Lanzhou, China. In their study, daily average PM10, NO2, and SO2 concentrations 
and ten meteorological parameters for six winters covering 2002–2007 were collected to constitute 
the original dataset. According to the correlation analysis and classification of synoptic-scale 
	circulations (concluded by PCA and other pre-treatment methods), six local meteorological 

parameters including wind speed (Ws) at 200 m, wind direction index (Wdi) at 800 m, potential 
temperature lapse rate (γ) at 50 m, gradient Richardson number (Ri) at 150 m, stable energy (Ew), 
and boundary layer height (Hpbl), coupled with historical PM10, NO2, and SO2 concentrations, 
were selected as inputs of BP-ANN model. It was revealed that local meteorological conditions 
have considerable contributions to the daily variations of pollutant concentrations. Even though 
the relative low correlation coefficient value of 0.71 to 0.83 was achieved for daily averages of 
PM10, NO2, and SO2, BP-ANN still can reproduce the pollution level and diurnal variations in a 
satisfied way. Based on the long-term historical data from 2014 to 2015 (spanning all four seasons) 
from industrial (Pukou) and suburban (Xianlin) areas in Nanjing, China, Leng et al. (2017) 
	developed rapid prediction models to estimate size-fractionated airborne particle-bound metals. 

Meteorological factors and PM concentrations were selected as input parameters, the 
concentrations of fourteen different elements were taken as outputs. In this study, the prediction 
effects of three linear and nonlinear models including SVM, BP-ANN, and MLR were compared. The result showed that the SVM models were superior. The well-trained SVM models were then applied to predict the daily airborne elements concentrations in 2015. The obtained results indicated that higher concentrations of nearly all elements were observed in industrial areas in winter compared to other seasons, which were in accordance with the data recorded in 2015.  