Among these studies in Table 6, the researches of particulate matters (PMs) account for a large proportion (Niu et al., 2016; Park et al., 2018; Sarigiannis et al., 2014; V oukantsis et al., 2011; Zhou et al., 2014, 2019). Relevant researches have revealed that indoor PMs prediction model could be established by taking outdoor PMs monitoring data as one of the important factors. For example, Park et al. (2018) developed an ANN model for predicting PM10 concentrations at 6 subway stations. It’s worth noting that the information of outdoor PM10 obtained from the nearby outdoor air monitoring sites was used due to the difficulty and high expense of collecting PM data indoor. Coupled with other indoor parameters such as subway frequency and ventilation rate, the proposed ANN model could estimate 67~80% of PM10 at six subway stations.  	Hybrid AI-based air quality monitoring and early-warning systems for reliable and scientific air 
quality index (AQI) forecast have been introduced by Li and Zhu (2018) and Yang and Wang (2017). a single AI method may not be sufficient to process and analyze large amounts of pollutant data, due to the irregularity, non-stationarity and randomness of AQI. According to the study of Li and Zhu (2018), the proposed hybrid AI system consists of three stages including i) an FL-based attributes selection for the determination of main pollutants for cities, ii) a deterministic prediction part for the estimation of pollutants, iii) an uncertainty prediction for estimating the possible boundary of deterministic forecasts and tackling the uncertainty of the future AQI. The availability of this hybrid system was validated in six target cities in China, and it was successful to predict the concentrations of six core indicator such as PM10, PM2.5, SO2, NO2, CO, and O3. Besides, by 	integrating the AQI assessment and prediction module, Yang and Wang (2017) established an AQI 
monitoring and early-warning system. Comparing to another ten different AI models (e.g., MLPNN, RBFNN, GRNN, ENN, etc.), the proposed model was proved to show the highest effectiveness in two studies for the estimations of the major air pollutants. In the above works, complementary ensemble empirical mode decomposition (CEEMD) was employed as a denoising technique for processing nonlinear and non-stationary time series, eliminating the effects of outliers and improving prediction accuracy. Appling FL to determine the main pollutants, and it is more and more common to use machine learning models embedded with heuristic algorithms for AQI prediction. It can be concluded that the hybrid AI methods were preferred and also confirmed to be more appropriate for establishing air quality monitoring and early-warning systems. 	