agro-industrial wastes through a hybrid GA-ANN model. Compared to RSM, the optimal composition (mixtures of 91% wheat bran and 9% soybean meal) to maximize amylase activities 	obtained by GA-ANN was closer to the actual experimental values. The comparative result of AI 
technology and RSM was also achieved by Selvakumar and Sivashanmugam (2018). In their research, a multi-hydrolytic biocatalyst (MHB), which was prepared from organic solid waste, was employed in the pre-treatment of municipal waste activated sludge. Lipase, amylase and protease activities of the obtained MHB were investigated for determining the multi-hydrolytic activity. RSM and ANN modeling were applied to validate the activity of each enzyme, it was suggested the predictive abilities of designed ANN models were higher than RSM. As a classic nonlinear modeling method, RSM has been widely compared to AI models (Antwi et al., 2018; Fernández Núñez et al., 2017; Geyikçi et al., 2012; Kartic et al., 2018; Kasiri et al., 2008; Zhang and Pan, 2014). Though the results of most related studies (Karri et al., 2018; Khajeh et al., 2013; 	Sabour and Amiri, 2017) concluded that AI models offered more precise predictions than RSM 
with higher R2 values and smaller average errors, these two models complement each other in the interpretation of the simulated results. According to Sabour and Amiri (2017), setting RSM prior to ANN (as a feeding tool) can signiﬁcantly enhance the predictive capacity of ANN. AI models 	are usually more effective to capture highly nonlinear relationships of the simulated results and 	influencing factors, while RSM models are good at describing the statistical importance of the 	independent influencing parameters and their interactions. One drawback of RSM is that only 	quadratic nonlinear correlations was considered, resulting in the requirement for extra experiments 	as well as good priori knowledge of a system (Fan et al., 2018; Karimifard and Alavi Moghaddam, 	2018; Lingamdinne et al., 2018). 		On the other hand, more researches are focusing on improving the efficiency of solid waste 	
reduction by applying AI-based analysis and prediction. Xie et al. (2018) developed ANN models 	to predict thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) data under five different ratios of O2/CO2 for 	modeling and optimization of the co-combustion process of pomelo peel and textile dyeing sludge. 
Chen et al. (2018) investigate the thermodynamic characteristics and kinetics of coffee grounds 
and sewage sludge co-combustion under increased ratios of O2/CO2 (21, 30, 40 and 60%). A 
3-20-1 MLPNN was presented to estimate mass loss percent as a function of O2-CO2 mixing ratio, 
