integrating GA, multi-stage programming and developed simulation model, was presented for this continuous treatment process. The results illustrated that the treatment costs of the proposed approach and the single-stage optimization in a fixed 36-hour period were $9.11 and $11.45, respectively. Zhang et al. (2016) proposed an online evaluation strategy based on FL for the control of the Cu removal. The industrial-scale results indicated that the presented control strategy could not only reduce Cu concentration in outlet with low consumption of Zn, but also minimize 	energy consumption and stabilize the production process. As shown in Table 3, the majority of 
these researches are laboratory-scale. However, data such as water quality parameters and operational variables obtained from actual WWTPs are widely used to simulate intelligent control of wastewater treatment processes. All of the obtained progress is of great significance for development of control strategy, which will improve effluent quality and reduce operational costs in real WWTPs.  3.1.3 Soft-sensor technologies for WWTPs In recent decades, the development of environmental technologies has promoted more stringent regulations and requirements for wastewater treatment (Olsson, 2012). For example, the renewal of the ammonia removal shifts to the removal of total nitrogen (TN) in China now. Hence, there is 	a strong desire to update the existing treatment process and upgrading of supporting equipment to 
meet these tight regulations (Haimi et al., 2013). On the other hand, the traditional strategies for the monitoring problems rely on the on-line and off-line analysis of primary parameters such as concentrations of nitrates, ammonia, chemical and biochemical oxygen demand, as well as other 	hard-to-measure variables like sludge blanket level. However, the availability of parameter values 	obtained through on-line analysis is always connected to high-cost investments and maintenance 	expense, while the results obtained using off-line analysis have the problems of time-delayed 	responses, which makes difficulty for real-time monitoring. 	