 Fig. 8. Summary of applications of AI technologies for environmental pollution controls. important influencing factors as well as model inputs. FL-based neuro-fuzzy systems, i.e. FNN 	and ANFIS, are the main technologies employed in intelligent control of aerobic stage of 
wastewater treatment process, the majority of the relevant works emphasized on cost-effective control of DO on-line for reducing total aeration time. AI soft-sensors are replacing traditional high-cost on-line instruments and off-line laboratorial analysis for estimation of hard-to-measure parameters in WWTPs, the on-line acquired pH, temperature and DO values were taken as necessary secondary variables to develop data-driven soft-sensors. At last, AI technologies especially hybrid AI methods has emerged as novel approaches for risk mapping and early-warning in both aquatic and atmospheric environments, they outperform existing statistical models in stability and accuracy.  As discussion and summary of the various AI applications shown in this review, the essential 	part for developing such a system is data that provides the connections between historical 
performance of the real system and a suitable model. The model is selected by testing different alternative AI models based on empirical experience for most of work, and the validation process is often performed by testing the historical data from real system. There is no doubt that AI technologies employed in this review are not completely summarized, but the samples of AI applications are enough to demonstrate the potential of AI technologies to tackle environmental challenges. Adaptive data-driven models with on-line learning abilities, which allow the models to directly use the real-time acquired information for training and adjusting structure and weights flexibility. Generally, it is hard to reach a standard to determine the AI technology for particular fields because of the diversities of application conditions and AI technologies. The existing 	