such as organic loading rate, NH4+-N, influent pH, COD, biogas yield and effluent volatile fatty 	acid were selected as input variables. Without detailed mechanisms of the anaerobic process, the 	nonlinear behavior between these dependent and independent variables associated with anaerobic 	digestion process was modeled and estimated by the proposed BP-ANN model. The experimental 		dataset could agree well with the predicted dataset with an R2 of 0.87, suggesting the efficacy of 	
the BP-ANN model was able to explain at least 87% of the variation existed in the overall COD 	removal dataset. For the treatment of naphthalene in marine oily wastewater by the means of 	photodegradation, Jing et al. (2014) employed an MLPNN to simulate the removal process. The 
effects of operating variables on naphthalene removal were investigated. All the variables were 
found to have promoting effects on the removal process. The most influential parameters were 
found to be the temperature and fluence rate. The results of this work indicated that ANN 
modeling can effectively estimate the behavior of the photo-induced polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbon (PAH) removal process. 
Moreover, Zhang and Pan (2014) developed RSM and MLPNN model to predict the removal of  
	batch and column phosphate by nano-hydrated ferric oxide, and GA was applied to achieve 

optimal conditions. Al-Obaidi et al. (2018) employed species conserving genetic algorithm 
(SCGA) in optimizing a multistage reverse osmosis (RO) conditions with permeate reprocessing 
and recycling for the degradation of N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA). By the means of optimization process, the best operating configuration was found in terms of the processes of rejection, recovery and energy consumption. A. M. Ghaedi et al. (2016) employed a GA-ANN to evaluate the potential usages of single-walled and multi-walled carbon nanotubes for rapid Triamterene adsorption. The conditions including adsorbent dosage, contact time and initial dye concentration were simulated to search the best adsorption capacities of adsorbents by GA. It was concluded that under the optimizing parameters obtained by GA, the maximum adsorption 	capacities of single-walled and multi-walled carbon nanotubes for the Triamterene removal was 
25.77 mg·g−1 and 33.14 mg·g−1 respectively.  3.1.2 Intelligent control of wastewater treatment AI models combined with automatic control techniques of wastewater treatment process to build intelligent control strategies or systems have been widely discussed in recent reports, and 