networks, to estimate effluent COD, TN and NH4+-N concentrations in a bioﬁlm system. Han et al. 		(2016) suggested a recurrent self-organizing neural network (RSONN) to predict the values of 	
SVI and inspecting the occurrence of sludge bulking in the wastewater treatment process. Zhu et 	al. (2018) proposed a hierarchical hybrid soft-sensor method incorporating ANN, compromise 	programming, and multiple linear regression (MLR) to predict BOD5 values. According to the 	up-to-date publications, the estimations of COD and BOD account for a large proportion in the 	reports related to the soft measurement of effluent parameters in WWTPs. 	Notably, it is feasible to realize the soft measurement of several parameters simultaneously. 	However, the number of parameters estimated simultaneously in one soft-sensor system is 	normally limited to three, possibly because too many output variables will increase the complex of 	nonlinearities between the inputs and the outputs, thus affecting the prediction reliability of the AI 		model and increasing the computational time. Fernandez de Canete et al. (2016) presented a 	
70-25-15-3 double-hidden MLPNN combined with PCA for on-line soft measurement of COD, 	TSS and TN in the effluent of ASP system. A validation process was performed to adjust the 	variables of the MLPNN, beginning from off-line data of the fluent parameters. The suggested 	estimator was tested on an industrial-scale municipal WWTP, and satisfactory prediction results 	were obtained under three different weather conditions (rainy, dry, and stormy). To predict the 	effluent COD, BOD, and TSS simultaneously in a biological WWTP (Tabriz, Iran), Nadiri et al. 	(2018) developed a FL based soft-sensor using influent water quality data such as pH, temperature, 	COD, BOD and TSS. The obtained results showed that the R2 value for COD, BOD and TSS in 	the testing subset is in the range of 0.87 to 0.98, suggesting the estimated values explained more 		than 87% of the actual values of these three variables. 	
Owing to the progresses of measurement, communication and automation technologies, modern 	biological wastewater treatment plants have been highly instrumented and most of the 	easy-to-measure secondary variables are routinely on-line acquired, providing key conditions for 		the practical applications of soft-sensor technologies in WWTPs. For further comprehension of 		soft-sensors for effluent parameters, Haimi et al. (2013) provided general guidelines for biological 		WWTPs soft-sensors design in their review article. They classified the reviewed soft measurement 		applications into four categories including on-line prediction, hardware-sensor monitoring, 		