3.3.1 Solid waste generation forecasts Precise estimation of solid waste generation is a key for waste management planning and the further design of incentives to encourage composting and recycling. Traditional and descriptive 	statistical methods for solid waste quantities estimation generally adopt average per-capita waste 	generation and population growth as the main indicators. It seems that these methods are 	impractical nowadays due to the increasingly complex dynamic characteristics of solid waste 	generation process (Abbasi et al., 2013; Abdoli et al., 2012; Sha’Ato et al., 2007). Regression 	analysis and material flow model as alternatives are widely used for solve this problem. However, 	the input variables in regression analysis have to meet strict requirements including constant 		variance, independence and normality of errors, limiting its applicability in solid waste quantities 	
estimation (Abbasi and El Hanandeh, 2016; Hockett et al., 1995). The feasibility of material flow 	model is also restricted since this method is unable to predict collected waste without available 	data of recycling and littering rates (Beigl et al., 2008). 
Recently, AI technologies such as ANN, SVM, DT and ANFIS have been employed for 
modeling municipal solid waste (MSW) generation due to their satisfactory prediction abilities. 
According to the length of the forecast period, current studies usually can be divided into 3 
different groups including short-term prediction (from days to months), mid-term prediction 
(months to 3–5 years), and long-term prediction (trying to predict many years ahead). Using 
historical socio-demographic, economic, and management-orientated data, most of the reported AI 
	based models were confirmed to be promising methods, exhibiting accurate predictive MSW 

generation in the scales of short (Abbasi et al., 2014; Johnson et al., 2017), medium (Abbasi and 
El Hanandeh, 2016; Kontokosta et al., 2018), and long-term (Tiwari and Bajpai, 2012).  
As shown in Table 7, Johnson et al. (2017) employed a gradient boosting regression tree (GBRT) model for short-term waste estimation in New York City. Trained on integrated historical waste collection data from 2005 to 2011, the proposed model was able to estimate weekly MSW generation quantities (including recycling of refuse, paper and metal/glass/plastic) with an average accuracy of 88% for 232 geographic sections of New York City in the year 2012. The waste collection data from the New York City Department of Sanitation (DSNY) spans more than a decade, each record contains the collection data of one truck including the collected tonnage, the 	