system to eliminate nitrogenous compounds at low energy cost in an anoxic/oxic (A/O) process. The proposed system consists of an FNN estimator to predict the nitrate concentration in the final anoxic process and FNN controller for controlling the nitrate recirculation flow. In comparison to the implementation with nitrate recirculation flow rate, the operating costs, and the concentrations of COD and TN for one week decreased by 17%, 14%, and 10.5%, respectively. Besides, to 	reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, effluent nutrient concentration and operational costs in 
WWTPs, Santin et al. (2018) designed a fuzzy controller coupled with three proportional-integral (PI) controllers to optimize six variables and their time derivatives in some cases, to investigate their trends over time.  	ANFIS is another feasible technique of fuzzy control applied to wastewater treatment processes 	(Gaya et al., 2015; Huang et al., 2009; Shen et al., 2014). It integrates learning capacities of ANN 	and reasoning abilities of FL to map the input-output relationships. For example, Huang et al. 	(2009) presented an ANFIS controller to adjust aeration in an aerated submerged biofilm 	wastewater treatment process at a small-scale WWTP with a daily treatment capacity of 100 m3 	industrial sewage. They introduced that the proposed ANFIS controller enables them to reduce the 		operation cost by about 33%. Gaya et al. (2015) employed an ANFIS based compensation 	
controller for dissolved oxygen control in an ASP. The study indicated that the suggested 	controller showed better settling-time and faster response in comparison to the common PID 	controller. 
In addition to precisely controlling aeration to achieve the desired DO concentration, intelligent 
control systems were also employed to optimize the photodegradation and other processes (Jing et 
al., 2015, 2014; Lin et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2016). As stated by Lin et al. (2012), a novel 
MLPNN control strategy was developed for UV and UV-TiO2 disinfection controls to meet the 
limits of three total coliform for municipal sewage reclamation. The reported indicated that the 
proposed ANN model could precisely correlate the interrelationships among multiple monitored 
	variables for both UV and UV-TiO2 disinfection, even though it is almost impossible to use 

existing mathematic methods. Besides, Jing et al. (2015) carried out a research related to the 
naphthalene removal from marine oily wastewater by means of UV treatment. Hence, a 
simulation-based dynamic mixed integer nonlinear programming (SDMINP) approach, which 