AI-based estimators, known as soft-sensors, have been accepted as remarkable alternatives to 	
the conventional observers and hardware sensors for rapidly and precisely estimating the 	hard-to-measure parameters. As shown in Table 4, a large number of researches have conducted 	soft-sensing studies on various primary parameters including concentrations of ammonia 	(NH4+-N), nitrates (NO3--N) and total nitrogen (TN), phosphates (PO43-) and total phosphorus (TP), 	chemical (COD) and biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), total suspended solids (TSS) and 	sludge volume index (SVI) and other water quality parameters (Cong and Yu, 2018; Fernandez de 	Canete et al., 2016; Haimi et al., 2015; Han et al., 2016, 2011; Mulas et al., 2011; Shi and Xu, 	2018; Zhu et al., 2018). These AI models applied to soft measurement were based on the data of 	some secondary variables (e.g., temperature, flow rate, pH, DO and ORP) that were easily 		obtained through on-line instruments. Among these secondary variables, pH, temperature and DO 	
were taken as necessary parameters in most reports. 	For instance, Zhu et al. (2017) presented a soft-sensor based on RBFNN to estimate the 	accurate values of effluent TP on-line in an industrial-scale WWTP. The suggested monitoring 	system consisted of soft-sensor model and on-line instruments. Therefore, the values of pH, 	temperature, DO, TSS, NH4+-N, NO3--N, and ORP in the A/A/O process were monitored by 	instruments, and these data were consistently transmitted to the soft-sensor method. RBFNN was 	trained up in advance for identifying the relationships between TP and the above secondary 	variables. It was revealed that this monitoring system was able to estimate TP values online with 	predicting accuracy and computational time of 83% and 16.8s, respectively. Besides, the report 		also pointed out that the proposed estimator could update its parameters as the change of on-line 	
obtained data. Cong and Yu (2018) used the sampled influent data of NH4-N, ORP, DO, suspended 	solid (SS) and flow rate, which were inputs in an anaerobic reactor, and then developed an 	integrated approach for on-line soft measurement of effluent COD in A/O wastewater treatment 	process. Several Hammerstein models, approximate linear dependence (ALD) analysis, adaptive 	weighted fusion and wavelet neural networks (WNN), were employed in their study. The findings 	of this research concluded that even in the case of frequent changes in operating conditions, the 	proposed soft-sensor could achieve a satisfactory result. Moreover, Shi and Xu (2018) applied the 	deep learning neural networks, namely stacked denoising auto-encoders (SDAE) deep learning 	