However, for these tasks the model has not really improved after the 850K checkpoint. For evaluation of
the SRL data, the CoNLL-2002 evaluation script is used in order to take chunk overlap of multi-token
expressions into account. The results on these tasks are stand-alone since we are not aware of the existence
of similar systems.
The results in Table 1 and Table 3 both show a similar pattern where the scores on training data are
higher than the development and test results. This indicates that BERTje may be prone to overﬁtting just
like other models. Therefore, hyper-parameter tuning for speciﬁc tasks may help to improve performance.
Sentiment Analysis Table 4 shows the sentiment analysis accuracy scores on the 110k Dutch Book
Reviews Dataset. Without hyperparameter tuning, BERTje comes close to the 93.8% score that van der
Burgh and Verberne (2019) obtain with manual hyperparameter tuning of an ULMFiT model (Howard
and Ruder, 2018).
5 Conclusion
We have successfully pre-trained, ﬁne-tuned and evaluated a Dutch BERT-based model called BERTje.
This model consistently outperforms multilingual BERT on word-level NLP tasks. Even though multi-
lingual BERT has been shown to perform well on Dutch NLP tasks (Wu and Dredze, 2019), our results
indicate that a monolingual model should be preferred.
In addition to the comparison with multilingual BERT, we see that lower level linguistic structure
like part-of-speech tags appear to be learned earlier during pre-training than higher level information.
Low-level linguistic tasks do not beneﬁt from longer pre-training after 850K epochs, but the higher-level
entity recognition task does beneﬁt from longer pre-training. This gives an indication that higher level
structures in language are only properly learned after lower level structures have been encoded. Therefore,
it is important that large pre-trained language models are trained for enough iterations to properly encode
high level structures. It has been observed that English BERT encodes higher level linguistic structures in
later layers (Jawahar et al., 2019; Tenney et al., 2019) and this may be the case for BERTje too.
In future work, the encoding of different layers of linguistic abstraction within BERTje should be
explored in order to fully understand and evaluate how well BERTje has learned different types of
information. It also needs to be investigated how well BERTje performs on sentence-level tasks that
require coherence information between sentences.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Daniel de Kok for sharing the Wikipedia data. BERTje was trained with Cloud TPUs
from Google’s TensorFlow Research Cloud (TFRC).
References
Benjamin van der Burgh and Suzan Verberne. 2019. The merits of universal language model ﬁne-tuning
for small datasets–a case with Dutch book reviews. arXiv preprint 1910.00896.
Isabelle Delaere, Veronique Hoste, and Paola Monachesi. 2009. Cultivating trees: Adding several semantic
layers to the Lassy treebank in SoNaR. In 7th International workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic
Theories (TLT-7) , pages 135–146. LOT (Landelijke Onderzoekschool Taalwetenschap).
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of NAACL , pages 4171–4186.
Jeremy Howard and Sebastian Ruder. 2018. Universal language model ﬁne-tuning for text classiﬁcation.
InProceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers) , pages 328–339, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ganesh Jawahar, Benoît Sagot, and Djamé Seddah. 2019. What does BERT learn about the structure of
language? In Proceedings of ACL , pages 3651–3657.