to the same word. We masked 15% of all tokens using this strategy. Of these selected tokens, 80% are
replaced with a special mask token, 10% are replaced by a completely random token, and 10% are left
as-is. This strategy is used to ensure that the model also accurately embeds unmasked words.
BERTje is pre-trained for 1 million iterations. To gauge the effect of the number of iterations on
the performance of downstream tasks, we also evaluate ﬁne-tuning performance at the 850k iterations
checkpoint.
3 Tasks and test data
To evaluate the effectiveness of BERTje for use on downstream tasks, the model is ﬁne-tuned for several
NLP tasks. We use annotated data from three sources for this.
First, we use the Dutch CoNLL-2002 named-entity recognition (NER) data (Tjong Kim Sang, 2002).
This is a four-class BIO-encoded named-entity classiﬁcation task with the following four classes: person ,
organisation ,location andmiscellaneous . Second, we evaluate on the 16 universal part-of-speech (POS)
tags in the Lassy Small treebank (van Noord et al., 2013) part of Universal Dependencies v2.5 (Zeman
et al., 2019). Both datasets are already split into train, development, and test sets.
Third, we evaluate on several classiﬁcation tasks that originate from the SoNaR-1 corpus of written
Dutch (Delaere et al., 2009). We evaluate on token-level NER (6 labels), coarse POS tags (12 labels) and
ﬁne-grained POS tags (241 labels in total of which 223 are present in the training data). The ﬁne-grained
POS tags contain many labels that are used only once. In addition to NER and POS tags, we extract three
other annotation types from SoNaR-1:
Semantic Role predicate-argument structures: The semantic role label annotations in SoNaR contain
predicate-argument relations. We only extract predicate and argument labels. Just the highest
level labels are used, so entire subordinate clauses are considered to be a single argument and the
arguments and predicates within these subordinate clauses are ignored.
Semantic Role modiﬁers: Modiﬁer phrases for semantic roles are often short and non-overlapping. The
labels for this task are the modiﬁer phrase types, regardless of the predicate they belong to.
Spatio-temporal Relations: A subset of spatio-temporal annotations are extracted including geographi-
cal relations and verb tenses.
Each of these annotations are ﬂattened from hierarchical annotations to token-level classiﬁcations. We
use 80% of the resulting documents for training, 10% for validation, and 10% for testing. The extracted
annotations are split on document level, so there is no document overlap between splits.
Each of the previous tasks describe a low level linguistic type of information. However, we want to test
BERTje on a more high-level, downstream task, such as sentiment analysis. For this, we use the 110k
Dutch Book Reviews Dataset (van der Burgh and Verberne, 2019), a balanced collection of positive and
negative reviews which lends itself to a binary sentiment classiﬁcation task.
4 Results
For each of the previously described tasks, three models are ﬁne-tuned: multilingual BERT base, BERTje
at the 850K checkpoint (BERTje 850k) and the fully trained BERTje model (1M checkpoint). All models
are ﬁne-tuned for four epochs on the training data for each task with the same hyperparameters. Longer
training has shown degradation of performance on some validation data and increase of performance after
the fourth epoch has not been observed.
Named-Entity Recognition Table 1 shows the span-based F1 scores of the ﬁne-tuned models. For both
the CoNLL-2002 data as well as the SoNaR-1 data, it is clear that BERTje outperforms the multilingual
BERT model. Additionally, the BERTje model has improved after the 850K checkpoint. Our models do
not outperform the state-of-the-art test score of 90.9% of Wu and Dredze (2019) on the CoNLL-2002 test
data. This model is a well optimized ﬁne-tuned large multilingual BERT model. Based on the performance
difference between multilingual BERT and BERTje, it is likely that replicating their approach with a
monolingual Dutch BERT model would improve the state-of-the-art performance.