architecture have been developed for Italian (Polignano et al., 2019), French (Le et al., 2019), German,2
Finnish (Virtanen et al., 2019), and Japanese.3The Italian model is pre-trained on Twitter data, which
may not be representative for general use of language and is only trained on the MLM objective, as the
NSP task is barely applicable to tweets. The other models are pre-trained on a combination of Wikipedia
with additional data from for instance online news articles.4
To demonstrate the effectiveness of using multi-genre data in a monolingual model, and to equip NLP
research on Dutch with a high-performing model, we developed a Dutch BERT model which we call
BERTje.5In this paper we describe the training process of BERTje and evaluate its performance by
ﬁne-tuning the model on several Dutch NLP tasks. We compare the performance on all tasks to that
achieved using multilingual BERT.
2 Pre-training data and parameters
To facilitate comparison and due to limited resources, we opt to train a single Dutch BERT-based model
that is architecturally equivalent to the BERT BASE model with 12 transformer blocks (Devlin et al., 2019).
However, the pre-training data is of course different and other pre-training data generation modiﬁcations
were made based on later derivations of BERT. Nevertheless, we aimed to collect a dataset of similar size
and diversity as used for the English BERT model.
2.1 Data
For pre-training, we combined several corpora of high quality Dutch text, listed below. The sizes in
parentheses are the uncompressed text sizes after cleaning.
Books: a collection of contemporary and historical ﬁction novels (4.4GB)
TwNC (Ordelman et al., 2007): a Multifaceted Dutch News Corpus (2.4GB)
SoNaR-500 (Oostdijk et al., 2013): a multi-genre reference corpus (2.2GB)
Web news: all articles of 4 Dutch news websites from January 1, 2015 to October 1, 2019 (1.6GB)
Wikipedia: the October 2019 dump (1.5GB)
Documents that originate from chats or Twitter were removed from the SoNaR corpus because of
quality considerations. We also removed the Wikipedia documents from SoNaR to avoid overlap with the
full Wikipedia dump. Finally, in order to avoid any overlap with texts that we want to use as test data,
we removed all documents from SoNaR-500 that are included in the manually annotated SoNaR-1 and
Lassy Small (van Noord et al., 2013) datasets. As a result, the ﬁnal pre-training dataset contains 12GB of
uncompressed text which amounts to about 2.4B tokens.
Like BERT, we constructed a WordPiece vocabulary with a vocabulary size of 30K tokens. A Sentence-
Piece model (Kudo and Richardson, 2018) was created for this based on the raw pre-training dataset. The
resulting vocabulary is translated to WordPiece format for compatibility with the original BERT model.
2.2 Pre-training procedure
BERT was pre-trained with two objectives: next sentence prediction (NSP) and masked language modeling
(MLM). Based on ﬁndings after the initial release of BERT, we made modiﬁcations in the pre-training
data generation procedure for both tasks.
Because of the demonstrated ineffectiveness of the NSP task during pre-training, BERTje is trained
with the SOP objective. This means that the second sentence in each training example is either the next
or the previous sentence. We also apply a different strategy for the MLM objective. Many words are
split into multiple WordPiece tokens and some sufﬁxes of words are too easy to predict (Lan et al., 2019).
Therefore, instead of randomly masking single word pieces, we mask consecutive word pieces that belong
2https://deepset.ai/german-bert
3https://github.com/cl-tohoku/bert-japanese
4A monolingual Dutch model has also been made available at http://textdata.nl , but this this model was consistently
signiﬁcantly outperformed by multilingual BERT in our experiments.
5The sufﬁx -jeis used to form diminutives in Dutch; it is also used with names in an affectionate sense. BERTje is pronounced
["bErÙ@ ].