BERTje: A Dutch BERT Model
Wietse de Vries ,Andreas van Cranenburgh ,Arianna Bisazza ,
Tommaso Caselli ,Gertjan van Noord , and Malvina Nissim
CLCG, University of Groningen, The Netherlands
research@wietsedv.nl
{a.w.van.cranenburgh,a.bisazza,
t.caselli,g.j.m.van.noord,m.nissim}@rug.nl
Abstract
The transformer-based pre-trained language model BERT has helped to improve state-of-the-art
performance on many natural language processing (NLP) tasks. Using the same architecture
and parameters, we developed and evaluated a monolingual Dutch BERT model called BERTje.
Compared to the multilingual BERT model, which includes Dutch but is only based on Wikipedia
text, BERTje is based on a large and diverse dataset of 2.4 billion tokens. BERTje consistently
outperforms the equally-sized multilingual BERT model on downstream NLP tasks (part-of-speech
tagging, named-entity recognition, semantic role labeling, and sentiment analysis). Our pre-trained
Dutch BERT model is made available at https://github.com/wietsedv/bertje .
1 Introduction
In the ﬁeld of computational linguistics there has been a major transition from the development of task-
speciﬁc models built from scratch to ﬁne-tuning approaches based on large general-purpose language
models (Howard and Ruder, 2018; Peters et al., 2018). Currently, the most commonly used pre-trained
model of this type is BERT (Devlin et al., 2019). This model and its derivatives are based on the
transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017). Many state-of-the-art results on benchmark natural
language processing (NLP) tasks have been improved by ﬁne-tuned versions of BERT and BERT-derived
models.
The BERT model is pre-trained with two learning objectives that force the model to learn semantic
information within and between sentences (Devlin et al., 2019). The masked language modeling (MLM)
task forces the BERT model to embed each word based on the surrounding words. The next sentence
prediction (NSP) task, on the other hand, forces the model to learn semantic coherence between sentences.
For BERT, NSP is implemented through a binary prediction task where two sentences are either consecutive
(positive instance) or the second sentence is completely random (negative instance). It has however been
shown that this method is ineffective (Liu et al., 2019). The NSP was intended to learn inter-sentence
coherence, but apparently BERT actually learned topic similarity. Indeed, if the next sentence is random,
it is not just a matter of coherence: crucially, the topic is likely different. Because of this, the authors
of RoBERTa removed the NSP task from the pre-training process (Liu et al., 2019). The developers of
ALBERT, instead, implemented a different solution by replacing the NSP task with a sentence order
prediction (SOP) task (Lan et al., 2019). In SOP, two sentences are either consecutive or swapped. This
change has resulted in improved downstream task performance.
The success of BERT on NLP tasks has mostly been limited to the English language since the main
BERT model is trained on English (Devlin et al., 2019). For other languages, one could either train
language-speciﬁc models with the same BERT architecture, or use the existing multilingual BERT
model.1This is a model trained on all Wikipedia pages of 104 different languages, including Dutch.
However, a monolingual model may perform better at tasks in a speciﬁc language and Wikipedia is a
speciﬁc domain that is not representative of general language use. Monolingual models with the BERT
1https://github.com/google-research/bert/blob/master/multilingual.mdarXiv:1912.09582v1  [cs.CL]  19 Dec 2019