log-mel spectrogram
(Spanish)8-layer
Stacked
BLSTM
EncoderconcatSpeaker
Encoderspeaker
reference
utterance
AttentionAttentionMultihead
Attention
2LSTM Decoder2LSTM DecoderSpectrogram
DecoderVocoder
phonemes
(Spanish)phonemes
(English)linear freq
spectrogram
(English)waveform
(English)
Auxiliary recognition tasks
Figure 1: Proposed model architecture, which generates English
speech (top right) from Spanish speech (bottom left), and an
optional speaker reference utterance (top left) which is only used
for voice transfer experiments in Section 3.4. The model is multi-
task trained to predict source and target phoneme transcripts as
well, however these auxiliary tasks are not used during inference.
Optional components are drawn in light colors.
to-sequence network (blue) which generates target spectrograms,
2) avocoder (red) which converts target spectrograms to time-
domain waveforms, and, 3) optionally, a pretrained speaker
encoder (green) which can be used to condition the decoder on
the identity of the source speaker, enabling cross-language voice
conversion [27] simultaneously with translation.
The sequence-to-sequence encoder stack maps 80-channel
log-mel spectrogram input features into hidden states which
are passed through an attention-based alignment mechanism to
condition an autoregressive decoder, which predicts 1025-dim
log spectrogram frames corresponding to the translated speech.
Two optional auxiliary decoders, each with their own attention
components, predict source and target phoneme sequences.
Following recent speech translation [21] and recognition
[28] models, the encoder is composed of a stack of 8 bidirectional
LSTM layers. As shown in Fig. 1, the ﬁnal layer output is passed
to the primary decoder, whereas intermediate activations are
passed to auxiliary decoders predicting phoneme sequences.We
hypothesize that early layers of the encoder are more likely to
represent the source content well, while deeper layers might
learn to encode more information about the target content.
The spectrogram decoder uses an architecture similar to
Tacotron 2 TTS model [26], including pre-net, autoregressive
LSTM stack, and post-net components. We make several
changes to it in order to adapt to the more challenging S2ST task.
We use multi-head additive attention [29] with 4 heads instead of
location-sensitive attention, which shows better performance in
our experiments. We also use a signiﬁcantly narrower 32 dimen-
sional pre-net bottleneck compared to 256-dim in [26], which we
ﬁnd to be critical in picking up attention during training. We also
use reduction factor [30] of 2, i.e. predicting two spectrogram
frames for each decoding step. Finally, consistent with results
on translation tasks [19, 31], we ﬁnd that using a deeper decoder
containing 4 or 6 LSTM layers leads to good performance.
We ﬁnd that multitask training is critical in solving the task,
which we accomplish by integrating auxiliary decoder networks
to predict phoneme sequences corresponding to the source and/or
target speech. Losses computed using these auxiliary recogni-
tion networks are used during training, which help the primary
spectrogram decoder to learn attention. They are not used dur-
ing inference. In contrast to the primary decoder, the auxiliary
decoders use 2-layer LSTMs with single-head additive atten-
tion [32]. All three decoders use attention dropout and LSTM
zoneout regularization [33], all with probability 0.1. TrainingTable 1: Dataset-speciﬁc model hyperparameters.
Conversational Fisher
Num train examples 979k 120k
Input / output sample rate (Hz) 16k / 24k 8k / 24k
Learning rate 0.002 0.006
Encoder BLSTM 8 1024 8256
Decoder LSTM 6 1024 41024
Auxiliary decoder LSTM 2 256 2256
source / target input layer 8 / 8 4 / 6
dropout prob 0.2 0.3
loss decay constant 1.0 0:3!0:001
at 160k steps
Gaussian weight noise stddev none 0.05
uses the Adafactor optimizer [34] with a batch size of 1024.
Since we are only demonstrating a proof of concept, we
primarily rely on the low-complexity Grifﬁn-Lim [35] vocoder
in our experiments. However, we use a WaveRNN [36] neural
vocoder when evaluating speech naturalness in listening tests.
Finally, in order to control the output speaker identity we
incorporate an optional speaker encoder network as in [15]. This
network is discriminatively pretrained on a speaker veriﬁcation
task and is not updated during the training of Translatotron. We
use the dvector V3 model from [37], trained on a larger set of
851K speakers across 8 languages including English and Span-
ish. The model computes a 256-dim speaker embedding from
the speaker reference utterance, which is passed into a linear
projection layer (trained with the sequence-to-sequence model)
to reduce the dimensionality to 16. This is critical to generalizing
to source language speakers which are unseen during training.
3. Experiments
We study two Spanish-to-English translation datasets: the large
scale “conversational” corpus of parallel text and read speech
pairs from [21], and the Spanish Fisher corpus of telephone con-
versations and corresponding English translations [38], which is
smaller and more challenging due to the spontaneous and infor-
mal speaking style. In Sections 3.1 and 3.2, we synthesize target
speech from the target transcript using a single (female) speaker
English TTS system; In Section 3.4, we use real human tar-
get speech for voice transfer experiments on the conversational
dataset. Models were implemented using the Lingvo frame-
work [39]. See Table 1 for dataset-speciﬁc hyperparameters.
To evaluate speech-to-speech translation performance we
compute BLEU scores [40] as an objective measure of speech
intelligibility and translation quality, by using a pretrained ASR
system to recognize the generated speech, and comparing the
resulting transcripts to ground truth reference translations. Due
to potential recognition errors (see Figure 2), this can be thought
of as a lower bound on the underlying translation quality. We
use the 16k Word-Piece attention-based ASR model from [41]
trained on the 960 hour LibriSpeech corpus [42], which obtained
word error rates of 4.7% and 13.4% on the test-clean and test-
other sets, respectively. In addition, we conduct listening tests
to measure subjective speech naturalness mean opinion score
(MOS), as well as speaker similarity MOS for voice transfer.
3.1. Conversational Spanish-to-English
This proprietary dataset described in [21] was obtained by crowd-
sourcing humans to read the both sides of a conversational
Spanish-English MT dataset. In this section, instead of using the
human target speech, we use a TTS model to synthesize target