Direct speech-to-speech translation with a sequence-to-sequence model
Ye Jia*, Ron J. Weiss*, Fadi Biadsy, Wolfgang Macherey, Melvin Johnson, Zhifeng Chen, Yonghui Wu
Google
fjiaye,ronwg@google.com
Abstract
We present an attention-based sequence-to-sequence neural net-
work which can directly translate speech from one language into
speech in another language, without relying on an intermediate
text representation. The network is trained end-to-end, learning
to map speech spectrograms into target spectrograms in another
language, corresponding to the translated content (in a different
canonical voice). We further demonstrate the ability to synthe-
size translated speech using the voice of the source speaker. We
conduct experiments on two Spanish-to-English speech transla-
tion datasets, and ﬁnd that the proposed model slightly underper-
forms a baseline cascade of a direct speech-to-text translation
model and a text-to-speech synthesis model, demonstrating the
feasibility of the approach on this very challenging task.
Index Terms : speech-to-speech translation, voice transfer, at-
tention, sequence-to-sequence model, end-to-end model
1. Introduction
We address the task of speech-to-speech translation (S2ST):
translating speech in one language into speech in another. This
application is highly beneﬁcial for breaking down communica-
tion barriers between people who do not share a common lan-
guage. Speciﬁcally, we investigate whether it is possible to train
model to accomplish this task directly, without relying on an in-
termediate text representation. This is in contrast to conventional
S2ST systems which are often broken down into three compo-
nents: automatic speech recognition (ASR), text-to-text machine
translation (MT), and text-to-speech (TTS) synthesis [1–4].
Cascaded systems have the potential problem of errors com-
pounding between components, e.g. recognition errors leading
to larger translation errors. Direct S2ST models avoid this is-
sue by training to solve the task end-to-end. They also have
advantages over cascaded systems in terms of reduced computa-
tional requirements and lower inference latency since only one
decoding step is necessary, instead of three. In addition, direct
models are naturally capable of retaining paralinguistic and non-
linguistic information during translation, e.g. maintaining the
source speaker’s voice, emotion, and prosody, in the synthesized
translated speech. Finally, directly conditioning on the input
speech makes it easy to learn to generate ﬂuent pronunciations
of words which do not need to be translated, such as names.
However, solving the direct S2ST task is especially chal-
lenging for several reasons. Fully-supervised end-to-end training
requires collecting a large set of input/output speech pairs. Such
data are more difﬁcult to collect compared to parallel text pairs
for MT, or speech-text pairs for ASR or TTS. Decomposing
into smaller tasks can take advantage of the lower training data
requirements compared to a monolithic speech-to-speech model,
and can result in a more robust system for a given training budget.
Uncertain alignment between two spectrograms whose underly-
ing spoken content differs also poses a major training challenge.
* Equal contribution.In this paper we demonstrate Translatotron1, a direct speech-
to-speech translation model which is trained end-to-end. To
facilitate training without predeﬁned alignments, we leverage
high level representations of the source or target content in the
form of transcriptions, essentially multitask training with speech-
to-text tasks. However no intermediate text representation is
used during inference. The model does not perform as well as a
baseline cascaded system. Nevertheless, it demonstrates a proof
of concept and serves as a starting point for future research.
Extensive research has studied methods for combining dif-
ferent sub-systems within cascaded speech translation systems.
[5, 6] gave MT access to the lattice of the ASR. [7, 8] integrated
acoustic and translation models using a stochastic ﬁnite-state
transducer which can decode the translated text directly using
Viterbi search. For synthesis, [9] used unsupervised clustering
to ﬁnd F0-based prosody features and transfer intonation from
source speech and target. [10] augmented MT to jointly predict
translated words and emphasis, in order to improve expressive-
ness of the synthesized speech. [11] used a neural network to
transfer duration and power from the source speech to the tar-
get. [12] transfered source speaker’s voice to the synthesized
translated speech by mapping hidden Markov model states from
ASR to TTS. Similarly, recent work on neural TTS has focused
on adapting to new voices with limited reference data [13–16].
Initial approaches to end-to-end speech-to-text translation
(ST) [17, 18] performed worse than a cascade of an ASR model
and an MT model. [19, 20] achieved better end-to-end perfor-
mance by leveraging weakly supervised data with multitask
learning. [21] further showed that use of synthetic training data
can work better than multitask training. In this work we take ad-
vantage of both synthetic training targets and multitask training.
The proposed model resembles recent sequence-to-sequence
models for voice conversion, the task of recreating an utterance
in another person’s voice [22 –24]. For example, [23] proposes
an attention-based model to generate spectrograms in the target
voice based on input features (spectrogram concatenated with
ASR bottleneck features) from the source voice. In contrast
to S2ST, the input-output alignment for voice conversion is
simpler and approximately monotonic. [23] also trains models
that are speciﬁc to each input-output speaker pair (i.e. one-to-
one conversion), whereas we explore many-to-one and many-
to-many speaker conﬁgurations. Finally, [25] demonstrated an
attention-based direct S2ST model on a toy dataset with a 100
word vocabulary. In this work we train on real speech, including
spontaneous telephone conversations, at a much larger scale.
2. Speech-to-speech translation model
An overview of the proposed Translatotron model architecture is
shown in Figure 1. Following [15, 26], it is composed of several
separately trained components: 1) an attention-based sequence-
1Audio samples are available at https://google-research.
github.io/lingvo-lab/translatotron .arXiv:1904.06037v2  [cs.CL]  25 Jun 2019