Information 2024 ,15, 99 22 of 27
Information  2024, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW   22 of 28 
 
  
Figure A1. Database  search from Scopus using Scopus-speci ﬁc advanced  query. From Scopus, 99 
documents  were returned,  including  the duplicates.  After removing  the duplicates,  records were 
screened.  For example,  the ﬁrst record, “Beyond  the Scalpel: Assessing  ChatGPT’s  Potential  as an 
Auxiliary  Intelligent  Virtual Assistant  in Oral Surgery”  is not relevant to the focus of this study, “i.e., 
GPT in Research/GPT  in Data Augmentation/GPT  in Data Generation/GPT  in Solving Research  
Problem”.  
 
Figure A2. Database  search from IEEE Xplore using IEEE Xplore-speci ﬁc advanced  queries. A total 
of 119 documents  were returned,  including  duplicates.  After removing  the duplicates,  records were 
screened.  For example,  the ﬁrst record was included,  and the second record was screened  out as this 
paper does not address “GPT in research”.  
Figure A2. Database search from IEEE Xplore using IEEE Xplore-specific advanced queries. A total
of 119 documents were returned, including duplicates. After removing the duplicates, records were
screened. For example, the first record was included, and the second record was screened out as this
paper does not address “GPT in research”.
Information  2024, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW   23 of 28 
 
  
Figure A3. Database  search from PubMed  using a PubMed-speci ﬁc advanced  query. From PubMed,  
47 documents  were returned,  including  the duplicates.  
 
Figure A4. Database  Search from Web of Science using their supported  advanced  query. From Web 
of Science, 306 documents  were returned,  including  duplicates.  After removing  the duplicates,  the 
records were screened.  For example,  the ﬁrst records were screened  out as this paper was focused 
on nanotechnology  and nanomaterials.  
Figure A3. Database search from PubMed using a PubMed-specific advanced query. From PubMed,
47 documents were returned, including the duplicates.