Information 2024 ,15, 99 4 of 27
PRISMA represents a meticulously structured approach for conducting and reporting
systematic literature reviews and meta-analyses within the realm of academic research.
The PRISMA method encompasses key components such as the identification, screening,
eligibility assessment, and inclusion of pertinent studies, as well as the extraction and
synthesis of data from the selected literature. This systematic approach is underpinned by
a commitment to reducing bias and enhancing the reproducibility of the review process.
Employing a meticulously devised strategy, as depicted in Figure 3, we formulated a
comprehensive set of search keywords. These keywords were then utilized across multiple
databases, including IEEE Xplore, Scopus, ACM Library, Web of Science, and PubMed,
leading to the initial identification using their supported advanced queries. As seen
from Figures A1–A5 in Appendix A, the actual implementation of advanced queries
varies from platform to platform. However, all these advanced queries implemented the
conceptual query design represented in Figure 3. Additionally, we explored other sources
like Litmaps [ 29], yielding nine supplementary resources. Innovative visualization tools like
Litmaps showed related research in our domain of interest, thereby highlighting papers that
might have been missed from mainstream databases. Figure A6 of Appendix A shows how
Litmaps identified 20 possible citations that might be within the domain of interest. After
identification of possible records from IEEE Xplore, Scopus, ACM Library, Web of Science,
and PubMed, duplicated records were identified and removed. From the records without
duplicates, the screening process was performed in two stages. In the first stage, screening
was performed by careful inspection of the titles and abstracts. If the title and abstract of a
record contained the keywords but focused on a completely different area of research, then
that record was excluded. For example, the records shown in Figure A1 (i.e., GPT as virtual
assistant in medical surgery), Figure A2 (i.e., comparison of ChatGPT, GPT, and DALL-E2),
and Figure A4 (i.e., research in nanomaterials and nanotechnology) of Appendix A were
excluded because these studies did not focus on “GPT in Research”. In stage 2 of screening,
full-text articles were downloaded, inspected, and critically reviewed for eligibility. From
reading the full text, if the article had an insignificant focus on the research questions set
out in RQ1, RQ2, and RQ2, the article was excluded. Finally, 77 articles relevant to the
research questions were included in this study.
Figure 3. Search keyword used for obtaining relevant existing academic works on “GPT, LLM, and
associated technologies in different phases of research”.
It should be noted that the extensive set of criteria represented in Table 1 is a modified
version of an earlier work on systematic literature review [ 30]. Figure 4 presents a schematic
diagram elucidating this systematic review process. Our analysis reveals that 48 of these