that fall into the j-th bin, and let Hj=/summationtext
k≤jhkbe the
cumulative sum of the histogram. Also, let h+
jcount the
number of neighbors of qin thej-th bin, and H+
jbe its
cumulative sum. With these deﬁnitions, we can rewrite the
probabilistic quantities in ( 13), and get a simple expression
for FastAP:
FastAP=L/summationdisplay
j=1H+
j
N+
q·N+
q
N
Hj
N·h+
j
N+q=1
N+qL/summationdisplay
j=1H+
jh+
j
Hj.(14)
It takesO(NL)time to perform histogram binning and
compute the FastAP approximation. A small Lsufﬁces in
practice, as we will show in the experiments section.
4. Stochastic Optimization
In this section, we describe how to optimize FastAP ( 14)
using SGD. AP is deﬁned with respect to the retrieval prob-
lem between a query and a retrieval set. With minibatches,
the natural choice is to deﬁne in-batch retrieval problems
where retrieval set Ris restricted to examples in the mini-
batch. Speciﬁcally, we use each example as the query qto
retrieve its neighbors from the rest of the batch. Each of
these in-batch retrieval problems emits one AP value, and
the overall objective of the minibatch is the average of them,
or the mean AP (mAP).
To perform gradient descent, we must ensure the his-
tograms in ( 14) are constructed as to permit gradient back-
propagation. To this end, we adopt the simple linear in-
terpolation technique proposed by [ 38] which replaces the
regular binning operation for histogram construction with
a differentiable soft binning technique. Essentially, this in-
terpolation relaxes the integer-valued histogram bin counts
hto continuous values, which we denote using ˆh. The cu-
mulative sums are also relaxed as ˆH. With a differentiable
binning operation, we can now obtain partial derivatives for
FastAP. Speciﬁcally, using subscript ito indicate that the
current query is xi, we have:†
∂FastAP i
∂ˆh+
i,k=1
N+
iL/summationdisplay
j=1∂
∂ˆh+
i,k/parenleftBiggˆH+
i,jˆh+
i,j
ˆHi,j/parenrightBigg
(15)
=1
N+
i/summationdisplay
j≥kˆHi,jˆh+
i,j+ˆH−
i,jˆh+
i,j
ˆH2
i,j. (16)
The relaxation of histogram binning is also used by
[6,13] to tackle the “leaning to hash” problem, with similar
in-batch retrieval formulations. FastAP differs in two main
aspects: the objective function, and the underlying distance
metric. In particular, [ 13] optimizes a complex closed form
of AP for the Hamming distance. In this case, the number of
†The complete derivations are provided in the supplementary material.histogram bins naturally corresponds to the number of dis-
crete levels in the Hamming distance. However, such a con-
venience does not exist for real-valued distances. Instead,
histogram binning is used for approximation purposes in
FastAP. The number of histogram bins now becomes a vari-
able parameter, which involves an interesting trade-off, as
we will discuss later.
4.1. Large­Batch Training
Large batch sizes can be beneﬁcial for training deep neu-
ral networks with SGD [ 32]; this is also observed in our ex-
periments (Section 5.3). However, batch sizes are limited
by GPU memory. In the case of classiﬁcation, the effective
batch size can be increased through data parallelism [ 10].
However, data parallelism for FastAP is less trivial, as it is
anon-decomposable objective: the objective value for each
example in a minibatch depends on other examples in the
same batch.
Inspired by a similar solution for the triplet loss [ 9],
we propose a heuristic to enable large-batch training for
FastAP. The main insight is that the loss layer takes the
embedding matrix of the minibatch as input (see supple-
mentary material). Thus, a large batch can be ﬁrst broken
into smaller chunks to incrementally compute the embed-
ding matrix. Then, we compute the gradients with respect
to the embedding matrix, which is a relatively lightweight
operation involving only the loss layer. Finally, gradients
are back-propagated through the network, again in chunks.
This solution works even with a single GPU.
4.2. Minibatch Sampling
Typically, metric learning methods derive neighborhood
relationships from class labels – instances sharing the same
class label are considered neighbors. In this scheme, sam-
pling strategies for pairs and triplets have been well-studied.
However, the listwise formulation of FastAP leads to differ-
ent considerations for minibatch sampling. The ﬁrst consid-
eration is that sampling should be done on the class level;
instance-level sampling cannot guarantee that each example
has at least one neighbor in the same minibatch, thus might
lead to ill-deﬁned in-batch retrieval problems.
The second consideration is that the sampled mini-
batches need to represent “sufﬁciently hard” in-batch re-
trieval problems to train the network. One option, as we
mentioned above, is to use large batches. However, when
training with large batches is not feasible, a sampling strat-
egy for classes becomes crucial. Our reasoning, illustrated
in Figure 3, is that sampling classes purely at random may
not create hard retrieval problems: for example, it is easy to
retrieve images of a bicycle from a pool of toasters, chairs,
etc. However, if the pool also includes images of other bi-
cycles, the retrieval problem becomes more challenging.
Rather than treating all classes as equally different from
1864