(a)
 (b)
++---
 -
++-- -Gradient = 0
Gradient ≠ 0
 (c)
Figure 4: Ablation studies. We monitor R@1 as a function of hyper-parameters on all datasets. (a) FastAP beneﬁts from
using large batch sizes. (b) Distance quantization induces a trade-off between close approximation of AP vs. “hardness” of
the resulting objective, and peak performance is observed around 10 bins. (c) Illustration of the trade-off.
present an ablation study where we vary the training batch
size for FastAP, with the ResNet-18 backbone. We measure
the R@1 on all three datasets (for VehicleID we use the
large subset).
As provided in Figure 4a, R@1 monotonically improves
with larger batch size on all three datasets. This observa-
tion resonates with the fact that large batches reduce the
variance of the stochastic gradients, which has been shown
to be beneﬁcial [ 32]. On the other hand, from the learn-
ing to rank perspective, we argue that larger batches result
in harder in-batch retrieval problems during training, since
the network is required to rank the neighbors in front of a
larger set of non-neighbors, and this in turn leads to better
generalization.
Distance Quantization
A hyper-parameter of FastAP is the number of histogram
bins used in distance quantization, which controls the qual-
ity of approximation. To study its effects, we also run an ab-
lation study with varying numbers of histogram bins during
training, keeping other parameters ﬁxed (ResNet-18, batch
size 256). Figure 4bshows the impact on test set perfor-
mance in terms of R@1.
Intuitively, using more histogram bins during training
would result in a closer approximation of Average Preci-
sion. However, we observe that retrieval performance does
not necessarily improve with more bins, and in fact consis-
tently peaks around 10 bins. To understand this trade-off,
we give a simple example in Figure 4c, where a ranked list
achieves perfect AP, with a small margin of separation ǫbe-
tween positive and negative examples. A ﬁne-grained quan-
tization of this ranked list produces all-positive histogram
bins, followed by all-negative ones, which means that the
FastAP approximation also evaluates to 1. In this case, the
gradients are zero, i.e., there are no learning signals for thenetwork. In contrast, we argue that a coarser quantization
would produce histogram bins where positives and nega-
tives are mixed, thus generating nonzero gradients to further
push them apart, which helps generalization.
The width of histogram bins has a similar effect as the
margin parameter in triplet losses, and it is desirable to keep
it reasonably large, or equivalently, the number of bins rel-
atively small. On the other hand, if there are too few bins in
the histogram, approximation quality also deteriorates; in
the extreme case of there being only one bin, no learning
is possible. In our experiments, 10-bin histograms usually
provide the best trade-off, and performance is not overly
sensitive to this parameter.
6. Conclusion
We revisit the “learning to rank” principle to propose
a deep metric learning method, FastAP. Our main contri-
bution is a novel solution to optimizing Average Precision
under the Euclidean metric, based on the probabilistic in-
terpretation of AP as the area under precision-recall curve,
as well as distance quantization. Compared to many exist-
ing solutions to this much-studied problem, FastAP is more
efﬁcient, and works in a stochastic setting by design. We
further propose a category-based minibatch sampling strat-
egy and a large-batch training heuristic. On three standard
datasets, FastAP consistently outperforms the current state-
of-the-art in few-shot image retrieval, and demonstrates an
excellent performance-complexity trade-off.
Acknowledgements
This work is conducted at Boston University, supported
in part by a BU IGNITION award, and equipment donated
by NVIDIA.
1868