Deep Metric Learning to Rank
Fatih Cakir∗1, Kun He∗2, Xide Xia2, Brian Kulis2, and Stan Sclaroff2
1FirstFuel, fcakirs@gmail.com
2Boston University, {hekun,xidexia,bkulis,sclaroff }@bu.edu
Abstract
We propose a novel deep metric learning method by re-
visiting the learning to rank approach. Our method, named
FastAP , optimizes the rank-based Average Precision mea-
sure, using an approximation derived from distance quan-
tization. FastAP has a low complexity compared to exist-
ing methods, and is tailored for stochastic gradient descent.
To fully exploit the beneﬁts of the ranking formulation, we
also propose a new minibatch sampling scheme, as well as
a simple heuristic to enable large-batch training. On three
few-shot image retrieval datasets, FastAP consistently out-
performs competing methods, which often involve complex
optimization heuristics or costly model ensembles.
1. Introduction
Metric learning [ 3,18] is concerned with learning dis-
tance functions that conform to a certain deﬁnition of simi-
larity. Often, in pattern recognition problems, the deﬁnition
of similarity is task-speciﬁc, and the success of metric learn-
ing hinges on aligning its learning objectives with the task.
In this paper, we focus on what is arguably the most im-
portant application area of metric learning: nearest neigh-
bor retrieval. For nearest neighbor retrieval applications,
the similarity deﬁnition typically involves neighborhood re-
lationships, and nearly all metric learning methods follow
the same guiding principle: the true “neighbors” of a refer-
ence object should be closer than its “non-neighbors” in the
learned metric space.
Taking inspirations from the information retrieval liter-
ature, we treat metric learning as a learning to rank prob-
lem [ 22], where the goal is to optimize the total ordering of
objects as induced by the learned metric. The learning to
rank perspective has been adopted by classical metric learn-
ing methods [ 20,24], but has received less attention recently
in deep metric learning. Working directly with ranked lists
∗Equal contribution. Kun He is now with Facebook Reality Labs.FastAP
2( ) pairsn
3( ) tripletsn
Figure 1: We propose FastAP, a novel deep metric learning
method that optimizes Average Precision over ranked lists
of examples. This solution avoids a high-order explosion
of the training set, which is a common problem in existing
losses deﬁned on pairs or triplets. FastAP is optimized using
SGD, and achieves state-of-the-art results.
has two primary advantages over many other approaches:
we avoid the high-order explosion of the training set, and
focus on orderings that are invariant to distance distortions.
This second property is noteworthy in particular, as it al-
lows circumventing the use of highly sensitive parameters
such as distance thresholds and margins.
Our main contribution is a novel solution to optimizing
Average Precision [ 4], a performance measure that has seen
wide usage within and beyond information retrieval, such
as in image retrieval [ 29], feature matching [ 14], and few-
shot learning [ 37]. To tackle the highly challenging prob-
lem of optimizing this rank-based and non-decomposable
objective, we employ an efﬁcient quantization-based ap-
proximation, and tailor our algorithmic design for stochastic
gradient descent. The result is a new deep metric learning
method that we call FastAP.
We evaluate FastAP on three few-shot image datasets,
and observe state-of-the-art retrieval results. Notably, with
1861