A Tour of Reinforcement Learning:
The View from Continuous Control
Benjamin Recht
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
University of California, Berkeley
June 25, 2018. Last updated: November 9, 2018.
Abstract
This manuscript surveys reinforcement learning from the perspective of optimization and
control with a focus on continuous control applications. It surveys the general formulation,
terminology, and typical experimental implementations of reinforcement learning and reviews
competing solution paradigms.
In order to compare the relative merits of various techniques, this survey presents a case study
of the Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR) with unknown dynamics, perhaps the simplest and
best-studied problem in optimal control. The manuscript describes how merging techniques from
learning theory and control can provide non-asymptotic characterizations of LQR performance
and shows that these characterizations tend to match experimental behavior. In turn, when
revisiting more complex applications, many of the observed phenomena in LQR persist. In
particular, theory and experiment demonstrate the role and importance of models and the cost
of generality in reinforcement learning algorithms.
This survey concludes with a discussion of some of the challenges in designing learning
systems that safely and reliably interact with complex and uncertain environments and how
tools from reinforcement learning and control might be combined to approach these challenges.
1 Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is the subeld of machine learning that studies how to use past data
to enhance the future manipulation of a dynamical system. A control engineer might be puzzled by
such a denition and interject that this is precisely the scope of control theory. That the RL and
control communities remain practically disjoint has led to the co-development of vastly dierent
approaches to the same problems. However, it should be impossible for a control engineer not to
be impressed by the recent successes of the RL community such as solving Go [68].
Indeed, given this dramatic recent progress in reinforcement learning, a tremendous opportunity
lies in deploying its data-driven systems in more demanding interactive tasks including self-driving
vehicles, distributed sensor networks, and agile robotic systems. For RL to expand into such
technologies, however, the methods must be both safe and reliable|the failure of such systems has
severe societal and economic consequences, including the loss of human life. How can we guarantee
that our new data-driven automated systems are robust? These types of reliability concerns are at
the core of control engineering, and reinforcement learning practitioners might be able to make their
methods robust by applying appropriate control tools for engineering systems to match prescribed
safety guarantees.
1arXiv:1806.09460v2  [math.OC]  10 Nov 2018