What is the best way to tie this information together in order to improve performance? What is the
best way to query and probe a system to achieve high quality control with as few interventions as
possible? Here \best" is also not clearly dened. Do we decide an algorithm is best if it crosses some
reward threshold in the fewest number of samples? Or is it best if it achieves the highest reward
given a xed budget of samples? Or maybe there's a middle ground? This oracle provides a rich
and complex model for interacting with a system and brings with it considerably more complexity
than in standard stochastic optimization settings. What's the most ecient way to use all of the
collected data in order to improve future performance?
2.1 Connections to supervised learning
The predominant paradigm of machine learning is supervised learning orprediction . In prediction,
the goal is to predict the variable yfrom a vector of featuresxsuch that on new data you are
predictingyfromxwith high accuracy. This form of machine learning includes classication and
regression as special cases. Most of the time when the term machine learning is used colloquially, it
refers to this sort of prediction. From this perspective, niche topics like semi-supervised learning [91]
and matrix completion [34] are prediction tasks as well.
By contrast, there are twospecial variables in reinforcement learning, uandr. The goal now
is to analyze the features xand then subsequently choose a policy that emits uso thatris large.1
There are an endless number of problems where this formulation is applied [14, 39, 76] from online
decision making in games [20, 51, 68, 79] to engagement maximization on internet platforms [19, 72].
A key distinguishing aspect of RL is the control action u. Unlike in prediction, the practitioner
can varyu, which has implications both for learning (e.g., designing experiments to learn about a
given system) and for control (e.g., choosing inputs to maximize reward).
Reinforcement learning is clearly more challenging than supervised learning, but, at the same
time, it can be considerably more valuable. Reinforcement learning provides a useful framework to
conceptualize interaction in machine learning, and promises to help mitigate changing distributions,
gaming, adversarial behavior, and unexpected amplication. There is a precarious trade-o that
must be carefully considered: reinforcement learning demands interventions with the promise that
these actions will directly lead to valuable returns, but the resulting complicated feedback loops
are hard to study in theory, and failures can have catastrophic consequences.
3 Strategies for solving reinforcement learning problems
Let us now turn to a taxonomy of the varied algorithmic frameworks for reinforcement learning,
focused on solving Problem (2.3) when the state-transition function is unknown. Model-Based
Reinforcement learning ts a model to previously observed data and then uses this model in some
fashion to approximate the solution to Problem (2.3). Model-Free Reinforcement learning eschews
the need for a system's model, directly seeking a map from observations to actions.
The role of models in reinforcement learning remains hotly debated. Model-free methods, as
discussed below, aim to solve optimal control problems only by probing the system and improving
strategies based on past rewards and states. Many researchers argue for algorithms that can
innately learn to control without access to the complex details required to simulate a dynamical
1To achieve notational consistency, I am throughout adopting the control-centric notation of denoting state-action
pairs as ( x; u) rather than ( s; a) as is commonly used in reinforcement learning.
4