This is akin to approximating the gradient in the random subspace spanned by the i
This particular algorithm and its generalizations go by many dierent names. Probably the
earliest proposal for this method was made by Rastrigin [60]. In an unexpected historical surprise,
Rastrigin initially developed this method to solve reinforcement learning problems! His main moti-
vating example was an inverted pendulum. A rigorous analysis using contemporary techniques was
provided by Nesterov and Spokoiny [54]. Random search was also discovered by the evolutionary
algorithms community, where it is called a ( ;)-Evolution Strategy [15, 66]. Random search has
also been studied in the context of stochastic approximation [71] and bandits [31, 5]. Algorithms
that are invented independently by four dierent communities probably have something good going
for them.
The random search method is considerably simpler than the policy gradient algorithm but it
uses much less structure from the problem as well. Since RL problems tend to be nonconvex, it is
not clear which of these approaches is best unless we focus on specic instances. In light of this, in
the next section we turn to a set of instances where we may be able to glean more insights about
the relative merits of all of the approaches to RL covered in this section.
3.4 Deep reinforcement learning
Note that in this section I have spent no time discussing deep reinforcement learning. That is
because there is nothing conceptually dierent other than the use of neural networks for function
approximation. That is, if one wants to take any of the described methods and make them deep, they
simply need to add a neural net. In model-based RL, 'is parameterized as a neural net, in ADP, the
Q-functions or Value Functions are assumed to be well-approximated by neural nets, and in policy
search, the policies are set to be neural nets. The algorithmic concepts themselves don't change.
However, convergence analysis certainly will change, and algorithms like Q-learning might not
even converge. The classic text Neuro-dynamic Programming by Bertsekas and Tsitisklis discusses
the adaptations needed to admit function approximation [14]. By eliminating the complicating
variable of function approximation, we can get better insights into the relative merits of these
methods, especially when focusing on a simple set of instances of optimal control, namely, the
Linear Quadratic Regulator.
4 Simplifying theme: The Linear Quadratic Regulator
With this varied list of approaches to reinforcement learning, it is dicult from afar to judge which
method fares better on which problems. It is likely best to start simple and small and nd the
simplest non-trivial problem that can assist in distinguishing the various approaches to control.
Though simple models are not the end of the story in analysis, it tends to be the case that if a
complicated method fails to perform on a simple problem, then this indicates a 
aw in the method.
I'd argue that in controls, the simplest non-trivial class of instances of optimal control is those
with convex quadratic rewards and linear dynamics. That is, the problem of the Linear Quadratic
Regulator (LQR):
minimize Eeth
1
2PN
t=0xT
tQxt+uT
tRut+1
2xT
N+1SxN+1i
;
subject to xt+1=Axt+But+et; ut=t(t)
(x0given).(4.1)
11