This survey aims to provide a language for the control and reinforcement learning communities
to begin communicating, highlighting what each can learn from the other. Controls is the theory
of designing complex actions from well-specied models, while reinforcement learning often makes
intricate, model-free predictions from data alone. Yet both RL and control aim to design systems
that use richly structured perception, perform planning and control that adequately adapt to
environmental changes, and exploit safeguards when surprised by a new scenario. Understanding
how to properly analyze, predict, and certify such systems requires insights from current machine
learning practice and from the applied mathematics of optimization, statistics, and control theory.
With a focus on problems in continuous control, I will try to disentangle the similarities and
dierences of methods of the complementary perspectives and present a set of challenging problems
whose solution will require signicant input from both sets of practitioners.
I focus rst on casting RL problems in an optimization framework, establishing the sorts of
methodological tools brought to bear in contemporary RL. I then lay out the main solution tech-
niques of RL including the dichotomy between the model-free and model-based methodologies.
Next, I try to put RL and control techniques on the same footing through a case study of the
linear quadratic regulator (LQR) with unknown dynamics. This baseline will illuminate the var-
ious trade-os associated with techniques from RL and control. In particular, we will see that
the so-called \model-free" methods popular in deep reinforcement learning are considerably less
eective in both theory and practice than simple model-based schemes when applied to LQR. Per-
haps surprisingly, I also show cases where these observations continue to hold on more challenging
nonlinear applications. I then argue that model-free and model-based perspectives can be unied,
combining their relative merits. This leads to a concluding discussion of some of the challenges at
the interface of control and learning that must be solved before we can build robust, safe learning
systems that interact with an uncertain physical environment, which will surely require tools from
both the machine learning and control communities.
2 What is reinforcement learning?
Reinforcement learning is the study of how to use past data to enhance the future manipulation of
a dynamical system. How does this dier from ordinary machine learning? The main view of this
survey is of reinforcement learning as optimal control when the dynamics are unknown. Our goal
will be to nd a sequence of inputs that drives a dynamical system to maximize some objective
beginning with minimal knowledge of how the system responds to inputs.
In the classic optimal control problem, we begin with a dynamical system governed by the
dierence equation xt+1=ft(xt;ut;et) wherextis the state of the system, utis the control action,
andetis a random disturbance. ftis the rule that maps the current state, control action, and
disturbance at time tto a new state. Assume that at every time, we receive some reward R(xt;ut) for
our current xtandut. The goal is to maximize this reward. In terms of mathematical optimization,
we aim to solve the problem
maximize Eet[PN
t=0Rt[xt;ut]]
subject to xt+1=ft(xt;ut;et)
(x0given).(2.1)
That is, we aim to maximize the expected reward over Ntime steps with respect to the control
sequenceut, subject to the dynamics specied by the state-transition rule ft. The expected value is
2