intensive long-horizon trajectory optimization, it does look considerably better than the sort of
gaits typically obtained by popular RL methods.
Is there a middle ground between expensive oine trajectory optimization and real time RHC?
I think the answer is yes in the same way that there is a middle ground between learning dynamical
models and learning Q-functions. The performance of a RHC system can be improved by better
modeling of the Q-function that denes the terminal cost: The better a model you make of the
Q-function, the shorter a time horizon you need for simulation, and the closer you get to real-time
operation. Of course, if you had a perfect model of the Q-function, you could just solve the Bellman
equation and you would have the optimal control policy. But by having an approximation to the
Q-function, high performance can still be extracted in real time.
So what if we learn to iteratively improve the Q-function while running RHC? This idea has been
explored in a project by Rosolia, Carvalho, and Borrelli [61]. In their \Learning MPC" approach,
the terminal cost is learned by a method akin to nearest neighbors. The terminal cost of a state
is the value obtained last time that state was tried. If a state has not yet been visited, the cost
is innite. This formulation constrains the terminal condition to be in a state observed before. It
enables the control system to explore new ways to decrease cost as long as it maintains the ability
to reach a state that has already been demonstrated to be safe. This \nearest-neighbors" approach
works surprisingly well in practice: in RC car demonstrations, the learned controller works better
than a human operator after only a few laps around a xed track.
Another reason to like this blended RHC approach to learning to control is that one can hard
code in constraints on controls and states and easily incorporate models of disturbance directly into
the optimization problem. Some of the most challenging problems in control are how to execute
safely while continuing to learn more about a system's capability, and an RHC approach provides
a direct route toward balancing safety and performance. Indeed, an interesting direction of future
work would be merging the robust learning of Coarse-ID Control with receding horizon control.
7 Challenges at the control-learning interface
We have set out to bridge the gap between the learning-centric views of RL and the model-centric
views of control. Perhaps surprisingly, we found that for continuous control problems, machine
learning seems best suited for model tting rather than for direct control. Moreover, perhaps less
surprisingly, we could seamlessly merge learned models and control action by accounting for the
uncertainty in our model ts. Moreover, we showed how value functions and models could be
learned in chorus and could provide impressive results on real embodied agents. These distinctions
and connections are merely the beginning of what the control and machine learning communities
can learn from each other. Let me close by discussing three particularly exciting and important
research challenges that may be best solved with input from both perspectives.
7.1 Merging perception and control
One of the grand aspirations of reinforcement learning is end-to-end control, mapping directly from
sensors like pixels to actions. Computer vision has made major advances by adopting an \all-conv-
net" end-to-end approach, and many, including industrial research at NVIDIA [18], suggest the
same can be done for complex control tasks.
In general, this problem gets into very old intractability issues of nonlinear output feedback
21