1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
samples102
101
100cost
1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
samples0.00.20.40.60.81.0fraction stable
Nominal
Robust LQRRobust LQR (bootstrap)
LSPIRandom Search
Policy GradientFigure 3: (left) Cost for the Laplacian model for varied models over 5000 iterations. (right) The
fraction of the time that the synthesized control strategy returns a stabilizing controller.
Note also that the nominal controller does tend to frequently nd controllers that fail to stabilize
the true system. A necessary and sucient condition for stabilization is for the matrix A+BK
to have all of its eigenvalues to be less than 1. We can plot how frequently the various search
methods nd stabilizing control policies when looking at a nite horizon in Figure 1 (right). The
robust optimization really helps here to provide controllers that are guaranteed to nd a stabilizing
solution. On the other hand, in industrial practice nominal control does seem to work quite well.
A great open problem is to nd reasonable assumptions under which the nominal controller is
stabilizing.
Figure 3 additionally compares the performance to model-free methods on this instance. Here
we again see that they are indeed far o from their model-based counterparts. The xaxis has
increased by a factor of 10, and yet even the approximate dynamic programming approach does
not nd a decent solution. Surprisingly, LSPI, which worked very well on the double integrator,
now performs worse than random search. This is likely because the LSPI subroutine requires a
stabilizing controller for all iterations and also requires careful tuning of the discount factor. Not
only are model-free methods sample hungry, but they fail to be safe. And safety is much more
critical than sample complexity.
6 Beyond the Linear Quadratic Regulator
Studying simple baselines such as LQR often provides insights into how to approach more chal-
lenging problems. In this section, we explore some directions inspired by our analysis of LQR.
6.1 Derivative Free Methods for Optimal Control
Random search works well on simple linear problems and appears better than more complex meth-
ods like policy gradient. Does simple random search work less well on more dicult problems?
The answer, it turns out, is yes. The deep RL community has recently been using a suite of
benchmarks to compare methods, maintained by OpenAI2and based on the MuJoCo simulator [80].
Here, the optimal control problem is to get the simulation of a legged robot to walk as far and quickly
2https://gym.openai.com/envs/#mujoco
18