modeling uncertain dynamic environments. But thinking of the humans as optimizers means that
their behavior is constrained. If we know the cost, then we get a complex game theoretic version
of receding horizon control [16, 46]. But as is usually the case, humans are bad at specifying their
objectives, and hence what they are optimizing must be learned. This becomes a problem of inverse
optimal control [40] or inverse reinforcement learning [55], where we have to estimate the reward
functions of the human and understand the loss accrued for crudely modeling these rewards.
7.4 Towards Actionable Intelligence
As I've expressed before, I think that all of the daunting problems in machine learning are now
RL problems. Whether they be autonomous transportation system or seemingly mundane social
network engagement systems, actively interacting with reality has high stakes. Indeed, as soon as
a machine learning system is unleashed in feedback with humans, that system is a reinforcement
learning system. The broad engineering community must take responsibility for the now ubiquitous
machine learning systems and understand what happens when we set them loose on the world.
Solving these problems is going to need advances in both machine learning and control. Perhaps
this intersection needs a new name so that researchers can stop arguing about territory. I personally
am fond of actionable intelligence as it sums up not only robotics but smarter, safer analytics. But
I don't really care what we call it: There is a large community spanning multiple disciplines that
is invested in making progress on these problems. Hopefully this tour has set the stage for a lot
of great research at the intersection of machine learning and control, and I'm excited to see what
progress the communities can make working together.
Acknowledgements
Countless individuals have helped to shape the contents here. First, this work was generously sup-
ported in part by two forward-looking programs at DOD: the Mathematical Data Science program
at ONR and the Foundations and Limits of Learning program at DARPA. Second, this survey was
distilled from a series on my blog argmin.net . I greatly appreciated the lively debates on Twitter,
and I hope that even those who disagree with my perspectives here nd their input incorporated
into this survey.
I'd like to thank Chris Wiggins for sharing his taxonomy on machine learning, Roy Frostig for
shaping the Section 3.3, Pavel Pravdin for consulting on how to get policy gradient methods up and
running, Max Raginsky for perspectives on adaptive control and translations of Russian. I'd like to
thank Moritz Hardt, Eric Jonas, and Ali Rahimi for helping to shape the language, rhetoric, and
focus of the blog series and this survey. I'd also like to thank Nevena Lazic and Gergely Neu for many
helpful suggestions for improving the readability and accuracy of this manuscript. Additionally, I'd
like to thank my other colleagues in machine learning and control for many helpful conversations
and pointers about this material: Murat Arcak, Karl Astrom, Francesco Borrelli, John Doyle, Andy
Packard, Anders Rantzer, Lorenzo Rosasco, Shankar Sastry, Yoram Singer, Csaba Szepesvari, Claire
Tomlin, and Stephen Wright. I'd also like to thank my colleagues in robotics, Anca Dragan, Leslie
Kaebling, Sergey Levine, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Olivier Sigaud, Russ Tedrake, and Emo Todorov
for sharing their perspectives on the sorts of RL and optimization technology works for them and
the challenges they face in their research.
I'd like to thank everyone who took CS281B with me in the Spring of 2017 where I rst tried to
23