as possible in one direction. Some of the tasks are very simple, but some are quite dicult like the
complicated humanoid models with 22 degrees of freedom. The dynamics of legged robots are well
specied by Lagrange's equations [52], but planning locomotion from these models is challenging
because it is not clear how to best design the objective function and because the model is piecewise
linear. The model changes whenever part of the robot comes into contact with a solid object, and
hence a normal force is introduced that was not previously acting upon the robot. Hence, getting
robots to work without having to deal with complicated nonconvex nonlinear models seems like a
solid and interesting challenge for the RL paradigm. Moreover, seminal work by Tedrake, Zhang,
and Seung demonstrated that direct policy search could rapidly nd feedback control policies for
certain constrained legged robot designs [78].
Levine and Koltun were among the rst to use MuJoCo as a testbed for learning-based control,
and were able to achieve walking in complex simulators without special-purpose techniques [45].
Since then, these techniques have become standard continuous control benchmarks for reinforcement
learning (see, for example [69, 47, 64, 65, 88]). Recently, Salimans and his collaborators at OpenAI
showed that random search worked quite well on these benchmarks [63]. In particular, they t
neural network controllers using random search with a few algorithmic enhancements. Random
Search had indeed enjoyed signicant success in some corners of the robotics community, and
others had noted that in their applications, random search outperformed policy gradient [73]. In
another piece of great work, Rajeswaran et al showed that Natural Policy Gradient could learn
linear policies that could complete these benchmarks [59]. That is, they showed that static linear
state feedback, like the kind we use in LQR, was also sucient to control these complex robotic
simulators. This of course left an open question: Can simple random search nd linear controllers
for these MuJoCo tasks?
Guy, Mania, and I tested this out, coding up a rather simple version of random search with a
couple of small algorithmic enhancements. Many RL papers were using statistics of the states and
whitening the states before passing them into the neural net mapping from state to action. We
found that when random search performed the same whitening with linear controls, this algorithm
was able to get state-of-the-art results on all of the MuJoCo benchmark tasks [49].
There are a few of important takeaways from this study. On the one hand, the results suggest
that these MuJoCo demos are easy, or at least considerably easier than they were believed to be.
Benchmarking is dicult, and having only a few simulation benchmarks encourages overtting to
these benchmarks. Indeed, it does seem like these benchmarks are more about taking advantage of
simulation approximations in MuJoCo than they are about learning reasonable policies for walking.
In terms of benchmarking, this is what makes LQR so attractive: LQR with unknown dynamics
is a reasonable task to master as it is easy to specify new instances, and it is relatively easy to
understand the limits of achievable performance.
Second, note that since our random search method is fast, we can evaluate its performance on
many random seeds. All model-free methods exhibit alarmingly high variance on these benchmarks.
For instance, on the humanoid task, the the model is slow to train almost a quarter of the time even
when supplied with what we thought were good parameters (see Figure 4 (middle)). And, for those
random seeds, we found the method returned rather peculiar gaits. Henderson et al and Islam et
alobserved this phenomenon with deep reinforcement learning methods, but our results on linear
controllers suggest that such high variability will be a symptom of all model-free methods [35, 36].
Though direct policy search methods are easy to code up, their reliability on any reasonable control
task remains in question.
19