modeling is not heavily built into the assumptions of model-free RL algorithms. Moreover, for con-
tinuous control problems these methods appear to make an inecient use of samples. Suppose the
internal state of the system is of dimension d. When modeling the state-transition function, (3.1)
providesdequations per time step. By contrast, we are only using 1 equation per time step in
ADP. Such ineciency is certainly seen in practice below. Also troubling is the fact that we had to
introduce the discount factor in order to get a simple Bellman equation. One can avoid discount
factors, but this requires considerably more sophisticated analysis. Large discount factors do in
practice lead to brittle methods, and the discount becomes a hyperparameter that must be tuned
to stabilize performance. We will determine below when and how these issues arise in practice in
control.
3.3 Direct Policy Search
The most ambitious form of control without models attempts to directly learn a policy function from
episodic experiences without ever building a model or appealing to the Bellman equation. From
the oracle perspective, these policy driven methods turn the problem of RL into derivative-free
optimization.
3.3.1 A generic algorithm for sampling to optimize
In turn, let's rst begin with a review of a general paradigm for leveraging random sampling to
solve optimization problems. Consider the general unconstrained optimization problem
maximizez2RdR(z): (3.8)
Any optimization problem like this is equivalent to an optimization over probability distributions
onz:
maximize p(z)Ep[R(z)]:
Ifz?is the optimal solution, then we'll get the same value if we put a -function around z?.
Moreover, if pis a probability distribution, it is clear that the expected value of the reward function
can never be larger than the maximal reward achievable by a xed z. So we can either optimize
overzor we can optimize over distributions overz.
Since optimizing over the space of all probability densities is intractable, we must restrict the
class of densities over which we optimize. For example, we can consider a family parameterized by
a parameter vector #:p(u;#) and attempt to optimize
maximize #Ep(z;#)[R(z)]: (3.9)
If this family of distributions contains all of the Delta functions, then the optimal value will coincide
with the non-random optimization problem. But if the family does not contain the Delta functions,
the resulting optimization problem only provides a lower bound on the optimal value no matter
how good of a probability distribution we nd.
That said, this reparameterization provides a powerful and general algorithmic framework for
optimization. In particular, we can compute the derivative of J(#) :=Ep(z;#)[R(z)] using the
8