in control [17] and partially observed Markov decision processes in reinforcement learning [57].
Nonetheless, some early results in RL have shown promise in training optimal controllers directly
from pixels [47, 51]. Of course, these results have even worse sample complexity than the same
methods trained from states, but they are making progress.
In my opinion, the most promising approaches in this space follow the ideas of Guided Policy
Search, which bootstraps standard state feedback to provide training data for a map from sensors
directly to optimal action [45, 44]. That is, a mapping from sensor to action can be learned
iteratively by rst nding the optimal action and then nding a map to that control setting. A
coupling along these lines where reliance on a precise state estimator is reduced over time could
potentially provide a reasonably ecient method for learning to control from sensors.
However, these problems remain daunting. Moving from fully observed scenarios to partially
observed scenarios makes the control problem exponentially more dicult. How to use diverse
sensor measurements in a safe and reliable manner remains an active and increasingly important
research challenge [6, 8, 10].
7.2 Rethinking adaptive control
This survey has focused on \episodic" reinforcement learning and has steered clear of a much harder
problem: adaptive control. In the adaptive setting, we want to learn the policy online. We only get
onetrajectory. The goal is, after a few steps, to have a model whose reward from here to eternity
will be large. This is very dierent, and much harder that what people are doing in RL. In episodic
RL, you get endless access to a simulator. In adaptive control, you get one go.
Even for LQR, the best approach to adaptive control is not settled. Pioneering work in the
eighties used stochastic gradient-like techniques to nd adaptive controls, but the guarantees for
these schemes are all asymptotic [33]. More recently, there has been a groundswell of activity
in trying to understand this problem from the perspective of online learning . Beginning with
work by Abbasi-Yadkori and Szepesvari [2], a variety of approaches have been devised to provide
ecient schemes that yield near optimal control cost. Abbasi-Yadkori and Szepesvari's approach
achieves an optimal reward building on techniques that give optimal algorithms for the multiarmed
bandit [9, 43]. But their method requires solving a hard nonconvex optimization problem as a
subroutine. Follow-up work has proposed methods using Thompson sampling [3, 4, 56], approximate
dynamic programming [1], and even coarse-ID control [28], though no method has been found that
is eciently implementable and achieves optimal cost. Again, this emphasizes that even the simple
LQR problem is not at all simple. New techniques must be developed to fully understand this
baseline problem, but it is clear that insights from both machine learning and control will be
necessary to develop ecient adaptive control that can cope with an ever-evolving world.
7.3 Humans in the loop
One nal important problem, which might be the most daunting of all, is how machines should
learn when humans are in the loop. What can humans who are interacting with the robots do and
how can we model human actions? Though economists may have a dierent opinion, humans are
challenging to model.
One popular approach to modeling human-robot interaction is game theoretic. Humans can
be modeled as solving their own optimal control problem, and then the human's actions enter as
a disturbance in the optimal control problem [62]. In this way, modeling humans is similar to
22