AdapterFusion:
Non-Destructive Task Composition for Transfer Learning
Jonas Pfeiffer1, Aishwarya Kamath2, Andreas R ¨uckl ´e1,
Kyunghyun Cho2;3, Iryna Gurevych1
1Ubiquitous Knowledge Processing Lab (UKP Lab), Technical University of Darmstadt
2New York University3CIFAR Associate Fellow
pfeiffer@ukp.tu-darmstadt.de
Abstract
Sequential ﬁne-tuning and multi-task learn-
ing are methods aiming to incorporate knowl-
edge from multiple tasks; however, they suffer
from catastrophic forgetting and difﬁculties in
dataset balancing. To address these shortcom-
ings, we propose AdapterFusion , a new two
stage learning algorithm that leverages knowl-
edge from multiple tasks. First, in the knowl-
edge extraction stage we learn task speciﬁc pa-
rameters called adapters , that encapsulate the
task-speciﬁc information. We then combine
the adapters in a separate knowledge composi-
tionstep. We show that by separating the two
stages, i.e., knowledge extraction and knowl-
edge composition, the classiﬁer can effectively
exploit the representations learned from mul-
tiple tasks in a non-destructive manner. We
empirically evaluate AdapterFusion on 16 di-
verse NLU tasks, and ﬁnd that it effectively
combines various types of knowledge at differ-
ent layers of the model. We show that our ap-
proach outperforms traditional strategies such
as full ﬁne-tuning as well as multi-task learn-
ing. Our code and adapters are available at
AdapterHub.ml.
1 Introduction
The most commonly used method for solving
NLU tasks is to leverage pretrained models, with
the dominant architecture being a transformer
(Vaswani et al., 2017), typically trained with a
language modelling objective (Devlin et al., 2019;
Radford et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019b). Transfer
to a task of interest is achieved by ﬁne-tuning all
the weights of the pretrained model on that single
task, often yielding state-of-the-art results (Zhang
and Yang, 2017; Ruder, 2017; Howard and Ruder,
2018; Peters et al., 2019). However, each task of in-
terest requires all the parameters of the network to
be ﬁne-tuned, which results in a specialized model
for each task.
Feed
Forward
Multi-Head
AttentionAdd & NormAdd & NormAdd & Norm
AdapterFusion
AdapterFigure 1: AdapterFusion architecture inside a trans-
former (Vaswani et al., 2017). The AdapterFusion com-
ponent takes as input the representations of multiple
adapters trained on different tasks and learns a parame-
terized mixer of the encoded information.
There are two approaches for sharing informa-
tion across multiple tasks. The ﬁrst consists of
starting from the pretrained language model and
sequentially ﬁne-tuning on each of the tasks one
by one (Phang et al., 2018). However, as we subse-
quently ﬁne-tune the model weights on new tasks,
the problem of catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey
and Cohen, 1989; French, 1999) can arise, which
results in loss of knowledge already learned from
all previous tasks. This, together with the non-
trivial decision of the order of tasks in which to
ﬁne-tune the model, hinders the effective transfer
of knowledge. Multi-task learning (Caruana, 1997;
Zhang and Yang, 2017; Liu et al., 2019a) is another
approach for sharing information across multiple
tasks. This involves ﬁne-tuning the weights of a
pretrained language model using a weighted sum
of the objective function of each target task simul-
taneously. Using this approach, the network cap-
tures the common structure underlying all the target
tasks. However, multi-task learning requires simul-arXiv:2005.00247v3  [cs.CL]  26 Jan 2021