tasks. By separating the extraction of knowledge
from its composition, we are able to effectively
avoid the common pitfalls of multi-task learning,
such as catastrophic forgetting and interference be-
tween tasks. Further, AdapterFusion mitigates the
problem of traditional multi-task learning in which
complete re-training is required, when new tasks
are added to the pool of datasets.
We have shown that AdapterFusion is compati-
ble with adapters trained in both single-task as well
as multi-task setups. AdapterFusion consistently
outperforms fully ﬁne-tuned models on the target
task, demonstrating the value in having access to
information from other tasks. While we observe
gains using both ST-A as well as MT-A, we ﬁnd
that composing ST-A using AdapterFusion is the
more efﬁcient strategy, as adapters can be trained
in parallel and re-used.
Finally, we analyze the weighting patterns of in-
dividual adapters in AdapterFusion which reveal
that tasks with small datasets more often rely on
information from tasks with large datasets, thereby
achieving the largest performance gains in our ex-
periments. We show that AdapterFusion is able
to identify and select adapters that contain knowl-
edge relevant to task of interest, while ignoring the
remaining ones. This provides an implicit no-op
option and makes AdapterFusion a suitable and
versatile transfer learning approach for any NLU
setting.
8.2 Outlook
R¨uckl´e et al. (2020a) have studied pruning a large
portion of adapters after Fusion training. Their re-
sults show that removing the less activated adapters
results in almost no performance drop at inference
time while considerably improving the inference
speed. They also provide some initial evidence that
it is possible to train Fusion with a subset of the
available adapters in each minibatch, potentially
enabling us to scale our approach to large adapter
sets — which would otherwise be computationally
infeasible. We believe that such extensions are a
promising direction for future work.
Pfeiffer et al. (2020d) have achieved consider-
able improvements in the zero-shot cross-lingual
transfer performance by dropping the adapters in
the last layer. In preliminary results, we have ob-
served similar trends with AdapterFusion when the
adapters in the last layer are not used. We will
investigate this further in future work.Acknowledgments
Jonas is supported by the LOEWE initiative (Hesse,
Germany) within the emergenCITY center. Aish-
warya was supported in part by a DeepMind PhD
Fellowship during the time which this project was
carried out. Andreas is supported by the German
Research Foundation within the project “Open Ar-
gument Mining” (GU 798/25-1), associated with
the Priority Program “Robust Argumentation Ma-
chines (RATIO)” (SPP-1999). This work was
partly supported by Samsung Advanced Institute of
Technology (Next Generation Deep Learning: from
pattern recognition to AI) and Samsung Research
(Improving Deep Learning using Latent Structure).
Kyunghyun was a research scientist at Facebook
AI Research part-time during which this project
was carried out.
We thank Sebastian Ruder, Max Glockner, Jason
Phang, Alex Wang, Katrina Evtimova and Sam
Bowman for insightful feedback and suggestions
on drafts of this paper.
References
Lei Jimmy Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E. Hin-
ton. 2016. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint .
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. In 3rd Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015,
Conference Track Proceedings .
Ankur Bapna and Orhan Firat. 2019. Simple, scal-
able adaptation for neural machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the
9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing, EMNLP-IJCNLP 2019, Hong
Kong, China, November 3-7, 2019 , pages 1538–
1548.
Rich Caruana. 1997. Multitask learning. Machine
Learning , 28(1):41–75.
Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang,
Tom Kwiatkowski, Michael Collins, and Kristina
Toutanova. 2019. Boolq: Exploring the surprising
difﬁculty of natural yes/no questions. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-
HLT 2019, Minneapolis, MN, USA, June 2-7, 2019,
Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 2924–
2936.