For NLP tasks, adapters have been introduced for
the transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017).
At each transformer layer l, a set of adapter param-
eters lis introduced. The placement and archi-
tecture of adapter parameters within a pretrained
model is non-trivial. Houlsby et al. (2019) experi-
ment with different architectures, ﬁnding that a two-
layer feed-foward neural network with a bottleneck
works well. They place two of these components
within one layer, one after the multi-head atten-
tion (further referred to as bottom ) and one after
the feed-forward layers of the transformer (further
referred to as top).1Bapna and Firat (2019) and
Stickland and Murray (2019) only introduce one
of these components at the topposition, however,
Bapna and Firat (2019) include an additional layer
norm (Ba et al., 2016).
Adapters trained in both single-task (ST-A) or
multi-task (MT-A) setups have learned the idiosyn-
cratic knowledge of the respective tasks’ training
data, encapsulated in their designated parameters.
This results in a compression of information, which
requires less space to store task-speciﬁc knowledge.
However, the distinct weights of adapters prevent
a downstream task from being able to use multi-
ple sources of extracted information. In the next
section we describe our two stage algorithm which
tackles the sharing of information stored in adapters
trained on different tasks.
3 AdapterFusion
Adapters avoid catastrophic forgetting by intro-
ducing task-speciﬁc parameters; however, current
adapter approaches do not allow sharing of infor-
mation between tasks. To mitigate this we propose
AdapterFusion.
3.1 Learning algorithm
In the ﬁrst stage of our learning algorithm, we train
either ST-A or MT-A for each of the N tasks.
In the second stage, we then combine the set of
Nadapters by using AdapterFusion. While ﬁxing
both the parameters as well as all adapters , we
introduce parameters 	that learn to combine the
Ntask adapters to solve the target task.
	m argmin
	Lm(Dm; ;1; : : : ; N;	)
	mare the newly learned AdapterFusion param-
eters for task m.refers to 0in the ST-A
1We illustrate these placements in Appendix Figure 5 (left).
FF DownFF UpQuery
Add & NormSoftMax
AdapterAdapterFusionAdd & Norm
Key ValueFigure 2: Our AdapterFusion architecture. This in-
cludes learnable weights Query ,Key, and Value .Query
takes as input the output of the pretrained transformer
weights. Both Key andValue take as input the out-
put of the respective adapters. The dot product of the
query with all the keys is passed into a softmax func-
tion, which learns to weight the adapters with respect
to the context.
setting or 0!f1;:::;N;m gin the MT-A setup. In
our experiments we focus on the setting where
m2 f1; :::; Ng, which means that the training
dataset of mis used twice: once for training the
adapters mandagain for training Fusion parame-
ters	m, which learn to compose the information
stored in the Ntask adapters.
By separating the two stages — knowledge ex-
traction in the adapters, and knowledge composi-
tion with AdapterFusion — we address the issues
of catastrophic forgetting, interference between
tasks and training instabilities.
3.2 Components
AdapterFusion learns to compose the Ntask
adapters nand the shared pretrained model , by
introducing a new set of weights 	. These param-
eters learn to combine the adapters as a dynamic
function of the target task data.
As illustrated in Figure 2, we deﬁne the Adapter-
Fusion parameters 	to consist of Key, Value and
Query matrices at each layer l, denoted by Kl,Vl
andQlrespectively. At each layer lof the trans-
former and each time-step t, the output of the feed-
forward sub-layer of layer lis taken as the query
vector. The output of each adapter zl;tis used as in-
put to both the value andkeytransformations. Sim-
ilar to attention (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Vaswani
et al., 2017), we learn a contextual activation of