taneous access to all tasks during training. Adding
new tasks thus requires complete joint retraining.
Further, it is difﬁcult to balance multiple tasks and
train a model that solves each task equally well. As
has been shown in Lee et al. (2017), these models
often overﬁt on low resource tasks and underﬁt on
high resource tasks. This makes it difﬁcult to ef-
fectively transfer knowledge across tasks with all
the tasks being solved equally well (Pfeiffer et al.,
2020b), thus considerably limiting the applicability
of multi-task learning in many scenarios.
Recently, adapters (Rebufﬁ et al., 2017; Houlsby
et al., 2019) have emerged as an alternative training
strategy. Adapters do not require ﬁne-tuning of all
parameters of the pretrained model, and instead
introduce a small number of task speciﬁc param-
eters — while keeping the underlying pretrained
language model ﬁxed. Thus, we can separately and
simultaneously train adapters for multiple tasks,
which all share the same underlying pretrained pa-
rameters. However, to date, there exists no method
for using multiple adapters to maximize the trans-
fer of knowledge across tasks without suffering
from the same problems as sequential ﬁne-tuning
and multi-task learning. For instance, Stickland
and Murray (2019) propose a multi-task approach
for training adapters, which still suffers from the
difﬁculty of balancing the various target tasks and
requiring simultaneous access to all target tasks.
In this paper we address these limitations and
propose a new variant of adapters called Adapter-
Fusion . We further propose a novel two stage learn-
ing algorithm that allows us to effectively share
knowledge across multiple tasks while avoiding
the issues of catastrophic forgetting and balancing
of different tasks. Our AdapterFusion architec-
ture, illustrated in Figure 1, has two components.
The ﬁrst component is an adapter trained on a task
without changing the weights of the underlying lan-
guage model. The second component — our novel
Fusion layer — combines the representations from
several such task adapters in order to improve the
performance on the target task.
Contributions Our main contributions are: (1)
We introduce a novel two-stage transfer learning
strategy, termed AdapterFusion , which combines
the knowledge from multiple source tasks to per-
form better on a target task. (2) We empirically
evaluate our proposed approach on a set of 16 di-
verse NLU tasks such as sentiment analysis, com-
monsense reasoning, paraphrase detection, and rec-ognizing textual entailment. (3) We compare our
approach with Stickland and Murray (2019) where
adapters are trained for all tasks in a multi-task man-
ner, ﬁnding that AdapterFusion is able to improve
this method, even though the model has simultane-
ous access to all tasks during pretraining. (4) We
show that our proposed approach outperforms fully
ﬁne-tuning the transformer model on a single tar-
get task. Our approach additionally outperforms
adapter based models trained both in a Single-Task,
as well as Multi-Task setup.
The code of this work is integrated into the
AdapterHub.ml (Pfeiffer et al., 2020a).
2 Background
In this section, we formalize our goal of transfer
learning (Pan and Yang, 2010; Torrey and Shavlik,
2010; Ruder, 2019), highlight its key challenges,
and provide a brief overview of common methods
that can be used to address them. This is followed
by an introduction to adapters (Rebufﬁ et al., 2017)
and a brief formalism of the two approaches to
training adapters.
Task Deﬁnition. We are given a model that is pre-
trained on a task with training data D0and a loss
function L0. The weights 0of this model are
learned as follows:
D0:=Large corpus of unlabelled text
L0:=Masked language modelling loss
0 argmin
L0(D0; )
In the remainder of this paper, we refer to this
pretrained model by the tuple (D0; L0).
We deﬁne Cas the set of N classiﬁcation tasks
having labelled data of varying sizes and different
loss functions:
C=f(D1; L1); : : : ; (DN; LN)g
The aim is to be able to leverage a set of N
tasks to improve on a target task mwithCm=
(Dm; Lm). In this work we focus on the setting
where m2f1; : : : ; Ng.
Desiderata. We wish to learn a parameterization
mthat is deﬁned as follows:
m argmin
0Lm(Dm; 0)
where 0is expected to have encapsulated relevant
information from all the Ntasks. The target model