Vol. 02, No. 01, pp. 20 – 28 (2021 ) 
ISSN: 2708 -0757 
 
JOURNAL OF APPLIED SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS  
 
www.jastt.org   
 
20 
doi: 10.38094/jastt20 165       
 
Classification Based on Decision Tree Algorithm for 
Machine Learning  
 
Bahzad Taha Jijo1*, Adnan Mohsin Abdulazeez2 
1IT Department , Technical College of Informatics Akre, Duhok Polytechnic University, Duhok , Kurdistan Region, Iraq, 
bahzad .taha@dpu.edu.krd   
2Presidency of Duhok Polytechnic University, Duhok, Kurdistan Region, Iraq, adnan.mohsin@dpu.edu.krd  
*Correspondence : bahzad .taha@dpu.edu.krd   
 
 
Abstract  
Decision tree classifiers are regarded to be a standout of the most well -known methods to data classification representation of classifiers. 
Different researchers from various fields and backgrounds have considered the problem of extending a decision tree from avail able 
data, such as m achine study, pattern recognition, and statistics. In various fields such as medical disease analysis, text classification, 
user smartphone classification, images, and many more the employment of Decision tree classifiers has been proposed in many w ays. 
This paper provides a detailed approach to the decision trees. Furthermore, paper specifics, such as algorithms/approaches used , 
datasets, and outcomes achieved, are evaluated and outlined comprehensively. In addition, all of the approaches analyzed were  
discussed to illustrate the themes of the authors and identify the most accurate classifiers. As a result, the uses of different  types of 
datasets are discussed and their findings are analyzed.  
 
Keywords:  Machine Learning, Supervised, Classification, Decision Tree.  
Received: January  11th, 2021  / Accepted: March 15th, 2021  / Online: March 24th, 2021  
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Nowadays, technology has developed a lot, especially in 
the field of Machine Learning (ML), which is useful for 
reducing human work. In the field of artificial intelligence, ML 
integrates statistics and computer science to build algorithms 
that get more ef ficient when they are subject to relevant data 
rather than being given specific instructions. Besides speech 
recognition, image detection, text localization, etc. ML is the 
study of computational algorithms that are enhanced from 
experience automatically. It is considered as an artificial 
intelligence subset [1 , 2]. Orderly to produce foretelling or 
decision without being specifically programmed to do so, ML 
algorithms create a model population based on a sample, 
defined as 'training data' [3 , 4]. In a broad area of applications, 
like email filtering and computer vision, ML algorithms are 
utilized where it is difficult or impractical to create traditional 
algorithms to implement functions required [5]. For ML, there 
are many uses, the most prominent of w hich is predictive data 
mining. Two major mechanisms can be broken into ML classification fulfillments; model development and model 
evaluation [6 , 7]. 
Using the same set of attributes, any instance in every 
dataset used by ML algorithms is described. The  attributes 
could be continuous, categorical, or binary [8 , 9]. If cases are 
recognized with recog nized labels (correct outputs), then 
learning is called supervised [10 , 11]. Supervised Learning is 
the role of inferring a function from classified train ing data is 
machine learning. It also analyzes the testing data and creates a 
derived task that can be used for new examples to map [12 , 
13]. Each data input object, however, has a class label pre -
assigned. The primary function of supervised algorithms i s to 
learn a model that creates the same labeling preferably for the 
data offered and popularizes well on unseen data. This is the 
major aim of algorithms for classification [14].  
Classification attempts to predict the goal class with the 
highest precisio n. The classification algorithm finds  out the 
relation between the input attribute and the output attribute to 
construct a model that is a