Tijo & Abdulazeez  / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 02, No. 01, pp. 20 – 28 (2021) 
 
22 TABLE I: COMPARISON BETWEEN THE MOST USED ALGORITHMS IN DT 
Methods  CART  C4.5  CHAID  QUEST  
The measure used for 
input variable collection  Gini index; Twoing 
criteria  Entropy info-gain Chi-square  Chi-square for categorical variables; J -
way ANOVA for continuous/ordinal 
variables  
Pruning  Pre-pruning using a 
single -pass algorithm  Pre-pruning using a single -pass 
algorithm  Pre-pruning using Chi -
square test for 
independence  Post-pruning  
Dependent variable  Categorical/ Continuous  Categorical/ Continuous  Categorical  Categorical  
Input variables  Categorical/ Continuous  Categorical/ Continuous  Categorical/ Continuous  Categorical/ Continuous  
Split at each node  Binary; Split on linear 
combinations  Multiple  Multiple  Binary; Split on linear combinations  
 
Fig.3. Value of the entropy [56]  
 
Information gain is one metric used for segmentation and is 
often called mutual information. This intuitively informs how 
much knowledge of a random variable's value [57 , 58]. It’s the 
opposite of entropy, the higher its value is the better. The data 
gain 𝐺𝑎𝑖𝑛 ( 𝑆 ,𝐴 ) is defined as the following on the definition 
of entropy [59 , 60], as shown  in “equation (2)”.  
 
Gain ( S ,A )=∑|Sv|
|S|v ∈ V(A)   Entropy ( Sv )      (2) 
Where the range of attribute  𝐴  is 𝑉(𝐴), and  𝑆𝑣  is a subset of 
set  𝑆 equal to the attribute value of attribute  𝑣  [58].  
 
C. Benefits and Drawbacks of decision tree  
The DT algorithm is part of the supervised learning 
algorithm family, and its main objective is to construct a 
training model that can be used to predict the class or value of 
target variables through learning decision rules inferred from 
the training data. The DT algorithm can be used t o solve 
regression and classification problems, but it has benefits and 
drawbacks [61  - 63], which are summarized in Table II. TABLE  II: BENEFITS AND DRAWBACKS OF DT 
Benefits  Drawbacks  
1) Simple to comprehend.  
2) Quickly translated to a set of 
principle for production.  
3) Can classify both categorical 
and numerical outcomes, but the 
attribute generated must be 
categorical.  
4) No a priori hypothesizes are 
taken with consideration to the 
goodness of the results . 1) The optimal decision -
making mechanism can be 
deterred and incorrect 
decisions can follow.  
2) There are lots of layers in 
the decision tree, which 
makes it interesting.  
3) For more training samples, 
the decision tree's 
calculation complexity may 
increase.  
 
III. LITERATURE REVIEW  
A decision tree was used in several machine learning and 
data mining tasks as a classifier. In this study discuss several 
recent works about the DT. The kinds of Literature Review on 
DT approaches are summarized in Table III.  
Zou et al. [64] Utilized a decision tree (j48), Random 
Forest (RF), and neural network algorithms for diabetes 
mellitus prediction. The dataset is physical research data for 
hospitals in Luzhou, China. There are 14 characteristics 
involved. Training array ran domly extracts data from 68994 
stable human and diabetic patients, respectively. They used the 
full significance of minimum Redundancy Maximum 
Relevance (mRMR) and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) 
to minimize dimensionality. In some ways, the effects of RF, 
as opposed to each other, seemed to be higher than the other 
classifiers. Also, 0.8084 is the best outcome in the Luzhou data 
collection.    
Assegie and Nair [65], Utilized the DT classification 
process to classify the handwritten digits of the standar d data 
set of kaggle digits and estimate the accuracy of the model for 
each digit from 0 to 9. The kaggle features include 42,000 rows 
and 720 columns used for machine training, vector features are 
used for pixels of digital images. They used a highly effi cient 
language named "python programming" for the application of 
machine learning algorithms to map the classifier's success rate 
graph in the realization of handwritten digits. The findings