Tijo & Abdulazeez  / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 02, No. 01, pp. 20 – 28 (2021) 
 
25 obtained for KMC images are 99.61% and for the RIM -ONE 
database, the obtained average values of accuracy are 99.15%.  
Nagra et al. [80] introduce d the Self -Inertia Weight 
Adaptive Particle Swarm Optimization with Gradient Base 
Local Search (SIW -APSO -LS) feature selection approach was 
modified to conduct feature selection and the C4.5 decision 
tree method was used as a classifier to determine the su b-sets 
of features given. When comparing algorithms in feature 
selection problems, 16 datasets from the UCI Machine 
Learning Repository were used for the experiments. The 
experimental outcomes demonstrate that SIW -APSO -LS 
simplifies the collection of featu res by effectively decreasing 
the number of features picked, thus maintaining the best 
precision compared to other literature selection approaches for 
the same test functions. In the field of attribute collection, the 
experimental findings showed that the proposed approach is 
useful and the highest accuracy obtained from a total of 16 
datasets is 99.88%  
Ahmim  et al. [81] proposed  a new Intrusion Detection 
System (IDS) that incorporates diverse classification systems  
that are DT -based and rule -based concepts, namely the REP 
tree, JRip algorithm, and Forest PA. In specific, the first and 
second approaches take  data   set   features  as     inputs    and 
categorize the network traffic as Attack/Benign. In comparison 
to the results both the first and second classifiers for reference, 
the third classifier uses the attributes of the original data 
collection. The research findings achieved by using the 
CICIDS2017 dataset to analyze the IDS testify to their 
dominance in terms of accuracy, identification rate, false alarm 
rate, and time overhead relative to current state -of-the-art 
schemes. In thoroug h, with 94.457%, our model has the highest 
DR, the highest precision with 96.665%, and the lowest FAR 
with 1.145%, although its low computing time makes it quickly 
implemented into a soft real -time system.  
Li et  al. [82] provided  an evidentiary decision tr ee to 
classify the fuzzy data set and the ding entropy has been used 
as an indicator of the partition rules for its construction. 
Moreover, the Basic Belief Assignment (BBAs) of Iris and 
wine Datasets are utilized  to calculate the optimal  splitting 
feature . The lower the entropy of Deng, the more effective the 
feature will be to characterize the samples. In contrast to the 
standard mixture rules employed  for the combination of BBAs, 
the proof DT  can be extended specifically to the classification. 
The findin gs showed that the implementation of the proof 
DT based on conviction entropy effectively decreases the 
complexity of the fuzzy data classification whether the patient 
is either affected by the cancer type of Malign or Benign. The 
Wisconsin Breast Cancer d ataset, containing 32 attributes and 
569 data, was used. They were using a 10 fold cross -validation 
test to identify and analyze the algorithms. The accuracy is 
95% when using Wine datasets, but the accuracy obtained by 
the Iris datasets is 98%.  
Sathiyanar ayanan et al. [83] used the DT algorithm under 
the supervised learning mechanism to reveal breast cancer. 
Breast cancer identification is conducted here and it focused on 
data, which separates the data for the preparation and testing 
process. The result ob tained is thus contrasted between the 
algorithms KNN and DT. The findings reveal that the accuracy obtained by KNN is 97%, while DT reaches the maximum 
accuracy of 99%. Therefore, a decision tree algorithm that 
comes under supervised learning methods predi cts the type of 
cancer.  
IV. COMPARISON AND DISCUSSION  
Decision tree classification algorithms consist of several 
types that are used to generate DT. This is by the control of 
both the continuous and periodic attributes of the missing 
values. DT is generated by a form that is typically represented 
as a statist ical classifier and can be used for clustering. Nodes 
and branches are included in the DT. Each node requires 
problems that are based on one or more properties, i.e. 
comparing an attribute value with a constant or using other 
functions to compare more than  one property. For the purpose 
of the decision tree, the learning data collection is sometimes 
referred to as the outcome tree. In order to incorporate 
classifications in machine learning and data mining using the 
DT algorithm.  In the following sequence, t his algorithm is 
applied iteratively and the classification requires a three -stage 
process: Construct Model (Learning), Evaluation Model 
(Accuracy), and Model Use (Classification). The DT 
classification stage is based on the percentage of acquired 
informat ion that is measured by entropy. The reach metric is 
used to describe the test characteristics for a node in the tree 
and is referred to as the property selection scale (property). As 
a test function for the current node, the best knowledge 
property is cal culated.  Some studies proposed approaches to 
overcome the shortcomings of the DT problems so that optimal 
trees can be calculated, based on a review that was performed 
earlier, without detailed details and samples. DT methods have 
shown that such problems as described above can be avoided. 
Furthermore, it will provide the specified dataset with an 
appropriate solution. According to "Table III" it was observed 
that in many  researches were conducted with different data sets 
and the DT approach was used to resolve its weaknesses and to 
obtain better performance. Several optimization techniques 
have been used in the study [76] to strengthen the decision tree 
on the UCI ML datasets stored; based on the assess ment 
findings, it was shown that the DT approach got the highest 
accuracy which is 99.93% comparing to other techniques such 
as KNN, LR, SVM, and NB which are less performing than the 
DT approach. In the segmentation task, the study [79] used the 
DT approa ch to identify and extract the blood artery for proper 
Optic Disc (OD) segmentation, which resulted in greater 
results equal to 99.61%. Moreover, based on the study [69], it 
has been shown that the DST method can also increase the DT , 
where both of them us ed PT and MLT for DT in the UCI 
datasets; it has been shown that DST is more capable to 
enhance DT than other techniques. Ultimately, by using UCI 
Machine Learning Library datasets and CICIDS2017 datasets 
consisting of the latest attacks among all other da tasets, DT 
proved to be the highest, and their accuracy was the best 
performing. While the study [75] utilized the DT(XGBoost) 
and RF on the datasets of the Smokers of the Chinese Center 
for Disease Control and Prevention, it was found that, again, 
the DT approach achieved the highest accuracy; which is 
84.11%. Furthermore, based on studies [73], [78], [83] using 
DT and KNN in the CICIDS2017, RNA -seq Malaria, and 
Wisconsin Breast Cancer datasets, it was found that the DT