Tijo & Abdulazeez  / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 02, No. 01, pp. 20 – 28 (2021) 
 
24 exceeds other conventional partition techniques. For  each 
algorithm such as this PLDT, the accuracy is 91.4%, GT is 
68.4%, RGT is 76%, and ANN is 84.4%.  
Linty et al. [71] proposed  a new approach that affects the 
amplitude of signals from the Global Navigation Satellite 
System (GNSS) and was used to detect i onic scintillation 
events that are concerned with accuracy, reliability, and 
readiness. A broad collection of 50 Hz post -correlation data 
was supplied by the GNSS recipient. The outcomes showed 
that this method, in terms of accuracy and F -score, exceeds 
state-of-the-art techniques and can achieve a human -driven 
standard, which is the level of manual annotation. It improves 
greatly as it gains 98 % of identification, very similar to hand -
driven human -driven classification.  
Kuang  et al. [72] Proposed a structure based on a decision 
tree named Screen Content Coding ( SCC) to make a fast 
decision in situations by testing their different features in the 
training sets. Moreover, to prevent the thorough search process, 
a sequential arr angement of decision trees was illustrated. In 
addition, SCBs were used as datasets to balance the SCC with 
the Intra Block Copy (IBC) and PaLeTte (PLT) modes. The 
results indicated that the SCC system offers a 47.62 % decrease 
in computational complexity on average, with a small 1.42 % 
in Bjøntegaard delta bitrate (BDBR).  
Ramadhan et al. [73] Demonstrated a comparative analysis 
of accuracy and process length for each algorithm performed 
using the K -Nearest Neighbor (KNN) and Decision Tree (DT) 
algorithms f or the detection of DDoS attacks. Moreover, they 
used the CICIDS2017 dataset that consists of the latest attacks 
and global packages, is standard and applicable to real -world 
data in a PCAP format. The findings showed that the accuracy 
of DT to detect DDoS  attacks was higher than the KNN value, 
the accuracy of DT was 99.91 %, and the accuracy of KNN 
was 98.94 %.  
Batitis et al. [74] presented  a system to identify up to 10 
irregular red blood cells and to know the accuracy rate for all 
abnormal red blood cell s. Additionally, To detect irregular red 
blood cells, they employed a DT algorithm in image processing 
and used frames of former patients for the scheme in hospitals. 
Also, the camera was used to insert them into the software to 
capture the slides. The res ults showed that the accuracy rate 
averaged 89.31 % and the error rate averaged 10.69 %. 
Furthermore, the central irregularity of the Codocyte pallor was 
found to be a cause for the mistake in the classification of 
abnormal red blood cells.  
Zhang et al. [7 5] Proposed a model based on the decision 
tree machine learning algorithm named Extreme Gradient 
Boosting (XGBoost) for the prediction of regular smoking 
time. Furthermore, to create a simulated data set for smoking 
time data, the Chinese Center for Diseas e Control and 
Prevention collected people's information from smokers. Also, 
they used a module for extracting feature information. To see 
its output in the feature extraction module, they used the 
decision tree (XGBoost) module and Random Forest machine 
learning algorithms. The results showed that DT efficiency is 
higher than RF, achieving 84.11 % with DT accuracy, while 
58.11 % with RF accuracy.  Nandhini and K.S [76] discussed the effective methods of 
developing a machine learning model using some of the 
common algorithms that can distinguish whether mail is spam 
or ham. UCI's Machine Learning store was used as a dataset 
for Spambase. Besides, they evaluated the output of Logistic 
Regression (LR), DT, Naïve Bayes (NB), KNN, and Support 
Vector Machine (SVM) to construct an efficient machine 
learning model for spam. Using the Weka tool to train and 
evaluate the data collection. The results indicated that DT 
performance is comparable to and better than KNN 
performance, and the accuracy for both of them is as fo llows: 
DT is 99.93 percent, KNN is 99.93 %, LR is 93.13 %, SVM is 
90.76 % and NB is 79.52 %.  
Taloba and Ismail [77] developed a new machine learning 
approach for the hybrid decision tree and a genetic algorithm 
known as GADT for spam detection. The most si gnificant 
algorithm for enhancing decision tree efficiency is the genetic 
algorithm. Also, it is efficient and reliable for text 
classification. A genetic algorithm has used the element of trust 
that governs decision tree pruning to optimize and detect its  
optimum value. They used the UCI Machine Learning Store 
spam dataset. Besides, they used the mechanism of main 
Principle Component Analysis (PCA) to delete features that are 
inappropriate for email message content and process them less 
frequently. The fin dings showed that after using PCA, the 
mixed GADT approach has an accuracy of 93.4 % before using 
PCA and an accuracy of 95.5 %. This implies that the 
extraction of inappropriate characteristics has a great impact on 
the PCA.  
Arowolo et al. [78] implemente d a Principle Component 
Analysis (PCA) feature extraction algorithm to decrease the 
dimensions and demonstrate the high dimensions analyze  
evidence on gene expression. The KNN classification and DT 
algorithm were utilized to detection various biological 
structures and to Offer better value resolution as well as to 
detect new malaria genes and prediction tests. Ribonucleic acid 
(RNA -seq) sequencing is also used as a data collection. The 
results indicated that the performance of the KNN 
classification is bett er than the DT classification in the PCA 
feature extraction. The accuracy of KNN reaches 86.7% while 
the DT reaches 83.3%.  
Pathan et al. [79] proposed  a new technique that recognizes 
and removes the blood artery for correct segmentation of the 
Optic Disc ( OD). This is done in two ways. First, the 
directional filter is used to build an efficient blood vessel 
identification and exclusion algorithm. In the second step, to 
detect the contour of the optic disc, the decision tree classifier 
is utilized to achieve  an adaptive threshold. As well as, two 
separate databases were used, including 300 fundus images 
obtained from Kasturba Medical College (KMC) Manipal and 
also the RIM -ONE database that is publicly accessible. The 
results showed that a fully automatic OD s egmentation 
technique that uses a decision tree classifier to achieve the 
segmentation threshold improves the robustness of the 
algorithm even for images containing exudate, vesicle atrophy, 
and reversals, Hence, resulting in an appropriate fractionation 
of OD. The mathematical study demonstrates the effect of 
pretreatment. Therefore, the average values of accuracy