Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 10 of 22
The ﬁnal defuzziﬁed outputs can be obtained as in (10). The expected decision surface of the
proposed IT2-FLS, which visualizes the variation of the two outputs in accordance with the inputs,
is given in Figure 7. The decision surfaces of the proposed IT2-FLS show higher non-linearity than
those of the proposed T1-FLS.
w=cw
L+cw
R
2
v=cv
L+cv
R
2(10)
𝑒𝑑ሶ𝑒𝑑𝜔
𝑒𝑑ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝑣
𝑒𝑑𝜔
𝑑𝑓
𝑣
𝑒𝑑 𝑑𝑓𝑑𝑓=0.5 𝑑𝑓=0.5
ሶ𝑒𝑑=0ሶ𝑒𝑑=0(a) (b)
(c) (d)
𝜔
𝑒𝑑ሶ𝑒𝑑𝑑𝑓=0.5
𝑒𝑑ሶ𝑒𝑑𝑑𝑓=0.5
𝑣
ሶ𝑒𝑑=0
𝑒𝑑𝜔
𝑑𝑓
 𝑒𝑑 𝑑𝑓𝑣ሶ𝑒𝑑=0(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 7. Decision surfaces of the IT2-FLS. ( a) Variation of wwith edand ˙ed, when df=0.5. (b) Variation
ofvwith edand ˙ed, when df=0.5. (c) Variation of wwith edand df, when ˙ed=0. (d) Variation of v
with edanddf, when ˙ed=0.
4. Results and Discussion
4.1. Validation Setup
A simulation was conducted using MATLAB Simulink to validate the characteristics and
performance of wall-following behavior established for a robot by using the proposed Type 1 Fuzzy
Logic System (T1-FLS) and Interval Type 2 Fuzzy Logic System (IT2-FLS). The validation process
was conducted in two phases. The characteristics of the proposed FLSs were analyzed in the ﬁrst
phase by considering heterogeneous situations of typical walls. In the second phase, the average
absolute displacement error of the paths (deﬁned as E=RT
0jdej/Twhere Tis the total run time in a
test case) followed by the robot with the T1-FLS and the IT2-FLS was compared by simulation trails on
complex heterogeneous wall arrangements. The performance of the proposed method with different
lateral distances to be maintained by the robot from a wall (i.e., with different dT) was examined in the
third phase of the validation. The inputs, deand ˙de, and outputs, wand v, of the FLSs were directly
taken/fed from/to the robot without taking a calibration gain. However, a calibration gain of 0.2
was used for the input, df, of the FLSs. Besides, the inputs were truncated to the respective universe
of discourse of the input space. The maximum ranges of the distance sensors were assumed as 4 m.
The resolution of the range sensors was considered as 1 cm for the simulation. The lateral distance to