Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 8 of 22
Nevertheless, IT2-FLSs are more complex and require high computational power while providing
better performance than that of T1-FLSs.
The architecture of the proposed IT2-FLS for establishing wall-following behavior is depicted in
Figure 5. The set of inputs and outputs used here is similar to the proposed T1-FLS. The inputs are
initially fuzziﬁed in the fuzziﬁcation layer with the aid of the input membership functions shown in
Figure 6. Nevertheless, the fuzziﬁcation process moderately differs from the T1-FLS. A fuzzy set of
an IT2-FLS has a Footprint Of Uncertainty (FOU), which is bounded by two fuzzy sets in a T1-FLS,
the Lower Membership Function (LMF) and the Upper Membership Function (UMF) (see Figure 6).
Thereby, fuzziﬁcation of the input by an IT2-FLS leads to a range instead of a crisp value for the
activation degree. This range can be obtained by fuzzifying an input considering the LMF and UMF
separately. Based on this formulation, the corresponding fuzziﬁed inputs of the proposed IT2-FLS
can be deﬁned as [med(ed),med(ed)],[m˙ed(˙ed),m˙ed(˙ed)], and [mdf(df),mdf(df)]for the inputs ed,˙ed, and df,
respectively, where “_” and “ ¯” denote resultants from the LMF and UMF, respectively. Moreover,
two crisp values are obtained per fuzzy set during the fuzziﬁcation of an input.
FuzzificationInferencingRule base
Defuzzification𝜔
𝑣FuzzificationInferencingRule base
Defuzzification𝜔
𝑣Type -reducer𝑒𝑑
ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓
𝑒𝑑
ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓
Figure 5. Architecture of the Interval Type 2 Fuzzy Logic System (IT2-FLS).
(c)(b)(a)𝜇𝑒𝑑
𝜇ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝜇𝑑𝑓(d)
(e)𝜔
𝑣𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓ሶ𝑒𝑑𝜇𝑣𝜇𝜔 ෩𝑁 ෪𝑁𝑆 ෨𝑍 ෪𝑃𝑆 ෨𝑃
෩𝑁 ෪𝑁𝑆 ෨𝑍 ෪𝑃𝑆 ෨𝑃෩𝑁 ෪𝑁𝑆 ෨𝑍 ෪𝑃𝑆 ෨𝑃
෪𝑉𝐶ሚ𝐶෨𝐹෨𝐿 ෩𝑀 ෩𝐻
Figure 6. Membership functions of the IT2-FLS. ( a–c) Input membership function for ed,˙ed, and df,
respectively. ( d,e) Output membership function for wand v, respectively. The upper membership
function and lower membership function of each fuzzy set are annotated as UpperMF and LowerMF.
The Footprint Of Uncertainty (FOU) is represented by the shaded area. Fuzzy labels are deﬁned as
N: “Negative,” NS: “Negative Small,” Z: “Zero,” PS: “Positive Small,” P: “Positive,” VC: “Very Close,”
C: “Close,” F: “Far,” L: “Low,” M: “Medium,” H: “High.” The universe of discourse of the membership
functions is deﬁned in the normalized scale, and they should be adapted based on the hardware
capabilities of the robot. It should be noted that the membership functions were pruned based on
human expert knowledge.
Similar to the T1-FLS, the proposed IT2-FLS uses a rule base for the inferencing. The same rule
base deﬁned for T1-FLS given in Table 1 is used in the proposed IT2-FLS. In contrast, two ﬁring
strengths are received for a rule considering LMFs and UMFs. The ﬁring strength of LMFs, Ri,