Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 3 of 22
other than evaluating the classiﬁcation ability of the testing dataset. The requirement of training
considering all the probable situations for the generalization is the major drawback of these machine
learning methods proposed for wall following.
Many studies have been conducted to develop the ability of the wall following in robots using
T1-FLSs tuned by methods such as genetic algorithms [ 33], ant colony optimization [ 34], bee colony
optimization [ 35,36], and differential evolution [ 37]. In addition to that, the work [ 38,39] proposed
IT2-FLSs tuned by reinforcement ant optimization and differential evolution, respectively, to establish
wall-following behavior. These optimization based fuzzy logic systems are capable of learning the
required maneuvering actions to follow walls after training on environments. However, these methods
have been designed in such a way that the training is speciﬁc for a particular lateral distance from a
wall. If the lateral distance from a wall needs to be changed to a new value, the FLSs must be retrained
considering the new value before the operation. Moreover, the lateral distance from a wall could not
be adjusted per the requirement of the disinfection process before retraining the FLSs. The requirement
of training/tuning, considering a large number of possible scenarios for generalization, is the primary
concern of these fuzzy logic systems based on optimization techniques.
Much work has been conducted on the development of T1-FLSs based on expert knowledge for
developing wall-following ability in mobile robots [ 40–43]. Moreover, these FLSs based on expert
knowledge have been proposed to resolve the limitation of FLSs tuned through optimization methods.
The work [ 40] compared and contrasted the performance of a PID controller and a T1-FLS designed for
establishing wall-following behavior. The main interest of the work was to improve the performance in
terms of time taken for following a wall, and the performance of maintaining a desired lateral distance
was not evaluated in this work. The T1-FLS proposed in [ 41] utilizes sonar sensor readings of a mobile
robot to realize wall-following behavior. The work [ 42,43] proposed a behavior based fuzzy controller
consisting of three independent T1-FLSs for wall-following. This controller switches between the three
T1-FLSs based on the contexts of wall following, straight, left corner, and right corner. The switching
between the FLSs is performed based o then conditions evaluated through range sensor readings. Thus,
the switching might be rigid in the case of sensor noises. Furthermore, three independent T1-FLSs were
required for realizing the wall following using the controller proposed in [ 42,43]. The T1-FLSs proposed
in [40–43] were capable of realizing the wall-following behavior of a mobile robot, and they could
resolve the limitation of FLSs tuned through optimization methods. Nevertheless, the FLSs proposed
in [40–43] were designed considering a speciﬁc lateral distance maintained from a wall. Moreover,
the membership functions of FLSs must be redesigned to facilitate the alteration of the desired lateral
distance. This limitation of the state-of-the-art FLSs designed for wall-following hinders the ﬂexible
utilization in a mobile robot intended for wall disinfection. According to [ 44,45], an IT2-FLS has more
ability to cope with uncertainties compared to a T1-FLS in general cases. Nevertheless, a comparison
between a T1-FLS and IT2-FLS for establishing the wall-following behavior of a robot has not
been conducted.
This paper proposes a novel method for establishing the wall-following behavior for a wall
disinfection robot with the focus on enhancing the ability to maintain a given target distance from
a wall. The proposed method has the ability to alter the target distance based on user requirements
withoutperforming any redesign work. This ability ensures the ﬂexibility of the utilization of the
proposed method in a mobile robot intended for wall disinfection over the state-of-the-art FLSs
designed for wall following. A non-singleton Type 1 Fuzzy Logic System (T1-FLS) and a non-singleton
Interval Type 2 Fuzzy Logic System (IT2-FLS) are individually considered for the proposed method.
The ability of the T1-FLS and IT2-FLS to maintain a target distance from a wall during the wall
following is systematically evaluated as a core contribution to the state-of-the-art. An overview of
the proposed system for wall disinfection is given in Section 2. The FLSs proposed for establishing
wall-following behavior are proposed in Section 3. The validation of the proposed FLSs, including a
comparison between the T1-FLS and IT2-FLS, is discussed in Section 4. Concluding remarks are given
in Section 5.