Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 18 of 22
disinfectant spraying mechanism or ultraviolet light directed at the wall. Thereby, occasional minor
deviations of the distance from the wall surface would not hinder the effectiveness of a robot-aided
disinfection task. However, fusing a method to adapt the parameters of the spraying mechanism
or ultraviolet light, such as intensity, based on the present distance from a wall, would beneﬁt from
further improving the effectiveness of the method proposed in this paper. For example, if the distance
from the wall was higher than the desired one, the spaying mechanism could be adapted to have
slightly more pressure. Further exploration in this direction is proposed for future work.
If there is an object beside a wall, the robot considers such an object as a part of the wall. If there is
an object beside the wall, contaminating the wall itself is less likely since the wall segment itself would
not be contactable by people. However, the likelihood of contaminating such objects would be high.
Therefore, considering an object beside a wall as a part of the wall is desirable and would not hinder
the effectiveness.
The implications discussed earlier were derived based on the characteristics and performance of
the proposed method identiﬁed based on the simulation results. The simulations were conducted by
considering realistic parameters and models for the robot and environments. Thereby, the results of
the simulation would not greatly deviate from real-world experiments. Moreover, the implications
concluded in the paper would be applicable to real-world scenarios. The robot’s effective workspace is
planar due to the following reasons. The robot perceives only planner information of the environment
from the range sensors placed surrounding the robot in the same plane. Furthermore, the robot’s
actions are limited to a planer workspace since only the navigation of the robot is considered in
the paper. Therefore, a 2D simulation environment is adequate for evaluating the behavior and the
performance of the work proposed in the paper. Real-world experiments with a robot equipped with a
disinfection mechanism are expected to be conducted in the next phase of the work.
5. Conclusions
Robot-aided solutions are demanded to disinfect possibly contaminated surfaces to reduce the
spread of infectious diseases. A wall disinfection robot should be capable of following a given wall
while maintaining a speciﬁed distance from the wall. The ability to maintain the speciﬁed distance
from the wall is crucial for the effective sterilization of the wall surface since the intensity of the
disinfectant agent applied on the wall depends on the distance. The disinfectant agent can be either a
sprayable liquid, a gas, or ultraviolet light directed at the wall. Therefore, this paper proposed a novel
method to establish the wall-following behavior for a disinfection robot.
The proposed method was designed in such a way that it enables a robot to follow a wall of an
unknown environment by online path planning based on the range sensor information. Fuzzy logic
was used for establishing the wall-following behavior based on the range sensor inputs. A Type 1
Fuzzy Logic System (T1-FLS) and an Interval Type 2 Fuzzy Logic System (IT2-FLS) were proposed in
this regard. The FLSs were designed in such a way that they were generalized from the lateral distance
to be maintained from a wall. Moreover, users can alter the lateral distance per the requirements
without performing any redesign work of the system. The FLSs take the information perceived from
range sensors as inputs and determine the linear velocity and the angular velocity of the robot required
to follow a wall successfully.
Simulations were conducted to evaluate the characteristics and performance of the proposed FLSs.
Heterogeneous test cases that consisted of typical wall arrangements were considered in the simulation.
According to the simulation results, both proposed FLSs (i.e., T1-FLS and IT2-FLS) were capable of
adequately following walls as expected for a wall disinfection robot. A superior performance could be
observed from the IT2-FLS compared to that of the T1-FLS, and this performance difference was large
and statistically signiﬁcant. The real-world applicability of the proposed method was veriﬁed from the
simulations, and it is expected that real-world trials will be conducted in the next phase of the work.