Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 17 of 22
According to the traced path of the robot, the robot was capable of adequately following the wall
segment of each environment for all the conﬁgurations of dT. The average lateral errors (i.e., E) of
the cases of dT= 0.5 m, 0.75 m, and 1.0 m were observed as 3.66 cm (SD = 0.41), 3.53 cm (SD = 0.63),
and 3.87 cm ( SD = 1.41 ), respectively. Moreover, an adequate level of performance could be observed
even though dTwas altered. This behavior implied that the proposed FLS was generalized for a ﬁnite
range of dTinstead of a speciﬁc value. Therefore, it can be concluded that the lateral distance of a
wall-following task can be altered per the user requirements without the requirement of any redesign
work of the proposed FLS.
4.5. Discussion
The characteristics of the proposed FLSs were evaluated in the ﬁrst phase of the validation.
The test cases of this phase consisted of typical heterogeneous situations that could be encountered by
a robot during the wall following. The path followed by the robot and the variation of the inputs and
outputs of the FLSs were analyzed in this regard. The wall-following performance of the proposed
FLSs was analyzed and compared in the second phase of the validation by considering complex wall
arrangements. Based on the outcomes of all the test cases (including both the ﬁrst and second phase),
it can be concluded that both proposed FLSs were effectively capable of coping with typical situations
expected during wall-following behavior. Moreover, the proposed FLSs were suitable for establishing
the wall-following behavior for a robot deployed for wall disinfection tasks.
In the second phase of validation, the performances of the proposed FLSs in maintaining the
desired distance from a wall were compared. Complex wall arrangements that could be encountered
by a disinfection robot were considered in this regard. This consideration supported the generalization
of the outcomes. In addition to that, statistical analysis was conducted to ascertain the generalizability.
The statistical outcomes conﬁrmed that the proposed IT2-FLS had signiﬁcantly superior performance
to the proposed T1-FLS for wall-following behavior. Moreover, the proposed IT1-FLS was more
suitable for a wall disinfection robot since it could follow a given wall while maintaining the distance
from the wall more accurately.
The evaluation and comparison of the performance were conducted based on the distance
maintaining performance, and the other performance indicators such as time and energy usage were
not considered. However, the ability to maintain a given distance from a wall while wall following is
the most crucial aspect for a wall disinfection robot. Hence, the consideration of distance maintaining
ability for the performance evaluation and comparison was justiﬁable. The consideration of other
performance indicators such as time and energy for the analysis is proposed for future work.
The state-of-the-art wall-following methods based on FLSs tuned by optimization techniques
(e.g., [ 33–39]) require training before utilization. Furthermore, these methods are not designed in a
way that the system is generalized to the lateral distance. Hence, retraining is required to alter the
lateral distance to be maintained from a wall. On the other hand, the FLSs designed for wall following
based on expert knowledge do not require training. However, state-of-the-art FLSs proposed in this
regard (e.g., [ 40–43]) have been designed considering a speciﬁc lateral distance to be maintained from
a wall. Moreover, the state-of-the-art FLSs designed for wall-following behavior require redesigning
of the FLSs in the case of altering the distance. In contrast, the FLSs proposed in this paper do
not require such redesigning since the FLSs consider the parameters related to the error of lateral
distance. Moreover, the membership functions of the FLSs are independent of the lateral distance.
The ﬂexibility of altering the lateral distance to be maintained in a wall-following task is useful for a
robot intended for wall disinfecting since the lateral distance has to be altered per the requirement of
the disinfecting process.
Most of the time, the proposed method for establishing the wall-following behavior is capable of
maintaining a given distance from a wall during a wall-following task. However, the deviations of
the distance from the desired distance could be observed in concave regions. The method proposed
for wall-following behavior is expected to be utilized in a wall disinfection robot that uses either a