Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 2 of 22
of adequately conducting the disinfection of public places. This difﬁculty hinders the control of the
spread of an infectious disease (e.g., COVID-19) among the community. As a solution to this dilemma,
robots can be utilized [7–12].
The indirect transmission of an infectious disease can be caused by contacting/touching
contaminated respiratory droplets in public places. Walls can easily be contaminated with these
pathogenic droplets due to closer contact with persons. The highest likely areas are long corridors in
hospitals, nursing homes, rapid transit stations, and community centers. Therefore, the walls of these
places should often be disinfected to avoid the community spread of the diseases. Robots can be used
for spraying disinfectant agents, directing ultraviolet light, or mopping to disinfect the walls [ 9,11–13].
Much work has been conducted on the development of teleoperated robots to provide medical
care in outbreaks of an infectious disease, alleviating the risk of workers [ 14–16]. Although these
teleoperated robots could be adopted for disinfecting walls, they require the continuous involvement
of a human operator. Furthermore, telerobotic control consists of a combination of a master, a slave,
and a human operator. Although the individual components are stable in isolation, when combined
together, they may be unstable. Therefore, the autonomous abilities of robots are preferred for a
robot intended for wall disinfection processes. The critical requirement of an autonomous robot for
disinfecting walls is the ability to appropriately follow a wall.
Wall-following behavior for a robot can be achieved by adopting line-following capabilities [ 17,18].
However, a perceivable line should be marked on the ﬂoor near a wall. Hence, the adoption of the
line-following methods for the wall-following behavior of a disinfection robot is not a feasible solution
for larger environments and general public places. Many research studies have been conducted on
navigating a robot in an environment by using Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM)
techniques [ 19,20]. These methods are capable of navigating a robot in a given trajectory within an
environment previously mapped. Therefore, robot navigation methods based on SLAM could be
adopted for wall following. However, these methods are prone to fail in situations when a map is
not correctly matched with the corresponding actual environment. Moreover, a robot requires an
accurate map of an environment, where the robot is deployed. Furthermore, accurately mapping
of and navigation in larger environments with fewer features such as corridors in hospitals are
problematic. Thereby, there are practical concerns about the usage of SLAM based navigation methods
for a robot intended for disinfecting walls in public spaces. In addition to these concerns, autonomous
robots with online path planning and decision-making abilities could outperform robots that use
ofﬂine methods [ 21–23]. Therefore, robots with online path planning abilities are preferred for a wall
disinfection robot.
The uncertain handling capacity of fuzzy logic has been exploited by many literature works,
on the online decision making intended for wall following. A method based on a Type 1 Fuzzy
Logic System (T1-FLS) for safely guiding a wheelchair through wall following was proposed in [ 24].
The work [ 25] proposed an Interval Type 2 Fuzzy System (IT2-FLS) to ensure the safety of navigation
through wall following. However, the focus of the work [ 24,25] was ensuring the safety by avoiding
the possible collisions with walls, and the methods were not intended for maintaining a given distance
from a wall during navigation. Thereby, the cited work could not be adapted for a wall disinfection
robot. Methods based on PID controllers for maintaining a given distance from a wall during the
wall following have been proposed [ 26,27]. However, the cited methods were designed for following
merely straight walls and require the tuning of the gains for different set-points. This assumption
hinders the applicability of the methods to a wall disinfection robot.
The wall-following behavior of different machine learning methods such as neural networks was
studied in [ 28–32], where a majority of the cited work compared the performances of these methods.
An open source database that contains the required action of the robot’s corresponding sensor readings
for a particular scenario has been used for both training and testing of the algorithms. Moreover,
the cited work compared the robot’s action classiﬁcation ability of the algorithms with corresponding
inputs. However, real experiments or simulations with a robot were not conducted for veriﬁcation