Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 14 of 22
A scenario where there was a small negative dent in the wall surface (see Figure 8e) was considered
for the case “e”. This kind of negative dent can be commonly found in corridors due to the inclusion
of doors. In contrast, a situation where there was a small positive dent in a wall (see Figure 8f) was
considered for the case “f”. This sort of situation is commonly created by structures like pillars and
beams. Thereby, the analysis of the characteristics of the proposed FLSs during such situations is
crucial. Initially, the robot smoothly followed the wall, and when it encountered a dent, a change in
the trajectory was triggered by the FLSs. This triggering allowed the robot to safely pass the positive
dent in the case “f”. The robot with the IT2-FLS showed smoother paths than the T1-FLS, where Ewas
0.02 m (Case “e”) and 0.05 m (Case “f”) for the IT2-FLS and 0.03 m (Case “e”) and 0.03 m (Case “f”)
for the T1-FLS. The identiﬁed characteristics validated the ability of the proposed FLSs to cope with
possible negative and positive dents in walls when performing the wall following.
In all the test cases, both proposed FLSs were effective at successfully maintaining the distance
from the wall within an acceptable range during the wall following. Moreover, the proposed FLSs
could be utilized for establishing the wall-following behavior of a robot intended for disinfecting
walls. However, better performance could be observed from the IT2-FLS compared to the TL-FLS.
Therefore, a performance comparison of the two FLSs was conducted in the second phase of the
validation (given in Section 4.3) by considering complex wall arrangements.
4.3. Performance Comparison of Wall-Following Behavior
In this phase of the validation, the performance of the proposed FLSs was compared by
considering complex wall arrangements. The wall arrangements considered in this regard are shown
in Figure 10. Similar to the ﬁrst phase of the validation, initially in these cases, the robot was placed
in such a way that the robot’s heading was parallel to the tangent to the wall surface, and dS=dT.
A total of 12 heterogeneous wall arrangements were considered, and the robot (with the T1-FLS and
with the IT2-FLS) was allowed to follow the wall for 200 s in each case. The trajectories of the robot
were captured. The traced paths of the robot during these test cases were also annotated. A video
compiled from the simulations of this phase can be found as a supplementary multimedia attachment.
According to the obtained results of these 12 cases, both proposed FLSs for wall-following
behavior were capable of successfully following the wall arrangement of the test cases. However,
the IT1-FLS generated smoother paths for the robot than the T1-FLS. The average lateral error of
each case (i.e., E) was calculated for both FLSs to analyze this performance variation quantitatively.
In all cases except Case “k”, the robot with the IT2-FLS had a lower Ethan that of T1-FLS. The mean
variation of Eobtained for the test cases is given in Figure 11a with error bars drawn to represent
the standard error. In addition to that, the corresponding box plots of Eare given in Figure 11b to
provide insights into the data distribution. The mean of Efor the T1-FLS was 6.1 cm, with a standard
deviation of 1.5. In contrast, the mean of Efor the IT2-FLS was 4.9 cm, with a standard deviation
of 1.3. A paired t-test was conducted to evaluate the statistical signiﬁcance between the two means.
According to the test outcomes, the IT2-FLS had a signiﬁcantly lower mean for Ecompared to that of
the T1-FLS ( t(11)=7.19,p=0.000 ). Furthermore, this error reduction was large according to the effect
size calculated based on Cohen’s d (Cohen’s d = 0.86; Cohen’s d >0.8 is considered as a large effect
size [ 61]). Therefore, it can be concluded that the IT2-FLS had signiﬁcantly superior performance than
the T1-FLS in wall-following behavior, and the performance difference was noteworthy.