Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 11 of 22
be maintained by the robot from the wall (i.e., dT) was conﬁgured as 0.5 m for the ﬁrst and second
phases of the validation. The maximum linear velocity of the robot was assumed as 1 m/s. This value
was chosen based on the requirements of the disinfection process, as well as the typical parameters of
mobile robot bases.
4.2. The Characteristics of Wall-Following Behavior
In this phase of the validation, heterogeneous scenarios where the robot encounters typical walls
such as corners and curves were considered individually to analyze the characteristics of the proposed
FLSs for wall-following behavior. The arrangement of walls in the test cases of the ﬁrst phase of the
validation is shown in Figure 8 along with the resulting trails of the robot with the T1-FLS and the
IT2-FLS. The variations of the parameters of the FLSs corresponding to the test cases are given in
Figure 9. It should be noted that for each test case, initially, the robot was placed in such a way that the
robot’s heading was parallel to the tangent to the wall surface, and dS=dT.
A wall arrangement with a right-angle corner, as shown in Figure 8a, was considered for the
case “a”. The robot was placed on the inner side of a right-angle corner of a wall. A robot could often
encounter this sort of wall segment when applying the disinfectant. The traced path of the robot for
both FLSs are annotated on the map. The corresponding variations of the inputs and the outputs of
the FLSs are given in Figure 9. Initially, dfwas 0.75, where it activated only the “Far” fuzzy set of
the input for df. As a result of sole activation of the “Far” set of df, the robot velocity, v, was at its
maximum, and the robot tried to minimize edby varying w. When the robot moved toward the corner,
dfdecreased gradually. When dfdropped to a level that activated the “Close” set, vstarted to decrease,
andwstarted to increase in the clockwise direction to turn the robot to the right. This behavior helped
the robot follow the right-angle turn of the wall at the corner. However, after completion of the turn at
the corner, the robot had a small ed. The robot managed to steady edafter a few oscillations, which were
small in magnitude (less than 0.1 m). The peak magnitudes and the number of the oscillations of the
IT2-FLS were lower than those of the T1-FLS. The average absolute displacement error of the robot’s
path ( E) was 0.04 m and 0.02 m for the case of the T1-FLS and the IT2-FLS, respectively, indicating a
slightly better performance for the IT2-FLS than the T1-FLS in this case. The results of the case “a”
veriﬁed that both proposed FLSs for wall-following behavior were capable of coping with a situation
where there could be right-angle corners in inner wall segments.
A situation where a robot moves along the outer surface of a wall segment that has a right-angle
corner was considered for the case “b” (see Figure 9b). Both conﬁgurations of the robot followed
the ﬁrst leg of the wall without having a lateral error ( ed=0). In this case, the robot could not
identify the corner by considering df, similar to the case “a”. Nevertheless, soon after the robot passes
the ﬁrst leg of the wall, it perceives the outward turn of the wall through ed. Therefore, both the
FLSs took necessary action to turn the robot to the left by raising win the anti-clockwise direction.
After that, both FLSs were capable of following the second wall segment as expected. Similar to the
case “a”, both FLSs were able to maintain a lower E(0.03 m and 0.02 m for the T1-FLS and the IT2-FLS,
respectively). The IT2-FLS showed better performance than that of the T1-FLS. The characteristics
identiﬁed from this case validated the ability of the proposed FLSs to follow the outer surface of a
right-angle wall corner.
The characteristics of the proposed FLSs in following a curve wall from the inner side were
evaluated in the case “d” shown in Figure 8c. The robot was successful at following the curved wall in
both conﬁgurations (i.e., with the T1-FLS and with the IT2-FLS) while having a lower E(0.07 m and
0.05 m for the T1-FLS and the IT2-FLS, respectively). In the case “d”, the proposed FLSs were tested
when the robot was following the same curved wall from outside (see Figure 8d). The proposed FLSs
were capable of following the wall surface while maintaining the average lateral error, E, within an
acceptable range (0.06 m and 0.04 m for the T1-FLS and the IT2-FLS, respectively) for the disinfection
process. The IT2-FLS exhibited a steady path with lower peaks of edcompared to the T1-FLS, yielding
a superior performance. The characteristics of the proposed FLSs identiﬁed from the cases “c” and “d”