Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 5 of 22
sensors in the case of the wall following from the left. The closest distance within the frontal region
is considered to ensure safety. Thus, dfis deﬁned as df=minfd0,d1g. The FLS determines the
reference/desired linear velocity ( v) and angular velocity ( w) of the robot required to properly follow
the wall based on its inputs. A Type 1 Fuzzy Logic System (T1-FLS) and an Interval Type 2 Fuzzy Logic
System (IT2-FLS) were considered for the FLS proposed for wall-following behavior. The linear velocity
(v) and angular velocity ( w) determined by the FLS are fed into the robot model, where it determines
the required/reference angular velocities of the left and right wheels of the robot ( wLandwR). In other
words, the output of the FLS decides the set-point inputs for the lower level PID controllers acting
on DC motors attached to the wheels. For the sake of brevity and without any loss of generality,
the desired/reference terms are dropped in the remainder of the paper. The variation of the angular
velocities of the wheels makes the robot follow the wall as expected.
3. Fuzzy Logic System for Wall-Following Behavior
A Fuzzy Logic System (FLS) can map the input space with the output space of a control problem
based on a set of linguistic rules [ 48,49]. Fuzzy logic can be considered as a reliable modeling method
that can model any complex system or process without knowing the exact underlying dynamics [ 50–52].
In the case of wall-following behavior, the exact dynamics of the robot and an environment is not
certain. Nevertheless, the required control actions for wall-following behavior could be explained
using linguistic expressions based on expert knowledge [ 53]. Furthermore, the sensory information
retrieved from the range sensors of the robot is imprecise due to sensor noise. On the contrary,
fuzzy logic has proven to be effective at inferring control actions while coping with imprecise sensor
information [ 54,55]. In addition to that, fuzzy logic has often been used for the navigation of robots
in unknown environments [ 53,56]. Therefore, fuzzy logic was used to establish the wall-following
behavior for the robot. Two fuzzy logic systems, a Type 1 Fuzzy Logic System (T1-FLS) and an Interval
Type 2 Fuzzy Logic System (IT2-FLS), were individually considered to realize the required goals of
wall-following behavior.
3.1. Type 1 Fuzzy Logic System
The architecture of the Type 1 Fuzzy Logic System (T1-FLS) proposed for establishing the
wall-following behavior of a mobile robot is depicted in Figure 2. The inputs of the FLS are the
lateral distance from the wall error (i.e., ed), the rate of change of lateral distance from the wall error
(i.e., ˙ed), and the distance from the front obstacle (i.e., df). The outputs of the T1-FLS are the angular
velocity (i.e., w) and linear velocity (i.e., v) of the robot. The inputs are fuzziﬁed in the fuzziﬁcation
layer by using the input membership functions given in Figure 3a–c for ed,˙ed, and df, respectively.
Non-singleton fuzzy sets are deﬁned for the input membership functions since they can cope more
effectively with uncertainties than the singleton counterparts [ 57]. The corresponding fuzziﬁed values
are deﬁned as med(ed),m˙ed(˙ed), and mdf(df).
FuzzificationInferencingRule base
Defuzzification𝜔
𝑣FuzzificationInferencingRule base
Defuzzification𝜔
𝑣Type -reducer𝑒𝑑
ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓
𝑒𝑑
ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓
Figure 2. Architecture of the Type 1 Fuzzy Logic System (T1-FLS).