Cutout HaS Ours
✘ ✘ ✘ ✘ ✔
Figure 1. Unsuccessful examples by previous strategies.
random erasing [29] delete only one continuous region of
the image. The resulting imbalance of these two conditions
is obvious because the deleted region is one area. It has a
good chance to cover the whole object or none of it depend-
ing on size and location. The approach of HaS [17] is to
divide the picture evenly into small squares and delete them
randomly. It is more effective and still stands a consider-
able chance for continuously deleting or reserving regions.
Some unsuccessful examples of existing methods are shown
in Fig. 1. Statical and more specific quantitative analysis is
provided in Sec. 3.
Contrary to previous methods, we surprisingly observe
the very easy strategy that can balance these two conditions
statistically better is by using structured dropping regions,
such as deleting uniformly distributed square regions. Our
proposed information removal method, named GridMask,
is thus to expand structured dropping. Its structure is really
simple as shown in Fig. 2, making it easy, fast, and flexible
to implement and incorporated in allexisting CNN models.
Our GridMask neither removes a continuous big region
like Cutout, nor randomly selects squares like hide-and-
seek. The deleted region is only a set of spatially uniformly
distributed squares. In this structure, via controlling the
density and size of the deleted regions, we have statisti-
cally higher chance to achieve a good balance between the
two conditions, as shown in Fig.5. As a result, we improve
many state-of-the-art CNN baseline models by a good mar-
gin using our very simple GridMask at an extremely low
computation budget.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of GridMask, extensive
experiments are designed and conducted as shown in Ta-
ble. 1. In the image classification task using dataset Im-
ageNet, GridMask can improve the accuracy of ResNet50
from 76.5% to 77.9%, much more effective than Cutout and
HaS, which accomplish 77.1% and 77.2%. Our result is also
better than that of AutoAugment (77.6%), which is a com-
bination of several existing policies through reinforcement
learning. Note that our method is just one simple policy,
which can also be incorporated into AutoAugment.
Further, on the COCO2017 dataset for the object detec-
tion task, GridMask increases mAP of Faster-RCNN-50-
FPN from 37.4% to 39.2%. On the semantic segmentation
task using the challenging dataset Cityscapes, our method
improves mIoU of PSPNet50 from 77.3% to 78.1%. They
all demonstrate the surprisingly high effectiveness and gen-RErase Cutout HaS Ours
Figure 2. More examples of different information dropping meth-
ods (best view in large size).
erality on a large variety of tasks and training data. Our
code is available at https://github.com/akuxcw/GridMask.
2. Releated Work
Regularization is an important skill for training neural
networks. In recent years, various regularization techniques
have been proposed. Dropout [18] is effective and is mainly
used in fully connected layers. Dropconnect [21] is very
similar to dropout, except that it does not drop the output
value, but instead the input value of some nodes. In addi-
tion, adaptive dropout [1], stochastic pooling [25], droppath
[12], shakeshake regulation [5] and dropblock [6] were also
proposed. These methods add noise to a few parameters
in the training process according to different rules, so as to
avoid over-fitting training data and improve models’ gen-
eralization ability. Besides, Mixup [26] and CutMix [23]
use multi-image information during the training process.
By modifying the input images, labels, and loss functions,
these methods can fuse information of multiple images and
achieve good results.
Data augmentation is also an effective regularization.
Compared with other methods, data augmentation has many
advantages. For example, it only needs to operate on the in-
put data, instead of changing the network structure. And
data augmentation is easy to apply to many tasks, while
other loss- or label-based methods may need extra design.
The basic policy of data augmentation contains random flip,
random crop, etc., which are commonly used on CNNs.
Except for the basic strategies, the inception-preprocess
[19] is more advanced with random disturbance of color
of the input image. Recently, AutoAugment [3] improved
the inception-preprocess using reinforcement learning to
search existing policies for the optimal combination. Be-
sides, some recently proposed methods based on informa-
tion dropping have also achieved good results of random
erasing [29], hide-and-seek [17], cutout [4], etc. These
methods delete information on input images through certain
policies. They usually work well on small datasets, while
the effect on large datasets is limited.