Figure 3. This image shows examples of GridMask. First, we pro-
duce a mask according to the given parameters ( r,d,δx,δy). Then
we multiply it with the input image. The result is shown in the last
row. In the mask, gray value is 1, representing the reserved re-
gions; black value is 0, for regions to be deleted.
Our method also belongs to information dropping aug-
mentation. Compared with previous methods, ours can
achieve consistently better results on various datasets, out-
performing all previous unsupervised strategies, including
the optimal combination proposed by AutoAugment. Our
method can serve as a new baseline policy for data augmen-
tation.
3. GridMask
GridMask is a simple, general, and efficient strategy.
Given an input image, our algorithm randomly removes
some pixels of it. Unlike other methods, the region that our
algorithm removes is neither a continuous region [4] nor
random pixels in dropout. Instead, our algorithm removes a
region with disconnected pixel sets, as shown in Fig. 3.
We express our setting as
˜x=x×M (1)
where x∈RH×W×Crepresents the input image, M∈
{0,1}H×Wis the binary mask that stores pixels to be re-
moved, and ˜x∈RH×W×Cis the result produced by our
algorithm. For the binary mask M, ifMi,j= 1 we keep
pixel (i, j)in the input image; otherwise we remove it. Our
algorithm is applied after the image normalization opera-
tion.
The shape of Mlooks like a grid, as shown in Fig. 3.
We use four numbers (r, d, δ x, δy)to represent a unique M.
Every mask is formed by tiling the units as shown in Fig.
𝑑
𝛿𝑥
𝛿𝑦𝑟Figure 4. The dotted square shows one unit of the mask.
4.ris the ratio of the shorter gray edge in a unit. dis the
length of one unit. δxandδyare the distances between the
first intact unit and boundary of the image.
Next, we talk about the choices of these four parameters.
Choice of r r determines the keep ratio of an input image.
We define the keep ratio kof a given mask Mas
k=sum(M)
H×W, (2)
which means the proportion of the region between reserved
and input images. The keep ratio is a very important param-
eter to control the algorithm. With a large keep ratio, CNN
may still suffer from over-fitting. If it is too small, we could
lose excessive information causing under-fitting. There is a
close relation between randk. Ignoring incomplete units
in a mask, we get
k= 1−(1−r)2= 2r−r2. (3)
The keep ratio is fixed following common practice. We per-
form extensive experimnents to verify the choice of rin
Section 4.1.3.
Choice of dThe length of one unit ddoes not affect the
keep ratio. But it decides the size of one dropped square.
When ris fixed, the relation between the side length lof
one dropped square and dis
l=r×d. (4)
The larger dis, the larger lbecomes. The keep ratio is con-
stant during training. Yet we still add randomness to enlarge
the variety of images – dis suitable to achieve this goal [17].
We randomly select dfrom a range as
d=random (dmin, dmax). (5)
It is easy to conclude that a smaller dcan avoid most failure
cases. But some recent works [4, 6] show that dropping
a very small region is useless for convolutional operation,
in accordance with our experimental results given later in
Section 4.1.3.