13
RoadNetworksPOIsMeteorologicalDataAirqualityindex(AQI)Multi-sourcedSTdataStaticfeaturesDynamicfeaturesFeatureextraction&fusionFNNLSTMAttention-basedpoolingFully-connectedlayerforpredictionADAINmodel
Fig. 15. ADAIN model framework.
of limited labeled extreme climate events, [123] presented
a multichannel spatiotemporal CNN architecture for semi-
supervised bounding box prediction. The approach proposed
in [123] is able to leverage temporal information and unlabeled
data to improve the localization of extreme weathers.
F . Other tasks.
Besides the problems we discussed above, deep learning
models are also applied in other STDM tasks include rec-
ommendation [10], [81], [193], pattern mining [118], relation
mining [197], etc. [10] proposed a content-aware hierarchical
POI embedding model CAPE for POI recommendation. From
text contents, CAPE captures not only the geographical in-
ﬂuence of POIs, but also the characteristics of POIs. [193]
also proposed to exploit the embedding learning technique
to capture the contextual check-in information for POI rec-
ommendation. [118] proposed a deep-structure model called
DeepSpace to mine the human mobility patterns through
analyzing the mobile data of human trajectories. [197] studied
the problem of Trajectory-User Linking (TUL), which aims
to link trajectories to users who generate them from the
geo-tagged social media data. A semi-supervised trajectory-
user relation learning framework called TULV AE (TUL via
Variational AutoEncoder) is proposed to learn the human
mobility in a neural generative architecture with stochastic
latent variables that span hidden states in RNN.
G. Fusing Multi-Sourced Data
Besides the ST data under study, there are usually some
other types of data that are highly correlated to the ST
data. Fusing such data together with the ST data can usually
improve the performance of various STDM tasks. For example,
the urban trafﬁc ﬂow data can be signiﬁcantly affected by
some external factors such as weather, social events, and
holidays. Some recent works try to fuse the ST data and
other types of data into a deep learning architecture for jointly
learning features and capturing the correlations among them
[16], [19], [89], [174], [178], [188], [201]. Generally, there are
two popular ways to fuse the multi-sourced data in applying
deep learning models for STDM, raw data-level fusion and
latent feature-level fusion.
Raw data-level fusion. For the raw data-level fusion, the
multi-sourced data are integrated ﬁrst and then input intothe deep learning model for feature learning. [201] studied
the trafﬁc accident prediction problem by using the Convolu-
tional Long Short-Term Memory (ConvLSTM) neural network
model. First, the entire studied area is partitioned into grid
cells. Then a number of ﬁne-grained urban and environmental
features such as trafﬁc volume, road condition, rainfall, tem-
perature, and satellite images are collected and map-matched
with each grid cell. Given the number of accidents as well
as the external features at each location mentioned above
as the model input, a Hetero-ConvLSTM model to predict
the number of accidents that will occur in each grid cell
in future time slots is proposed. [19] proposed the ADAIN
model which fused both the urban air quality information from
monitoring stations and the urban data that are closely related
to air quality, including POIs, road networks and meteorology
for inferring ﬁne-grained urban air quality of a city. The
framework of ADAIN model is shown in Fig 15. Features are
ﬁrst manually extracted from the multi-sourced data including
road networks, POIs, meteorological data and urban air quality
index data. Then all the features are fused together and then
fed into FNN and RNN models for feature learning.
Latent feature-level fusion. For the latent feature-level
fusion, different types of raw features are input into dif-
ferent deep learning models ﬁrst, and then a latent feature
fusion component is used to fuse different types of latent
features. [89] proposed a deep-learning-based approach called
ST-ResNet, which is based on the residual neural network
framework to collectively forecast the inﬂow and outﬂow of
crowds in each region of a city. As shown in Fig 16, ST-
ResNet handles two types of data, the ST crowd ﬂow data
sequences in a city and the external features including the
weather and holiday events. Two components are designed to
learn the latent features of the external features and the crowd
ﬂow data features seperately, and then a feature fusing function
tanh is used to integrate the two types of learned latent
features. [174] proposed a Deep Multi-View Spatial-Temporal
Network (DMVST-Net) framework to combine multi-view
data for taxi demand prediction. DMVST-Net consists of three
views: temporal view, spatial view and semantic view. CNN is
used to learn features from the spatial view, LSTM is used to
learn features from the temporal view and network embedding
is applied to learn the correlations among regions. Finally, a
fully connected neural network is applied to fuse all the latent
features of the three views for taxi demand prediction.
H. Attention Mechanism
Attention is a mechanism that was developed to improve
the performance of the Encoder-Decoder RNN on machine
translation [5]. A major limitation of the Encoder-Decoder
RNN is that it encodes the input sequence to a ﬁxed length
internal representation, which results in worse performance
for long input sequences. To address this issue, attention
allows the model to learn which encoded words in the source
sequence to pay attention to and to what degree during the
prediction of each word in the target sequence. Although
attention is initially proposed in machine translation with the
word sequence data as the input, it actually can be applied