7
TrajectoriesTimeSeriousSpatialMapsSTRasterSequenceMatrix(2D)Tensor(3D)GraphCNN,GraphCNNConvLSTMSeq2SeqRNN,LSTM,GRU
AE,SDAEHybridOthers
Fig. 12. Data representation for different DL models
III. F RAMEWORK
In this section, we will introduce how to use deep learning
models for addressing STDM problems in general. First,
we will give a framework that describes the pipeline which
contains ST data instance construction, ST data representation,
deep learning model section & design, and ﬁnally addressing
the problem. Next we will introduce these major steps in detail.
A general pipeline for using deep learning models for ST
data mining is shown in Fig. 13. Given the raw ST data
collected from various location sensors, including the event
data, trajectory data, point reference data and raster data,
data instances are ﬁrst constructed for data storage. As we
discussed before, the ST data instances can be point, time
series, spatial maps, trajectory and ST raster. To apply deep
learning models for various mining tasks, the ST data instances
need to be further represented as a particular data format
to ﬁt the deep learning models. The ST data instances can
be represented as sequence data, 2D matrix, 3D tensors and
graphs. Then for different data representations, different deep
learning models are suitable to process them. RNN and LSTM
models are good at handling sequence data with short-term
or long-term temporal correlation, while CNN models are
effective to capture the spatial correlation in the image like
matrices. The hybrid model that combines RNN and CNN can
capture both the spatial and temporal correlations of a tensor
representation of the ST raster data. Finally, the selected deep
learning models are used to address various STDM tasks such
as prediction, classiﬁcation, representation learning, etc.
A. ST Data Preprocessing
ST data preprocessing aims to represent ST data instances
as a proper data representation format that the deep learning
model can handle. Usually the input data format of a deep
learning model can be a vector, a matrix or a tensor depending
on different models. Fig. 12 shows the ST data instances
and their corresponding data representations. One can see that
usually one type of ST data instance corresponds to one typical
data representations. Trajectory and time series data can be
naturally represented as sequence data. Spatial map data canbe represented as a 2D matrix. ST raster can be represented
as a 2D matrix or 3D tensor.
However, it is not always the case. For example, trajectory
data sometimes are represented as a matrix, and then CNN
model is applied to better capture the spatial features [24],
[67], [103], [117], [150]. The ST ﬁeld where the trajectories
are measured such as a city is ﬁrst partitioned into grid cell
regions. Then the ST ﬁeld can be modeled as a matrix with
each cell region representing an entry. If a trajectory paths
over the cell region, the corresponding entry value is set to 1;
otherwise it is set to 0. In this way, a trajectory data can be
represented as a matrix and thus CNN can be applied. Some-
times a spatial map is represented as a graph. For example, the
sensors deployed in the express ways are usually modeled as
a graph where the nodes are the sensors and the edges denote
the road segments between two neighbor sensors. In such a
case, GraphCNN models are usually utilized to process the
sensor graph data and predict the future trafﬁc (volume, speed,
etc.) for all the nodes [22], [85]. ST raster data can be both
represented as 2D matrices or 3D tensors, depending on the
data types and applications. For example, a series of fMRI
brain image data can be represented as a tensor and input into
a 3D-CNN model for diseases classiﬁcation [78], [116], and
it can be also represented as a matrix by extracting the time
series correlations between pair-wise regions of the brain for
brain activity analysis [48], [113].
B. Deep Learning Model Selection & Design
With the data representations of the ST data instances,
the next step is to feed them into the selected or designed
deep learning models for different STDM tasks. As shown
in the right part of Fig. 12, there are different deep learning
model options for each type of data representation. Sequence
data can be used as the input of the models including RNN,
LSTM, GRU, Seq2Seq, AE, hybrid models and others. RNN,
LSTM and GRU are all recurrent neural networks that are
suitable to predict the sequence data. Sequence data can also
be processed by Seq2Seq model. For example, in multi-step
trafﬁc prediction, a Seq2Seq model which consists a set of
LSTM units in the encoder layer and a set of LSTM units
in the decoder layer is usually applied to predict the trafﬁc
speed or volume in the next several time slots simultaneously
[89], [90]. As a feature learning model, AE or SAE can be
used to various data representations to learn a low-dimensional
feature coding. Sequence data can also be encoded as a low-
dimensional feature with AE or SAE. GraphCNN is particu-
larly designed to process the graph data to capture the spatial
correlations among the neighbor nodes. If the input is a single
matrix, usually CNN model is applied, and if the input is a
sequence of matrices, RNN models, ConvLSTM and hybrid
models can be applied depending on the problems under study.
If the goal is only for feature learning, AE and SAE models
can be applied. For tensor data, usually it is handled by a
3D-CNN or the combination of 3D-CNN with RNN models.
Table I summarizes the works using deep learning models to
handle different types of ST data. As shown in the table, CNN,
RNN and their variants (e.g. GraphCNN and ConvLSTM) are