1
Deep Learning for Spatio-Temporal Data Mining: A
Survey
Senzhang Wang, Jiannong Cao, Fellow, IEEE , Philip S. Yu, Fellow, IEEE ,
Abstract —With the fast development of various positioning
techniques such as Global Position System (GPS), mobile de-
vices and remote sensing, spatio-temporal data has become
increasingly available nowadays. Mining valuable knowledge
from spatio-temporal data is critically important to many real
world applications including human mobility understanding,
smart transportation, urban planning, public safety, health care
and environmental management. As the number, volume and res-
olution of spatio-temporal datasets increase rapidly, traditional
data mining methods, especially statistics based methods for
dealing with such data are becoming overwhelmed. Recently, with
the advances of deep learning techniques, deep leaning models
such as convolutional neural network (CNN) and recurrent
neural network (RNN) have enjoyed considerable success in
various machine learning tasks due to their powerful hierarchical
feature learning ability in both spatial and temporal domains,
and have been widely applied in various spatio-temporal data
mining (STDM) tasks such as predictive learning, representation
learning, anomaly detection and classiﬁcation. In this paper, we
provide a comprehensive survey on recent progress in applying
deep learning techniques for STDM. We ﬁrst categorize the types
of spatio-temporal data and brieﬂy introduce the popular deep
learning models that are used in STDM. Then a framework is
introduced to show a general pipeline of the utilization of deep
learning models for STDM. Next we classify existing literatures
based on the types of ST data, the data mining tasks, and the deep
learning models, followed by the applications of deep learning
for STDM in different domains including transportation, climate
science, human mobility, location based social network, crime
analysis, and neuroscience. Finally, we conclude the limitations
of current research and point out future research directions.
Index Terms —Deep learning, Spatio-temporal data, data min-
ing
I. I NTRODUCTION
Spatio-temporal data mining (STDM) is becoming grow-
ingly important in the big data era with the increasing avail-
ability and importance of large spatio-temporal datasets such
as maps, virtual globes, remote-sensing images, the decennial
census and GPS trajectories. STDM has broad applications in
various domains including environment and climate (e.g. wind
prediction and precipitation forecasting), public safety (e.g.
crime prediction), intelligent transportation (e.g. trafﬁc ﬂow
prediction), human mobility (e.g. human trajectory pattern
S.Z. Wang (szwang@nuaa.edu.cn) is with the College of Computer Science
and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nan-
jing, China, and also with the Department of Computing, The Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, HongKong, China.
J.N. Cao is with the Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hong Kong, China.
P.S. Yu is with the Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois
at Chicago, Chicago, USA, and also with Institute for Data Science, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China.mining), etc. Classical data mining techniques that are used to
deal with transaction data or graph data often perform poorly
when applied to spatio-temporal datasets because of many
reasons. First, ST data are usually embedded in continuous
space, whereas classical datasets such as transactions and
graphs are often discrete. Second, patterns of ST data usually
present both spatial and temporal properties, which is more
complex and the data correlations are hard to capture by
traditional methods. Finally, one of the common assumptions
in traditional statistical based data mining methods is that
data samples are independently generated. When it comes to
the analysis of spatio-temporal data, however, the assumption
about the independence of samples usually does not hold
because ST data tends to be highly self correlated.
Although STDM has been widely studied in the last several
decades, a common issue is that traditional methods largely
rely on feature engineering. In other words, conventional
machine learning and data mining techniques for STDM are
limited in their ability to process natural ST data in their raw
form. For example, to analyze human’s brain activity from
fMRI data, usually careful feature engineering and consider-
able domain expertise are needed to design a feature extractor
that transforms the raw data (e.g. the pixel values of the
scanned fMRI images) into a suitable internal representation or
feature vector. Recently, with the prevalence of deep learning,
various deep leaning models such as convolutional neural
network (CNN) and recurrent neural network (RNN) have
enjoyed considerable success in various machine learning tasks
due to their powerful hierarchical feature learning ability, and
have been widely applied in many areas including computer
vision, natural language processing, recommendation, time
series data prediction, and STDM. Compared with traditional
methods, the advantages of deep learning models for STDM
are as follows.
Automatic feature representation learning Signiﬁ-
cantly different from traditional machine learning meth-
ods that require hand-crafted features, deep learning
models can automatically learn hierarchical feature rep-
resentations from the raw ST data. In STDM, the spatial
proximity and the long-term temporal correlations of the
data are usually complex and hard to be captured. With
the multi-layer convolution operation in CNN and the
recurrent structure of RNN, such spatial proximity and
temporal correlations in ST data can be automatically and
effectively learned from the raw data directly.
Powerful function approximation ability Theoretically,
deep learning can approximate any complex non-lineararXiv:1906.04928v2  [cs.LG]  24 Jun 2019