3
(e1,l1,t1)(e1,l2,t2)(e1,l3,t3)(e2,l4,t4)(e2,l5,t5)(e2,l6,t6)(e2,l7,t7)(e2,l8,t8)(e3,l9,t9)(e3,l10,t10)(l2,t2)(l1,t1)(l3,t3)(l4,t4)(l5,t5)
(l6,t6)(l7,t7)(l8,t8)(l9,t9)(l10,t10)(l11,t11)
(a) Three types of events
(e1,l1,t1)(e1,l2,t2)(e1,l3,t3)(e2,l4,t4)(e2,l5,t5)(e2,l6,t6)(e2,l7,t7)(e2,l8,t8)(e3,l9,t9)(e3,l10,t10)(l2,t2)(l1,t1)(l3,t3)(l4,t4)(l5,t5)
(l6,t6)(l7,t7)(l8,t8)(l9,t9)(l10,t10)(l11,t11) (b) The trajectories of two moving
objects
Fig. 2. Illustration of event and trajectory data types
several open problems that are not well studied currently,
and points out possible research directions in the future.
Organization of This Survey The rest of this survey is
organized as follows. Section II introduces the categorization
of the ST data, and brieﬂy introduces the deep learning
models that are widely used for STDM. Section III provides
a general framework for using deep learning for STDM.
Section IV overviews various STDM tasks addressed by deep
learning models. Section V presents a gallery of applications
across various domains. Section VI discusses the limitations
of existing works and suggests future directions. We ﬁnally
conclude this paper in Section VII.
II. C ATEGORIZATION OF SPATIO -TEMPORAL DATA
A. Data Types
There are various types of ST data that differs in the way
of data collection and representation in different real-world
applications. Different application scenarios and ST data types
lead to different categories of data mining tasks and problem
formulations. Different deep learning models usually have
different preferences to the types of ST data and have different
requirements for the input data format. For example, CNN
model is designed to process image-like data, while RNN is
usually used to process sequential data. Thus it is important
to ﬁrst summarize the general types of ST data and represent
them properly. We follow and extend the categorization in [4],
and classify the ST data into the following types: event data,
trajectory data, point reference data, raster data, and videos.
Event data. Event data comprise of discrete events occur-
ring at point locations and times (e.g., crime events in the
city and trafﬁc accident events in a transportation network).
An event can generally be characterized by a point location
and time, which denotes where and when the event occurred,
respectively. For example, a crime event can be characterized
as such a tuple (ei; li; ti), where eiis the crime type, li
is the location where the crime occurs and tiis the time
when it occurs. Fig. 1(a) shows an illustration of the event
data. It shows three types of events denoted by different
shapes of the symbol. ST event data are common in real-
world applications such as criminology (incidence of crime
and related events), epidemiology (disease outbreak events),
transportation (car accident), and social network (social event
and trending topics).Trajectory data. Trajectories denote the paths traced by
bodies moving in space over time. (e.g., the moving route of
a bike trip or taxi trip). Trajectory data are usually collected
by the sensors deployed on the moving objects that can
periodically transmit the location of the object over time, such
as GPS on a taxi. Fig. 1(b) shows an illustration of two
trajectories. Each trajectory can be usually characterized as
such a sequencef(l1; t1);(l2; t2):::(ln; tn)g, where liis the
location (e.g. latitude and longitude) and tiis the time when
the moving object passes this location. Trajectory data such
as human trajectory, urban trafﬁc trajectory and location based
social networks are becoming ubiquitous with the development
of Mobile applications and IoT techniques.
Point reference data. Point reference data consist of
measurements of a continuous ST ﬁeld such as tempera-
ture, vegetation, or population over a set of moving refer-
ence points in space and time. For example, meteorologi-
cal data such as temperature and humidity are commonly
measured using weather balloons ﬂoating in space, which
continuously record weather observations. Point reference data
can be usually represented as a set of tuples as follows
f(r1; l1; t1);(r2; l2; t2):::(rn; ln; tn)g. Each tuple (ri; li; ti)de-
notes the measurement of a sensor riat the location liof the
ST ﬁled at time ti. Fig. 3 shows an example of the point
reference data (e.g. sea surface temperature) in a continuous
ST ﬁeld at two time stamps. They are measured by the sensors
at reference locations (shown as while circles) on the two
time stamps. Note that the locations of the temperature sensors
change over time.
Raster data. Raster data are the measurements of a contin-
uous or discrete ST ﬁeld that are recorded at ﬁxed locations in
space and at ﬁxed time points. The major difference between
point reference data and raster data is that the locations of the
point reference data keep changing while the locations of the
raster data are ﬁxed. The locations and times for measuring
the ST ﬁeld can be regularly or irregularly distributed. Given
mﬁxed locations S=fs1; s2; :::s mgandntime stamps T=
ft1; t2; :::t ng, the raster data can be represented as a matrix
Rmn, where each entry rijis the measurement at location si
at time stamp tj. Raster data are also quite common in real-
world applications such as transportation, climate science, and
neuroscience. For example, the air quality data (e.g. PM2.5)
can be collected by the sensors deployed at ﬁxed locations of
a city, and the data collected in a continuous time period form
the air quality raster data. In neuroscience, functional magnetic
resonance imaging or functional MRI (fMRI) measures brain
activity by detecting changes associated with blood ﬂow. The
scanned fMRI signals also form the raster data for analyzing
the brain activity and identifying some diseases. Fig. 4 shows
an example of the trafﬁc ﬂow raster data of a transportation
network. Each road is deployed a trafﬁc sensor to collect real
time trafﬁc ﬂow data. The trafﬁc ﬂow data of all the road
sensors in a whole day (24 hours) form a raster data.
Video. A video that consists of a sequence of images can
be also considered as a type of ST data. In the spatial domain,
the neighbor pixels usually have similar RGB values and thus
present high spatial correlations. In the temporal domain, the
images of consecutive frames usually change smoothly and