5
𝑉𝑉1 𝑉𝑉2ℎ1
𝑉𝑉𝑛𝑛⋯
Visible unitsℎ2ℎ3 ℎ𝑚𝑚⋯Hidden units
𝑤𝑤11 𝑤𝑤𝑛𝑛𝑚𝑚
Fig. 6. Structure of the RBM model.
facilitate the utilization of CNN models [67], [118], [142].
Although graph can be also represented as a matrix, here we
categorize graph and image matrix as two different types of
data representations. This is because graph nodes does not
follow the Euclidean distance as the image matrix does, and
thus the way to deal with graphs and image matrices are totally
different. We will discuss more details on the methods to
handle the two types of data representations later. Spatial maps
can be both represented as graphs and matrices, depending
on different applications. For example, in urban trafﬁc ﬂow
prediction, the trafﬁc data of a urban transportation network
can be represented as a trafﬁc ﬂow graph [85], [155] or cell
region-level trafﬁc ﬂow matrix [121], [137]. Raster data are
usually represented as 2D matrices or 3D tensors. For the
case of matrix, the two dimensions are locations and time
steps, and for the case of tensor, the three dimensions are row
region cell id, column region id and time stamp. Matrix is
a simpler data representation format compared with tensor,
but it loses the spatial correlation information among the
locations. Both are widely used to represent raster data. For
example, in wind forecasting, the wind speed time series data
of multiple anemometers deployed in different locations are
usually merged as a matrix, and then is feed into a CNN or
RNN model for future wind speed prediction [96], [200]. In
neuroscience, one’s fMRI data are a sequence of scanned fMRI
brain images, and thus can be represented as a tensor like a
video. Many works use the fMRI images tensor as the input
of CNN model for feature learning to detect the brain activity
[66], [76] and diagnose diseases [116], [158].
C. Preliminary of Deep Learning Models
In this subsection, we brieﬂy introduce several deep learning
models that are widely used for STDM, including RBM, CNN,
GraphCNN, RNN, LSTM, AE/SAE, and Seq2Seq.
Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBM). A Restricted
Boltzmann Machine is a two-layer stochastic neural network
[53] which can be used for dimensionality reduction, classiﬁ-
cation, feature learning and collaborative ﬁltering. As shown in
Fig. 6, the ﬁrst layer of the RBM is called the visible, or input
layer with the neuron nodes fv1; v2; :::v ng, and the second is
the hidden layer with the neuron nodes fh1; h2; :::h mg. As a
fully-connected bipartite undirected graph, all nodes in RBM
are connected to each other across layers by undirected weight
edgesfw11; :::w nmg, but no two nodes of the same layer are
⋯ ⋯Input
LayerConvolutional
LayerPooling
LayerFully Connected
LayerOutput
LayerFig. 7. Structure of the CNN model.
PoolingInputGraph Conv Graph Conv
Output
... ...Pooling...
Fig. 8. Structure of GraphCNN model.
linked. The standard type of RBM has a binary-valued nodes
and also bias weights. RBM tries to learn a binary code or
representation of the input, and depending on the particular
task, RBM can be trained in either supervised or unsupervised
ways. RBM is usually used for learning features.
CNN. Convolutional neural networks (CNN) is a class of
deep, feed-forward artiﬁcial neural networks that are applied
to analyze visual imagery. A typical CNN model usually
contains the following layers as shown in Fig. 7: the input
layer, the convolutional layer, the pooling layer, the fully-
connected layer and the output layer. The convolutional layer
will determine the output of neurons of which are connected
to local regions of the input through the calculation of the
scalar product between their weights and the region connected
to the input volume. The pooling layer will then simply
perform downsampling along the spatial dimensionality of the
given input to reduce the number of parameters. The fully-
connected layers will connect every neuron in one layer to
every neuron in the next layer to learn the ﬁnal feature vectors
for classiﬁcation. It is in principle the same as the traditional
multi-layer perceptron neural network (MLP). Compared with
traditional MLPs, CNNs have the following distinguishing
features that make them achieve much generalization on vision
problems: 3D volumes of neurons, local connectivity and
shared weights. CNN is designed to process image data. Due to
its powerful ability in capturing the correlations in the spatial
domain, it is now widely used in mining ST data, especially
the spatial maps and ST rasters.
GraphCNN. CNN is designed to process images which can