16
has the type of crime (e.g., arson, assault, burglary, robbery,
theft, and vandalism), as well as the time and location of the
crime. Patterns in crime and the effect of law enforcement
policies on the amount of crime in a region can be studied
using this data with the goal of reducing crime [4]. As the
crimes happened at different regions of a city usually present
high spatial and temporal correlations, deep learning models
can be used with the crime account heat map of a city as the
input to capture such complex correlations [31], [57], [145].
For example, [31] proposed a Spatiotemporal Crime Network
based on CNN to forecast the crime risk of each region in
the urban area for the next day. [145] proposed to utilize
ST-ResNet model to collectively predict crime distribution
over the Los Angeles area. [57] developed a new crime
prediction framework–DeepCrime, which is a deep neural
network architecture that uncovers dynamic crime patterns
and explores the evolving inter-dependencies between crimes
and other ubiquitous data in urban space. As we discussed
before, crime data are typical ST event data, but are usually
represented as spatial maps through merging the data in spatial
and temporal domains so that deep learning models can be
applied for analytics.
G. Neuroscience
In recent years, brain imaging technology has become a hot
topic within the ﬁeld of neuroscience. Such technology in-
cludes functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), elec-
troencephalography (EEG), Magnetoencephalography (MEG),
and functional Near Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS). The spa-
tial and temporal resolutions of neural activity measured
by these technologies is quite different from another. fMRI
measures the neural activity from millions of locations, while
it is only measured from tens of locations for EEG data.
fMRI typically measures activity for every two seconds,
while the temporal resolution of EEG data is is typically 1
millisecond. Because of its space resolving power, fMRI and
EEG combined with deep learning methods, has been widely
used in the study of neuroscience [34], [63], [113], [128].
As we discussed before, deep learning models are mostly
used for the classiﬁcation task in neuroscience by using the
fMRI data or EEG data such as disease classiﬁcation [34],
brain function network classiﬁcation [113] and brain activation
classiﬁcation [63]. For example, Long-Short Term Memory
network (LSTM) was used to identify Autism Spectrum Disor-
der (ASD) [34], Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) were
used to diagnose amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment (aMCI)
[113] and Feedforward Neural Networks (FNN) were used to
classify Schizophrenia [119].
VI. O PEN PROBLEMS
Though many deep learning methods have been proposed
and widely used for STDM in diverse application domains dis-
cussed above, challenges still exist due to the highly complex,
large volume, and fast increasing ST data. In this section, we
provide some open problems that have not been well addressed
by current works and need further studies in the future.Interpretable models. Current deep learning models for
STDM are mostly considered as black-boxs which lack of
interpretability. Interpretability gives deep learning models
the ability to explain or to present the model behaviors in
understandable terms to humans, and it is an indispensable part
for machine learning models in order to better serve people and
bring beneﬁts to society [29]. Considering the complex data
types and representations of ST data, it is more challenging
to design interpretable deep learning models compared with
other types of data such as images and word tokens. Although
attention mechanisms are used in some previous works to
increase the model interpretability such as periodicity and
local spatial dependency [19], [57], [88], how to build a more
interpretable deep learning model for STDM tasks is still not
well studied and remains an open problem.
Deep learning model selection. For a given STDM task,
sometimes multiple types of related ST data can be collected
and different data representations can be choosen. How to
properly select the ST data representations and the correspond-
ing deep learning modes is not well studied. For example, in
trafﬁc ﬂow prediction, some works model the trafﬁc ﬂow data
of each road as a time series so that RNN, DNN or SAE are
used for prediction [104], [136]; some works model the trafﬁc
ﬂow data of multiple road links as spatial maps so that CNN is
applied for prediction [184]; and some works model the trafﬁc
ﬂow data of a road network as a graph so that GraphCNN is
adopted [85]. There lacks of deeper studies on how to properly
select deep learning models and data representations of the ST
data for better addressing the STDM task under study.
Broader applications to more STDM tasks. Although
deep learning models have been widely used in various STDM
tasks discussed above, there are some tasks that have not been
addressed by deep learning models such as frequent pattern
mining and relationship mining [4], [87]. The major advantage
of deep learning is its powerful feature learning ability, which
is essential to some STDM tasks such as predictive learning
and classiﬁcation that largely rely on high quality features.
However, for some STDM tasks like frequent pattern mining
and relationship mining, learning high quality features may
not be that helpful because these tasks do not require features.
Based on our review, currently there are very few or even
no works that utilize deep learning models for the tasks
mentioned above. So it remains an open problem that how
deep learning models along or the integration of deep learning
models with traditional models such as frequent pattern mining
and graphical models can be extented to broader applications
to more STDM tasks.
Fusing multi-modal ST datasets. In big data era, multi-
modal ST datasets are increasingly available in many domains
such as neuroimaging, climate science and urban transporta-
tion. For example, in neuroimaging, fMRI and DTI can both
capture the imaging data of the brain activity with different
technologies that provide different spatiotemporal resolutions
[61]. How to use deep learning models to effectively fuse them
together to better perform the tasks of disease classiﬁcation
and brain activity recognition is less studied. The multi-modal
transportation data including taxi trajectory data, bike-sharing
trip data and public transport check-in/out data of a city can