11
the trajectory. Then multi-layer convolutional neural networks
were adopted to combine multi-scale trajectory patterns for
destination prediction of taxi trajectories. Modeling trajectories
as image-like matrix is also utilized in other tasks such
anomaly detection and inference [111], [150], which will be
introduced in detail later.
ST raster. As we discussed before, ST raster data can be
represented as matrices whose two dimensions are location and
time, or tensors whose three dimensions are cell region ID, cell
region ID, and time. Usually for ST raster data prediction, 2D-
CNN (matrices) and 3D-CNN (tensors) are applied, and some-
times they are also combined with RNN. [188] proposed a
multi-channel 3D-cube successive convolution network named
3D-SCN to nowcast storm initiation, growth, and advection
from the 3D radar data. [121] modeled the trafﬁc speed data
at multiple locations of a road in successive time slots as a ST
raster matrix, and then input it into a deep neural network for
trafﬁc ﬂows prediction. [106] explored the similar idea as [121]
for trafﬁc prediction on a large transportation network. [12]
proposed a 3D Convolutional neural networks for citywide
vehicle ﬂow prediction. Instead of predicting trafﬁc on a road,
they tried to predict vehicle ﬂows in each cell region of a city.
So they modeled the citywide vehicle ﬂow data in successive
time slots as ST rasters and input them into the proposed 3D-
CNN model. Similarly, [131] modeled the mobility events of
passengers in a city in different time slots as a 3D tensor,
and then used 3D-CNN model to predict the supply and
demand of the passengers for transportation. Note that the
major difference between ST raster and spatial maps is that ST
raster is the merged ST ﬁeld measurements of multiple time
slots, while spatial map is the ST ﬁeld measurement in only
one time slot. Thus the same type of ST data sometimes can be
represented as both spatial maps and ST raster depending on
the real application scenarios and the purposes of data analysis.
B. Representation Learning
Representation learning aims to learn the abstract and useful
representations of the input data to facilitate downstream data
mining or machine learning tasks, and the representations
are formed by composition of multiple linear or non-linear
transformations of the input data. Most existing works on
representation learning for ST data focused on studying the
data types of trajectories and spatial maps.
Trajectories. Trajectories are ubiquitous in location-based
social networks (LBSNs) and various mobility services, and
RNN and CNN models are both widely used to learn the trajec-
tory representations. [82] proposed a seq2seq-based model to
learn trajectory representations, for the fundamental research
problem of trajectory similarity computation. The trajectory
similarity based on the learned representations is robust to
non-uniform, low sampling rates and noisy sample points.
Simiarly, [170], [171] proposed to transform a trajectory
into a feature sequence to describe object movements, and
then employed a sequencetosequence autoencoder to learn
ﬁxedlength deep representations for clustering. Location-based
social network (LBSN) data usually contain two important
aspects, i.e., the mobile trajectory data and the social networkof users. To model the two aspects and mine their correlations,
[164] proposed a neural network model to jointly learn the
social network representation and the users’ mobility trajectory
representation. RNN and GRU models are used to capture the
sequential relatedness in mobile trajectories at the short or long
term levels. [10] proposed a content-aware POI embedding
model named CAPE for POI recommendation. In CAPE, the
embedding vectors of POIs in a user’s check-in sequence are
trained to be close to each other. [26] proposed a geographical
convolutional neural tensor network named GeoCNTN to learn
the embeddings of the locations in LBSNs. [41] proposed to
use RNN and Autoencoder to learn the user check-in embed-
ding and trajectory embedding, and used the embeddings for
user social circle inference in LBSNs.
Spatial maps. There are several works that study how to
learn representations of the spatial maps. [21] proposed a
convolutional neural network architecture for learning spatio-
temporal features from raw spatial maps of the sensor data.
[153] formulated the problem of learning urban community
structures as a spatial representation learning task. A collective
embedding learning framework was presented to learn urban
community structures by unifying both static POIs data and
dynamic human mobility graph spatial map data. [182] studied
how to learn nonlinear representations of brain connectivity
patterns from neuroimage data to inform an understanding
of neurological and neuropsychiatric disorders. A deep learn-
ing architecture named Multi-side-View guided AutoEncoder
(MV AE) is proposed to learn the representations of the input
brain connectome data derived from fMRI and DTI images.
C. Classiﬁcation
The classiﬁcation task is mostly studied in analyzing fMRI
data. Recently, brain imaging technology has become a hot
topic within the ﬁeld of neuroscience, including functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), electroencephalography
(EEG), and Magnetoencephalography (MEG) [120]. Particu-
larly, fMRI combined with deep learning methods, has been
widely used in the study of neuroscience for various clas-
siﬁcation tasks such as disease classiﬁcation, brain function
network classiﬁcation and brain activation classiﬁcation when
watching words or images [158]. Various types of ST data
can be extracted from the raw fMRI data depending on
different classiﬁcation tasks. [34] proposed the use of recurrent
neural networks with long short-term memory (LSTMs) for
classiﬁcation of individuals with autism spectrum disorders
(ASD) and typical controls directly from the resting-state
fMRI time-series data generated from different brain regions.
[48], [52], [54], [71], [113], [132] modeled the fMRI data
as spatial maps, and then used them as the input of the
classiﬁcation models. Instead of using each individual resting-
state fMRI time-series data directly, [48] and [52] calculated
the whole-brain functional connectivity matrix based on the
Pearson correlation coefﬁcient between each pair of resting-
state fMRI time-series data. Then the correlation matrix can
be considered as a spatial map, and is input to a DNN
model for ASD classiﬁcation. [113] proposed a more general
convolutional neural network architecture for functional con-
nectome classiﬁcation called connectome-convolutional neural