2
020406080100
20122013201420152016201720182019Relatedpaperspublishedineachyear
Fig. 1. Number of papers that explore deep learning techniques for STDM
published in recent years.
functions and can ﬁt any curves as long as it has enough
layers and neuros. Deep learning models usually consist
of multiple layers, and each layer can be considered as
a simple but non-linear module with pooling, dropout,
and activation functions so that it transforms the feature
representation at one level into a representation at a
higher and more abstract level. With the composition of
enough such transformations, very complex functions can
be learned to perform more difﬁcult STDM tasks with
more complex ST data.
Figure 1 shows the number of yearly published papers that
explore deep learning techniques for various STDM tasks.
One can see that there is a signiﬁcant increase trend of the
paper number in the last three years. Only less than 10 related
papers are published each year from 2012 to 2015. From 2016
on, the number increases rapidly and many researchers try
different deep learning models for different types of ST data
in different applications domains. In 2018, there are about
90 related papers published, which is a large number. The
complete number for 2019 is unavailable now, but we believe
that the growing trend will keep on this year and also the future
several years. Given the richness of problems and the variety
of real applications, there is an urgent need for overviewing
the existing works that explore deep learning techniques in
the rapidly advancing ﬁeld of STDM due to the following
reasons. It can highlight the similarities and differences of
using different deep learning models for addressing STDM
problems of diverse applications domains. This can enable the
cross-pollination of ideas across disparate research areas and
application domains, by making it possible to see how deep
learning model (e.g., CNN and RNN) developed for a certain
problem in a particular domain (e.g., trafﬁc ﬂow prediction in
transportation) can be useful for solving a different problem
in another domain (e.g., crime prediction in crime analysis).
Related surveys on STDM There are a few recent sur-
veys that have reviewed the literature on STDM in certain
contexts from different perspectives. [9] and [143] discussed
the computational issues for STDM algorithms in the era of
“big data” for application domains such as remote sensing,
climate science, and social media analysis. [87] focused on
frequent pattern mining from spatio-temporal data. It statedthe challenges of pattern discovery from ST data and clas-
siﬁed the patterns into three categories: individual periodic
pattern; pairwise movement pattern and aggregative patterns
over multiple trajectories. [18] reviewed the state-of-the-art in
STDM research and applications, with emphasis placed on the
data mining tasks of prediction, clustering and visualization for
spatio-temporal data. [130] reviewed STDM from the compu-
tational perspective, and emphasized the statistical foundations
of STDM. [112] reviewed the methods and applications for
trajectory data mining, which is an important type of ST data.
[75] provided a comprehensive survey on ST data clustering.
[4] discussed different types of ST data and the relevant
data mining questions that arise in the context of analyzing
each type of data. They classify literature on STDM into
six major categories: clustering, predictive learning, change
detection, frequent pattern mining, anomaly detection, and
relationship mining. However, all these works reviewed STDM
from the perspective of traditional methods rather than deep
learning methods. [114] and [157] provided a survey that
specially focused on the utilization of deep learning models
for analyzing trafﬁc data to enhance the intelligence level
of transportation systems. There still lacks of a broad and
systematic survey on exploring deep learning techniques for
STDM in general.
Our Contributions Compared with existing works, our
paper makes notable contributions summarized as follows:
First survey To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst survey that
reviews recent works exploring deep learning techniques
for STDM. In light of the increasing number of studies
on deep learning for spatio-temporal data analytics in the
last several years, we ﬁrst categorize spatio-temporal data
types, and present the popular deep learning models that
are widely used in STDM. We also summarize the data
representations for different data types, and summarize
which deep learning models are suitable to handle which
types of data representations of ST data.
General framework We present a general framework
for deep learning based STDM, which consists of the
following major steps: data instance construction, data
representation, deep learning model selection and ad-
dressing STDM problems. Under the guidance of the
framework, given a particular STDM task, one can better
use the proper data representations and select or design
the suitable deep learning models for the task under study.
Comprehensive survey This survey provides a compre-
hensive overview on recent advances of using deep learn-
ing techniques for different STDM problems including
predictive learning, representation learning, classiﬁcation,
estimation and inference, anomaly detection, and others.
For each task, we provide detailed descriptions on the
representative works and models for different types of ST
data, and make necessary comparison and discussion. We
also categorize and summarize current works based on
the application domains including transportation, climate
science, human mobility, location based social network,
crime analysis, and neuroscience.
Future research directions This survey also highlights