4
600
400500
300
100200
0 0
100 200 300 400 500 6001.9
1.71.8
1.6
1.41.5
1.3
1.11.2
600
400500
300
100200
100 200 300 400 500 6001.9
1.71.8
1.6
1.41.5
1.3
1.11.2
0.91
Fig. 3. Illustration of ST reference point data in two time stamps. The while
circles are the locations of the sensors that record the readings of the ST ﬁeld.
The color bars show the distribution of the ST ﬁeld.
 IDs of the road linksHour of a day000000
Fig. 4. Illustration of raster data collected from trafﬁc ﬂow sensors. The x-
axis is the ID of the road links in a transportation network, and the y-axis is
the hour of a day. Different colors denote different trafﬁc ﬂows on the road
links captured by the road sensors deployed at ﬁxed locations.
present high temporal dependency. A video can be generally
represented as a three dimensional tensor with one dimension
representing time tand the other two representing an image.
Actually, video data can be also considered as a special raster
data if we assume that there is a “sensor” deployed at each
pixel and at each frame the “sensors” will collect the RGB
values. Deep learning based video data analysis is extremely
hot and a large number of papers are published in recent
years. Although we categorize videos as a type of ST data,
we focus on reviewing related works from the perspective of
data mining and video data analysis falls into the research
areas of computer vision and pattern recognition. Thus in this
survey we do not cover the ST data type of videos.
B. Data Instances and Representations
The basic unit of data that a data mining algorithm operates
upon is called a data instance. For a classical data mining
setting, a data instance can be usually represented as a set of
features with a label for supervised learning or without labels
for unsupervised learning. In the ST data mining scenario,
there are different types of data instances for different ST data
types. For different data instances, there are several types of
data representations that are used to formulate the data for
further mining by the deep learning models.
Data instances. In general, the ST data can be summarized
into the following data instances: points, trajectories, time
series, spatial maps and ST raster as shown in the left part
of Fig. 5. A ST point can be represented as a tuple containing
STEventTrajectoriesSTPointReferenceSTRasterPointsTimeSeriesSpatialMapsTrajectoriesSequenceMatrix(2D)Tensor(3D)Graph
STRasterSTdatatypesSTdatainstancesDatarepresentations
VideosFig. 5. Data instances and representations of different ST data types
the spatial and temporal information as well as some additional
features of an observation such as the types of crimes or
trafﬁc accidents. Besides ST events, trajectories and ST point
reference can also be formed as points. For example, one can
break a trajectory into several discrete points to count how
many trajectories have passed a particular region in a particular
time slot. Besides formed as points and trajectories, trajectories
can be also formed as time series in some applications. If we
ﬁx the location and count the number of trajectories traversing
the location, it forms a time series data. The data instance of
spatial maps contains the data observations of all the sensors
in the entire ST ﬁled at each time stamp. For example, the
trafﬁc speed readings of all the loop sensors deployed at the
expressway at time tform a spatial map data. The data instance
of the ST raster data contains the measurements spanning the
entire set of locations and time stamps. That is, a ST raster
comprises of a set of spatial maps.
Different data instances can be extracted from ST raster
as time series, spatial maps or ST raster itself, depending
on different applications and analytic requirements. First, we
can consider the measurements at a particular ST grid of
the ST ﬁeld as a time series for some time series mining
tasks. Second, for each time stamp the measurements of an
ST raster can be considered as a spatial map. Third, one can
also consider all the measurements spanning all the locations
and time stamps as a whole for analysis. In such a case, ST
raster itself can be a data instance.
Data representations. For the above mentioned ﬁve types
of ST data instances, four types of data representations are
generally utilized to represent them as the input of various
deep learning models, sequence, graph, 2-dimensional matrix
and 3-dimensional tensor as shown in the right part of Fig. 5.
Different deep learning models require different types of data
representations as input. Thus how to represent the ST data
instances relies on the data mining task under study and the
selected deep learning model.
Trajectories and time series can be both represented as
sequences. Note that trajectories sometime are also repre-
sented as a matrix whose two dimensions are the row and
column ids of grid ST ﬁeld. Each entry value of the matrix
denotes whether the trajectory traverses the corresponding
grid region. Such a data representation is usually used to