12
network (CCNN). CCNN is able to combine information from
diverse functional connectivity metrics, and thus can be easily
adapted to a wide range of connectome based classiﬁcation
or regression tasks, by varying which connectivity descriptor
combinations are used to train the network.
Some works also directly use the 3D structural MRI brain
scanned images as the ST raster data, and then 3D-CNN
model is usually applied to learn features from the ST raster
for classiﬁcation [63], [66], [78], [116], [128], [194]. [78]
proposed two 3D convolutional network architectures for brain
MRI classiﬁcation, which are the modiﬁcations of a plain
and residual convolutional neural networks. Their models
can be applied to 3D MRI images without intermediate
handcrafted feature extraction. [194] also designed a deep
3D-CNN framework for automatic, effective, and accurate
classiﬁcation and recognition of large number of functional
brain networks reconstructed by sparse 3D representation of
whole-brain fMRI signals.
D. Estimation and Inference
Current works on ST data estimation and inference mainly
focus on the data types of spatial maps and trajectories.
Spatial maps. While monitoring stations have been estab-
lished to collect pollutant statistics, the number of stations is
very limited due to the high cost. Thus, inferring ﬁne-grained
urban air quality information is becoming an essential issue for
both government and people. [19] studied the problem of air
quality inference for any location based on the air pollutant
of some monitoring stations. They proposed a deep neural
network model named ADAIN for modeling the heterogeneous
data and learning the complex feature interactions. In general,
ADAIN combines two kinds of neural networks: i.e., feed-
forward neural networks to model static data and recurrent
neural networks to model sequential data, followed by hidden
layers to capture feature interactions. [139] investigated the
application of deep neural networks to precipitation estimation
from remotely sensed information. A stacked denoising auto-
encoder is used to automatically extract features from the
infrared cloud images and estimate the amount of precipitation.
Estimating the duration of a potential trip given the origin
location, destination location as well as the departure time is
a crucial task in intelligent transportation systems. To address
this issue, [83] proposed a deep multi-task representation
learning model for arrival time estimation. This model pro-
duces meaningful representation that preserves various trip
properties and at the same time leverages the underlying road
network and the spatiotemporal prior knowledge.
Trajectories [147], [181] tried to estimate the travel time of
a path from the mobility trajectory data. [181] proposed a RNN
based deep model named DEEPTRA VEL which can learn
from the historical trajectories to estimate the travel time. [147]
proposed an end-to-end Deep learning framework for Travel
Time Estimation called DeepTTE that estimated the travel
time of the whole path directly rather than ﬁrst estimating the
travel times of individual road segments or sub-paths and then
summing up them. [111] studied the problem of inferring the
purpose of a users visit at a certain location from trajectorydata. They proposed a graph convolutional neural networks
(GCNs) for the inference of activity types (i.e., trip purposes)
from GPS trajectory data generated by personal smartphones.
The mobility graphs of a user is constructed based on all
his/her activity areas and connectivities based on the trajectory
data, and then the spatio-temporal activity graphs are fed into
GCNs for activity types inference. [42] studied the problem
of Trajectory-User Linking (TUL), which aims to identify and
link trajectories to users who generate them in the LBSNs.
A Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) based model called
TULER is proposed to address the TUL problem by combining
the check-in trajectory embedding model and stacked LSTM.
Identifying the distribution of users transportation modes, e.g.
bike, train, walk etc., is an essential part of travel demand
analysis and transportation planning [24], [148]. [24] proposed
a CNN model to infer travel modes based on only raw GPS
trajectories, where the modes are labeled as walk, bike, bus,
driving, and train.
E. Anomaly Detection
Anomaly detection or outlier detection aims to identify the
rare items, events or observations which raise suspicions by
differing signiﬁcantly from the majority of the data. Current
works on anomaly detection for ST data mainly focus on the
data types of events and spatial maps.
Events. [137] tried to detect the non-recurring trafﬁc con-
gestions caused by temporal disruptions such as accidents,
sports games, adverse weathers, etc. A convolutional neural
network (CNN) is proposed to identify non-recurring trafﬁc
anomalies that are caused by events. [189] studied how to
detect trafﬁc accidents from social media data. They ﬁrst thor-
oughly investigated the 1-year over 3 million tweet contents
in Northern Virginia and New York City, and then two deep
learning methods: Deep Belief Network (DBN) and Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) were implemented to identify
the trafﬁc accident related tweets. [199] proposed to utilize
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) for automatic detection
of trafﬁc incidents in urban networks by using trafﬁc ﬂow
data. [16] collected big and heterogeneous data including
human mobility data and trafﬁc accident data to understand
how human mobility will affect trafﬁc accident risk. A deep
model of Stack denoise Autoencoder was proposed to learn
hierarchical feature representation of human mobility, and
these features were used for efﬁcient prediction of trafﬁc
accident risk level.
Spatial maps. [100] presented the ﬁrst application of Deep
Learning techniques as alternative methodology for climate
extreme events detection such as hurricanes and heat waves.
The model was trained to classify tropical cyclone, weather
front and atmospheric river with the climate image data as
the input. [72] studied how to detect and localize extreme
climate events in very coarse climate data. The proposed
framework is based on two deep neural network models, (1)
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to detect and localize
extreme climate events, and (2) Pixel recursive recursive
super resolution model to reconstruct high resolution climate
data from low resolution climate data. To address the issue