2762 V. Rani et al.
1 3
pseudo labels are used for representations that were generated 
automatically by taking into account the attributes of the dataset. 
These pseudo labels are then used for classification, detection, 
and segmentation [5 ]. The auxiliary pretext is primarily used to 
fill in missing parts of an image [6 ], convert it to gray scale [7 ], 
predict hidden parts, and many other tasks. Contrastive learn-
ing, on the other hand, distinguishes between augmented image 
features. For example, in one image, a close-up view is captured, 
while in another, a distant view is captured. Considering the dif-
ferences in perspectives between the two helps the model in 
learning. Before being integrated into computer vision, SSL had 
its origins in the NLP (natural language processing domain. Bidi-
rectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT is 
the most widely used SSL method in NLP. Neighbour sentence 
prediction, Neighbor word prediction, auto-regressive language 
modeling, and other NLP methods are used for SSL. As we all 
know, shuffling a single word in NLP can change the semantics 
of a sentence,the method described above can help with this.
2  Motivation Behind the Work
One important distinction between humans and machines is 
that humans can learn faster than machines by observing and 
sensing their surroundings. Machines, on the other hand, can 
take hours or even days to simulate. A large dataset is required 
to train machines to predict. Most artificial intelligence tech-
niques require labelled datasets to make predictions. Labe -
ling each data point manually or with data labelling software 
is a costly and time-consuming task. Unlabeled data, on the 
other hand, is available in plenty and easily. Thus, the motiva-
tion behind SSL is to learn useful depictions of the data from 
unlabeled data by making use of the self-supervision concept and then fine-tune these depictions with some labels for the 
supervised downstream task. These downstream tasks may 
range from simple to complex, like from image classification 
to semantic segmentation and object detection, etc. Therefore, 
there was a need for an hour to thoroughly discuss the SSL in 
detail. This article aims to provide a detailed illustration of 
SSL with applications in various areas, along with the litera-
ture review. The latter section also discusses the benefits and 
drawbacks of SSL. Also, the critical analysis along with future 
directions has been provided to make researchers familiar with 
the future research scope of SSL.
The article is organized as follows: Sect. 1 gives a brief 
introduction to SSL; Sect.  2 discusses the motivation for this 
work; and Sect.  3 discusses various learning algorithms. Sec-
tion  4 discusses in detail the SSL algorithm, it’s types, its 
learning tasks, the SSL applications and related work and the 
various terms used in the SSL paradigm. Section  5 discusses 
about various SSL datasets used in the medical domain and 
computer vision. Section  6 summarizes the critical analysis 
of the literature review, and at the end, Sect.  7 concludes the 
article by discussing the domain's future prospects.
3  Learning Algorithms
3.1  Supervised Learning
Supervised learning necessitates manual labelling of data, 
which slows the system's performance [8 ]. Supervised 
learning attempts to map input variables to output vari -
ables. Supervised learning is similar to a classroom setting 
in which a teacher is present to guide the students [2]. These 
models are created for a specific task and contain a large Fig. 1  Self-supervised learning 
process