2763 Self-supervised Learning: A Succinct Review  
1 3
amount of manually annotated data. This data is divided into 
three categories at random: training data, testing data, and 
validation data. The success of computer vision programs is 
dependent on this annotated data, which is a time-consuming 
and expensive process to acquire. Figure  2 depicts the opera-
tion of supervised learning.
3.2  Semi‑supervised Learning
Semi-supervised learning uses both labelled and unlabeled 
data to perform specific tasks [9]. First, some of the systems 
are trained using manually labelled data, and then the sys-
tem is used to predict the remaining portion using unlabeled 
data, as shown in Fig.  3. Finally, a full dataset containing 
both labelled and pseudo-labeled datasets is used to train 
the network.
The goal of semi-supervised learning is to combine the 
benefits of both supervised and unsupervised learning tech-
niques. Semi-supervised learning algorithms' main goal is 
to use unlabeled data to build a reliable model. These algo-
rithms do not guarantee that including only unlabeled data 
will improve prediction performance because unlabeled data 
is only useful when it contains information useful for label 
prediction.
3.3  Weakly‑Supervised Learning
Weakly-supervised learning is the process of learning from 
noisy or poorly labelled data. Because of the high cost of 
manually labelling data, it is difficult to obtain strong super -
vision information. In this scenario, it is necessary to build 
machines that can operate with minimal supervision. Weak 
supervision is classified into three types: incomplete super -
vision, inexact supervision, and inaccurate supervision [10]. 
Incomplete supervision is one of the, in which only a portion 
of the training data is labeled, and the rest is left unlabeled. 
The second type of supervision is inexact supervision, which 
contains only coarse-grained labels, and the last type is inac-
curate supervision, in which the given labels do not depict the truth. Instagram is an example of weakly-supervised 
learning, in which users' hash tags are used to label data [ 2].
3.4  Semi‑weak Supervised Learning
The combination of semi-supervised and weakly-supervised 
learning techniques is known as semi-weak supervised 
learning [11]. It adheres to the "student–teacher" frame-
work, in which a weakly supervised dataset is first trained 
with noisy hash tags, referred to as the teacher model. This 
teacher model is further refined using an ImageNet labelled 
dataset, and the refined labels are used to train the target 
student model.
3.5  Unsupervised Learning
Unsupervised learning, on the other hand, seeks to dis-
cover implicit patterns in data that has not been labeled. 
Manual annotations are not required for unsupervised 
learning. Unsupervised learning is done through cluster -
ing. Unsupervised learning is the process of teaching a 
computer to operate on unlabeled data and allowing the 
algorithm to act on it without supervision. The machine's 
task is to sort unsorted data into groups based on simi-
larities, patterns, and differences, as illustrated in Fig.  4.
Fig. 2  Supervised learning
Fig. 3  Semi-supervised learning