2767 Self-supervised Learning: A Succinct Review  
1 3
with insufficient data labels, semantic segmentation, and 
action recognition. Down streaming can be accomplished 
in two ways: fine-tuning or using a linear classifier [25]. To 
achieve good performance, a small amount of data labeling 
is required in the downstream task. When the domain gap 
between self-supervised pre-training and the downstream 
task is smaller, performance on the downstream task is usu-
ally better.
4.1.2.1 Image Classification Image classification is the pro-
cess of recognizing the category of each object in an image. 
Many networks are used for image classification, including 
AlexNet, ConvNet, ResNet, DenseNet, GoogLeNet, VGG, 
and others [26]. An image may contain multiple objects of 
different classes, but only one class label is used for each 
image. Image classification is used as a downstream task to 
estimate the quality of an image's features. To extract fea-
tures from each image, a self-supervised learning model is 
used, which is then used to train a classifier.
Liu Object detection is a downstream task that recognizes 
the category of an object as well as its relative position in an 
image. This task is extremely important in computer vision 
applications such as robotics, autonomous driving, scene 
text detection, and so on [27]. The two most popular datasets 
for object detection are MOSOCO and OpenImage. Many 
ConvNet models, such as CNN, R-CNN [28], Fast-RCNN, 
Fast YOLO, and others, have been proposed to achieve high 
performance [29].
4.1.2.2 Semantic Segmentation Semantic segmentation is 
the process of assigning semantic labels to each pixel in an 
image. This task is critical in a variety of applications, such 
as human–machine interaction, robotics, and autonomous 
driving. Many networks have been used in downstream 
tasks, and semantic segmentation is no exception. These 
networks include VGG, ResNet, AlexNet, CNN, and FCN 
(fully connected network). FCN is a watershed moment in 
semantic segmentation because it employs a fully convolu-
tional network to solve the problem.
4.1.2.3 Human Action Recognition (HAR) Human action 
recognition is the task of recognizing what people are doing 
in videos for a set of pre-defined action classes. This task 
necessitates the use of both spatial and temporal features. 
HAR has enabled the field to address one of its most press-
ing issues: using unlabeled data to build reliable recognition 
systems with only a few labeled training samples [30]. HAR 
is frequently used to evaluate the quality of video features 
learned using self-supervised methods. You and Wang [31] 
proposed using a view-enhanced jigsaw puzzle (VEJP) to 
recognize 3D human actions. VEJP captures multi-view 
data and forces the encoder to obtain view independent high-level features from the human skeleton. VEJP-extracted fea-
tures are more robust and distinguishable.
4.2  Types of SSL Learning Techniques
The ConvNet model serves as the foundation of SSL, and 
its architecture influences the quality of visual representa-
tions learned through the pretext task. There are numerous 
pre-trained convolutional neural network models available, 
including ResNet50, ResNet50 v1, and upgraded versions. 
When a low-capacity model, such as AlexNet, is used for 
pre-training, little improvement can be obtained when com-
pared to the Resnet50 family [26]. The major categories of 
SSL learning are Contrastive learning and non-contrastive 
learning.
4.2.1  Contrastive Learning
Contrastive learning is used to learn a representation or 
feature space that attracts and repels representations from 
similar images. Contrastive learning has a wide range of 
applications in computer vision and natural language pro-
cessing. For example, in NLP, changing the position of a 
single word can change the semantics of a sentence. The 
goal of contrastive learning is to bring semantically related 
samples closer together while keeping dissimilar samples 
separate [32]. In contrastive learning one sample from the 
training data is used as an anchor, its augmented form is 
labeled as a positive sample, and the remaining examples in 
the training batch are labeled as negative samples. Because 
people can distinguish items without remembering every 
detail about them, their cognitive learning patterns give 
rise to the concept of contrastive learning. The contrastive 
learning framework is depicted in Fig.  10, and it consists of 
a large set of unlabeled data, accurate data augmentation, 
an encoder (ResNet-50, ConvNet, CNN, etc.), and a hand-
crafted pretext task. Data augmentation is the use of sto-
chastic transformations to map an image into different per -
spectives, such as resizing, random flipping, color distortion, 
Gaussian blurring, and so on. Data augmentation can alter 
an image's visual appearance without changing its seman-
tics. An encoder is used to extract features from images. 
The quality of features increases as the number of layers in 
a network increases. In contrastive learning, three types of 
encoders are used: image encoders, momentum encoders, 
and dictionaries [33]. To predict the unlabeled data, pretext 
tasks generate pseudo labels from these extracted features.
4.2.2  Non‑contrastive Learning
Non-contrastive learning techniques only depends on posi-
tive sample pairs which means that the training data con -
tains only related representations, for example the data may