2769 Self-supervised Learning: A Succinct Review  
1 3
does the need for large memory. To address this issue, Lan 
et al. [39] proposed a two-parameters reduction technique 
called ALBERT (A lite BERT) that use fewer parameters 
than traditional BERT. ALBERT has two parameters: factor -
ized embedding parameterization and cross-layer parameter 
sharing. One large vocabulary matrix is decomposed into 
two small matrices in the first step. The size of the vocabu-
lary embedding is kept separate from the hidden layers. If 
the number of parameters is increased, this separation will 
not increase the size of the memory. Multiple techniques are 
used to share parameters in cross-layer parameter sharing. 
When the network's depth increases, cross-layer parameter 
sharing prevents the parameters from growing.
4.3.2  Self‑supervised Learning in Healthcare
Chowdhury et al. [40] discussed SSL implementation in 
healthcare as well as four other major areas: pixel to scalar 
pretext task, pixel to pixel pretext task, adversarial learning, 
and contrastive learning. The findings explain in their arti-
cle that SSL has the ability to solve the problems caused by 
supervised learning. Jamaludin et al. [41] used longitudinal 
MRI scan data to train a Siamese CNN to learn embedding 
in which pairs of images from the same patient at different 
times in time are pushed further apart in the latent space 
and vice versa. These two pretext tasks' loss functions are 
combined, and a third pretext task is used to forecast ver -
tebral body levels. The authors collected data from 1016 
subjects for their experimental work. To address the issue of 
high traffic at network stations, Isravel et al. [25] incorporat-
ing SSL techniques into the software-defined networking 
domain. By sensing the channel, SSL can estimate the traffic 
behavior. Chen et al. [42] used SSL for context restoration in 
medical image analysis. They validated context restoration 
in three medical imaging problems: classification, localiza-
tion, and segmentation. They used 2D ultrasound images for 
classification and CT images of abdominal organs for locali-
zation. They considered MRI of brain tumors to segment the 
imaging problem. The semantic features of images are taken 
into account by using SSL-based restoration. Kwasigroch 
et al. [43] proposed a fusion method that combines trans-
fer and self-supervised learning. They used this method in 
skin treatment, which is the most delicate application in the 
medical domain. They divided the dermoscopic images into 
two categories: benign and malignant. The dataset used for 
this experiment includes 2000 training images, 150 valida-
tion images, and 600 testing images. Because this dataset 
is unbalanced, they encountered various problems while 
conducting experiments. They demonstrated in their pro-
posed method that SSL can perform better even when only 
a small number of images are labeled. Ghesu et al. [44] pro-
posed a contrastive learning and online feature clustering 
method. They collected 100 million 2D and 3D medical images from a variety of modalities, including radiography, 
computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging 
(MR), and ultrasonography. They extracted features from 
these images and using these extracted features to train the 
model in both supervised and unsupervised modes. They 
validate three medical problems: chest radiography abnor -
mality assessment, brain metastasis detection in MR, and 
brain hemorrhage detection in CT image data. Spathis 
et al. [ 45] discussed the role of self-supervised learning in 
the medical domain. They collected ECG signal data and 
applied prominent SSL methods to it. They demonstrated 
that self-supervised learning can perform well with large 
amounts of data without the need for annotations. Nguyen 
et al. [46] proposed a method using SSL to solve a variety of 
medical problems. They have worked with image data con-
taining spatial 3D information, such as CT and MR images. 
The system has been divided into two stages: classification 
and segmentation. They used Resnet 34 to predict the value 
of spatial information. This stage's output was used as the 
initial parameters for the second segmentation stage. The 
authors considered two medical domain problems for experi-
ment purposes. The first issue is organ risk, and the second 
is detecting intracranial hemorrhage. The StructSeg dataset, 
which contains CT images of 60 lung cancer patients, was 
used for the Organ at Risk problem, and the RSNA dataset 
was used for Intracranial Hemorrhage detection. This dataset 
contains 17,079 images of patients.
4.3.3  Self‑supervised Learning in Computer Vision
SSL has been widely used in computer vision applications 
such as object detection, image classification, graph clas -
sification, visual question answering, and so on. For object 
detection, two approaches are used: a one-stage detector 
and a two-stage detector. In a two-stage detector, the object 
proposal is generated first, and then the object is located 
and classified in the second stage, whereas in a one-stage 
detector, classification and bounding box location are done 
in the same stage. Self-supervised learning methods are 
rapidly gaining popularity. The basic idea behind SSL is to 
develop a model that can solve problems in the field of com-
puter vision. Gidaris et al. [47] proposed a ConvNets-based 
method for recognizing 2D rotations in images. According 
to Huang et al. [48], SSL should be used for few shot object 
detection (FSOD) and instance segmentation. Object detec-
tion necessitates dense labeling, which is a time-consuming 
process,the FSOD method attempts to recognize previously 
unseen object classes based on a few labels. They discussed 
various object detection benchmark datasets and their evalu-
ation matrices also in this work. Self-EMD is a method for 
learning spatial-visual representation proposed by Liu et al. 
[49]. They used more than one set of images from various 
perspectives. The image is then cropped to 224 × 224 and