2766 V. Rani et al.
1 3
ual features. Treneska et al. [19] used an image colorization 
model based on a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN). 
The GAN model can produce the most realistic results. The 
extracted knowledge was transferred to two downstream 
tasks after applying the GAN model: multi-label image 
classification and semantic segmentation. In multi-label 
classification, a single image is assigned to multiple classes. 
The authors used 11,987 training images and 1713 testing 
images in their study. Semantic labels are assigned to each 
pixel of an image in semantic segmentation. They conducted 
experiments using the PascalVOC 2012 dataset.
4.1.1.2 Predicting a Missing Patch A pretext task that can 
predict the position of an image patch is predicting a miss-
ing patch from an image. To predict the relative position of 
a patch within an image, models should be trained. Doersch 
et al. [18] proposed using SSL to predict a missing patch. 
They chose a random patch and predicted the relative posi-
tion of an image's second and central patches, as shown in 
Fig.  9b. The patches are numbered 1 through 8. Following 
the selection of a patch, each patch is fed into a CNN that 
adheres to the AlexNet architecture. Both architectures are 
completely interconnected and share weights between lay -
ers. A gap was added between patches to prevent over-fit-
ting. Softmax was used as a final layer to predict the relative 
position of each patch configuration.
4.1.1.3 Estimating the Rotation Angle Estimating the rota-
tion is a task requiring instance discrimination [20]. Pre-
dicting picture rotations is a simple but effective method for 
identifying rotation discriminative features. If an image is 
rotated at any angle (0, 90, 180, or 270 degrees) and fed into 
a CNN model, the network model is pre-trained on pairs 
of rotated images from an unlabeled dataset. The network 
must understand the location, type, and pose of an object in an image in order to estimate the rotation angle of the 
original image. In Fig.  9c, an image is rotated three times, 
and the CNN model recovers the original image by learning 
the position of the object. Devgon et al. [21] developed a 
self-supervised learning model to estimate an object's rota-
tion between the desired rotation and the current rotation. 
They used a trained model to estimate the rotation between 
two depth images.
4.1.1.4 Jigsaw Puzzle Solving a jigsaw puzzle requires not 
only knowledge of a single patch, but also knowledge of the 
relationships between different patches of the same image, 
as shown in Fig.  9d [22]. Understanding the patches dis-
criminatory features helps in solving the puzzle. There is no 
shortcut method for predicting the right position of a patch, 
so multiple permutation functions are generated for each 
patch to find its right position [23]. Li et al. [24] solved Jig-
saw puzzles using the GAN model. They created a multitask 
pipeline for solving unpaired image jigsaw puzzles. They 
classified jigsaw permutations into a separate branch and 
then used a GAN model to recover features from images in 
the correct order. The classification branch concentrated on 
the pseudo labels generated by shuffling the image pieces, 
whereas the GAN model concentrated on the semantic 
information of the pieces.
4.1.2  Downstream Task
Downstream tasks are primary tasks that define the model's 
purpose. Pretext tasks, also known as secondary tasks, allow 
the model to learn useful feature representation informa-
tion that is used to complete downstream tasks. To ensure 
quality in downstream tasks, feature representation learned 
in pretext tasks should be calculated. The primary task 
downstream is to perform classification or object detection 
Fig. 9  Several exapmples of 
pretext task (a) colorizing the 
image (b) Predicting a missing 
patch (c) Estimating the rotation 
angle (d) Jigsaw Puzzle