Vol.:(0123456789)1 3Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering (2023) 30:2761–2775 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11831-023-09884-2
REVIEW ARTICLE
Self‑supervised Learning: A Succinct Review
Veenu Rani1 · Syed Tufael Nabi1 · Munish Kumar1  · Ajay Mittal2 · Krishan Kumar2
Received: 26 December 2022 / Accepted: 5 January 2023 / Published online: 20 January 2023 
© The Author(s) under exclusive licence to International Center for Numerical Methods in Engineering (CIMNE) 2023
Abstract
Machine learning has made significant advances in the field of image processing. The foundation of this success is supervised 
learning, which necessitates annotated labels generated by humans and hence learns from labelled data, whereas unsuper -
vised learning learns from unlabeled data. Self-supervised learning (SSL) is a type of un-supervised learning that helps in 
the performance of downstream computer vision tasks such as object detection, image comprehension, image segmenta-
tion, and so on. It can develop generic artificial intelligence systems at a low cost using unstructured and unlabeled data. 
The authors of this review article have presented detailed literature on self-supervised learning as well as its applications 
in different domains. The primary goal of this review article is to demonstrate how images learn from their visual features 
using self-supervised approaches. The authors have also discussed various terms used in self-supervised learning as well as 
different types of learning, such as contrastive learning, transfer learning, and so on. This review article describes in detail 
the pipeline of self-supervised learning, including its two main phases: pretext and downstream tasks. The authors have shed 
light on various challenges encountered while working on self-supervised learning at the end of the article.
Keywords Contrastive learning · Machine learning · Self-supervised · Supervised learning · Un-supervised learning
1 Introduction
Machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) algorithms have 
revealed incredible performance in computer vision applications 
such as image recognition, object detection, image segmentation, 
and so on. These models are trained using either labeled data 
or un-labeled data. Supervised learning works on labeled data 
and unsupervised learning works on un-labeled data. Manually 
labeling data is a time-consuming and labor-intensive process [1]. Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) is a solution to the afore-
mentioned issues that has emerged as one of the most promis-
ing techniques that does not necessitate any expensive manual 
annotations. The term "self-supervised learning" was first used 
in robotics, where labels were automatically assigned to training 
data to exploit the relationships between input signals and sen-
sors. The basic idea behind SSL's operation is that while provid-
ing input, some parts are hidden, and the visible parts are used to 
predict the hidden parts. SSL differs from unsupervised learning 
in that it requires labels but does not require human labeling [2 ]. 
The fundamental process of SSL is depicted in Fig.  1, with a 
large unlabeled corpus of images as input. The ConvNet model is 
trained to predict the image's hidden portion based on the visible 
portion. The concept of self-supervised learning is inspired by 
the way infants teach [3 ]. Infants always learn through observa-
tion, common sense, their surroundings, and little interaction. 
All these factors contribute to his or her ability to self-learn. An 
infant's surroundings become a source of supervision for him, 
which helps in his understanding of how things work without 
constant supervision. The same idea is replicated in the machine 
via SSL, where the data supervises itself for training the model 
rather than having annotated labels, instructing the network on 
what is right or wrong. SSL employs two main concepts: auxil-
iary pretext tasks and contrastive learning [4 ]. In pretext tasks,  * Munish Kumar 
 munishcse@gmail.com
 Veenu Rani 
 veenugoyal7@gmail.com
 Syed Tufael Nabi 
 ertufail32@gmail.com
 Ajay Mittal 
 ajaymittal@pu.ac.in
 Krishan Kumar 
 k.saluja@pu.ac.in
1 Department of Computational Sciences, Maharaja Ranjit 
Singh Punjab Technical University, Bathinda, Punjab, India
2 University Institute of Engineering and Technology, Panjab 
University, Chandigarh, India