2768 V. Rani et al.
1 3
contain the two versions of same image of a dog like color 
and black and white but not the image of some unrelated 
data or negative samples like a picture of a building. This 
may be thought that the contrastive learning model being 
trained on positive samples only may be prone to collapse, 
but FAIR found that the model has the ability to learn good 
representations despite learning from only positive sam-
ples. The non-contrastive SSL model uses stop-gradient and 
extra-predictor operations to achieve better learning results. 
BYOL and SimSiam proved that using these operations, the 
non-contrastive learning model does not suffer representa-
tion collapse. The Table  1 given below mentions some dif-
ferences between contrastive and non-contrastive learning.
4.3  Applications of SSL and Its State of the Art Work
4.3.1  Self‑supervised Learning and NLP
SSL has become a hot research topic for researchers since 
2018, when Google introduced the natural language process-
ing (NLP) model. SSL's most fruitful results in the field of 
NLP are BERT and T5. A substantial amount of research has 
been conducted in this area. This section goes over a few of 
them. Zhou et al. [34] used the SSL regularization technique 
in NLP for text classification. They defined text classification 
as a key concept in NLP. Authors provided training texts that 
were encoded using a text encoder as input. In the encoded text, the authors defined two tasks: prediction and self-super -
vision. Both tasks use the same encoded text. They tested 
their model on 17 text classification datasets, attempting to 
minimize classification and regularization losses. Chen et al. 
[35, 36] used a hybrid SSL approach to regularize the train -
ing of a text classification task. Task adaptive pre-training 
(TAPT) and domain adaptive pre-training (DAPT) have 
been proposed by Gururangan et al. [37]. TAPT continues to 
train it on the target task's training dataset, after pre-training 
RoBERTa on large-scale corpora. DAPT is still pre-training 
RoBERTa on datasets with minor domain differences from 
datasets in target tasks. The difference between the SSL-Reg 
technique and TAPT and DAPT is that SSL-Reg uses a self-
supervised task (for example, mask token prediction) to reg-
ularize RoBERTa fine-tuning, whereas TAPT and DAPT use 
separate tasks. TAPT and DAPT, on the other hand, use a 
self-supervised task for pre-training, with the text classifica-
tion task coming first, followed by the self-supervised task. 
SSL-Reg method and TAPT are similar in that they both use 
texts in target tasks to conduct self-supervised learning. Sun 
et al. [38] proposed ERNIE 2.0, a framework for learning 
multiple tasks in incremental increments. They created sev -
eral tasks and trained the ERNIE 2.0 model to extract lexi-
cal, syntactic, and semantic information from the training 
dataset. They used General Language Understanding Evalu-
ation (GLUE) to assess the model's performance. As the 
size of the model in natural language processing grows, so Fig. 10  Contrastive learning in 
computer vision
Table 1  Difference between contrastive learning and non-contrastive learning
Contrastive learning Non-contrastive learning
Complex NN Simple NN as compared to CL
Prone to dimensional collapse Lesser dimensional collapse
Takes into consideration both positive and negative data samples Takes into consideration only positive data samples
Minimises the distance between positive data and maximizes the distance between negative 
dataLeverages the positive data points from the dataset