2765 Self-supervised Learning: A Succinct Review  
1 3
will be able to learn guitar more quickly by applying prior 
knowledge to a new domain [16]. The basic idea behind 
using transfer learning is to transfer the information con-
tained in a trained model on a task with a large amount 
of data to an objective task with less data.
One of the most important learning algorithms is self-
supervised learning (SSL) which has been discussed in 
the upcoming section.
4  Self‑Supervised Learning (SSL)
SSL is considered to be the bridge between supervised learn-
ing and unsupervised learning. The SSL model trains itself 
using one part of the input data to learn the other part of the 
input data. This is also called predictive or pretext learn-
ing. The SSL algorithm has the ability to auto-generate the 
labels for un-labelled data, which converts the un-supervised 
model to a supervised model. Figure  7 shows the block dia-
gram of the SSL algorithm.
4.1  Self‑Supervised Learning (SSL) Tasks
SSL is a new approach that differs from other techniques. 
The main distinction between them is that SSL does not require manual labeling. SSL tasks are divided into two cat-
egories: pretext and downstream tasks. The former employs 
supervised learning to learn representations, with labels gen-
erated from the data itself. When this learning is complete, 
the model applies the previously learned representations to 
the subsequent tasks. Figure  8a, b depict various tasks per -
formed by pretext and downstream tasks, respectively.
4.1.1  Pretext Task Learning Framework
In pretext tasks, the hidden portion of data is predicted using 
the visible portion. The pretext task can be applied to any 
type of data, such as images, audio, video, and so on [5 ]. 
Figure  9a–d show examples of pretext tasks such as coloriz-
ing an image [17], predicting a missing patch [6 ], estimating 
the rotation angel [2 ], jigsaw puzzle [18], and so on. This 
task allows machines to learn automatically by obtaining 
supervision directly from the data, without the use of anno-
tations. Designing an appropriate pretext task necessitates 
domain knowledge.
4.1.1.1 Image Colorization Image colorization, as shown in 
Fig. 9a refers to the process of converting a colour image to 
a black-and-white image. Each pixel's full-color information 
is stored by the trained model. It is a pretext for learning vis-
Fig. 7  Block diagram of SSL
Fig. 8  Various tasks performed 
by a pretext and b downstream