2770 V. Rani et al.
1 3
resized using various methods such as color distortion, ran-
dom Gaussian blur, random horizontal flip, and so on. The 
COCO image dataset was used for experimentation. Amrani 
et al. [50] proposed a self-supervised learning method for 
detecting and retrieving an object from an unlabeled video. 
By listening to the video, this model captures similar frames 
with a common theme. For background rejection, contrastive 
learning was used, and new clusters were formed by a high 
level of label noise. Table  2 lists the major contributions of 
researchers in various fields, such as health care, natural 
language processing, image classification, object detection, 
and so on.
4.4  Taxonomy of SSL
Self-supervised learning has attracted many researchers for 
its excellent data efficiency. In this method, fewer labels and 
smaller samples are used to learn more by incorporating a 
neural network. In this section, we will go over some fun-
damental SSL terms.
4.4.1  Pseudo Labels
The data curation process must be automated to reduce 
manual input, and the number of labels required for good 
performance must be reduced [57]. Pseudo labels are labels 
that are assigned automatically by the network based on pre-
text tasks. For example, an image is provided as input, and 
the system performs some type of transformation on it, such 
as rotation, colorization, and so on. The transformed image 
is fed into ConvNet, which predicts the transformation via 
a pseudo labeling process. Figure  11 depicts this process.
4.4.2  Linear Classification
A typical assessment protocol involves training a linear 
classifier on top of (frozen) representations learned through 
self-supervised methods. It is evaluated for the classification 
accuracy of the learned classifier model on the ImageNet 
Val/Test set.
4.4.3  Pre‑trained Models
A common assessment protocol involves training a linear 
classifier on top of (frozen) representations learned through 
self-supervised methods. The classification accuracy of the 
learned classifier model is evaluated on the ImageNet Val/
Test set.
4.4.4  Fine‑tuning the Model
The fairness of self-supervised learning is affected by model 
fine-tuning [58]. The design of all models, including their parameters, is copied into the target model, except for the 
output layer when fine-tuning models. These parameters are 
adjusted based on the target datasets. To achieve the highest 
level of performance, downstream tasks in SSL use fine-
tuned models.
5  Sources of Datasets
This section will go over various datasets used for training 
and evaluating self-supervised visual features, natural lan-
guage processing, image classification, the medical domain, 
and so on. These datasets are collected for self-supervised 
training without the use of human-annotated labels. Table  3 
discusses various datasets used for computer vision, medical 
imaging, and natural language processing, along with their 
source links.
6  Critical analysis
When compared to supervised models, SSL has achieved 
remarkable success in the computer vision, NLP, and health -
care domains. SSL has some issues that researchers encoun-
ter, just like every coin has two sides. We have discussed a 
few of the pros and cons of SSL in this section.
• The vast majority of self-supervised pre-trained mod-
els, such as those in the ImageNet dataset, are trained 
on images with a single dominant object. The scene in 
applications such as self-driving cars contains several 
items, making it difficult to distinguish between two simi-
lar scenes.
• Finding context in satellite and medical images is 
extremely difficult due to their lack of structure. As a 
result, approaches like relative patch prediction and jig-
saw puzzles are useless when dealing with such images.
• When dealing with less structured datasets containing 
medical and satellite images, a different augmentation 
method is required than when dealing with datasets for 
natural language processing.
• Creating a useful pretext assignment that allows a net-
work to learn meaningful images/text is the most difficult 
aspect of self-supervised learning.
• After reviewing a large amount of literature, we discov -
ered that as the size of the dataset grows, so does the sys-
tem's performance. Larger datasets should thus be used 
whenever possible.
• Because SSL can process large data sets without relying 
on labels, an incomplete sentence in the NLP domain 
can be completed with a few words. Later words can be 
completed by understanding the semantics of the previ-
ous sentence.