3 
 demand and supply , and the continually  fluctuating environment , makes it difficult to  respond 
adequately  to this type of bullwhip effect.  
Hence, our study examine s the capabilities  required  to manage  supply chain s and the learning  
opportunities that the current situation of Covid -19 offers  that can help firms to increase  visibility 
and control in their supply chains. We have chosen  artificial intelligence  (AI) as a technological 
enabler  to help to address problems  associated  with supply chain resilience , and to offer potential 
avenues to assist  organization s in their journey  towards long term sustainability. The reason for 
choosing AI  is that it encompas ses the features of machine learni ng, big data , and deep learning  
(Gupta et al., 2021; Wamba et al., 2020c; Dwivedi et al., 2019; Roh et al., 2019) . For instance, 
machine learning  helps to automate the contractual agreements with suppliers and thus strengthen 
the procurement strategy  of the organization. Big data help s to improve the decision making 
capabilities of an organization and can therefore  avoid redundancy throughout the supply chain  
(Baryannis et al., 2019; Dubey et al., 2020) . Additionally , AI is capable of developing  agent -based 
system s, genetic algorithm s, and expert systems to facilitate demand planning, order fulfilment, 
network desig n, and inventory planning in conjunction  with supplier systems  (Muniz et al., 2020) . 
Covid -19 has forced many organizations to re -think and  transform their supply chain models 
(Ivanov, 2020a) . Dun & Bradstreet  report how  approximately  75 per cent of busines ses, including  
services, manufacturing, wholesale , and retail , are connected to economies  that have been severely 
impacted by the pandemic, such as  China. Retailers around the world are struggling with  how to 
respond  to business es, consumers , and workers. Therefore, business continuity , and longer -term 
economic sustainability, are both major  challenge s for many organizations at present.  In summary, 
Covid -19 ha s exposed a myriad of  weak er elements in  the supply chain  (Queiroz et al., 2020) . We 
suggest that many of these can be addressed by using  intelligent and logical technologies to 
improve existing  supply chain capabilities.   
The dynamic capabilities (DC) of an organization help to strengthen its supply chain . DC is the 
“ability of an organization to integrate, build and reconfigure in -house and outside competences  
to address the environment  that is regularly changing”  (Teece et al., 1997) . However, the re is a 
paucity of  studies that  apply DC as an approach to solve large scale supply chain disruption , for 
example disruption  caused due to Covid -19 (van Hoek , 2020) . Therefore, in this study , we have 
adopted  the theoretical lens of DC to  bridge the research -practice gap that currently exists in supply