7 
  
3. Critical Factors to Enhance Supply Chain Resilience  
Artificial intelligence can be considered as a fundamental enabler that  strengthens  resilience 
capabilities in the supply chain  (Dwivedi et al., 2019) .  Covid -19 has highlighted the importance 
of supply chain resilience, which  has been clearly evidenced as  companies struggl e to find ways 
to balance demand and supply  (Ivanov, 2021) . This section discusses the critical factors of artificial 
intelligence, supply chain resilience, and dynamic capabilities in terms of their ability to enhance 
supply chain resilience.   
3.1 Artificial Inte lligence  
Many organizations have been trying to adopt digitization of their processes for the last two 
decades , and recently Industry 4.0 has emerged as a business  buzzword  (Wollschlaeger et al., 
2017).  AI has long been recognized  as one of the prominent technolog ies capable of enabl ing 
communication among devices and machines  (Guzman & Lewis, 2020; Dwivedi et al., 2019; 
Schutzer, 1990) . Since the supply chain involve s a series  of complex tasks, AI can simplify 
operations  by solving problems at higher  levels of  speed and accuracy while  simultaneously  
handling large volume s of data (Schniederjans et al., 2020) . AI is not new,  but its potential for vast 
applications , including supply chain management , has only been recognized more recent ly (Huin 
et al., 2003) . AI has the potential to facilitate smart and agile decision making in the supply chain 
to anticipate problems. Hence, a proactive system of AI helps in enhancing the quality of service 
and in delighting custome rs through on -time and undamaged deliveries  (Toorajipour et al., 2021 ; 
Wamba et al., 2020b ). AI facilitate s automated compliance that results in lower costs and  the 
efficient  functioning of a value chain network  (Treleaven & Batrinca, 2017) . AI also has a 
significant impact on enhancing the predicti ve capabilities  required  for demand forecasting in 
today’s  dynamic business environment. AI can be very efficient in the engagement of customers  
as interactions can be personalized by AI -driven bots. These bots c an help in tracking  the delivery  
status  of an item  and are further supported by echo users assisted by a customer support team  
(Huang & Rust, 2020) . AI can help in simplifying tedious tasks  in warehouse operations through 
automation. Companies like Amazon and Alibaba are already using AI -driven robots t o enhance 
the productivity and efficiency of the supply chain  (Ham, 2019) . In the supply chain , every minute