31 
 highlight the role of AI in enhancing organizational performance and supply chain resilience  by 
connecting stakeholders  in real time  (Dubey et al., 2020; Dolgui & Ivanov , 2020). Complementary  
theories such as resource -based view and organizational information processing  can be applied to 
test our propositions  further. Third, by drawing on the five  propositions we have developed a five -
dimensional framework representing the components of AI -enabled supply chain resilience 
capabilities that have gained increasing importance  due to Covid -19. Our study appreciates the 
role of DC in AI facilitated resilience for supply chains in complex situations  of extremely high 
uncertainty (e.g. Covid 19 ). Hence , our study offers interesting avenues for further work examining 
how supply chains  can improve resilie nce by developing  adequate capabilities that can reduce the 
risk and impact of disruption  in uncert ain situations , such as Covid -19. In identifying and 
addressing these key gaps in  practice , we answer  the research question s posed at the outset of our 
study : What AI capabilities should be considered when designing and executing post -Covid -19 
supply chains? How can AI capabilities be leveraged to improve s upply chain resilience?  In 
drawing on our propositions and five -dimensional  framework , businesses can equip and enhance 
their capabilities  to meet the challenges arising  when a pandemic like Covid -19 or other disasters 
strike.  
 
7.2 Implications for practice  
 
The  study offers unique opportunities  for supply chain practitioners to employ AI technologies to 
strengthen the resilience  required to  respond in dynamic situations,  such as Covid -19. These AI -
enabled capabilities can be helpf ul not only to the focal firm but also to supply chain actors as co -
ordination  become s critical in Covid -19 impacted supply chains. However, before deciding to 
employ AI in the supply chain  professionals need to consider  (i) existing sensing capabilities (ii) 
how to capture  the multi -directional information , and  (iii) the degree of re -configuration required 
on the basis of the impact of a Covid -19 like pandemic on their supply chain. Practitioners must  
analyze the logistic al capabilities  required  for ensuring last mile delivery  are consistent with social 
distancing and how AI -driven technologies can enhance effectiveness. Inventories and their 
importance  were discussed in significant detail during our interviews , therefore the appropriate 
level of  inventory for ensuring the continuity  of the supply chain is necessary and AI can help in