28 
 R 7 “  Due to physical distancing due to Covid 19, we are consistently working towards paperless 
techniques for our del ivery force. Physical data is being converted into the digital forms and 
updated through software applications, which leads to improvements in delivery lead time 
significantly ”. The above discussion leads us to the following proposition:  
P4:  In instances where social distancing is required AI facilitate s the digital delivery of  products 
to  customers  at the right time and in the right quantity which improves customer satisfaction.   
Covid -19 has heightened volatility, uncertainty , and unpredictability (Singh et al. 2020a) .  It has  
forced business units to opt for flexible systems or systems that can change their shape and pace 
according to the situation (Singh et al. 2019) and that the system that can handle business shocks 
(Singh et al. 2020b). Dynamic  capabilities , for example  the automation of different supply chain 
processes (procurement, warehouse, delivery, etc.)  can enhance the efficiency of a system and can 
quickly adjust to change. According to R14 “ The automated supply chain management system and 
location based tracking tools can help firms  to reveal desperately needed end to end information 
about the status of goods and suppliers. Pre -Covid , supply lines were designed keeping stable 
production in mind, but now Covid 19 has exposed the vulnerab ilities of complex global supply 
chains .”  Due to th ese requirements  we need a flexible system that can adapt and mould based on 
the changes in the environment. Adaptability of the system can make it shock -free, or shock 
absorbing , and more resilient. The above discussion leads us to the following  proposition:  
P5: During  periods of uncertainty, for example  Covid -19, AI can offer a  higher degree of flexibility 
and automation that allows firms  to quickly adjust to the changing environment  and enables supply 
chains to improve performance by mitigating the risk of disruption.  
Based on the five propositions, we develop  a framework  presented as  Figure 4  that can be further 
explored and tested through an appropriate organizational and grounded theory appro ach.