2 
 1. Introduction  
The Covid -19 virus  has rapidly  spread across the world and most countries have struggled to 
contain it. The impact of the Covid -19 pandemic  continues to ricochet across globe despite the 
efforts made by government s, the public sector , and individual businesses  to halt its detrimental 
effect on health and on the economy  (Craven et al., 2020; Sarkis, 2020) . Covid-19 is costing  the 
lives of individuals , and from a business continuity perspective it is  causing significant disruptions 
to the supply chains of countless different  industries  (Handfield et al., 2020) . Many companies 
have reported significant  supply chain disruption and  openly share their stories of  struggling to  
reconfigure  distribution chains and networks  (Mahajan & Tomar, 2021) . Reports indicate how  
companies failed to develop contingency plan s that could address the  types of  supply chain 
disruption s caused by phenomena such as  Covid -19, and hence  firms  across the globe have  
reported the unpredictable delay s experienced  in receiving materials from a particular location  due 
to inadequate supply chain information  (Paul & Chowdhury, 2020) . Other factors including  
consolidation of suppliers, reducing the cost of production and minimizing the risk ha ve decreased 
available inventories and has  led to  the current state of scarcities  (Dolgui & Ivanov, 2020; Wang -
Mlynek & Foerstl, 2020) .  
It is important to recognize  the challenges in today’s supply chai ns that ha ve led firms to this level 
of crisis. For instance, manufacturing ha s become  extremely  complex in terms of outsourcing 
components from multiple locations to assemble a single produ ct. Consequently there is a 
substantial reliance on logistics, import , and export that in turn poses challenge s in the case of 
disruption  and highlights  the requirement for smart decision making  (Choi, 2020; Wamba et al, 
2020b, Wamba et al., 2020c ). Other challenge s for sourcing organization s include  distribution risk 
and shortages in the network  (Dolgui & Ivanov, 2020) . Distribution is a critical area where staffing 
of warehouses, direct distribution  (de Koster & Warffemius, 2005) , and responsive allocation ha ve 
become important  considerations  in the era of Covid -19 (Butt, 2021) .  
Retail supply chains have also been impacted, where in the demand for essential items  has 
increased,  but demand  is subdued  in other categories like luxury items , and this further challenges 
operating margins and existing business models  (Pantano et al., 2020) . On the consumer side, 
stocking essential supplies and over -the-counter medicines have stressed supply chains  to their 
limits  (Mahajan & Tomar, 2021 ; Muniz et al., 2020 ). This unnatural  and unpredictable  increase  in