4 
 chain management.  To do this we gather and analyze  empirical data from supply chain 
professionals  to present a framework that can help in enhancing supply chain capabilities using 
AI. We have developed  the following two research questions to frame the  study:  
RQ1: What AI capabilities should be considered when designing and executing post -Covid -19 
supply c hains?  
RQ2: How can AI capabilities  be leveraged to improve  supply chain resilience?  
The remaining paper is presented in six sections. Section 2 highlight s the related literature, wh ile 
section 3 discuss AI, supply chain resilience and dynamic capabilities . Section 4 presents the 
research design and section 5 displays the findings. Section 6 presents  research propositions and 
develops a  framework  followed by  conclusion s drawn  in section 7.  
2. Literature Review  
Firms have long recognized the importance of contingency planning, mitigating supply shocks, 
demand volatility , and making the workplace safer than ever to derive efficiency and effectiveness 
in supply chains (Ivanov, 2020b). Prior to  the Covid -19 pandemic, supply chain s were often lauded  
for their ultra-efficiency , sourcing  strategies, and just -in-time capabilities ( van Hoek , 2020). 
Further, evidence shows how  pre-Covid -19, many  consumers were  opting for  in-store purchases 
over online  shopping  as they c ould see, touch,  and compare  items.   Unsurprisingly, o nline 
purchases have soared during  Covid -19 and s upply chain visibility is  therefore arguably more  
important than ever (Butt, 2021; Queiroz et al., 2020) . However  many organizations were not 
prepared  for the practicalities of fulfilling on line orders,  and  planning  processes were ill -equipped 
to respon d to the sudden increase in demand as a consequence of  Covid -19.  For many supply 
chains it therefore rapidly became apparent that  an increased level of  supply chain resilience was 
required  (Ivanov, 2021; Queiroz et al., 2020; van Hoek , 2020) . Developing supply chain resilience 
in response to disruption poses challenges; on the one hand there is large amount of uncertainty  
and on the other a significant amount of data is generated (Wamba et al ., 2020c). Hence,  due to 
uncertainty  and vast data  it becomes very difficult for supply chains to achieve  their desired degree 
of resilience ( Ivanov, 2021) . In consequence , many firms are making short term predictions and  
focusing on  strengthening their supply chain capabilities  (Sundarakani et al., 2020) . To do this