33 
 findings of our study (Chan et al., 2016). Further work may also  compare pre a nd post -Covid 
changes in supply chain resilience. Our study considers  the region -specific orientation of supply 
chain professionals that can be verified with multi -country studies in the future. Forthcoming  
studies may employ an explanatory  approach to tes t the proposed framework. Further research can 
be conducted to test the different supply chain resilience approaches enabled by intelligent 
technologies in different industries and find the commonalities in terms of how AI facilitates the 
supply chain resi lience capability in a certain  group of industries. In summary, our study provides 
many avenues for interesting, topical and contemporary further work.  
8.0 Conclusion  
Our study  adopts the lens of DC to investigate the  potential of  AI to develop supply chain resilience 
during Covid -19. In considering DC, we have demonstrated  how AI can improve  supply chain  
resilience  and support organization al surviv al in a complex and uncertain environment. Moreover 
our study develops  and presents  a framework de monstrating  supply chain resilience capabilities. 
Our study responds to the underdeveloped debates of the current Covid -19 time period;  debates 
focused on how to  utiliz e AI as a dynamic capability of an organization to strengthen supply chain  
resilienc e. AI can be helpful in addressing  pressing supply chain concerns , such as improving  
transparency through continuous monitoring, ensuring last mile delivery of essential  household 
items, maintaining  a dynamic procurement strategy, offering personalized solutions  and mitigating 
the disruption caused due to Covid -19.  In summary, our study presents in -depth investigation and 
findings of employing AI enabled platforms and systems to improve supply chain resilience during 
extreme events such as Covid -19.  
Declaration:  The authors declare  that there is  no conflict of interest.  
 
Barbieri, D.M., Lou, B., Passavanti, M., Hui, C., Lessa, D.A., Maharaj, B.,  Banerjee, A., Wang, F., Chang, K., Naik, 
B.,Yu, L. , Liu, Z., Sikka, G., Tucker, A., Mirhosseini , A.F., Naseri, S., Qiao, Y., Gupta, A., Abbas, M., Fang, K., 
Ghasemi, N., Peprah, P., Goswami, S., Hessami, A., Agarwal, N., Lam, L ., and Adomako,S.  (2020), “A survey 
dataset to evaluate the changes in mobility and transportation due to COVID -19 travel re strictions in 
Australia, Brazil, China, Ghana, India, Iran, Italy, Norway, South Africa, United States ”, Data in Brief . doi: 
10.1016/j.dib.2020.106459 . 
 
Barbieri et al. , 2020: The article is recently published and therefore p age range is not avliable , therefore DOI 
is given .