27 
 the local vendors meetin g the business requirements. For instance, in the pre-Covid 19 era we 
used to have  a daily supply of raw materials to follow just -in-time. However, in Covid -19 it has 
reversed where rather than us, we were expecting our supplier s to have inventory cap acity, so 
whenever we require the raw material, the supplier is able to provide ”. In terms of dynamic 
capabilities, organizations dynamically make shifts in their procurement strategy to reflect  the 
change in demand patterns. According to R 31 “ AI analyses the market demands and thereafter 
align s to supply operations. During Covid -19, the usage of AI further consider s the capabilities of 
the stakeholders and take the clues from local suppliers to offer superior demand management”. 
These highlights lead us to the  following proposition:  
P3:  Under conditions of uncertainty AI can assist  in identifying the most efficient suppliers in 
local geographies , which in turn reduces supply chain risk  due to the sourcing emphasis on 
resilience .  
The Covid -19 pandemic has incr eased the demand for, and engagement in,  online retailing  and has 
accel erated the shift towards a more digital world. Online shopping has increased  significantly  
during the  various  phase s of Covid -19 lockdown. As a result,  firms have been  forced to change 
their delivery operations either by hiring 3rd party “last mile delivery” service s or by establishing 
new  “last mile delivery” operations in their own organizations .  The challenge has not only been 
the last mile delivery , but also ensur ing the safety of employees a nd delivery partners a s front line 
workers . According to R 12 “ We have developed tracker tools to ensure the safety of our employees 
and these tools  regularly provide  data to the plant that  an employee is healthy to work according 
to the sympto m checker ”.  
With the increase in customer expectation of high -speed delivery, organizations have optimized 
the delivery process and delivery route s consistently to remain competitive. A I and leading -edge  
technologies will be critical to the next generation of supply chain  management  due to their ability  
to respond so quickly . Last -mile delivery is considered the most expensive logistics process and 
accounts for nearly 50 per cent of overall shipment delivery cost (McKinsey, 2018). Predicting  the 
feasible delivery routes with the help of AI -enabled technology based on data related to traffic 
mapping, the resources (workforce, vehicles, etc.) required for delivery, and the fluctuation in 
demand of a particular region reduces supply chain risk  (Sundarakani et al., 2020) . Further , the 
digitization of processes improves  transparency and agility in the delivery process. According to