9 
 resource base (Helfat et al., 2007). These capabilities may be internal  or external  and are closely 
related to resilience capabilities in supply chain literature (Kwak et al., 2018). Dynamic 
capabilities are known for scanning, analyzing , and mitigating risks  by enabling resources and 
capabilities to ensure continuity of the business in a dynamic environment. The DC in supply 
chains can be viewed as knowledge processing and employing in strument s to develop, protect , and 
extend the network to create value for customers  (de Moura & Saroli, 2020) . The role of dynamic 
capabilities ha s seen a steady increase in popularity  in supply chains due to the increasing 
complexity  of networks . Dynamic capabilities consider core competencies of a firm to extend the 
short term competitive position to further construct  long term competitive advantage. In an 
emergency like Covid -19 where the wor ld was experiencing significant  uncertaint y, dynamic 
capabilities are particularly  suitable in develop ing supply chain resilience to build the long-term 
sustainability  of an organization.  Whilst there has been a lot of research on AI, its application in a 
SC context has received relative ly limited r esearch attention. Therefore we wish to understand 
how AI has been implemented in practice, and  to highlight what  we can learn from experiences of 
the Covid -19 pandemic in relation to supply chain management.  
4. Research Design  
To investigate  the feasibility of artificial intelligence  to develop  supply chain resilience, our study  
adopted  a qualitative  case study  and used  the theoretical lens of dynamic capabilit ies advocated by 
existing literature ( Gammelgaard, 2017) .  Dynamic capabilities was selected as an appropriate lens 
to examine  supply chain resilience because  AI can be used to improve responsiveness  and agility  
in the supply chain  (Wamba et al., 2020b) . Further, q ualitative research is a powerful tool to 
capture individual perception s as it analyses thoughts and opinion s to identify  trends  and insights  
(Fawcett  et al., 2014; Gligor & Autry, 2012) . The case based research  method  can also help to 
develop and test the theory ( Dubois & Gibbert, 2010; Pagell  & Wu, 2009; Gibbert et al., 2008; 
Eisenhardt , 1989).  Therefore, following a detailed  thematic  analysis, our study develops  five 
propositions leading to a framework representing AI enabled supply chain resilience capabilities.  
A structured research protoco l is followed in our study and is presented in Figure 2. As the practical 
application of AI mechanism to improve supply chain resilience is relatively under -researched, 
our study offers contemporary insights into current practice.