5 
 firms need to regularly assess  their levels of  risk across  multiple parameters  (Dolgui & Ivanov, 
2020) .  
Therefore, the application of intelligent technologies like AI can help  firms to strengthen their  
supply chain resilience  position. This is because t he adoption of AI can act as a critical capability 
to devise better control  mechanisms  and to identify areas of disruption  (Gupta et al., 2020 : Wamba 
et al., 2020b; Dwive di et al., 2019 ). AI based innovations  can assist  in real - time coordination and 
collaboration to  enable supply chains to have improved  visibility  (Wamba et al., 2020c; Remko, 
2020) .  
With the visi bility  capability of AI -based technologies, one can generate insights on how the whole 
chain can be affected  by a particular phenomenon over  a certain period of time  (Bock et al., 2020) . 
As there  continue s to be  sudden surge s in demand  patterns  during the pandemic, it become s 
challenging for supply chains to meet  their existing service level agreements  with actors in the 
chain . The se service levels are determined on the basis of  dynamic capabilities, margins , and the 
location from which a company is operating  (Defee & Fugate, 2010) . Another critical issue is 
network planning and mapping in the supply chain , and this is a  further  area in which  AI can assist  
the supply chain in terms of production, routes , and other linking nodes (Ivanov & Dolgui, 2020). 
AI can further improve th e collaboration  between  contractors and suppliers in shaping the supply 
chain in unprecedented time s. It offers the visibility of routes and accordingly , promises can be 
made to consumers  (Datta, 2017) . AI utilizes  data science principles to handle the volume, 
velocity, variety, veracity, value, variability , and visualization  of data  for critical insights ( Wamba 
et al., 2020 a). Further, AI helps in trac king the performance of warehouses in terms of demand 
and shelf life. Inventory management has become critical in ensuring continuous  supply during 
Covid -19 (Butt, 2021; Queiroz et al., 2020) . AI offer s a robust examination of stock levels and 
align s associated activities accordingly. Supply chains are continuously expanding  their 
geographic reach , particularly into  areas that  they have not served previously  due to the pandemic , 
and therefore the examination of traffic, weather , and the optimal route is also a concern for 
companies. With the help of AI , firms can navigate different markets remotely and can take 
strategic decisions more accurately. The technologies of AI also help top management and 
employee s to be up to date in terms of the skill set ne eded to mitigate emergenc ies and cross -
cultural mana gement in an organization ( Dubey et al., 2018; Dubey  et al., 2016; Dubey &