25 
 Our study adopted a semi -structured interview methodology to collect contemporary empirical 
data. This approach  offered exciting insights and implications for developing dynamic capabilities 
through AI that further assist in strengthening supply chain resilience during periods of 
uncertainty, for example  during  the Covid -19 global pandemic. In drawing on this 
conceptualization, we offer a further contribution by developin g propositions for further research 
based on our study , which are now discussed and presented.  
During the current pandemic, the focus  of organizations  and supply chains has been on ensuring 
that the demand forecast is correct during this period of disruption , demand fluctuation and 
uncertainty . Firms have faced significant  challenges because of a sudden drop in product demand ; 
this unpredictability has impacted on the ability to develop accurate forecasts . According to R 11 
“ In the pre -Covid era the major task use d to be forecast ing the yearly demand, wh ich we use d to 
decide  on at the start of the financial year. But Covid practically hit in March 2020,  especially in 
India, so the demand fell drastically and the previous forecast was useless.  We had to adjust to the 
conditions and do the forecasting process all over again with the help of supply chain partners, 
especially retailers  and accordingly build up inventory.”   Retailers are the  supply chain actors  
who frequently communicate and connec t with customers .  They therefore   play a key role in the 
supply chain by identifying the customer’s preferences and  providing information about  potential 
customer segment ation . Real -time updat ing of such data with the help of AI will speed up  this 
process , and will allow  firms to make changes to their manufacturing and distribution scheduling  
to create transparency throughout the supply chain. According to R 33 “AI technologies help in 
understanding customer demand more precisely and inform the changes in customer requirements 
in uncertain conditions like Covid -19. This can help to cater to large number of customers in short 
span of time. With the help of AI,  the supply chain will get more automated and efficient, which in 
turn would help in the transparenc y of the entire network”. These insights lead us to the following 
proposition:  
P1: Under  extremely  uncertain conditions, for example  Covid -19, it is crucial for  supply chain 
actors to  have access to actual demand  data originating from the retailer and in such situations  
AI can play a critical role  in align ing demand and supply to avoid the impact of disruption.  
Covid -19 has forced firms to reconfigure their supply chain stru ctures due to sudden change s in 
the demand for consumer products i.e. healthcare products, personal protective equipment, toilet