26 
 paper, food items etc. (Flynn,  2021).  During the pandemic it  became quite a challenge to maintain 
the right amount of inventory stock (of raw material and finished good s) to fulfil unpredictable  
customer demand. According to R 33 “ Apart from fetching the right forecast, there is a focus on 
demand and purchas ing pattern s, since inventory buildup  and capacity build up could cost 
extensively and firms fear what they will do wi th extra capacity post -Covid  19. Hence, AI can be 
helpful in predicting and maintaining the system and protect ing it from disruption”. The impact 
of disruption can be avoided to a large extent if a mechanism to reach out to customer s in real time 
is availa ble.  Firms are embracing diverse ways to reach out to their existing customers , as well as 
potential customers, to enhance the interaction frequency as well as improve the service level. 
Interaction with customers will result in acquiring demand sets, gaining insights into preference 
changes, and will lead to providing personalized s olutions. In the words of R 26 “ AI-based supply 
chains will facilitate better customer -centric solutions as AI will be studying the personal behavior 
of the client as well as incorporat ing their needs and requirements from their lifestyle and 
provid ing a better solution that is much more personalized.” Therefore, to develop dynamic 
capabilities  the personalized solution approach with identification of key supply chain processes 
and reconfiguration of resources are necessary for firms to quickly adjust the s ystem to instill 
resilience (Chowdhury and Quaddus, 2017). The above discussion leads us to the following 
proposition:  
P2:  During periods of prolonged supply chain disruption, technology such as AI can be used by 
firms to  increase their information proces sing capabilities to improve resilience in the supply 
chain  by synchroniz ing manufacturing and inventory plan ning.  
Supply chain contracts play a vital role in conducting  business  operations  and procuring materials , 
particularly  in highly uncertain and vol atile  environment s because  they reduce the risk of loss for 
any one party. Due to Covid -19, supplier contracts,  and trade contracts have been impacted 
significantly  due to lockdown and travel restrictions. The situation is further exacerbated  as supply 
chain contracts can become a complex legal issue in  highly uncertain periods, for example during  
Covid -19. Identification of the right supplier and maintaining the relationship results in more 
profitable and stable supply chains. Therefore, it is recommen ded by experts to develop and invest 
in local suppliers to achieve more resilience in the supply chain, as R 28 notes  “Procurement is 
more deeply done by connecting to vendors locally by detecting the demand and AI helps in finding