32 
 offering accuracy and transparency to enhance the overall efficiency at firm, supplier, distributor 
and retailer nodes . Apart from additional  safety and  the pressur e to reduc e costs, supply chain  
professionals may  also consider the application of AI for identifying and analyzing trends  to 
realign the supply chain capabilities that emerged due to Covid -19. As compared to a traditional 
setting, an AI -enabled environmen t offers the scope for enhancing the capabilities of the 
stakeholders upstream as well as downstream to avoid the bullwhip effect ; such capabilities are 
crucial  in a situation like Covid -19. In this way the adoption of AI will not only enhance the 
company readiness and resilienc e to cope with uncertainty  but will also facilitate the customer 
experience that in turn drives business growth even during  situations such as  Covid -19. Supply 
chain professionals can consider the elements highlighted in the proposed  framework and link 
them to their AI adoption approach and continuously assess  against this framework  to gauge the 
benefits in terms of supply chain resilience capabilities during and post -Covid 19 era.  
 
7.3 Limitations and scope for future research  
 
The c oncept of dynamic capabilities is based on two classic systems i.e. strategic management and 
marketing , in the form of resource -based and market positioning. Dynamic capabilities specifically 
develop on the basis of choices that organizations make for thei r internal activities and are 
consider ed based on  external factors such as markets and number of competitors. To develop the 
AI-based infrastructure one needs to check the compatibility of existing infrastructure and scope 
for supply chain resilience capab ility.  Whilst our study offers clear theoretical and managerial 
contributions, it is not without limitations.  For example, our study utilizes a relatively small 
number  of respondents  and hence only their views are captured.  Further work may consider a 
larger sample across a broader range of industries and geographical reach.   From the findings, it is 
evident how AI can influence the different aspects of supply chain resilience  and there is potential 
for future studies to examine and investigate the social media driven AI capabilities that can direct 
the supply chains to align with customer requirements  (Wamba et al., 2019) . Future studies may 
explore the role of AI from the perspective of organizational information processing theory and 
resource -based view to develop the required degree of resilience in uncertain times such as Covid -
19. Addit ionally, future  research  can adopt a mix ed-method s approach to further validate the