8 
 and every mile matter and AI use s algorithm s that  can help in reducing time and costs by 
optimizing routes and deliveries  (Wen et al., 2018) . 
3.2 Supply Chain Resilience  
Supply chain resilience is the capability of a supply chain to cope with unforeseen, disrupting 
events and to recover quickly to its original level of performance, or  to a new level  required  to 
maintain the expected operating, financial , and market performance  (Adobor, 2020; Ponomarov 
& Holcomb, 2009) . To build a resilient supply chain, firms need to identify and assess the nodes 
for risks, their severity, and the likelihood of occurrence , and how these risk s can be detected  
(Dubey et al., 2017; Chang et al., 2015) . Companies do adopt multiple strategies to keep their 
supply chain s resilient. In the initial period of Covid -19, inventory and capacity buffers were 
identified as a source of resilience by  some  supply chains, where as others have used underutilized 
production capacity for medicines and other related products  (Queiroz et a l., 2020; Wong et al., 
2020) . Some  supply chains have  also benefitted from  resilience due to multi -sourcing strategies as 
compared to a single source of supply  (de Sá et al., 2019) . Covid -19 has also highlighted  the 
importance of near -shoring to reduce the  geographical reliance on global networks  (Kano & Oh, 
2020) . In this way , local supply chains facilitate more control over inventory and transfer the 
product to the customer more quickly  (Sundarakani et al., 2020) . The more local the network, the 
more  opportunities exist for the technology used in production to be harmonized more effectively  
to facilitate a seamless flow of products across the network  (Singh et al., 2020) . Hence, 
standardization of components for different products , especially those that are not critical and 
visible to the customer , simplify sourcing  and thus enhance the degree of resilience. A side from 
the core components, the supply chain ecosystem partnership s with contract manufactures and 
third -party logistics play a critical role in its resilience.  
3.3 Dynamic Capabilit ies 
Firm resources are a base for developing the capabilities of a firm, whereas capabilities are the 
direct source of competitive edge (Grant, 1991).  This lead s to the development of dynamic 
capabilities that define the ability of a firm to quickly adapt to changing business situations. This 
adaptation happen s by aligning internal and external resources  (Teece et al., 1997).  Hence, 
dynamic capabilities refer to the capacity of a firm to intent ional ly create, extend , or transform its