30 
 technologies in the design and development of  responsive  supply chains , thus  enhanc ing their 
capabilities to ensure business continuity (Russell & Swanson, 2019; Pettit et al., 2013). Hence, 
we conceptualized DC as an appropriate lens to observe  and critique  the implications for theory 
and practice for supply chain management that are emerg ing during Covid -19. 
7.1 Implications for theory  
In this study, we offer a three -fold contribution to existing literature. First, by drawing on the 
insights of  experts in supply chain management with experience of working during the Covid -19 
pandemic, we  have discovered the practical issues faced during uncertain and extremely difficult 
conditions.  Through our discussions with experts we have seen how  firms and  supply chains have 
boosted their resilience by adopting intelligent technologies. We have witnessed a gap between 
the theory and practice of logistics in the Covid 19  context . For instance, most of the supply chain 
managers  we interviewed  were in favour o f holding  inventory not only in their own firms  but also 
with their suppliers , which is in contrast to academic  emphasis on Just in Time (van Hoek , 2020) .  
Second, based on the open, axial, and selective cod ing of the qualitative data , we have developed 
and presented five propositions developed from  the views of supply chain professionals and their 
experience during Covid -19.  These proposition s provide a  state-of-the-art foundation for further 
research . As per our  propositions, the transparency of a supply chain can build resilience when 
supply chain actors  are capable of tracking their shipments , have the  correct invoicing to drive the 
operations and  utilize  AI to forecast demand  (Ivanov, 2021; Queiroz et al., 2020) . Further, AI can 
be viewed as a  tool in understanding market and consumer requirements , which  can assist  in 
designing and offering personalized solutions. As procurement and strategic sourcing are often 
perceived as the  back -bone of a supply chain,  AI can support  in effective contract management, 
thus developing  understand ing and reduc ing the impact of supplier risk management  (van Hoek , 
2020; Sundarakani et al., 2020) . During Covid -19,  one of the most difficult task s for e-commerce 
has been  the last mile delivery, where problems such as workforce  shortages and the requirement 
to adopt digital and paperless delivery  have proven challenging.  AI can be used to  address and 
optimize the workforce to ensure last mile delivery  by developing  AI driven innovation and 
technologies to improve flexibility, automation and strategic planning , thus strengthening  the 
capability of organizations to reduce the impact of risk ( Dolgui & Ivanov, 2020; Wamba et al., 
2020b).  Our study supports  the findings of existing studies  that have utilized DC theory,  which