Electronics 2023 ,12, 2379 4 of 21
RQ1: To what extent is classical computing combined with quantum computing?
RQ2: Does quantum machine learning provides speed increases compared to classical
machine learning?
RQ3: Does combining classical and quantum approaches lead to increased accuracy, or are
there cases where classical machine learning performs better?
RQ4: What are the advantages and limitations of quantum machine learning?
By providing answers to these questions, we aim to provide a better understanding
of the current state of the QML ﬁeld and the potential beneﬁts and limitations of using
quantum approaches in machine learning.
1.2. Literature Analysis
This paper presents a systematic literature review that explores the current state of
Quantum Machine Learning (QML) from historical, theoretical, and technical perspec-
tives. To ensure a thorough analysis, speciﬁc criteria were applied based on relevant
keywords found in the titles of publications. The research methodology employed for this
review was conducted in March 2023, and it included an initial search on Scopus with the
following query: TITLE-ABS-KEY (quantum AND machine AND learning) OR TITLE-ABS-
KEY (quantum AND svm) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (quantum AND classiﬁers) (6171 papers).
We limited the results to journal articles, conference papers, and book chapters only in
English (5079).
Scopus includes the most important digital libraries (Elsevier, Springer, IEEE), provides
a reﬁned search, and facilitates the export of ﬁles, focusing on the years 2000–2023.
We conducted more detailed searches on Scopus speciﬁc to our paper, such as QSVM
and SVM classiﬁers, evaluated them, and gathered any relevant works referenced in our
paper. This process yielded around 84 papers that are included in this systematic review.
Quantum computing is a rapidly advancing ﬁeld of research. Scientists are exploring
ways to solve complex problems quickly, efﬁciently, and accurately using quantum systems.
Many different quantum algorithms have been developed to address a wide range of
computational challenges. Some key milestones in the history of quantum computing
include Feynman’s observation in the early 1980s that classical computers cannot simulate
quantum phenomena [ 43], Deutsch’s demonstration in 1985 of the universality of quan-
tum computing [ 44], Shor’s 1994 development of an algorithm for prime factorization
that is exponentially faster than classical algorithms [ 28], and Grover’s 1996 algorithm
for quantum cryptography [ 45]. One of the major challenges of quantum computing is
achieving faster computation speeds, and signiﬁcant research efforts have been dedicated
to this goal. In 2019, Google announced Quantum Supremacy, a signiﬁcant milestone that
demonstrated the superior computational power of quantum systems compared to classical
computers [46].
The number of publications on quantum computing has increased signiﬁcantly since
2011, as illustrated in Figure 1, depicting the articles published in the Scopus database
until early 2022. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst decade, from 2000 to 2010 exhibited a comparatively
lower number of publications. However, from 2011 onwards, the interest of researchers
has noticeably increased, reaching its peak in 2022, which recorded the highest number of
publications to date. However, there has been a slight decrease in publications in 2016.
Below are the ﬁrst ten countries that have published articles on QML, with the United
States and China singling out almost 50% (Figure 2), and ﬁnally, all countries that published
articles from 2000 to 2023 (Figure 3).