Electronics 2023 ,12, 2379 12 of 21
curve are True Positive Rate (TPR) or recall and False Positive Rate (FPR) or fall-out where
their mathematical formulas are:
TPR =TP
TP+FN(1)
FPR =FP
FP+TN(2)
In Equation (1), the term TP stands for True Positive and indicates that a model
correctly estimates the positive class. The term FN stands for False Negative and indicates
that a model incorrectly estimates the negative class. In Equation (2), the term FP stands for
False Positive and indicates that a model incorrectly estimated the positive class. The term
TN stands for True Negative and indicates that a model correctly estimated the negative
class. Based on these two formulas, the ROC_AUC curve is calculated. F1-score is also a
performance metric that shows the balance of a model to distinguish the positive classes
from the negatives. Its mathematical formula is:
F1-score =2TP
2TP +FP+FN(3)
In Equation (3), its terms are the same as TPR and FPR, and the results are the harmonic
mean of precision and sensitivity. Similarly to the previous metrics, accuracy is also a
performance metric calculated based on the previously mentioned terms. Its mathematical
formula is:
Accuracy =TP+TN
TP+TN+FP+FN(4)
Equation (4) is a fraction between the number of correct predictions and the total
number of predictions. With these metrics, the overall performance of a classiﬁcation
model is covered, even if it is quantum or classical, since only the model predictions
are considered.
6.1. Datasets Acquisition
In this study, we utilized three datasets from the UCI Machine Learning Reposi-
tory. The ﬁrst dataset is the Breast Cancer Wisconsin (Diagnosis) dataset, which contains
699 observations with ten features used to predict the diagnosis value of a breast cancer
cell nucleus as either benign (represented by the default diagnosis value of 0) or malignant
(represented by a diagnosis value of 1). This dataset is available from scikit learn [82].
The second dataset is the UCI ML Ionosphere dataset, collected by a system in Goose
Bay, Labrador, and consists of a phased array of 16 high-frequency antennas with total
transmitted power on the order of 6.4 kilowatts. This dataset contains 351 observations and
34 features that are used to predict whether radar returns show evidence of some type of
structure in the ionosphere (represented as “good” returns) or not (represented as “bad”
returns) [83].
The third dataset contains 4601 observations and 57 features related to the concept
of spam, such as advertisements for products/websites, make-money-fast schemes, chain
letters, etc. The dataset includes spam and non-spam emails from ﬁeldwork and personal
emails [ 84]. All three datasets are suitable for quantum machine learning algorithms and
were used for supervised binary classiﬁcation problems.
6.2. Experimental Results and Discussion
To provide a more technical review, we conducted an experimental study to compare
the performance of QSVM and classical SVM on three datasets, two of which were used for
the ﬁrst time in this study. The experiments were conducted in several phases, including
data preprocessing, quantum and classical model training, and prediction using a 10-fold
cross-validation approach. Cross-validation is the sampling by no overlap test sets, while