Electronics 2023 ,12, 2379 2 of 21
signiﬁcant concerns have been deﬁned for the security and robustness of machine learning
models in critical applications [8–10].
Quantum computers excel at solving complex algebraic expressions, such as the
factorization of large integers and the computation of discrete logarithms, leveraging their
computational power [ 11]. These impressive capabilities stem from the unique axioms
and characteristics of quantum mechanics, such as quantum bits (qubits), interpolation,
superposition, and entanglement. Quantum computers process information using qubits,
enabling breakthroughs in various scientiﬁc domains [ 12,13], including cryptography, big
data analysis, machine learning, optimization, the Internet of Things (IoT), and Blockchain.
The simultaneous storage of several qubit states forms the basis of quantum paral-
lelism. The entanglement and interference of quantum states combined with the above
accelerate quantum computation. Quantum computation has evolved rapidly since Feyn-
man ﬁrst claimed it as an effective means of simulating complex quantum systems [ 14,15].
The ﬁrst QML application was presented in 2014, where the quantum version of the SVM
algorithm, QSVM, sorted large amounts of data [ 4]. Another learning algorithm based on
superposition and quantum operator developed was the Superposition-based Architecture
Learning algorithm (SAL) [ 16]. Search algorithms such as QKNN (Quantum K-Nearest
Neighbors) [17] and decision tree classiﬁcation [18] have also been proposed.
In addition to the distinction between classical machine learning (ML) and quantum
machine learning (QML), researchers have also explored the hybrid approach, which
combines both quantum and classical algorithms to achieve optimal performance. Extensive
research has been conducted in this exciting area, yielding promising results. A notable
study has been conducted in this area, where a classiﬁer was presented for encoding data
in N-dimensions with the help of the training algorithm [ 19]. In another study, the authors
introduced the Hybrid Quantum Feature Selection Algorithm (HQFSA), which is based on
subroutines for the selection of features [ 20]. Another approach is adiabatic QML, which is
suitable for certain classes of optimization problems [21–23].
Quantum technologies also include quantum cryptography, with the most famous
being Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) (BB84 protocol) [ 24,25]. With the appearance of
quantum computers, researchers started to focus on post-quantum cryptography (PQC),
which is the pre-design and development of quantum encryption algorithms [ 26,27]. With
the Shors algorithm [ 28] and a powerful quantum computer, every known encryption
algorithm like RSA or ECC could be exposed since they were designed based on known
mathematical problems like elliptic-curve discrete logarithm problems or integer factoriza-
tion. The algorithms implemented in quantum machine learning are not entirely quantum
but correspond to classical methods adapted by differentiations.
The purpose of this paper is two-fold. Firstly, it offers an overview of Quantum
Machine Learning and its connection to classical Machine Learning. Secondly, it presents a
series of experiments conducted on three datasets, including one tested for the ﬁrst time, to
compare the classical and quantum versions of the SVM ML model. The experimental part
is conducted to highlight QML and CML connections from a more technical perspective
and verify their differences and limitations through experimental results.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: The introduction section estab-
lishes the research scope, performs a literature analysis, and outlines the main contribu-
tions of this study. Section 2 describes the basic concepts of Quantum Machine Learning.
Section 3 presents quantum algorithms and their applications, focusing on the Support
Vector Machine and Quantum Support Vector Machine. Section 4 introduces quantum
learning methods, and Section 5 provides a critical analysis of their advantages and limita-
tions. Section 6 presents the conducted experiments, describes the applied methods, and
evaluates the results. Finally, Section 7 concludes the study with potential conclusions and
future directions.