Electronics 2023 ,12, 2379 18 of 21
In conclusion, quantum models exhibit promising potential for achieving superior per-
formance compared to classical models, but there are numerous challenges and limitations
that need to be addressed and resolved.
7. Conclusions and Future Works
Quantum computing is still in its early stages, and building a functional and efﬁ-
cient computer with enough qubits takes years. While quantum machine learning (QML)
methodologies produce spectacular results, the quantum material currently available is not
sufﬁcient. Researchers need access to quantum computers with more physical resources to
expand the scope and power of QML. As quantum hardware and computing continue to
evolve, QML is likely to become a leading approach in applications such as unsupervised
learning and generative models, which outperform classical versions.
Many classical machine learning (ML) methods and techniques can be transformed
into QML schemes to increase the domain’s capabilities, such as expert systems. In this
paper, we experimentally compared three datasets using classical and quantum machine
learning methods. We used three datasets (Breast Cancer, Ionosphere, and Spam Base) and
implemented SVM and QSVM algorithms to predict accuracy. The Spam Base dataset was
used for the ﬁrst time and was the most challenging of the experiments, where QSVM
outperformed classical SVM. It is important to note that even though the quantum execution
environment was simulated by a classical computer, QSVM achieved higher scores in Spam
Base dataset, where each fold contained 1527 training samples and 712 testing samples.
Another important observation is that the higher the complexity of the dataset, the
wider the performance gap between quantum and classical models. This is because quan-
tum machine learning operations can generalize much better without losing performance,
in contrast to classical models, where complex datasets and simple models often overﬁt. In
the future, there are some open issues that need to be addressed. For instance, the quantum
simulator was executed on a local classical machine without high computing power, while
execution on a real quantum computer could provide more realistic outcomes. The QML
domain should also target designing new quantum learning models that will observe pat-
terns under quantum mechanics schemes, not classical statistical theory. This will provide
an opportunity to explore new model architectures that might overcome classical machine
learning limitations.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, K.A.T., T.K. and G.A.P .; methodology, K.A.T. and T.K.;
software, K.A.T. and T.K.; validation, K.A.T. and T.K.; formal analysis, K.A.T. and T.K.; investigation,
K.A.T. and T.K.; resources, K.A.T.; data curation, K.A.T.; writing—original draft preparation, K.A.T.
and T.K.; writing—review and editing, G.A.P .; visualization, K.A.T. and T.K.; supervision, G.A.P .;
project administration, G.A.P .; funding acquisition, G.A.P . All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: This work was supported by the MPhil program “Advanced Technologies in
Informatics and Computers”, hosted by the Department of Computer Science, International Hellenic
University, Kavala, Greece.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Hu, W. Comparison of Two Quantum Nearest Neighbor Classiﬁers on IBM’s Quantum Simulator. Nat. Sci. 2018 ,10, 87–98.
[CrossRef]
2. Biamonte, J.; Wittek, P .; Pancotti, N.; Rebentrost, P .; Wiebe, N.; Lloyd, S. Quantum Machine Learning. Nature 2017 ,549, 195–202.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Samuel, A.L. Some Studies in Machine Learning Using the Game of Checkers. IBM J. Res. Dev. 1959 ,3, 210–229. [CrossRef]
4. Rebentrost, P .; Mohseni, M.; Lloyd, S. Quantum Support Vector Machine for Big Data Classiﬁcation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014 ,
113, 130503. [CrossRef] [PubMed]