Electronics 2023 ,12, 2379 3 of 21
1.1. Motivation and Contribution
Quantum machine learning has become an increasingly popular research topic in
the computer science ﬁeld. While the roots of this ﬁeld date back to earlier days, recent
research has focused on various techniques and methods of quantum machine learning,
including supervised and unsupervised algorithms. These studies aim to combine and
compare classical and quantum machine learning algorithms through experiments on
different datasets with complex features.
One notable theoretical study by Ciliberto et al. [ 29] examines the computational costs
and the need for data transformation in quantum machine learning. Other research has
investigated quantum algorithms, such as Quantum SVM, which offers quantum speed-up
in machine learning applications [ 30]. Schuld et al. [ 31] explain quantum machine learning
algorithms for handling big data, while Havenstein et al. [ 32] compare the performance of
machine learning algorithms executed on traditional and quantum computers. The latter
concludes that quantum multi-class SVM classiﬁers offer advantages for future quantum
computers with large numbers of qubits.
In data classiﬁcation, Support Vector Machines (SVM) and Quantum SVM [ 2] are
the most common methods used in classical and quantum machine learning, respectively.
Many classical and quantum SVM algorithms have been developed to solve classiﬁcation
problems, as shown in various benchmark studies. For instance, [ 33] implements a quantum
support vector machine (QSVM) algorithm with the MNIST dataset of handwritten digits
and compares classical and quantum SVM algorithms in terms of execution time and
accuracy. Saini et al. [ 34] implement a QSVM-based classiﬁcation model on a breast
cancer dataset and compare QSVM accuracy to SVM. Havlicek et al. [ 35] experiment with
quantum algorithms on noisy quantum computers, while Tang [ 36] designs a QML-based
recommendation algorithm that can achieve exponential improvement.
Other researchers propose new algorithms and methods to improve the accuracy and
efﬁciency of classical and quantum machine learning. For example, Shan et al. [ 37] designed
a QSVM algorithm and proposed a quantum kernel estimation method with measurement
error mitigation using the breast cancer dataset. Kumar et al. [ 38] implement classiﬁcation
models using QSVM and classical SVM on quantum and classical computational backends
on three constructed datasets. In [ 39], the authors examine the execution speed and accuracy
of quantum support vector machines compared to classical SVM by proper quantum feature
mapping selection using IBMQ quantum computer. Batra et al. [ 40] experiment with a
large dataset, such as the drug dataset, which is hard for classical computations, to compare
quantum and classical computations using the SVM algorithm. Finally, Suzuki et al. [ 41]
propose a method to analyze the feature map for the kernel-based quantum classiﬁer with
two qubits using the SVM algorithm, while Bay et al. [ 42] propose a quadratic kernel-free
least squares support vector machine (QLSSVM) to solve binary classiﬁcation problems
using the heart disease dataset.
The aforementioned works have produced interesting results. Some of these studies
focus on the comparison between classical and quantum machine learning algorithms
only theoretically, while others include experiments implementing classical and quantum
classiﬁers such as SVM and QSVM to solve binary classiﬁcation problems. However, all
researchers evaluate and focus on the computational cost and accuracy, and they conclude
that machine learning can harness the advantages offered by a quantum algorithm.
Motivated by the growing interest in quantum machine learning and its potential to
revolutionize the ﬁeld of machine learning, this paper aims to provide an overview of the
current state of QML from a historical, theoretical, and technical perspective. Speciﬁcally,
we focus on the implementation and comparison of classical machine learning algorithms,
particularly Support Vector Machines, with their quantum counterparts, known as Quan-
tum Support Vector Machines (QSVM). By comparing classical and quantum machine
learning models, we aim to evaluate the current state of the QML ﬁeld while highlighting
the corresponding challenges and limitations.
To achieve this goal, we address several critical research questions, including: