Electronics 2023 ,12, 2379 6 of 21
Figures 2 and 3 demonstrate that the United States and China are at the forefront of
QML contributions. This ﬁnding is justiﬁed by prominent quantum hardware providers in
these countries.
Quantum machine learning has a long and fascinating history that runs almost parallel
to classical machine learning. QML began to take shape before the advent of quantum
computers in 1900, and since then, it has been growing steadily, with several landmark
contributions that led to the development of quantum computing.
In 1981, physicist Richard Feynman gave a lecture on the possible beneﬁts of computa-
tion with quantum systems and the simulation of the physical properties of matter [ 15,43].
Four years later, physicist David Deutsch published the idea of a universal quantum com-
puter. In 1994, mathematician Peter Shor developed an algorithm for ﬁnding the prime
factors of large numbers, which demonstrated the immense potential of quantum comput-
ers [ 11,28]. In 1996, mathematician Lov Grover introduced an algorithm that optimizes
search in an unstructured database [ 45]. In 1998 [ 46], Jones, Mosca, and Hansen of Oxford
University executed Grover’s algorithm on a 2-qubit quantum computer.
In 2001, IBM partnered with Stanford University to publish and implement the Shor
algorithm on a 7-qubit processor [ 47]. In 2012, physicist John Preskill described the moment
when controlled quantum systems perform tasks that transcend classical ones [ 48]. In 2019,
Google announced the achievement of quantum supremacy, a milestone in which a quan-
tum computer can perform a task that is beyond the capability of classical computers [ 49].
Today, QML has evolved into a new concept known as quantum brain-inspired ma-
chine learning, which aims to develop artiﬁcial algorithms that use interactions and dy-
namics of a quantum system as a direct resource of learning, mimicking the computation
of the brain (Figure 4).
Figure 4. Timeline progression of QML milestones. Diagram highlighting major advancements in
quantum machine learning.