Electronics 2023 ,12, 2379 8 of 21
employs circuits with qubits (based on neurons) and rotational gates (proportional to
weights). On the other hand, Classical deep learning (CDL) uses complex multi-level neu-
ral networks, and a deep learning algorithm constructs multiple levels of abstraction from
large datasets. Boltzmann machines (BM) are a well-known class of deep-learning networks
where the nodes of graphs and connections are established by the Gibbs distribution [ 65]
(Figure 6). The method aims to minimize the maximum distribution probability using the
gradient descent method, which ensures consistency between the model and the training
data [66].
Figure 6. Boltzmann Neural Network. A deep learning neural network with three hidden layers.
Each layer is speciﬁed as a vector of binary components, and the edges between the vectors are
deﬁned as a matrix of weight values. The conﬁguration space of the graph is given by a Gibbs
distribution with an Ising-spin Hamiltonian [65].
Recently, Wiebe et al. [ 67] have developed two quantum algorithms, namely BM and
QDL, which efﬁciently calculate the distribution of data. In BM, the state is initially approx-
imated using the classical mean-ﬁeld method before being fed into the quantum computer
and applying sampling to calculate the required gradient. On the other hand, the second
algorithm performs a similar process but requires access to the superposition training data
(via QRAM) and provides more accurate solutions but not acceleration. This procedure
is equivalent to an attribute map that assigns data to vectors in Hilbert space [68,69] . The
inner products of such quantum states encode data and create kernels [35].
Fuzzy cognitive maps (FCMs) have been introduced as a quantum-inspired machine
learning model belonging to the category of expert systems. Quantum Fuzzy Cognitive
Maps (QFCM) were initially introduced in 2009, presenting a quantum-based approach
to cognitive maps [ 2,70]. In this framework, each concept is represented by a single qubit,
and the concept value is computed through qubit superposition. In 2015, the QFCM model
was further developed as an ensemble classiﬁer [ 71], which outperformed other models
such as AdaBoost and Neural Networks, demonstrating increased robustness against
noise. Additionally, in the same year, a variant of FCM called bipolar quantum FCMs was
proposed [ 72]. In 2018, the authors of bipolar quantum FCM explored the application of
the quantum cryptography problem [ 73], where bipolar quantum FCMs performed well in
comparison with other methods. Although QFCMs may not strictly fall within the domain
of QML, most implementations are inspired by quantum principles, even though explicit
proposals for execution on quantum computers are not prevalent.
A well-deﬁned example of QML is the QSVM algorithm, which utilizes a quantum
processor to estimate the kernel directly in the quantum space. This method involves a
training phase where the kernel is computed, and support vectors are determined. Subse-
quently, the unlabeled data is classiﬁed based on the solution obtained during the training
phase [ 74]. The algorithm is capable of performing binary or multi-class classiﬁcation based
on the data classes and can even be utilized for data clustering and exploration.
Machine learning classiﬁcations are versatile tools with applications in diverse ﬁelds,
such as computer vision, medical imaging, drug discovery, handwriting recognition, geo-