Citation: Tychola, K.A.; Kalampokas,
T.; Papakostas, G.A. Quantum
Machine Learning—An Overview.
Electronics 2023 ,12, 2379. https://
doi.org/10.3390/electronics12112379
Academic Editors: Shi-Lei Su,
He-Liang Huang, Chu Guo and
Zu-En Su
Received: 27 March 2023
Revised: 19 May 2023
Accepted: 23 May 2023
Published: 24 May 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
electronics
Review
Quantum Machine Learning—An Overview
Kyriaki A. Tychola
 , Theofanis Kalampokas and George A. Papakostas *
MLV Research Group, Department of Computer Science, International Hellenic University, 65404 Kavala, Greece;
kytzcho@cs.ihu.gr (K.A.T.); theokala@cs.ihu.gr (T.K.)
*Correspondence: gpapak@cs.ihu.gr; Tel.: +30-2510462321
Abstract: Quantum computing has been proven to excel in factorization issues and unordered search
problems due to its capability of quantum parallelism. This unique feature allows exponential speed-
up in solving certain problems. However, this advantage does not apply universally, and challenges
arise when combining classical and quantum computing to achieve acceleration in computation
speed. This paper aims to address these challenges by exploring the current state of quantum machine
learning and benchmarking the performance of quantum and classical algorithms in terms of accuracy.
Speciﬁcally, we conducted experiments with three datasets for binary classiﬁcation, implementing
Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Quantum SVM (QSVM) algorithms. Our ﬁndings suggest that
the QSVM algorithm outperforms classical SVM on complex datasets, and the performance gap
between quantum and classical models increases with dataset complexity, as simple models tend to
overﬁt with complex datasets. While there is still a long way to go in terms of developing quantum
hardware with sufﬁcient resources, quantum machine learning holds great potential in areas such as
unsupervised learning and generative models. Moving forward, more efforts are needed to explore
new quantum learning models that can leverage the power of quantum mechanics to overcome the
limitations of classical machine learning.
Keywords: quantum machine learning; quantum classiﬁer; quantum computer; quantum support
vector machine
1. Introduction
The term “quantum” in physics refers to the smallest discrete unit of a ”physical
quantity”. Quantum particles are dualistic (wave-particle) and fall under quantum theory,
which deals with ﬁnding the probability of a quantum particle at a given point in space [ 1].
In recent decades, Quantum Machine Learning (QML) has been developing and evolving
in computer science, as it is linked to Machine Learning (ML), where data is processed and
analyzed using various decision-making models. With data volume increasing by around
20% per year, it is necessary to manage it properly [2].
The idea of optimizing a limited multivariable function without programming was
proposed by A. Samuel in 1959 [ 3]. Since then, this concept has been the basis of machine
learning, where algorithms are implemented to match the input and output points in
order to create decision functions. In QML, the most common supervised algorithm is the
Quantum Support Vector Machine (QSVM) [ 4], which uses the vector space optimization
limit of the higher dimension to classify labeled data categories. QSVM creates patterns of
unlabeled data and reduces them for easier analysis [5].
Machine learning techniques create patterns in data, while quantum systems produce
informal patterns and investigate how to create and implement quantum software for
faster machine learning [ 2]. In the 20th century, computers were built to analyze mathe-
matical models using several techniques and methods. Artiﬁcial neural networks were
implemented in the 1950s [ 6], and from 1960 to 1990, deep learning was proposed (Hop-
ﬁeld networks, Boltzmann machines) using the backpropagation method [ 7]. Recently,
Electronics 2023 ,12, 2379. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics12112379 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/electronics