Electronics 2023 ,12, 2379 7 of 21
2. Quantum Machine Learning—The Basic Concept
Quantum Machine Learning, classical Machine Learning, and Quantum Computing
are interconnected, with the shared goal of developing more accurate and reliable models.
Learning algorithms are designed to identify patterns in data for making predictions and
decisions. The power of quantum computing lies in its qubits, which cannot be copied
and have no ramiﬁcations or feedback loops [ 50]. Quantum computation is represented by
quantum registers, gates, and circuits that consist of qubits and denote the chronological
order and mode of action of the gates and registers [ 51]. A quantum register comprises
a set of unordered qubits that simultaneously store all their states, with the elements
numbered clockwise [ 52]. The SWAP gate is central to designing networks for the quantum
computation of qubits, which carries out multiple qubit gates to create a base. The multi-
qubit and CNOT gates are typical features of quantum computation [ 53], with the SWAP
gate being crucial in the network design of Shor’s algorithm [ 54,55]. Recently, it has been
suggested that generalizing quantum computation to higher-dimensional systems may
offer advantages [ 56]. At the heart of Machine Learning is the extraction of information
from data distributions without being explicitly programmed. Therefore, harnessing
quantum phenomena is necessary [ 2], which is accomplished by developing quantum
algorithms that implement classical algorithms using a quantum computer. In this way,
data can be classiﬁed and analyzed by supervised and unsupervised learning methods
using Quantum Neural Networks (QNNs) [ 57,58]. Variational Quantum Circuit (VQC)
is a quantum gate circuit with free parameters that approximate, optimize, and classify
various arithmetic tasks. The VQC-based algorithm is known as the Variational Quantum
Algorithm (VQA), a classical quantum hybrid algorithm where parameter optimization
typically occurs on classical computers [ 59]. The VQA approaches the target function using
learning parameters with quantum characteristics, such as reversible linear gate operations
and multi-layer structures that use layers of engagement. VQC has been used to replace
existing Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [ 60,61], with QNNs being deﬁned as
a subset of VQA, and a general expression of the QNN quantum circuit is presented in
Figure 5 [62,63].
Figure 5. QNN based on VQA framework [63].
While VQA continues to be a prominent approach for designing QNNs, it also inherits
some of its drawbacks. For instance, the QNN framework currently faces the issue of the
barren plateau, but speciﬁc solutions to this problem have yet to be proposed. Additionally,
the measurement efﬁciency of quantum circuits has not been thoroughly investigated,
which remains a challenge for QNN designers.
3. Quantum Machine Learning—Algorithms and Applications
Quantum machine learning algorithms are applied in the domains of Supervised
Learning, Unsupervised Learning, and Reinforcement Learning (RL). In Supervised Learn-
ing, patterns are learned by observing training data, whereas in Unsupervised Learning, the
structure is recognized from a set of grouped data. In RL, the algorithm learns from direct
interaction with the environment [ 64]. Additionally, a technique called deep-supervised
learning trains QNN to recognize patterns and images. It is a feed-forward network that