A Kernel Theory of Modern Data Augmentation
invariance and by reducing model complexity . We vali-
date the quality of our approximation empirically, and draw
connections to other generalization-improving techniques,
including recent work in invariant learning (Zhao et al.,
2017; Mroueh et al., 2015; Raj et al., 2017) and robust
optimization (Namkoong & Duchi, 2017).
Finally, in Section 5, to illustrate the utility of our theoreti-
cal understanding of augmentation, we explore promising
practical applications, including: (i) developing a diagnos-
tic to determine, prior to training, the importance of an
augmentation; (ii) reducing training costs for kernel meth-
ods by allowing for augmentations to be applied directly to
features—rather than the raw data—via a random Fourier
features approach; and (iii) suggesting a heuristic for train-
ing neural networks to reduce computation while realizing
most of the accuracy gain from augmentation.
2. Related Work
Data augmentation has long played an important role in ma-
chine learning. For many years it has been used, for example,
in the form of jittering andvirtual examples in the neural
network and kernel methods literatures (Sietsma & Dow,
1991; Sch ¨olkopf et al., 1996; Decoste & Sch ¨olkopf, 2002).
These methods aim to augment or modify the raw training
data so that the learned model will be invariant to known
transformations or perturbations. Given its importance, re-
cent efforts have been made to apply data augmentation
more efﬁciently, for example with subsampling (Kuchnik
& Smith, 2019). There has also been signiﬁcant work in
incorporating invariance directly into the model or training
procedure, rather than by expanding the training set (van der
Wilk et al., 2018; Tai et al., 2019). One illustrative example
is that of tangent propagation for neural networks (Simard
et al., 1992; 1998), which proposes a regularization penalty
to enforce local invariance, and has been extended in several
recent works (Rifai et al., 2011; Demyanov et al., 2015;
Zhao et al., 2017). However, while efforts have been made
that loosely connect traditional data augmentation with these
methods (Leen, 1995; Zhao et al., 2017), there has not been
a rigorous study on how these sets of procedures relate in
the context of modern models and transformations.
In this work, we make explicit the connection between aug-
mentation and modiﬁcations to the model, and show that
prior work on tangent propagation can be derived as a spe-
cial case of our more general theoretical framework (Sec-
tion 5). Moreover, we draw connections to recent work on
invariant learning (Mroueh et al., 2015; Raj et al., 2017) and
robust optimization (Namkoong & Duchi, 2017), illustrat-
ing that data augmentation not only affects the model by
increasing invariance to speciﬁc transformations, but also
by reducing the variance of the estimator. These analyses
lead to an important insight into how invariance can be mosteffectively applied for kernel methods and deep learning
architectures (Section 5), which we show can be used to
reduce training computation and diagnose the effectiveness
of various transformations.
Prior theory also does not capture the complex process by
which data augmentation is often applied. For example,
previous work (Bishop, 1995; Chapelle et al., 2001) shows
that adding noise to input data has the effect of regularizing
the model, but these effects have yet to be explored for more
commonly applied complex transformations, and it is not
well-understood how the inductive bias embedded in com-
plex transformations manifest themselves in the invariance
of the model (addressed here in Section 4). A common
recipe in achieving state-of-the-art accuracy in image clas-
siﬁcation is to apply a sequence of more complex transfor-
mations such as crops, ﬂips, or local afﬁne transformations
to the training data, with parameters drawn randomly from
hand-tuned ranges (Cire s ¸an et al., 2010; Dosovitskiy et al.,
2014). Similar strategies have also been employed in appli-
cations of classiﬁcation for audio (Uhlich et al., 2017) and
text (Lu et al., 2006). In Section 3, we analyze a motivating
model reafﬁrming the connection between augmentation
and kernel methods, even in the setting of complex and
composed transformations.
Finally, while data augmentation has been well-studied in
the kernels literature (Burges, 1999; Sch ¨olkopf et al., 1996;
Muandet et al., 2012), it is typically explored in the con-
text of simple geometrical invariances with closed forms.
For example, van der Wilk et al. (2018) use Gaussian pro-
cesses to learn these invariances from data by maximizing
the marginal likelihood. Further, the connection is often
approached in the opposite direction—by looking for ker-
nels that satisfy certain invariance properties (Haasdonk &
Burkhardt, 2007; Teo et al., 2008). We instead approach the
connection directly via data augmentation, and show that
even complicated augmentation procedures akin to those
used in practice can be represented as a kernel method.
3. Data Augmentation as a Kernel
To begin our study of data augmentation, we propose and in-
vestigate a model of augmentation as a Markov process,
inspired by the general manner in which the process is
applied—via the composition of multiple different types
of transformations. Surprisingly, we show that this augmen-
tation model combined with a k-nearest neighbor ( k-NN)
classiﬁer is asymptotically equivalent to a kernel classiﬁer,
where the kernel is a function of the base transformations.
While the technical details of the section can be skipped on
a ﬁrst reading, the central message is that kernels appear
naturally in relation to data augmentation, even when we do
not start with a kernel classiﬁer. This provides additional
motivation to study kernel classiﬁers trained on augmented