A Kernel Theory of Modern Data Augmentation
Tri Dao1Albert Gu1Alexander J. Ratner1Virginia Smith2Christopher De Sa3Christopher R ´e1
Abstract
Data augmentation, a technique in which a train-
ing set is expanded with class-preserving transfor-
mations, is ubiquitous in modern machine learn-
ing pipelines. In this paper, we seek to establish a
theoretical framework for understanding data aug-
mentation. We approach this from two directions:
First, we provide a general model of augmentation
as a Markov process, and show that kernels appear
naturally with respect to this model, even when
we do not employ kernel classiﬁcation. Next, we
analyze more directly the effect of augmentation
on kernel classiﬁers, showing that data augmen-
tation can be approximated by ﬁrst-order feature
averaging and second-order variance regulariza-
tion components. These frameworks both serve
to illustrate the ways in which data augmenta-
tion affects the downstream learning model, and
the resulting analyses provide novel connections
between prior work in invariant kernels, tangent
propagation, and robust optimization. Finally,
we provide several proof-of-concept applications
showing that our theory can be useful for accel-
erating machine learning workﬂows, such as re-
ducing the amount of computation needed to train
using augmented data, and predicting the utility
of a transformation prior to training.
1. Introduction
The process of augmenting a training dataset with synthetic
examples has become a critical step in modern machine
learning pipelines. The aim of data augmentation is to
artiﬁcially create new training data by applying transfor-
mations, such as rotations or crops for images, to input
data while preserving the class labels. This practice has
many potential beneﬁts: Data augmentation can encode
prior knowledge about data or task-speciﬁc invariances, act
1Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Cali-
fornia, USA2Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pennsylvania, USA3Department of
Computer Science, Cornell University, New York, USA. Corre-
spondence to: Tri Dao <trid@cs.stanford.edu >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).as regularizer to make the resulting model more robust, and
provide resources to data-hungry deep learning models. As
a testament to its growing importance, the technique has
been used to achieve nearly all state-of-the-art results in
image recognition (Cire s ¸an et al., 2010; Dosovitskiy et al.,
2016; Graham, 2014; Sajjadi et al., 2016), and is becoming
a staple in many other areas as well (Uhlich et al., 2017; Lu
et al., 2006). Learning augmentation policies alone can also
boost the state-of-the-art performance in image classiﬁca-
tion tasks (Ratner et al., 2017; Cubuk et al., 2018).
Despite its ubiquity and importance to the learning process,
data augmentation is typically performed in an ad-hoc man-
ner with little understanding of the underlying theoretical
principles. In the ﬁeld of deep learning, for example, data
augmentation is commonly understood to act as a regularizer
by increasing the number of data points and constraining the
model (Goodfellow et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2017). How-
ever, even for simpler models, it is not well-understood how
training on augmented data affects the learning process, the
parameters, and the decision surface of the resulting model.
This is exacerbated by the fact that data augmentation is
performed in diverse ways in modern machine learning
pipelines, for different tasks and domains, thus precluding
a general model of transformation. Our results show that
regularization is only part of the story.
In this paper, we aim to develop a theoretical understand-
ing of data augmentation. First, in Section 3, we analyze
data augmentation as a Markov process, in which augmenta-
tion is performed via a random sequence of transformations.
This formulation closely matches how augmentation is often
applied in practice. Surprisingly, we show that performing k-
nearest neighbors with this model asymptotically results in
a kernel classiﬁer, where the kernel is a function of the base
augmentations. These results demonstrate that kernels ap-
pear naturally with respect to data augmentation, regardless
of the base model, and illustrate the effect of augmentation
on the learned representation of the original data.
Motivated by the connection between data augmentation
and kernels, in Section 4 we show that a kernel classiﬁer on
augmented data approximately decomposes into two com-
ponents: (i) an averaged version of the transformed features,
and (ii) a data-dependent variance regularization term. This
suggests a more nuanced explanation of data augmentation—
namely, that it improves generalization both by inducing