Multi-View Sequence-to-Sequence Models with Conversational Structure
for Abstractive Dialogue Summarization
Jiaao Chen
School of Interactive Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
jiaaochen@gatech.eduDiyi Yang
School of Interactive Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
dyang888@gatech.edu
Abstract
Text summarization is one of the most chal-
lenging and interesting problems in NLP.
Although much attention has been paid to
summarizing structured text like news re-
ports or encyclopedia articles, summarizing
conversations—an essential part of human-
human/machine interaction where most impor-
tant pieces of information are scattered across
various utterances of different speakers—
remains relatively under-investigated. This
work proposes a multi-view sequence-to-
sequence model by ﬁrst extracting conversa-
tional structures of unstructured daily chats
from different views to represent conversa-
tions and then utilizing a multi-view de-
coder to incorporate different views to gen-
erate dialogue summaries. Experiments on
a large-scale dialogue summarization corpus
demonstrated that our methods signiﬁcantly
outperformed previous state-of-the-art mod-
els via both automatic evaluations and hu-
man judgment. We also discussed speciﬁc
challenges that current approaches faced with
this task. We have publicly released our
code at https://github.com/GT-SALT/
Multi-View-Seq2Seq .
1 Introduction
We live in an information age where communi-
cations between human and human/machine are
increasing exponentially in the form of textual di-
alogues between users and users-agents (Kester,
2004). It is challenging and time-consuming to
review all the content before starting any conversa-
tions especially when the chatting history becomes
very long (Gao et al., 2020). How to process and or-
ganize those interaction activities into concise and
structured data, i.e. conversation summarization,
becomes technically and socially important.
Most existing research efforts on text summa-
rization have been focused on single-speaker doc-uments like news reports (Nallapati et al., 2016;
See et al., 2017), scientiﬁc publications (Nikolov
et al., 2018) or encyclopedia articles (Liu* et al.,
2018), where structured text is usually used to elab-
orate a core idea in the third-person point of view,
and the information ﬂow is very clear through para-
graphs or sections. Different from these structured
documents, conversations are often informal, ver-
bose and repetitive, sprinkled with false-starts, back
channeling, reconﬁrmations, hesitations, speaker
interruptions (Sacks et al., 1978) and the salient
information is scattered in the whole chat, mak-
ing current summarization models hard to focus on
many informative utterances. Take the conversation
in Table 1 as an example, turns, informal words, ab-
breviations, and emoticons all introduce new forms
of challenges to the task of summarization. This
calls for the design and development of new meth-
ods for dialogue summarization instead of directly
applying current document summarization models.
There has been some recent research on conver-
sation summarization such as directly deploying
existing document summarization models (Gliwa
et al., 2019) and exploring multi-sentence compres-
sion (Shang et al., 2018), however, most of them
haven’t utilized speciﬁc conversational structures,
which refer to the way utterances are organized in
order to make the conversation meaningful, enjoy-
able and understandable (Sacks et al., 1978), in di-
alogues – a key factor that differentiates dialogues
from structured documents. As a way of using
language socially of “doing things with words” to-
gether with other persons, the conversation has its
own dynamic structures that organize utterances in
certain orders to make the conversation meaningful,
enjoyable, and understandable (Sacks et al., 1978).
Although there are a few exceptions such as utiliz-
ing topic segmentation (Liu et al., 2019b; Li et al.,
2019), dialogue acts (Goo and Chen, 2018) or key
point sequence (Liu et al., 2019a), they either needarXiv:2010.01672v1  [cs.CL]  4 Oct 2020