Figure 1: Model architecture. Different views of conversations are ﬁrst extracted automatically, and then encoded
through the conversation encoder (a) and combined in the multi-view decoder to generate summaries (b). In the
conversation encoder, each view (consists of blocks) is encoded separately and the block’s representations Siare
encoded through LSTM to represent the view. In the multi-view decoder, the model decides attention weights over
different views and then attend to each token in different views through the multi-view attention.
document summarization (Cao et al., 2018; Zhu
et al., 2020a), in order to enhance the information
consistency between summaries and the input.
Dialogue Summarization When it comes to the
summarization of dialogues, Shang et al. (2018)
proposed a simple multi-sentence compression
technique to summarize meetings. Zhao et al.
(2019); Zhu et al. (2020b) introduced turn-based
hierarchical models that encoded each turn of ut-
terance ﬁrst and then used the aggregated repre-
sentation to generate summaries. A few studies
have also paid attention to utilizing conversational
analysis for generating dialogue summaries, such
as leveraging dialogue acts (Goo and Chen, 2018),
key point sequence (Liu et al., 2019a) or topics (Liu
et al., 2019b; Li et al., 2019). However, they either
needed a large amount of human annotation for
dialogue acts, key points or visual focus (Goo and
Chen, 2018; Liu et al., 2019a; Li et al., 2019), or
only utilized topical information in conversations
(Li et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019b).
These prior work also largely ignored diverse
conversational structures in dialogues, for instance,
reply relations among participants (Mayﬁeld et al.,
2012; Zhu et al., 2019), dialogue acts (Ritter et al.,
2010; Paul, 2012), and conversation stages (Al-
thoff et al., 2016). Models that only utilized a ﬁxed
topic view of the conversation (Galley et al., 2003;
Joty et al., 2010) may fail to capture its comprehen-
sive and nuanced conversational structures, and any
amount of information loss introduced by the con-
versation encoder may lead to larger error cascade
in the decoding stage. To ﬁll these gaps, we pro-
pose to leverage diverse conversational structuresincluding topic segments, conversational stages, di-
alogue overview, and utterances to design a multi-
view model for dialogue summarization.
3 Method
Conversations can be interpreted from different
views and every single view enables the model to
focus a speciﬁc aspect of the conversation. To take
advantages of those rich conversation views, we
design a Multi-view Sequence-to-Sequence Model
(see Figure 1) that ﬁrstly extracts different views of
conversations (Section 3.1) and then encodes them
to generate summaries (Section 3.2).
3.1 Conversation View Extraction
Conversation summarization models may easily
stray among all sorts of information across vari-
ous speakers and utterances especially when con-
versations become long. Naturally, if informative
structures in the form of small blocks can be ex-
plicitly extracted from long conversations, models
may be able to understand them better in a more or-
ganized way. Thus, we ﬁrst extract different views
of structures from conversations.
Topic View Although conversations are often
less structured than documents, they are mostly
organized around topics in a coarse-grained struc-
ture (Honneth et al., 1988). For instance, a tele-
phone chat could possess a pattern of “ greetings!
invitation!party details!rejection ” from a top-
ical perspective. Such explicit view and topic ﬂow
could help models interpret conversations more pre-
cisely and generate summaries that cover important
topics. Here we combine the classic topic segment