Figure 4: Human evaluation results. The mean score
for each model is also shown in the box plot.
for the stage view and topic view in our best model
(see Appendix) and found contributions of topic
views are slightly more prominent compared to
stage views. This also communicated that the two
different structured views can complement each
other well though sharing the same dialogue con-
tent. Note that the gains from Multi-view BART
(Topic + Stage) are mainly from the precision
scores while recall scores are kept comparable, sug-
gesting that our proposed model produced fewer
irrelevant tokens while preserving necessary infor-
mation in its generated summary.
Impact of Participants and Turns We visual-
ized the impact of two essential components in
conversations—the number of participants and
turns—on rouge scores via our best-performing
model Multi-view BART with topic view + stage
view in Figure 3. As the number of partici-
pants/turns increases, ROUGE scores decrease, in-
dicating that the difﬁculty of conversation summa-
rization increased with more participants involved
in conversations and more utterances.
Qualitative/Human Evaluation We also con-
ducted human annotations to evaluate the extracted
dialogue summaries, in addition to ROUGE scores.
Similar to Gliwa et al. (2019), we asked human
annotators on Amazon Mechanical Turk5to rate
each summary (200 randomly sampled summaries
in total) on the scale of [-2, 0, 2], where -2 means
that a summary was poor, extracted irrelevant in-
formation or did not make sense at all, 2 means it
was understandable and gave a concise overview of
the text, and 0 refers to that the summary only ex-
tracted only a part of relevant information, or made
some mistakes. The score for each summary was
averaged among three different annotators. The
Intra-class Correlation was 0.583, indicating mod-
erate agreement (Koo and Li, 2016).
As shown in Figure 4, consistent with ROUGE
scores in Table 4, our multi-view model achieved
5https://www.mturk.com/the highest human annotation scores, signiﬁcantly
higher (via a student t-test) than either generic (dis-
crete or global) view or structured (stage or topic)
view, which further proved the effectiveness of
combing different views.
5 Model Analysis and Discussion
So far, we have achieved a reasonable summariza-
tion performance. To further study why dialog sum-
marization is challenging and how future research
could advance this direction, we take a closer look
at this dialogue summarization dataset (SAMSum),
model generation errors, as well as certain chal-
lenges that existing approaches are struggling with.
5.1 Challenges in Dialog Summarization
We conduct a thorough examination of the chal-
lenges in conversation summarization and orga-
nized them into 7 categories as below:
1.Informal language use Many conversations
especially in online contexts such as Twit-
ter/Reddit (Jackson and Moulinier, 2007), con-
tain typos, word abbreviations, slang or emoti-
cons/emojis, making it hard to be represented
and summarized.
2.Multiple participants As shown in Figure 3,
conversations with more speakers are harder
to be summarized since it may require mod-
els to accurately differentiate both language
styles and content from different speakers,
similar to the multiple characters issue in story
summarization (Zhang et al., 2019).
3.Multiple turns Similar to long document
summarization (Xiao and Carenini, 2019),
conversations with many utterances contain
more information to be processed, thus harder
to be summarized.
4.(Referral and coreference People usually re-
fer to each other, mention others’ names or
use coreference in their messages, which in-
troduces extra difﬁculty to dialogue summa-
rization, also a challenge also exists in reading
comprehension (Chen et al., 2016) and docu-
ment summarization (Falke et al., 2017).
5.Repetition and interruption Information is
generally scattered through the whole conver-
sation, and speakers may interrupt each other,