Figure 5: Relations between difﬁculties in conversa-
tions and errors made by our model.
5.3 Relation between Challenges and Errors
To ﬁgure out relations between challenges and er-
rors made by our models, i.e., how different types
of errors correlate with different types of chal-
lenges, we visualized the co-occurrence heat map
in Figure 5. We found that: (i) Our model generated
good summary for generic , simple conversations.
(ii) All kinds of challenges had high correlations
with, or could lead to the missing information er-
ror. (iii) Wrong references were highly associated
with referral & coreference ; this was as expected
since co-references in conversations would natu-
rally increase the difﬁculty for models to associate
correct speakers with correct actions. (iv) High cor-
relations between role & language change ,referral
& coreference andincorrect reasoning indicated
that interactions between multiple participants with
frequent co-references might easily lead current
summarization models to reason incorrectly.
6 Conclusion
In this work, we proposed a multi-view sequence-
to-sequence model that leveraged multiple conver-
sational structures (topic view and stage view) and
generic views (global view and discrete view) to
generate summaries for conversations. In order
to strategically combine these different views for
better summary generations, we propose a multi-
view sequence-to-sequence model. Experiments
conducted demonstrated the effectiveness of our
proposed models in terms of both quantitative and
qualitative evaluations. Via thorough error analy-
ses, we concluded a set of challenges that current
models struggled with, which can further facili-
tate future research on conversation summarization.
Due to the lack of annotations, we only adopted
simple unsupervised segmentation methods to ex-tract different views. In the future, we plan to anno-
tate some of the data, explore supervised segmen-
tation models (Li et al., 2018) and introduce more
conversation structures like dialogue acts (Oya and
Carenini, 2014; Joty and Hoque, 2016) into abstrac-
tive dialogue summarization.
Acknowledgment
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers
for their helpful comments, and the members of
Georgia Tech SALT group for their feedback. We
acknowledge the support of NVIDIA Corporation
with the donation of GPU used for this research.
References
Tim Althoff, Kevin Clark, and Jure Leskovec. 2016.
Large-scale analysis of counseling conversations:
An application of natural language processing to
mental health. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics , 4:463–476.
Iz Beltagy, Matthew E. Peters, and Arman Cohan. 2020.
Longformer: The long-document transformer.
Ziqiang Cao, Furu Wei, Wenjie Li, and Sujian Li. 2018.
Faithful to the original: Fact aware neural abstrac-
tive summarization. In AAAI .
Danqi Chen, Jason Bolton, and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2016. A thorough examination of the
CNN/daily mail reading comprehension task. In
Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers) , pages 2358–2367, Berlin, Germany.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yen-Chun Chen and Mohit Bansal. 2018. Fast abstrac-
tive summarization with reinforce-selected sentence
rewriting. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 675–686, Mel-
bourne, Australia. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Freddy Y . Y . Choi. 2000. Advances in domain inde-
pendent linear text segmentation. In 1st Meeting of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics .
Arman Cohan, Franck Dernoncourt, Doo Soon Kim,
Trung Bui, Seokhwan Kim, Walter Chang, and Na-
zli Goharian. 2018. A discourse-aware attention
model for abstractive summarization of long docu-
ments. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers) , pages 615–621,
New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.