Conversation Topic View Stage View
James: Hey! I have been thinking about you : )GreetingsOpenings Hannah: Oh, that’s nice ; )
James: What are you up to?
Today’s plan Hannah: I’m about to sleepIntentionJames: I miss u. I was hoping to see you
Hannah: Have to get up early for work tomorrow
Plan for tomorrow
DiscussionJames: What about tomorrow?
Hannah: To be honest I have plans for tomorrow evening
James: Oh ok. What about Sat then?Plan for SaturdayHannah: Yeah. Sure I am available on Sat
James: I’ll pick you up at 8?Pick up timeHannah: Sounds good. See you then. Conclusion
Summary James misses Hannah. They agree for James to pick Hannah up on Saturday at 8.
Table 1: Example conversation from SAMSum (Gliwa et al., 2019) with its topic view and stage view (extracted
by our methods), and the human annotated summary.
extensive expert annotations of discourse acts(Goo
and Chen, 2018; Liu et al., 2019a), or only en-
code conversations based on their topics (Liu et al.,
2019b), which fails to capture rich conversation
structures in dialogues.
Even one single conversation can be viewed
from different perspectives, resulting in multiple
conversational or discourse patterns. For instance,
in Table 1, based on what topics were discussed
(topic view ) (Galley et al., 2003; Liu et al., 2019b;
Li et al., 2019), it can be segmented into greetings ,
today’s plan ,plan for tomorrow ,plan for Saturday
andpick up time ; from a conversation progression
perspective ( stage view ) (Ritter et al., 2010; Paul,
2012; Althoff et al., 2016), the same dialogue can
be categorized into openings ,intention ,discussion ,
andconclusion . From a coarse perspective ( global
view ), conversations can be treated as a whole, or
each utterance can serve as one segment ( discrete
view ). Models that only utilized a ﬁxed topic view
of the conversation (Joty et al., 2010; Liu et al.,
2019b) may fail to capture its comprehensive and
nuanced conversational structures, and any amount
of information loss introduced by the conversation
encoder may lead to larger error cascade in the
decoding stage. To ﬁll these gaps, we propose to
combine those multiple, diverse views of conversa-
tions in order to generate more precise summaries.
To sum up, our contributions are: (1) we propose
to utilize rich conversational structures, i.e., struc-
tured views (topic view and stage view) and the
generic views (global view and discrete view) for
abstractive conversation summarization. (2) We de-sign a multi-view sequence-to-sequence model that
consists of a conversation encoder to encode dif-
ferent views and a multi-view decoder with multi-
view attention to generate dialogue summaries. (3)
We perform experiments on a large-scale conver-
sation summarization dataset, SAMSum (Gliwa
et al., 2019), and demonstrate the effectiveness of
our proposed methods. (4) We conduct thorough
error analyses and discuss speciﬁc challenges that
current approaches faced with this task.
2 Related Work
Document Summarization Document summa-
rization has received extensive research attention,
especially for abstractive summarization. For
instance, Rush et al. (2015) introduced to use
sequence-to-sequence models for abstractive text
summarization. See et al. (2017) proposed a
pointer-generator network to allow copying words
from the source text to handle the OOV issue and
avoid generating repeated content. Paulus et al.
(2018); Chen and Bansal (2018) further utilized
reinforcement learning to select the correct content
needed by summarization. Large-scale pre-trained
language models (Liu and Lapata, 2019; Raffel
et al., 2019; Lewis et al., 2019) have also been intro-
duced to further improve the summarization perfor-
mance. Other line of work explored long-document
summarization by utilizing discourse structures in
text (Cohan et al., 2018), introducing hierarchical
models (Fabbri et al., 2019) or modifying atten-
tion mechanisms (Beltagy et al., 2020). There are
also recent studies looking at the faithfulness in