4 Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed MPNet, a novel pre-training method that addresses the problems of MLM
in BERT and PLM in XLNet. MPNet leverages the dependency among the predicted tokens through
permuted language modeling and makes the model to see auxiliary position information to reduce the
discrepancy between pre-training and ﬁne-tuning. Experiments on various tasks demonstrate that
MPNet outperforms MLM and PLM, as well as previous strong pre-trained models such as BERT,
XLNet, RoBERTa by a large margin. In the future, we plan to extend our MPNet into other advanced
structures and apply MPNet on more diverse language understanding tasks.
Acknowledgements and Disclosure of Funding
We thank the editor and each anonymous reviewer for their constructive comments and suggestions.
This work was supported by National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant
2017YFB1300205.
Broader Impact
In natural language processing, pre-trained models have achieved rapid progress and a lot of pre-
training methods are proposed. In terms of positive impacts, MPNet can help people to rethink
current popular pre-trained methods ( i.e., MLM in BERT and PLM in XLNet) and thus inspire future
researchers to explore more advanced pre-training methods. Currently, the pre-trained models have
been considered as the most powerful tools, which help machine to obtain amazing performance in a
series of NLP tasks. The ﬁnal goal of the pre-trained models is to enable machine understands natural
languages as human being, which is an important step towards artiﬁcial intelligence. In terms of
negative impact, pre-training models are usually of large model size and training cost, which makes it
too expensive for both research and product. In the future, we will develop more light-weight and
low-cost pre-training models.
References
[1]Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. Improving language
understanding by generative pre-training. URL https://s3-us-west-2. amazonaws. com/openai-
assets/researchcovers/languageunsupervised/language understanding paper. pdf , 2018.
[2]Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In NAACL , pages 4171–4186,
2019.
[3]Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever.
Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI Blog , 1(8), 2019.
[4]Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Tao Qin, Jianfeng Lu, and Tie-Yan Liu. MASS: Masked sequence to
sequence pre-training for language generation. In ICML , pages 5926–5936, 2019.
[5]Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V
Le. Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding. In NIPS , pages
5754–5764, 2019.
[6]Li Dong, Nan Yang, Wenhui Wang, Furu Wei, Xiaodong Liu, Yu Wang, Jianfeng Gao, Ming
Zhou, and Hsiao-Wuen Hon. Uniﬁed language model pre-training for natural language under-
standing and generation. In NIPS , pages 13042–13054, 2019.
[7]Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 , 2019.
[8]Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena,
Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a uniﬁed
text-to-text transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.10683 , 2019.
9