MPNet: Masked and Permuted Pre-training for
Language Understanding
Kaitao Song1, Xu Tan2, Tao Qin2, Jianfeng Lu1, Tie-Yan Liu2
1Nanjing University of Science and Technology,2Microsoft Research
{kt.song,lujf}@njust.edu.cn, {xuta,taoqin,tyliu}@microsoft.com
Abstract
BERT adopts masked language modeling (MLM) for pre-training and is one of
the most successful pre-training models. Since BERT neglects dependency among
predicted tokens, XLNet introduces permuted language modeling (PLM) for pre-
training to address this problem. However, XLNet does not leverage the full
position information of a sentence and thus suffers from position discrepancy
between pre-training and ﬁne-tuning. In this paper, we propose MPNet, a novel
pre-training method that inherits the advantages of BERT and XLNet and avoids
their limitations. MPNet leverages the dependency among predicted tokens through
permuted language modeling (vs. MLM in BERT), and takes auxiliary position
information as input to make the model see a full sentence and thus reducing the
position discrepancy (vs. PLM in XLNet). We pre-train MPNet on a large-scale
dataset (over 160GB text corpora) and ﬁne-tune on a variety of down-streaming
tasks (GLUE, SQuAD, etc). Experimental results show that MPNet outperforms
MLM and PLM by a large margin, and achieves better results on these tasks
compared with previous state-of-the-art pre-trained methods (e.g., BERT, XLNet,
RoBERTa) under the same model setting. The code and the pre-trained models are
available at: https://github.com/microsoft/MPNet .
1 Introduction
Pre-training language models [ 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8] have greatly boosted the accuracy of NLP tasks
in the past years. One of the most successful models is BERT [ 2], which mainly adopts masked
language modeling (MLM) for pre-training1. MLM leverages bidirectional context of masked tokens
efﬁciently, but ignores the dependency among the masked (and to be predicted) tokens [5].
To improve BERT, XLNet [ 5] introduces permuted language modeling (PLM) for pre-training to
capture the dependency among the predicted tokens. However, PLM has its own limitation: Each
token can only see its preceding tokens in a permuted sequence but does not know the position
information of the full sentence (e.g., the position information of future tokens in the permuted
sentence) during the autoregressive pre-training, which brings discrepancy between pre-training and
ﬁne-tuning. Note that the position information of all the tokens in a sentence is available to BERT
while predicting a masked token.
In this paper, we ﬁnd that MLM and PLM can be uniﬁed in one view, which splits the tokens
in a sequence into non-predicted and predicted parts. Under this uniﬁed view, we propose a new
pre-training method, masked and permuted language modeling (MPNet for short), which addresses
the issues in both MLM and PLM while inherits their advantages: 1) It takes the dependency among
the predicted tokens into consideration through permuted language modeling and thus avoids the
1We do not consider next sentence prediction here since previous works [ 5,7,9] have achieved good results
without next sentence prediction.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.