5we can distinguish between black box attacks (zero knowledge), grey box 
attacks (partial knowledge), and white box  attacks (complete knowledge).
• The capability determines the type of actions that an attacker can perform 
against the targeted environment that includes, but is not limited to, the 
machine-learning system. As a strict requirement, it is important to specify which kind of access the attacker has to the cyber detector: he can have full access (that is, reading its output and modifying its internals), limited access (can only read its output) or no access at all. 
• The strategy denotes the workflow pursued by the attacker to achieve his 
goal by leveraging previous knowledge and capabilities.
The attacker model distinguishes the adversarial attacks against cyber security systems from offences against other domains of application of machine learning. For example, most papers on image recognition [9, 28] assume that the attacker has complete knowledge and capability. These assumptions are unrealistic in cyber security applications for two reasons: cyber detectors are protected by multiple defence layers; if an attacker overcomes these barriers and can modify the detector, he can achieve his goals without relying on adversarial attack strategies. Thus, in the remainder of this paper, we consider attacks in which the attacker has limited or no access to the machine-learning system.
In Table 1, we classify the most important examples of adversarial attacks against 
three cyber security areas (Network intrusion detection, Malware analysis, Spam detection) representing scenarios where machine-learning methods are achieving appreciable results (e.g., [14, 15, 29]). In this table, columns indicate the cyber security problem while rows denote the adversarial attack class. Each cell reports the machine-learning algorithms that are tested against the related class of attacks. We remark that algorithms written in bold are evaluated for the first time in this paper. The existing literature focuses mainly on integrity attacks, with several algorithms evaluated for Malware analysis and Spam analysis. Few solutions exist and are tested in the Network intrusion detection context, and this observation motivates this paper. There are few documented attacks targeting the system availability, and there are no specific studies at test-time.