3under normal and adversarial settings. In addition, we have measured the effectiveness 
of some countermeasures, including the strategy proposed in this paper.  
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a thorough 
description of adversarial attacks in the cyber security sphere. Section 3 explores existing strategies for countering these threats and proposes our original methodology against poisoning attacks. Section 4 presents the experimental results and evaluations. Section 5 concludes the paper with final remarks and future work.
2. Advers ArIAl Att Acks And cyber secur Ity
To defend against cyber threats, security operators rely on techniques borrowed from the machine-learning domain [14, 15] because of their anomaly detection 
capabilities, which may identify novel attacks and which are not recognizable through signature-based approaches [16, 17]. Machine-learning algorithms can be divided into supervised and unsupervised techniques, depending on the requirement of the 
training phase, with a set of labelled data [18]. Both groups can solve cyber security problems [3], but supervised methods are appreciated due to their ability to provide actionable results, such as detecting an attack [4]. On the other hand, unsupervised techniques are employed for ancillary tasks such as data clustering [19]. All these methods present several open issues that must be considered when integrating them into security systems [18]. Here, we focus on the topic of adversarial attacks.
Adversarial attacks against machine-learning solutions represent a major limitation to 
the adoption of a fully autonomous cyber defence platform. These threats are based on the generation of specific samples that induce the model to produce an output that is favourable to the attacker, and leverage the intrinsic sensitivity of machine-learning models to their internal configuration settings [14, 20, 21]. Although adversarial perturbations affect all applications of machine learning, the cyber security field presents several characteristics that further aggravate this menace: there is a constantly evolving arms race between attackers and defenders; the system and network behaviour of an organization can be subject to continuous modifications. These unavoidable and unpredictable changes are denoted as the concept drift 
[22] problem, which decreases the performance of any model based on anomaly detection. Mitigations involve periodic retraining and adjustment processes that can identify behavioural modifications and recent related threats. While performing such operations is a challenging task in itself [18], it also facilitates the execution of adversarial attacks [23].
Many research results (e.g., [6, 24, 8]) show that machine-learning algorithms are