14TABLE 5. EV ALUATION OF THE COUNTERMEASURE BASED ON FEATURE REMOV AL IN NON-
ADVERSARIAL SETTINGS, AND COMPARISON WITH THE BASELINE PERFORMANCE.
C. Adversarial Attacks at Training-time
We analyse the effects of poisoning attacks that focus on integrity violations. The 
attacker model considers an opponent who has compromised the targeted network and plans to infect other hosts with novel malware. He is aware that the network is monitored by a NIDS based on some supervised machine-learning algorithms, and he also knows that this detector is periodically retrained. His goal is to ensure that the deployed new malware variants evade detection mechanisms. The attacker has full access to the server that contains the training dataset, but he cannot interact with the detector. To reach his goal, the attacker plans to poison the training dataset through malicious samples representing the behaviour of the deployed malware variant, but that is classified with the benign label. 
To simulate this attack scenario, we craft sets of malicious flows that slightly differ 
(to account for the novel malware variant) from those contained in the testbed, and we label them as benign. This procedure is performed by selecting the existing malicious samples and increasing their duration by [1-5] seconds, their exchanged_bytes by [1-
1024], and their total_packets  by [1-10]. Then, we inject some of these samples into 
each training dataset. We measure the effectiveness of a similar attack by comparing the performance of the detectors on the poisoned samples before and after the poisoned retraining phase. The results shown in Table 6 highlight that, before the poisoning attempt, the classifiers were able to identify the novel attack samples with detection rates comparable to other proposals against zero-day malware [17]. The performance of the same algorithms suffered a significant drop after a retraining phase with the poisoned data. The high attack severity score gives a clear idea of the impact of the effect.