21. Introduct Ion
Solutions based on machine- and deep-learning algorithms are becoming pervasive 
in multiple fields [1], with documented successes for computer vision, speech processing, social media analysis and healthcare [2]. However, the application of these techniques to cyber security is still affected by several shortcomings that limit their effectiveness in real scenarios. Recent results evidence that utmost care and due diligence should be adopted when considering defensive methods based on machine learning  to protect current organizations [3, 4, 5]. There are several motivations for these problems: attacks are relatively infrequent compared to the massive number of events generated by modern enterprises; they evolve rapidly, with consequences for possible ground truth for validation; and attackers are not constrained by rules as in artificial intelligence gaming. In this paper, we consider the additional problem presented by the inherent vulnerability of machine-learning methods to adversarial attacks, through which opponents can thwart the system by inducing the generation of incorrect or undesirable results [6]. This issue is aggravated by the multiple variations of malicious actions that can be performed during the training- or test-time of the machine-learning algorithms [7, 8].
Adversarial attacks against machine learning have been explored in image processing 
[9], but lack adequate analyses in the cyber security domain. The papers that evaluate the performance of cyber detectors in adversarial settings (e.g., [7, 10]) consider a limited number of cyber security problems, few machine-learning classifiers, and a restricted subset of adversarial attacks. The main focus is on spam and malware analysis [11, 12], while we consider this issue from a network intrusion detection perspective [13], where experimental evaluations and novel solutions are lacking [5]. We provide a comprehensive overview of adversarial attacks against cyber security applications of machine learning and propose a taxonomy of these threats in three areas: network intrusion detection, malware analysis, and spam and phishing detection. We present existing solutions to counter this menace, and propose an original method for mitigating attacks based on data poisoning. We have executed a large set of experiments to evaluate and compare the performance of cyber detectors improvements in several directions. The paper paves the way for more robust machine-
learning-based techniques that can be integrated into cyber security platforms.
Keywords: adversarial attacks, machine learning, deep learning, poisoning attacks, 
evasion attacks, intrusion detection