8that adopt automated tools. Expert opponents can detect such deception activities and 
bypass them.
B. Defending Against Attacks at Training-time
Attacks performed at training-time alter the decision process of the machine-learning algorithm by modifying the configuration of the model before the training phases, that is, by manipulating the training dataset(s). Existing solutions focus on protecting the training dataset with the objective of minimizing the effects of adversarial perturbations. We identify the following two groups of security-by-design defences.
• Data sanitization. Poisoning attacks are countered through a data sanitization process that aims to detect and remove poisoned samples introduced in the training data [49]. The problem is that some assumptions of these approaches are not always applicable to the cyber security field. For example, the work in [50] assumes that each poisoning sample significantly affects the training process. This assumption is not valid in many situations in which an attacker introduces few samples just to avoid some specific detections of his interest. Other solutions [51] leverage the machine unlearning concept that allows 
the effects of poisoned data to be cancelled without the need to retrain the machine-learning model. The main limitation of this approach is that it needs to know which (poisoned) data to unlearn, that is, it requires the knowledge of which poisoned data samples have been introduced by the attacker. This is an unrealistic assumption in real cyber security contexts.
• Ensemble methods. The adoption of multiple-classifier systems can also 
be effective against attacks at training-time [50]. These solutions present the same advantages and problems characterizing their test-time version, that is, a misconfiguration of even one component can damage the results of the entire detection mechanism.
Defences against partial- or zero-knowledge attacks include the collection of training data from randomized sources [52] with the goal of making it harder for the attacker to devise effective adversarial samples; and the application of strategies to prevent the attacker from controlling the actual training dataset [52]. As an example of this latter group, we propose an original methodology based on the idea of generating the actual training set only at training-time. The approach introduces data transformation procedures on the training dataset. In this way, even if an adversary manages to poison the stored dataset by injecting malicious samples that are labelled as benign, the data transformation step ensures that the model is not trained on those exact poisoned samples. The expected result is that these samples will have a significantly smaller impact on the detector. The complete description of this solution is as follows.