1Addressing Adversarial 
Attacks Against Security Systems Based on Machine Learning
Abstract: Machine-learning solutions are successfully adopted in multiple contexts 
but the application of these techniques to the cyber security domain is complex and still immature. Among the many open issues that affect security systems based on machine learning, we concentrate on adversarial attacks that aim to affect the detection and prediction capabilities of machine-learning models. We consider realistic types of poisoning and evasion attacks targeting security solutions devoted to malware, spam and network intrusion detection. We explore the possible damages that an attacker can cause to a cyber detector and present some existing and original defensive techniques in the context of intrusion detection systems. This paper contains several performance evaluations that are based on extensive experiments using large traffic datasets. The results highlight that modern adversarial attacks are highly effective against machine-learning classifiers for cyber detection, and that existing solutions require Giovanni Apruzzese
Department of Engineering“Enzo Ferrari”University of Modena and Reggio EmiliaModena, Italygiovanni.apruzzese@unimore.it
Luca Ferretti
Department of Engineering “Enzo Ferrari”University of Modena and Reggio EmiliaModena, Italyluca.ferretti@unimore.itMichele ColajanniDepartment of Engineering “Enzo Ferrari”University of Modena and Reggio EmiliaModena, Italymichele.colajanni@unimore.it
Mirco Marchetti
Department of Engineering “Enzo Ferrari”University of Modena and Reggio EmiliaModena, Italymirco.marchetti@unimore.it2019 11th International Conference on Cyber Conflict:
Silent BattleT. Minárik, S. Alatalu, S. Biondi, M. Signoretti, I. Tolga, G. Visky (Eds.)2019 © NATO CCD COE Publications, TallinnPermission to make digital or hard copies of this publication for internal 
use within NATO and for personal or educational use when for non-profit or non-commercial purposes is granted providing that copies bear this notice and a full citation on the first page. Any other reproduction or transmission requires prior written permission by NATO CCD COE.