4unsuitable to face adversarial settings. The first examples of adversarial attacks date 
back to 2004 [25], but the advent of  deep learning drew the attention of the research community to this issue [26]. Possible countermeasures have appeared in the computer vision literature [9], with several papers proposing solutions for improving the robustness of deep neural networks for image classification in adversarial environments [27]. However, the performance of machine-learning algorithms depends on their application contexts, hence it is of paramount importance to understand the effects of adversarial threats against cyber security detectors. We consider different classes of attacks by proposing a taxonomy inspired by the work of Huang et al. [6], where threats are classified on the basis of two properties: the influence  determines whether 
an attack is performed at training-time or test-time; the violation  denotes the type of 
security violation that may affect availability or integrity of the system. 
• Influence
° Training-time: these attacks include the manipulation of the training set used by the machine-learning model through the insertion or removal of specific samples that alter the decision boundaries of the algorithm. They are also known as poisoning attacks .
° Test-time: These attacks assume that the detector has been deployed and aim to subvert its behaviour through the submission of specific samples during its operational phase.
• Violation
° Integrity: often referred to as evasion attacks , these attacks aim to 
increase the false negative rate of the model by introducing malicious samples that are classified as benign. Hence, when successful, these stealthy threats do not cause any defensive action to be taken by the targeted organization.
° Availability : these attacks make the targeted model useless, for example 
by causing overwhelming spikes of false alarms. For this reason, attacks of this type usually induce some sort of response action by the defending side, such as temporary shut-down and recalibration of the model.
A comprehensive classification of adversarial attacks requires a definition of the attacker model. According to Biggio et al. [24], we should consider the following main features.
• The goal is related to the security violation purpose of the adversarial attack.
• The knowledge denotes the information possessed by the attacker on 
the machine-learning system that may include the adopted algorithm, its parameters, and its training data set. Depending on the type of information,