Avg (82% - 4%)
 Occlusion (82% - 4%)
 Gradient×Input (75% - 4%)
CD (76% - 4%)
 LRP (84% - 3%)
 LRP hT (68% - 7%)
0
+
++Figure 1: PCA projection of sentence-level representations built on top of word embeddings that were linearly
combined using their respective relevance. Avgcorresponds to simple averaging of word embeddings. For LRP
hTthe last time step hidden layer was reweighted by its relevance. In parenthesis we indicate the percentage of
variance explained by the ﬁrst two PCA components (those that are plotted) and by the third PCA component. The
resulting representations were roughly ordered (row-wise) from less structured to more structured.
lar sentences/phrases by employing standard eu-
clidean distance.
4 Interpreting Single Predictions
Next, we analyze single predictions using the
same task and model as in Section 3.3, and illus-
trate the usefulness of relevance visualization with
LRP-all , which is the method that performed well
in both our previous quantitative experiments.
Semantic Composition . When dealing with
real data, one typically has no ground truth rel-
evance available. And the visual inspection of
single relevance heatmaps can be counter-intuitive
for two reasons: the relevance is not accurately
reﬂecting the reasons for the classiﬁer’s decision
(the explanation method is bad), or the classi-
ﬁer made an error (the classiﬁer doesn’t work as
expected). In order to avoid the latter as much
as possible, we automatically constructed bigram
and trigram samples, which are built solely upon
the classiﬁer’s predicted class, and visualize the
resulting average relevance heatmaps for differ-
ent types of semantic compositions in Table 4.
For more details on how these samples were con-
structed we refer to the Appendix, note though that
in our heatmaps the negation <not> , the intensi-
ﬁer<very> and the sentiment words act as place-
holders for words with similar meanings, since the
representative heatmaps were averaged over sev-eral samples. In these heatmaps one can see that,
to transform a positive sentiment into a negative
one, the negation is predominantly colored as red,
while the sentiment word is highlighted in blue,
which intuitively makes sense since the explana-
tion is computed towards the negative sentiment,
and in this context the negation is responsible for
the sentiment prediction. For sentiment intensiﬁ-
cation, we note that the ampliﬁer gets a relevance
of the same sign as the ampliﬁed word, indicat-
ing the ampliﬁer is supporting the prediction for
the considered target class, but still has less im-
portance for the decision than the sentiment word
itself (deep red colored). Both previous identiﬁed
patterns also reﬂect consistently in the case of a
negated ampliﬁed positive sentiment.
Understanding Misclassiﬁcations . Lastly, we
inspect heatmaps of misclassiﬁed sentences in Ta-
ble 5. In sentence 1, according to the heatmap, the
classiﬁer didn’t take the negation never into ac-
count, although it identiﬁed it correctly in sentence
1b. We postulate this is because of the strong sen-
timent assigned to fails that overshadowed the
effect of never . In sentence 2, the classiﬁer obvi-
ously couldn’t grasp the meaning of the words pre-
ceding must-see . If we use a negation instead,
we note that it’s taken into account in the case
ofneither (2b), but not in the case of never
(2c), which illustrates the complex dynamics in-