Accuracy Change (in %) random Grad. Grad. Input LRP-prop LRP-abs LRP-half LRP-all CD Occlusion f-diff Occlusion P-diff
decreasing order (std<16) 0 35 66 15 -1 -3 97 92 96 100
increasing order (std<5) 0 -18 31 11 -1 3 49 36 50 100
Table 3: Average change in accuracy when removing up to 3 words per sentence, either in decreasing order of
their relevance (starting with correctly classiﬁed sentences), or in increasing order of their relevance (starting
with falsely classiﬁed sentences). In both cases, the relevance is computed with the true class as the target class.
Results are reported proportionally to the changes for i) random removal (0% change) and ii) removal based on
Occlusion P-diff(100% change). For all methods, the higher the reported value the better. We boldface those methods
that perform on-par with the occlusion-based relevances.
cording to Occlusion P-diff. Our idea is that random
removal is the least informative approach, while
Occlusion P-diff is the most informative one, since
the relevance for the latter is computed in a sim-
ilar way to the perturbation experiment itself, i.e.
by deleting words from the input and tracking the
change in the classiﬁer’s prediction. Thus, with
this normalization, we expect the accuracy change
(in %) to be mainly rescaled to the range [0;100].
When removing words in decreasing order of
their relevance, we observe that LRP-all andCD
perform on-par with the occlusion-based rele-
vance, with near 100% accuracy change, followed
byGradientInput which performs only 66%.
When removing words in increasing or-
der of their relevance (which mainly corre-
sponds to remove words with a negative rele-
vance), Occlusion P-diff performs best, followed by
Occlusion f-diff and LRP-all (both around 50%),
then CD(36%). Unsurprisingly, Gradient per-
forms worse than random, since its relevance is
positive and thus low relevance is more likely to
identify unimportant words for the classiﬁcation
(such as stop words), rather than identify words
thatcontradict a decision, as noticed in Arras et al.
(2017b). Lastly Occlusion f-diffis less informative
than Occlusion P-diff, since the former is not nor-
malized by the classiﬁcation scores for all classes.
This analysis revealed that methods such as
LRP-all andCDcan detect inﬂuential words sup-
porting (resp. contradicting) a speciﬁc classiﬁca-
tion decision, although they were not tuned to-
wards the perturbation criterion, as opposed to Oc-
clusion (which can be seen as the brute force ap-
proach to determine the inputs the model is the
most sensitive to), whereas gradient-based meth-
ods are less accurate in this respect. Remarkably
LRP-all only require one forward and backward
pass to provide this information.
Sentence-Level Representations . In addition
to testing selectivity, we explore if the word rel-evance can be leveraged to build sentence-level
representations that present some regularities akin
word2vec vectors. For this purpose we lin-
early combine word embeddings using their re-
spective relevance as weighting12. For methods
such as LRP and GradientInput that deliver also
relevances for single variables, we perform an
element-wise weighting, i.e. we construct the sen-
tence representation as:P
tRxtxt. For ev-
ery method we report the best performing vari-
ant from previous experiments, i.e. Occlusion P-diff,
GradientInput ,CDandLRP-all . Additionally
we report simple averaging of word embeddings
(we call it Avg). Further, for LRP, we consider an
element-wise reweighting of the last time step hid-
den layerhTby its relevance, since LRP delivers
also a relevance for each intermediate neuron (we
call it LRPhT). We also tried using hTdirectly:
this gave us a visualization similar to Avg. The re-
sulting 2D whitened PCA projections of the test
set sentences are shown in Fig. 1.
Qualitatively LRP delivers the most structured
representations, although for all methods the ﬁrst
two PCA components explain most of the data
variance. Intuitively it makes also sense that the
neutral sentiment is located between the positive
and negative sentiments, and that the very nega-
tive and very positive sentiments depart from their
lower counterparts in the same vertical direction.
The advantage of having such regularities
emerging via PCA projection, is that the sen-
tence/phrase semantics might be investigated visu-
ally, without requiring any nonlinear dimensional-
ity reduction like t-SNE (typically used to explore
the representations learned by recurrent models,
e.g. in Cho et al., 2014; Li et al., 2016). Such rep-
resentations might also be useful in information
retrieval settings, where one could retrieve simi-
12W.l.o.g. we use here the true class as the target class,
since the classiﬁer’s 5-class performance is very low. In a
practical use-case one would use the predicted class instead.