sion was shown to deliver inferior results, there-
fore we consider only occlusion-based relevance.
2.3 Layer-wise relevance propagation
A general method to determine input space rele-
vances based on a backward decomposition of the
neural network prediction function is layer-wise
relevance propagation (LRP) (Bach et al., 2015).
It was originally proposed to explain feed-forward
neural networks such as convolutional neural net-
works (Bach et al., 2015; Lapuschkin et al., 2016),
and was recently extended to recurrent neural net-
works (Arras et al., 2017b; Ding et al., 2017;
Arjona-Medina et al., 2018).
LRP consists in a standard forward pass, fol-
lowed by a speciﬁc backward pass which is de-
ﬁned for each type of layer of a neural network
by dedicated propagation rules. Via this backward
pass, each neuron in the network gets assigned a
relevance, starting with the output neuron whose
relevance is set to the prediction function’s value,
i.e. tofc(x). Each LRP propagation rule redis-
tributes iteratively, layer-by-layer, the relevance
from higher-layer neurons to lower-layer neurons,
and veriﬁes a relevance conservation property2.
These rules were initially proposed in Bach et al.
(2015) and were subsequently justiﬁed by Deep
Taylor decomposition (Montavon et al., 2017) for
deep ReLU nets.
In practice, for a linear layer of the form zj=P
iziwij+bj, and given the relevances of the out-
put neurons Rj, the input neurons’ relevances Ri
are computed through the following summation:
Ri=P
jziwij
zj+sign(zj)Rj, whereis a stabilizer
(small positive number); this rule is commonly re-
ferred as-LRP or-rule3. With this redistribution
the relevance is conserved, up to the relevance as-
signed to the bias and “absorbed” by the stabilizer.
Further, for an element-wise nonlinear activa-
tion layer, the output neurons’ relevances are re-
distributed identically onto the input neurons.
In addition to the above rules, in the case of
a multiplicative layer of the form zj=zgzs,
Arras et al. (2017b) proposed to redistribute zero
relevance to the gate (the neuron that is sigmoid
2Methods based on a similar conservation principle in-
clude contribution propagation (Landecker et al., 2013),
Deep Taylor decomposition (Montavon et al., 2017), and
DeepLIFT (Shrikumar et al., 2017).
3Such a rule was employed by previous works with recur-
rent neural networks (Arras et al., 2017b; Ding et al., 2017;
Arjona-Medina et al., 2018), although there exist also other
LRP rules for linear layers (see e.g. Montavon et al., 2018)activated) i.e. Rg= 0, and assign all the rele-
vance to the remaining signal neuron (which is
usually tanh activated) i.e. Rs=Rj. We call this
LRP variant LRP-all , which stands for “signal-
take-all” redistribution. An alternative rule was
proposed in Ding et al. (2017); Arjona-Medina
et al. (2018), where the output neuron’s relevance
Rjis redistributed onto the input neurons via:
Rg=zg
zg+zsRjandRs=zs
zg+zsRj. We re-
fer to this variant as LRP-prop , for “proportional”
redistribution. We also consider two other vari-
ants. The ﬁrst one uses absolute values instead:
Rg=jzgj
jzgj+jzsjRjandRs=jzsj
jzgj+jzsjRj, we
call it LRP-abs . The second uses equal redistri-
bution:Rg=Rs= 0:5Rj(Arjona-Medina
et al., 2018), we denote it as LRP-half . We further
add a stabilizing term to the denominator of the
LRP-prop andLRP-abs formulas, it has the form
sign(zg+zs)in the ﬁrst case, and simply in
the latter.
Since the relevance can be computed in one for-
ward and backward pass, the LRP method is ef-
ﬁcient. Besides, it is general as it can be ap-
plied to any neural network made of the above lay-
ers: it was applied successfully to CNNs, LSTMs,
GRUs, and QRNNs (Poerner et al., 2018; Yang
et al., 2018)4.
2.4 Contextual Decomposition
Another method, speciﬁc to LSTMs, is contextual
decomposition ( CD) (Murdoch et al., 2018). It
is based on a linearization of the activation func-
tions that enables to decompose the LSTM for-
ward pass by distinguishing between two contri-
butions: those made by a chosen contiguous sub-
sequence (a word or a phrase) within the input se-
quence x, and those made by the remaining part
of the input. This decomposition results in a ﬁ-
nal hidden state vector hT(see the Appendix for
a full speciﬁcation of the LSTM architecture) that
can be rewritten as a sum of two vectors: Tand

T, where the former corresponds to the contribu-
tion from the “relevant” part of interest, and the
latter stems from the “irrelevant” part. When the
LSTM is followed by a linear output layer of the
formwT
chT+bcfor classc, then the relevance of
a given word (or phrase) and for the target classc,
is given by the dot product: wT
cT.
4Note that in the present work we apply LRP to stan-
dard LSTMs, though Arjona-Medina et al. (2018) showed
that some LRP rules for product layers can beneﬁt from si-
multaneously adapting the LSTM architecture.