ISSN 2775 -2658  International Journal of Robotics and Control Systems  741 Vol. 2, No. 4, 2022, pp. 739-748 
  
 
Purwono  (Understanding of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN): A Review ) 
  
Fig. 2.  Pixels of Image  
The convolutional layer employs a kernel filter to calculate the convolution of input images, 
extracting the fundamenta l features. The filter kernel has the same dimension size but a smaller 
constant parameter value than the input image [20]. For instance, the acceptable length of a kernel 
filter for a 2D scalogram with a size of 35×35×35 is 𝑓×𝑓×2, where 𝑓 = 3, 5, 7, and so on. However, 
the filter size has to be smaller t han the size of the input image. The filter mask slides across the input 
image step by step and estimates the product point between the kernel filter weight and the pixel value 
of the input image. This process results in a 2D activation map. CNN will then learn the visual feature 
of the image. The general equation of the convolutional layer can be expressed as in the (1). Fig. 3  
shows a simple illustration of the computational process in CNN that results in t he activation map.  
 𝐴𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛  𝑚𝑎𝑝 =𝐼𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡 ∗𝐹𝑖𝑙𝑡𝑒𝑟  
= ∑ (∑ 𝐼𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡 (𝑥−𝑝,𝑦−𝑞)𝐹𝑖𝑙𝑡𝑒𝑟  (𝑥,𝑦)𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑠
𝑥=0)𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑛𝑠
𝑦=0 (1) 
 
 
Fig. 3.  Convolutional Layer  
A convolutional layer is defined by: kernel size, stride length, and padding [21]. Kernel size is 
the kernel filter's size or the sliding kernel [22]. Stride length is the number of kernels that slide 
before making produc t points and creating output pixels [23]. Padding is the size of the 0 -th frame 
set up around the input feature map [24]. 
2.2. Pooling Layer  
The pooling layer will combine two consecutive convolutional layers. It reduces the number of 
parameters and computation loads by making down -sampling representations. The f unction in the 
pooling layer can result in a maximized or averaged value. A maximizing combination is often used 
for an optimal function [25]. The pooling layer is also helpful in reducing overfitting or computation 
weights. Fig. 4  represents a simple operation  in dimension reduction of an activation map using the 
max-pooling function [20].