742 International Journal of Robotics and Control Systems  ISSN 2775 -2658  Vol. 2, No.  4, 2022, pp. 739-748 
 
 
Purwono  (Understanding of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN): A Review ) 
  
Fig. 4.  Pooling Layer  
2.3. Fully Connected Layer  
The third layer is the fully connected layer, commonly called the convolutional output layer [26]. 
The fully connected layer is similar to a feedforward neural network , as shown in Fig. 5 . The layer is 
commonly found in the bottom layer of the network. It receives input from the final pooling or the 
convolutional output layer, flattened before being sent to the subsequent layer. Even distributio n of 
the output means unrolling all the values of the result obtained after the last pooling or convolutional 
layer into a vector (3D matrix). This method is a simple technique for studying high -level non -linear 
combinations of a feature represented by the  output convolutional layer [26]. 
 
Fig. 5.  Fully Connected Layer  
2.4. Nonlinearity Layer (Activation Function)  
An activation function plays an essential role in CNN layers. The filtered output provides another 
mathematical function called activation [26]. ReLU, abbreviated from th e Rectified Linear Unit [27], 
is the most common activation function in feature extraction u sing CNN. The main objective of the 
activation function is to decide the final output of a neural network, such as 'yes' or 'no'. The activation 
function maps the output values between -1 and 1, 1 and 0, and so on.  
The activation function can be differenti ated into two categories, which are [26]. 
1. Linear Activation Functions. A simplified mathematical expression of linear activation functions 
can be written as 𝐹(𝑥) = 𝐶𝑌. The input values are multiplied with the constant parameter, 𝑐, 
which is the weight of each neuron. The process results in an output that is proportional to the 
input. Linear functions can perform more than the step function since they only give a single final 
answer of yes or no and not multiple choices.  
2. Non-linear Activation Functions. Non -linear activation functi ons are used in modern neural 
networks. They allow the model to design a complicated mapping between the network's input 
and output, which is essential for complex learning and modeling systems.