IJRCS International Journal of Robotics and Control Systems  
 Vol. 2, No. 4, 202 2, pp. 739-748 
ISSN 2775 -2658  
http://pubs2.ascee.org/index.php/ijrcs  
 
 
       http://dx.doi.org/10.31763/ijrcs.v2i4.888  ijrcs@ascee.org    
  
Understanding of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN): A 
Review  
Purwono  a,1, Alfian Ma’arif  b,2,*, Wahyu Rahmaniar  c,3, Haris Imam Karim Fathurrahman  b,4, 
Aufaclav  Zatu Kusuma Frisky  d,e,5, Qazi Mazhar ul Haq  f,6 
a Universitas Harapan Bangsa , Jl. Raden Patah No. 100 Kedunglongsir Ledug Kembaran , Banyumas 53182, Indonesia  
b Department of Electrical Engineering, Universitas Ahmad Dahlan,  Banguntapan, Bantul,  Yogyakarta  55191 , Indonesia  
c Department o f Electronic Engineering, National Taipei University of T echnology,  Taipei  10608 , Taiwan  
d Institute of Visual Computing & Human -Centered Technology, Technische Universität Wien, Vienna  1040 , Austria  
e Department of Computer Science and Electronics, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta  
f Department of Computer Software Engineering, National University of Sciences and Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan  
1 purwono@uhb.ac .id; 2 alfianmaarif@ee.uad.ac.id ; 3 wahyu.rahmaniar@gmail.com ; 4 haris.fathurrahman@te.uad.ac.id ; 
5 aufaclav@ugm.ac.id ; 6 qazimazhar@mcs.nust.edu.pk   
* Corresponding Author  
 
1. Introduction  
In recent years, deep learning technology has been used in various sectors. Deep learning has 
developed human -like abilities, such as knowledge learning, problem -solving, and decision -making 
[1]. Big companies have tried to adopt the latest digital technologies, including the Internet of Things 
(IoT), Big Data, Artificial Intelligence (AI), and Blockchain [2]. Deep learning technology is a 
development of machine learning and Artificial Intelligence (AI) [3].  ARTICLE INFO   ABSTRACT  
 
Article history  
Received November  10, 2022 
Revised December  15, 2022 
Accepted  January  15, 2023  The application of deep learning technology has increased rapidly in recent 
years. Technologies in deep learning increasingly emulate natural human 
abilities, such as knowledge learning, problem -solving, and decision -
making. In general, deep learning can c arry out self -training without 
repetitive programming by humans. Convolutional neural networks 
(CNNs) are deep learning algorithms commonly used in wide applications. 
CNN is often used for image classification, segmentation, object detection, 
video process ing, natural language processing, and speech recognition. 
CNN has four layers: convolution layer, pooling layer, fully connected 
layer, and non -linear layer. The convolutional layer uses kernel filters to 
calculate the convolution of the input image by ext racting the fundamental 
features. The pooling layer combines two successive convolutional layers. 
The third layer is the fully connected layer, commonly called the 
convolutional output layer. The activation function defines the output of a 
neural network, such as 'yes' or 'no'. The most common and popular CNN 
activation functions are Sigmoid, Tanh, ReLU, Leaky ReLU, Noisy ReLU, 
and Parametric Linear Units. The organization and function of the visual 
cortex greatly influence CNN architecture because it is de signed to 
resemble the neuronal connections in the human brain. Some of the popular 
CNN architectures are LeNet, AlexNet and VGGNet.   
Keywords  
Deep Learning;  
Artificial Intelligence;  
Machine Learning;  
Convolutional Neural 
Network;  
Computer Vision;  
Image Processing  
This is an open -access article under the CC–BY-SA license.