ISSN 2775 -2658  International Journal of Robotics and Control Systems  743 Vol. 2, No. 4, 2022, pp. 739-748 
  
 
Purwono  (Understanding of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN): A Review ) 
 Some of the most common or popular activation functions in C NN and other neural networks are 
listed as follows [28]. 
1. Sigmoid: this activation function uses real numbers as inputs and limits the output between 0 and 
1. The curve of the sigmoid function is S -shaped and can be mathematically represented as in 
(2). 
𝑓(𝑥)𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑚 = 1
1+𝑒−𝑥 (2) 
2. Tanh: Apparently, the tanh function is similar to sigmoid since both use real numbers as their 
inputs. However, the tanh function limits its output in -1 and 1. The tanh function can be 
mathematically represented as in (3).  
𝑓(𝑥)𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ= 𝑒𝑥+𝑒−𝑥
𝑒𝑥+𝑒−𝑥 (3) 
3. ReLU: R eLU is the most common function used in CNN. All inputs are converted into positive 
numbers. The computational load of ReLU is relatively lower than other functions. 
Mathematically, the representation of the ReLU function is presented as in (4).  
𝑓(𝑥)𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 =max  (0,𝑥) (4) 
4. Leaky ReLu: If the ReLU function is responsible for down -scaling the negative inputs, the Leaky 
ReLU function ensures that inputs are never ignored. This function is used to solve a dying issue 
in ReLU. A mathematical representation of Leaky ReLU is presented in (5).  
𝑓(𝑥)𝐿𝑒𝑎𝑘𝑙𝑦𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 ={    𝑥, if 𝑥>0
𝑚𝑥, if 𝑥≤0} (5) 
5. Noisy ReLU: This function is used to perform Gaussi an distribution. A mathematical expression 
of the Noisy ReLU function is presented in  (6). 
𝑓(𝑥)𝑁𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑦𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 =max (x + Y),withY  ~N(0,σ(x)) (6) 
6. Parametric Linear Units: Most of this function adopts the concept of Leaky ReLu. The difference 
between both functions is shown in the leak factor updated through the training mode. A 
mathematical representation of Parametric Linear Units can be seen in (7). 
𝑓(𝑥)𝑃𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑎𝑟 ={  𝑥, if 𝑥>0
𝑎𝑥, if 𝑥≤0} (7) 
3. Popular CNN Architecture  
Architecture in CNN is influenced by the organization and function of the visual cortex [26]. The 
design is made to resemble neuron connections in human brains. After knowing several layers in CNN, 
we will discuss some popular CNN architectures in this section.  
3.1. LeNet  
Currently, the de velopment of LeNet has reached the LeNet -5 version. This version is a gradient -
based CNN learning structure and was first introduced for digital handwriting character recognition 
[29]. The structure diagram of Le Net-5 is presented in Fig. 6  [30]. The input of LeNet -5 is grayscale 
images with a dimension of 32×32×1, which then pass six feature maps of a convolutional layer with 
a 5×5 filter and a stride. Those six feature maps are pre -processed image ch annels from the 28×28×6 -
sized convolutional operation. Stride is used as sliding control of a filter when passing through the 
dataset. The sliding control uses the tanh activation function. The second pooling layer has a 2×2 filter, 
six feature maps, and t wo strides. The tanh function on the second layer results in a 14×14×6 image.