Broader Impact
This paper provides a theoretical analysis of the overﬁtting problem of (linear) autoencoders to the
identity-function when learned from data, and how it can be mitigated. These novel scientiﬁc insights
hopefully help improve autoencoders in various practical application areas, with positive societal
effects. Given that autoencoders may also be applied to collaborative ﬁltering / recommender systems,
as done in this paper for empirical illustration of the derived theoretical results, the various ethical
or societal concerns that apply to collaborative ﬁltering systems in general, like the danger of ﬁlter
bubbles or various aspects of fairness, also apply here. They may be mitigated by the fact that the
collaborative ﬁltering approach (e.g., autoencoder) is typically only one component in a larger system,
where several of the other components are tasked to guard against negative ethical and societal effects.
Acknowledgements
I am very grateful to Chaitanya Ekanadham, Ashish Rastogi, and Mahdi M. Kalayeh for their valuable
suggestions and comments, as well as to the anonymous reviewers for their useful feedback. I am
also indebted to Dawen Liang for providing the code for the experimental setup of all three data-
sets. Regarding the required Financial Disclosure, I did not receive ﬁnancial support beyond my
employment at Netﬂix.
References
[1]M.S. Advani and A.M. Saxe. High-dimensional dynamics of generalization error in neural networks, 2017.
arXiv:1710.03667.
[2]P. Bachman, O. Alsharif, and D. Precup. Learning with pseudo-ensembles. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2014.
[3]P. Baldi and P. Sadowski. Understanding dropout. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS) , 2013.
[4] P. Baldi and P. Sadowski. The dropout learning algorithm. Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2014.
[5]J. Bennet and S. Lanning. The Netﬂix Prize. In Workshop at SIGKDD-07, ACM Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining , 2007.
[6]T. Bertin-Mahieux, D.P.W. Ellis, B. Whitman, and P. Lamere. The million song dataset. In International
Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR) , 2011.
[7]C.M. Bishop. Training with noise is equivalent to Tikhonov regularization. Neural Computation , 7, 1995.
[8]S. Boyd, N. Parikh, E. Chu, B. Peleato, and J. Eckstein. Distributed optimization and statistical learning
via the alternating direction method of multipliers. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning , 3:1–122,
2011.
[9]J. Cavazza, P. Morerio, B. Haeffele, C. Lane, V . Murino, and R. Vidal. Dropout as a low-rank regularizer
for matrix factorization. In International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) ,
2018.
[10] M. Chen, Z. Xu, K. Q. Weinberger, and F. Sha. Marginalized denoising autoencoders for domain adaptation.
InInternational Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2012.
[11] M. Cissé, P. Bojanowski, É. Grave, Y .N. Dauphin, and N. Usunier. Parseval networks: improving robustness
to adversarial examples. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2017.
[12] D. Gabay and B. Mercier. A dual algorithm for the solution of nonlinear variational problems via ﬁnite
element approximations. Computers and Mathematics with Applications , 2:17–40, 1976.
[13] R. Glowinski and A. Marrocco. Sur l’approximation, par elements ﬁnis d’ordre un, et la resolution, par
penalisation–dualite, d’une classe de problems de dirichlet non lineares. Revue Francaise d’Automatique,
Informatique, et Recherche Operationelle , 9:41–76, 1975.
[14] C. Guo, A. Mousavi, X. Wu, D.N. Holtmann-Rice, S. Kale, S. Reddi, and S. Kumar. Breaking the
glass ceiling for embedding-based classiﬁers for large output spaces. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2019.
[15] F. M. Harper and J. A. Konstan. The MovieLens datasets: History and context. ACM Transactions on
Interactive Intelligent Systems (TiiS) , 5, 2015.
[16] D. P. Helmbold and P. M. Long. On the inductive bias of dropout. JMLR , 2015.
10