Autoencoders that don’t overﬁt towards the Identity
Harald Steck
Netﬂix
Los Gatos, California
hsteck@netflix.com
Abstract
Autoencoders (AE) aim to reproduce the output from the input. They may hence
tend to overﬁt towards learning the identity-function between the input and output,
i.e., they may predict each feature in the output from itself in the input. This is
not useful, however, when AEs are used for prediction tasks in the presence of
noise in the data. It may seem intuitively evident that this kind of overﬁtting is
prevented by training a denoising AE [ 36], as the dropped-out features have to be
predicted from the other features. In this paper, we consider linear autoencoders,
as they facilitate analytic solutions, and ﬁrst show that denoising / dropout actually
prevents the overﬁtting towards the identity-function only to the degree that it is
penalized by the induced L2-norm regularization. In the main theorem of this paper,
we show that the emphasized denoising AE [ 37] is indeed capable of completely
eliminating the overﬁtting towards the identity-function. Our derivations reveal
several new insights, including the closed-form solution of the full-rank model, as
well as a new (near-)orthogonality constraint in the low-rank model. While this
constraint is conceptually very different from the regularizers recently proposed
in [11,42,14], their resulting effects on the learned embeddings are empirically
similar. Our experiments on three well-known data-sets corroborate the various
theoretical insights derived in this paper.
1 Introduction and Motivation
Autoencoders (AE) have been successful in various unsupervised problems, including machine
translation (e.g. [ 34]), computer vision (e.g., [ 30]) and recommender systems (e.g., [ 41]). In machine
learning applications, their prediction accuracy on noisy test-data is often more important than the
learned encodings/representations. The latter are often simply a means for achieving high prediction
accuracy. Given a data-point as input, an AE aims to reconstruct the feature-values of this data-point
in its output-layer. Obviously, the trivial yet futile solution is to learn literally the identity-function
between the input and output-layer (given sufﬁciently large model-capacity), i.e., to predict each
featureiin the output-layer from the same featureiin the input-layer. As to achieve high prediction
accuracy on noisy data, however, the AE should ideally learn all the relevant dependences/interactions
among the various features, i.e., feature iin the output-layer should be predicted by taking into
account all other featuresj6=iit depends on in the input-layer. Intuitively speaking, when the
learned AE makes predictions for a feature iin the output-layer by relying ‘too much’ on the same
featureiin the input-layer (i.e., identity function), and ‘not enough’ on the other featuresj6=iit
depends on, we call this overﬁtting towards the identity function in this paper.1Even if the model-
capacity is limited, the training may still tend to overﬁt towards the identity-function, as we will show
in this paper.
1Note that the objective in this paper is still to minimize the reconstruction error–by predicting feature i
in the output-layer from the other features j 6=iin the input-layer, i.e., without learning literally the identity
function or overﬁtting towards it.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.