Improved Mixed-Example Data Augmentation
Cecilia Summers
Department of Computer Science
University of Auckland
cecilia.summers.07@gmail.comMichael J. Dinneen
Department of Computer Science
University of Auckland
mjd@cs.auckland.ac.nz
Abstract
In order to reduce overﬁtting, neural networks are
typically trained with data augmentation, the practice
of artiﬁcially generating additional training data via
label-preserving transformations of existing training exam-
ples. While these types of transformations make intuitive
sense, recent work has demonstrated that even non-label-
preserving data augmentation can be surprisingly effec-
tive, examining this type of data augmentation through lin-
ear combinations of pairs of examples. Despite their ef-
fectiveness, little is known about why such methods work.
In this work, we aim to explore a new, more generalized
form of this type of data augmentation in order to deter-
mine whether such linearity is necessary. By consider-
ing this broader scope of “mixed-example data augmenta-
tion”, we ﬁnd a much larger space of practical augmenta-
tion techniques, including methods that improve upon pre-
vious state-of-the-art. This generalization has beneﬁts be-
yond the promise of improved performance, revealing a
number of types of mixed-example data augmentation that
are radically different from those considered in prior work,
which provides evidence that current theories for the ef-
fectiveness of such methods are incomplete and suggests
that any such theory must explain a much broader phe-
nomenon. Code is available at https://github.com/
ceciliaresearch/MixedExample .
1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have demonstrated remarkable
performance on many tasks previously considered in-
tractable, but they come with a cost: they require large
amounts of data. While great progress has been made at
making neural nets more data-efﬁcient through the use of
improved network architectures and training methods, the
limitation remains, with the greatest effect in data-starved
domains such as robotics [18, 19] and medical applica-
tions [4, 8, 7].
To get around the requirement for large amounts of
data, machine learning practitioners typically either trans-
Linear Methods
Input
Generalized
Figure 1. Given two input examples, mixed-example data aug-
mentation consists of the set of functions that combine the inputs
into a novel image, perhaps with an appearance unrealistic to hu-
mans. Previous work has considered the case of linear transfor-
mations, i.e.element-wise weighted averaging. In this work, we
explore a more generalized space of functions in order to deter-
mine whether non-linear functions are similarly effective. Shown
above are examples of 8 of the methods considered in this work,
all of which result in improved performance over non-mixed ex-
ample augmentation, illustrating that the space of viable functions
is much broader than previously realized.
fer knowledge from other tasks, or employ large amounts
of “data augmentation”, the practice of generating synthetic
data based on real examples. This synthetic data artiﬁcially
expands the size of datasets used for training models by
many orders of magnitude, and typically takes the form of
transformations that maintain the realistic appearance of the
input, e.g.for image classiﬁcation, ﬂipping an image hori-
zontally or making minor adjustments to its brightness.
A handful of recent work, however, has pointed out a
new direction: data augmentation can take the form of mix-
ing training examples together, speciﬁcally via element-
wise averages of pairs of inputs [27, 24, 25, 12]. ThougharXiv:1805.11272v4  [cs.CV]  19 Jan 2019