Caltech-256Method Accuracy (%)
Inception-v3 48.6
mixup [27] 57.3
BC+[24] 57.4
VH-Mixup 56.3
VH-BC+ 59.7
Table 3. Experimental results on Caltech-256. Accuracies are de-
termined by a single run of model training, with evaluation check-
points picked based on maximum validation performance.
performed prior work on CIFAR-100 (8 for CIFAR-100 vs
3 for CIFAR-10). While we do not offer any compelling
hypothesis for this change, it provides evidence that at
least some minor differences in effectiveness between each
mixed-example method are likely to be data-dependent.
A further point worth noting, shared across both CIFAR-
10 and CIFAR-100, is that row-based methods performed
better than their column-based counterparts: “Vert. Con-
cat” outperformed “Horiz. Concat”, “Rand. Rows” outper-
formed “Rand. Cols”, and “Rand. Row. Int” improved upon
“Rand. Col. Int”. This potentially indicates the importance
of keeping horizontal information intact when doing data
augmentation, a ﬁnding reminiscent of much older work in
picking horizontally-shaped spatial pooling grids [17].
Caltech-256. In order to test methods for mixed-
example data augmentation on larger, more real-world im-
ages, we additionally evaluate on Caltech-256 [6], a dataset
of 256 categories. Since there is no canonical training, val-
idation, or test splits, we constructed splits by randomly
taking 40 images from each category for training, 10 for
validation, and 30 for testing, resulting in splits of size
10,240, 2560, and 7,680, respectively. While smaller than
other datasets of large natural images, e.g.ImageNet [20],
experiments are also much more tractable, taking roughly
10 hours on average when training from scratch, compared
with an estimated 25 days to run a single ImageNet ex-
periment, which is prohibitively long. For this set of ex-
periments, we focused our analysis on the best-performing
methods from CIFAR-10 and 100, “VH-Mixup” and “VH-
BC+”, in addition to the three baselines. Results are pre-
sented in Table 3.
Most noticeably, we found that allmixed-example data
augmentation methods were able to improve performance
over the baseline Inception-v3 network. The effect is dra-
matic, with improvements of up to 10% in accuracy above
baseline. This highlights the strength of mixed-example
methods, particularly with high-capacity models, a ﬁnding
that strengthens results from prior work [27, 24].
Within the set of mixed-example methods, though, or-
dering is less obvious — while it is clear that “VH-BC+”
was particularly successful, the reason by which it was somuch better than “VH-Mixup” remains mysterious. It is
also worth noting that conﬁdence intervals for these exper-
iments are somewhat wide: a 95% conﬁdence interval due
to data sampling alone is roughly 1%at current accuracy
levels, and the true interval is likely larger due to additional
run-to-run variance from random initialization and data pro-
cessing. Despite these limitations in measurement, we see
these results as highly encouraging for applied tasks where
data may be limited and performance is critical.
5. Discussion
In this paper we explored the space of mixed-example
data augmentation, in the process generalizing and improv-
ing upon recent work [27, 24, 12]. We sought to determine
whether linearity was necessary in order for mixed-example
data augmentation to be effective, and in the process of
answering that question, found a surprisingly large spec-
trum of non-linear methods that resulted in improvements
over models trained with standard augmentation methods.
Our methods, though speciﬁc to image-based tasks, are
straightforward to implement and do not require any hyper-
parameter tuning beyond those in existing methods [27, 24].
Though we considered a variety of methods in this work, the
ﬁeld of mixed-example data augmentation is still in its early
stages, and we postulate that it is likely even more effective
methods exist. We hope that our explorations inspire further
research in the area.
Key questions for future research include developing
an understanding for why mixed-example data augmenta-
tion works and determining which speciﬁc properties of
such augmentation methods are useful. We have shown
that it is possible to combine the strengths of multiple ap-
proaches, but it remains unclear what the limits of mixed-
example data augmentation are. On a lower level, it would
also be interesting to understand the relationship between
mixed-example data augmentation and other more tradi-
tional forms of data augmentation. For example, we found
the puzzling behavior that mixed-example data augmenta-
tion is only effective when performed after other forms of
data augmentation, and even this simple detail eludes cur-
rent understanding.
One disadvantage of our approach is that, unlike some
prior work [27, 24], our methods operate only on images.
While this is true, we believe it is likely that domain-speciﬁc
approaches such as ours can be made for other problems,
such as speech [10] or natural language processing [2]. Fur-
thermore, we believe that such approaches are actually most
important for domain-speciﬁc tasks, such as robotics [18],
which also tend to be the most data-starved and in need of
improved methodology and further research.