this type of data augmentation does not produce data real-
istic to humans, it is surprisingly effective at training mod-
els, signiﬁcantly improving performance across a variety of
tasks and domains even after other forms of data augmenta-
tion are considered. Due to the nascency of such techniques,
we currently do not have a good understanding of why they
are effective. One hypothesis comes from Zhang et al. [27],
who suggest that the added linearity this form of data aug-
mentation encourages is a useful inductive bias. Another
is from Tokozume et al. [24], who put forth the idea that
CNNs treat imagery as waveform data and that such data
augmentation puts constraints on internal feature distribu-
tions. While the true modus operandi by which these meth-
ods are successful remains an area of active research, these
works nevertheless point to new directions for reducing the
dependence of modern deep neural networks on large quan-
tities of labeled data.
In this paper, we ask the question: is linearity critical to
the success of these data augmentation methods that com-
bine multiple input examples? To answer this question,
we explore this new area of data augmentation as general-
ized functions of multiple inputs, which we denote “mixed-
example data augmentation”. We propose a variety of al-
ternative methods for example generation, and surprisingly
ﬁnd that almost all methods result in improvements over
models trained without any form of mixed-example data
augmentation (see Fig. 1 for examples). As a byproduct
of increasing this search space, we ﬁnd multiple methods
that improve upon existing work [27, 24]. Though we do
not propose new theoretical reasons for the utility of mixed-
example data augmentation, our experiments shed empirical
light on existing hypotheses, providing evidence that they
are incomplete.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In
Sec. 2 we review related work in data augmentation and reg-
ularization more generally, and in Sec. 3 we present our ex-
ploration of mixed-example data augmentation, overview-
ing 14 alternatives. We present experiments on CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100, and Caltech-256 in Sec. 4, then conclude with
a discussion in Sec. 5.
2. Related Work
Data Augmentation. Data augmentation is key to the
success of most modern neural networks across nearly every
domain. Here we limit our discussion of data augmentation
to applications with images, the focus of this work.
Common forms of data augmentation include random
crops, horizontal ﬂipping, and color augmentation [15],
which improve robustness to translation, reﬂection, and il-
lumination, respectively. Occasionally, random scalings are
also done [21] as well as random rotations and afﬁne trans-
formations, though these tend to get somewhat less use.
One more recent form of data augmentation consists of ze-roing out random parts of the image [3, 28], a structured
form of input-layer dropout, which works surprisingly well
on the CIFAR-10/100 datasets. Though they differ greatly
in technique, all of these methods are a form of label-
preserving data augmentation, i.e. they are designed to
maintain the label of the transformed image, which requires
a small amount of task-speciﬁc knowledge. For example, in
the context of image classiﬁcation, an image of a cat, even
after horizontally ﬂipping it and altering its brightness, is
still recognizable as an image of a cat.
More directly relevant to our work is recent progress on
generating images for training as linear combinations of
other training images [27, 24, 12]. While we save a de-
tailed overview for Sec. 3.2, these methods take the gen-
eral form of randomly generating a mixing coefﬁcient and
producing a new image and label as a convex combination
of two images/labels. Tokozume et al. [24] further consid-
ered an improved form based on the interpretation of im-
ages as waveform data, and Inoue restricted the sampling
coefﬁcient to 0:5. Our research, inspired by these, consid-
ers more generalized functions of a different form, showing
that the space of effective mixed-example data augmenta-
tion is much more broad than linearity-based methods.
Regularization. Closely related to the topic of data
augmentation is regularization. One of the most common
approaches to regularization is weight decay [16], which
is equivalent to L2-regularization when using a vanilla
stochastic gradient descent learning rule. Other common
types of regularization include Dropout [22], which can also
be considered a form of feature-space data augmentation in-
jected at intermediate layers in a neural network, and Batch
Normalization [13], which has a regularization effect due
to randomness in minibatch statistics. Other more exotic
forms of regularization include randomly dropping out lay-
ers [11] and introducing disparities between forward- and
backward-propagation [5]. Data augmentation and regu-
larization can both be viewed as ways to incorporate prior
knowledge into models, either via invariances in data (label-
preserving data augmentation) or through priors on how
weights and activations in neural networks should behave
(regularization), and both have the goal of reducing the
train-test generalization gap. As such, it is folk wisdom that
there is a tradeoff between the optimal amount of data aug-
mentation and regularization to use — for example, Zhang
et. al [27] found that using mixup well required a 5x lower
amount of weight decay than without mixup on CIFAR-10.
3. Methods
3.1. General Formulation
Most uses of label-preserving data augmentation can be
represented by stochastic functions of the form
(~x;~y) =~f(x;y) = (f(x);y): (1)