feed-forward CNNs. Second, it makes assumptions on cluster distributions of predictions. This might
not be a problem if the training of CapsNets successfully learns to ﬁt the weights to the assumptions.
However, it is likely that the routing-by-agreement tends to fail when a number of prediction vectors
become noisy so that they are clustered in an unexpected form.
In this work, we aim to overcome the above limitations by proposing a new and surprisingly simple
routing strategy that does not involve agreement anymore. In our algorithm, the contribution of a
lower-level capsule to a higher-level capsule is determined by its activation and the routing decision
by its subordinate routing network. We refer to this design of routing as self-routing . To the best of
our knowledge, there is no previous literature on removing the routing-by-agreement from CapsNets.
Our method is motivated by the structural resemblance between CapsNets and Mixture-of-Experts
(MoE) [ 18,7,36,20]. They are similar in that their composing units ( i.e. capsules and experts)
specialize in different regions of input space and that their contributions are adjusted differently
per example. One key difference is that, in CapsNets, gating values are dynamically adjusted to
suppress potentially unreliable submodules via the routing-by-agreement. However, if the robustness
of CapsNets can be retained without the routing-by-agreement, then we might be able to safely
remove the unsupervised clustering part that causes the two aforementioned weaknesses.
For evaluation, we compare our self-routing to the two most prominent routing-by-agreement,
dynamic [ 34] and EM [ 16] routing on CIFAR-10 [ 22], SVHN [ 42] and SmallNORB [ 24] datasets.
We compare not only classiﬁcation accuracies but also robustness under adversarial attacks and
viewpoint changes. For fairness, we use the same CNN base architectures ( e.g. 7-layer CNN and
ResNet-20) and replace only the last layers of the original networks to respective capsule layers.
Compared to the previous routing-by-agreement methods [ 16,34], the self-routing achieves better
classiﬁcation performance in most cases while using signiﬁcantly fewer computations in FLOPs.
Moreover, it shows stronger robustness under both perturbations of adversarial attacks and viewpoint
changes. We also show that our self-routing beneﬁts more the CapsNets from the increase in model
sizes ( i.e. wider capsule layers), while the previous methods often degrade.
2 Related Work
Capsule networks . Recently, capsule networks have been actively applied to many domains, such
as generative models [ 19], object localization [ 27], and graph networks [ 40], to name a few. Hinton
et al. [15] ﬁrst introduced the idea of capsules and equivariance in neural networks. In their work,
autoencoders are trained to generate images with the desired transformation; yet the model requires
transformation parameters to be supplied externally. Later, Sabour et al. [34] proposed a more
complete model in which transformations are directly learnable from the data. To control the
information ﬂow between adjacent capsule layers, they employed a mechanism named dynamic
routing . Since then, alternative routing methods have been suggested. Hinton et al. [16] proposed to
use Gaussian-mixture clustering. Bahadori et al. [3] made convergence faster via eigendecomposition
of prediction vectors. Wang et al. [41] formalized the routing process to suggest a theoretically
reﬁned version. Li et al. [25] approximated the routing process with the interaction between master
and aide branches. Compared to all of the previous work, our routing approach is free from agreement
but focuses on its ability of mixture-of-experts.
Mixture-of-experts. There have been many attempts to incorporate mixture-of-experts (MoE) into
deep network models. Eigen et al. [7] stacked multiple layers of MoE to create an exponentially
increasing number of inference paths. Shazeer et al. [36] used sparsely-gated MoE between stacked
LSTM layers to expand model capacity with only a minor loss in computational efﬁciency. In [ 30],
architectural diversity is added by allowing experts to be an identity function or a pooling operation.
Kirsch et al. [21] modularized a network so that neural modules can be selected on a per-example
basis. In [ 33], a routing network is trained to choose appropriate function blocks for the input and task.
This work interprets the origin of CapsNet’s strengths as the behavior of MoE, and such perspective
leads to our self-routing design.
CNN fragility. Despite the great success of CNNs, many recent studies have raised concerns about
their robustness [ 8,9,14]. Unlike humans, CNNs easily yield incorrect answers when presented
with rotated images [8, 9]. Surprisingly, little improvement is observed in terms of noise robustness
even for recent deep CNNs that are highly successful on image classiﬁcation tasks [ 14]. However,
2