4.2 Self-Routing
We name the CapsNet model with our proposed self-routing as SR-CapsNet . Figure 2(a)–(b) illustrate
the high-level difference between the self-routing and the routing-by-agreement. In the self-routing,
each capsule determines its routing coefﬁcients by itself without coordinating the agreement with peer
capsules. Instead, each capsule is endowed higher modeling power by a subordinate routing network .
Following the MoE literature [ 36], we design the routing network as single-layer perceptrons,
although it is straightforward to extend it to an MLP. The routing coefﬁcients also work as the
predicted activations of output capsules. That is, an upper-level capsule is more likely to be activated
if more capsules have high routing coefﬁcients to it.
The self-routing involves two learnable weight matrices, WrouteandWpose, which are used to
compute routing coefﬁcients cijand predictions ^ujji, respectively. Each layer of the routing network
multiplies the pose vector uiby a trainable weight matrix Wroute
iand outputs the routing coefﬁcients
civia a softmax layer. The routing coefﬁcients cijare then multiplied by the capsule’s activation
scalaraito generate weighted votes. The activation ajof an upper-layer capsule is simply the
summation of the weighted votes of lower-level capsules over spatial dimensions HW(orKK
when using convolution). In summary,
cij=softmax (Wroute
iui)j; aj=P
i2
lcijaiP
i2
lai: (3)
The pose of the upper-layer capsule is determined by the weighted average of prediction vectors:
^ ujji=Wpose
ijui;uj=P
i2
lcijai^ujjiP
i2
lcijai: (4)
5 Experiments
In experiments, we focus on comparing our self-routing scheme with the two most impor-
tant agreement-based routing algorithms from multiple perspectives. We ﬁrst evaluate the im-
age classiﬁcation performance (section 5.2). We then compare the robustness against unseen
input perturbations, since such generalization abilities have been the key motivation of Cap-
sNets. Especially, we experiment the robustness against adversarial examples (section 5.3) and
viewpoint changes by afﬁne transformation (section 5.4). Our full source code is available at
http://vision.snu.ac.kr/projects/self-routing .
5.1 Experimental Settings
Datasets . Following CapsNet literature, we mostly use two classiﬁcation benchmarks of CIFAR-10
[22] and SVHN [ 42] and additionally SmallNORB [ 24] for the afﬁne transformation tests. During
training on CIFAR-10 and SVHN, we augment using random crop, random horizontal ﬂip, and
normalization. For SmallNORB, we follow the setting of [ 16]; we downsample training images to
4848, randomly crop 3232patches, and add random brightness and contrast. Test images are
center cropped after downsampled.
Architectures . For a fair comparison, we let all routing algorithms share the same base CNN
architecture. We choose ResNet-20 [ 13] designed for CIFAR-10 classiﬁcation for the following two
reasons. First, the ResNet is one of the best performing CNN architectures in various computer
vision applications [ 4,11,26,31,32]. It would be interesting to verify whether employing capsule
structures can beneﬁt mainstream CNNs. Second, the ResNet is mostly composed of Conv layers,
which makes it easy to implement CapsNets due to the similar structure between them. Note that
CapsNets consist of only Conv layers and capsule layers. Given that ResNet-20 [ 13] consists of
19 Conv layers followed by the last average pooling and FC layers, we can build a CapsNet on
top of it by replacing the last two layers by a primary capsule (PrimaryCaps) and fully-connected
capsule (FCCaps) layers, respectively. However, SmallNORB dataset is much less complex than
CIFAR-10/SVHN, and its training set is relatively small (16200 samples), we use a 7-layer CNN,
which is a shallower network with no shortcut connection. It consists of 6 CONV layers, followed by
AvgPool and FC layers.
We also measure the performance variations according to the depth and width of capsule layers. The
depth means how many routing layers are inserted after the PrimaryCaps layer. Thus, the depth of
5