Self-Routing Capsule Networks
Taeyoung Hahn Myeongjang Pyeon Gunhee Kim
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{taeyounghahn,mjpyeon,gunhee}@snu.ac.kr
http://vision.snu.ac.kr/projects/self-routing
Abstract
Capsule networks have recently gained a great deal of interest as a new architecture
of neural networks that can be more robust to input perturbations than similar-sized
CNNs. Capsule networks have two major distinctions from the conventional CNNs:
(i) each layer consists of a set of capsules that specialize in disjoint regions of the
feature space and (ii) the routing-by-agreement coordinates connections between
adjacent capsule layers. Although the routing-by-agreement is capable of ﬁltering
out noisy predictions of capsules by dynamically adjusting their inﬂuences, its
unsupervised clustering nature causes two weaknesses: (i) high computational
complexity and (ii) cluster assumption that may not hold in the presence of heavy
input noise. In this work, we propose a novel and surprisingly simple routing
strategy called self-routing , where each capsule is routed independently by its
subordinate routing network. Therefore, the agreement between capsules is not
required anymore, but both poses and activations of upper-level capsules are
obtained in a way similar to Mixture-of-Experts. Our experiments on CIFAR-
10, SVHN, and SmallNORB show that the self-routing performs more robustly
against white-box adversarial attacks and afﬁne transformations, requiring less
computation.
1 Introduction
In the past years, deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become the de-facto standard
architecture in image classiﬁcation tasks, thanks to their high representational power. However, an
important yet unanswered question is whether deep networks can truly generalize. Well-trained
networks can be catastrophically fooled by the images with carefully designed perturbations that
are even unrecognizable by human eyes [ 23,29,37,38]. Furthermore, natural, non-adversarial pose
changes of familiar objects are enough to trick deep networks [ 1,8]. The later is more depressing
since natural pose changes are universal in the real world.
Some research [ 5,15] has argued that neural networks should aim for equivariance , not invariance .
The reasoning is that, by preserving variations of an entity in a group of neurons (equivariance) rather
than only detecting its existence (invariance), it would be easier to learn the underlying spatial relations
and thus yield better generalization. Following this argument, a new network architecture called
capsule networks (CapsNets) and a mechanism called routing-by-agreement have been introduced
[16,34]. In this design of networks, each capsule contains a pose (orinstantiation parameters ) for
encoding patterns of its responsible entity. Active capsules in one layer make pose predictions for
capsules in the next layer via transformation matrices. Then, the routing algorithm ﬁnds a center-
of-mass among the predictions via iterative clustering and ensures that only the majority opinion is
passed down to the next layer.
While the routing-by-agreement [ 16,34] has shown to be effective, its unsupervised clustering nature
causes two inherent weaknesses. First, it requires repeatedly computing means and membership
scores of prediction vectors. This makes CapsNets much computationally heavier than one-pass
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.