the standard GAN loss over sequences of vectors may not be sufﬁcient to ensure that the dynamics of
the network efﬁciently captures stepwise dependencies present in the training data.
In this paper, we propose a novel mechanism to tie together both threads of research, giving rise to a
generative model explicitly trained to preserve temporal dynamics. We present Time-series Generative
Adversarial Networks (TimeGAN), a natural framework for generating realistic time-series data in
various domains. First, in addition to the unsupervised adversarial loss on both real and synthetic
sequences, we introduce a stepwise supervised loss using the original data as supervision, thereby
explicitly encouraging the model to capture the stepwise conditional distributions in the data. This
takes advantage of the fact that there is more information in the training data than simply whether each
datum is real or synthetic; we can expressly learn from the transition dynamics from real sequences.
Second, we introduce an embedding network to provide a reversible mapping between features and
latent representations, thereby reducing the high-dimensionality of the adversarial learning space.
This capitalizes on the fact the temporal dynamics of even complex systems are often driven by fewer
and lower-dimensional factors of variation. Importantly, the supervised loss is minimized by jointly
training both the embedding and generator networks, such that the latent space not only serves to
promote parameter efﬁciency—it is speciﬁcally conditioned to facilitate the generator in learning
temporal relationships. Finally, we generalize our framework to handle the mixed-data setting, where
both static and time-series data can be generated at the same time.
Our approach is the ﬁrst to combine the ﬂexibility of the unsupervised GAN framework with the
control afforded by supervised training in autoregressive models. We demonstrate the advantages
in a series of experiments on multiple real-world and synthetic datasets. Qualitatively, we conduct
t-SNE [ 7] and PCA [ 8] analyses to visualize how well the generated distributions resemble the
original distributions. Quantitatively, we examine how well a post-hoc classiﬁer can distinguish
between real and generated sequences. Furthermore, by applying the "train on synthetic, test on real
(TSTR)" framework [ 5,9] to the sequence prediction task, we evaluate how well the generated data
preserves the predictive characteristics of the original. We ﬁnd that TimeGAN achieves consistent
and signiﬁcant improvements over state-of-the-art benchmarks in generating realistic time-series.
2 Related Work
TimeGAN is a generative time-series model, trained adversarially and jointly via a learned embedding
space with both supervised and unsupervised losses. As such, our approach straddles the intersection
of multiple strands of research, combining themes from autoregressive models for sequence prediction,
GAN-based methods for sequence generation, and time-series representation learning.
Autoregressive recurrent networks trained via the maximum likelihood principle [ 10] are prone to
potentially large prediction errors when performing multi-step sampling, due to the discrepancy
between closed-loop training ( i.e. conditioned on ground truths) and open-loop inference ( i.e.
conditioned on previous guesses). Based on curriculum learning [ 11], Scheduled Sampling was
ﬁrst proposed as a remedy, whereby models are trained to generate output conditioned on a mix of
both previous guesses and ground-truth data [ 1]. Inspired by adversarial domain adaptation [ 12],
Professor Forcing involved training an auxiliary discriminator to distinguish between free-running
and teacher-forced hidden states, thus encouraging the network’s training and sampling dynamics to
converge [ 2]. Actor-critic methods [ 13] have also been proposed, introducing a critic conditioned
on target outputs, trained to estimate next-token value functions that guide the actor’s free-running
predictions [ 3]. However, while the motivation for these methods is similar to ours in accounting for
stepwise transition dynamics, they are inherently deterministic, and do not accommodate explicitly
sampling from a learned distribution—central to our goal of synthetic data generation.
On the other hand, multiple studies have straightforwardly inherited the GAN framework within the
temporal setting. The ﬁrst (C-RNN-GAN) [ 4] directly applied the GAN architecture to sequential
data, using LSTM networks for generator and discriminator. Data is generated recurrently, taking as
inputs a noise vector and the data generated from the previous time step. Recurrent Conditional GAN
(RCGAN) [ 5] took a similar approach, introducing minor architectural differences such as dropping
the dependence on the previous output while conditioning on additional input [ 14]. A multitude of
applied studies have since utilized these frameworks to generate synthetic sequences in such diverse
domains as text [ 15], ﬁnance [ 16], biosignals [ 17], sensor [ 18] and smart grid data [ 19], as well as
renewable scenarios [ 20]. Recent work [ 6] has proposed conditioning on time stamp information to
2