2928 J. Naskath et al.
1 3
The classification accuracies obtained are better than the results acquired by Gaussian 
Naïve Bayes classifier. Xiaoai Dai et  al., [51] devised a DBF model to extract artificial 
target features in cities, as a hyper-spectral image. DBF performs dimensionality reduction 
and extracts the depth features of pixels. DBF provides better robustness and separabil-
ity compared with Principal component analysis. O’Connor et  al., [52] This paper pro-
poses a method based on the Siegert approximation for Integrate-and-Fire neurons to map 
an offline-trained DBN onto an efficient event-driven spiking neural network suitable for 
hardware implementation. The method is demonstrated in simulation and by a real-time 
implementation of a 3-layer network with 2694 neurons used for visual classification of 
MNIST handwritten digits with input from a 128 × 128 Dynamic Vision Sensor (DVS) 
silicon retina, and sensoryfusion using additional input from a 64-channel AER-EAR sili-
con cochlea. The system is implemented through the open-source software in the jAER 
project and runs in realtime on a laptop computer. It is demonstrated that the system can 
recognize digits in the presence of distractions, noise, scaling, translation and rotation, and 
that the degradation of recognition performance by using an event-based approach is less 
than 1%. Movahedi, faezeh et al., [46] discussed the state of- the-art algorithms for deep 
belief networks and their performances in electroencephalographic applications in medical 
fields such as emotion recognition, sleep stage classification, and seizure detection. It also 
includes the challenges and future research direction of DBF in electroencephalographic 
applications. Abdellaoui and Douik [53] suggested an optimal HAR system with a two-
phase DBN model that offers a better quality of classification prediction [54] (Table 3).
Kuldeep et al. [55], proposed to build a cluster out of the vehicles based on their relay 
nodes, distrust values, and recommendation and experience-based faith vehicles. Deep 
Belief Network (DBN) used the threshold value discovered to classify the vehicles into 
three lists: regular, irregular, and vicious. By removing the malicious nodes from the 
VANET network [56], this belief result from the FBTRP-DBN model enables the selec-
tion of an ideal cluster head using the highest trustworthy node [57]. According to that 
it improved the overall connectivity and throughput of the network [26, 58]. Moreover, 
the classification algorithm provided the varied results based on the involving vehicles 
types and counts i.e.real time data sets [59]. The challenges faced by these algorithms are 
depicted in the Fig. 7.
5.3  Limitations of MLP , SOM and DBN Algorithms
MLP with back propagation has feeble generalization ability for statistically neutral prob-
lems. Hence the model does not know the expected output, and the relation between differ -
ent input variables determines the output.MLP has too many parameters as it is fully con-
nected, resulting in redundancy and inefficiency [6].MLP disregards Spatial information in 
solving problems. SOM minimizes the volume of the dataset, making it easier to visualize 
and form clusters. However, it has several flaws, including poor handling of categorical 
variables. Solutions for enormous data sets are computationally demanding and potentially 
inaccurate. As per DBN, it needs High energy and large space requirement for its execu-
tion. The huge requirement of Random Number Generators (RNGs) drops deep belief net-
works energy efficiency [60].
Moreover, in DBN, Learning time is prolonged in a back-propagation neural network 
with multiple hidden layers. Greedy learning is inefficient in the directed module as the 
posterior is not factorizable in each training case. Integrating the overall organization of