Vol.:(0123456789)Wireless Personal Communications (2023) 128:2913–2936
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11277-022-10079-4
1 3
A Study on Different Deep Learning Algorithms Used in Deep 
Neural Nets: MLP SOM and DBN
J. Naskath1 · G. Sivakamasundari1 · A. Alif Siddiqua Begum1,2
Accepted: 28 September 2022 / Published online: 19 October 2022 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2022
Abstract
Deep learning is a wildly popular topic in machine learning and is structured as a series of 
nonlinear layers that learns various levels of data representations. Deep learning employs 
numerous layers to represent data abstractions to implement various computer models. 
Deep learning approaches like generative, discriminative models and model transfer have 
transformed information processing. This article proposes a comprehensive review of vari-
ous deep learning algorithms Multi layer perception, Self-organizing map and deep belief 
networks algorithms. It first briefly introduces historical and recent state-of-the-art reviews 
with suitable architectures and implementation steps. Moreover, the various applications 
of those algorithms in various fields such as wireless networks, Adhoc networks, Mobile 
ad-hoc and vehicular ad-hoc networks, speech recognition engineering, medical applica-
tions, natural language processing, material science and remote sensing applications, etc. 
are classified.
Keywords Machine learning algorithms · Multi layer perception · Self organising maps · 
Deep belief networks · Deep neural nets · Application of algorithms
1 Introduction
Nowadays, deep learning models significantly impact extracting information or hidden 
patterns from enormous amounts of data with greater accuracy. Compared to conven-
tional machine learning approaches, deep learning can solve complex problems and cor -
relate the interdependent variables. However, traditional neural networks SOM, MLP 
 * J. Naskath 
 naskath.neccse@gmail.com
 G. Sivakamasundari 
 gssundari1973@gmail.com
 A. Alif Siddiqua Begum 
 alifsiddi@gmail.com
1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Engineering College, Kovilpatti, 
TamilNadu, India
2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, S. Abdur Rahman Crescent Institute of Science 
and Technology, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India