2926 J. Naskath et al.
1 3
network connects to CAN buses inside the car. Many hybrid methods, combining the SOM 
network with other clustering methods, such as the k-means algorithm, have been proposed 
to improve the accuracy of the model. Several data sets, including those for automobile 
hacking, spoofing, fuzzy data, and denial-of-service attacks, are used for simulation.
5  Deep Belief Network
Nowadays, Machine Learning dominates research interests due to its vast application in 
various fields. “Deep Learning,” a type of machine learning algorithm also known as Rep-
resentation Learning [42] has its application in multimedia concept retrieval, text mining, 
social network analysis and video recommendation. Deep Learning represents ANN with 
layered network topologies of neuron models (Fig. 5).
5.1  Architecture, Algorithm and Characteristics of DBN
Hinton et al. [43], Deep Belief Network (DBN) [22] is a popular deep learning algorithm 
representing advanced learning methodology, more profound architecture, and high-level 
abstraction of biological modelling, giving rise to simplified mathematical models. Its net-
work architecture is inspired by artificial intelligence (AI) research study replicate human-
level intelligence.
DBN, an alternate class of Deep Neural Network, is a graphical model with multiple 
layers of ‘hidden units’ with a connection within layers and not within each layer [22]. 
Trained Unsupervision DBN reconstructs its inputs probabilistically acting as feature 
detectors, whereas trained Supervision DBN is utilized for classification. Restricted Boltz-
mann Machine (RBM)/autoencoders is an unsupervised DBN representing an undirected, 
generative energy-based model where hidden layer acts as a visible layer for the succes-
sor. When trained greedily layer-wise, DBN leads to an effective deep learning algorithm 
[44]. Overall deep belief network real-time application scenarios include computer vision, 
electroencephalography [45], drug discovery [46], natural language processing, speech rec-
ognition, material inspection, board game programs, and so forth, with fantastic outcomes 
surpassing human expert achievement. Figure  6 represents the algorithmic steps of the 
Deep Belief Network.
5.2  Application of DBN
Liu et al. [47] suggested a model for image classification using Deep belief network. In this, 
the stacked restricted Boltzmann machine make use of contrastive divergence algorithm 
for feature extraction and softmax layer make use of Evolutionary Gradient Descent(EGD) 
strategy to classify the extracted features. The acceleration rate of EGD is remarkable com-
pared to Gradient Descent algorithm. Jianjian Yang et al. [48] proposed a model for deep 
fault recognition using Deep Belief Network. To refine the result of the DBN, the pro-
posed method makes use of stochastic adaptive particle swarm optimization (RSAPSO) 
algorithm. To address the limitations such as local optimization and low search accuracy 
of conventional PSO algorithms, the proposed system used RSAPSO algorithm that allows 
particles to reset the position from the original with an assured probability, and continue its 
searching again. Hence, the proposed method minimizes the probability of the trapping in