2917
A Study on Different Deep Learning Algorithms Used in Deep Neural…
1 3
model comprises three modules knowledge base, detection model, and feedback mecha-
nism and MLP act as binary classifier during attack detection [15] (Table 1).
The model proposed by Morteza Taki et al. [15] predicts the irrigated and rainfed wheat 
output energy using artificial network models MLP, RBF and Gaussian Process Regression 
(GPR). The RBF model performs better than the other two models in predicting wheat out-
put energy under various irrigated and rainfed farms. [16]
In order to decrease error and packet loss in the network, Jafari-Marandi et al. [18] 
suggested an MLP with many layers arranged in an input layer, an output layer, and 
several hidden layers. Back-propagation learning is a method used by MLPs to train 
the network. A collection of vectors derived from actual data or produced by a realistic 
simulator are used during the training phase. Perceptrons learn by adjusting the con-
nection weights to reduce the output error relative to the predicted outcome for each 
training vector. Authors [19] propose secure routing on the Internet of Vehicles based 
on V2V (Vehicle to Vehicle) communication [20] using multilayer perceptron (MLP) to 
detect intruders or attackers on the network [21]. MLP algorithm-generated classifica-
tion report based on Denial of service attacks. The MLP’s precision, recall, F1 score, 
and support [22] scores are displayed in the classification report. They utilized it to 
compare classification models and choose the ones with more robust or balanced clas-
sification scores. The measures employed are true positives and false negatives as well 
as true and false positives [23].
4  Self‑organizing Map (SOM)
A Self-organizing map (SOM) is an unsupervised-based neural network algorithm. It 
is also referred to as the dimensionality reduction algorithm or Kohonen Network with 
input and output layers without a hidden layer. Since this algorithm reduces the input 
dimension of the data, the final output is represented as a feature map. Similar samples 
of maps are merged as a map. Generally, this algorithm is used to convert the high-
dimensional dataset into a 2D discretized pattern [4 ].
4.1  Architecture, Algorithm and Characteristics of SOM
The SOM architecture has two layers: the input and output layers with the feature map. It 
does not contain any hidden layer like a neural network. So, it just passes weight values 
to the output layer without performing any activation function in neurons. At the same 
time, each neuron is assigned with some weight value based on the input space. The SOM 
architecture has a feed-forward structure with a 2D computational layer of nodes arranged 
in rows and columns and connected fully with all other sources of the input layer [24]. Fig-
ure 3 depicts an architectural overview of Kohonen’s SOM.
The SOM uses competitive learning to update its weights. It consists of three methods 
as Competition, Cooperation and Adaptation. In the competition process, compute the dis-
tance between each neuron of the Kohonen layer and the input layer and identify the mini-
mum or maximum distance of neuron based upon the applications. That will be considered 
as the winner of the process. Following the cooperation process, select the neighbourhood 
neurons depending on the time and distance of the winner neurons.