2916 J. Naskath et al.
1 3
VHR (Very High Resolution) image scene classification model comprising three phases: 
Data augmentation to learn robust features, a pre-trained CNN model to extract features 
from the original image, and an adaptive gradient algorithm multi-layer perceptron to 
improve the accuracy of the classifier.
With the advent of modern remote sensing technologies, various very fine spatial reso-
lutions (VFSR) dataset is now commercially available. These VFSR images have opened 
up many opportunities such as urban land use rescue, agriculture, and tree crown descrip-
tion. Zhang et al. [4] proposed a hybrid classification system that combines the contextu-
ally based classifier CNN and pixel-based classifier MLP with a rule-based decision fusion 
strategy. The decision fusion rules formed based on the confidence distribution of the con-
textual-based CNN classifier. If the input image patch is at the homogeneous region, the 
confidence is high.
On the other hand, if the image pixel contains other land cover classes as related infor -
mation, the confidence is low. As a result, the MLP can rectify the classified pixels with 
low confidence at the pixel level. This paper also compares the proposed method’s perfor -
mance with benchmark standards such as pixel-based MLP, spectral texture-based MLP, 
and contextual-based CNN classifiers.
Md Manjurul Ahsan et al. [5] proposed a hybrid model with a combination of a Convo-
lutional Neural Network (CNN) and Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) in which MLP handles 
the numerical/categorical data, and CNN extracts features from the X-ray images. Param-
eter tuning used the grid search method to decide the number of hidden layers, number of 
neurons, epochs, and batch size. Meha Desai et al. [6], in their study, compare and analyze 
the function and designing of MLP and CNN for the application of breast cancer detection 
and conclude CNN give slightly higher accuracy than MLP.
Vinod Kumar et  al. [7] suggested a hybrid CNN-MLP model that analyzes novel 
and diversified attacks. The problem of intrusion detection is a classification task using 
machine learning and deep learning techniques. The model used feature selection and 
reduction techniques, random forest regressor, along the correlation parameter. The CIC-
IDS2017 dataset used the performance of the proposed model outperforms that of the per -
formance of the individual CNN and MLP models. Hanwen Feng et  al. [8] suggested a 
CNN model for Classification of Points of Interest in Side-channel attacks and compared 
it with MLP and concludes that MLP is more suitable for PCA traces and CNN is for POI 
traces; shorter traces improves the classification results. Bikku [9] proposed a model using 
MLP to predict future health risk with a certain probability, comparing it with LSTM and 
RNN, and they suggested MLP outperforms the other two. Salah, L. B presented a model 
to control a bioreactor using deep learning feed-forward neural networks with different 
MLP structures. The trained model emulates the inverse dynamics of the bioreactor and 
then uses neural controllers for neural control strategies of the chosen bioreactor [10].
Bairavel et al. [11] suggested a model for multimodal sentiment analysis using feature-
level fusion technique and novel oppositional grass bee optimization (OGBEE) algorithm 
for fusing the extracted features from different modalities and MLP for classification. [12] 
compared three different neural network approaches, MLP, RBF and PNN, for Thematic 
mapping from remotely sensed data. For the proposed model, PNN outperforms. Singh 
et al. [13] designed a model to find the optimal collision-free path and control the robot’s 
speed in a dynamic environment for the mobile robots to reach the destination using MLP. 
The ultrasonic sensors in the robot sense the obstacle in its path and calculate the distance 
between them. Meng Wang et al. [14] devised a model to detect the Distributed Denial of 
Service (DDoS) attack using MLP with feature selection for optimal feature selection and 
the Back Propagation algorithm to reconstruct the detector when errors are perceived. The