2923
A Study on Different Deep Learning Algorithms Used in Deep Neural…
1 3
4.2  Application of SOM
Kohonen et al., [62] initially used them for speech recognition. But nowadays it is used 
in various applications such as, Pattern recognition, speech processing, industrial and 
medical diagnostics applications [25, 26], and data mining etc. using some hybrid archi-
tecture merged with RNN, CNN and back tracking approaches. The phonetic typewriter 
of Kohonen is one of the earliest and most well-known applications of the SOM. The 
challenge is to identify phonemes in real time so that they can be used to drive a type-
writer from dictation in the field of speech recognition. The speech signals [27] are pre-
processed before applied to the SOM. The Fourier transforming and filtering process are 
used to sample the data using 24 dimensional spectral vectors. The proposed network 
was effectively trained using speech waveforms, and the output nodes are naturally clus-
tered with the ideal phonemes. Finally, the model output generated logical phoneme 
strings from real-world speech applications (Table 2 )
Behnisch and Ultsch [64] used an extension of SOM as an emergent self-organizing 
map (ESOM) for clustering and classification of the data. It keeps the high-dimensional 
data’s neighborhood relationships. On the other hand, the finite grid has a drawback 
because neurons on the map’s edges have somewhat different mapping qualities than 
neurons in the middle versus those on the boundary. Growing hierarchical self-organiz-
ing maps (GHSOM) used by Chifu and Letia [65] consist of a set of SOMs (particularly 
bidimensional grids) organized as nodes in a hierarchy. GHSOM is initialized with a 
hierarchy mirroring the one in the taxonomy, and concepts are mapped to some nodes in 
the corresponding SOM by initializing the node’s weights with the vector description of 
the concept; all other unmapped nodes are initialized randomly [28].
Potok [29] suggested the architecture for Breast cancer diagnosis using neural network 
based self-organizing maps (SOM). It classified tumour breast or benign and non tumour 
or malignant lesions with the samples of 243 breast tumours. The SOM based autocorrela-
tion texture features used to classify the tumours. Osman [30] suggested a corona virus 
detection technique based on the Locality weighted learning and self-organization map 
(LWL-SOM) technique for capturing the images and identify the diseases of COVID-19 
cases. They grouped the chest X-ray data patterns based on SOM strategy to categorize 
between the positive and negative cases of COVID-19. Then, they built locality weighted 
learning model for diagnosing the cases. Materials Informatics application.
Jimin et al. [28] used the machine learning technique of SOM to visualize and validate 
relationships between high-dimensional materials dataset. Compared to conventional meth-
ods, the SOM categorized and validated the materials using various mapping techniques 
like U-matrix map, heat maps, cluster-based map, and Gruneisen parameter. Nicolas et al., 
[35], proposed the classification of vertebral problems using K-means and SOM algorithm. 
In his approach, SOM outperformed than the K-Means clustering analysis. Felix et al. [36] 
and Srivatsa et al., [37] used the hybrid version of self organising map algorithm with Susi 
framework and Cellular Self-Organizing Map for classifying the hyper spectral datasets. 
A self-organization-based clustering network in MANET employing zone-based group 
mobility was proposed by Farooq et al. in [40] to increase scalability and decrease addi-
tional energy consumption in the network. They employed the flocking behavior of birds 
as a microbe model to build and maintain clusters in MANETs. A cluster size management 
plan that lowers network traffic, enhances MANETs’ performance in group mobility, and 
uses less energy. A distance-based intrusion detection system based on an unsupervised 
SOM network was proposed by Barletta et  al. in [41]. To identify intrusions, the SOM