2920 J. Naskath et al.
1 3Table 1  (continued)
Author & Year The objective of the articles Experimental design Techniques Datasets used Response and Performance 
measure
Bairavel et al. [11] Novel OGBEE-based feature 
selection and feature-level 
fusion with MLP neural 
network for social media multi-
modal sentiment analysisFeature-level fusion technique- to 
fuse the extracted features from 
different modalities. Novel 
oppositional grass bee opti-
mization (OGBEE) algorithm 
-feature selection
MLP- for classificationweb recordings that utilize audio, 
video, and textual modalitiesAccuracy in sentimental analysis 
classification 95.2%
Singh et al. [13] Mobile Robot Navigation Using 
MLP-BP Approaches in 
Dynamic EnvironmentsMLP Real-time system Identifies the Optimal collision-
free path for mobile robots to 
reach the destination
Khatttab et al. [42] Secure Optimization routing Artificial Neural Networks 
(ANN) &MLPDataa from VanetMobisim sim-
ulatorA cooperative monitoring 
mechanism and using continuous 
learning to capitalize on prior 
detection expertise. With 100 
nodes, our system increases 
the detection probability to 98 
percent while lowering the false 
negative rate to about 3 percent
Meng Wang et al. [14] A dynamic MLP-based DDoS 
attack detection method using 
feature selection and feedback,
Computers & SecurityMLP
Feedback mechanism used to 
detect the error and reconstruct 
the detector to improve the 
performanceISOT dataset comprises of attack 
and regular packets and ISCX 
dataset comprises of normal 
packetsClassifies the samples as normal 
or attack
Ayesha and Mourad [43] To detect intruders or attackers on 
a Vehicular network, we present 
a multilayer perceptron (MLP) 
neural network for intrusion 
detectionTo identify intruders or attackers 
on an IoV network, use a multi-
layer perceptron (MLP) neural 
network. Predictions, classifica-
tion reports, and confusion 
matrices are used as resultsData from Mobility simulators Predictions, classification reports, 
and confusion matrices are used 
as results. A detailed simulation 
exercise demonstrates the new 
MLP-based intrusion detection 
system’s performance