12
Previous Layer1×1×1 
Conv1×1×1 
Conv1×1×1 
Conv1×3×3 
Conv3×1×3 
Conv3×3×1 
Conv3×1×1
Conv1×3×1 
Conv1×1×3 
ConvConcatNext Layer
Fig. 16: Architecture of one separable 3D convolutional
block [13]. Using parallel design the architecture performs
the 3D convolution in three paths with less computation
burden.
the adapted sampling points followed by batch normaliza-
tion and ReLU activation. Since the calculated offset miis
usually not an integer, the input value at the sampling point
is determined using bilinear interpolation. Exchanging the
simple convolutions with deformable convolutions helps
the network adapt to different shapes, scales, and orienta-
tions but comes at a higher computational burden because
an additional convolutional layer per block is needed to
determine the offsets of the sampling grid.
When segmenting from 3D images it is important to
make use of the full spatial information from the volumetric
data. However, this is not possible with 2D convolutions
and 3D convolutions are computationally very expensive.
To address this problem, Chen et al. [13] used separable 3D
convolutions as the backbone of the U-Net. Each 3D convo-
lutional block in the original U-Net is replaced by an S3D
block which can be seen in Figure 16. The 3D convolution
is divided into three branches where each branch represents
a different orthogonal view so that the input is processed
in axial, sagittal, and coronal views. Additionally, a residual
skip connection is added to the separated 3D convolution.
Using separable 3D convolutions as the backbone of the
U-Net, Chen et al. [13] can take into consideration the
full spatial information from the volumetric data in the U-
Net architecture without the extremely high computational
burden of standard 3D convolution.
3.2.4 Recurrent Architecture
Recurrent neural networks (RNN) are used frequently to
process sequential data such as in speech recognition. Liang
et al. [127] were among the ﬁrst groups to design a recurrent
convolutional neural network (RCNN) for images recogni-
tion. Although the input image, in contrast to sequential
data, is static, the activity of each unit is modulated by the
activities of its neighboring units because the activities of
RCNNs evolve over time. By unfolding the RCNN throughtime, they can obtain arbitrarily deep networks with a ﬁxed
number of parameters.
Using these RCNN blocks as the backbone of the U-Net
architecture enhances the ability of the model to integrate
contextual information. Alom et al. [128] used RCNN blocks
as a backbone in their RU-Net architecture, ensuring better
feature representation for segmentation tasks.
InputsOutputs
Conv. + R eLUConv. + R eLU
(a)Architecture of double recur-
rent convolutional block.
Conv. + R eLUUnfold(b) A single unfolded recurrent
convolutional block for t= 2.
Fig. 17: Recurrent Convolutional Mechanism introduced by
Alom et al. [128], namely RU-Net.
Figure 17a shows a recurrent convolutional unit, they
used as a backbone. Figure 17b shows one of the two sub-
blocks in Figure 17a unfolded for t= 2, which is also the
unfolding parameter chosen in their experiments. Adding
additional residual connections to the separate recurrent
convolutional blocks enables deeper networks and results
in their R2U-Net architecture.
3.3 Bottleneck Enhancements
The U-Net architecture can be separated into three main
parts: the encoder (contracting path), the decoder (expand-
ing path), and the bottleneck which lies between the encoder
and decoder. The bottleneck is used to force the model to
learn a compressed representation of the input data which
should only contain the important and useful information
needed to restore the input in the decoder. To this end,
various modules are designed in multiple studies [79], [129]
to recalibrate and highlight the most discriminant features.
In the original U-Net, the bottleneck consists of two 33
convolutional layers with ReLU activation. More recent
approaches however have extended the classic bottleneck
architecture to improve performance.
3.3.1 Attention Modules
Several works apply attention modules in the bottleneck
of their U-Net architecture. Fan et al. used a position-wise
attention block (PAB) in their MA-Net to model spatial
dependencies between pixels in the bottleneck feature maps
with self-attention [76]. The architecture of the PAB can
be seen in Figure 18. The feature maps passed into the
bottleneck at the end of the encoder path are ﬁrst processed
by a 33convolutional layer. The resulting outputs are
then processed by three individual 11convolutional layers
producingA,B, andC.AandBare reshaped to form two
vectors. A matrix multiplication of these two vectors passed