1
Medical Image Segmentation Review:
The Success of U-Net
Reza Azad , Ehsan Khodapanah Aghdam , Amelie Rauland, Yiwei Jia , Atlas Haddadi Avval ,
Afshin Bozorgpour , Sanaz Karimijafarbigloo , Joseph Paul Cohen , Ehsan Adeli , and Dorit Merhof
Abstract —Automatic medical image segmentation is a crucial topic in the medical domain and successively a critical counterpart in
the computer-aided diagnosis paradigm. U-Net is the most widespread image segmentation architecture due to its ﬂexibility, optimized
modular design, and success in all medical image modalities. Over the years, the U-Net model achieved tremendous attention from
academic and industrial researchers. Several extensions of this network have been proposed to address the scale and complexity
created by medical tasks. Addressing the deﬁciency of the naive U-Net model is the foremost step for vendors to utilize the proper
U-Net variant model for their business. Having a compendium of different variants in one place makes it easier for builders to identify
the relevant research. Also, for ML researchers it will help them understand the challenges of the biological tasks that challenge the
model. To address this, we discuss the practical aspects of the U-Net model and suggest a taxonomy to categorize each network
variant. Moreover, to measure the performance of these strategies in a clinical application, we propose fair evaluations of some unique
and famous designs on well-known datasets. We provide a comprehensive implementation library with trained models for future
research. In addition, for ease of future studies, we created an online list of U-Net papers with their possible ofﬁcial implementation. All
information is gathered in https://github.com/NITR098/Awesome-U-Net repository.
Index Terms —Medical Image Segmentation, Deep Learning, U-Net, Convolutional Neural Network, Transformer.
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
IMAGE segmentation, deﬁned as the partition of the en-
tire image into a set of regions, plays a vital role in a
wide range of applications. Medical image segmentation
is a crucial example of this domain and offers numerous
beneﬁts for clinical use. Automated segmentation facilitates
the data processing time and guides clinicians by providing
task-speciﬁc visualizations and measurements. In almost all
clinical applications the visualization algorithm not only
provides insight into the abnormal regions in human tissue
but also guides the practitioners to monitor cancer progres-
sion. Semantic segmentation as a preparatory step in auto-
matic image processing technique can further enhance the
visualization quality by modeling to detect speciﬁc regions
which are more relevant to the task on hand (e.g., heart
segmentation) [1].
R. Azad and E. Khodapanah Aghdam contributed equally to this work.
R. Azad, A. Rauland, Y. Jia, and S. Karimijafarbigloo are with the Institute
of Imaging and Computer Vision, RWTH Aachen University, 52074
Aachen, Germany.
E. Khodapanah Aghdam is with the Department of Electrical Engineering,
Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran 1983969411, Iran.
A. Haddadi Avval is with the School of Medicine, Mashhad University of
Medical Sciences, Mashhad 9177899191, Iran.
A. Bozorgpour is with the Department of Computer Engineering, Sharif
University of Technology, Tehran 1458889694, Iran.
J.P . Cohen is with the Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine &
Imaging, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California 94304, USA, and
this work was done prior to joining Amazon.
E. Adeli is with Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.
D. Merhof is with the Faculty of Informatics and Data Science, University
of Regensburg, 93053 Regensburg, Germany, and also with the Fraunhofer
Institute for Digital Medicine MEVIS, 28359 Bremen, Germany.
(Corresponding author: D. Merhof. E-mail: dorit.merhof@ur.de.)
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright
may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be
accessible.Image segmentation tasks can be classiﬁed into two cat-
egories: semantic segmentation and instance segmentation
[2], [3]. Semantic segmentation is a pixel-level classiﬁcation
that assigns corresponding categories to all the pixels in an
image, whereas instance segmentation also needs to identify
different objects within the same category based on semantic
segmentation. Designing segmentation methods to distin-
guish organ or lesion pixels requires task-speciﬁc image data
to provide the appropriate critical details. Common medical
imaging modalities for acquiring data are X-ray, Positron
Emission Tomography (PET), Computed Tomography (CT),
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), and Ultrasound (US)
[4]. Early traditional approaches to medical image segmen-
tation mainly focused on edge detection, template matching
techniques, region growing, graph cuts, active contour lines,
machine learning, and other mathematical methods. In re-
cent years, deep learning has matured in diverse ﬁelds for
solving many edge cases speciﬁc to the medical domain.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have successfully
implemented feature representation extraction for images,
thus eliminating the need for hand-crafted features in image
segmentation, and their superior performance and accuracy
make them the main choice in this ﬁeld.
An initial attempt to model the semantic segmentation
using a deep neural network was proposed in [5]. This
approach passes the input images through the convolutional
encoder to produce the latent representation. Then on top
of the generated feature maps the fully connected layers
are included to produce a pixel-level prediction. The main
limitation of this architecture was the use of fully connected
layers, which depleted the spatial information and conse-
quently degraded the overall performance. Long et al. [6]
proposed Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs) to addressarXiv:2211.14830v1  [eess.IV]  27 Nov 2022