24
z
U-NetImage
Sample  ᫤KL
Prior Net
Posterior Net
Predicted 
SegmentationGround
TruthCross-
Entropy
Latent Space
ᵤprior
ḙprior
ᵤpost,ḙpost
U-NetImage
SamplePrior Net
Latent Space
ᵤprior
ḙpriorz1z2
z3
*
1
2
3
z
᫤1,᫤2,᫤3,...a b
Fig. 31: (a)Illustration of the sampling process of M seg-
mentations with probabilistic U-Net. (b)Illustration of the
training process of the probabilistic U-Net for one training
sample. The green arrows represent loss functions. Figure
from [182].
produce the segmentation map corresponding to the drawn
point from the latent space. Only the combination needs to
be recalculated in each iteration, as the last feature maps of
the U-Net and the output of the prior net can be reused for
each hypothesis.
Figure 31 (b) shows the training procedure of the probabilis-
tic U-Net.
Apart from the standard training procedures for condi-
tional VAEs and deterministic segmentation models, it has
to be learned how to embed the segmentation variants in the
latent space in a useful way. This is solved by the posterior
net. It learns to recognize a segmentation variant and map
it to a certain position in the latent space. A sample from its
output posterior distribution combined with the activation
map of the u-net must result in a segmentation identical to
the ground truth segmentation. From this, it follows that the
training data set must include a set of different but plausible
segmentations for each input image.
Myronenko [53] adds a VAE branch to a 3D U-Net
architecture to address the problem of limited training data
for brain tumor segmentation. In their architecture, the U-
Net is used for the segmentation of the tumor, and the VAE
is used for the reconstruction of the image sharing the same
encoder. For the VAE, the output of the encoder is reduced
to a lower dimensional space and a sample is drawn from
the Gaussian distribution with the given mean and standard
derivation (std). The sample is then reconstructed to the
input image using an architecture similar to that of the U-
Net decoder but without any skip connections. The total loss
to be minimized during training is made up of three terms:
L=Ldice+ 0:1LL2+ 0:1LKL (17)
Ldiceis a soft dice loss between the predicted segmentation
of the u-net and the GT segmentation.
LL2andLKLare the losses for the VAE where LL2describes
how well the reconstructed image matches the input image
andLKLis the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between
the estimates normal distribution and a prior distribution
N(0;1). Using the VAE brach helps to better cluster the
features at the end of the encoder. This helps to guide and
regularize the shared encoder for small training set sizes.
Adding the additional VAE branch, therefore, improved the
performance and led to stable results for different random
initializations of the network.
UNet
MRF softmaxXlog-sum-exp
categorical 
cross -entropyR R*Z
Mean -field iterationUFig. 32: Schematic illustration of the MRF-UNet product.
Figure from [183].
3.6.2 Graphical Model Algorithm
While the classic U-Net performs well on data from the same
distribution as the training data, its accuracy decreases on
out-of-distribution data.
To address this problem, Brudfors et al. [51] combine
a U-Net with Markov random ﬁelds (MRFs) to form the
MRF-Unet. The low-parameter, ﬁrst-order MRFs are better
at generalization because they encode simpler distributions
which is an important quality to ﬁt out of distribution data.
The very accurate U-Net predictions make up for the fact
that the MRFs are less ﬂexible. The architecture of the pro-
posed model can be seen in Figure 32. As the combination of
the U-Net and MRF distribution is intractable by calculating
the product of the two, an iterative mean-ﬁeld approach is
used to estimate the closest factorized distribution under
the Kullback-Leibler divergence. A detailed mathematical
derivation of the process can be found in the work by Brud-
fors et al. [51]. Experiments showed that the combination of
MRF and U-Net improved performance on in- and out-of-
distribution data. The lightweight MRF component, which
does not add any additional parameters to the architecture,
serves as a simple prior and therefore learns abstract label-
speciﬁc features.
Klug et al. [52] use a Bayesian skip connection in an
attention-gated 3D U-Net to allow a prior to bypass most of
the network and be reintegrated at the ﬁnal layer in their
work to segment stroke lesions in perfusion CT images.
The skip connection provides the prior to the ﬁnal network
layer and should reduce false-positive rates for small and
patchy segmentations of varying shapes. As a prior, the
segmentation of the ischemic core obtained by a standard
thresholding method is used. Klug et al. [52] evaluated two
ways to combine the prior and the output of the U-Net
to calculate the ﬁnal output segmentation: Addition and
convolution of the two maps. Superior results were achieved
by using convolution for combination in all experiments.
The input to the U-Net is the concatenation of the
3D perfusion CT image and the prior. When comparing
a 3D attention gate U-Net to the same architecture with
the bayesian skip connection additionally reintegrating the
prior at the end of the network, the latter achieves a better
performance in terms of dice score with faster convergence.
It is worth mentioning that we have found excessive papers
in which probabilistic design is integrated into the U-Net in
applications such as for brain tumor [184], and skin lesion
segmentation [185].