15
Linear Pr ojection of Flattened PatchesTransformer EncoderMLP HeadClass
COVID
COVID
Patch + Position
Embedding
Extra learnable
[class] embedding
(a)Overview of preliminary Vision Transformer (ViT) structure pro-
posed by Dosovitskiy et al. [131]. ViT splits an image into ﬁxed-size
patches with a non-overlapping regime and then linearly embeds each
of them to a 1D vector space, afterward adds position embeddings,
and feeds the resulting sequence of vectors to a standard Transformer
encoder. In order to perform classiﬁcation, naive ViT uses the stan-
dard approach of adding an extra learnable classiﬁcation token to the
sequence. However, this token is not practical in the segmentation
literature, although the MLP head (from the dashed line in the above
ﬁgure) is omitted in segmentation tasks.
Embedded
PatchesLNMulti-Head  
Self-Attention  LN MLP
MatMulScaleSoftMaxMatMul
Linear LinearScaled Dot-Pr oduct  
Attention  
LinearConcatLinear(b)Up: Transformer Encoder block visualization, down-left: Multi-
Head Self-Attention (MHSA) block, down-right: Attention mechanism
block feed by the query (Q), key (K), and value (V) representations
learned from the input embedded patches. LN and MLP denote the
Layer Normalization [132] and Multi-Layer Perceptron operations,
respectively.
Fig. 20: The above ﬁgure portrays the ViT [131] pipeline with all of its detailed counterparts from a top-down view.
reshape1/41/81/2 
Conv3x3, ReLUUpsampleSegmentation head(n_patch, D)(D, H/16, W/16)(512, H/16, W/16)(256, H/8, W/8)(128, H/4, W/4)(64, H/2, W/2)(16, H, W)
Transformer Layer…(n = 12)Hidden FeatureLinear ProjectionCNN
Hidden FeatureDownsampleFeature ConcatenationTransformer LayerEmbeddedSequence𝒙𝒑𝟏,𝒙𝒑𝟐,…,𝒙𝒑𝑵LayerNormMSALayerNormMLP++𝒛𝟏(a) (b) 
Fig. 21: The overview architecture of the TransUNet. The
Transformer layers are employed in the encoder part. The
schematic of the Transformer is shown on the left. Figure
from [38].
information, TransBTS utilizes the 3D CNN backbone for its
encoder and decoder path to capture local representation
across spatial and depth dimensions and unleash from the
high computational burden for the Transformer counterpart
in overall. The essential key points in the amalgamation
of the Transformer with the encoded low-resolution with
high-level representation ﬂow come from CNN blocks, are
linear projection and feature mapping blocks, where the
input/output signals reshape and downsample to be com-
patible for their usage. This hybrid network captures the
local and global information from 3D data and demonstrates
the improved performance within two Brain Tumor Seg-
mentation (BraTS) 2019-2020 [91], [135], [136] datasets over
the previous CNN U-Net structures.
Li et al. [40] proposed the GT U-Net structure to ad-
dress the low performance of previous segmentation meth-
ods in fuzzy boundaries while keeping the computationalcomplexity low within the hybrid structure of CNN and
the Transformer in a U-Net-like paradigm. Their method
was applied to the private orthodontist tooth X-ray images
and DRIVE dataset [137]. All the main counterparts of U-
Net are based on Group Transformer (GT) to dispense the
quadratic computational complexity within these successive
parallel convolution, Multi-Head Self-Attention (MHSA),
convolution modules in each stage to gradually increase
receptive ﬁled and extracting long local-dependencies. So
far, the presence of a Transformer in the segmentation tasks
is crucial because if a network wants to provide an efﬁcient
prediction mask, it should be able to minimize the miss-
classifying of the background and foreground pixels that
leads to a reduction in False Positives (FP). Therefore learn-
ing long-range contextual features is as essential as fuzzy
boundaries resulting from object overlappings or variation
in exposure of the medical imaging devices. To mitigate the
occurrence of this miss predicting in boundary levels, GT
U-Net utilizes a Fourier descriptor loss term within binary
cross entropy to impose the prior shape knowledge.
Xie et al. [41] addressed the computational complexity
that restrains the multi-scale functionality of conventional
Self-Attention (SA) and proposed the hybrid CoTr architec-
ture for volumetric medical image segmentation. The whole
network is a U-Net-like structure with CNN-based 3D resid-
ual blocks for encoder and decoder paths with the amalga-
mation of Deformable Transformer (DeTrans) for multi-scale
fusion, besides the conventional skip connections from the
encoder to the decoder for better localization information
and faster convergence. TransUNet suffers from parameters
overload within MHSA, which treats all image tokenization
positions equally. Therefore, CoTr instantiates the defor-
mation concept from [126], [138] into the deformable self-