20
size instead of 4(overlapping windows) for preserving local
continuity in building the patches stage. The encoder path
molds hierarchical representation (see Figure 24c) with the
help of Enhanced Transformer Block, which accompanies
the Figure 25b Transformer module. Enhanced Transformer
block comprises an Efﬁcient Self-Attention module to de-
crease the traditional attention calculation by downsam-
pling the corresponding query, key, and value matrixes. Af-
terward, the Enhanced Mix-Feed Forward Network (FFN)
sub-module (modiﬁed clone of Mix FFN from [169]) aligns
features and makes discriminant representation with 33
depth-wise convolutions for capturing the local context
efﬁciently. Analogous to [45], MISSFormer rethinks the
skip connection design, utilizes the Enhanced Transformer
Context Bridge module for multi-scale information fusion,
and hinders the gap between encoder and decoder feature
maps. This module captures the local and global correlations
between different scale features. For a brief review of this
module, the context bridge (Figure 24c) ﬂattens the output
attention matrixes from different scales in the spatial dimen-
sion and reshapes it in a way to have a consistent channel
dimension and concatenates the representations in ﬂattened
spatial dimension and feed to enhanced Transformer block
to produce long-range dependencies and local context corre-
lations. Ultimately the output of Enhanced Mix-FFN is split
and restores to its original shape to get the discriminant
fused hierarchical multi-scale representation. MISSFormer
plotted high performances compared to TransUNet [38] and
Swin-Unet [48] over Synapse [89] and ACDC [101] datasets.
Since most U-Net-shaped standalone Transformer uti-
lized models incorporate 2D inputs, Wu et al. [50] proposed
a Dilated Transformer (D-Former) for 3D medical image
segmentation with consideration of degrading the computa-
tional complexity. D-Former [50], Figure 24d, is a U-shaped
hierarchical architecture with specialized D-former blocks
which consist of Local Scope Modules (LSMs) and Global
Scope Modules (GSMs) in an alternate order to capture local
and global contextual information. Each D-Former block
could repeat the successive LSM and GSM counterparts,
however the original D-Former [50] uses three successive
sequences of LSM-GSM modules in the third and sixth D-
Former blocks. LSM captures local self-attention by dividing
a 3D feature map into non-overlapping 3D-volumetric units
that consist of 3D patches and calculating the self-attention
within these 3D units. As a complement to the locally
ﬁne-grained attention, the GSM module attains interactions
through different units in a dilated manner to enlarge the
attention’s performance range. This intuition captures local
and global interactions with ﬁxed-size patches within sets
of 3D volumetric units without any computation overﬂow.
Also, D-Former takes advantage of positional encoding
within Transformers with Dynamic Positional Encoding
(DPE), which can be a vital cue in dense prediction tasks
such as segmentation. Due to the 3D functionality and 3D
contextual information, D-Former is a SOTA method on
various 3D datasets such as Synapse [89] and ACDC [101]
datasets with large margins in Dice score over CNN-hybrid
or standalone Transformer designs.
Still, numerous studies out there, e.g., DS-TransUNet
[170] utilize the Swin Transformer in the dual-path U-
shaped structure for modeling the multi-scale patch sizeto lessen the deﬁciency of Transformers in capturing the
local context. We reviewed multiple studies that utilized
the Transformer in their U-Net pipeline in various methods.
With such evidence and stunning growth in the Transformer
ﬁeld, we still hear about the outstanding collaboration be-
tween Transformers and U-Net-like networks so often.
3.5 Rich Representation Enhancements
To obtain a rich representation, the common approaches
applied to medical image segmentation are multi-scale and
multi-modal methods, e.g. [171], [172], [173]. The key ob-
jective is to enhance the performance of the trained models
by utilizing all available information from multi-modal or
multi-scale images while retaining the most desirable and
relevant features.
The multi-scale method, also referred to as the pyra-
mid method originated from the Laplace pyramid method
proposed by Burt et al. [174]. The approach converts the
source input image by resizing it into a series of images with
decreasing spatial resolutions. This scheme allows encoders
of models to directly access the features of the enhanced im-
ages of different sizes and thus learn the respective features.
The study of the organs of interest requires their speciﬁc
imaging modality to provide targeted information. How-
ever, each imaging technique has its limitations and can only
reveal partial details about the organ, which may lead to in-
accurate clinical analysis. Therefore, a fusion of images from
various imaging modalities can be conducted to supplement
each other’s information by integrating complementary in-
formation retrieved from several input images.
The powerful structural design of the UNet network
with the encoder and decoder allows the network to mine
salient features at multiple input levels and enables effective
feature fusion of different modalities.
Lachinov et. al. evaluate the performance of the Cas-
caded U-Net [58] with multiple encoders processing each
modality respectively to demonstrate the improvement due
to the extraction multi-modal representation. The results
indicate that the architecture taking the multiple modalities
into account outperforms the network only relying on one
single modality.
The following classiﬁcations will illustrate the modality
fusion proposed to learn richer representations.
3.5.1 Multi-scale Fusion
Image pyramid input or side output layers are aggregated
into U-Net structures to fuse the multi-scale information in
the encoder or decoder stage.
Abraham et al. [18] propose the Focal Tversky Attention
U-Net with a generalized focal loss function that modulates
the Tversky index [175] to address the issue of data imbal-
ance and improve precision and recall balance in medical
image segmentation. Furthermore, they incorporate multi-
scale image inputs into the attention U-Net model with
deep supervision output layers [70]. The novel architecture
facilitates the extraction of richer feature representations and
results in 3% dice score improvement on multi-class CT
abdominal segmentation task. Compared to the commonly
used Dice loss, the Tversky similarity index introduces a