7
Fig. 6: Architecture of the U-Net++ [67]. The U-Net++ uses
a nested structure of convolutional layers Xi;j(indicatej-th
convolution layer in the i-th scale) connected through the
skip connection paths to model multi-scale representation.
tions that connect up-sampled lower layers with ﬁner stride
with the ﬁnal prediction layer.
In the original U-Net architecture by Ronneberger et
al. [7] each level in the encoder path is connected to the
corresponding same-resolution level in the decoder path
by a skip connection to combine the global information
describing what with the local information resolving where.
The difference to the above approach is not only the higher
number of skip connections but also the way in which the
features are combined. Long et al. [6] up-sampled feature
maps from earlier layers to the output resolution and added
them to the output of the ﬁnal layer. Ronneberger et al. [7]
concatenated the features of the corresponding encoder and
decoder level and process them together by passing them
through two convolutional layers and an up-sampling layer
together.
Li et al. [62] conducted an ablation study on skip con-
nections by training a dense U-Net with and without skip
connections. The results clearly show that the network with
the skip connections generalize better than the network
without skip connections.
Over the following years, many variants and extensions
of the original U-Net architecture were developed con-
cerning the skip connections [111], [112]. Different types
of extensions dealing with processing the encoder feature
maps passed through the skip connections, combining the
two sets of feature maps, and extending the number of skip
connections will be presented in the following sections.
3.1.1 Increasing the Number of Skip Connections
In 2020 Zhou et al. [67] introduced the U-Net++ in which
they redesign skip connections to be more ﬂexible and there-
fore exploit multiscale features more effectively. Instead
of restricting skip connections to only aggregate features
that have the same scale in the encoder and decoder path,
they redesign them in such a way that features of different
semantic scales can be aggregated [67].
They argue that there has been no proof so far that
encoder and decoder feature maps at the same scale are the
best match for feature fusion and therefore design a more
ﬂexible setup. In their approach, they tackle two problems
Fig. 7: Architecture showing the full-scale skip connections
of the UNet3+ [68]. Xi
EeandXi
Dedenote the encoder and
decoder path feature maps at i-th scale, respectively. In
addition, each subscript under each feature map symbol
represents the number of feature maps to the corresponding
block.
simultaneously. Since the optimal depth of a U-Net is un-
known apriori and usually has to be determined through
an exhaustive search, they incorporate U-Nets of different
depths into one architecture. As can be seen in Figure 6
all the U-Nets share the same encoder but have their own
decoder. Instead of only passing the same-scale encoder
feature maps through the skip connections, each node in
the decoder is also presented with the feature maps of the
same-level decoders of the U-Nets with a lower depth. It
can then be learned during training, which of the presented
feature maps should ideally be used for the segmentation.
Huang et al. [68] take the dense skip connections in-
troduced in the U-Net++ one step further by introducing
full-scale skip connections in their architecture the U-Net3+.
They argue that both the original U-Net with plain skip
connections between same-level encoder and decoder nodes
and the U-Net++ with the dense and nested skip connec-
tions do not sufﬁciently explore features from full scales
making it challenging for the network to learn the position
and boundary of an organ explicitly. To overcome this
limitation they connect each decoder level with all encoder
levels and all preceding decoder levels as can be seen in
Figure 7. Since not all feature maps arriving at a decoder
node through skip connections have the same scale, higher-
resolution encoder feature maps will be downscaled using
a max-pooling operation and lower-resolution feature maps
coming from intra-decoder skip connections will be upsam-
pled using bilinear upsampling. Additionally, apart from
the up- or down-sampling operation, each skip connection
is equipped with a 33convolutional layer calculating 64
output maps. The 64 feature maps arriving through each
skip connection are stacked and the stack of feature maps
is passed through another convolutional layer, followed by
batch normalization and a ReLU activation before being
further processed in the respective decoder node.
Instead of increasing the number of forward skip con-
nections, Xiang et al. [69] add additional backward skip con-
nections: Their Bi-directional O-Shape network (BiO-Net) is
a U-Net architecture with bi-directional skip connections.
This means that there are two types of skip connections:
1) The forward skip connections are known from the origi-