23
maxmax
Cmaxmax
C CT1T2T1ceFLAIR
NNNN
2N2N2N2N
4N4N4N4N
8N8N8N8N2NN
8N4N 4N2NN
4N8N+K3
K3 K2 K14N+K2 2N+K1 2N N
Fig. 29: Architecture of Cascaded Unet with multiple en-
coders. T1, T2, T1CE, and FLAIR indicate several MRI
modalities. N denotes the current number of ﬁlters. K is
a number of ﬁlters in the context feature map produced
from lower-scale models. At each stage of the encoding path
across modalities, the resulting features are calculated as a
maximum of the feature maps processed by encoders. In the
decoder of the model, the output at each scale is obtained
from the skip connections from the encoder, the decoder
output from the previous stage, and the context connections.
Figure from [180].
The overall architecture of the Cascaded Unet model can
be seen in Figure 29. The encoder path contains separate
subpaths where every subpath utilizes a convolution group
to process one input modality and generate feature maps.
Then elementwise maximum operation acts on the multiple
feature maps per stage to obtain the resulting features. The
output of the feature map is afterward joined with the
corresponding feature map of the larger-scale block, which
boosts the information ﬂow between the feature maps at
different scales. The decoder of Cascaded UNet produces
output at each level depending on the output at the same
scale and the output of the decoder block at the previous
stage. This strategy encourages the model to iteratively
improve the results from earlier iterations.
3.5.3 Leveraging Depth Information
Some methods modify the U-Net into a 3D model and
design modules to extract the information across channels in
order to fully exploit the structural information of the third-
dimension medical images. For improving automatic brain
tumor prognosis, Islam et al. adapt the U-Net architecture
to a 3D model and integrate the 3D attention strategy to
perform image segmentation [59]. Compared to only skip
connections, the introduced 3D attention model is aggre-
gated into the decoder part of U-Net that includes channel
and spatial attention in parallel with skip connections. The
additional 3D attention layers encourage the module to
encode richer spatial features from the original images.
As shown in Figure 30, the 3D attention U-Net is com-
posed of a 3D encoder, the decoder, and skip connections
combined with the channel and spatial attention mech-
anism. In the path for 3D spatial attention, the authors
perform 11Cconvolution on the input feature maps to
obtain the result of the HW1dimension. In parallel, the
input feature maps are passed through an average pooling
and then fed to the fully-connected layer to get the 11C
sequential channel correlation. Since the two paths capture
features parallelly, the inconsistency and sparsity caused by
EncoderDecoderExcitation ModuleFinal Conv
Fig. 30: Architecture of 3D Attention U-Net with a channel
and a spatial attention parallel to skip connections. Figure
from [181].
the two excitations can be alleviated by fusing skip con-
nections. Furthermore, the integration of skip connections
can enhance the performance of segmentation prediction
which can be inferred from the experiments on the BraTS
2019 dataset.
3.6 Probabilistic Design
Another type of U-Net extension combines the classic U-Net
with different types of probabilistic extensions. Depending
on the task that should be achieved or the process that
should be enhanced, different types of extensions from
bayesian skip connections, over variational auto-encoders
to Markov random ﬁelds are used, which are introduced in
the following.
3.6.1 Variational Auto Encoder (VAE) Regularization
In medical image segmentation tasks, different graders often
produce different segmentations. Most of these different
segmentations are plausible as many medical images con-
tain ambiguities that can not be resolved considering only
the image at hand. Taking this into consideration, Kohl et
al. learn a distribution over segmentations from an am-
biguous input to produce an unlimited number of possible
segmentations instead of just providing the most likely
hypothesis [54]. In their approach, they combine a U-Net,
for producing reliable segmentations, with a conditional
variational autoencoder (CVAE), which can model complex
distributions and encodes the segmentation variants in a
low-dimensional latent space. The best results were ob-
tained for a latent space of dimension 6.
Figure 31 (a) shows the sampling process given a trained
prior net and u-net as well as a low-dimensional latent
space. Each position in the latent space encodes a different
segmentation variant. Passing the input image through the
prior net, it will determine the probability of the encoded
variants for the given input image. For each possible seg-
mentation to be predicted the network is applied to the same
input image. A random sample from the prior probability
distribution is drawn and broadcast to an N-channel feature
map with the same shape as the segmentation map. It will
then be concatenated with the ﬁnal feature maps of the u-
net and processed with successive 11convolutions to