9
feature slice feature slice
1×1 
conv concat &
1×1 convconcat &
1×1 convcopy copy
Fig. 10: The spatial RNN module used in the skip connec-
tions of the CR-Unet by Li et al. in [75].
To improve performance on the difﬁcult task of the ovary
and follicle segmentation from ultrasound images, Li et al.
[75] added spatial recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to
the skip connections of a U-Net. Since there are usually
many small follicles in an image, it is very likely that the
neighboring follicles are spatially correlated. In addition,
there might be a possible spatial correlation between the
follicles and the ovary. As the max-pooling operation in the
original U-Net brings a loss of spatially relative information
the spatial RNNs should improve the segmentation results
by learning multi-scale and long-range spatial contexts.
Li et al. [75] built the spatial RNNs from plain RNNs
with a ReLU activation. Each spatial RNN module takes
feature maps as input and produces spatial RNN features
as output. It uses four independent data translations to in-
tegrate local spatial information in up, down, left, and right
directions. The maps from each direction are concatenated
and passed through a 11convolutional layer to produce
feature maps where each point contains information from
all four directions. The process is then repeated to extend
the local spatial information to global contextual informa-
tion. As can be seen in Figure 10, the ﬁnal feature maps
passed through the skip connection are a combination of
the original encoder feature maps and the RNN features
extracted from these maps. The authors claim that the ar-
chitecture is especially strong at avoiding the segmentation
of false positives and detecting and segmenting very small
follicles. A limitation of the RNN modules is that they make
training more difﬁcult and computationally expensive. To
compensate for this, Li et al. added deep supervision.
While most medical applications demand segmentations
to be in the same dimension as the input image, there
are also medical protocols that require segmentation of the
image projection, e.g., Liefers et al. [114] studied the retinal
vessel segmentation as a 2D!1D retinal OCT segmentation
task. This adds the problem of dimensionality reduction
to the segmentation. Lachinov et al. [73] introduced a U-
Net with projective skip connections to handle ND!MD
segmentations, where M < N . The encoder is a classic U-
Net encoder with residual blocks. The decoder however
only restores the input resolution for the Mdimensions
of the segmentation. The remaining reducible dimensions
M < dNare left compressed. This means that the sizes
of the encoder and decoder feature maps no longer match
which is why Lachinov et al. [73] introduce the projective
32x64x256x128
64x32x128x64
128x16x64x32128x16x64x3264x32x128x3232x64x256x32
Transformation
Projective skip-connection
Strided Convolution
Linear upsampling
ConcatenationGAP
1x64x256x1
ConvolutionGAPGlobal Average 
Pooling
Fig. 11: Architecture of U-Net with 3D input and 2D output
segmentation. Figure from [115].
skip connections. The encoder feature maps passed along
the projective skip connections are processed by an average
pooling layer with varying kernel size so that the dimen-
sions which are not present in the segmentation are reduced
to the size they have in the bottleneck. This way they can be
concatenated with the corresponding decoder feature maps.
Global Average Pooling (GAP) and a convolutional layer
are added after the last decoder level to calculate the ﬁnal
MD segmentation. The overall architecture for N= 3 and
M= 2 can be seen in Figure 11. The third dimension is not
upsampled to its original resolution in the decoder path and
is ﬁnally reduced to one by the GAP .
3.1.3 Combination of Encoder and Decoder Feature Maps
Another extension of the classic skip connections is in-
troduced in the BCDU-Net by Azad et al. [74] where a
bi-directional convolutional long-term-short-term-memory
(LSTM) module is added to the skip connections. Azad et al.
argue that a simple concatenation of the high-resolution fea-
ture maps from the encoder and the feature maps extracted
from the previous up-convolutional layer containing more
semantic information might not lead to the most precise
segmentation output. Instead, they combine the two sets of
feature maps with non-linear functions in the bi-directional
convolutional LSTM module. Ideally, this leads to a set of
feature maps rich in both local and semantic information.
The architecture of the bi-directional convolutional LSTM
module used to combine the feature maps at the end of
the skip connection can be seen in Figure 12. It uses two
ConvLSTMs, processing the input data in two directions in
the forward and backward paths. The output will be deter-
mined by taking into consideration the data dependencies
in both directions. In contrast to the approach by Li et al.
[75], where only the encoder feature maps are processed by
the RNN and then concatenated with the decoder features,
this approach processes both sets of feature maps with the
RNN.
3.2 Backbone Design Enhancements
Apart from adapting the skip connections of a U-Net it is
also common to use different types of backbones in newer
U-Net extensions. The backbone deﬁnes how the layers in
the encoder are arranged and its counterpart is therefore
used to describe the decoder architecture.
In the original U-Net by Ronneberger et al. [7] each level
in the encoder consists of two 33convolutional layers