10
Batch Normalization
Up ConvolutionForward ConvLSTMBackward ConvLSTM
tanh
Forward ConvLSTMBackward ConvLSTM
tanh
Fig. 12: Bi-directional convolutional LSTM module for the
combination of encoder feature maps passed through the
skip connection and decoder feature maps from the previ-
ous up-convolutional layer. XeandXdrepresent the set of
feature maps copied from the encoding part and the output
of the previous scale’s convolutional layer, respectively. Yi
indicates the output of the BConvLSTM module in a i-th
block of a single skip connection. Figure from [116].
with ReLU activation followed by a max pooling operation.
The number of feature maps doubles at each level. Any 2D
or 3D CNN image classiﬁer can be used as an encoder in
a U-Net adding its mirrored counterpart as the decoder.
Dozens of studies modiﬁed the vanilla U-Net main blocks
to broaden the receptive ﬁelds of convolution operations
and extract rich, and ﬁne-grained semantic representations
for challenging multi-class problems, e.g., [64], [117], [118],
[119], [120]. This section presents several prominent back-
bones used in the U-Net architecture and explains their
beneﬁts and downsides.
3.2.1 Residual Backbone
A very common backbone for the U-Net architecture is
the ResNet initially developed by He et al. [121]. Residual
networks enable deeper network architectures by tackling
the vanishing gradient problem that often occurs when
stacking several layers in deep neural networks as well as a
degradation problem that leads to ﬁrst saturating and then
degrading accuracy when adding more and more layers to
a network. Residual building blocks, explicitly ﬁt a residual
mapping by adding skip connections and performing an
identity mapping that is added to the output of the stacked
layers.
In their implementation of a residual U-Net, Drozdzal et
al. [60] refer to the standard skip connections in the U-Net
as long skip connections and the residual skip connections
as short skip connections, as they only skip ahead over two
convolutional layers. Using residual blocks as the backbone
in a U-Net, Drozdzal et al. [60] can build deeper architec-
tures and ﬁnd that the network training converges faster
compared to the original U-Net. Milletari et al. [61] report
the same ﬁndings in their 3D U-Net architecture using 3d
residual blocks as the backbone.
A prominent adaption of the backbone is to exchange
all 2D convolutions with 3D convolutions to process an
Fig. 13: Schematic representation of V-Net structure for
volumetric biomedical image segmentation that comprises
residual connections in each scale. In addition, V-Net utilizes
the strided convolutional kernels rather than max-pooling
layers to lessen the memory footprint in the training stage.
Figure from [122].
entire image volume as can often be found in medical
applications. When processing a 3D image in a slice-wise
fashion using 2D convolutions, the contexts on the z-axis
can not be captured and learned by the network. Using fully
convolutional architecture with 3D convolutions elevates
this drawback and can fully leverage the spatial information
along all three dimensions.
A drawback of using 3D convolutional layers as the
backbone in a u-net is the high computational cost and
GPU memory consumption which limits the depth of the
network and the ﬁlter’s size i.e. its ﬁeld-of-view. Milletari
et al. [61] fully convolutional volumetric, V-Net architecture
uses 3D residual blocks (Figure 13) as a backbone, thereby
enabling fast and accurate segmentation in 3D images. The
H-DenseUNet by Li et al. [62] uses two U-Nets, one with
2D-dense-blocks as the backbone and the other with 3D-
dense-blocks as the backbone. This enables them to ﬁrst
extract deep intra-slice features and then learn inter-slice
features in shallower volumetric architecture with a lower
computational burden.
3.2.2 Multi-Resolution blocks
To tackle the difﬁculty of analyzing objects at different
scales, Ibtehaz et al. introduce the MultiResUNet with
inception-like blocks as a backbone [15]. Inception blocks,
introduced by Szegedy et al. [123], use convolutional layers
with different kernel sizes in parallel on the same input and
combine the perceptions from different scales before passing
them deeper into the network. The two following convo-
lutions with 33kernels in the classical U-Net resemble
one convolution with a 55kernel. For incorporating a
multi-resolution analysis into the network, 33and77
convolutions should be added in parallel to the 55convo-
lution. This can be achieved by replacing the convolutional
layers with inception-like blocks. Adding the additional
convolutional layers increases the memory requirement and