3
tal datasets, training process, the loss functions, evaluation
metrics, comparative results, and ablation studies. Section 5
discusses the current challenges in the literature and future
directions. Eventually, the last chapter provides the conclu-
sion.
2 T AXONOMY
This section suggests a taxonomy that organizes different
approaches presented in the literature to modify U-Net
architecture for medical image segmentation. Due to the
modular design of U-Net, we proposed our taxonomy to
cope with the inheritance design of U-net rather than the
conceptual taxonomies offered in [37]. Furthermore, this
property makes it difﬁcult to ﬁt each study into only one
group so that a method may belong to several groups of
divisions. Figure 2 depicts our structure for taxonomy, and
we think this taxonomy helps the ﬁeld be organized and
even motivational for future research. In Section 3, we will
go through each concept of taxonomy. In the remainder of
this section, we will ﬁrst explain the naive 2D U-Net, and
following that, we will introduce the 3D U-Net. Eventually,
we will elaborate on the importance of the U-Net model
from a clinical perspective.
2.1 2D U-Net
Before recapitulating the U-Net structure in more detail,
we will ﬁrst consider the path that brings us to the U-
Net architecture. The story begins with the EM segmenta-
tion challenge in 2012, where Ciresean et al. [5] were the
ﬁrst researchers who outperform the previous biomedical
imaging segmentation methods using convolutional layers.
The key factor that made them able to win the challenge
was the availability of huge annotated data (CNN can learn
comparatively better than the classical machine learning
approach on large datasets [84], [85]). However, access to
the high amount of annotated data in biomedical tasks is
always inherently challenging due to privacy concerns, the
complexity of the annotation process, expert skill require-
ments, and the high price of taking images with biomedical
imaging systems. The ﬁrst step toward alleviating the need
for large annotated data was proposed in [5]. This method
used an image patching technique to not only increase the
number of samples but also model the data distribution with
small patches. Using this technique the CNN network learns
the visual concept by simply deploying a sliding window.
However, the sliding window usually brings more compu-
tation burden than its performance increase. Hence, there is
always a trade-off between performance and computational
complexity.
In 2015, Ronnebreger et al. [7] proposed a new archi-
tecture with respect to Long et al.’s [6] FCN framework
in conjunction with ISBI cell tracking challenge , where they
won the competition by a large margin. Figure 3 shows the
structure of the U-Net model. Their proposed method is a
cornerstone in a few attitudes those days. First, it is based on
a fully convolutional network in an encoder-decoder design
with insufﬁcient data than the DNNs instinct with some
intuitive data augmentation techniques. Second, their model
was reasonably fast and outperformed other methods in thechallenge. The model architecture can be divided into two
parts: The ﬁrst part is the contracting path, also known as
the encoder path, where its purpose is to capture contextual
information. This path consists of repeated blocks, where
each block contains two successive 33convolutions,
followed by a ReLU activation function and max-pooling
layers. The max pooling layer is also included to gradually
increase the receptive ﬁeld of the network without imposing
an additional computational burden.
The second part is expanding the path, also called
the decoder path, where it aims to gradually up-sample
feature maps to the desired resolution. This path consists
of one 22transposed convolution layer (up-sampling),
followed by two consecutive 33convolutions and a
ReLU activation. The connection path between encoder and
decoder paths (also known as a bottleneck) includes two
successive 33convolutions followed by a ReLU activation.
The successive convolutional operations included in the U-
Net model enables the network’s receptive ﬁeld size to be
increased linearly. This process makes a network gradually
learn coarse contextual and semantic representation in deep
layers compared to shallow layers. Learning high-level se-
mantic features makes the network slowly lose localization
of extracted features, where this aspect is essential to re-
construct segmentation results. Ronnebreger et al. presented
skip connections from the encoder path to the decoder
path on the same scales to overcome this challenge. The
existential reason for these skip connections is to impose
localization information of extracted semantic features at the
same stage from the encoder. To this end, the connection
module concatenates low-level features coming from the
encoder path with high-level representation derived from
the decoding path to enrich localization information. Even-
tually, the network uses a 11convolution to map the ﬁnal
representation to the desired number of classes. To mitigate
the loss of contextual information in the missing image’s
border pixels, the U-Net model uses an overlap tile strategy.
In addition, to deal with insufﬁcient training data a typical
data augmentation technique such as rotation, and gray-
level intensities invariance, elastic deformation is utilized.
It should be noted that elastic deformation is a common
strategy to make the model resistant to deformations, a
common variation in tissues. From a practical perspective,
the original U-Net model outperformed a sliding-window
convolutional network [5] in warping error terminology in
theEM segmentation challenge dataset [7]. This network also
became a new state-of-the-art on two other cell segmen-
tation datasets, PhC-U373 and DIC-Hela cells, by a large
margin of approximately 9%and31% from the previous
best methods in the ISBI Cell Tracking Challenge 2015 by
reporting Intersection over Union (IoU) metric [7].
2.2 3D U-Net
Due to the abundance and representation power of vol-
umetric data, most medical image modalities are three-
dimensional. So, C ¸ ic ¸ek et al. [92] proposed a 3D volumetric-
based U-Net not only to pay attention to this need but also
to overcome the time-consuming slice-by-slice annotation
process for data. As it is noticeable that neighboring slices
share the same information, there is no need for this much