31
Input Image
 Target (GT)
 UNet
 UNet++
 AttUNet
 ResUNet
 MultiResUNet
 TransUNet
 MISSFormer
 UCTransNet
Fig. 35: Visual comparisons of different methods on the SegPC 2021 cell segmentation dataset. Red region indicates the
Cytoplasm and blue denotes the Nucleus area of cell.
Ground Truth
 U-Net
 U-Net++
 Attention U-Net
 Residual U-Net
 MultiResUNet
 TransUNet
 MISSFormer
 UCTransNetaorta gallbladder left kidney right kidney liver pancreas spleen stomach
Fig. 36: Visual comparisons of different methods on the Synapse multi-organ segmentation dataset.
DiceSynapse
DiceSegP  C2021
Memory Eﬃciency Complexity EﬃciencyDiceISIC2018
0.20.40.60.81.0 U-Net
Att-UNet
U-Net++
MultiResUNet
Residual U-Net
TransUNet
UCTransNet
MISSFormer
Fig. 37: Comparison of experimental models with respect
to their Dice score over studied datasets, memory, and
complexity factors.
for advancement that researcher might consider in their
approach.5.2 Balance Between Accuracy and Efﬁciency
It is always appealing for the deep model to be accurate and
efﬁcient. However, model efﬁciency usually requires meet-
ing some restrictions (e.g., low computational constraint).
Such a scenario potentially leads to a poor network design
and consequently results in less accurate predictions. Hence,
there is always a trade-off between the model’s accuracy and
efﬁciency. From a clinical perspective, it is highly desirable
to take into account the balance between efﬁciency and ac-
curacy. Therefore, one might consider the trade-off between
the accuracy and efﬁciency of U-Net extension.
5.3 Model scaling and complexity
As mentioned in the previous sections, evident is the fact
that some parameters such as running time, computational
complexity, and memory are important for clinics with
limited computing resources. In addition to the memory
shortage, inference time and consequently computational
complexity also have key roles in real-time applications
that need to be considered. To do so, well-known metrics
evaluate the model’s complexity such as Model parameters,
Floating-Point Operations (FLOPS), Runtime, and Frame
Per Second (FPS) should be considered in the model as-
sessment. The two given metrics, model parameters, and
FLOPS are independent of the implementation environ-
ment. Hence, a larger value ends up with lower imple-
mentation efﬁciency. Metrics such as run-time and FPS may