16
attention mechanism in Transformer to decrease the compu-
tation complexity and prepare the ground for using Trans-
former to process multi-scale and high-resolution feature
maps. MS-DMSA layer is a deformable transformer instead
of MHSA that focuses on only a small set of key sampling
locations around a reference path. CoTr demonstrates the
competitive results in a score-parameter trade-off on The
Multi-Atlas Labeling Beyond the Cranial Vault (BCV) [89]
dataset.
UNETR [139] is a 3D segmentation network that directly
utilizes volumetric data incorporating ViT solely at the en-
coder stage to capture global multi-scale contextual informa-
tion in a 3D volumetric style which is usually of paramount
importance in medical image segmentation domain. The
architecture follows the U-shaped structure of [7] with skip
connections carrying successive 3D convolution operations
to the 3D CNN-based decoder. Using a CNN-based decoder
is since transformers can not capture spatial localization in-
formation well despite their excellent capability of learning
global information. Analogous to U-Net, Hatamizadeh et al.
[139] uses the different stages of Transformer in the encoder
to pass the ﬂow from the contracting path to extracting
path, and the multi-resolution contextual information (after
reshaping the embedded sequence to a proper tensor shape
and applying convolution operations) merges with CNN-
based decoder to improve the segmentation mask predic-
tion. UNETR produces uniform, non-overlapping patches
from volumetric data and applies a linear projection to
project patches into a constant embedding dimensional
space throughout the Transformer layers. Their ablation
studies depict that they outperformed the TranUNet [38],
TransBTS [39], and CoTr [41] on BCV [89], and MSD [90]
datasets on an average of 1% margin in the dice score metric.
In computer vision tasks, neighboring information of a
speciﬁc region tends to be more correlated than far regions.
To this end, Wang et al. [43] proposed the MT-UNet net-
work utilized with the Mixed Transformer Module (MTM)
to capture long-range dependencies wisely concerning the
most neighboring contextual information. Another critical
point is that the ViT with Self Attention (SA) calculates
the intra-tokens afﬁnities, ignoring the inter-tokens connec-
tions dispensed through the other dimensions, especially
in medical images. Therefore, MTM consists of an External
Attention (EA) counterpart in itself to address this concern.
MTM is used in conjunction with a U-Net-like structure
accompanied by CNN blocks. CNN blocks are used to not
only reduce the computational overhead by downsampling
the input feature maps but also introduce a structure prior
to the model in the case of small medical datasets. MT-UNet
performs well on Synapse [89] and ACDC [101] datasets in
comparison with TranUNet [38].
Azad et al. [44] proposed a contextual attention network,
namely TMU, for adaptively synthesizing the U-Net pro-
duced local feature with the ViT’s global information for
enhanced overlap boundary areas in medical images. TMU
is two branches pipeline, wherein the ﬁrst stream utilizes
a U-Net-like block without a segmentation head (Resnet
backbone [121]) to extract high semantic features and object-
level boundary heatmap interaction representation. In the
next branch, the ViT-based Transformer module applies to
non-overlap input images to extract long-range dependen-cies. Whereas the objective of segmentation differs from one
subject to another data, as mentioned before, TMU aims to
merge the local and global information adaptively. To do so,
Azad et al. proposed a contextual attention mechanism to
produce image-level contextual information and highlight
the most discriminative regions within importance coefﬁ-
cients delivered by attention weights from Transformer. This
paradigm not only revealed the efﬁciency of the bound-
ary information as a prior and adaptive collaboration of
local and long-range dependencies but also outperforms
the conventional hybrid and solely CNN-based methods on
SegPC challenge dataset [140], [141], [142] and skin lesion
segmentation datasets [143], [144], [145].
 
Sigmoid
Conv 1×1
CCT
CCT……L ×
MaxPool+ConvsConcat+  
UpSample+ConvsEmbedd Reconstruct+  
 Channel-wise Cr oss AttentionMulti-head  
Cross-AttentionMLP MLP MLP MLPConcat
LN LN LN LNLN LN LN LN
1×1×C
 1×1×C
GAP GAP
D iCCA
H×W×C H×W×C
T okensUpSample+ConvLinear  
+Sigmoid
1×1×C
 1×1×C
Fig. 22: Overview of the UCTransNet architecture. The
original skip connections of U-Net architecture are replaced
with the proposed CTrans Module including Channel-wise
Cross fusion Transformer (CCT) and Channel-wise Cross
Attention (CCA). CCT with the Multi-head Cross-Attention
module is illustrated on the left. Figure from [146].
Skip connections in the U-Net-based model are used
to transfer high spatial information from the encoder to
the decoder for accurate localization, while the successive
downsampling operations suffer from the loss of spatial
information. However, Wang et al. [45] studied the effec-
tiveness of the preliminary U-Net skip connections and
stated that the naive skip connections suffer from the highly
semantic gap such as semantic gaps among multi-scale
encoder features and between the encode-decoder stages.
They proposed UCTransNet [45] that alleviates these men-
tioned issues from the channel perspective with an atten-
tion mechanism, namely Channel Transformer (CTrans).
CTrans is a modiﬁcation for skip connections in a U-Net-
based pipeline and consists of two sub-counterparts Chan-
nel Cross fusion with Transformer (CCT) and Channel-wise
Cross-Attention (CCA), for aggregating multi-scale features
adaptively and guiding the fused multi-scale channel-wise
features to decoder effectively, respectively (see Figure 22).
CCT aims to fuse multi-scale encoder features to adaptively
compensate for the semantic gap between different scales
with the advantage of long-range dependency modeling
in the Transformer. CCT tokenized feature maps at each
stage within patch sizes from a multiple of1
2, preserving
the channel dimensions. From Figure 22, the proposed CCT
module accompanies tokenized feature maps as a query
and concatenated four tokens come from stages as key and
value matrixes. With the use of instance normalization [147]