26
the feature maps from Encoder and Decoder. The novel skip
connections in these mentioned methods enable the models
to be more ﬂexible and therefore explore local and semantic
features more efﬁciently and from different scales. However,
it also means a more complex design of the network archi-
tecture which leads to a larger number of parameters and
more expensive computation.
Instead of altering skip connections, some proposed
methods use other types of backbones apart from the orig-
inal U-Net by Ronneberger et al. [7]. Residual mapping
structure, inception modules, and dense-connections are in-
corporated into the architectures respectively. Such designs
alleviate the vanishing gradient and degradation problems,
which facilitates the faster convergence of the training pro-
cess. Several approaches focus on adapting convolution
operations such as using deformable convolutional kernels
to make the network more general and robust. Nevertheless,
a higher computational cost is needed due to the additional
convolution layers.
In the third strategy, some approaches utilize other
mechanisms in the bottleneck aiming at enhancing feature
extraction and compressing more useful spatial information.
Attention modules are employed to model long-range spa-
tial dependencies between pixels in the bottle-neck feature
maps. Atrous spatial pyramid pooling (ASPP) with different
sampling rates can resample the compressed feature maps
in the bottleneck separately, which helps to gain the output
of bottleneck from different sizes of reception ﬁelds.
The rise of the Transformer, which is prevalent in the
ﬁeld of NLP , inspires the development of computer vision.
The proposed ViT facilitates the new trend of the combina-
tion of U-Net and Transformer. The tokenized input images
are passed through Transformer to extract global informa-
tion that will supplement U-Net. Despite the state-of-the-
art (SOTA) performance that the Transformer-based U-Net-
like models have achieved, the large number of parameters
of models sometimes cause a long time for convergence.
Some models are also highly dependent on the pretrained
weights.
The last direction combines the original U-Net with
various types of probabilistic extension modules resulting
in new types of variants. Probabilistic U-Net integrates
the U-Net structure with a conditional variational autoen-
coder (CVAE) to generate an unlimited number of plausible
prediction results when the inputs are obscure. Further-
more, the network with Markov Random Fields (MRF) has
the advantage of preventing the model from overﬁtting
with precise segmentations, which signiﬁcantly improves
the performance on out-of-distribution data. The methods
in this direction demonstrate more or less robustness to
defective input datasets, such as those of limited size or
containing ambiguous images.
Figure 33 demonstrates the timeline of typical U-Net-
based methods proposed in medical semantic segmentation
literature from 2015 to 2022. As shown in the timeline, the
U-Net structure has continued to be appealing in recent
years regarding the task of medical image segmentation.
The direction for the extension of U-Net is prominently
inﬂuenced by Transformer after 2021 as a result of the
emergence of ViT [131].4 Q UANTITATIVE COMPARISON
In this section, we evaluate the performance of several
of the previously discussed U-Net variants on favored
medical segmentation benchmarks. It is worth noting that
although most models reported their performance on stan-
dard datasets and used standard metrics, some failed to do
so, making across-the-board comparisons difﬁcult. Further-
more, only a small percentage of publications provide ad-
ditional information, such as hyper-parameters, execution
time, and memory footprint, in a reproducible way, which
is essential for industrial and real-world applications. To
compensate for the gap between the solid foundation for
comparison of the architectures, we conducted several stud-
ies on them in fair conditions to empower the equilibrium
insights on their performance.
4.1 Implementation details
In this section, we discuss our experiments and selected
networks criteria. Before diving in deep, we should mention
that all our implementation code is done in Python with the
PyTorch library [189]. We used a single Nvidia RTX 3090
GPU for training the networks. As a baseline network, we
select the 2D U-Net [7] to build our comparison upon the
naive U-Net and explore the effect of modiﬁcations to U-
Net. Next will be the Attention U-Net [70], which is the pi-
oneering method to integrate the attention mechanism with
U-Net to enhance the feature reusability and a feature se-
lection measure to make the features more discriminant. U-
Net++ [67] brings the highly dense skip connection schema
to U-Net to decrease the semantic gap between down-
sampling and up-sampling paths. However, some methods
tried to surpass the convolution operations of local receptive
ﬁelds by using dense backbones to U-Net, but not only
this procedure still lacks the real global context, but it also
adds more parameters to the model, which is not desirable.
To this end, Residual U-Net [173] brings a neighboring
afﬁnity recipe to hinder locality problems via RCNN blocks.
Although this model originally applied to non-medical data,
it demonstrated robust results on the medical images too.
MultiResUNet [15] by modeling the multi-modal informa-
tion in the backbone is another intuition that we will see
its contribution over the base U-Net, that which is more
successful than the other in compensating the locality of
CNN-based methods. Lastly, we selected three Transformer-
utilized U-shaped networks, TransUNet [38], UCTransNet
[190] and MISSFormer [49], to demonstrate the Transformer
evolution to the medical segmentation ﬁeld by effectively
capturing global contextual information. We should also
note that no pretraining weights were utilized during the
training process for any of the networks. Even though the
pretraining weights on Imagenet might bring some advan-
tages, we dropped the pretraining weight to provide a fair
evaluation criterion.
4.2 Datasets
To demonstrate a fair and productive comparison on the sec-
tion 4.1 networks, we selected several datasets from the di-
verse modalities for the semantic segmentation task. In this
respect, we consider Segmentation of Multiple Myeloma