32
seem to be less desirable compared to model parameters
and FLOPs, due to their reliance on hardware and imple-
mentation environment. However, these metrics are also
imperative for a real-world application and need to be taken
into account as well.
5.4 Interpretable Models
It is always a question for clinical, how deep learning mod-
els learns speciﬁc patterns to recognize certain cancer. From
a clinical point of view, understanding the object recognition
process by deep models is signiﬁcantly appropriate. As a
result, the radiologists can interpret the deep models (e.g.,
feature visualization), to ﬁnd out how the diagnosis process
happens inside the deep model and how they can include
prior knowledge (e.g., pathology assumption) to further
improve model performance. Hence, model interpretation
not only assists the radiologist to understand the hidden
markers in medical data but also provides a way to further
scrutinize the network architecture for possible improve-
ment with modeling clinical assumptions. In this respect,
future direction for U-Net extension might consider the
importance of interpretable characteristics in their network
design.
5.5 Federated Learning
In a medical domain data, privacy provides a set of reg-
ulations to conﬁrm data conﬁdentiality and security. In
most clinical applications, whole data acquisition usually
happens in one center, which limits the data diversity and
results in less generalizable deep neural networks. In con-
trast, a multi-central dataset with authorized data privacy
can provide a more realistic dataset for clinical purposes
[205]. The future network design might consider a federated
learning strategy in their optimization process to provide a
more generalizable model for clinical use.
5.6 Software Ecosystems
With the rapid development of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)
systems, these methods are integrated and adapted in al-
most all domains to facilitate the data processing strategy
and provide assistive tools to meet consumer demands. A
software ecosystem coordinates this process by deﬁning a
set of actors (e.g., developers, users, etc.) in conjunction with
the appropriate interaction strategy to secure consumers’
demands. The software ecosystem can be considered as a
three-step pipeline (see Figure 5). The ﬁrst step (Figure 5) is
data acquisition and preparation. This step aims to recog-
nize the hardware requirements (e.g., MRI scan, metadata
processing) for the task-speciﬁc goal and prepare the data in
a standard format for the next step. The deep learning model
design and optimization process happens in the second
step to learn the task-speciﬁc objective. Finally, the last
step provides comprehensive tools to analyze and evaluate
the extracted results for the clinical applications. Several
software prototypes already exist in the literature, nnUNet
[98], Ivadomed [206], and etc., to provide open access code
for both clinical/research communities. Similarly, our open-
source software at GitHub2provides an implementation of
2. https://github.com/NITR098/Awesome-U-Netthe U-Net family for several public datasets. The future
research direction might consider contributing to an open-
source library to further support software development.
5.7 Data Driven Decisions
In a supervised learning task, the neural network uses the
ground truth mask to learn a discriminative space, which
enables the network to distinguish the target class from
the background regions (e.g., segmenting tumor regions
in bran images). All the extensions of the U-Net models
presented in this review were based on the supervised
learning paradigm. Such a training strategy imposes a mask
bias on the training process and prevents the network from
learning data-driven features. This might explain why su-
pervised trained networks have less capacity to generalize
for unseen objects. To address this issue, one might consider
including unsupervised data in their training process for
a richer data representation, like [207]. As it is clear from
the name, the unsupervised technique does not require any
annotation and gives the model more freedom to infer from
the data itself without imposing any prior knowledge (e.g.,
mask information). Although training and reasoning from
the image itself is a complex task, modeling such behavior
might open up new potential for the U-Net family to learn
more generic and data-representative features. The future
direction of the U-Net family might consider this point in
their potential design for a further performance boost.
6 C ONCLUSION
In this study, we presented a thorough review of the liter-
ature on U-Net and its variants, the emergence of which
has continued to rise in the medical image segmentation
ﬁeld over the years. We examined the area from its main
taxonomy, the extensions to the variants, and a benchmark
of performance and speed. To structure the wide variety
of U-Net extensions, the different extensions and variants
are grouped depending on which type of change was made
to the architecture. Adaptions to the skip connections are
presented in Section 3.1 and comprise methods that in-
crease the number of skip connections, apply additional
processing to the feature maps in the skip connections to
focus on the areas of interest and improve the fusion of
the encoder and decoder feature maps combined through
the skip connections. Section 3.2 introduces different types
of backbones used in the U-Net architecture e.g. deeper
network architectures, processing of 3D images or multi-
resolution feature extraction for high inter-patient variabil-
ity in terms of size of the object(s) of interest. A variety
of extensions of the bottleneck of the original U-Net is
examined in Section 3.3. The different approaches adapt the
bottleneck for multi-scale representation of the bottleneck
feature maps or position-wise attention to model spatial
dependencies between pixels in the bottleneck. The trans-
former variants of the U-Net architecture, introduced in
Section 3.4, enable the networks to capture inter-pixel long-
range dependencies and to compensate for the otherwise
limited receptive ﬁeld of the convolutions in the original U-
Net. Approaches presented in Section 3.5 adapt the U-Net
architecture to use information from multiple modalities