Comparing BERT and XLNet from the Perspective of Computational
Characteristics
Hailong Li, Jaewan Choi, Sunjung Lee, Jung Ho Ahn
Department of Transdisciplinary Studies, Seoul National University
{lhl2017,cjw9202,shiish,ga jh}@sn u.ac.kr
Abstract
Exploiting attention mechanism, Transformer provides su-
perior performance compared to traditional CNN and RNN
models on various NLP (Natural Language Processing) tasks.
BERT and XLNet are two popular models utilizing Trans-
former . In this paper , we compare the computational char-
acteristics of the inference of BERT and XLNet using MPRC
(Microsoft Research Paraphrase Corpus), one of the popular
language understanding benchmarks. Through evaluation, we
observe that the both models exhibit similar computationalcharacteristics except the target-position-aware representa-
tion and relative position encoding features of XLNet, leading
to a better benchmark score at the cost of 1.2 ×arithmetic
operations and 1.5 ×execution time on a modern CPU.
Keywords: Deep learning, NLP , BERT, XLNet
1. Introduction
Recently, Transformer [6], which is based solely on attention
mechanism, shows superior performance in training time and
accuracy compared to CNN and RNN on various NLP (Natural
Language Processing) tasks.
Auto-encoding (AE) and auto-regressive (AR) language
modeling have been mainly used in the Transformer-based
language model. AE language model predicts the target word
by using bidirectional information for training. It is useful for
context understanding tasks. A notable example is BERT [2],
which was the forerunner in accuracy. AR language model is
trained to use only unidirectional information. The model is
adequate for text generation, but it is not effective in context
understanding tasks. XLNet [ 8], a generalized AR language
model, takes the pros of AE, whereas alleviating the cons of
AR, leading to a better accuracy compared to BERT.
Although BERT and XLNet are representative models on
various NLP benchmarks, they take a long time and require
considerable operations to perform both training and inference.
For example, training of BERT-large was performed on 64
TPUv3 chips for 4 days [ 2]. XLNet-large on 512 TPUv3 chips
took 2.5 days during training [ 8]. Inference of BERT-large and
XLNet-large with a single batch was performed respectively
on 1 GPU Titan V V olta for 22 iterations and 19 iterations
per second. In this paper, we analyze and compare the latest
language models, BERT and XLNet, through examining the
computational characteristics and memory bandwidth require-
ment during inference.x
ݕ݁݇݀Softmax x =Query Key
ValueAttentio n
outputAttention score
Fig. 1: Calculation of attention scores in the self-attention
layer
2. Analyzing BERT
BERT is a popular attention-based Transformer language
model and auto-encoding model. It is a multi-layered stacked
structure using the encoder side of Transformer for mapping
input words to a sequence of vectors. The output of each
encoder reﬂects the correlation between the words for con-
centrating on important information. The encoder uses a self-
attention layer as a unit structure. As shown in Figure 1, it
calculates the ﬁnal attention output by using a query/key/value
(feature), which is obtained by matrix multiplication. That
is, an input sequence is multiplied by each of the weights ofquery/key/value to get query/key/value, respectively. There-fore numerous matrix multiplications are performed. Then,
the attention output is forwarded to feedforward networks (FC-
GeLU [ 3]-FC-dropout-Layer Norm [ 5]). Moreover, the output
of a feedforward network is transmitted to the upper encoder
layer as an input. These processes are repeated until the upper-
most encoder layer sends the output of the last feedforward to
the classiﬁcation layer for ﬁnal results.
2.1. Analysis of memory bandwidth requirement and
memory access patterns in BERT
BERT-base with 110M parameters is a large-scale network
model which uses signiﬁcant computing resources during infer-
ence. Arithmetic intensity (FLOP/B) is a measure of ﬂoating-
point operations (FLOPs) performed by a given code section
relative to the amount of memory accesses (Bytes). We exam-
ine the memory bandwidth requirement and memory access
patterns prior to checking the arithmetic intensity of each layer.
We used PyTorch 1.2.0 as a reference framework, Intel Xeon
Gold 6138 processor (Skylake SP), and MRPC benchmark
of GLUE (General Language Understanding Evaluation [ 7])
datasets.
Each encoder layer from Figure 2 shows a similar pattern of
memory bandwidth utilization over time. In the encoder, we