Seg 1[ 0, 1, 2, 3 ]
Seg 2[ 0, 1, 2, 3 ]
Seg 3[ 0, 1, 2, 3 ] Absolute positional 
encoding
[ 0, 1, 2, 3 | 4, 5, 6, 7 | 8, 9, 10, 11 ]
Seg 1 Seg 2 Seg 3Relative positional 
encoding
Fig. 5: Relative position concept used for XLNet.
of encoder layers. It also uses signiﬁcant computing resource
during inference with large parameters (XLNet-large, 340M).
It provides a superior performance compared to BERT on
various NLP tasks thanks to permutation which is applied to
XLNet.
In the training process, permutation method, as shown in
Figure 4, ﬁrst shufﬂes the input tokens, and then predicts
words for training according to the AR method. It enables
the model to consider bidirectional information. For example,
when shufﬂing the tokens of the input sequence and predicting
‘x5’ in permutation AR, as shown in Figure 4, the model
can consider ‘x6, x8’ tokens that are initially on the other
side. However, the method makes tokens to lose their original
position information. XLNet model solves this problem bya target position-aware representation which uses position
information according to the target index detailed in [8].
Besides, XLNet uses the key ideas of Transformer-XL [ 1]
for effectively learning long sentences. It learns data as a
segment unit divided from a long sentence. At the same time,
it uses the states of previous segments. Although it makesthe model learn long sentences effectively, it causes another
position issue. For example, each segment using an absolute
positional encoding method like BERT has the same position
information in a long sentence, as shown in Figure 5. Eachtoken in each segment should have different position infor-
mation. XLNet uses a relative positional encoding method
detailed in [ 8] to solve the problem that is more complicated
compared to Transformer-XL.
3.2. Comparison between BERT and XLNet
XLNet also has two types of multiplications which multiply
input feature by weight (Mat-Mat mul (1)) and an input feature
by another input feature (Mat-Mat mul (2)). Compared to
BERT, Mat-Mat mul (1) includes a relative key ( k_head_r )
calculation additionally. The result is used for the calculation
of a position score as an input. Mat-Mat mul (2) includes
additional multiplications for the calculation of position score
and segment score which respectively multiplies a relative key
by a query and a segment by the query.
In order to check the computational characteristics of XL-
Net and compare it with BERT, we used the same experiment
environment as BERT. We compared the total execution time
and FLOPs of XLNet with BERT in the encoder layer. As
shown in Table 2, XLNet has 1.2 times more FLOPs compared
to BERT, but the execution time is 1.5 times longer. For com-
paring them in detail, We proﬁled a single encoder layer of
XLNet and BERT. As shown in Figure 6, We found that most01 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 50BERTXLNet
GFLOP
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40BERTXLNet
Time ( ms)Self-attention score
Post attention score
FC (FC1,2)
Other (Layer norm1,2)
Target pos-aware representation and rel-pos encoding (XLNet only)
Fig. 6: Comparison of FLOP and execution time in the encoder
layer between XLNet and BERT
TABLE. 2: Comparison of execution time and total FLOPs be-
tween XLNet and BERT in each encoder layer (in a single iter-
ation)
Language models Execution time (ms) GFLOPS
XLNet 38 44
BERT 26 37
Ratio 1.5 1.2
of execution breakdowns were similar except for the red zones
which only XLNet has. They take up about 16% and 32% of
the FLOPs and execution time, respectively, in the encoder
layer of XLNet.
For further analysis, we checked the arithmetic intensity
and memory bandwidth according to the layer types within
the red zone, which is used for target the position-aware repre-
sentation and the relative position encoding in XLNet. Table 3
shows that the red zone consists of the same types of Mat-Mat
mul as described above except element-wise multiplication.
The element-wise multiplication is the addition of an attention
score, position score, and segment score. The output consider-
ing position and segment is used for softmax’s input similar to
the attention score shown in Figure 1. Although it accounts
for only 0.25%, it costs relatively more execution time com-pared to the other types. However, the execution time of the
element-wise multiplication only takes up about 13% within
the encoder layer (Table 4). Besides, we conﬁrmed that most
of the operations within red zone are Mat-Mat mul (1), which
reaches almost 89%(Table 2) in FLOPs.
Table 4 shows XLNet’s arithmetic intensity and memory
bandwidth in the encoder layer. By comparing Table 4 with
Table 1, we can see that XLNet and BERT show almost simi-
lar computational characteristics. Most layers heavily utilize
compute-intensive Mat-Mat mul. Therefore, GPU, which is
optimized for Mat-Mat mul, is a suitable solution for XL-
Net/BERT inference.