MAD-GAN: Multivariate Anomaly Detection for Time Series Data
with Generative Adversarial Networks
Dan Li1, Dacheng Chen1, Lei Shi1, Baihong Jin2, Jonathan Goh3, and See-Kiong Ng1
1Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore, 3 Research Link Singapore 117602
2Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
3ST Electronics (Info Security) Pte Ltd, 100 Jurong East Street 21 Singapore 609602
?
Abstract. The prevalence of networked sensors and actuators in many real-world systems such as smart
buildings, factories, power plants, and data centres generate substantial amounts of multivariate time series
data for these systems. Many of these cyber-physical systems (CPSs) are engineered for mission-critical tasks
and are thus targets for cyber-attacks. The rich sensor data can be continuously monitored for intrusion
events through anomaly detection. However, conventional threshold-based anomaly detection methods are
inadequate due to the dynamic complexities of these systems, while supervised machine learning methods
are unable to exploit the large amounts of data due to the lack of labeled data. On the other hand, current
unsupervised machine learning approaches have not fully exploited the spatial-temporal correlation and other
dependencies amongst the multiple variables (sensors/actuators) in the system for detecting anomalies. Most
of the current techniques also employed simple comparison between the present states and predicted normal
ranges for anomaly detection, which can be inadequate given the highly dynamic behaviors of the systems. In
this work, we propose an unsupervised multivariate anomaly detection method based on Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs), using the Long-Short-Term-Memory Recurrent Neural Networks (LSTM-RNN) as the base
models (namely, the generator and discriminator) in the GAN framework to capture the temporal correlation
of time series distributions. Instead of treating each data stream independently, our proposed M ultivariate
Anomaly D etection with GAN (MAD-GAN) framework considers the entire variable set concurrently to capture
the latent interactions amongst the variables. We also fully exploit both the generator and discriminator
produced by the GAN, using a novel anomaly score called DR-score to detect anomalies by discrimination and
reconstruction. We have tested our proposed MAD-GAN using two recent datasets collected from real world
CPS: the Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) and the Water Distribution (WADI) datasets. Our experimental
results showed that the proposed MAD-GAN is eective in reporting anomalies caused by various cyber-
intrusions compared in these complex real-world systems.
Keywords: Anomaly Detection, Mutlivariate Time Series, Cyber Intrusions, Generative Adversarial Networks
(GAN).
1 Introduction
Today's Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs) such as smart buildings, factories, power plants, and data centres are large,
complex, and axed with networked sensors and actuators that generate substantial amounts of multivariate time
series data that can be used to continuously monitor the CPS' working conditions to detect anomalies in time [1] so
that the operators can take actions to investigate and resolve the underlying issues. The ubiquitous use of networked
sensors and actuators in CPSs and other systems (e.g. autonomous vehicles) will become even more prevalent with
the emergence of the Internet of Things (IoT), leading to multiple systems and devices communicating and possibly
operating a large variety of tasks autonomously over networks. As many of the CPSs are engineered for mission-
critical tasks, they are prime targets for cyber-attacks. It is thus of particular importance to closely monitor the
behaviors of these systems for intrusion events through anomaly detection using the multivariate time series data
generated by the systems.
?The code is available at https://github.com/LiDan456/MAD-GANsarXiv:1901.04997v1  [cs.LG]  15 Jan 2019