MAD-GAN: Multivariate Anomaly Detection for Time Series Data with Generative Adversarial Networks 3
data [14]. PLS is another multivariate data analysis method that has been extensively utilized for model building
and anomaly detection [15]. However, they are only eective for highly correlated data, and require the data to
follow multivariate Gaussian distribution [16].
For the distance-based methods, a popular approach is the K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) algorithm which computes
the average distance to its k nearest neighbours and obtains anomaly scores based on this distane[17]. The Clustering-
Based Local Outlier Factor (CBLOF) method is another example of the distance-based methods. It uses a predened
anomaly score function to identify anomalies based on clustering, which is an enhanced version of the Local Outlier
Factor (LOF) method [18]. Although eective in some cases, these distance-based methods perform better with
priori knowledge about anomaly durations and the number of anomalies.
The probabilistic model-based and density estimation-based methods were proposed as improvements of distance-
based methods by paying more attention to the data distributions. For example, the Angle-Based Outlier Detection
(ABOD) method [19] and Feature Bagging (FB) method [20] deal with data by taking variable correlations into
consideration. However, these methods are unable to take into consideration the temporal correlation along time
steps, and thus do not work well for multivariate time series data.
The deep learning-based unsupervised anomaly detection methods have gained much popularity recently with
their promising performance. For instance, the Auto-Encoder (AE) [21] is a popular deep learning model for
anomaly detection by inspecting its reconstruction errors. Others like Deep Autoencoding Gaussian Mixture Model
(DAGMM) [22] and LSTM Encoder-Decoder [23] have also reported good performance for multivariate anomaly
detection. In this work, we follow the promising success of deep learning-based unsupervised anomaly detection
methods, and propose a novel deep learning-based unsupervised anomaly detection strategy built on the basis of
the Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN).
Our contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: (i) we proposed MAD-GAN, a GAN-based unsuper-
vised anomaly detection method to detect anomalies for multivariate time series; (ii) the MAD-GAN architecture
adapts the GAN framework previously developed for image-related applications to analyze multivariate time series
data by adopting the Long Short Term-Recurrent Neural Networks (LSTM-RNN) as the base models learned by
the GAN to capture the temporal dependency; (iii) we used both GAN's discriminator and generator to detect
anomalies using a novel anomaly score that combines the discrimination results and reconstruction residuals for
each testing sample. The proposed MAD-GAN is shown to outperform existing methods in detecting anomalies
caused by cyber-attacks for two CPS datasets.
3 Anomaly Detection with Generative Adversarial Training
The basic task of anomaly detection for time series is to identify whether the testing data conform to the normal
data distributions; the non-conforming points are called anomalies, outliers, intrusions, failures or contaminants in
various application domains [4]. Fig. 1 depicts the overall architecture of the proposed MAD-GAN.
3.1 MAD-GAN Architecture
First, to handle the time-series data, we construct the GAN's generator and discriminator as two Long-Short-Term
Recurrent Neural Networks (LSTM-RNN), as shown in the left middle part of Fig. 1. Following a typical GAN
framework, the generator ( G) generates fake time series with sequences from a random latent space as its inputs,
and passes the generated sequence samples to the discriminator ( D), which will try to distinguish the generated
(i.e. \fake") data sequences from the actual (i.e. \real") normal training data sequences.
Instead of treating each data stream independently, the MAD-GAN framework considers the entire variable
set concurrently in order to capture the latent interactions amongst the variables into the models. We divide the
multivariate time series into sub-sequences with a sliding window before discrimination. To empirically determine
an optimal window length for sub-sequences representation, we used dierent window sizes to capture the system
status at dierent resolutions, namely sw= 30i;i= 1;2;:::;10.