2 D. Li et al.
An anomaly is usually dened as points in certain time steps where the system's behaviour is signicantly
dierent from the previous normal status [2]. The basic task of anomaly detection is thus to identify the time
steps in which an anomaly may have occurred. Traditionally, Statistical Process Control (SPC) methods such as
CUSUM, EWMA and Shewhart charts were popular solutions for monitoring quality of industrial processes to nd
out working states that are out of range [3]. These conventional detection techniques are unable to deal with the
multivariate data streams generated by the increasingly dynamic and complex nature of modern CPSs. As such,
researchers have moved beyond specication or signature-based techniques and begun to exploit machine learning
techniques to exploit the large amounts of data generated by the systems[4]. Due to the inherent lack of labeled
data, anomaly detection is typically treated as an unsupervised machine learning task. However, most existing
unsupervised methods are built through linear projection and transformation that is unable to handle non-linearity
in the hidden inherent correlations of the multivariate time series. Also, most of the current techniques employ
simple comparisons between the present states and the predicted normal ranges to detect anomalies, which can be
inadequate given the highly dynamic nature of the systems.
Recently, the Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) framework has been proposed to build generative deep
learning models via adversarial training [5]. While GAN has been shown to be wildly successful in image processing
tasks such as generating realistic-looking images, there has been limited work in adopting the GAN framework
for time-series data todate. To the best of our knowledge, there are only few preliminary works that used GAN
to generate continuous valued sequences in the literature. Yet in these early works, the GAN framework has been
proven to be eective in generating time series sequences, either to produce polyphonic music with recurrent neural
networks as generator and discriminator [6], or to generate real-valued medical time series using an conditional
version of recurrent GAN [7]. These early successes of GAN in generating realistic complex datasets, as well as the
simultaneous training of both a generator and a discriminator in an adversarial fashion, are highly suggestive of the
use of the GAN framework for anomaly detection.
In this work, we propose a novel Multivariate Anomaly Detection strategy with GAN (MAD-GAN) to model
the complex multivariate correlations among the multiple data streams to detect anomalies using both the GAN-
trained generator and discriminator. Unlike traditional classication methods, the GAN-trained discriminator learns
to detect fake data from real data in an unsupervised fashion, making it an attractive unsupervised machine learning
technique for anomaly detection [8]. Inspired by [9] and [10] that updates a mapping from the real-time space to
a certain latent space to enhance the training of generator and discriminator, researchers have recently proposed
to train a latent space understandable GAN and apply it for unsupervised learning of rich feature representations
for arbitrary data distributions. [11] and [12] showed the possibility of recognizing anomalies with reconstructed
testing samples from latent space, and successfully applied the proposed GAN-based detection strategy to discover
unexpected markers for images. In this work, we will leverage on these previous works to make use of both the
GAN-trained generator and discriminator to detect anomalies based on both reconstruction and discrimination
losses.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents an overview of the related works. Section 3
introduces our proposed MAD-GAN framework and the anomaly score function. In Section 6, we introduce the
tested CPSs and datasets. In Section 5, we show the experimental results of our proposed MAD-GAN on two
real-world CPS datasets. Finally, Section 6 summarizes the whole paper and suggests possible future work.
2 Related Works
Given the inherent lack of labeled anomaly data for training supervised algorithms, anomaly detection methods are
mostly based on unsupervised methods. We can divide the unsupervised detection methods into four categories:
i) linear model-based method, ii) distance-based methods, iii) probabilistic and density estimation-based methods,
and vi) the deep learning-based methods that are recently highly popular.
For linear model-based unsupervised anomaly detection methods, a popular approach is the Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) [13]. PCA is basically a multivariate data analysis method that preserves the signicant variability
information extracted from the process measurements and reduces the dimension for huge amount of correlated