4 D. Li et al.
Fig. 1: MAD-GAN: Unsupervised GAN-based anomaly detection. On the left is a GAN framework in which the
generator and discriminator are obtained with iterative adversarial training. On the right is the anomaly detection
process where both the GAN-trained discriminator and generator are applied to compute a combined anomaly score
based on discrimination and reconstruction.
As in standard GAN framework, the parameters of DandGare updated based on the outputs of D, so that the
discriminator can be trained to be as sensitive as possible to assign correct labels to both real and fake sequences,
while the generator will be trained to be as smart as possible to fool the discriminator (i.e. to mislead Dto assign
real labels to fake sequences) after sucient rounds of iterations. By being able to generate realistic samples, the
generatorGwill have captured the hidden multivariate distributions of the training sequences and can be viewed
as an implicit model of the system at normal status. At the same time, the resulting discriminator Dhas also been
trained to be able to distinguish fake (i.e. abnormal) data from real (i.e. normal) data with high sensitivity. In this
work, we propose to exploit both GandDfor the anomaly detection task by (i) reconstruction: exploiting the
residuals between real-time testing samples and reconstructed samples by Gbased on the mapping from real-time
space to the GAN latent space; and (ii) discrimination: using the discriminator Dto classify the time series. This
is depicted in the right middle part of Fig. 1. As shown, the testing samples are mapped back into the latent
space to calculate the corresponding reconstruction loss based on the dierence between the reconstructed testing
samples (by the generator G) and the actual testing samples. At the same time, the testing samples are also fed
to the trained discriminator Dto compute the discrimination loss. Note that the testing multivariate time series
are similarly divided into a set of sub-sequences by sliding window and before being fed into the detection model.
We use a novel Discrimination and Reconstruction Anomaly Score (DR-Score) to combine the two losses to detect
potential anomalies in the data (more details are described in Section 3.3).
3.2 GAN-based Anomaly Detection
Let us now formulate the anomaly detection problem using GAN. Given a training dataset X  RMTwith
Tstreams and Mmeasurements for each stream, and a testing dataset XtestRNTwithTstreams and N
measurements for each stream, the task is to assign binary (0 for normal and 1 for anomalous) labels to the
measurements of testing dataset. Note that we assume here that all the points in the training dataset are normal.
To eectively learn from X, we apply a sliding window with window size swand step size ssto divide the
multivariate time series into a set of multivariate sub-sequences X=fxi;i= 1;2;:::;mgRswT, wherem=