MAD-GAN: Multivariate Anomaly Detection for Time Series Data with Generative Adversarial Networks 9
The aforementioned observations suggest that it is of importance to adopt a multivariate approach in the
modeling of the systems for anomaly detection, as the overall change in performance by dierent sub-process could
collectively help to better recognize the attacks. In other words, the underlying correlations between the sensors
and actuators could be useful to detect the anomalies in the behaviors of the system caused by the attack.
5 Experiments
5.1 Data Preparation and System Architecture
In the SWaT dataset, 51 variables (sensor readings and actuator states) were measured for 11-days. Within the
raw data, 496 ;800 samples were collected under normal working conditions (data collected in the rst 7-days), and
449;919 samples were collected when various cyber-attacks were inserted to the system subsequently. Similarly, for
the WADI dataset, 789371 samples for 103 variables were collected under normal working conditions in the rst
14-days, and 172801 samples were collected when various cyber-attacks were inserted to the system in the last 2
days. For both of these datasets, we eliminated the rst 21 ;600 samples from the training data (normal data) since
it took 5-6 hours to reach stabilization when the system was rst turned on according to [26].
In the anomaly detection process, we subdivide the original long multiple sequences into smaller time series by
taking a sliding window across raw streams. Since it is an important topic in time series study to decide the optimal
window length for sub-sequences representation, we tried a set of dierent window sizes to capture the system status
at dierent resolutions, namely sw= 30i;i= 1;2;:::;10. To capture the relevant dynamics of SWaT data, the
window is applied to the normal and testing datasets with shift length ss=10.
For this study, we used an LSTM network with depth 3 and 100 hidden (internal) units for the generator.
The LSTM network for the discriminator is relatively simpler with 100 hidden units and depth 1. Inspired by
the discussion about latent space dimension in [7], we also tried dierent dimensions and found that higher latent
space dimension generally generates better samples especially when generating multivariate sequences. We set the
dimension of latent space as 15 in this study.
5.2 Evaluation Metrics
We use the standard metrics, namely Precision (Pre), Recall (Rec), and F 1 scores, to evaluate the anomaly detection
performance of MAD-GAN:
Pre=TP
TP+FP(7)
Rec=TP
TP+FN(8)
F1= 2PreRec
Pre+Rec(9)
whereTPis the correctly detected anomaly (True Positives: At= 1 while real label Lt= 1),FPis the falsely
detected anomaly (False Positives: At= 1 while real label Lt= 0),TNis the correctly assigned normal (True
Negatives:At= 0 while real label Lt= 0), andFNis the falsely assigned normal (False Negatives: At= 0 while
real labelLt= 1).
Given that our application in this work is to detect intrusions (cyber-attack), it is important for the system to
detect all the attacks even if it requires tolerating a few false alarms. As such, the focus is on correctly detecting
actual positives, while the false positives are not so important as long as they are not excessive. Therefore, we use
recall as the main metric to measure the performance of anomaly detection for this study.