MAD-GAN: Multivariate Anomaly Detection for Time Series Data with Generative Adversarial Networks 7
4 CPSs and Cyber-attacks
4.1 Water Treatment and Distribution System
4.1.1 SWaT The Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) system is an operational test-bed for water treatment that
represents a small-scale version of a large modern water treatment plant found in large cities [25]. The overall
testbed design was coordinated with Singapore's Public Utility Board, the nation-wide water utility company, to
ensure that the overall physical process and control system closely resemble real systems in the eld. The SWaT
dataset collection process lasted for a 11 days with the system operated 24 hours per day. A total of 36 attacks were
launched during the last 4 days of 2016 SWaT data collection process [26]. Generally, the attacked points include
sensors (e.g., water level sensors, 
ow-rate meter, etc.) and actuators (e.g., valve, pump, etc.). These attacks were
launched on the test-bed with dierent intents and diverse lasting durations (from a few minutes to an hour) in
the nal four days. The system was either allowed to reach its normal operating state before another attack was
launched or the attacks were launched consecutively. Please refer to the SWat website4for more details about the
SWaT dataset.
The water purication process in SWaT is composed of six sub-processes referred to as P1 throughP6 [26]. The
rst process is for raw water supply and storage, and P2 is for pre-treatment where the water quality is assessed.
Undesired materials are them removed by ultra-ltration (UF) backwash in P3. The remaining chorine is destroyed
in the Dechlorination process ( P4). Subsequently, the water from P4 is pumped into the Reverse Osmosis (RO)
system (P5) to reduce inorganic impurities. Finally, P6 stores the water ready for distribution.
4.1.2 WADI Unlike a water treatment system plant which is typically contained in a secured location, a distri-
bution system comprises numerous pipelines spanning across a large area. This highly increases the risk of physical
attacks on a distribution network. The Water Distribution (WADI) testbed is an extension of the SWaT system,
by taking in a portion of SWaTs reverse osmosis permeate and raw water to form a complete and realistic water
treatment, storage and distribution network. There are three control processes in the water distribution system.
The rst process is to intake the raw water from SWaT, Public Utility Board (PUB) inlet or the return water
in WADI, and store the raw water in two tanks. P2 distributes water from two elevated reservoir tanks and six
consumer tanks based on a pre-set demand pattern. Water is recycled and sent back to P1 at the third process.
The WADI testbed is similarly equipped with chemical dosing systems, booster pumps and valves, instrumenta-
tion and analysers [27]. In addition to simulating attacks and defences being carried out on the PLCs via networks,
WADI has the capabilities to simulate the eects of physical attacks such as water leakage and malicious chemical
injections. The WADI data collection process consists of 16 days' continuous operations, of which 14 days data
was collected under normal operation and 2 days' with attack scenarios. During the data collection, all network
trac, sensor and actuator data were collected. Please refer to the WADI website5for more details about the WADI
dataset.
4.2 Cyber-Attacks
The goal of an attacker is to manipulate the normal operations of the plant. It is assumed that the attacker has
remote access to the SCADA system of SWaT and WADI and has the general knowledge about how the systems
work. Various experiments have been conducted on the SWaT and WADI systems to investigate cyber-attacks and
respective system responses. In total, 36 attacks and 15 attacks have been inserted to SWaT and WADI, respectively
[25,28]. For illustration, let us explain one exemplary attack for each system.
{ SWaT One attacking goal is to degrade the performance of SWaT from the nominal level (for example, 5
gallons/minute) to a lower value. This attack could be launched by compromising sensor LIT401, which measures
4https://itrust.sutd.edu.sg/testbeds/secure-water-treatment-swat/
5https://itrust.sutd.edu.sg/testbeds/water-distribution-wadi/