14 D. Li et al.
{It is interesting to see that the F 1 scores under dierent principal spaces were at similar low levels (about
0:22 0:24). This was caused by the low precision, as large amount of false positives are reported by MAD-GAN
for the unbalanced SWaT dataset. We will discuss more about the precision issues in the next subsection.
5.3.4 Subsequence Resolution Selecting a suitable subsequence resolution (ie. sub-sequence length) is critical
for RNN and time series related studies. In this work, we empirically determined the optimal subsequence resolution
by trying a series of dierent sub-sequence lengths (i.e. window sizes) sw= 30i; i= 1;2;:::;10. For each sub-
sequence length, the GAN model was trained recursively for 100 iterations (i.e. epochs). We depict the box-plots
of the recall and F 1 values of MAD-GAN at each of the training iterations over dierent sub-sequence lengths in
Figs. 5.
From Figs. 5, we can observe the following dierences:
{SWat dataset: Generally, MAD-GAN achieved better metric values (precision, recall and F 1) with SWaT
dataset when the sub-sequence length used was only 3. The precision values when using sub-sequence length
300 were markedly poorer than those using smaller sub-sequence lengths, while the recall values were better
than the average level across dierent sub-sequence lengths for the SWaT dataset. This indicates that there are
more false positives (bad precision) with larger sub-sequence lengths for SWaT dataset.
{WADI dataset: The overall F 1 level for the WADI dataset was poor (less than 0.2) while the average recall
values were satisfactory. This is in accordance with what we have mentioned in Section 5.3. The poor F 1
(as well as precision) was caused by the large amount of false positives reported for the highly unbalanced
data. Nevertheless, this is acceptable given that false alarms are relatively tolerable for intrusion detection
applications.
While there were 
uctuations in performance (in particular recall) and no convergence along the range of tested
sub-sequence lengths, we can see that the recall values were roughly oscillating within relatively acceptable bounds
(50 100%) for both datasets. Thus, a relatively small sub-sequence length (such as sw= 30) could be a safe choice
for CPS datasets like SWaT and WADI, where the data were recorded every second, and the system has relatively
quick responses6. This choice of small sub-sequence length can save lots of time while the performance can be
guaranteed (As mention in Section 5.3.2 it took more time to train test the GAN model with sub-sequences longer
than 200). It would be a worthy further work for us to investigate and develop a principled approach to determine
the optimal subsequence resolution for time-series analysis using GAN.
5.3.5 Stability across Multiple Iteration Epochs As alluded above, the stability of MAD-GAN is another
interesting issue to explore further. To observe the stability during the training epochs, we plot the recall values as
a function of the iteration epochs for the SWaT and WADI datasets with sub-sequence length sw= 180 in in Fig.
6. Note that the performance for 100 iterations was shown since we have xed the number of training epochs to be
100 for our experiments in this work.
From the gures, we can observe large variances of the performance (the recall values) amongst the iteration
epochs for both datasets. On closer scrutiny, it can be seen that the performance was rapidly improved during
the rst few epochs and then started to oscillate at relatively high level (larger than 60%). We have also observed
similar 
uctuation when testing EGAN (its performance was also not improved by adding more training iterations).
While this may suggest that a small number of training epochs could be sucient for MAD-GAN to rapidly achieve
satisfactory results, the subsequent oscillations indicate the instability of GAN-based anomaly detection method.
As further work, it will be worthwhile to consider the stability of GAN-trained generators and discriminators for
anomaly detection.
6It only takes several hours for SWaT and WADI to achieve steady states, and the system can recover very quickly after
attacks (usually within several minutes).