Data poisoning attack.  Aiming at embedding some tainted data such as 
malicious samples or disguised data to destroy data integrity or give rise to the bias of 
training results. There are two main types of ‘data poisoning’ attack modes includin g 
model skew and feedback weaponization. Traditional machine learning approaches 
are vulnerable to data poisoning since adversarial could directly manipulate the 
triggers to misguide the global model. Nevertheless, these traditional data poisonings 
methods  are less effective or may need many malicious participants when it comes to 
FL since malicious attackers have no direct access to raw data (Bagdasaryan et al., 
2018). On the basis research of Bagdasaryan et al., (2018), Yang, Qb. et al., (2019) 
studied a novel and effective distributed backdoor attack. They divided an attack 
trigger into many slices and embedded each slice into different attackers instead of 
embedding a complete trigger into only one attacker. This new -fashioned mode 
throws a wrench in the old argument that FL is possible to avoid data poisoning. It 
also gives a new evaluation form for security analysis in FL.  
Model poisoning （Also known as Adversarial attack) . Model poisoning refer 
to make machine learning model t o generate a wrong result by designing a specific 
input. Furthermore, it can be subdivided into Non -targeted adversarial attack and 
Targeted adversarial attack. The former one is a common type which lead to an 
incorrect consequence, and the other one is re latively difficult that aiming at injecting 
a specific type for input. In FL, secure aggregation is implemented, and aggregator is 
not familiar with the local update modes thus are not able to detect anomalies or 
verify correctness of local updates. Accord ing to this drawback, the backdoor can be 
inserted into federated environment by malicious participant through model -
replacement methodology thus misunderstand the joint model. This novel attack 
method can be successfully employed in federated training tas ks including image