Federated transfer le arning . Unlike the scenarios in horizontal FL and vertical FL, in 
most cases, data shares neither sample space nor feature space. Thus, the main 
problem in this setting is lack of data labels with poor data quality. Transfer learning 
enables to move the kn owledge of one domain (i.e., the source domain) to another 
domain (i.e., the target domain) to achieve better learning results, which is appropriate 
for this situation (Pan et al., 2010). In this way, Liu, Chen and Yang (2018) conceived 
federated transfer learning (FTL) to generalize FL to have broader application when it 
comes to common parties with small intersection. This is the first complete stack for 
FL based on transfer learning, including training, evaluation and cross validation. 
Besides this, the neural networks with additive homomorphic encryption technology 
in this frame could not only prevent privacy leakage but also provide comparable 
accuracy with traditional non -privacy -preserving method. However, communication 
efficiency remains an issue. Ac cordingly, Sharma et al., (2019) work hard on 
improvement for FTL. They made use of secret sharing technology instead of HE to 
further reduce overhead without decreasing the accurate rate. Furthermore, it could be 
extended to hinder malicious server. While  in the previous work they assume that they 
the model is semi -honest. For a real application, Chen et al.,  (2019) constructed a 
FedHealth model that gather data owned by different organizations via FL and offer 
personalized service for healthcare through t ransfer learning. As shown in Figure 4, 
some disease diagnosis and treatment information in one hospital could be transferred 
to another hospital to help other disease diagnosis by FTL. The research in FTL is not 
yet mature, thereby there is still plenty o f room for growth to make it more flexible 
with different data structure. Data islands and privacy protection issues are prominent 
problems encountered in the current large -scale industrialization of machine learning.