federated setting, it is better to design much more Byzantine fault -tolerant system 
based on fault detection to eliminate or reduce threats.  
FL with block -chain technology.  As a novel technology, block -chain is 
developing fast abroad. In short, Block -chain is essentially a distributed ledger, 
derived from Bitcoin (Nakamoto. S, 2008), which is characterized by decentralization, 
immutability, traceability, collective maintenance, openness and transparency. Several 
blockchain -assisted schemes  for industrial data sharing have been proposed, including 
quality surveillance of 3D -printed articles (Kennedy et al., 2017), consumption 
monitoring and privacy -preserving energy trading for smart grids (Aitzhan and 
Svetinovic, 2018) and emergency medical  service for pre -hospital care (Hasavari and 
Song 2019). Existing studies based on block chain mainly focus on innovate medical 
information sharing system but training collaboratively to maximize data utilization 
has not been implemented. Recent research h as proofed that block chain has potential 
to significantly transform some issues in FL. Blockchain and FL are auxiliary to each 
other. As an inherently secure distributed system, blockchain naturally suitable for 
developed with FL. Since blockchain framewo rk is tolerant with malicious node and 
work normally as long as malicious nodes do not exceed 51% of the total.  
Injecting block -chain technology into FL, Majeed and Hong (2019) envisioned a 
robust Fl -chain that could verify local model update. Although the  security of entire 
architecture can be guaranteed with block chain technology, this security has nothing 
to do with privacy protection. There is no privacy concern in allusion to individual 
node. If there is a malicious clinic or hospital join in the coll aborative training, it may 
spare no effort to snoop other participants’ privacy information. Hence Ilias and 
Georgios (2019) utilized blockchain smart convention to coordinate all clients and 
additionally used homomorphic encryption to provide extra privac y guarantee. The