As a disruptive method to preserve data privacy, FL has great prospect in health 
care. Each medical institute might have a lot of patient data, but that may be far from 
enough to train their own prediction models (Szegedi, Kiss and Horváth,2019) . 
Combination  of FL and disease prediction is one of the good solutions to break down 
the barriers of analysis throughout different hospitals.       
Electronic health records (EMR) contain lots of meaningful clinical concepts, 
Kim, et al., (2017) gave an attempt to use tensor factorization models for phenotyping 
analysis to obtain information concealed in health records without sharing patient -
level da ta. It could be regarded as the first attempt for FL application in medical 
industry. Pfohl et al., (2019) explored differentially private learning for EMR in 
federated setting. And they further demonstrated the performance is comparable with 
training in a  centralized setting. Huanga et al., (2019) make use of EMRs scattered 
across hospitals to predict mortality rate for heart disease patients. During training 
process, there is not any form of data or parameters transmission among hospitals’ 
databases. Besi des this, data consolidated from multiple remote clients into a central 
server is encoded in advance and the decoder will be abandoned at the end of training. 
In addition, Brisimi et al., (2018) also use EMRs to evaluate whether a patient with 
heart diseas e will be hospitalized based on a FL algorithm called cluster Primal Dual 
Splitting (cPDS). This prediction work can be accomplished either on health 
monitoring devices or hospitals holding these medical data without information 
leakage. With utilization o f health records, Lee et al., (2018) proposed a federated 
patient hashing framework to detect similar patients scattered in different hospitals 
without sharing patient -level information. This patient matching method could help 
doctors to summarize general character and direct them to treat patient with more 
experience. In addition, Huangb et al., (2019) leveraged Loss -based adaptive boosting