frameworks such as Stackelberg -based game theory enjoy wide popularity in 
motivation mechanism design. Sarikaya and Ercetin (2019) explore inventive 
mechanism in Stackelberg perspective to inspire workers to allocate more CPU for 
local training. Khan et al., (2019) discussed Stackelberg -based incentive mechanism 
to set local iteration times adaptively to be effective as much as possible. The 
crowdsourcing framework adopted two -stage stackelberg model to acquire utility 
maximization among clients and server ( Pandey et al., 2019).  For future work, more 
frameworks like matching theory and auction theory can be introduced to cope with 
trade -off between number of participants and up date latency.  
Verification for returned model . Most privacy -preserving method in FL rely on a 
strong assumption that clients are semi -honest which obey training rules but keeping 
curious about private data acquisition. However, realistic application gets t he other 
kind. Client may wittingly or unwittingly transmit an erroneous model compel global 
model to deviate from normal trace. For instance, in wearable medical system, 
adversaries may generate plausible but not accurate data to attack the entire model 
(Cai and Venkatasubramanian, 2018). This kind of Byzantine problem is always 
encountered in FL. Thus, Byzantine fault -tolerant system should be developed which 
means even if certain clients don’t follow training protocol or be malicious to attack 
global mod el, the collaborative training can still work well.  
To detect this anomalous model update, Li et al., (2019) considered an 
autoencoder enable model parameters to be replaced by low -dimension vector as well 
as discover irregular weights update. Muñoz -Gonzál ez and Lupu (2019) discussed 
adaptive FL to grub abnormal updates via a Hidden Markov Model to evaluate model 
quality. Traditional Byzantine fault -tolerant system is supported by some defense 
mechanism rather than malicious client detection. Considering lo ss of accuracy in