blockchain -based privacy -preserving FL framework designed by Awan et al., (2019) 
also added a variation of the Paillier cryptosystem as an excess measure to forestall 
privacy leakage. Furthermore, take advantage of block chain, the contrib ution of each 
party to optimize global model could be traced, which make it possible for an 
incentive mechanism. Aforementioned FL frames based on block chain didn’t give 
specific rewarding mechanism for clients to join training. To improve performance for  
FL, a dynamic weighting method had been proposed (Kim and Hong, 2019). It 
considered learning accuracy and participation frequency as training weight to 
motivate high -quality client to get involved in the training. Besides, Block -Fl 
proposed by Kim, H. et  al., (2019) award client holding number of samples to reduce 
convergence time. To sum up, incorporate block chain with FL is auspicious since it 
is a decentralized technology thus doesn’t need central server to predict global model 
anymore. Therefore, it could overcome the limitation of bandwidth in FL. Further, it 
could not only exchange updates while verify correctness to enhance security but also 
employ some activate mechanism to improve FL service. But introducing blockchain 
may cause more latency when  exchange learning model. It would be better to design a 
blockchain -based FL to with low latency.  
Federated training for unsupervised machine learning.  According to the analysis 
of research on FL, existing FL frameworks construct based on supervised learni ng 
method. For instance, FL have been effectively leveraged in neural network (Wang, S. 
et al., 2019; Haob et al., 2019; Bonawitz et al., 2019 ) and SVM ( Liu et al., 2019) , as 
well as linear classifier ( Hardy et al., 2017) .  
Actually, in most of cases where  labeled data either do not exist, or with little 
existence, unsupervised learning methods are supposed to be applied. Thus, 
unsupervised learning is reasonable to be used to infer potential information in these