classification and word prediction (Bagdasaryan et al., 2018). Similarly, Bhagoji et 
al., (2019) attacked global model through few malicious adversaries to wrongly 
classified targeted model. This kind of attack obviously belong to target ed adversarial 
attack. In this case, they ensure convergence of integrated model and accuracy of 
most tasks. In addition, the results show Byzantine -resilient aggregation technology is 
weak to offense this type of attack in the federated setting. Then Zhan g et al., (2019) 
give first attempt to generate model poisoning attack based on Generative Adversarial 
Nets (GAN). In this work, malicious participant pretended to be a benign agent. Then 
they assign a GAN architecture to generate training data as well as distributed a 
wrong label to induce benign client to be damaged. The existing methodologies 
aiming at defending poisoning attack are quite invalid in federated settings. In the 
future work, to mitigate this type of attack for FL, anomaly detection in serve r side 
and concealment of classification results is a promising direction.  
Inferring attack. The value of this type of attack mainly used to detect privacy 
records or restore training data through a white box or a black box. It can be broken 
down into trac ing attacks (also known as membership inference attacks) and 
reconstruction attacks. The first mentioned of two indicates to infer whether a client is 
contained in the data set. The latter advocates recover some features about an 
individual participant. Wi th utilization of vulnerability of SGD, Nasr et al., (2019) 
designed a white -box membership inference attack method direct at neural network. 
Then it was successfully applied to federated setting to infer information via a curious 
server or any of a partic ipant. The previous work focuses on malicious server 
assumption and unable to recover information on specific client because of invisibility 
of client update. In cases of this kind, Wang, Z. et al., (2019) built a general attack 
frame called mGAN -AI which could reconstruct private information for target client.