global gradient information due to biased estimation in local clients. Xiao et al., 
(2020) detect that the mutual information is increased which implies correlation 
between clients, while the di stance of parameters is getting greater with increased 
iteration. This study shows gradient averaging is possible not a good manner for 
gradient aggregation. To eliminate gradient bias in local training stage, Yao et al., 
(2019) keep trace of dispatched gl obal parameters in each local training epoch. Since 
local gradient update is a function of global parameters, then gradients can be 
aggregated in an unbiased way. To better learn aggregation mode in FL, Ji et al., 
(2019) introduce a recurrent neural networ k aggregator to automatically get an 
optimized way for gradient aggregation. In addition, Wang et al., (2019 ) designed a 
layer -wise aggregation mode to serially generate layer parameters in neural network 
for global model. Considering Non -iid distribution on clients, gradient aggregation in 
a simply averaging way isn’t a good choice. It would be better if researchers can bring 
in some adaptive weight for each client or some machine learning method to learn 
how to aggregate these gradients in an effective wa y.  
Incentive mechanism . For performance improvement, apart from optimization of 
resource allocation or novel architecture design, to establish an incentive mechanism 
to encourage more parties join into the training is also an effective way. The original 
FedAvg would select clients randomly. It seems that all clients are equally likely to go 
into the training. In fact, some lazy clients with high quality or some selfish clients 
afraid of power consumption may not attend the whole training process with a cer tain 
probability. Incentive mechanism could be established to motivate such clients. The 
cloud server would allocate the reward to each participant according to their 
contribution. And the client would maximize their utility to obtain more revenue. In 
this way, a benign cyclic effect would be formulated to obtain a satisfied model. The