focusses on evolution of FedAvg in a synchron ous fashion. However, this method 
relies on strong assumption of which is not realistic in practice. The heterogeneous 
resource in terms of different computation ability and various network settings and 
unbalanced data distribution would result in differen t training time and unknown 
communication cost. Based on previous work on asynchronous gradient descent, 
Sprague et al., (2019) compared asynchronous aggregation scheme with FedAvg and 
obtained basically satisfactory results. Generous asynchronous training  mode in FL 
refer to asynchronous local update or asynchronous aggregation. At the client side, 
Chen, Sun and Jin (2019) designed an asynchronous approach for client model 
update. Layers in deep neural network are divided into deep layers and shallow layer s 
with different update frequency. At the server side, asynchronous aggregation could 
be implemented. For instance, asynchronous online FL framework presented by Chen 
et al., (2019) updates central model in an asynchronous way by introducing feature 
learni ng and dynamic learning step size. Considering trade -off between advantages of 
synchronous update and asynchronous training, Wu et al., (2019) proposed a semi -
asynchronous protocol which allow straggling clients don’t always go together with 
central server . The main idea is that make stragglers join training properly to speed up 
training process with utilization of their slowly update model. Gaining a good deal of 
enlightenment from this semi -asynchronous method, a combination of asynchronous 
mode and synch ronous scheme is a promising direction. In this way, can we reduce 
unwanted overhead and give little fault -tolerance to stragglers.  
Gradient aggregation. Usually, in gradient aggregation stage, the gradient of global 
model is the sum of weighted gradient produced by each client. And the weight of 
each client is decided by the sample ratio. However, there is no evidence demonstrate 
that this weighted averagi ng gradient acquired from local clients is equivalent to real