Int. J. Financial Stud. 2020 ,8, 45 4 of 14
and products are o ered at a lower cost to the customer and the provider. This allows customers
to transact in irregular tiny amounts to assist them to manage their uneven incomes (Koh et al.
2018). Additionally, with digital ﬁnancial inclusion, it is possible to have additional ﬁnancial services
tailor-made for customers’ needs and ﬁnancial circumstances which are made possible by the value
storage services embedded in it and the data generated within it (Bourreau and Valletti 2015). Digital
ﬁnancial services also help to reduce risks of loss, theft, and other ﬁnancial crimes posed by cash-based
transactions, as well as the reduced costs associated with transacting in cash and using informal
providers (Muneeza et al. 2018). Again, it can also promote economic empowerment by enabling asset
accumulation for women, in particular, increasing their economic participation (David-West 2015;
Peric 2015).
1.2. Industry 4.0
Industry 4.0, also known as the fourth industrial revolution, can be described as the advent of
cyber-physical systems involving entirely new capabilities for people and machines (Schwab 2015).
While these capabilities are reliant on the technologies and infrastructure of the third industrial
revolution, the 4IR represents entirely new ways in which technology becomes embedded within
societies and even our human bodies (Schwab 2015). 4IR is deﬁned as the fusion of technologies that is
blurring the lines between the physical, digital, and biological worlds (Schwab 2015; Moloi 2020). The
term 4IR was ﬁrst coined by Klaus Schwab, founder and executive chairman of the World Economic
Forum. “The 4IR is sometimes described as an incoming thunderstorm, a sweeping pattern of change visible
in the distance, arriving at a pace that a ords little time to prepare. While some people are ready to face the
challenge, equipped with the tools to brave the change and take advantage of its e ects, others do not even know a
storm is brewing” (Deloitte 2018a).
The 4IR is a ecting almost every facet of our daily life, impacting how individuals relate to
technology and changing how and where work is done (Schwab 2019). Another way to have an
understanding of industry 4.0 is to appreciate the technology used in this revolution. Some of
the technologies include artiﬁcial intelligence and robotics, ubiquitous linked sensors, virtual and
augmented realities, additive manufacturing, blockchain and distributed ledger technology, advanced
materials and nanomaterials, energy capture, storage and transmission, new computing technologies,
biotechnologies, geoengineering, neurotechnology, space technologies. These are some of them that
are driving the fourth industrial revolution in the 21st century (Schwab 2019; Moloi 2020).
1.3. Brief Deﬁnition and History of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
As propounded by Hassani et al. (2020), artiﬁcial intelligence has multiple deﬁnitions. As a result,
no one deﬁnition can deﬁne artiﬁcial intelligence (Hassani et al. 2020). Legg and Hutter (2007) came
up with 70 deﬁnitions of artiﬁcial intelligence covering multiple views. Colom et al. (2010) deﬁned
artiﬁcial intelligence as a general mental ability for reasoning, problem-solving, and learning while
Snyderman and Rothman (1987) deﬁned artiﬁcial intelligence as a general mental ability for reasoning,
problem-solving, and learning. Gottfredson (1997) also deﬁned artiﬁcial intelligence where more
emphasis was given to learning swiftly and the ability to learn from experiences. Hassani et al. (2020)
also deﬁned AI as an intelligent system created to use data and to analyze the data as well as involving
the performance of certain tasks without the need for programming. AI has a strong capacity to create
a foundation for decision making and support through insights and results, collected from vast and
complex data sets which are compressed into the manageable scale (Hassani et al. 2020).
There were generations of scientists, mathematicians and philosophers who had the concept of AI
in their minds by the 1950s (An Editorial with 52 Researchers 1994). Gottfredson (1997) insinuated that
the history of AI began in the periods of human classical civilization with myths and rumours of artiﬁcial
beings endowed with intelligence or consciousness by master craftsmen. The attempt by the classical
philosophers to describe the process of human thinking as the mechanical manipulation of symbols
gave more meaning to the concept of AI (Colom et al. 2010). As articulated by Colom et al. (2010),