Int. J. Financial Stud. 2020 ,8, 45 8 of 14
2018). However, AI is transforming ﬁnancial inclusion through the widespread use of algorithms to
automate risk detection management and measurement (Peric 2015; Muneeza et al. 2018). The use of
AI is making it possible for the previously excluded groups to be able to access ﬁnancial services using
various digital tools such as cell phones or instruments like payment cards that can be used to connect
with digital devices like point of sale terminals (Alameda 2020; Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation 2019).
In Kenya, M-Pesa, where M represents mobile while Pesa is another word for money in Swahili, is
one of the mobile phone-based money transfer service operated by Safaricom which was able to o er
payments services, and micro-ﬁnancing service lunched in 2007 (Osah and Kyobe 2017; Burns 2018).
The service has since spread to many countries which include Tanzania, Mozambique, DRC, Lesotho,
Ghana, Egypt, Afghanistan, South Africa, India, Romania and Albania among many other countries
(Jacob 2016; Burns 2018). The ability of a mobile device using AI intelligence could make it possible for
people to make deposits, to withdraw money, to transfer money, pay for goods and services, to have
access to credit and savings (Van Hove and Dubus 2019). This helps the low-income earners to be able
to access these services which they could not access in the traditional banking system (Wang and He
2020). Additionally, through the use of AI intelligence, registration of accounts was achieved digitally;
approximately 17 million accounts were registered in Kenya in its initial stages in 2012 while 7 million
accounts were registered in Tanzania in 2016 (Van Hove and Dubus 2019; Wang and He 2020).
AI also plays an important role in preventing currency risk (Paul 2019). Through digital ﬁnance,
individuals and small businesses (SMEs) have the option to add funds in the ﬁat currency which allows
a shift in the volatility risk to the ﬁnancial intermediary (FI) (Paul 2019). Many FIs are using bitcoin as
a vehicle currency with the United States dollar as the dominant vehicle currency used in 88 per cent
of trades (Global Partnership For Financial Inclusion 2016; Paul 2019). The use of bitcoin as a vehicle
currency and block chain’s platforms means that the recipient and the sender are not exposed to the
volatility of virtual currency (Paul 2019). The ability to prevent risk is allowing small income earners to
participate in the ﬁnancial market as a result of the strength of AI technology (Alameda 2020). In short,
ﬁnancial markets are adopting more and more to AI to come with more exciting nimble models which
are being utilized by ﬁnancial experts to pinpoint trends, identify risks, conserve manpower and to
ensure better information and for future planning (GPFI 2017).
2.1.2. AI and Information Asymmetry
The credit rationing theory credited to Stiglitz (Berardi 2011). This theory asserts that when
information asymmetry (also referred to as imperfect information) is present in a competitive loan
market, credit rationing will be the major feature of that credit market. Among a group of borrowers
with fully observable and identical characteristics, some will receive loans while others will not get
anything (Stiglitz 1989; Yuan et al. 2011). In the process, some disappointed borrowers will be more
than willing to pay an interest rate which is more than the market interest rate. However, ﬁnancial
institutions will not be willing to respond to excess demand for loanable funds through raising the
interest rate for borrowers (Stiglitz 1989). The major reason given was that in many circumstances
when the interest rate is high, safer borrowers do not borrow as they are disuaded from borrowing
(Yuan et al. 2011).
In addition, when the interest rate is high, borrowers will invest in high-risk projects which will
limit the probability of paying back the loan (Berardi 2011). This condition will limit the participation
of other potential players in the credit market. Accordingly, this explanation will help to explain why
some economic agents will be excluded in the ﬁnancial market and the increase in ﬁnancial exclusion
in the formal ﬁnancial markets. According to the credit rationing theory, one of the major factors
which cause the market to malfunction in developing nations is information asymmetry (Bell et al.
1997). It is believed that information asymmetry through adverse selection and moral hazards is the
primary source of market ine ciencies (Bell et al. 1997). As a result of these ine ciencies in the market,
high-risk borrowers like small scale farmers will be excluded from the group of potential borrowers