Int. J. Financial Stud. 2020 ,8, 45 2 of 14
(ML), robotics, and symbolic logic (Paul 2019). It is believed that the popularity of AI technologies boomed
in 2011 when companies like Google, Microsoft, IBM and Facebook embarked on a massive investment
in AI and machine learning to be applied in the commercial space.
The traditional banking market is equipped with millions of customers with a history that
spans over hundreds of years, and some of these customers may be worth billions (Alameda 2020;
Peric 2015). The challenge which is currently there is that these customers are not digital (Alameda 2020;
Louﬁeld et al. 2018). On the other hand, ﬁntech start-ups have a rich digital vision but to win the trust
of customers is a huge obstacle to them (The World Bank 2020). The occurence of the disturbances
caused by COVID-19 brought another perspective of ﬁntech to customers as it was the only option
available to engage in banking as well as buying. Banks resorted to digital banking while shopping
in many countries was done online using various banking applications to perform transactions. In
addition, the existence of various tech corporations like Google, Apple, Facebook Amazon in America
and Baidu, Alibaba and Tencent in Asia who take pride in having millions of customers with ﬁnancial
returns in the billions and decades of history and a pure digital vision will act as examples a for banks
to embrace digital technology and to understand the importance of AI in ﬁnance (Alameda 2020).
The World Bank stated that digital ﬁnancial services which include the use of mobile phones
have been launched in more than 80 countries (The World Bank 2020; Chu 2018). As a result, millions
of formerly excluded and underserved poor individuals are migrating from cash-based transactions
to formal ﬁnancial services where a variety of services like payments, transfers, credit, insurance,
securities and savings are o ered to them (The World Bank 2020). Mobile phones and other digital
tools including AI are widely used and the rate at which ﬁnancial inclusion is rising is commendable
(Salampasis and Mention 2018; Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation 2019). With digital ﬁnancial inclusion,
ﬁnancial services are provided to customers at an a ordable cost in ways that are sustainable to
customers (Gomber et al. 2017). Digital ﬁnancial services provide unlimited beneﬁts to the previously
excluded customers but it comes with a lot of risks which result from the introduction of non-ﬁnancial
ﬁrms in the provision of new technologies used in the process (The World Bank 2020; Rathi 2016).
Another risk in digital ﬁnance lies in the existence of new contractual relationships between
ﬁnancial institutions and third parties which involve the use of agent networks, other risks result from
dierent regulatory treatment of deposit-like products as compared to real deposits, there are other
risks which result from unknown and unpredictable costs to inexperienced and vulnerable consumers,
together with risks that result from the use of new kinds of data which come with new privacy and
data security issues (The World Bank 2020; Rathi 2016). However, experts are indicating that the use
of AI (particularly algorithms) can help to ﬁght some of the risks (Chu 2018; Killeen and Chan 2018).
Motivated by the fact that in the industry 4.0, AI is increasingly becoming common while on the other
hand digital ﬁnancial inclusion is becoming central in the debate on how to ensure that people who are
at the lower levels of the pyramid become ﬁnancially active, for instance, groups of women, youths,
small businesses among many disadvantaged groups. This study, therefore, intends to investigate the
impact of AI on digital ﬁnancial inclusion, that is to understand the channels in which AI can help to
improve ﬁnancial inclusion.
1.1. History and Deﬁnition of Digital Financial Inclusion
Financial inclusion refers to the number of adults having access to banking or ﬁnancial services.
The Global Findex Survey reported that in the 15 +age group, 79.9% of the population had accounts
with ﬁnancial institutions in the year 2017 (Demirguc-Kunt et al. 2017). This meant a strong growth
compared to 53.1% reported in the previous edition of the survey in 2014, and 35.2% in 2011. Nearly
half of the world’s adult population (or 3.5 billion people) are unbanked and underbanked (with
limited or non-transactional access to ﬁnance). Of these 1.7 billion adults in the world without an
account, China, India, Pakistan and Indonesia account for the largest unbanked persons.
The ﬁrst step towards ﬁnancial inclusion is having an account (Sarma 2015). Increasingly,
digital payments are being used for ﬁnancial transactions (Muneeza et al. 2018). Digital ﬁnancial