Int. J. Financial Stud. 2020 ,8, 45 9 of 14
(Yuan et al. 2011). This will mark the reason many economic agents are ﬁnancially excluded in the
formal ﬁnancial markets.
However, digital tools like AI can overcome the problem of information asymmetry (Kaya and
Pronobis 2016). Digital ﬁnancial inclusion through AI can have access to various online shopping
platforms and various online social networks which produces a large amount of information on
individuals which will help to do away with the problem of information asymmetry between ﬁnancial
institutions and individuals (Wang and He 2020; Yang and Zhang 2020). Digital tools improve access
to credit to vulnerable groups especially those without collateral security based on big data analysis
and cloud computing (Wang and He 2020). Many digital technologies which use AI technology utilize
other credit score mechanisms to create collateral free-loan products (Matsebula and Yu 2017). One
example of the bank which o ered collateral-free loans was the Grameen Bank that won a Nobel Prize
in 2006 together with Prof. Muhammad Yunus. The bank distributed collateral-free loans of united
states dollars (USD) 24 billion to borrowers (Karlan and Morduch 2010; Wang and He 2020). In a
way, AI solutions are assisting ﬁnancial institutions and credit lenders to make smarter underwriting
decisions through the use of many factors that assess accurately traditionally underserved borrowers
in the credit decision-making process (Paul 2019).
2.1.3. AI and Customer Support and Helpdesk through Chatbots
Through the use of AI, banks are now adopting customer support and help desks which are
impacting more on increasing e ciency and reducing the cost of customer support. Banks are o ering
an electronic virtual assistant (EVA). Moreover, with AI, ﬁnancial institutions can provide personalized
banking where chatbots and AI assistants, use AI to come up with personalized ﬁnancial advice and
natural language processing to provide instant, self-help customer service (Alameda 2020; Paul 2019).
Besides, AI is used as a relationship manager, banks are introducing chatbots for this purpose.
This allows vulnerable households in rural areas to access ﬁnancial advice and help which they cannot
enjoy when dealing with human beings (Paul 2019). The HDFC bank of India has already introduced
a chatbot for relationship manager purposes (Paul 2019). It is alleged that many bank sta have an
urban orientation which makes it di cult for them to have the patience to deal and talk to the rural
customers (Journal of Digital Banking 2019). Through the power of AI, banks can come up with natural
regional language processing-based AI-trained robots for training and talking to the rural customers in
regional language (Paul 2019). These robots explain various banking products o ered by the bank, the
robots can also explain the amount of debt rural customers have and even o er suggestions on the
need to save (Siddiqui and Siddiqui 2017). AI-trained robots can become ﬁnancial advisors to rural
households (Deloitte 2018b; Paul 2019). As a result, AI is helping a lot to allow previously vulnerable
groups to be able to access formal ﬁnancial services (Wang and He 2020).
Additionally, some customers can access banking services through their mobile phones, where
they can transact even while at home in the remote parts of their countries as long as they are connected
to mobile networks. Furthermore, the use of AI can help a lot in account opening as individuals
can open accounts or deposit through the use of phones (Paul 2019; Wang and He 2020). The use
of blockchain has also allowed usability of accounts to be more e ective; it takes approximately 10
minutes to transfer money which is faster than the conventional means mainly used in developing
nations (Paul 2019). When using blockchain technology in digital ﬁnance payments, there is no need
for payments to go through the national payments system and as a result, there is no need for physical
branches. This makes payments more feasible as the cost of the transfer is the percentage of the value
of the transferred (Paul 2019). On some instances, AI can facilitate quantitative trading. AI-powered
computers can have a deep analysis of large and complex data sets very fast and more e ciently than
human beings. This will result in automated trading which saves valuable time (Wang and He 2020).