Int. J. Financial Stud. 2020 ,8, 45 3 of 14
inclusion is explained by the World bank as the deployment of cost-saving digital means to reach the
ﬁnancially excluded and the generally underserved population groups with formal ﬁnancial services
that are tailor-made to satisfy their needs (Alameda 2020). Wang and He (Wang and He 2020) also
described digital ﬁnancial inclusion as broad access to and use of formal ﬁnancial services by the
excluded or underserved individual. Digital ﬁnancial inclusion began to attract the attention of many
people as a result of the success of M-PESA, one of the payment innovations introduced in Kenya
(Beck et al. 2018). With M-PESA, mobile money is used for digital payments (Dubus and Van Hove
2017; Van Hove and Dubus 2019). According to Wang and He (Wang and He 2020), digital ﬁnancial
inclusion in China represents more than a payment instrument as it includes three basic business
formats which include digital payments, digital investment and digital ﬁnancing.
Digital ﬁnancial inclusion put more emphasis on the importance of information communication
technology (ICT) in expanding the scale as well as the use of ﬁnancial services by the previously
disadvantaged individuals (Lauer and Lyman 2015; Wang and He 2020). The journey started with
microcredit, microﬁnance and ﬁnancial inclusion, then the journey is now striving for digital ﬁnancial
inclusion (Lauer and Lyman 2015). The word microcredit was ﬁrst used to refer to institutions like the
Grameen Bank of Bangladesh which was created to provide small loans to the poor (Chatterjee and
Sarangi 2006; Wang and He 2020). In the early 1990s, the word microcredit was dominating before it
was replaced by the word microﬁnance which was described as the supply of a variety of ﬁnancial
services which include savings, insurance, loans (Karlan and Morduch 2010; Wang and He 2020).
The ﬁeld-based operation which was used by banks like Grameen where microcredit, microﬁnance
and ﬁnancial inclusion was developed, weakened the e ciency of these banks in serving the poor
(Visser and Prahalad 2013). The existence of ICT and AI made it possible for ﬁnancial inclusion to
change to digital ﬁnancial inclusion which is the fourth stage which will change the lives of those
individuals at the bottom of the pyramid (Visser and Prahalad 2013). Wang and He (Wang and He
2020) indicated that to do business with people at the bottom of the pyramid requires unique business
models and radical innovations such as AI. Wang and He (Wang and He 2020) noted that digital
ﬁnancial inclusion is di erent from traditional ﬁnancial inclusion because digital ﬁnancial services
reduce transaction costs in rural areas due to lower marginal costs. When relying on ICT digital
ﬁnancial services require no physical outlets. However, coming up with new technologies face higher
start-up costs to have them established, but their marginal costs normally move towards zero when
business volume increases (Liao et al. 2020).
The use of AI and various ICT tools helps to overcome the major problem of traditional ﬁnancial
inclusion which is information asymmetry (Gomber et al. 2017). Online services and products o er
a lot of information to customers which could not be accessible without the use of digital services.
The availability of this information helps to reduce information asymmetry between the ﬁnancial
institutions and individuals (Gomber et al. 2017).
The important components of digital ﬁnancial inclusion include but are not limited to digital
transaction platforms, which allow customers to make payments and to store electronic value (Peric
2015; GPFI 2017). The other important aspect provided by digital ﬁnance is devices which are used
by customers which can either be digital devices like mobile phones that can transmit information
or instruments like payment cards that can be used to connect with digital devices like point of sale
terminals (Alameda 2020; Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation 2019). Moreover, digital ﬁnancial inclusion
is characterized by retail agents with digital devices connected to communication infrastructure that
will transmit and receive transaction details. This activity allows customers to convert cash into
electronically stored value also referred to as cash in or to convert back the stored values back into
cash which can also be referred to as cash-out (Peric 2015). With digital ﬁnancial inclusion, additional
ﬁnancial services like credit, insurance and even savings can be o ered by banks and non-banks to the
ﬁnancially excluded and those underserved individuals through digital tools like AI.
As articulated by Peric (2015) the beneﬁts of digital ﬁnancial inclusion include access to formal
ﬁnancial services by the ﬁnancially excluded individuals, and the fact that digital ﬁnancial services