Int. J. Financial Stud. 2020 ,8, 45 7 of 14
crowdfunding in Malaysia, found out that crowdfunding is a necessary way to promote ﬁnancial
inclusion while blockchain can assist in mitigating the risks faced by platform operators.
In summary, the empirical literature review discovered that literature on digital ﬁnancial inclusion
is available, especially literature on how mobile phone technologies are inﬂuencing ﬁnancial inclusion.
In this review, it was noted that digitization has enabled a large population of individuals who were
not ﬁnancially active to be able to enjoy ﬁnancial services because digital tools make the ﬁnancial
services a ordable to many. The review also discovered that digital technology is expanding ﬁnancial
inclusion where it is made possible for the unbanked to be able to access banking services like savings,
insurance, and other ﬁnancial services crucial to the unbanked population and those living in poverty.
The other important aspect noted was that ﬁnancial inclusion is important to bridge the gap between
the physical, digital and the psychological use of money. Authors like Ariﬁn (Muneeza et al. 2018)
indicate that the emergence of innovative digital technologies such as blockchain and crowdfunding is
showing new sustainable ways to support the poor.
1.5. Research Methodology
This study article is premised on desktop research to investigate the impact of AI on digital
ﬁnancial inclusion. The study used unobtrusive research techniques to analyze objectively the impact
of AI on digital ﬁnancial inclusion. The techniques include conceptual and documentary analysis of
peer-reviewed journals, reports and other authoritative documents on AI and digital ﬁnancial inclusion.
Table 1 gives an estimated number of journal articles, reports and other authoritative documents
which include news articles and web page articles that helped to shape the direction of the study. Some
of the journal reports and news articles listed were not necessarily referenced in the paper as they
contributed to ideas which led to the development of the paper. The criteria used in the selection of
the articles, reports and other important documents were simply the relevance of the articles in the
provision of information useful for the main objective of the study which was to investigate the impact
of AI on digital ﬁnancial inclusion. Conceptual analysis and document analysis were used in the
study because documents come in a variety of forms, making documents a very accessible and reliable
source of data. Obtaining and analysing documents is often far more cost-e cient and time-e cient
compared to conducting ﬁeld research or experiments.
Table 1. Journal articles, reports and news articles that shaped the trajectory of the study.
Journal Articles Reports Other Documents Web Pages Articles and News Articles
66 33 40
Source: Author’s Analysis.
2. Results
2.1. The Inﬂuence of AI in Driving Digital Financial Inclusion
Fintech companies are increasingly applying AI applications for many purposes which include
but are not limited to the following: to manage and detect risk, risk measurement, fraud detection,
consumer protection (Paul 2019). Other prominent areas of use include credit scoring, chatbots, capital
optimization, market impact analysis, trade signalling, and ‘reg tech’ applications (Paul 2019).
2.1.1. Risk Detection, Management and Measurement
One major reason for many vulnerable groups—like women, youths and small businesses-like
smallholder farmers—being excluded from the formal ﬁnancial market in the traditional banking
sector was driven by issues around risk (Beck et al. 2009). Many of these vulnerable groups were
viewed as high risk due to the limited capability to detect and measure the risk among them (Park and
Mercado 2015, 2018). Some of the factors that exacerbated this was lack of data (Park and Mercado