Int. J. Financial Stud. 2020 ,8, 45 5 of 14
the e ort in describing human thinking as mechanical manipulation culminated in the invention
of programmable digital computers in the 1940s. These programmable computers were machines
premised on the abstract essence of mathematical reasoning (Hassani et al. 2020). The ideas around the
developed device inﬂuenced several scientists to start discussing, with seriousness, the possibility of
coming up with an electronic brain (Gottfredson 1997).
According to Hassani et al. (2020), artiﬁcial intelligence was mentioned for the ﬁrst time in 1956 at
a computing conference. In 1956 in a workshop at Dartmouth College during the summer of 1956, the
research on AI began. The people who attended the workshop became the leaders of AI for decades
(Hassani et al. 2020). Considerable investment in AI boomed in the ﬁrst decades of the 21st century
due to availability of large data sets, powerful computer hardware and due to the availability of new
methods. This motivated the application of machine learning to many problems in academia and
industry (Frank 2019; Hassani et al. 2020). In this century AI has evolved from being an academic ﬁeld
to become a key factor in the social and economic mainstream technologies including banking, medical
diagnosis, autonomous vehicles as well as voice-activated assistance (Frank 2019).
1.4. Literature Review
The literature on digital ﬁnancial inclusion is available, especially literature on how mobile phones
are increasingly inﬂuencing ﬁnancial inclusion. Ozili (2018) insinuated that digital ﬁnancial inclusion
is a critical component of the e orts applied in trying to include the groups of people who are not
part of the formal ﬁnancial system. Ozili (2018) went on to argue that digital ﬁnance is beneﬁcial to
ﬁnancial users, providers governments and the general economy. However, Ozili (2018) believes that
there are many issues which still need to be resolved in digital ﬁnance, about regulation among others.
Additionally, Dawei et al. (2018) also argued that it is a paradox in a globalized world to have a
third of the population who are not part of the formal ﬁnancial system, yet literature points out that
ﬁnancial services can assist to improve the welfare of the households and to promote small businesses.
Dawei et al. (2018) believes that the inherent limitations of the conventional ﬁnancial system hinder
the prospects of the excluded population. However, Dawei et al. (2018) believes that digital ﬁnancial
inclusion through digital currency and mobile technology can help penetration of ﬁnancial systems in
the unserved parts of the world or country. It is believed that the high cost for small-ticket ﬁnancial
transactions makes these services virtually impossible and unavailable (Dawei et al. 2018).
Dawei et al. (2018) went further to state that digital currency and mobile technology allow small
transactions at an a ordable cost which is a beneﬁt to small businesses and vulnerable groups. Digital
currency and mobile transactions can also help to reduce time and to make transactions in bulk and
with accuracy (Dawei et al. 2018). Many developing nations such as Brazil, India, Nigeria and other
African nations like Kenya and Zimbabwe embraced mobile technology to overcome the problem of
ﬁnancial exclusion.
Sapovadia (2018) also argued that digital ﬁnancial inclusion is di erent from traditional banking
in that it serves the clients without requiring historical records. Sapovadia (2018) went further to
state that digital ﬁnancial inclusion uses data technology and AI to unravel credit assets of clients
and mitigate information asymmetry. It is believed that the availability of AI and big data allow the
use of alternative information like shopping history, online behavior pattern, transaction record and
many other potential information sources of information not common to the convectional banking for
credit scoring. Credit Ease Financial Cloud is one of the examples of big data which provides open
and always accessible functions of anti-fraud, risk management, real-time loan granting and targeted
marketing to external and internal people.
In addition, Levin et al. (2018) also argued that the crisis of the 1960s created the need for the
growth and development of electronic trading and the development of ﬁnancial services technology.
The author believes that technology like AI is important in the ﬁnancial sector as people are preparing
for the new era. Hotchkiss and Lee Kuo Chuen (2018) support Levin et al. (2018), Hotchkiss and Lee
Kuo Chuen (2018) argued that the development of innovations like ﬁntech and blockchain technology