Int. J. Financial Stud. 2020 ,8, 45 10 of 14
2.1.4. Fraud Detection and Cybersecurity
Ramping up cybersecurity and fraud detection e orts is becoming a necessity for any ﬁnancial
institution or bank because of huge quantities of digital transactions which are carried out via online
accounts every day, sometimes through mobile phone and applications (Lopes and Pereira 2019b;
Paul 2019). AI is playing a big role in the improvement of security of online ﬁnance. The ability of
AI to o er this kind of security to online ﬁnance makes it possible for the people at the bottom of the
pyramid concerning ﬁnancial inclusion to be able to participate in the formal ﬁnancial sector (Reim
et al. 2020). Further, ﬁntech companies are using AI applications to advance consumer protection
and user experience, manage risk, detect fraud in many countries (Paul 2019). Various national stock
exchanges in many countries are contemplating the use machine learning to identify market patterns
to improve monitoring and prevent manipulation of its high-frequency trading (HFT) markets (Journal
of Digital Banking 2019; Deloitte 2018b). In reality, AI-enabled cybersecurity systems are increasingly
being used to guard against and prevent possible security breaches. In addition, AI is inﬂuencing
wealth management through robot advisors that provide automated ﬁnancial planning services like tax
planning advice, insurance advice, health, investment advice and many other crucial services (Journal
of Digital Banking 2019). The HDFC bank of India is using AI for its Mobile Banking App, and On
Chat, which makes use of Natural Language Processing where users can interact, conﬁrm and pay for
services within chat (Paul 2019).
2.2. Challenges of AI
Though AI is promising and doing a lot in fuelling digital ﬁnancial inclusion, however, there are
challenges associated with reaping the beneﬁts from intelligent algorithms (Deloitte 2018b). Some of
the challenges relate to data quality, responsibility requirements to roll out AI technology (Sundblad
2018). The prediction power of AI depends chieﬂy on the availability of quality data, However, limited
availability of the right quality and quantity of data may act as an obstacle of the power of AI (Harkut
and Kasat 2019). The prediction power of an algorithm depends highly on the quality of data fed as an
input. Sometimes even in quality data, biases can be hidden (Sundblad 2018). In the ﬁnancial sector,
some reference data are often a ected by quality issues (Sundblad 2018). The concept of AI is premised
on having a data-quality program in place (Sundblad 2018). Moreover, the use of intelligent machines
represents a challenge concerning liability (Harkut and Kasat 2019). The questions which remain
unanswered are who /what shall be responsible in case something goes wrong? Financial institutions
are sometimes reluctant to give machines full autonomy since the behavior of machines is not fully
foreseeable (Deloitte 2018b; Sundblad 2018). In many cases, they tend to keep the human supervisor
in place to validate the critical machine activities and decisions like blocking payments or releasing
payments (Sundblad 2018). This, in a way, partially defeats the purpose of using machines in the ﬁrst
place (Sundblad 2018). In some instances, compliance and operational security standards are relatively
strict and insu cient understanding of AI’s inherent risks, the culture of the ﬁrm and regulation can
all act as barriers to widespread adoption of AI in ﬁnancial services ﬁrms (Harkut and Kasat 2019).
2.3. Conclusion and Policy Recommendations
The research was premised on investigating the impact of AI on digital ﬁnancial inclusion. Digital
ﬁnancial inclusion is becoming central in the debate on how to ensure that people who are at the lower
levels of the pyramid become ﬁnancially active. On the other hand, ﬁntech companies are taking
advantage of the availability of AI to apply its applications to ensure that the goal of digital ﬁnancial
inclusion is realized that is to include groups of low-income earners, the poor, women, youths, small
businesses in the mainstream ﬁnancial market. The study discovered that AI has a strong inﬂuence on
digital ﬁnancial inclusion in areas related to risk detection, measurement and management, addressing
the problem of information asymmetry, availing customer support and helpdesk through chatbots
and fraud detection and cybersecurity. On the aspect of risk, AI is transforming ﬁnancial inclusion