Int. J. Financial Stud. 2020 ,8, 45 6 of 14
has taken the attention o the people around the world and the attention of the banking world.
Hotchkiss and Lee Kuo Chuen (2018) stated that digital ﬁnancial inclusion is doing great things in
Myanmar, one of the fastest-growing economies in Southeast Asia where approximately 52 million
people who live in the country are gaining access through digital ﬁnancial inclusion.
Killeen and Chan (2018) also stated that bitcoin blockchain is creating new ways of transacting
with security without the need for an intermediary. Killeen and Chan (2018) went on to insinuate that
the use of ledger to verify and record identity and asset ownership for individuals to have access to the
transactional account is free from the limitation associated with centralized controls when blockchain is
used. Killeen and Chan (2018) believe that blockchain is satisfying the old needs previously served by
convectional banks more e ciently which risks rendering the existence of the old central institutions
like development banks and large scale investment ﬁrms obsolete. Killeen and Chan (2018) further
argued that global ﬁnancial institutions must try to respond swiftly to the changes in culture and
dynamic values accompanied by blockchain innovation.
David-West (2015) also believes that digital ﬁnancial inclusion can help many households who
were previously excluded to have access to formal ﬁnancial services. David-West (2015) believes that
documentation requirements, costs and literacy issues are some of the factors forcing households and
individuals to adopt informal ﬁnancial services. The existence of mobile money and digital currency
has revolutionized the traditional perspective of ﬁnancial access and inclusion. Moreover, digital
ﬁnancial currency and mobile money have led to the introduction of new ﬁnancial service providers
such as mobile money operators sometimes referred to as agents in many African countries such as
Kenya and Zimbabwe. The existence of mobile money also resulted in policy changes that led to the
existence of other operators which led to the unbanked community being o ered ﬁnancial services
(David-West 2015).
Rathi (2016) also stated that digitization has enabled a large population of individuals who were
not ﬁnancially active to be able to enjoy ﬁnancial services due to the fact that digital tools make the
ﬁnancial services a ordable to many. Rathi (2016) also reiterated that developing nations such as India
are relying on digital technology to provide ﬁnancial services to the unbanked population. In a way,
digital technology is allowing the previously unbanked population to be included in the mainstream
formal ﬁnancial market. Chu (2018) also argued that digital technology is expanding ﬁnancial inclusion
where it is made possible for the unbanked to be able to access banking services like savings, insurance,
and other ﬁnancial services crucial to the unbanked population and those living in poverty. Chu (2018)
argued that ﬁnancial inclusion is important to bridge the gap between the physical, digital and the
psychological use of money. Chu (2018) also believes that bringing together the digital ﬁnancial tools
such as blockchain with the psychological tools like ﬁnancial education can allow the unbanked to
have access to ﬁnancial services which can help to break the poverty cycle.
Salampasis and Mention (2018) in the paper, ﬁntech: harnessing innovation for ﬁnancial inclusion,
argued that ﬁnancial inclusion has been taken as the soft side of ﬁnancial services with limited attention
given to it from the regulators, and policymakers despite its importance in the empowerment of the
marginalized population. Salampasis and Mention (2018) argued that many disadvantaged people in
society are left out of the formal ﬁnancial market, thus creating inequality and general dependence
syndrome by those who are unable to access ﬁnancial services and making the ﬁght against poverty
dicult. However, Salampasis and Mention (2018) also suggested that the emergence of ﬁn-tech, a
new breed of ﬁnancial innovation, is increasingly closing the gap between unbanked, underbanked
and developed societies. Salampasis and Mention (2018) believe that digital technology is opening
previously closed doors in the digital economy for many individuals leading to more equitable growth
and society.
Muneeza et al. (2018), in the paper, the application of blockchain technology in crowdfunding: towards
ﬁnancial inclusion viatechnology, posit that the advent of innovative digital technologies such as
blockchain and crowdfunding is showing new sustainable ways to support the economically poor
and the vulnerable people. Muneeza et al. (2018), after an investigation of the development of