xii Preface
gebra, and elementary probability (mathematically complicated argu ments
involving laws of large numbers and stochastic convergence are byp assed
in favor of intuitive explanations).
Still in our use of a more intuitive but less proof-oriented expository
style, we have followed a few basic principles. The most important of
these is to maintain rigor in the use of natural language. The reason is
that with fewer mathematical arguments and proofs, precise lang uage is
essential to maintain a logically consistent exposition. In particular, we
have aimed to deﬁne terms unambiguously, and to avoid using multiple
terms with essentially identical meaning. Moreover, when circumsta nces
permitted, we have tried to provide enough explanation/intuition so that
a mathematician can ﬁnd the development believable and even constr uct
the missing rigorous proofs.
We note that several of the methods that we present are often s uc-
cessful in practice, but have less than solid performance propert ies. This
is a reﬂection of the state of the art in the ﬁeld: there are no metho ds that
are guaranteed to work for all or even most problems, but there a re enough
methods to try on a given problem with a reasonable chance of succe ss in
the end. †To aid in this process, we place primary emphasis on developing
intuition into the inner workings of each type of method. Still, howeve r, it is
important to have a foundational understanding of the analytical principles
of the ﬁeld and of the mechanisms underlying the central computat ional
methods. To quote a statement from the preface of the NDP mono graph
[BeT96]: “It is primarily through an understanding of the mathematic al
structure of the NDP methodology that we will be able to identify pro mis-
ing or solid algorithms from the bewildering array of speculative propo sals
and claims that can be found in the literature.”
Another statement from a recent NY Times article [Str18], in connec -
tion with DeepMind’s remarkable AlphaZero chess program, is also wor th
quoting: “What is frustrating about machine learning, however, is t hat
the algorithms can’t articulate what they’re thinking. We don’t know w hy
they work, so we don’t know if they can be trusted. AlphaZero gives every
appearance of having discovered some important principles about c hess,
but it can’t share that understanding with us. Not yet, at least. As human
beings, we want more than answers. We want insight. This is going to b e
†While reinforcement learning rests on the mathematical pri nciples of DP, it
also relies on multiple interacting approximations whose e ﬀects are hard to predict
and quantify in practice. It may be hoped that with further th eoretical and
applications research, the state of the subject will improv ea n dc l a r i f y . H o w e v e r ,
it can be said that in its current form, reinforcement learni ng is an exploding
ﬁeld, which is complicated, unclean, and somewhat confusin g( s o m e t h i n gt h a t
the front cover image of the book also tries to convey). Reinf orcement learning is
not unique in this. One may think of other important optimiza tion areas where
as i m i l a rs t a t eo ft h ea r th a sp r e v a i l e df o ral o n gt i m e .