x Preface
space , whereby we select the policy by using optimization over a suitably
restricted class of policies, usually a parametric family of some form. In
some schemes these two types of approximation may be combined, a iming
to capitalize on the advantages of both. Generally, approximation in value
space is tied more closely to the central DP ideas of value and policy it-
eration than approximation in policy space, which relies on gradient-lik e
descent, a more broadly applicable optimization mechanism.
While we provide a substantial treatment of approximation in policy
space, most of the book is focused on approximation in value space. Here,
the control at each state is obtained by optimization of the cost ov er a
limited horizon, plus an approximation of the optimal future cost. Th e
latter cost, which we generally denote by ˜J, is a function of the state where
we may be. It may be computed by a variety of methods, possibly invo lving
simulation and/or some given or separately derived heuristic/subop timal
policy. The use of simulation often allows for implementations that do n ot
require a mathematical model, a major idea that has allowed the use o fD P
beyond its classical boundaries.
We discuss selectively four types of methods for obtaining ˜J:
(a)Problem approximation :H e r e ˜Jis the optimal cost function of a re-
lated simpler problem, which is solved by exact DP. Certainty equiv-
alent control and enforced decomposition schemes are discussed in
some detail.
(b)Rollout and model predictive control :H e r e ˜Jis the cost function of
some known heuristic policy. The needed cost values to implement a
rollout policy are often calculated by simulation. While this method
applies to stochastic problems, the reliance on simulation favors de-
terministic problems, including challenging combinatorial problems
for which heuristics may be readily implemented. Rollout may also
be combined with adaptive simulation and Monte Carlo tree search,
which have proved very e ﬀective in the context of games such as
backgammon, chess, Go, and others.
Model predictive control was originally developed for continuous-
space optimal control problems that involve some goal state, e.g.,
the origin in a classical control context. It can be viewed as a specia l-
ized rollout method that is based on a suboptimal optimization for
reaching a goal state.
(c)Parametric cost approximation :H e r e ˜Jis chosen from within a para-
metric class of functions, including neural networks, with the para m-
eters “optimized” or “trained” by using state-cost sample pairs an d
some type of incremental least squares/regression algorithm. Ap -
proximate policy iteration and its variants are covered in some detail,
including several actor and critic schemes. These involve policy eval-
uation with simulation-based training methods, and policy improve-