Preface xi
ment that may rely on approximation in policy space.
(d)Aggregation :H e r e ˜Jis the optimal cost function of some approxi-
mation to the original problem, called aggregate problem, which has
fewer states. The aggregate problem can be formulated in a variet y
of ways, and may be solved by using exact DP techniques. Its opti-
mal cost function is then used as ˜Jin a limited horizon optimization
scheme. Aggregation may also be used to provide local improvement s
to parametric approximation schemes that involve neural network so r
linear feature-based architectures.
We have adopted a gradual expository approach, which proceeds
along four directions:
(1)From exact DP to approximate DP : We ﬁrst discuss exact DP algo-
rithms, explain why they may be di ﬃcult to implement, and then use
them as the basis for approximations.
(2)From ﬁnite horizon to inﬁnite horizon problems : We ﬁrst discuss ﬁ-
nite horizon exact and approximate DP methodologies, which are in-
tuitive and mathematically simple in Chapters 1-3. We then progress
to inﬁnite horizon problems in Chapters 4-6.
(3)From deterministic to stochastic models : We often discuss separately
deterministic and stochastic problems. The reason is that determin is-
tic problems are simpler and o ﬀer special advantages for some of ou r
methods.
(4)From model-based to model-free implementations : Reinforcement lear-
ning methods o ﬀer a major potential beneﬁt over classical DP ap-
proaches, which were practiced exclusively up to the early 90s: the y
can be implemented by using a simulator/computer model rather tha n
a mathematical model. In our presentation, we ﬁrst discuss model-
based implementations, and then we identify schemes that can be
appropriately modiﬁed to work with a simulator.
After the ﬁrst chapter, each new class of methods is introduced a sa
more sophisticated or generalized version of a simpler method introd uced
earlier. Moreover, we illustrate some of the methods by means of ex amples,
which should be helpful in providing insight into their use, but may also
be skipped selectively and without loss of continuity.
The mathematical style of this book is somewhat di ﬀerent from the
one of the author’s DP books [Ber12], [Ber17], [Ber18a], and the 1996
neuro-dynamic programming (NDP) research monograph, written jointly
with John Tsitsiklis [BeT96]. While we provide a rigorous, albeit short,
mathematical account of the theory of ﬁnite and inﬁnite horizon DP ,a n d
some fundamental approximation methods, we rely more on intuitive ex-
planations and less on proof-based insights. Moreover, our mathe matical
requirements are quite modest: calculus, a minimal use of matrix-ve ctor al-