ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Dimitri Bertsekas studied Mechanical and Electrical Engineering at the
National Technical University of Athens, Greece, and obtained his Ph.D.
in system science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technolog y. He has
held faculty positions with the Engineering-Economic Systems Depar tment,
Stanford University, and the Electrical Engineering Department o f the Uni-
versity of Illinois, Urbana. In 1979 he joined the Electrical Engineer ing and
Computer Science Department of the Massachusetts Institute o f Technol-
ogy (M.I.T.), where he retired in 2016 as McAfee Professor of Engine ering.
In 2019, he became Fulton Professor of Computational Decision Ma king in
the School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engin eering
at the Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ.
Professor Bertsekas’ teaching and research have spanned sev eral ﬁelds,
including deterministic optimization, dynamic programming and stocha stic
control, large-scale and distributed computation, and data commu nication
networks. He has authored or coauthored numerous research p apers and
eighteen books, several of which are currently used as textbook s in MIT
and ASU classes, including “Dynamic Programming and Optimal Contro l,”
“Data Networks,” “Introduction to Probability,” “Convex Optimizat ion
Algorithms,” “Nonlinear Programming,” and the present book.
Professor Bertsekas was awarded the INFORMS 1997 Prize for Re -
search Excellence in the Interface Between Operations Research and Com-
puter Science, the 2001 AACC John R. Ragazzini Education Award, the
2009 INFORMS Expository Writing Award, the 2014 AACC Richard Bell-
man Heritage Award, the 2014 INFORMS Khachiyan Prize for Life-Tim e
Accomplishments in Optimization, the 2015 MOS/SIAM George B. Dant zig
Prize, and the 2022 IEEE Control Systems Award. In 2018, he was awarded,
jointly with his coauthor John Tsitsiklis, the INFORMS John von Neuma nn
Theory Prize, for the contributions of the research monographs “Parallel
and Distributed Computation” and “Neuro-Dynamic Programming.” I n
2001, he was elected to the United States National Academy of Eng ineer-
ing for “pioneering contributions to fundamental research, prac tice and
education of optimization/control theory, and especially its applica tion to
data communication networks.”
iii