Preface xiii
a source of tension in our interactions with computers from now on.” †To
this we may add that human insight can only develop within some struc-
ture of human thought, and it appears that mathematical reason ing with
algorithmic models is the most suitable structure for this purpose.
I would like to express my appreciation to the many students and
colleagues that contributed directly or indirectly to the book. A spe cial
thanks is due to my principal collaborators on the subject, over th e last 25
years, particularly John Tsitsiklis, Janey (Huizhen) Yu, and Mengdi Wang.
Moreover, sharing insights with Ben Van Roy over the years has bee n im-
portant in shaping my thinking. Interactions with Ben Recht regard ing
policy gradient methods were also very helpful. The projects that m ys t u -
dents worked on as part of DP courses I taught at MIT inspired man y ideas
that indirectly found their way into the book. I want to express my t hanks
to the many readers, who proofread parts of the book. In this re spect I
would like to single out Yuchao Li who made many helpful comments, an d
Thomas Stahlbuhk, who went through the entire book with great ca re, and
oﬀered numerous insightful suggestions.
The book took shape while teaching a course on the subject at the
Arizona State University (ASU) during a two-month period starting in
January 2019. Videolectures and slides from this class are available f rom
my website
http://web.mit.edu/dimitrib/www/RLbook.html
and provide a good supplement and companion resource to the book .
The hospitable and stimulating environment at ASU contributed much
to my productivity during this period, and for this I am very thankfu lt o
Stephanie Gil, as well as other colleagues from ASU, including Heni Ben
Amor, Esma Gel, Subbarao (Rao) Kambhampati, Angelia Nedic, Giulia
Pedrielli, Jennie Si, and Petr Sulc. Moreover, Stephanie together wit hh e r
†The two 1957 Bellman quotations at the beginning of this pref ace also
express this tension, although the ﬁrst of these, while stri king and widely cited,
is admittedly taken a little out of context (throughout his w ork on practical
applications, Bellman remained a mathematical analyst at h eart). Bellman’s
fascinating autobiography [Bel84] contains a lot of inform ation on the origins of
DP (and approximate DP as well!); selected quotations from t his autobiography
have been compiled by his collaborator Dreyfus [Dre02]. Amo ng others, Bellman
states that “In order to make any progress, it is necessary to think of approximate
techniques, and above all, of numerical algorithms. Finall y, having devoted a
great deal of time and e ﬀort, mostly fruitless, to the analys is of many varieties
of simple models, I was prepared to face up to the challenge of using dynamic
programming as an e ﬀective tool for obtaining numerical ans wers to numerical
questions.” He goes on to attribute his motivation to work on numerical DP to
the emergence of the (then primitive) digital computer, whi ch he calls “Sorcerer’s
Apprentice.”