6 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED JULY , 2021
control, is reﬂected to the user through haptic guidance [93],
[80]. Exploiting the online estimated probability of following
a certain trajectory, mechanisms for automatic regulation of
haptic assistance have been developed [94], [95]. However,
the haptic feedback provided to the human operator may be
in conﬂict with other sensory signals (e.g., audio or visual).
The conﬂict may be caused by a low conﬁdence estimation
of human goals performed by the autonomous control. This
results in low or wrong assistance causing a decrease of trust
in automation by the human operator [96], [97]. Accounting
for this in the design of SA frameworks can potentially lead to
reduced user’s workload and higher trust in automation [98]
as discussed in the next section.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION
In this letter, we brieﬂy surveyed the use of autonomy in
pHRI, discussing SC and SA as implementation paradigms.
The autonomy level is manually designed and tuned by the
human in SC while it is automatically adapted by the system
in SA exploiting the robot understanding of the human and/or
the task/environment.
In this view, SC still constitutes a powerful paradigm
for combining human decision-making and robot precision
capabilities. Indeed, it provides assistance through commands
overlay and subtasks control while leaving the human operator
the ultimate authority over the system. The common trend
behind the design of SC architectures is the leverage of
task models and model-based control. However, while this is
advantageous for stability and safety certiﬁcation, it makes SC
strategies speciﬁc to the application domain and to the task to
be performed. As no autonomy adaptation is envisioned in this
paradigm, any change in the task requires substantial strategy
modiﬁcations leading to tedious interruptions and setting up
times. This constitutes the main limiting factor, as the level
of the robot autonomy is desirable to change according to the
human/environment evolving behavior.
Determining the level of autonomy that a human wants a
robotic system to have is a very complex problem. There are
cases in which users appreciate that the robotic system guides
them [99]. However, there are also cases where the user wants
that the autonomy is limited and the robotic system does not
take invasive actions, (see, e.g., the surgical domain). Since
pHRI embraces a wide range of applications, we believe there
is no unique answer to this open problem but it requires the
development of a case-by-case solution.
Contrarily, SA approaches provide this favorable autonomy
level adaptation feature that leverages inference of the human
intentions or the task progress. However, other environmental
information are typically ignored. Thus, some of the open
questions are: how does this information increase the ver-
satility of the robots in performing everyday tasks? How to
combine the information coming from multiple sources in a
uniﬁed framework? Our intuition is that the SA framework
should be able to dynamically understand the importance of
each source and appropriately choose its autonomy level.
As advanced SA techniques are being developed, using
various adaptation mechanisms and haptic communicationmeans, these require novel control methodologies that assure
a safe interaction between the human and the robotic system.
The enhanced ﬂexibility of SA systems, that are capable of
providing contextual or personalized assistance and seamless
adaption of the autonomy level, is a desirable trend that raises
new challenges for safety and stability certiﬁcation [100]. A
possible approach is to use passivity-based control techniques
as largely done for SC scenarios [101].
As discussed in Sec. IV, most of the SA approaches use
user’s goals inference within a predict-then-act paradigm.
However, when the user’s goals cannot be predicted with
high conﬁdence, SA methods may not assist the user or give
little assistance [96]. Developing reliable inference methods
to effectively regulate assistance is still an open research
ﬁeld. Moreover, SA approaches that require task/environment
inference are challenged by unstructured environments with
ill-deﬁned tasks. This issue may be mitigated by developing
approaches that render robots capable of online learning, up-
dating in real-time their understandings of the user’s goals and
of the task/environment. To this end, reinforcement learning
and deep learning techniques are capable of learning auton-
omy/assistive policies directly, instead of optimizing them. In
particular, deep reinforcement learning allows implementing
model-free SA but this typically requires lots of training data,
which can be burdensome for human users operating physical
robots [102].
The concept of human trust in autonomy is another essential
aspect to be considered when developing effective human-
robot collaboration techniques. Trust favors the adoption of
semi-autonomous systems such as robot assistants [97]. SA
paradigms integrating the notion of trust require the deﬁnition
of its computational model, which is a research question per
se. The trust towards a robotic system depends on many factors
such as the context, the application, and several individual
factors such as user’s attitude and experience. It also evolves
over time, which can be anchored in speciﬁc features of
the robot, and can be inﬂuenced by the user experience and
the robot behavior [103]. Developing sophisticated predictive
models integrating trust into the robot decision-making in a
principled way, while maintaining computational tractability,
is an exciting area for future work [60]. This opens interesting
questions: how much autonomy should the system have?
How does this affect users’ trust and their willingness to use
the system? Transparency and explainability of the system
behavior, intended as the human understanding of what the
system is doing, why, and what it will do next is another
important aspect to consider [104]. In this context, haptics
may be used to increase system legibility and the situational
awareness of the human, which may increase trust towards the
system.
Ultimately, the evaluation of SA systems is highly sub-
jective, users generally may prefer more assistance when
performing difﬁcult tasks, as this might allow a more efﬁcient
task completion. In our opinion, SA approaches require the
development of contextualized benchmarking and validation
methods for their objective evaluation. These validations in
simulated and/or real-world scenarios may speed up the de-
ployment of robots in our every-day life [105].