4 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED JULY , 2021
maintenance, formation control, and obstacle avoidance func-
tionalities allow the user to control a semi-autonomous group
of UA Vs while redeeming from directly commanding single
agents [50], [51], [21]. More recently, SC was used to perform
cooperative grasping and transportation of an object with a
group of aerial manipulations [52], [53] or with heterogeneous
robot teams [54] following the operator’s commands. In a
recent and comprehensive review on SC methodologies for
human-robot team interaction, the autonomy level adaptation,
e.g., based on the human conﬁdence in performing certain
tasks, is identiﬁed as a key step to be taken in the future [55].
IV. S HARED AUTONOMY
As discussed above, in SC approaches the amount of auton-
omy, shared between the human and the robot, is either static
or manually tuned by the human. However, as the physical
interaction between the human and the robot has an evolving
nature, autonomy adaptation approaches were started to be
devised paving the way towards SA architectures. This enabled
a human-robot interaction much closer to a human-human one
where (mutual) adaptation is a predominant aspect.
The transition from the SC to the SA paradigm was smooth.
Some works preliminary introduced human-robot cooperative
control with different autonomy levels leveraging features
such as active constraints, machine learning, and automated
movements in the context of robotic surgery [56]. On this
line, platforms able to deal with different autonomy levels for
human-robot coexistence and collaboration in manufacturing
applications were developed [57]. Besides surgical and indus-
trial scenarios, several other ﬁelds envisioned the use of multi-
level autonomy such as autonomous driving [18], space [58],
and assistive robotics [22].
As stated above, in the SA paradigm the autonomy level is
dynamic and its adaptation is seamlessly performed by the
robot during the task execution. This adaptation is usually
performed leveraging information extracted from the human
and/or from the environment (including the task). According
to the source of information that triggers the autonomy adap-
tation, we list approaches that extract information from the
human in Sec. IV-A and approaches that use environmental
information in Sec. IV-B.
A. Human
In this section, we survey approaches that extract and use
information from the human operator to adapt the autonomy.
In the following, we consider human intentions (Sec. IV-A1),
muscle activity (Sec. IV-A2), and skills (Sec. IV-A3).
1) Human intentions: A SA system may infer which is, in
a probabilistic sense, the action that the human is performing.
Based on this information, it can compute what action the
robot must undertake, regulating its autonomy and/or provid-
ing assistance. Leveraging this concept, a human-robot mutual
adaptation framework for collaborative object transportation
tasks is presented in [59], [60]: a bounded memory adaptation
model assumes that the human stochastically switches between
a ﬁnite set of modal policies and a mixed-observability Markov
decision process chooses the robot action, accordingly. A SAapproach for assistive teleoperated robots that infers and pre-
dicts human intentions is proposed in [7]: a recursive Bayesian
ﬁlter fuses multiple observations to infer the human goal and
alter the system autonomy level in function of its estimated
uncertainty. On the same line, a framework based on policy
blending is presented in [61]: the robot assistance, during
a teleoperated reach-to-grasp task execution, is provided as
arbitration of two policies, namely, user’s input and the robot’s
prediction of the user’s intent.
Approaches based on SA can be used to assist humans
with disabilities in object reaching and manipulation (e.g.,
slicing and scooping) tasks: a linear blending function with
user-tunable parameters and a conﬁdence metric estimating the
human goal are used in [62] to determine the arbitration be-
tween the autonomous controller and the human. Similarly, the
human task is modelled as a Markov decision process in [63],
which provides the autonomous controller with the human goal
estimates using dimensionality reduction techniques. A SA
teleoperation framework, which mimics the arm movements
of an operator through a bimanual robotic system, is presented
in [64]: the human is assisted on-the-ﬂy in completing different
bimanual tasks (e.g., object handover, container opening) by
means of a recurrent neural network using the user motion
information detected through a motion capture system. Game-
theoretic approaches also can be used to build SA frameworks:
the system assumes that the human is optimizing its objective
function, while its latent intention is inferred from feedback
errors to determine the parameters of a variable impedance
controller during human–robot co-assembly tasks [65], [66].
2) Human muscle activity: Instead of inferring the human
intentions, some papers focus on estimating a metric related
to the human fatigue and take actions for minimizing it. A
framework for proximal human-robot collaboration is pre-
sented in [67]: the robot implements a hybrid force/impedance
controller and estimates the human muscle activity while
performing the task thanks to wearable EMG electrodes. When
the human muscle activity exceeds a threshold, the robot
uses the learned skills (encoded as periodic dynamic motion
primitives) for helping the human in reducing his/her fatigue.
A similar idea is proposed in [68], where the ‘rapid upper
limb assessment’ is used to estimate the human muscle activity
during remote teleoperation tasks: based on this information,
the robot adapts its trajectory to minimize it. An interesting
emerging direction consists in estimating the human fatigue
thanks to a continuous monitoring of the human activities [69].
3) Human skills: Attributing skills to humans allows deﬁn-
ing distance metrics between the performances of expert and
naive operators. The autonomy level can then be autonomously
regulated according to these metrics. In surgical robotics, a SA
teleoperation framework that adapts its cooperative properties
to the estimated skill level of the operator is proposed in [70]:
skill proﬁles, captured as task performance measures, are
exploited to modify the behavior of the assistive robotic system
and enhance the user experience by preventing unnecessary
restrictions for skilled users. On the same line, the assistance-
as-needed paradigm provides the user with variable assistance
during surgical training according to its current and past
performances [71]. A partially observable Markov decision