SELV AGGIO et al. : AUTONOMY IN PHRI: A BRIEF SURVEY 5
process is used to represent the expertise level of an operator
during teleoperated navigation of a mobile robot [72]: the
SA framework uses the inferred user’s expertise level and
environmental observation to fuse the user’s input with the
appropriate autonomous controller.
In general, the correct interpretation of data and attribution
of human mental states are crucial aspects in SA systems.
Perspective-taking (i.e., the ability to take one another’s per-
spective and reason from this alternative point of view) on
robots would be a valuable asset for people working with
them [73]: interpreting data from a human perspective allows
overcoming ambiguity and incompleteness that can often
be present in human demonstrations [74] and communicate
and interact naturally with humans [75]. Theory of mind
computational models allow attributing beliefs, goals, and
desires to the human operator [76], [77]. In this perspective,
neural networks have shown to be capable of building models
for agents’ behavior predicting the main characteristics and
mental states [78]. However, the development of efﬁcient
computational models that predict the human behavior in real-
time is still an open challenge as will be discussed in Sec. VI.
B. Environment
In this section, approaches that use information about the
environment (rather than the human operator) to adapt the
autonomy level are discussed. The most common method to re-
trieve environmental information is to focus on what the robot
has to fulﬁll, i.e., the task, and extract information directly
from it. In this perspective, Learning-from-Demonstration
(LfD) has been proven to be an effective approach: the idea
is to extract expert users’ behavior while executing some
tasks, and use this information to help non-expert users in
accomplishing similar tasks. This paradigm is adopted in
the context of a pick-and-place remote manipulation task
in [79], where trajectories from expert users are captured
through a haptic device, encoded into some distributions, and
then used by an adaptive controller to determine the system
autonomy. This way, naive operators are assisted during the
task execution through haptic cues that point in the direction
of the trajectories performed by the expert users.
Similarly, a task-parametrized Gaussian Mixture Model
(GMM) is used to build a representation of a remotely ex-
ecuted scanning task in [80]: datapoints from expert operators
are collected to encode the task. This is used, together with
the user input, inside a linear quadratic regulator that computes
the robot stiffness and damping that determines the autonomy
level of the teleoperated robot. A similar approach is presented
in [81], where a Task-Parametrized Hidden Semi-Markov
Model (TP-HSMM) is used together with an incremental
online learning algorithm to encode models of a hot-stabbing
task. A model predictive control, that uses the TP-HSMM
predicted state evolution, allows anticipating and adapting the
robot to future events. The approach is extended in [82],
where the system is also able to automatically disambiguate
between local and remote task parametrizations. LfD is used
in [83] for encoding remotely performed peg-in-hole tasks:
GMMs are used to extract information from demonstrationsof expert operators, which is then used to generate force-
based haptic guidance trajectories that help non-expert users
in fulﬁlling the insertion task. Similarly, LfD is used to create
surgical task models in [56]: the proposed framework collects
demonstrations and segments the task based on tool-tissue
or tool-tool interaction. The task is encoded as a continuous
hidden Markov model which is used to regress a path among
those captured during the demonstration, helping naive users
through visual and haptic cues.
Besides the task, environmental constraints can be used to
trigger the system adaptation. An adaptive authority frame-
work handling target occlusions is presented in [84]: the
control allocation between the human and the autonomous
controller is adapted based on target measurements uncertainty
of an adaptive Bayesian ﬁlter. This estimates the pose of the
target based on visual measurements and its covariance matrix
is used to linearly weight the contribution of the human and
the autonomous controller.
It is worth to note that the use of human/environment
sources of information is not mutually exclusive. A challenge
in the design of effective SA frameworks is to understand how
to properly combine and, possibly, prioritize information gath-
ered from multiple sources, as will be discussed in Sec. VI.
V. H APTIC COMMUNICATION
In both remote and proximate pHRI scenarios, haptic
communication between the human and the robot is always
inherently present. In some SC/SA approaches the autonomous
controller inputs, opportunely arbitrated, are provided to the
users as haptic signals [79]. Control of the robotic system is
thus shared, since user’s movements are inﬂuenced by haptic
signals generated exploiting knowledge of the environment
and the task [85]. In this way, the potentially variable au-
tonomy is reﬂected to the user, the system becomes more
legible/transparent, while the operator retains its full control.
The exchange of forces helps to increase the human situ-
ation awareness providing useful information about, e.g., the
current system status, proximity to constraints [39], environ-
mental obstacles [86], etc. Haptic signals integrated in SC/SA
systems can be equivalently seen as virtual ﬁxtures , that help
the human to operate into restricted regions and/or to move
along desired paths [87], [31]. Haptic displays realize the
cobotic behaviour of the robotic device [26] making it poten-
tially well-suited to safety-critical tasks (e.g., surgery) [88].
However, their effective integration is subject to the stability
and the safety certiﬁcation of the interactive robotic system.
Haptic-based SC/SA frameworks have been developed to
guide the user towards grasp poses that maximize manipulation
capabilities [89], [90], or avoid incurring into the system
constraints along post-grasping trajectories [91]. At a larger
scale, whole-body haptic teleoperation interfaces are currently
being developed for bipedal robots to provide the user with a
sense of the robot’s executed motion [92].
Contextualized haptic assistance can be provided to the
operator in a structured manner exploiting models of the task
learned from demonstration [82], [56]. The level of autonomy,
adjusted exploiting the conﬁdence into human and autonomous