IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED JULY , 2021 1
Autonomy in Physical Human-Robot Interaction:
a Brief Survey
Mario Selvaggio1, Marco Cognetti2, Stefanos Nikolaidis3, Serena Ivaldi4, and Bruno Siciliano1
Abstract —Sharing the control of a robotic system with an
autonomous controller allows a human to reduce his/her cognitive
and physical workload during the execution of a task. In recent
years, the development of inference and learning techniques
has widened the spectrum of applications of shared control
(SC) approaches, leading to robotic systems that are capable of
seamless adaptation of their autonomy level. In this perspective,
shared autonomy (SA) can be deﬁned as the design paradigm
that enables this adapting behavior of the robotic system.
This letter collects the latest results achieved by the research
community in the ﬁeld of SC and SA with special emphasis
on physical human-robot interaction (pHRI). Architectures and
methods developed for SC and SA are discussed throughout
the paper, highlighting the key aspects of each methodology. A
discussion about open issues concludes this letter.
Index Terms —Physical Human-Robot Interaction; Human-
Centered Robotics; Human-Robot Collaboration.
I. I NTRODUCTION
AFULLY autonomous robot is a machine that is able to
carry out a task by sensing, planning, and acting into
an environment without any human intervention. However,
despite the great progress achieved by automation in the
recent years, we are still far from providing robots with full
autonomy , that would allow them to successfully deal with
unpredictable events or unforeseen situations. Nowadays, in
most robotic applications, it is customary to have robots that
are operated or supervised by a human operator, who can pro-
vide superior situation awareness, logic, and problem-solving
capability. Sometimes, this is enforced by safety regulations
and/or ethical concerns (e.g., a robot is still fully operated
by a doctor during surgical procedures). In other words, the
interaction between humans and even the most autonomous
robot, albeit minimal, is needed and often desirable.
In Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) applications, autonomy
constitutes a means rather than the goal and its level varies
Manuscript received: February 24, 2021; Revised: June 1, 2021; Accepted:
July 19, 2021.
This paper was recommended for publication by Editor Jee-Hwan Ryu upon
evaluation of the Associate Editor and Reviewers’ comments. This work was
supported by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme under grant agreement No 101017008.
1M. Selvaggio and B. Siciliano are with the Department of Electrical Engi-
neering and Information Technology, University of Naples Federico II, Naples,
Italy. Corresponding author e-mail: fmario.selvaggio g@unina.it
2M. Cognetti is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, National
University of Ireland Maynooth, Maynooth, Ireland.
3S. Nikolaidis is with the Department of Computer Science, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, USA.
4S. Ivaldi is with the Inria, Loria, Universit ´e de Lorraine, CNRS, Nancy,
France.
Digital Object Identiﬁer (DOI): see top of this page.widely from one application to another. Autonomy allows
reducing the human operator’s workload when performing
a task that can be repetitive and/or requires skills, effort or
precision levels that exceed those of a human.
In the past, several robot control architectures were designed
for humans to interact with a (partially) autonomous robot.
This design methodology was typically referred to as Shared
Control (SC). In the last decade, the advancements of sensing,
inference, modeling, and learning methods have extended SC
capabilities and have widened its spectrum of applications.
This gave rise to Shared Autonomy (SA) approaches where
the robot is capable of seamless adaptation of its auton-
omy level based on its own understanding of the human
actions/intentions and of the surrounding environment. Adap-
tation is the most desirable feature when the robot operates
in dynamically changing environments, needs to accomplish
diverse tasks and/or when the human behavior evolves over
time. The autonomy level is typically adapted by opportunely
arbitrating the user and the autonomous controller inputs. Until
now, SC and SA expressions have been used interchangeably.
In this survey, we make this distinction clearer: in SA the
robotic system automatically adjusts its level of autonomy
based on internal/external information, while in SC the human
manually tunes it. The application determines the paradigm
that needs to be adopted.
In both approaches, autonomy constitutes the key aspect to
be properly designed. In the past, other papers tried to propose
continuous or discrete classiﬁcations of autonomy levels in
SC applications. However, these classiﬁcations are drawn for
speciﬁc domains such as telerobotics [1], [2], autonomous
vehicles [3], [4], and surgical robotics [5], and are hard to
be generalized. In general, it would be more appropriate to
deﬁne a spectrum in place of discrete levels of autonomy
for SA approaches, since the robot may continuously vary its
autonomy level in function of external signals coming from
the human, the task, and/or the environment.
In this survey, we review the use of autonomy in physical
Human-Robot Interaction (pHRI). For us, the word physical
comprises both proximal andremote (bilateral teleoperation)
HRI scenarios. In the former, the human and the robot are
in direct contact, which may be mediated by a third object
(e.g., in cooperative manipulation scenarios). In the latter,
the connection between the human, at the local site, and the
robot, operating in a remote environment, is obtained by means
of an appropriate force feedback action that is provided to
the user. This survey provides the following contributions:
(i)we review the role of autonomy in pHRI, highlighting
the difference between SC and SA as design paradigms;