15 
 
we also have to stress that we clearly need more research on the role of both human and machine 
intelligence in entrepreneurship (and its changing nature) to come to safer conclusions. This could 
also include aspects of social and emotional intelligence (e.g., Bainbridge et al. 1994).  However , 
others argue that it might be less intelligence and instead prediction that is the real promise of AI 
for business ( Agrawal  et al.  2018).  
The second  fundamental question  concerns uncertainty . Entrepreneurship , as least in its 
classic sense,  is often discussed as a context of uncertainty ( McMullen and Shepherd 2006; Parker 
2009) and hence as decision -making  under the condition of uncertainty. Per this definition, and in 
contrast to the condition of risk  for example , the concept of uncertainty implies that there are no 
reliable and complete preexisting data available that would help give orientation with respect to 
entrepreneurial ta sks and causal models that come with  a proven track record of success 
(Sarasvathy 2001).  If this is true though, and if AI basically relies on existing data to learn patterns 
and to make predictions, we can ask whether AI will ever overcome these classic unce rtainty 
challenges in entrepreneurship. Assuming a unique role of intuition , imagination, creativity,  
heuristics, and even cognitive bias in entrepreneurship, we can ask whether the irrational and rule -
breaking nature  many entrepreneurs show ( Baron 1998 ; Obschonka  et al.  2013 ) can indeed be 
imitated, “enhanced ,” or replaced by intelligen t machine s that might rely more  or less  on rules, 
rational logics , and formalized thinking.  It seems that AI is better suited to create a “synthetic 
homo economics” ( Parkes and Wellman 2015) than a rule -breaking, intuitive, and creative 
entrepreneur.  It might contribute to what science historian Lorraine Daston describes as new 
rationalization driven by  algorithms ( that replaces self-critical judgments of reason , decision -
making, and strategic planning ; e.g., Erickson  et al.  2013).  On the other hand, AI under conditions 
of uncertainty is a vibrant research field (e.g., Ghahramani 2015; Tversky and Kahnemann 1974;