16 
 
for an overview see also see Russell and Norvig 2016) and we mig ht see major developments in 
this particular  field in the near future as well, including new implications for entrepreneurship as 
effective decision -making under the condition of uncertainty  (as it is discussed in game theory and 
with relation to similar strategy fields like public policy and warfare ; Cummings 2017; Von 
Neumann and Morgenstern 1944).  
These developments could also concern concrete essential entrepreneurial tasks in the very 
early stage of the entrepreneurial process, namely ideation and opportunity discovery/co -creation. 
Can AI help discover and co -creat e opportunities for new economic activity? Can it find its own 
data and make its own experience in the real world to learn how  to be successful in this field? 
Again, this seems more like an unreal utopia at this point (e.g., given the sheer complexity of 
information and dynamics at various levels that might be involved ; and also in view of the 
fundamental  ongoing debate and disag reement in entrepreneurship research about what 
opportunities actually are ; Alvarez  et al.  2017; Davidsson 2017; Foss and Klein 201 7; Ramoglou 
and Tsang 2016) . Nevertheless, also with respect to aspects  of ideation and autonomous learning , 
the field of AI is making incredible scientific progress. For example, recently an AI program  that 
trained itself via reinforcement learning, without any human input and guidance , outperformed 
human experts and other AI programs trained by human experts in highly compl ex tasks (the board 
game  Go and chess ) (Silver et al. 2017; Singh  et al.  2017).  Other AI programs are obviously able 
to help creating  pieces of “real” art ( Cohen  2018) , and economists stress the great potential of AI 
for discovery  and inventions  (Aghion  et al.  2017; Cockburn  et al.  2018).   
The third fundamental question concerns potential limits and risk s associated with AI and 
Big Data. It will be essential for the future  not only  to deal with ethical challenges and to enable 
and regulate access to data  and technological infrastructure  (e.g., for budding entrepreneurs but