5 
 
techniques an often -recommended  work is the textbook by Russell  and Norvig (2016) . Other 
overview  work s that focus particularly on machine learning are Bishop (2006) and Witten  et al.  
(2016).  
Big Data , in turn,  which as an academic  term is typically more loosely defined than AI , 
can mean a large volume of structured, semi -structure d, or unstructured data , and a way to 
collect /produce , process, and analyze these dataset s using non -traditional methods (e.g., AI 
methods). Such data are the fuel, “the new oil” (Agrawal  et al.  2018) for AI and intelligent 
machines. Hence, Big Data and AI are often intertwined  and go hand in hand  as drivers of the 
current digital  transformation  in society  (Brynjolfsson and McAfee 2014; Zomaya and Sakr 2017) . 
However, it is also notable that AI can also rely on , and work with,  smaller existin g datasets  (e.g., 
neural networks based on smaller amounts of existing data).   
At first glance, the field of entrepreneurship research seems not well -prepared and probably 
overwhelmed by the rapid changes and progress in the field of AI and Big Data . After  all, 
entrepreneurship is not really a subfield of computer science and vice versa. But, interestingly  
enough , when thinking about the topic of AI /Big Data  in the context of entrepreneurship it leads 
us to essential questions such a s rationality  and uncertainty , intelligence and logic, discover y and 
ideation, strategy, and experienced -based pattern recognition —topics that have been  of central 
concern for entrepreneurship researchers for many years.  Moreover, one should probably go a step 
further by, s omewhat radically, declaring that the  era of AI and Big Data in entrepreneurship has 
clearly and inevitably begun , and t his is true for both entrepreneurship research  and practice . 
Intelligent machines and algorithms will not only inspire and empower a new generation of 
research in this field, they will also shape  the actual real -world phenomenon of entrepreneurship, 
be it  for example  the development/recognition of opportunities and business ideas, “smart”