20 
 
First, t he articles by Coad and Srhoj (in press)  and Obschonka et al. (in press)  present 
empirical analyses that utilize AI and other Big Data technique s to retest phenomena and 
mechanisms  that have already been studied with traditional methods in prior entrepreneurship 
research. Coad and Srhoj’s (in press) article  targets the prediction of high -growth  firms. By means 
of a Big Data technique they identify valid predictors from a relatively large set of potential 
candidate predictors. They also stress though that with 10% explanation power , the prediction of 
high-growth firms remains a challenging endeavor despite the novel method they utilized. The 
article by Obschonka et al. (in press) focuses on entrepreneurial r egions and attempts to measure 
and validate regional differences in entrepreneurial personality by utilizing individual -level large 
datasets and AI methods that extract psychological patterns. Specifically, they utilize large datasets 
collected from social  media and AI -based language -analyses of this social media language from 
the various regions. They show that the AI-based measure of regional entrepreneurial personality 
that is solely based on free ly available social media data is a similarly valid predictor and indicator 
of actual entrepreneurial activity in the region to regional personality measures collected from 
traditional self -reports (e.g., from millions of personality tests).  
 Second, the articles by Liebregts et al. (i n press) and Zhang and Van Burg (in press)  
present conceptual papers  that advance our theoretical thinking and knowledge about methods and 
data sources in the context of AI/Big Data and entrepreneurship. Liebregts et al. (in press) focuses 
on entrepreneuri al decision -making and how behavioral and non -behavioral cues can be utilized 
via Big Data and AI. Zhang and Van Burg (in press) in turn address the question of how a subfield 
of AI —genetic algorithms —can be utilized in entrepreneurship when combining a de sign science 
and effectuation perspective.