13 
 
humans . Similar question s are being already (indirectly) asked around the topics of invention s, 
innovation,  and scientific progress in general ( Aghion  et al.  2017; Cockburn  et al. 2018 ; Slezak 
1989 ). For example, recently Springer Nature published its first machine -generate scientific book 
(Writer, 2019). Just like  AI has already started to massively shift the way in which  research and 
practice is done  in various fields such as astrophysics, genetics, and health , it could also shift the 
way entrepreneurship is carried out . However, it seems very unlikely  today that AI will completely 
replace humans as entrepreneurial agents  in the near future . 
Interestingly, researchers  estimate  that jobs like business management (which m ight also 
involve entrepreneurship ) are probably confronted with a relatively  small  likelihood to be replaced 
by machines in the near future because “ generalist occupations requiring knowledge of human 
heuristics,  and specialist occupations involving the development of novel ideas and artifacts, are 
the least susceptible to computerization” (Frey and Osborne 2017 : 266). Indeed, “prototypical ” 
entrepreneurship is often described as some sort of generalist work ( Lazear 2004; Stuetzer  et al.  
2013)  that involve s human heuristics ( Busenitz and Barney 1997) , but it can of course also be 
linked to the more specialized development of novel ideas and artifacts (e.g., in the processes of 
ideation, invention, and innovatio n; Drucker 1985; Schumpeter 1934) .  
In the less extreme scenario, and for the near future the obviously more likely case, AI and 
Big Data do not replace but support  entrepreneurs in perform ing entrepreneurial tasks  and reaching 
their individual and organizational goals . So it would be less a matter of humans against  machines 
than humans plus machines. This symbiotic , collaborative  view seems to be evolving into the 
mainstream practice perspective in the contemporary  business and management literature  (Jarrahi 
2018 ; Wilson and Daugherty 2018 ) and it should  be a promising avenue for entrepreneurship as 
well.