3 
 
1 Introduction   
 
This essay and editorial for the S pecial Issue on artificial intelligence (AI), Big Data, and 
entrepreneurship is not an attempt to provide a  complete  overview and prospect of the scope and 
potentially disruptive nature of AI and  Big Data  for entrepreneurship research and practice. There 
is of course the “danger” that what we write  and hypothesize here is incomplete or becomes 
obsolete very soon for various reasons. For example, a ny predictions and explications of future 
scenarios might quickly become outdated due to the rapid  progress  in the field s of AI and Big Data  
and the ir potentially far-reaching , yet hard to precisely predict , future implications  for the real 
world  (Grace  et al.  2018).  But there is of course also ongoing change with respect to the nature  of 
entrepreneurship as a real -world phenomenon  influence d by changing and evolving  external 
enablers and institutions (Davidsson 2016; Davidsson  et al.  2018 ; Eesley  et al.  2016) , and new 
generations of entrepreneurs who grew up i n the digital era , the “digital natives”  (OECD 2017 ).  
Nevertheless, since there is growing attention  around AI and Big Data in an increasing  
number of research  and application fields, i ncluding industry , innovation,  and business 
management , but comparably little attention wi th regard to  entrepreneurship , we would like to 
offer some reflections , thereby being well aware of the challenging and uncertain nature of this 
endeavor , particularly with respect to long -term predictions  within such dynamic fields. We write 
this piece from the perspective of entrepreneurship research , and we will try to focus on the near 
future , for example with respect to research priorities, infrastructure changes, and collaborative 
efforts in the coming generation of entrepreneurship research. Or as Alan Turing, one of the fathers 
of AI, once famously put it : “We can only see a short distance ahead, but we can see plenty there 
that needs to be done”  (Turing 1950 : 460).