19 
 
Finally, t o stay within the opportunity -focused terminology of entrepreneurship research 
as “the study of sources  of opportunities; the processes  of discovery, evaluation, and exploitation 
of opportunities; and the set of individuals who discover, evaluate, and exploit them” (Shane and 
Venkataraman 2000 : 218), and to stress the optimistic “promise” -factor that Shane and 
Venkataraman (2000) championed, a next concrete step could be the focus on the sources, 
processes, and individuals associated with opportunities around machine -based intelligence for 
new entrepreneurship research and its application . This at least could be one way to achieve an 
entrepreneurial handling of the dawning AI and Big Data -augmented  era that seems to be in front 
of us . 
 
5 The articles in this Special Issue  
 
The central goal of the Special Issue “Rethinking the entrepreneurial (research) process: 
Opportunities and challenges of Big Data and Artificial Intelligence for entrepreneurship research” 
was to provide an interdisciplinary platform for conceptual and em pirical papers addressing either 
opportunities or challenges (or both) of AI and Big Data for the diverse field of entrepreneurship 
research. Here we present seven articles that showcase examples for concrete research in this field . 
The works illustrate th e usefulness of innovative perspective s and methods,  but also the existing 
challenges and open questions that entrepreneurship researchers are facing when applying AI/Big 
Data to their field. All papers underwent a traditional double -blind peer review proc ess.1 
                                                 
1 We are grateful to all external reviewers, listed in the following, who reviewed papers that were submitted to this 
Special Issue project: Thomas H. Allison, Joern Block, Niels Bosma, Ryan Boyd, Dermot Breslin, Per Davidsson, 
Dimo Dimov, Uwe Dullek , Brent Clark, Graciela Corral de Zubielqui, Christian Fisch, Denise Elaine Fletcher, 
Michael Fritsch, Samuel D. Gosling, Sven Heidenreich, Colin Jones, Michal Kosinski, Edward J. Malecki, Alex 
Maritz, Nicos Nicolaou, Mark D. Packard, Luke Pittaway, Stuart  Read, Enrico Santarelli, Dean Shepherd, Rolf 
Sternberg, Michael Stuetzer, Amulya Tata, Diemo Urbig, Frederik von Briel, Johan Wiklund,  and Michael 
Wyrwich .