14 
 
Indeed, AI and Big Data have  been supporting business activities and managers (e.g., 
finance, marketing, distribution, business planning, information systems, production, and 
operations) for a long time  (Rajab and Sharma 2018) , but the way and scope  in which  machines 
and humans can interact and collaborate in this field might be new . Wilson and Daugherty (2018) , 
for example,  describe five elements of business process improvement where AI and humans can 
collaborate: flexibility, speed , scale, decision -making, and personalization. The competitive  
advantage of mastering the new generation of AI and Big Data led Brynjolfsson and Mcafee (2017) 
to conclude that “over the next decade, AI won’t replace managers, but managers who use AI will 
replace those who don’t .” Something similar could app ly to entrepreneurs as well  (e.g., “smart 
entrepreneurship”) , particularly if they are operating in AI -relevant business fields  or with 
ambitions where AI can help them to scale.  
However, we see at least t hree fundamental questions associated with such a functional  
nexus between AI and entrepreneurship , and we can only touch the surface of these questions here . 
The first question concerns the very notion of intelligence  itself. If AI is indeed a manifestation of 
intelligence where the latter is defined in a sense of human  intelligence (Turing 1950), we can ask 
whether entrepreneurship really benefits from extremely high levels of  human intelligence . 
Interesting ly, so far research has not show n a clear link between (extremely high) intelligence and 
entrepren eurship. Intelligence researcher Robert J. Sternberg hypothesized that “successful 
entrepreneurship requires a blend of analytical, creative, and practical aspects of intelligence ” 
(Sternberg 2004 : 186).  Hence, successful entrepreneurship might not be “a story about intelligence 
in the traditional sense” (e.g., general human intelligence ; Spearman 1904)  but rather about certain 
facets of intelligence that help entrepreneurs in their analytic, creative, and practical capacities. 
Hence, machine intelligence aiming to support entrepreneurship could focus on these domains, but