4 
 
AI and Big Data are growing in importance in broader research fields that are often seen 
as foundational for entrepreneurship research, such as economics ( Acemoglu and Restrepo 2 018; 
Brynjolfsson  et al.  2017; Einav and Levin 2014), economic policy (Agrawal  et al.  2019), 
innovation (Aghion  et al.  2017), management (George  et al.  2014 ; Ransbotham  et al.  2017 ), and 
psychology (Kosinski et al. 2016).  Likewise, this data revolution is also disrupting application 
fields associated with entrepreneurship, including industry , business management , and innovation 
(Cockburn  et al.  2018) . These massive transformations are  also coined “the second machine age ”, 
in contrast to  “the first machine a ge”—the Industrial Revolution 200 years ago  (Brynjolfsson and 
McAfee 2014) . So, this “second machine age” is  driven  not by coal  and steam  but by data and AI. 
Likewise, AI  expert Andrew Ng describes AI as some kind of  “new electricity” , transforming 
industry and business in a fundamental way like electricity did 100 years ago  (Burgess  2018) . AI 
is therefore also affecting the concrete role and position of people  in this new AI -infused world of 
work in many ways ( Acemoglu and Restrepo 201 8; Frank et al. 2019).  
How are AI and Big Data  defined ? While there are different and evolving definitions  
available , AI can be broadly defined as intelligence demonstrated by machines —or, in terms of an 
academic field (typically seen as a subdiscipline  of computer science ), the examination of how 
digital computers and algorithms perform tasks and solve complex problems  that would normally 
require (or exceed) human intelligence , reasoning , and prediction power  needed to adapt to 
changing circumstances. This modern definition has been evolving since the first definition of AI 
presented by computer scientist John McCarthy more than 60 years ago as “the science and 
engineering of making intelligent machines” (see Andersen 2002).  Within the AI terminology, a n 
often -used categorization is that machine learning is a subset of AI, and deep learning (e.g., deep 
neural networks) a subset of machine learning. For a broad , general  overview of AI and its