17 
 
also entrepreneurship researchers) , but also to maintain a critical perspective. For example , 
researchers raise the issue that AI might not always lead to the most  reliable and useful  solutions 
(e.g., Clever Hans effect ; Lapuschkin et al. 2019)  and it is important to ensure transparency and 
critical evaluation of AI performance . For example, in health research , scholars warn that “one of 
the dangers of ready accessibility of health care data and computational tools for data analysis is 
that the process of data mining can become uncoupled from the scientific process of clinical 
interpretation, understanding the p rovenance of the data, and external validation” (Belgrave et al. 
2017). Indeed, there seems to be general danger of a “blind trust” in algorithms (Logg  et al.  2019). 
So, if entrepreneurs rely on, but do not question and critically evaluate, AI results that  might not 
actually deliver the best and smartest solution , it could lead to biased decisions  and negative 
consequences or at least unused potential for the individual business .  
 
 
3.2 Entrepreneurship education and training  
 
 Third  and finally , besides t heir role as objective external enablers and as support for 
entrepreneurial individuals and teams, AI and Big Data might also enrich  the practice field of 
entrepreneurship education and training  in a new way . In an extreme case, where algorithms and 
intelligen t machine s overtake (some) entrepreneurial tasks from humans, this could mean , 
somewhat ironically,  that these algorithms and machines themselves “receive” some sort of 
entrepreneurship education and training (e.g., in the form of real -world data  that help them to 
learn).  On the other hand, educators might want to make use of AI and Big Data to enhance their 
educational practices in the classroom and in other settings (McArthur  et al.  2005). This could of 
course also mean actually  teach ing entrepr eneurship -relevant AI/Big Data techniques  to better