4 Xingkun Liu, Arash Eshghi, Pawel Swietojanski and Verena R ieser
designed intents were included: ‘set event’, ‘delete event’ and ‘query event’. An
example question for intent ‘set event’ is: “How would you ask your PDA to sched-
ule a meeting with someone?” for which a user’s answer exampl e was “Schedule
a chat with Adam on Thursday afternoon”. The Turkers would th en type in their
answers to these questions and select possible entities fro m the pre-designed sug-
gested entities list for each of their answers.The Turkers d idn’t always follow the
instructions fully, e.g. for the speciﬁed ‘delete event’ Intent, an answer was: “PDA
what is my next event?”; which clearly belongs to ‘query event’ Intent. We have
manually corrected all such errors either during post-proc essing or the subsequent
annotations.
The data is organized in CSV format which includes informati on like scenarios,
intents, user answers, annotated user answers etc.(See Tab le 4 in Appendix). The
split training set and test set were converted into differen t JSON formats for each
platform according to the speciﬁc requirements of the each p latform (see Table 1)
Our ﬁnal annotated corpus contains 25716 utterances, annotated for 64 Intents
and 54 Entity Types .
4.2 Annotation & Inter-annotator Agreement
Since there was a predetermined set of Intents for which we co llected data, there
was no need for separate Intent annotations(some Intent cor rections were needed).
We therefore only annotated the data for Entity Tokens & Enti ty Types. Three stu-
dents were recruited to do the annotations. To calculate int er-annotator agreement,
each student annotated the same set of 300 randomly selected utterances. Each stu-
dent then annotated a third of the whole dataset, namely, abo ut 8K utterances for
annotation. We used Fleiss’s Kappa, suitable for multiple a nnotators. A match was
deﬁned as follows: if there was any overlap between the Entit y Tokens (i.e. Partial
Tokens Matching), and the annotated Entity Types matched ex actly. We achieved
moderate agreement ( κ=0.69) for this task.
5 Evaluation Experiments
In this section we describe our evaluation experiments, com paring the perfor-
mance of the four systems outlined above.
5.1 Train & Test Sets
Since LUIS caps the size of the training set to 10K, we chose 19 0 instances of
each of the 64 Intents at random . Some of the Intents had slightly fewer instances
than 190. This resulted in a sub-corpus of 11036 utterances covering all the 64
Intents and 54 Entity Types. The Appendix provides more deta ils: Table 5 shows the
number of the sentences for each Intent. Table 6 lists the num ber of entity samples
for each Entity Type. For the evaluation experiments we repo rt below, we performed
10 fold cross-validation with 90% of the subcorpus for training and 10% for testing
in each fold.10
10We also note here that our dataset was inevitably unbalanced across the different Intents &
Entities: e.g. some Intents had much fewer instances: iotwemo had only 77 instances. But this
would affect the performance of the four platforms equally, and thus does not confound the results
presented below.