2 Xingkun Liu, Arash Eshghi, Pawel Swietojanski and Verena R ieser
In the absence of reliable, third-party – and thus unbiased – evaluations of NLU
toolkits, it is difﬁcult for users (which are often conversa tional AI companies) to
choose between these platforms. In this paper, our goal is to provide just such an
evaluation: we present the ﬁrst systematic, wide-coverage evaluation of some of
the most commonly used3NLU services, namely: Rasa4, Watson5, LUIS6and Di-
alogﬂow7. The evaluation uses a new dataset of 25k user utterances whi ch we an-
notated with Intent and Named Entity speciﬁcations. The dat aset, as well as our
evaluation toolkit will be released for public use.
2 Related Work
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst wide coverage comparative evaluation of NLU
services - those that exist tend to lack breadth in Intent typ es, Entity types, and the
domains studied. For example, recent blog posts [3, 4], summ arise benchmarking
results for 4 domains, with only 4 to 7 intents for each. The cl osest published work
to the results presented here is by [1], who evaluate 6 NLU ser vices in terms of
their accuracy (as measured by precision, recall and F-scor e, as we do here) on 3
domains with 2, 4, and 7 intents and 5, 3, and 3 entities respec tively. In contrast,
we consider the 4 currently most commonly used NLU services o n a large, new data
set, which contains 21 domains of different complexities, c overing 64 Intents and 54
Entity types in total. In addition, [2] describe an analysis of NLU engines in terms
of their usability, language coverage, price etc., which is complimentary to the work
presented here.
3 Natural Language Understanding Services
There are several options for building the NLU component for conversational
systems. NLU typically performs the following tasks: (1) Cl assifying the user Intent
or Dialogue Act type; and (2) Recognition of Named Entities ( henceforth NER) in
an utterance8. There are currently a number of service platforms that perf orm (1) and
(2): commercial ones, such as Google’s Dialogﬂow (formerly Api.ai), Microsoft’s
LUIS, IBM’s Watson Assistant (henceforth Watson), Faceboo k’s Wit.ai, Amazon
Lex, Recast.ai, Botfuel.io; and open source ones, such as Sn ips.ai9and Rasa. As
mentioned above, we focus on four of these: Rasa, IBM’s Watso n, Microsoft’s LUIS
and Google’s Dialogﬂow. In the following, we brieﬂy summari se and discuss their
various features. Table 1 provides a summary of the input/ou tput formats for each
of the platforms.
(1) All four platforms support Intent classiﬁcation and NER ; (2) None of them
support Multiple Intents where a single utterance might exp ress more than one In-
tent, i.e. is performing more than one action. This is potent ially a signiﬁcant limi-
tation because such utterances are generally very common in spoken dialogue; (3)
3according to anecdotal evidence from academic and start-up communities4https://rasa.com/5
https://www.ibm.com/watson/ai-assistant/6https://www.luis.ai/home7https://dialogﬂow.com/
8Note that, one could develop one’s own system using existing libraries, e.g. sk learn libraries
http://scikit-learn.org/stable/, spaCy https://spacy. io/, but a quicker and more accessible way is to
use an existing service platform.9was not yet open source when we were doing the benchmark-
ing, and was later on also introduced in https://arxiv.org/ abs/1805.10190