Benchmarking NLU Services for building Conversational Age nts 3
Particular Entities and Entity types tend to be dependent on particular Intent types,
e.g. with a ‘set alarm’ intent one would expect a time stamp as its argument. T here-
fore we think that joint models, or models that treat Intent & Entity classiﬁcation
together would perform better. We were unable to ascertain t his for any of the com-
mercial systems, but Rasa treats them independently (as of D ec 2018). (4) None of
the platforms use dialogue context for Intent classiﬁcatio n and NER - this is another
signiﬁcant limitation, e.g. in understanding elliptical o r fragment utterances which
depend on the context for their interpretation.
Service Input (Training) Output (Prediction)
Rasa JSON or Markdown. Utterances with an-
notated intents and entities. Can provide
synonym and regex features.JSON. The intent and intent ranking with
conﬁdence. A list of entities without
scores.
Dialogﬂow JSON. List of all entity type names and
values/synonyms. Utterance samples with
annotated intents and entities. Need to
specify the expected returning entities as
parameters for each intent.JSON. The intent and entities with values.
Overall score returned, not speciﬁc to In-
tent or Entity. Other returned info related
to dialogue app.
LUIS JSON, Phrase list and regex patterns as
model features, hierarchical and compos-
ites entities. List of all intents and entity
type names. Utterance samples with anno-
tated intents and entitiesJSON. The intent with conﬁdence. A list
of entities with scores
Watson CSV . List of all utterances with Intent la-
bel. List of all Entities with values. No an-
notated entities in an utterance needed.JSON. The intent with conﬁdence. A list
of entities and conﬁdence for each. Other
info related to dialogue app.
Table 1: Input Requirements and Output of NLU Services
4 Data Collection and Annotation
The evaluation of NLU services was performed in the context o f building a SDS,
aka Conversational Interface, for a home assistant robot. T he home robot is ex-
pected to perform a wide variety of tasks, ranging from setti ng alarms, playing mu-
sic, search, to movie recommendation, much like existing co mmercial systems such
as Microsoft’s Cortana, Apple’s Siri, Google Home or Amazon Alexa. Therefore the
NLU component in a SDS for such a robot has to understand and be able to respond
to a very wide range of user requests and questions, spanning multiple domains,
unlike a single domain SDS which only understands and respon ds to the user in a
speciﬁc domain.
4.1 Data Collection: Crowdsourcing setup
To build the NLU component we collected real user data via Ama zon Mechanical
Turk (AMT). We designed tasks where the Turker’s goal was to a nswer questions
about how people would interact with the home robot, in a wide range of scenarios
designed in advance, namely: alarm, audio, audiobook, cale ndar, cooking, datetime,
email, game, general, IoT, lists, music, news, podcasts, ge neral Q&A, radio, recom-
mendations, social, food takeaway, transport, and weather .
The questions put to Turkers were designed to capture the dif ferent requests
within each given scenario. In the ‘calendar’ scenario, for example, these pre-