6 Xingkun Liu, Arash Eshghi, Pawel Swietojanski and Verena R ieser
- Cohen’s D) due to its lower entity score as discussed above. The signiﬁcance test
shows no signiﬁcant differences between Dialogﬂow, LUIS an d Rasa.
The detailed data analysis results in the Appendix (see Tabl e 5 and Table 6)
for fold-114reveal that distributions of Intents and Entities are imbal anced in the
datasets. Also, our data contains some noisy Entity annotat ions, often caused by
ambiguities, which our simpliﬁed annotation scheme was not able to capture. For
example, an utterance in the pattern “play xxx please” where xxx could be any en-
tity from song name, audiobook name, radio name, posdcasts name or game name,
e.g. “play space invaders please” which could be annotated t he entity as [song name
: space invaders] or [game name : space invaders]. This type of Intent ambiguity
that can only be resolved by more sophisticated approaches t hat incorporate domain
knowledge and the dialogue context. Nevertheless, despite the noisiness of the data,
we believe that it represents a real-world use case for NLU en gines.
7 Conclusion
The contributions of this paper are two-fold: First, we pres ent and release a large
NLU dataset in the context of a real-world use case of a home ro bot, covering 21
domains with 64 Intents and 54 Entity Types. Secondly, we per form a comparative
evaluation on this data of some of the most popular NLU servic es – namely the
commercial platforms Dialogﬂow, LUIS, Watson and the open s ource Rasa.
The results show they all have similar functions/features a nd achieve similar per-
formance in terms of combined F-scores. However, when divid ing out results for
Intent and Entity Type recognition, we ﬁnd that Watson has si gniﬁcant higher F-
scores for Intent, but signiﬁcantly lower scores for Entity Type. This was due to its
high number of false positives produced in its Entity predic tions. As noted earlier,
we have nothere evaluated Watson’s recent ‘Contexual Entity’ annotat ion tool.
In future work, we hope to continuously improve the data qual ity and observe its
impact on NLU performance. However, we do believe that noisy data presents an
interesting real-world use-case for testing current NLU se rvices. We are also work-
ing on extending the data set with spoken user utterances, ra ther than typed input.
This will allow us to investigate the impact of ASR errors on N LU performance.
References
1. Daniel Braun, Adrian Hernandez Mendez, Florian Matthes a nd Manfred Langen (2017) Eval-
uating Natural Language Understanding Services for Conver sational Question Answering
Systems. In: Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2017,174–185.
2. Massimo Canonico and Luigi De Russis (2018) A Comparison a nd Critique of Natural Lan-
guage Understanding Tools. In: Proceedings of CLOUD COMPUT ING 2018.
3. Caroline Wisniewski, Clment Delpuech, David Leroy, Fran ois Pivan and
Joseph Dureau (2017) Benchmarking Natural Language Unders tanding Systems.
https://snips.ai/content/sdk-benchmark-visualisatio n/
4. Alice Coucke, Adrien Ball, Clment Delpuech, Clment Doumo uro, Sylvain Raybaud, Thibault
Gisselbrecht and Joseph Dureau (2017) Benchmarking Natura l Language Understanding
Systems: Google, Facebook, Microsoft, Amazon, and Snips. h ttps://medium.com/snips-
ai/benchmarking-natural-language-understanding-syst ems-google-facebook-microsoft-and-
snips-2b8ddcf9fb19
14Tables for other folds are omitted for space reason