arXiv:1903.05566v3  [cs.CL]  26 Mar 2019Benchmarking Natural Language
Understanding Services for building
Conversational Agents
Xingkun Liu, Arash Eshghi, Pawel Swietojanski and Verena Ri eser
Abstract We have recently seen the emergence of several publicly avai lable Natural
Language Understanding (NLU) toolkits, which map user utte rances to structured,
but more abstract, Dialogue Act (DA) or Intent speciﬁcation s, while making this
process accessible to the lay developer. In this paper, we pr esent the ﬁrst wide cov-
erage evaluation and comparison of some of the most popular N LU services, on a
large, multi-domain (21 domains) dataset of 25K user uttera nces that we have col-
lected and annotated with Intent and Entity Type speciﬁcati ons and which will be
released as part of this submission.1The results show that on Intent classiﬁcation
Watson signiﬁcantly outperforms the other platforms, name ly, Dialogﬂow, LUIS
and Rasa; though these also perform well. Interestingly, on Entity Type recognition,
Watson performs signiﬁcantly worse due to its low Precision2. Again, Dialogﬂow,
LUIS and Rasa perform well on this task.
1 Introduction
Spoken Dialogue Systems (SDS), or Conversational Agents ar e ever more com-
mon in home and work environments, and the market is only expe cted to grow. This
has prompted industry and academia to create platforms for f ast development of
SDS, with interfaces that are designed to make this process e asier and more acces-
sible to those without expert knowledge of this multi-disci plinary research area.
One of the key SDS components for which there are now several s uch plat-
forms available is the Natural Language Understanding (NLU ) component, which
maps individual utterances to structured, abstract repres entations, often called Dia-
logue Acts (DAs) or Intents together with their respective a rguments that are usually
Named Entities within the utterance. Together, the represe ntation is taken to specify
the semantic content of the utterance as a whole in a particul ar dialogue domain.
Xingkun Liu, Arash Eshghi and Verena Rieser
Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, EH14 4AS, e-mail: [x.l iu], [a.eshghi], [v.t.rieser]@hw.ac.uk
Pawel Swietojanski
The University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, e-mai l: p.swietojanski@unsw.edu.au
(work done when Pawel was with Emotech North LTD)
1https://github.com/xliuhw/NLU-Evaluation-Data2At the time of producing the camer-
a-ready version of this paper, we noticed the seemingly rece nt addition of a ‘Contextual Entity’
annotation tool to Watson, much like e.g. in Rasa. We’d thref ore like to stress that this paper does
notinclude an evaluation of this feature in Watson NLU1