4.3. Energy Based Unknown Identiﬁer
Given the features ( f∈F) in the latent space Fand
their corresponding labels l∈L, we seek to learn an en-
ergy function E(F,L). Our formulation is based on the En-
ergy based models (EBMs) [ 27] that learn a function E(·)
to estimates the compatibility between observed variables
Fand possible set of output variables Lusing a single out-
put scalar i.e., E(f):Rd→R. The intrinsic capability
of EBMs to assign low energy values to in-distribution data
and vice-versa motivates us to use an energy measure to
characterize whether a sample is from an unknown class.
Speciﬁcally, we use the Helmholtz free energy formula-
tion where energies for all values in Lare combined,
E(f)=−TlogZ
l0exp✓
−E(f,l0)
T◆
, (2)
whereTis the temperature parameter. There exists a simple
relation between the network outputs after the softmax layer
and the Gibbs distribution of class speciﬁc energy values
[34]. This can be formulated as,
p(l|f)=exp(gl(f)
T)
PC
i=1exp(gi(f)
T)=exp(−E(f,l)
T)
exp(−E(f)
T)(3)
wherep(l|f)is the probability density for a label l,gl(f)is
thelthclassiﬁcation logit of the classiﬁcation head g(.). Us-
ing this correspondence, we deﬁne free energy of our clas-
siﬁcation models in terms of their logits as follows:
E(f;g)=−TlogCX
i=1exp(gi(f)
T). (4)
The above equation provides us a natural way to transform
the classiﬁcation head of the standard Faster R-CNN [ 54] to
an energy function. Due to the clear separation that we en-
force in the latent space with the contrastive clustering, we
see a clear separation in the energy level of the known class
data-points and unknown data-points as illustrated in Fig. 3.
In light of this trend, we model the energy distribution of the
known and unknown energy values ⇠kn(f)and⇠unk(f),
with a set of shifted Weibull distributions. These distribu-
tions were found to ﬁt the energy data of a held out valida-
tion set very well, when compared to Gamma, Exponential
and Normal distributions. The learned distributions can be
used to label a prediction as unknown if ⇠kn(f)<⇠unk(f).
4.4. Alleviating Forgetting
After the identiﬁcation of unknowns, an important req-
uisite for an open world detector is to be able to learn new
classes, when the labeled examples of some of the unknown
classes of interest are provided. Importantly, the train-
ing data for the previous tasks will not be present at this
stage since retraining from scratch is not a feasible solu-
tion. Training with only the new class instances will lead to
Figure 3: The energy values of the known and unknown data-
points exhibit clear separation as seen above. We ﬁt a Weibull
distribution on each of them and use these for identifying unseen
known and unknown samples, as explained in Sec. 4.3.
catastrophic forgetting [ 40,11] of the previous classes. We
note that a number of involved approaches have been devel-
oped to alleviate such forgetting, including methods based
on parameter regularization [ 2,24,29,66], exemplar replay
[6,51,37,5], dynamically expanding networks [ 39,60,56]
and meta-learning [ 50,25].
We build on the recent insights from [ 49,26,62] which
compare the importance of example replay against other
more complex solutions. Speciﬁcally, Prabhu et al.[49] ret-
rospects the progress made by the complex continual learn-
ing methodologies and show that a greedy exemplar selec-
tion strategy for replay in incremental learning consistently
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods by a large margin.
Knoblauch et al.[26] develops a theoretical justiﬁcation for
the unwarranted power of replay methods. They prove that
an optimal continual learner solves an NP-hard problem and
requires inﬁnite memory. The effectiveness of storing few
examples and replaying has been found effective in the re-
lated few-shot object detection setting by Wang et al.[62].
These motivates us to use a relatively simple methodology
for ORE to mitigate forgetting i.e., we store a balanced set
of exemplars and ﬁnetune the model after each incremental
step on these. At each point, we ensure that a minimum of
Nexinstances for each class are present in the exemplar set.
5. Experiments and Results
We propose a comprehensive evaluation protocol to
study the performance of an open world detector to identify
unknowns, detect known classes and progressively learn
new classes when labels are provided for some unknowns.
5.1. Open World Evaluation Protocol
Data split: We group classes into a set of tasks T=
{T1,···Tt,···}. All the classes of a speciﬁc task will be
introduced to the system at a point of time t. While learn-
5834