the object detector along with known objects. As they are
not labelled, these unknown instances would be explicitly
learned as background, while training the detection model.
Dhamija et al.[8] ﬁnds that even with this extra training sig-
nal, the state-of-the-art object detectors results in false pos-
itive detections, where the unknown objects end up being
classiﬁed as one of the known classes, often with very high
probability. Miller et al.[43] proposes to use dropout sam-
pling to get an estimate of the uncertainty of the object de-
tection prediction. This is the only peer-reviewed research
work in the open set object detection literature. Our pro-
posed Open World Object Detection goes a step further to
incrementally learn the new classes, once they are detected
as unknown and an oracle provides labels for the objects of
interest among all the unknowns. To the best of our knowl-
edge this has not been tried in the literature. Fig. 1shows a
taxonomy of existing research work in this space.
The Open World Object Detection setting is much more
natural than the existing closed-world, static-learning set-
ting. The world is diverse and dynamic in the number, type
and conﬁgurations of novel classes. It would be naive to
assume that all the classes to expect at inference are seen
during training. Practical deployments of detection systems
in robotics, self-driving cars, plant phenotyping, healthcare
and surveillance cannot afford to have complete knowledge
on what classes to expect at inference time, while being
trained in-house. The most natural and realistic behav-
ior that one can expect from an object detection algorithm
deployed in such settings would be to conﬁdently predict
an unknown object as unknown, and known objects into
the corresponding classes. As and when more information
about the identiﬁed unknown classes becomes available, the
system should be able to incorporate them into its existing
knowledge base. This would deﬁne a smart object detection
system, and ours is an effort towards achieving this goal.
The key contributions of our work are:
•We introduce a novel problem setting, Open World Ob-
ject Detection, which models the real-world more closely.
•We develop a novel methodology, called ORE, based on
contrastive clustering, an unknown-aware proposal net-
work and energy based unknown identiﬁcation to address
the challenges of open world detection.
•We introduce a comprehensive experimental setting,
which helps to measure the open world characteristics
of an object detector, and benchmark ORE on it against
competitive baseline methods.
•As an interesting by-product, the proposed methodology
achieves state-of-the-art performance on Incremental Ob-
ject Detection, even though not primarily designed for it.
2. Related Work
Open Set Classiﬁcation: The open set setting considers
knowledge acquired through training set to be incomplete,thus new unknown classes can be encountered during test-
ing. Scheirer et al.[58] developed open set classiﬁers in
a one-vs-rest setting to balance the performance and the
risk of labeling a sample far from the known training exam-
ples (termed as open space risk). Follow up works [ 23,59]
extended the open set framework to multi-class classiﬁer
setting with probabilistic models to account for the fading
away classiﬁer conﬁdences in case of unknown classes.
Bendale and Boult [ 4] identiﬁed unknowns in the fea-
ture space of deep networks and used a Weibull distribu-
tion to estimate the set risk (called OpenMax classiﬁer). A
generative version of OpenMax was proposed in [ 13] by
synthesizing novel class images. Liu et al .[35] consid-
ered a long-tailed recognition setting where majority, mi-
nority and unknown classes coexist. They developed a met-
ric learning framework identify unseen classes as unknown.
In similar spirit, several dedicated approaches target on de-
tecting the out of distribution samples [ 30] or novelties [ 48].
Recently, self-supervised learning [ 46] and unsupervised
learning with reconstruction [ 65] have been explored for
open set recognition. However, while these works can rec-
ognize unknown instances, they cannot dynamically update
themselves in an incremental fashion over multiple training
episodes. Further, our energy based unknown detection ap-
proach has not been explored before.
Open World Classiﬁcation: [3] ﬁrst proposed the open
world setting for image recognition. Instead of a static clas-
siﬁer trained on a ﬁxed set of classes, they proposed a more
ﬂexible setting where knowns and unknowns both coexist.
The model can recognize both types of objects and adap-
tively improve itself when new labels for unknown are pro-
vided. Their approach extends Nearest Class Mean classi-
ﬁer to operate in an open world setting by re-calibrating the
class probabilities to balance open space risk. [ 47] studies
open world face identity learning while [ 64] proposed to use
an exemplar set of seen classes to match them against a new
sample, and rejects it in case of a low match with all pre-
viously known classes. However, they don’t test on image
classiﬁcation benchmarks and study product classiﬁcation
in e-commerce applications.
Open Set Detection: Dhamija et al.[8] formally studied
the impact of open set setting on popular object detectors.
They noticed that the state of the art object detectors of-
ten classify unknown classes with high conﬁdence to seen
classes. This is despite the fact that the detectors are ex-
plicitly trained with a background class [ 55,14,33] and/or
apply one-vs-rest classiﬁers to model each class [ 15,31]. A
dedicated body of work [ 43,42,17] focuses on developing
measures of (spatial and semantic) uncertainty in object de-
tectors to reject unknown classes. E.g., [ 43,42] uses Monte
Carlo Dropout [ 12] sampling in a SSD detector to obtain
uncertainty estimates. These methods, however, cannot in-
crementally adapt their knowledge in a dynamic world.
5831