3. Open World Object Detection
Let us formalise the deﬁnition of Open World Object De-
tection in this section. At any time t, we consider the set of
known object classes as Kt={1,2,..,C}⊂N+where
N+denotes the set of positive integers. In order to realis-
tically model the dynamics of real world, we also assume
that their exists a set of unknown classes U={C+1,...},
which may be encountered during inference. The known
object classes Ktare assumed to be labeled in the dataset
Dt={Xt,Yt}whereXandYdenote the input im-
ages and labels respectively. The input image set com-
prises of Mtraining images, Xt={I1,...,IM}and as-
sociated object labels for each image forms the label set
Yt={Y1,...,YM}. EachYi={y1,y2,..,yK}encodes
a set ofKobject instances with their class labels and lo-
cations i.e., yk=[lk,xk,yk,wk,hk], wherelk∈Ktand
xk,yk,wk,hkdenote the bounding box center coordinates,
width and height respectively.
The Open World Object Detection setting considers an
object detection model MCthat is trained to detect all the
previously encountered C object classes. Importantly, the
modelMCis able to identify a test instance belonging to
any of the known Cclasses, and can also recognize a new
or unseen class instance by classifying it as an unknown ,
denoted by a label zero (0). The unknown set of instances
Utcan then be forwarded to a human user who can identify
nnew classes of interest (among a potentially large num-
ber of unknowns) and provide their training examples. The
learner incrementally adds nnew classes and updates it-
self to produce an updated model MC+nwithout retraining
from scratch on the whole dataset. The known class set
is also updated Kt+1=Kt+{C+1,..., C+n}. This
cycle continues over the life of the object detector, where it
adaptively updates itself with new knowledge. The problem
setting is illustrated in the top row of Fig. 2.
4. ORE: O pen Wor ld Object De tector
A successful approach for Open World Object Detection
should be able to identify unknown instances without ex-
plicit supervision and defy forgetting of earlier instances
when labels of these identiﬁed novel instances are presented
to the model for knowledge upgradation (without retraining
from scratch). We propose a solution, ORE which addresses
both these challenges in a uniﬁed manner.
Neural networks are universal function approximators
[22], which learn a mapping between an input and the out-
put through a series of hidden layers. The latent represen-
tation learned in these hidden layers directly controls how
each function is realised. We hypothesise that learning clear
discrimination between classes in the latent space of ob-
ject detectors could have two fold effect. First , it helps the
model to identify how the feature representation of an un-known instance is different from the other known instances,
which helps identify an unknown instance as a novelty. Sec-
ond, it facilitates learning feature representations for the
new class instances without overlapping with the previous
classes in the latent space, which helps towards incremen-
tally learning without forgetting. The key component that
helps us realise this is our proposed contrastive clustering
in the latent space, which we elaborate in Sec. 4.1.
To optimally cluster the unknowns using contrastive
clustering, we need to have supervision on what an un-
known instance is. It is infeasible to manually annotate even
a small subset of the potentially inﬁnite set of unknown
classes. To counter this, we propose an auto-labelling
mechanism based on the Region Proposal Network [ 54] to
pseudo-label unknown instances, as explained in Sec. 4.2.
The inherent separation of auto-labelled unknown instances
in the latent space helps our energy based classiﬁcation head
to differentiate between the known and unknown instances.
As elucidated in Sec. 4.3, we ﬁnd that Helmholtz free en-
ergy is higher for unknown instances.
Fig. 2shows the high-level architectural overview of
ORE. We choose Faster R-CNN [ 54] as the base detec-
tor as Dhamija et al.[8] has found that it has better open
set performance when compared against one-stage Retina-
Net detector [ 31] and objectness based YOLO detector [ 52].
Faster R-CNN [ 54] is a two stage object detector. In the ﬁrst
stage, a class-agnostic Region Proposal Network (RPN)
proposes potential regions which might have an object from
the feature maps coming from a shared backbone network.
The second stage classiﬁes and adjusts the bounding box
coordinates of each of the proposed region. The features
that are generated by the residual block in the Region of In-
terest (RoI) head are contrastively clustered. The RPN and
the classiﬁcation head is adapted to auto-label and identify
unknowns respectively. We explain each of these coherent
constituent components, in the following subsections:
4.1. Contrastive Clustering
Class separation in the latent space would be an ideal
characteristic for an Open World methodology to identify
unknowns. A natural way to enforce this would be to model
it as a contrastive clustering problem, where instances of
same class would be forced to remain close-by, while in-
stances of dissimilar class would be pushed far apart.
For each known class i∈Kt, we maintain a prototype
vectorpi. Letfc∈Rdbe a feature vector that is generated
by an intermediate layer of the object detector, for an object
of classc. We deﬁne the contrastive loss as follows:
Lcont(fc)=CX
i=0`(fc,pi),where, (1)
`(fc,pi)=(
D(fc,pi) i=c
max{0,∆−D(fc,pi)}otherwise
5832