!
Incremental learning tasks?? ?
?? ??
?
? Unknown objectsKnown objects (New)
Known objects (Old)? ?
? ??
?
? ??
?
Open -set classes
person
?microwave
ovenrefrigerator
? ?person?
Backbone
Unknown 
aware RPNUnknowns
"!"#
"$%&
!
UnknownsRefrigeratorPerson
Microwave
Attraction RepulsionContrastive Clustering
Energy based 
Classification 
Head
Regression Head
Feature space
PrototypesFeature Map
Ground -truth boxes DetectionsPotential unknown object
Detection 
Model
RoI HeadLabel objects 
of interest
Input
Prediction
Auto -labelling UnknownsProblem Setting Open -world Object DetectorFigure 2: Approach Overview:
Top row: At each incremental
learning step, the model iden-
tiﬁes unknown objects (denoted
by ‘?’), which are progressively
labelled (as blue circles) and
added to the existing knowledge
base (green circles). Bottom
row: Our open world object de-
tection model identiﬁes poten-
tial unknown objects using an
energy-based classiﬁcation head
and the unknown-aware RPN.
Further, we perform contrastive
learning in the feature space to
learn discriminative clusters and
can ﬂexibly add new classes in a
continual manner without forget-
ting the previous classes.
whereDis any distance function and ∆deﬁnes how close
a similar and dissimilar item can be. Minimizing this loss
would ensure the desired class separation in the latent space.
Mean of feature vectors corresponding to each class is
used to create the set of class prototypes: P={p0···pC}.
Maintaining each prototype vector is a crucial component
of ORE. As the whole network is trained end-to-end, the
class prototypes should also gradually evolve, as the con-
stituent features change gradually (as stochastic gradient
descent updates weights by a small step in each iteration).
We maintain a ﬁxed-length queue qi, per class for stor-
ing the corresponding features. A feature store Fstore=
{q0···qC}, stores the class speciﬁc features in the corre-
sponding queues. This is a scalable approach for keeping
track of how the feature vectors evolve with training, as
the number of feature vectors that are stored is bounded by
C×Q, where Q is the maximum size of the queue.
Algorithm 1provides an overview on how class proto-
types are managed while computing the clustering loss. We
start computing the loss only after a certain number of burn-
in iterations ( Ib) are completed. This allows the initial fea-
ture embeddings to mature themselves to encode class in-
formation. Since then, we compute the clustering loss us-
ing Eqn. 1. After every Ipiterations, a set of new class
prototypes Pnew is computed (line 8). Then the existing
prototypes Pare updated by weighing PandPnewwith a
momentum parameter ⌘. This allows the class prototypes
to evolve gradually keeping track of previous context. The
computed clustering loss is added to the standard detection
loss and back-propagated to learn the network end-to-end.
4.2. Auto-labelling Unknowns with RPN
While computing the clustering loss with Eqn. 1, we
contrast the input feature vector fcagainst prototype vec-Algorithm 1 Algorithm C OMPUTE CLUSTERING LOSS
Input: Input feature for which loss is computed: fc; Feature
store:Fstore ; Current iteration: i; Class prototypes: P=
{p0···pC}; Momentum parameter: η.
1:InitialisePif it is the ﬁrst iteration.
2:Lcont←0
3:ifi==Ibthen
4:P←class-wise mean of items in FStore .
5:Lcont←Compute using fc,Pand Eqn. 1.
6:else ifi>Ibthen
7: ifi%Ip== 0 then
8: Pnew←class-wise mean of items in FStore .
9: P←ηP+(1−η)Pnew
10:Lcont←Compute using fc,Pand Eqn. 1.
11:returnLcont
tors, which include a prototype for unknown objects too
(c∈{0,1,..,C}where0refers to the unknown class). This
would require unknown object instances to be labelled with
unknown ground truth class, which is not practically feasi-
ble owing to the arduous task of re-annotating all instances
of each image in already annotated large-scale datasets.
As a surrogate, we propose to automatically label some
of the objects in the image as a potential unknown object.
For this, we rely on the fact that Region Proposal Network
(RPN) is class agnostic. Given an input image, the RPN
generates a set of bounding box predictions for foreground
and background instances, along with the corresponding ob-
jectness scores. We label those proposals that have high ob-
jectness score, but do not overlap with a ground-truth object
as a potential unknown object. Simply put, we select the
top-k background region proposals, sorted by its objectness
scores, as unknown objects. This seemingly simple heuris-
tic achieves good performance as demonstrated in Sec. 5.
5833