A self-attention network learns to generate hidden state
representations for a sequence of input symbols using a
multi-layer architecture [30]. The hidden states of the
upper layer are built from the hidden states of the lower
layer using a self-attention mechanism. It learns to aggre-
gate information from lower layer hidden states according
to their similarities to the t-th hidden state. The learned
representations are highly effective because they capture
deep contextualized information of the input sequence. The
self-attentive network with multi-head attention has demon-
strated success on a number of tasks including machine
translation [30, 28], language modeling and natural lan-
guage inference [5], semantic role labeling [27], often sur-
passing recurrent neural networks by a substantial mar-
gin. Particularly, [30] describes the Transformer model that
makes the self-attention mechanism an integral part of the
architecture for improved sequence modeling. [5] learns
deep contextualized word representations that have led to
state-of-the-art performance on question answering and nat-
ural language inference without task-speciﬁc architecture
modiﬁcations. Despite the success, self-attentive networks
have been less investigated for the task of skeleton-based
action recognition. In this paper, we introduce a novel self-
attentive architecture to ﬁll this gap.
Temporal information can be extracted from a sequence
data or a video. Many research endeavors have introduced
methods for modeling the temporal structure for action
recognition [20, 34, 8]. [20] proposes to employ latent vari-
ables to decompose complex actions in time and [34] intro-
duces a latent hierarchical model that extends the temporal
decomposition of complex actions. [8] utilizes a rank SVM
to model the temporal evolution of BoVW representations.
[35] introduces a method to model a long-range temporal
structure by simply splitting a video into snippets and fusing
CNN outputs from each part. We adopt this method since
it effectively extracts long-range temporal information and
also is applicable to any network with end-to-end training.
3. Self-Attention Network
In this section, we brieﬂy review the Self-attention net-
work. Self-attention network [30] is a powerful method
to compute correlation between arbitrary positions of a se-
quence input. An attention function consists of a query AQ,
keys AK, and values AVwhere query and keys have same
vector dimension dk, and values and outputs have same size
of dimension dv. The output is computed as a weighted sum
of the values, and the weight assigned to each value is com-
puted by scaled dot-product of query and keys. The vectors
of query AQ, keys AKand values AVare packed in a ma-
trix generating Q,K, and Vmatrices. Then the attentionfunction is deﬁned as
Attention (Q,K,V) =softmax/parenleftBigg
QKT
√dk/parenrightBigg
V,(1)
where1√dkis a scaling factor.The equation computes scaled
dot-product attention and the network computes the atten-
tion multiple times in parallel (multi-head) to extract differ-
ent correlation information. The multi-head attention out-
puts are concatenated and transformed to the same vector
dimension the input sequence. A residual connection is
adopted to take the input and output of the multi-head self-
attention layer and a layer normalization is applied to the
summed output. A fully-connected feed-forward network
with a residual connection is applied to the normalized self-
attention output. The entire network is illustrated as a self-
attention layer in Fig. 3a and multiple layers are repeated to
extract better representation.
4. Approach
In this paper, we propose an effective model for skeleton-
based action recognition, which is based on Self-Attention
Network. The overall framework of the model is shown in
Fig. 2. Primarily we have position and motion of joints.
We can use raw position of the joints for ﬁguring out the
motion/velocity of the joints. Our SAN variants operate on
encoded representations of position and motion sequences.
We will be using simple non-linear projection (FCNN) and
CNN based encoders for encoding the raw position and ve-
locity sequences. First we will explain the data transforma-
tion from raw sequences of position and motion of the joints
to encoded features. Once features are encoded, we will
make use of three different SAN based architectures for ef-
fectively capturing the contextual information from the en-
coded features.
4.1. Raw Position and Motion Data
The raw skeleton position xp∈RF×J′×Cin a video
clip is deﬁned with the number of frames F, the number
of joints per person J, and the coordinates of each joint C.
There may be Sskeletons in a frame so the total number of
joints isJ′=S×J. The position data can be depicted for
each person as x(s)
p, wheres∈ {1,2,···,S}.
The motion or velocity data, xm∈RF×J′×C, can be
explicitly retrieved by taking differences of each joint Jt
j∈
RC, wherej∈ {1,···,J}andt∈ {1,···,F}, between
consecutive frames:
xt
m=/braceleftbig
Jt+1
1−Jt
1,Jt+1
2−Jt
2,···,Jt+1
J−Jt
J/bracerightbig
(2)
Similarly, the motion data for each person is represented as
x(s)
m.
637