Self-Attention Network for Skeleton-based Human Action Recognition
Sangwoo Cho, Muhammad Hasan Maqbool, Fei Liu, Hassan Foroosh
Computer Science Department
University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816, USA
{swcho, hasanmaqbool }@knights.ucf.edu, {feiliu, foroosh }@cs.ucf.edu
Abstract
Skeleton-based action recognition has recently attracted
a lot of attention. Researchers are coming up with new ap-
proaches for extracting spatio-temporal relations and mak-
ing considerable progress on large-scale skeleton-based
datasets. Most of the architectures being proposed are
based upon recurrent neural networks (RNNs), convolu-
tional neural networks (CNNs) and graph-based CNNs.
When it comes to skeleton-based action recognition, the
importance of long term contextual information is central
which is not captured by the current architectures. In order
to come up with a better representation and capturing of
long term spatio-temporal relationships, we propose three
variants of Self-Attention Network (SAN), namely, SAN-V1,
SAN-V2 and SAN-V3. Our SAN variants has the impressive
capability of extracting high-level semantics by capturing
long-range correlations. We have also integrated the Tem-
poral Segment Network (TSN) with our SAN variants which
resulted in improved overall performance. Different conﬁg-
urations of Self-Attention Network (SAN) variants and Tem-
poral Segment Network (TSN) are explored with extensive
experiments. Our chosen conﬁguration outperforms state-
of-the-art Top-1 and Top-5 by 4.4 %and 7.9%respectively
on Kinetics and shows consistently better performance than
state-of-the-art methods on NTU RGB+D.
1. Introduction
Video-based action recognition has been an active re-
search topic due to its important practical applications in
many areas, such as video surveillance, behavior analysis,
and video retrieval. Human action recognition can also be
applicable to human-computer interaction or human-robot
interaction to help machines understand human behaviors
better [39, 21, 4]. Unlike a single image that contains only
spatial information, a video provides additional motion in-
formation as an important cue for recognition. Although
a video provides more information, it is non-trivial to ex-
tract the information due to a number of difﬁculties such as
Figure 1: An example of self-attention response from the
last self-attention layer. Eight frames are uniformly sam-
pled from an action with the class ‘put on jacket’ and il-
lustrated as frame 0 to 7. Frame 0 has the strongest cor-
relation with the last frame, frame 7, at the fourth head
, and attends heavily itself at the second head . Note
that with the self-attention network each frame is associated
with other frames so that local and global context informa-
tion can be acquired.
viewpoint changes, camera motions, and scale variations,
to name a few. There has been extensive research in RGB
video-based action recognition and one of the mainstream
methods is to employ both temporal optical ﬂow and spatial
appearance to obtain spatial and temporal information [25]
. The RGB video datasets typically contain an extensive
amount of data to process, hence require large models and
resources to train them properly. On the other hand, skele-
ton based action recognition comprises of only key joint lo-
cations of human bodies. With the advent of cost-effective
depth cameras [42], stereo cameras, and the advanced tech-
niques for human pose estimation [2], the cost to obtain
key points has reduced and skeleton-based human action
recognition has garnered increasing attraction [1, 7, 40]. Al-
though the key joint locations dont include appearance in-
formation, humans are able to recognizing actions from the
motion of a few human skeleton joints according to Johans-
son [11]. In this paper, we focus on human action recogni-
tion based on 3D skeleton sequences.
635