To extract information from skeleton sequences, many
works naturally apply recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
to model temporal dynamics [22, 18, 41]. They also uti-
lize CNNs to model spatio-temporal dynamics by treating
the 3D skeleton data as 2D pseudo images with 3 channels
[17, 36]. Another method is to retrieve structure informa-
tion of human body by constructing a graph with human
joints as edges [40], which also based on CNNs. Despite
the signiﬁcant improvements in performance, there exist a
problem to be solved. Both recurrent and convolutional op-
erations are neighborhood-based local operations [38] ei-
ther in space or time; hence local-range information is re-
peatedly extracted and propagated to capture long-range de-
pendencies. Many works have designed networks with hi-
erarchical structure [7, 16, 3] to obtain longer range and
deeper semantic information but the problem still persists
if there are back and forth semantic dependencies.
In this paper, we propose a novel model with Self-
Attention Network (SAN) to overcome the above limitation
and retrieve better semantic information (Fig. 1). Fig. 2
shows the overall pipeline of our model. The framework is
motivated by temporal segment network [35] that extracts
short-term information from each video sequence. Our
model extracts semantic information from each video se-
quence by SAN variants. SAN-Variants take a sequence of
features from encoded signals and computes the response at
each position as a weighted sum of features at all positions.
This operation enables SAN-Variants to correlate features
in distance or even in opposite direction. The predicted out-
puts based on each clip are merged with consensus opera-
tions to capture deeper semantic understanding. Therefore,
our model can effectively solve the problem of acquiring
long-term semantic information. Experimental results show
that the learned SAN variants outperforms state of the art
methods on challenging large scale datasets. We also vi-
sualize the attention correlations trying to understand how
the network works and provide some insights. The main
contributions of the paper are summarized as follows:
1. We propose Self Attention Network (SAN) variants
SAN-V1, SAN-V2 and SAN-V3 for effectively captur-
ing deep semantic correlations from action sequences
involving human skeleton.
2. We have integrated the Temporal Segment Network
(TSN) with our SAN variants. We observed improved
performance because of this integration of TSN and
SAN variants.
3. We visualize self-attention probabilities to show how
each frame is correlated with other frames.
4. Our proposed method achieves state-of-the-art re-
sults on two large scale datasets: NTU RGB+D and
Kinetics-skeleton
Figure 2: The overall pipeline of the proposed model. The
network takes as inputs temporally segmented clips and ex-
tracts contextual information from each snippet by one of
SAN variants described in section 4.3. Predictions of each
snippet are fused to compute the ﬁnal prediction.
2. Related Work
Handcrafted features are used to represent the skeleton
motion information in early works. [10] computes covari-
ance matrix for joint positions over time. [31] extracts 3D
geometric relationships of body parts in Lie group based on
rotations and translations of joints. With further progress in
deep learning, researchers started using Recurrent Neural
Networks to extract temporal dynamics between joints as
RNNs use sequential processing. [7] proposes a hierarchi-
cal RNN that splits the human body into ﬁve parts with each
part fed into different subnetworks and fuses them hierar-
chically. [22] splits a cell in an LSTM into part based cells
and human body parts are applied to each cell to learn a rep-
resentation of each part over time. [43] proposes a spatio-
temporal LSTM network that learns the co-occurrence fea-
tures of skeleton joints with a group sparse regularization.
[18] introduces trust gate to reduce the inﬂuence of noisy
joints and employs a spatio-temporal LSTM network to ex-
plore the spatila and temporal relationships. [26] intro-
duces attention mechanism in the LSTM network to focus
on more important joints at each time instances. In recent
works, CNN based approaches [13, 6, 19, 37] are adopted
to learn skeleton features and achieves signiﬁcant perfor-
mance. They attempt to convert a skeleton sequence into
pseudo images and utilize CNNs to learn. [6] maps a skele-
ton sequence to a tensor with frames, joints, and xyz co-
ordinates treating it as image and leverages CNNs to train.
[13] proposes a method to use relative positions between the
joints and the reference joints based on CNNs. [37] maps
trajectories of joints to orthogonal planes by using the 2D
projection. CNNs are also employed in our method to ob-
tain more informative features from the raw skeleton joints.
However, while the aforementioned RNNs and CNNs lack
the ability to extract long-term correlation between fea-
tures, our proposed method ﬁlls the gap to obtain high-level
semantic information with long-range connections of fea-
tures.
636