(a) SAN-Block
 (b) SAN-V1
 (c) SAN-V2
 (d) SAN-V3
Figure 3: Different designs of Self-Attention Network architecture. (a) self-attention network block (SAN) computing pair-
wise correlated attentions; (b) baseline model with early fused input features; (c) model that learns movements of each person
in a scene; (d) model that learn different modalities for available people in a scene.
4.2. Encoder
Our SAN variant models (Fig. 3) operate upon the en-
coded position x(p,enc)and motion features x(m,enc). In
this section, we describe two methods to encode the raw
positionxpand motion data xm.
4.2.1 Non-Linear Encoder
A non-linear encoder simply uses a feed-forward neural
network (FCNN) with a non-linear activation function for
projecting the input vector to higher dimension. For ex-
ample, when encoding for SAN-V1 (Fig. 3b) we perform
early fusion of xpandxmto getx∈RF×2J′×Cand then
use our non-linear encoder to get x(ﬀ)∈RF×2J′×C′. On
the other hand, encoding for SAN-V2 (Fig. 3c) and SAN-
V3 (Fig. 3d) individual skeletons are incorporated. In this
case non-linear encoding is used to extend the skeleton joint
position and motion tensor to x(s)
(p,ﬀ)∈RF×J×C′, and
x(s)
(m,ﬀ)∈RF×J×C′, respectively.
4.2.2 CNN Based Encoder
A CNN based encoder is employed for encoding low level
features from raw joint position and motion data xp,xm, or
x(s)
p, andx(s)
m. 2D convolutions can serve the purpose of ex-
tracting features from 3D tensors of raw skeleton data. Our
encoder block consist of 4 convolutional layers as evident
from Fig. 4. We will explain the general encoding scheme
by keeping in view the encoding requirements for SAN-V1
architecture. As we mentioned earlier in 4.2.1, for SAN-
V1,x∈RF×2J′×Cwhich is the output of early fusion of
xpandxm. First layer uses 1×1×64ﬁlters with stride
1. Output of the ﬁrst layer are the extended coordinates in
the form of F×J′×64tensor. Layer two operates with
3×1×32ﬁlters and stride 1, and outputs a tensor of shape
F×J′×32. Note that convolution window size for layer two
is3×1because we are interested in extracting local con-
textual information over frames. Now, we transpose jointsand cooridinates making the tensor of shape F×32×J′in
order to extract features from correlations of all joints over
local frames. Third layer uses 3×3×32ﬁlters with stride 1
and max pooling with 1×2pooling window is also applied.
Output of third layer is a tensor with shape F×16×32. Fi-
nal convolution layer applies 3×3×64ﬁlters with stride 1.
Similar to third layer, max pooling with a pooling window
of1×2is also applied producing a F×8×64tensor. Last
two CNN layers encode correlated local features from all
joints of human body. For SAN-V2 (Fig. 3c) and SAN-V3
(Fig. 3d) we encode x(s)
pandx(s)
mfor individual skeletons
in the frames. Note that Fremains the same so feature rep-
resentations for each frame are acquired with encoders.
4.3. SAN Variant Architecture
We investigate three SAN based network architectures
as shown in Fig. 3 for skeleton based action recognition.
These architectures employ the same SAN architecture as
shown in Fig. 3a but operate upon varying combinations of
encoded features, x(enc),x(p,enc), andx(m,enc). We ﬁrst
discuss the SAN block used in the network in detail.
4.3.1 Self-Attention Network
SAN block operates on encoded representations of posi-
tion and motion information. The input to SAN block is
x∈RF×H, whereHis a feature representation per frame.
The dimension of Hrelys on the different encoders and
model variants, and H= 512 = 8 ×64with the CNN
encoder for SAN-V1. The ﬁrst layer of the SAN block is
a position embedding generating p∈RF×H. Position em-
bedding layer is used for providing a sense of order to the
feature vectors. The ordering prior knowledge is helpful for
each feature vector at each time to capture overall contex-
tual cues from the input sequence. The output of the posi-
tion embedding layer yis an element-wise addition of the
input sequence xand the position embedding p.
Output of position embedding layer yis fed to the ﬁrst
self-attention layer z1. Each SAN layer consumes the out-
638