We conjecture that since the self-attention output signals
are based on weighted average computation, it makes more
sense to use the element-wise average aggregation function
for the collected outputs from each snippet. By doing so, the
video level self-attention can be computed properly leading
to the best performance.
5.4.4 Effect of Number of Layers and Mutli-heads in
SAN Block
We compare TS-SAN-V2 model with different number of
layers and multi-heads. The results are shown in Table 6.
By comparing the row 2 and 3, we observe that the num-
ber of heads affect the performance marginally. From the
results of the row 3 and 4, we also observe that the network
underperform if it contains too many paramerters. On the
contrary, the network also underperforms when the number
of parameters are not enough (row 1). According to the re-
sults, we argue that the proposed model requires a proper
number of layers and heads for a cetrain dataset to perform
the best.
5.5. Visualization of Self­Attention Layer Response
The self-attention network determines where each frame
correlates to other frames. We visualize the self-attention
response from the last self-attention layer with a visualiza-
tion tool [32] to understand how each frame is correlated for
a certain action video. As shown in Fig. 5, the vertical axis
shows the sampled 32 frames. Self-attention responses for
eight multi-heads are displayed and each column shows the
coarse shape of the attention pattern between two frames.
The model used for this visualization attains four layers
and eight heads, and takes 32 sampled frames as the input
sequence. No temporal segment network is used to train the
network. The self-attention probabilities are calculated by
the equ. 1 in the self-attention layer described in Fig. 3a.
For example, from Fig. 5a, one of the strongest correla-
tion in the third head can be found from a connection be-
tween frame 31 to frame 0 (a line across from bottom left
to top right). From the above example, we can check the
long range correlation is achieved and the proposed method
captures a variety of correlations in both short and long dis-
tance.
We observe that the overall self-attention response pat-
terns of the same action class (‘put on jacket’) resembles
each other as shown in Fig. 5a and Fig. 5b. The repsonses
of head 1 and head 6 from two videos especially shows sim-
ilar pattern. Although two videos are taken by different sub-
jects, duration, and views, we can see that the self-attention
catches a certain latent similarity. Comparing Fig. 5a and
Fig. 5b with Fig. 5c, there is not much similar response
pattern between them due to different action classes (‘put
on jacket’ vs ‘reading’). We also learn that the proposed
(a) ‘Put on jacket’ action with subject 1
(b) ‘Put on jacket’ action with subject 2
(c) ‘Reading’ action with subject 1
Figure 5: Self-attention probabilities from the last self-
attention layer for three test videos on NTU RGB+D are
visualized. The brighter color denotes the higher probabil-
ity or the stronger connection.
model is robust to subtle motion or speed of action changes
from difference subjects or even views.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose three novel SAN variations
in order to extract high-level context from short and long-
range self-attentions. Our proposed architectures signiﬁ-
cantly outperform state-of-the-art methods. CNN employed
in our model is effective to extract feature representations
for the input sequence of the self-attention network. SAN
can capture the temporal correlations regardless of distance,
making it possible to obtain high-level context information
from both short and long-range self-attentions. We also pro-
pose an effective integration of SAN and TSN which re-
sults in observable performance boost. We perform exten-
sive experiments on two large scale datasets, NTU RGB+D
and Kinetics-skeleton, and verify the effectiveness of our
proposed models for the skeleton-based action recognition
task. In the future, we will apply our model to video-based
recognition tasks with key point annotations, such as facial
expression recognition. We will also explore different meth-
ods to extract effective feature representations for the input
sequence of SAN.
642