64
J′F
32
J′F
J’
32F
32
32F
64
16F
64
8F
Figure 4: An input sequence of skeleton joints over frames,
F×J′×C, is fed to the convolutional blocks and output
tensor size of F×8×64is generated, which is denoted by
. Each color denotes the following layers: convo-
lutional layer; ReLU activation; and max-pooling
layer.
put of the previous SAN layer. Each self-attention layer
computes pairwise attention probabilities and K,Q andV
parameters described in Eq. 1 are learned. Each self-
attention layer outputs zi,i∈ {1,2,···,N}whereNis
the number of self-attention layers. We concatenate the out-
puts from each SAN layer in order to gather all the attention
probabilities as shown below
c=concat([z1,z2,···,zN]) (3)
o=ReLU(flin(favg(c))) (4)
whereconcat layer concatenates zi∈RF×Halong the
vector axis creating a concatenated sequence c∈RF×HN.
Then, a global average layer favgis applied to calong the
frame axis to obtain video-level features and a resulting di-
mension of the feature is RHN. Finally, a fully connected
layerflinwith a non-linear activation, ReLU, projects the
feature vector to the same input dimension H.
4.3.2 SAN-V1
SAN-V1 (Fig. 3b) is a baseline network to understand how
well the SAN block works for this task. It takes a concate-
nated input of position ( xp) and motion ( xm) data gener-
ating an input sequence x∈RF×2J′C. The concatenation
is to achieve feature-level early fusion. xrequires encod-
ing which is achieved using CNN encoder and non-linear
encoder. The shape of the input sequence to the encoders is
RF×HwhereH= 2×J′×C. SAN block extracts latent lo-
cal and global context information out of the input encoded
sequences xconv andxﬀ. Note that Jis the number of
joints for one person, hence J′represent the joints belong-
ing to all the poeple in the frame. Zero paddings are applied
in case that the number of valid people in a frame is less
than a pre-deﬁned maximum number of people. The out-
put of the SAN block is fed to a classiﬁcation layer which
consists of a ReLU activation layer, a dropout layer, and a
linear layer with softmax activation to predict probabilities
for each class. The network is trained with cross-entropy
loss.4.3.3 SAN-V2
SAN-V2 (Fig. 3c) is designed to extract contextual features
with the SAN blocks for each subject (skeleton) in a scene.
This network computes actions for each skeleton and takes
the strongest signal from all available people in a video.
Similar to SAN-V1, the encoded position and motion skele-
ton data for each person is concatenated respectively and the
concatenated input sequences are fed to the corresponding
SAN blocks. The input dimension for each SAN block is
RF×2JC′andRF×2×512with the non-linear and CNN en-
coder, respectively. SAN blocks share weights to learn a va-
riety of movements from different people. SAN outputs can
be merged with different operations such as element-wise
max, mean or concatenation. According to our preliminary
experiments, element-wise max works the best as it cap-
tures the strongest action signal among people who may not
be available. The ﬁnal classiﬁcation layer is identical to the
one in SAN-V1. Note that SAN-V2 leverages late fusion
strategy and is scalable to arbitrary number of people.
4.3.4 SAN-V3
Lastly, SAN-V3 (Fig. 3d) is designed to deal with differ-
ent data modalities: position and velocity (or motion). The
most prominent signals from all people are chosen by an
element-wise max operation for each modality. The input
dimension for the SAN block is RF×JC′andRF×512for
the non-linear and CNN encoder, respectively. The output
of each SAN block is fed to separate classiﬁers and the con-
catenated signal from the SAN blocks is consumed by an-
other classiﬁer. This network is also scalable to any num-
ber of people in a scene. The training losses of the model
are calculated by adding all cross entropy losses from each
classiﬁer.
4.4. Temporal Segment Self­Attention Network
(TS­SAN)
The self-attention network can associate features in dis-
tance making it possible to capture long range informa-
tion. However, as the feature representations for same ac-
tion can vary with many constraints (viewpoint change, dif-
ferent speed of action by different subjects, etc), the pro-
posed network may not learn well. Thus, we leverage the
temporal segment network [35] to train the network more
effectively. As shown in Fig. 2, a video is divided into K
clips and one of the SAN variants in Fig. 3 is employed to
learn temporal dynamics on each clip. Note that all lay-
ers share weights for different clips. Formally, given K
segments S1,S2,···,SKof a video, the proposed network
models a sequence of clips as follows:
TS−SAN(S1,S2,···,SK) =C(F(S1;W),F(S2;W),
···,F(SK;W)).(5)
639