Sensors 2021 ,21, 1278 2 of 21
sensors. With the breakthrough of hardware technology, the integration of multi-model
information such as vision, touch, and perception enables robots to identify the pose of
the target more accurately [ 5]. So far, the biggest challenge at present is how to learn the
optimal grasping strategy based on visual information.
At present, although the robot can perform some simple repetitive tasks well, it still
cannot adapt to the complex environment with shielding or changing lighting conditions
in real time. With the increasing demand for intelligent robots, it is urgent to design a robot
grasping solution with independent ability of decision-making and learning. Therefore,
the robot is a high-level embodiment of artiﬁcial intelligence in the physical world, and
automation is the basis of intelligence [ 6]. The rapid development of artiﬁcial intelligence
technology that encapsulates models of uncertainty further advances in adaptive and robust
control. These machine learning algorithms for object grasps mainly include analytical
and empirical approaches [ 7]. These methods are effective, but simplify the grasping
environment and are based on hand-crafted features. Therefore, they are arduous, time-
consuming, and cannot adapt to complex environments [ 8]. It is necessary to create
a universal robotic solution for various environments, which have the ability to make
decisions and learn independently. At present, deep reinforcement learning is the main
method of intelligent decision and control of robots, which enables robots to learn a task
from scratch. This method requires a lot of trials and incurs many errors, which is difﬁcult
to apply to actual robot manipulation [ 9]. To solve this problem, imitation learning and
transfer learning are proposed. Ultimately, it is hoped that an end-to-end neural network
can be constructed to output the motor control of each joint simply by inputting the
observed image [10].
To sum up, this paper will present a state-of-the-art survey on an intelligent robot
with the capability of autonomous deciding and learning. The paper ﬁrst reviews the
main achievements and research in adaptive and robust control. The survey reveals that
the latest research in deep learning and reinforcement learning has paved the way for
highly complex tasks to be performed by robots. Furthermore, three main methods of
deep reinforcement learning, imitation learning, and transfer learning are discussed for a
robot. Finally, major achievements based on these methods are summarized and analyzed
thoroughly, and future research challenges are proposed.
The remainder of the paper is arranged as follows. In Section 2, we survey the theory
of how to form stable manipulation and introduce the research background. Section 3
focuses on how a robot can learn a motor control policy via deep reinforcement learning
as a complete solution to a task. Section 4 describes approaches of imitation learning to
master skills by observing movements from only a small number of samples. Section 5
describes approaches that knowledge can be transferred to the real robot by building a
robot virtual simulation system based on transfer learning. Finally, latest applications and
future research directions are discussed.
2. The Background
For decades, researchers have worked to establish the theory of how to form a stable
manipulation. However, manipulating an object is a far more daunting problem. At
present there are mainly two directions, one way is to set up a mathematical model aimed
at determining the minimal number and optimal positions of the ﬁngertips on the object‘s
surface to ensure stability [ 11]. The second way is data-driven methods by establishing
a database about the manual grasping type, the optimal solution of grasping can be
obtained by analyzing and understanding the data with sensors information and prior
knowledge [12]. The survey is structured as Figure 1.