Sensors 2021 ,21, 1278 13 of 21
higher-level complementary approach of enhanced transfer learning that produces policies
which generalize across tasks.
5.3. Robust Policy
Methods of transfer learning have difﬁculty in obtaining policies which can generalize
across tasks, despite collecting a large amount of data. He et al. proposed an attempt to
learn a robust policy directly on a real robot based on model-predictive control (MPC),
adapting to unseen tasks [ 107]. A continuous parameterization and policy can be learned
simultaneously in simulation instead of end-to-end learning policy for single task. Then
the multi-skill policy can be transferred directly to a real robot that is actuated by choosing
sequences of skill latents. The model of MPC is composed of the pre-trained policy executed
in the simulation, run in parallel with the real robot. Agents trained in the simulator may
not be invalid in the real world when performing actions due to the gap between training
and execution environments. Ramakrishnan proposed the oracle feedback to learn a
predictive model of blind spots in order to reduce costly errors [ 108]. By evaluating
the application of the method in two domains, it was demonstrated that the predictive
performance has been improved and the learned model can be used to query oracle
selectively to prevent errors. Although a general simulator is needed for ﬂexible learning
approaches, control policy in simulation directly applied to robot will yield model errors.
In order to overcome cases of severe mismatch, Raileanu et al. proposed a novel way to
regularize a decoder of a variational autoencoder to a black-box simulation, with the latent
space bound to a subset of simulator parameters [ 109]. Encoder training from real-world
trajectories can yield a latent space with simulation parameter distribution that matches
the real setting.
The above methods are mainly to improve the adaptability of state and action in
the virtual environment, and try to introduce parameters in the physical environment
into the strategy training of the simulated environment [ 110]. In addition to the three
methods mentioned above, there are other ways to improve transfer learning for robot
manipulation. Jeong directly introduced the state-related generalized forces to capture
the difference between the simulated environment and the real world, thus realizing the
transfer learning of robot manipulation [ 111]. Hwangbo et al. built a perfect actuator
model by adding stochastic dynamic parameters, which strengthened the generalization
of the neural network [ 112]. Matas et al. studied the manipulation of non-rigid objects in
simulation [ 113]. Sadeghi et al. studied transfer learning based on multiple domains and
proposed a simulation benchmark for robot grasping, which played an important role in
promoting the research on robot [ 114]. Mees et al. proposed an adversarial skill network
to ﬁnd the embedded space suitable for different task domains. This method is not only
applicable to the transfer learning of robots, but also to other tasks of ﬁnding and learning
transferable skills [115].
In summary, methods of transfer learning help us to ﬁnd out the commonality of
problems and deal with the newly encountered problems. The advantage of robot transfer
learning lies in learning control strategies based on sufﬁcient data in the simulated envi-
ronment, while the difﬁculty of research lies in transferring control strategies to real robots.
In the ﬁeld of robotics, data from simulation can be used to solve problems in which there
are few or no sample in the target domain. Dominant approaches for ameliorating transfer
learning include building better simulation environment, policy randomization, and direct
training of robust policy. Improved methods for robot transfer learning are summarized in
Table 3.