Sensors 2021 ,21, 1278 4 of 21
can extract more generalized features autonomously[ 25]. Due to the excellent capability
of feature extraction, the deep learning network has achieved fantastic results in machine
perception and image processing [ 26]. At the same time, deep learning can also be combined
with the method of mathematical modeling to learn the robot manipulation, but the biggest
shortcoming is still the lack of the entire system model [ 27]. Therefore, deep reinforcement
learning (DRL) is proposed to realize the end-to-end learning from perception to robot
manipulation.
However, it is difﬁcult for agents to ensure the effectiveness of deep reinforcement
learning in complex scenarios due to the limitations of sparse rewards. There, researchers
put forward the idea of hierarchy according to the characteristics of human intelligence [28] .
Hierarchical deep reinforcement learning can decompose the whole task, and then imple-
ment it step by step by lower levels of policy. According to the latest research in recent
years, it is found that the effect of hierarchical deep reinforcement learning is far better
than previous algorithms, which can not only adapt to complex problems, but also solve
the problem of sparse rewards [29].
Reinforcement learning enables the robot to interact with the environment through
trial and error, then the optimal strategy can be learned by maximizing the total return [30] .
The method of deep reinforcement learning require a large number of samples and tri-
als, so they are feasible for the ﬁeld of image recognition but hardly suit for real robot
manipulation. Nowadays, there are two ways forward to solve this problem [ 31]. One
is imitation learning, in which machines can quickly learn to manipulate by observing
a demonstration or a small amount of data. The method can reduce the complexity of
robot strategy space and improve the learning efﬁciency [ 32]. The other one is transfer
learning, in which the robot ﬁrstly learns to manipulate in the simulation environment,
and then transfer the knowledge to the real. During the training of the real robot, valuable
information is extracted from the simulated neural network, which greatly accelerates and
strengthens the learning effect [ 33]. These three methods of robot learning will be described
and analyzed in detail in this paper.
3. Deep Reinforcement Learning
Traditional manipulation learning methods need to know the model of the whole sys-
tem in advance, but it is impossible in most cases in practice. Therefore, the method of rein-
forcement learning is inevitable, which enables the robot to make policy independently [34] .
The traditional algorithm of reinforcement learning is the dynamic planning that deals with
ﬁnite state space—then the optimal strategy can be obtained based on the accurate model,
but it cannot solve the problem of robot manipulation. Therefore, deep reinforcement learn-
ing independent of the dynamic model that can adapt to the environment well is proposed
to handle the task of continuous state space [ 35]. Deep reinforcement learning combines
the perception ability of deep learning and the decision-making ability of reinforcement
learning, which can learn the actions of the robot directly from images. Nowadays, deep
reinforcement learning has become a key research direction in the ﬁeld of robotics. Markov
decision process (MDP) is the basis of reinforcement learning, the function of action-state
value can be obtained from the expected sum of rewards [ 36]. The formula of value function
is shown as Formula (1).
Qp(s,a) =Ep"
T
å
t=0gtrtjst=s,at=a#
(1)
In the formula, the expected sum of discounted rewards is deﬁned as the function
of action state value Qp(s,a).Eprepresents the expected value in the case of motion
strategy p,rtrepresents the reward value for the corresponding moment, and gtrepresents
the discount factor. On the basis of whether the state transition probability and return
are known, reinforcement learning also can be sorted into model-based and mode-free
methods as shown in Figure 2. Model-based methods can generate an environment model