Sensors 2021 ,21, 1278 10 of 21
and the generated natural motion is almost indistinguishable from the original motion
capture data in the absence of perturbations.
Methods of behavioral cloning and IRL learn strategies from demonstrations, but
can not interact with the expert to further optimize the policy [91]. Therefore, the method
of generative adversarial imitation learning is proposed to solve the problem based on
adversarial networks [92].
4.3. Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning
The method of GAIL is implemented by comparing the difference between the gener-
ated strategy and the expert strategy. Iterative confrontation training can be performed to
make the distribution between the expert and the agent as close as possible [ 93]. Generative
adversarial networks (GANs) have been successfully applied to policy imitation problems
under model-free settings. Baram et al. proposed the algorithm of model-based generative
adversarial imitation learning (MGAI) based on a forward model to make the calculations
completely divisible, which allows the use of accurate discriminator gradients to train
strategies [ 94]. The use of pure learning methods with simple reward functions often results
in non-human and too rigid movement behaviors. Merel et al. extended the algorithm
of GAIL that the training of general neural network strategies can generate human-like
motion patterns from limited demonstrations without access to actions. This method
constructs strategies and shows that they can be reused to solve tasks when controlled by
a higher-level controller [ 95]. They are vulnerable to cascading failures when the agent
trajectory diverges from the demonstrations. Wang et al. added a variation auto-encoder
(VAE) to learn semantic policy embeddings that made the algorithm of GAIL more robust
than the supervised controller especially with few demonstrations. Leveraging these poli-
cies, a new version of GAIL can be developed to avoid mode collapse and capture many
different behaviors [96].
Unfortunately, methods of imitation learning tend to require that demonstrations are
supplied in the ﬁrst-person that is limited by the relatively hard problem of collecting
ﬁrst-person demonstrations. Stadie et al. presented a method of unsupervised third-person
imitation learning (TPIL) to train agent to correctly achieve goal in a simple environment
when the demonstration is provided from a different viewpoint [ 97]. Standard imitation
learning methods assume received examples that could be provided in advance, which
stands in contrast to how humans and animals imitate. Liu et al. proposed an learning
method of imitation from observation (IFO) based on video prediction with context trans-
lation, which ensured output of different domains consistent [ 98]. The assumption in
imitation learning is lifted that shows the effectiveness of our approach in learning a wide
range of real-world robot manipulation.
The way that robots learn desired strategies based on deep reinforcement learning in
real scenario will face the problem of large data requirement, high cost of trial and error and
long training process. To enable learning of robot manipulation, roboticists focused their
efforts on imitation learning that coincided with the learning process of human. Methods
of imitation learning combined expert demonstrations with appropriate algorithms of
machine learning, which can provide a simple and intuitive framework of robot learning
and reduce the cost of deployment. Therefore, imitation learning is an effective method
for the system to obtain control strategies when an explicit reward function is insufﬁcient,
using supervision provided as demonstrations of the expert.
Although the method of BC is intuitive and simple to implement, a large amount of
data is required and the learned policy cannot adapt to the new environment. Although the
method of IRL makes up for shortcomings of above situations, the consumption of training
time is still costly. The method of GAIL introduces the idea of generative adversarial
networks for imitation learning, which has better performance than the other two methods
in high-dimensional situations. A major drawback of GAIL is the problem of model
collapse because the diversity of generated images is often smaller than the real data. To
summarize, imitation learning has been a key method in the ﬁeld of robot manipulation.