Sensors 2021 ,21, 1278 9 of 21
Gams et al. proposed dynamic motion primitives (DMPs) to generate a stable and
generalizable strategy based on trajectories [ 76]. Methods of DMPs can generate trajectory
of arbitrary complexity that can be used to describe robot manipulation. The disadvantage
of DMPs is the need of a deterministic model, yet the fact that demonstrations cannot
be completely alike. Therefore, it is difﬁcult for this method to model the uncertainty of
multiple demonstrations, resulting in a poor ﬁt of the system as a whole. Zhang et al.
proposed a virtual reality teleoperation system to collect high-quality demonstrations of
robot manipulation, then the control strategy can be obtained via visuomotor learning
(VL) [77] . The result shows that imitation learning can be surprisingly effective in learning
deep policy that map directly from pixel values to actions, only with a small amount of
learning data.
However, the problem of BC is that the number of samples is not enough, so the
agent cannot learn situations that are not included in samples. Therefore, in the case of a
small amount of samples, the strategy obtained by behavioral cloning is not generalizable.
In order to solve the learning problem of insufﬁcient samples, the method of inverse
reinforcement learning is proposed [78].
4.2. Inverse Reinforcement Learning
Inverse reinforcement learning is a method of evaluating how well an action is per-
formed via reward function, which is an abstract description of behavior. Compared to
methods of behavioral cloning, IRL is an efﬁcient paradigm of imitation learning that is
more adaptable in responding to different environments. When the execution environment
or robot model changes signiﬁcantly, the resulting mapping function will be difﬁcult to
apply and will need to learn again [ 79]. Whereas the method of IRL is more task-related, the
appropriate strategy can be obtained based on the previous reward function after receiving
new information from the environment and the model [ 80]. Inverse reinforcement learning
can be classiﬁed according to the algorithms it depends on.
Abbeel et al. proposed the max-margin principle (MP) of obtaining a reward function
based on teaching data, in which the difference between the optimal strategy and other
suboptimal strategies can be maximized [ 81]. Ratliff et al. suggested the framework of
maximum marginal planning (MMP) based on the principle of maximum margin, and
transformed the learning of reward function into a structural prediction [ 82]. The method
of maximum marginal programming is very expensive to solve the MDP , so Klein et al.
proposed a method of structured classiﬁcation (SC) to learn the reward function without
solving MDP [ 83]. Ho et al. proposed a neural network on the basis of apprenticeship
learning (AL), and updated it via the method of policy gradient. It is hard to determine
the quality of actions in actual scenarios [ 84]. The above methods are all artiﬁcial design
features of the reward function that are difﬁcult to generalize to the high dimensional and
continuous robot state space. Therefore, Xia et al. proposed the neural inverse reinforce-
ment learning (NIRL), which is still based on the framework of maximum margin [85].
The disadvantage of maximum margin methods is that different reward functions
will lead to the same expert strategy in many cases, thus resulting in ambiguity. Therefore,
many algorithms of inverse reinforcement learning are proposed based on the probabilistic
model to overcome this problem [ 86]. Ziebart et al. constructed a probabilistic model
for sequential policy by maximum entropy inverse reinforcement learning, which can
ensure the manipulation strategy has better performance when the teaching data are
not optimal and the reward function is random deviation [ 87]. Finn et al. updated the
policy based on the maximum entropy IRL and constructed reward function to help
training via expert data [ 88]. The method of inverse reinforcement learning based on
maximum entropy needs to know the state transition probability of the system. Therefore,
Boularias et al. established the maximum relative entropy model to solve the model-free
problem [ 89]. Peng et al. presented a data-driven deep reinforcement learning framework
to train humanoid robots in virtual environment via the algorithm of DeepMimic and then
learned a series of difﬁcult manipulation skills [ 90]. The resulting strategy is highly robust