Sensors 2021 ,21, 1278 15 of 21
make the deep neural network ﬁt the nonlinear model better which mainly include Sigmoid,
Tanh, ReLU etc. Moreover, data regularization and dropout are the main methods to solve
overﬁtting. By inserting these processes before the activation function, the deviation of
data distribution can be reduced and the accuracy of network can be effectively improved.
Neural network architectures need to be experimented and inferred from experimental
results. It is recommended to use proven architectures such as VGG, ResNet, Inception,
etc. The hyperparameters are the values that initialize the neural network, and these
values cannot be learned during training. These super parameters include the number of
neural network layers, the size of the batch, the number of trained epochs, etc. Each neural
network will have an optimal combination of hyperparameters, which will achieve the
maximum accuracy. There is no direct way to get it but usually through trial and error.
It is a challenge to ensure that the learned model is valid, given the interference of the
real environment. Much of the collected data are meaningless, so constructing an accurate
simulator is hard. Generally, humans solve the new problem via some basic skills. Inspired
from this, the method of meta-learning is proposed to generate correct motion sequences
that adapts to scene changes based on existing models. Meta-learning is the foundation
of both transfer learning and imitation learning that utilizes the previous knowledge and
experience to form a core value network [135].
The existing meta-learning neural network structure can be used to accelerate learn-
ing when facing new tasks. Model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) is a meta-learning
algorithm for supervised learning and reinforcement learning [ 136]. The method of MAML
makes a back-propagation update of the neural network with the sample, and then com-
pletes supervised learning based on the updated parameters. The neural network is forced
to learn some task information by adding external data [ 137,138]. Santoro et al. added
external memory to the neural network, which obtained the relevant images for compar-
ison [ 139]. Marcin et al. trained a general neural network to predict the gradient by the
regression problem of equation. As long as the gradient is predicted correctly, this method
signiﬁcantly speeds up the training [ 140]. Oriol et al. constructed an attention mechanism
via imitating humans, which directly focus on the most important parts [ 141]. Sachin et al.
trained an update mechanism of neural networks via the long short-term memory (LSTM)
structure, and obtained new parameters by inputting current network parameters [ 142].
Flood et al. constructed a model to learn and predict the function of loss via previous tasks,
which sped up the learning rate [143].
Hence, meta-learning is not a simple mapping, but a way to connect different infor-
mation. Meta-learning enables the neural network to learn a kind of meta-knowledge
based on samples, so that the change factors have been completely separated from the
invariant factors in the learned representation space, and the decisive factors can be learned.
Although the method has made some progress in the ﬁeld of robot learning, a large amount
of training data is still required in the training phase of meta-learning. Meta-learning is the
basis of imitation learning and transfer learning, and one shot learning is an extreme form
of the two methods. Therefore, designing a one-shot learning neural network structure
with high learning efﬁciency and excellent performance is an important research direction
in the future.
7. Conclusions
In view of this method, the robot can understand the intention of samples and
map directly to joint control without a lot of training data [ 144]. With fast learning
ability, such a robot system has strong universality. Finn et al. used the visual infor-
mation to obtain the control information of joints based on the MAML algorithm of
Meta-Learning [ 145]. Tianhe et al. proposed a method of one-shot learning to build
prior knowledge by using human and robot demonstration data based on meta-learning.
Next, combining this prior knowledge with a person’s video presentation, the robot can per-
form the tasks demonstrated by the person [ 146]. Feifei et al. proposed a novel framework
of robot learning called neural task programming (NTP), which used neural program in-